page 1 
VOL. XIX. JANUARY 1, 1898. No. 1. 



CONTENTS. 



Zion's Watch Tower for 1898 2 

Will It Be a Year of Blessing? 3 

Joseph L. Russell, Deceased 4 

"Thou Shalt Guide Me With 

Thy Counsel" 5 

"Tempted in All Points Like as 

We Are" 9 

The Beginning of Jesus' Ministry 14 

Interesting Letters 16 

R2238 : page 2 

THIS JOURNAL AND ITS MISSION. 



THIS journal is set for the defence of the only true foundation of 

the Christian's hope now being so generally repudiated,— Redemption 

through the precious blood of "the man Christ Jesus who gave himself 

aransom [a corresponding price, a substitute] for all." (1 Pet. 1:19; 

1 Tim. 2:6.) Building up on this sure foundation the gold, silver 

and precious stones (1 Cor. 3:1 1-15; 2 Pet. 1:5-11) of the Word 

of God, its further mission is to— "Make all see what is the fellowship 

of the mystery which. ..has been hid in God,. ..to the intent 

that now might be made known by the Church the manifold wisdom of 

God"— "which in other ages was not made known unto the sons of men, 

as it is now revealed."— Eph. 3:5-9,10. 

It stands free from all parties, sects and creeds of men, while it 
seeks more and more to bring its every utterance into fullest subjection to 
the will of God in Christ, as expressed in the Holy Scriptures. It is thus 
free to declare boldly whatsoever the Lord hath spoken;— according to 
the divine wisdom granted unto us, to understand. Its attitude is not 
dogmatical, but confident; for we know whereof we affirm, treading with 
implicit faith upon the sure promises of God. It is held as a trust, to 
be used only in his service; hence our decisions relative to what may and 
what may not appear in its columns must be according to our judgment 
of his good pleasure, the teaching of his Word, for the upbuilding of his 
people in grace and knowledge. And we not only invite but urge our readers 
to prove all its utterances by the infallible Word to which reference 
is constantly made, to facilitate such testing. 

TO US THE SCRIPTURES CLEARLY TEACH 



That the Church is "the Temple of the Living God"— peculiarly "His 



workmanship;" that its construction has been in progress throughout the 
Gospel age— ever since Christ became the world's Redeemer and 
the chief corner stone of this Temple, through which, when finished, 
God's blessings shall come "to all people," and they find access to 
him.-l Cor. 3:16,17; Eph. 2:20-22; Gen. 28:14; Gal. 3:29. 

That meantime the chiseling, shaping and polishing, of consecrated believers 
in Christ's atonement for sin, progresses; and when the last of these 
"living stones," "elect and precious," shall have been made ready, 
the great Master Workman will bring all together in the First Resurrection; 
and the Temple shall be filled with his glory, and be the meeting 
place between God and men throughout the Millennium.— Rev. 15:5-8. 

That the Basis of Hope, for the Church and the World, lies in the fact that 
"Jesus Christ, by the grace of God, tasted death for every man," "a 

ransom 

for all," and will be "the true light which lighteth every man that 
cometh into the world," "in due time."— Heb. 2:9; John 1:9; 1 Tim. 

2:5,6. 

That the Hope of the Church is that she may be like her Lord, "see him 
as he is," be "partaker of the divine nature," and share his glory as 
his joint-heir.- 1 John 3:2; John 17:24; Rom. 8:17; 2 Pet. 1:4. 

That the present mission of the Church is the perfecting of the saints for 
the future work of service; to develop in herself every grace; to be God's 
witness to the world; and to prepare to be the kings and priests of 
the next age. -Eph. 4:12; Matt. 24:14; Rev. 1:6; 20:6. 

That the hope for the World lies in the blessings of knowledge and opportunity 
to be brought to all by Christ's Millennial Kingdom— the restitution 
of all that was lost in Adam, to all the willing and obedient, at the 
hands of their Redeemer and his glorified Church.— Acts 3:19-21; Isa. 

35. 

CHARLES T. RUSSELL, Editor. 



SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
-ADDRESS TO- 
TOWER PUBLISHING CO., BIBLE HOUSE, 58 ARCH ST., 
ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 



SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, N.Y. DRAFT, MONEY ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS: 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age or accident, or other 
adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, if they 
send a Postal Card each December, stating their cases and requesting the paper. 



WHAT SAY THE SCRIPTURES ABOUT SPIRITISM? 
ALSO 
WHO ARE THE SPIRITS IN PRISON? AND WHY ARE THEY THERE? 

This booklet is now ready and will be supplied at 10 cents 
each: wholesale rates 50 cents per dozen are open to all TOWER 



readers who may desire to circulate these among their friends. 
In leatherette binding 25 cents. Prices include postage. 

page 2 

PATENT BINDERS FOR ZION'S WATCH TOWER. 



These hold two years' issues which can be added just as received 
and kept clean. All interested readers should preserve 
one copy of each issue for future reference. These binders will 
henceforth be supplied at 50 cents each, including postage. 

R2238 : page 2 

DO YOU DESIRE ZION'S WATCH TOWER DURING 1898? 



Please notice the address tag on your paper. It indicates 
the date to which your subscription is paid. If it does not agree 
with your record, please drop a card at once, explaining. 

If you desire the TOWER, but cannot pay just now, drop a 
card so stating, so that your name be not dropped. 

If you are unable to pay at all, you will see above that the 
Lord has made full provision for you as one of "THE LORD'S 
POOR." All such are requested to apply each December. Like 
all of God's gifts, a desire and a request are necessary to obtain 
them. A Postal Card request will do. 

If we do not thus hear from you, your name will be dropped 
at once, as we cannot know that you desire its visits further. 
Then, if you should write later, it would cause us extra trouble 
to reset your name for the list. 



R2239 : page 3 

WILL IT BE A YEAR OF BLESSING? 

-1898- 

DEAR FELLOW Pilgrims on the "narrow way" 
to the Heavenly Kingdom, we feel for you an 
earnest brotherly love and take this opportunity at the 
beginning of a new year to tell you of it, and to formally 
express to you our earnest wish that the year 
beginning may be a very happy and a very favorable 
one for us all— as new creatures in Christ Jesus. And 
we would fain say something that would be helpful in 
this direction. What shall we say? 

We would remind you and ourselves that the 
amount of blessing that shall come to us each will depend 
almost entirely on the course we shall pursue in 
seeking those blessings. It will not depend on God; 



for he sets us at rest on that point, by assuring us in 
advance of his willingness to help and bless us, along 
certain lines which he has foreordained as the best and 
only proper ones. He thus throws the responsibility 
upon us. If we follow his directions we shall be blessed: 
to the extent that we shall neglect the Divine Counselor's 
instructions we shall surely fail of the blessings. 
It is thus that we are to obey the instruction, "Keep 
yourselves in the love of God." (Jude 21.) To those 
who thus obediently abide in God's love, the lights and 
the shades of life, its storms and its calms, its sorrows 
and its joys, are all blessings and helps onward and 
upward;— "Nearer my God to Thee." 

Nor is it either reasonable or Scriptural to expect 
that the major portion of our path should be smooth 
and bestrewn with flowers of prosperity, while we follow 
in the footsteps of our dear Redeemer. We remember 
that his path was both rough and thorny, and 
if ours were very different we should feel sure that we 
were not walking in his footsteps. And if it were needful 
that he, the perfect one, should be disciplined and 
learn obedience by the things which he suffered, much 
more do we who are imperfect and seriously "out of 
the way" need to suffer in learning the lesson of obedience 
to God, enduring the trials which would prove us 
to be "copies" of God's dear Son. 

Beloved, the more thorough and warm our consecration, 
the greater will be the progress we shall be able 
to make in developing the fruits and graces of the spirit. 
Now what will most help us to be "fervent in spirit, 

R2240 : page 3 

serving the Lord?" 

We answer, faith! Faith in the exceeding great 
and precious promises which God has given to us; and 
faith in God's testimony that the narrow way alone 
leads to the glory promised. Obedience naturally follows 
in the wake of such a faith. We believe, then act 
accordingly. Hence it is the wise course as well as 
the Scriptural one to keep in close touch with the 
Scriptures, God's presentation of the basis of our faith 
and hopes, the expositor of our shortcomings and the 
delineator of the perfection which we are to copy and 
as nearly as possible attain outwardly as well as in 
our hearts. 

So, then, that the year 1898 shall be one of even 
more than usual progress and spiritual blessing to us 
all, we recommend that each of us give more attention 
than ever before to God's promises to us as his Church 
and to the conditions upon which they shall be made sure 
to us. To this end we commend Sunday meetings and 
mid-week meetings, where practicable, for our own 
help and for the helping of others by word and example. 
We advise also a continuance of the course 
recommended a short time ago— of reading alternately 



each Sunday our Lord's delineation of the graces which 
will insure his blessing (Matt. 5:1-16) and the Apostle 

R2240 : page 4 

Paul's description of the same graces summed up 
under the name Love. (1 Cor. 13:1-13.) We have 
heard from very many already blessed by these readings, 
and now we desire to urge all who are praying 
for and hoping for great blessings during the year 
beginning to try this simple prescription which the 
Great Physician of our souls has prepared for us. 
Where we have heard from scores that they have been 
blessed by this course during the past three months 
we hope to hear from hundreds and thousands as being 
similarly blest during the year beginning. 

Now another part of the prescription. Let us 
begin each day with prayer for wisdom and grace that 
we may serve the Lord acceptably and be a blessing to 
others and be blest ourselves: and let us close these 
morning prayers with the inspired petition— "Let the 
words of my mouth and the meditation of my heart be 
acceptable in thy sight, O Lord, my strength, and my 
Redeemer." (Psa. 19: 14.) Then at the close of each 
day let us square our day's account with the Lord at 
his throne of grace: recounting so far as we are able 
its opportunities used and neglected, its victories won 
or its defeats, its self-sacrifices and its selfishnesses;— 
thanking God for the grace that helped in time of 
need and apologizing for all errors and defeats, craving 
forgiveness in the name and merit of our Savior 
and promising greater faithfulness and zeal by the 
Lord's grace the next day. And pray for us and all 
the interests of the truth and all the dear colaborers, 
as we also remember you and all the household of faith. 
These are straight paths for our feet and all those who 
take them will find them ways of pleasantness and 
paths of peace for their souls, however stormy the way 
for the flesh. 



R2239 : page 4 

JOSEPH L. RUSSELL, DECEASED. 



THE EDITOR has lost his oldest, tried and 
true friend— his Father according to the flesh, 
his Brother according to the spirit; well known to quite 
a number of our readers. He was in his 84th year, 
and the burdens and disabilities of life under present 
conditions had gradually come to outweigh its pleasures, 
so that he was glad to enter into rest;— the rest 
that remains for the people of God. 



The Editor's mother, a noble Christian woman, 
whose instructions and example are still fresh to his 
memory and will never be forgotten, died when he was 
but nine years old; and from that time his father filled 
nobly the office of both parents. His care, his admonitions, 
his help into paths of righteousness will never 
be forgotten. 

But it was after we had come under the first rays 
of "present truth" that his fellowship became most 
precious. He was one of the first to accept the harvest 
message as set forth in ZION'S WATCH TOWER, MILLENNIAL 
DAWN, etc. Altho not gifted as a teacher 
of the good tidings, either by voice or pen, he manifested 
his zeal for the Lord and his cause in various 
ways— he loaned and gave away thousands of tracts 
and DAWNS, besides contributing financially for their 
publication. He was one of the founders of the Tract 
Society; voluntarily giving $1,000 in the first subscription 
at its organization,— a large donation for his means. 
His greatest helpfulness however was in his personal 
encouragement of the Editor; in every visit and in 
every letter, he sought to "hold up our hands." This 
was specially noticeable at such times as the Lord permitted 
the great Adversary to assault the work, and 
the Editor as one of its representatives. 

In his case we have been reminded of the Apostle's 
words in Hebrews 10:32-34. He had the spirit of 
martyrdom, and if he did not get into the thickest of 
the fight and did not bear the brunt of the Enemy's 
attacks, he surely was a faithful encourager and "companion 
of them that were so used" and "had compassion 
on me in my bonds." And as the Apostle adds so add 
we for the encouragement of all such whom the Lord 
has not assigned to duty in the front of the battle:— 

"Cast not away therefore your confidence which hath 
great recompense of reward." "For God is not unrighteous 
to forget your work and labor of love which ye 
...have ministered to the saints, and do minister." 
-Heb. 10:35; 6:10. 

Our last conversation before he became unconscious 
was respecting our blessed hope of eternal life through 
Christ, our dear Redeemer, and the promised future 
glory in which the Apostle intimates there will be different 
degrees of brilliancy, as "one star differeth from 
another star in glory." (1 Cor. 15:41.) Humble minded, 
unostentatious and neither vain nor boastful, he declared 
that he did not expect a great or prominent position 
in the Lord's Kingdom, but that he had full 
confidence nevertheless— not in his own perfection but 
in the Lord's perfection and sacrifice and love and 
grace,— and was confident therefore that a place was 
reserved for him, and he was satisfied to have the 
matter thus. 

It is not for us to say what shall be his blessing 
and reward: the gracious Judge will esteem us none the 
less if our confidence is in him, rather than boastfully 



in ourselves; but we can say of father a few things 
without boasting of him or for him. He was a lover of 

R2239 : page 5 

righteousness. He walked not after the flesh but after 
the spirit. He was a true yoke fellow and helper in 
the Lord's cause. He fought a good fight— striving 
to conquer self-will and inherited sin and to resist the 
world and the devil. He kept the faith— did not deny 
it,— confessing it in word and deed to the very last, 
leaning on and trusting in the dear Redeemer. He 
has finished his course, and the righteous Judge, in 
whose grace he trusted, will grant him a goodly portion 
in the Father's house of many mansions. 



R2240 : page 5 

THOU SHALT GUIDE ME WITH THY COUNSEL 
AND AFTERWARD RECEIVE ME TO GLORY.-PSA. 73:24. 



HOW WONDERFUL is the thought that 

the Almighty God offers to guide his people 

through the difficulties of the present life by his divine 

counsel. One of life's most important lessons is our 

own insufficiency, our own lack of wisdom. In childhood 

days we naturally sought parental counsel. In 

after years even, while recognizing perhaps the fallibility 

and imperfection of all human counsel, we nevertheless 

have found such counsel helpful— perhaps at 

times absolutely necessary to our welfare: nevertheless, 

under the realization that to some extent selfishness is 

a trait in all humanity, we have found it necessary to 

be on guard on this point also; lest the counsel which 

we received should be not only fallible but possibly 

biased by the interests or preferences of the counselor. 

But when, after learning of the grace of God and 
his provision in Christ Jesus for the forgiveness of our 
sins and the reconciliation of ourselves to him, we not 
only accepted the forgiveness, but turning over a 
new leaf, sought to walk in life according to the rules 
of justice, conscientiously, we found that more than 
ever we needed counsel— good counsel, unselfish counsel. 
We found that the course we had adopted is quite 
contrary to the spirit of the world; and hence that the 
number who would be able and willing to counsel us 
along these lines is comparatively small. Then it was 
that we first learned to go to the Lord's Word for 
counsel: and as we studied it we found in it more and 
more of a heavenly wisdom, profitable not only respecting 
the life to come, but also respecting the things 



of the present life. 

After we had learned more of our own weakness 
and imperfection and more of the wisdom and grace of 
God, and after we had heard him inviting us, "calling" 
us to a full consecration of ourselves to him, 
and thus to a jointheirship with our Lord Jesus in the 
coming Kingdom, and after we had found the narrowness 
of the way to the divine nature and glory, we 
came more than ever to appreciate the necessity for a 
Counselor, and a very wise one. We found that even 
the best of earthly counsel is of value only as it has 
been directed by the divine counsel: and hence we 
learned that in every condition in life, in every perplexity, 
we should listen to the Voice Celestial. When 
we arrived at this stage of experience the words of our 
text brought us great comfort and joy, prophetically 
assuring us of the very thing which we had desired, 
namely, guidance by divine counsel. Moreover, there 
is in it the additional assurance that this counsel shall 
be sufficient for us, so that ultimately, by giving heed 
thereto, we shall reach the everlasting prize at the end 
of the racecourse. 

It is not surprising that, misinterpreting the divine 
Word and hence the divine plan for human salvation, 
many should fancy that they are being guided by God's 
counsel when really they are merely following the 
imaginings of their own minds. How many have been 
even led to absurdities by following what they imagined 
were impressions of the holy spirit. We know of 
no more fruitful source of error than this: no channel 
which the Adversary more frequently uses to delude 
and mystify those who consecrate themselves to the 
Lord; some of them finally becoming bound with their 
own erroneous views as with a chain. 

It is usually after having stumbled through severe 
experiences of disappointment by following their own 
imaginings, thinking that they are led by the holy 
spirit, that God's people ultimately, if honest with 
themselves, find the falsity of this method and look 
further and lay hold upon God's counsel provided for 
us in his Word— the Bible. 

The Adversary seeks to keep us from it and therefore 
misrepresents it as self-contradictory, contradicted 
by assurances of Scientists so-called, etc., etc. But 
the child of God not satisfied with self-deception, but 
really in earnest in the matter, learning his need of a 
counselor, and seeking grace to help at the throne of 
grace, will be providentially led of the Lord to his 
Word. He may even then be turned aside by some of 
the Adversary's devices, but if he be truly begotten of 
the truth, the heavenly Father will doubtless correct 
him with chastisements and disappointments, and providentially 
bring him again in contact with his Word, 
at a time when his heart will be more mellow, and 
when he will more than ever feel his need of divine 
counsel. 



We are not claiming that divine power is limited, 
so that no other channel than the Scriptures could be 

R2240 : page 6 

used in communicating between God and his people. 
It would be far from our thought to limit the Almighty; 
but it is quite our desire to ascertain if he has in 
any degree limited himself as respects the channels 
which he would use in counselling his people. We believe 
in divine providences, but believe that they are 
means for the bringing of God's people into a condition 
where they can be taught of God from his Word; 
and that providences do not supplant God's written 
Word. We know of nothing whatever in the Scriptures 
to indicate that God is pleased to reveal his will to 
his people, or to counsel them, by impressing thoughts 
upon their attention. Perhaps we ought to make an 
exception of the apostles, for possibly the Lord may 
so have dealt with them, inasmuch as they were used 
in the writing of the divine counsel for our instruction 
—the Scriptures. 

But there is no intimation that God's people of the 
Church in general are to have any plenary inspiration, 
after the manner of the prophets and the apostles. 
Quite to the contrary, the Church is continually urged 
to search the Scriptures, that they may know the will, 
the counsel, of God, and the Apostle declares that the 
written Word is sufficient "that the man of God may 
be perfect, thoroughly furnished." (2 Tim. 3:16,17.) 
"That your faith should not stand in the wisdom of 
men but in the power of God"— the Word of God 
which liveth and abideth forever. It is in harmony 
with this that our Lord prayed to the Father for the 
Church, saying, "Sanctify them through thy truth; 
thy Word is truth." (John 17:17.) It is for the same 
reason that the Bereans are commended, "in that they 
...searched the Scriptures daily." (Acts 17:11.) It 
is for the same reason that the strongest and most 
faithful Christians in every period of the world's history 
have been those who loved and reverenced the 
Bible, and who went to it as the Word of God when 

R2241 : page 6 

they desired counsel from the Most High. This is the 
oracle of God, and as the prophet Isaiah declares, "If 
they speak not according to this word, it is because 
there is no light in them." The prophet David says 
of some that "sit in darkness" that "it is because they 
rebelled against the words of God, and condemned the 
counsel of the Most High: therefore he brought down 
their heart with labor; they fell down, and there was 
none to help. Then they cried unto the Lord in their 
trouble, and he saved them out of their distresses." 
-Psa. 107:11-13. Compare Prov. 1:25,30. 



Some reject the Word of the Lord in toto: others 
accept it nominally, but really never accept its counsels 
in the sense of putting them into practice in their 
daily lives. These latter are as truly rejectors as the 
former, altho they include the vast majority of nominal 
Christians. The Apostle calls attention to the difference 
between the hearer of the Word and the doer of 
the Word: also in the first Psalm the Lord points out 
to us the blessedness of those who walk according to 
the divine law or counsel, and not according to the 
counsel of the ungodly, saying, "He shall be like a 
tree planted by the river of water that bringeth forth 
fruit in its season. His leaf therefore shall not wither; 
and the thing which he doeth shall prosper." This 
class has one great, chief object in life: it is to serve 
the Lord acceptably, and thus to cultivate the character 
which he enjoined, and thus to be fitted and prepared 
for the glories and blessing promised to such in 
the life to come. As the Apostle Paul declared, so 
say all of these: "This one thing I do"— and such 
shall prosper in that one thing which they are doing; 
such will win the great prize set before us in the gospel. 

Even in earthly matters, how great wisdom do we 
find in the Lord's counsel, the Lord's Word. How 
often his people have ascertained years afterward, that 
it would have been wise for them, even from a selfish 
standpoint, to have sought first the counsel of the Lord 
in reference to the smallest affairs of life. For instance, 
how many have learned the wisdom of the Lord's 
counsel which says, "Be thou no surety for another." 
How many people have made shipwreck, financially, 
by the neglect of this admonition from the great Counselor. 
Nothing in this implies selfishness however, for 
the counsel of the Lord is that his people should be of 
a generous disposition. He counsels, "Do good, and 
lend, hoping for nothing [for no corresponding favors] 
again." (Luke 6:35.) We may do good and lend according 
to our opportunities and abilities, but are not 
to obligate ourselves beyond what we would be willing 
to give or to lend outright. 

How many would have found it of great advantage 
to them in life to have followed the Lord's counsel 
which says, "Owe no man anything but love." How 
often in the neglect of this divine counsel, God's people 
as well as the worldly have suffered for years in 
endeavoring to pay debts which should never have 
been contracted. On the other hand, the Lord counsels 
us that we should "lay by in store" that we may 
have to give to charities. (1 Cor. 16:2; Eph. 4:28.) 
Economy and frugality, and provision for the necessities 
of our own household, and generosity toward others 
needing assistance, spiritual or temporal, are the 
good counsels of the Lord. 

How many have suffered themselves and brought 
suffering upon others through neglect of the Lord's 
counsel which says, "A soft answer turneth away 



wrath; but grievous words stir up anger." Who cannot 
see that the whole world would be blessed by obedience 
to this counsel and that a very large proportion of the 
domestic infelicity of the whole world arises from a 

R2241 : page 7 

total or partial neglect of the course here pointed out 
by the divine Counsellor. 

How many have failed to properly apply the divine 
counsel which assures us that, if rightly exercised 
thereby, tribulation worketh a hope which will not be 
put to shame, because of the love of God shed abroad 
in our hearts by such experiences. If all the Lord's 
people would give attention to this, what a willingness 
to endure tribulation for the truth's sake would take 
the place of fear; and what growth in grace would 
speedily be manifested. 

The Lord's counsel speaks to us again, instructing 
us as to the attitude of heart necessary if we would 
receive and be profited by his counsels. He says, "The 
meek will he guide in judgment, the meek will he teach 
his way." Ah, yes! But how often pride, and haughtiness 
of language and demeanor, mark those who would 
be teachers of God's people. But such marks to those 
who are looking to the Lord for counsel, should be indications 
that such teachers are not meek, are therefore 
not taught of God, nor in an attitude to receive 
his instruction; and that consequently they would be 
very unsafe helpers and guides respecting the heavenly 
counsel. 

The heavenly Counselor instructs us, saying, 
"Forget not the assembling of yourselves together— 
and so much the more as ye see the day drawing on." 
The meek who receive the counsel will seek so far as 
they are able to make use of all the means of grace 
which the Lord provides, for all possible fellowship of 
spirit with those who have the mind of Christ they will 
enjoy and seek to use. Those who do otherwise are 
rejecting the counsel of the Lord against themselves— 
to their own detriment and injury. Wherever the 
spirit of the Lord is in any heart, it will surely seek 
fellowship in others of like spirit. Hence, if our own 
hearts are in good condition, we will proportionately 
desire fellowship with the Lord, expressing ourselves 
in prayer and hearing the testimony of the Lord through 
his Word in reply; and similarly we will enjoy mingling 
with the Lord's people. "He who loveth not 
his brother whom he hath seen, how can he love God 
whom he hath not seen." Any lack of fellowship with 
all who love the Lord and are consecrated to him 
should be considered by us as a sure sign of a spiritual 
decline, and should be correspondingly opposed with 
all our energy, until our hearts come back to that condition 
in which we have (as an assurance that we have 
passed from death unto life) the fact that we love the 



brethren.— 1 John 3:14. 

Our heavenly Father counsels us again in the 
words, "My grace is sufficient for thee, for my strength 
is made perfect in weakness." How often would this 
good counsel of the Lord, if remembered, bring a 
blessing and a relief from the attacks of the Adversary 
who fain would make us believe that our unavoidable 
weaknesses and imperfections are proofs that we are 
not the Lord's. With this counsel before us, what a 
strength we should have in combating the besetments 
of the world, the flesh and the devil. How it should 
lead us in the moment of temptation to lift up our 
hearts in prayer to the Lord for "grace to help in time 
of need." The Lord wishes us to learn the lesson of 
our own weakness and imperfection and to learn to go 
to him for strength and succor— not before we need it, 
but "in time of need," in every time of trouble. 

What a blessing comes to us with a true appreciation 
of the Lord's counsel, "Godliness with contentment 
is great gain." The combination of godliness 
and contentment is necessary to our peace and spiritual 
prosperity. However much godliness the discontented 
may have or seek to have, they cannot have true 
happiness. However contented any may be in sin or 
ungodliness, he is certainly losing a great deal in not 
having godliness— not only as respects the present life, 
but also that which is to come. Godliness with contentment 
does not mean indifference to our condition 
and welfare, either spiritual or temporal: the child of 
God is to be ambitious, especially in spiritual things, 
and in the use of every earthly talent to the Master's 
praise: but while putting forth every energy and not 
slothful in the Lord's business, nor in any other business 
in which he may engage with the Lord's approval, 
but fervent in his spirit, serving the Lord, he may 
be content with such blessings upon his efforts as the 
Lord is pleased to grant, so that while still pursuing 
and still achieving he may continually be thankful and 
restful at heart, singing,— 

"Content, whatever lot I see, 
Since 'tis my God that leadeth me." 

No counsel of the Lord could be much more important 
than this at the present juncture; for we are in 
a time when more and more the whole world of mankind 
is growing discontented as well as losing Godlikeness. 
God's people have therefore all the more 
need to cultivate these qualities; not only for their own 
sakes, but also as helpers, counselors and exemplars 
for the world. 

How many of God's consecrated people, through 
neglect to appropriate it to themselves, have lost the 
great comfort and peace which should go with the 
promise of our Counselor, "All things work together 
for good, to them that love God; to the called ones 
according to his purpose." The well-instructed soul 
has learned that the good here referred to is not always, 



nor very often, earthly good,— temporal advantage: 

they that love God and are called according to his purpose, 

and have been giving attentive heed to his counsel, 

R2241 : page 8 

know that the "all things" include chiefly the trials 
and disappointments and perplexities and difficulties 
and temptations of the narrow way, in which they have 
consecrated themselves to walk; and that the "good" 
which will be worked out, will be in the chiseled and 
polished characters, likenesses to the character of 
Christ, which through faithfulness unto the end will 
be perfected in the divine honor and glory and immortality 
promised by the Lord to his faithful. 

R2242 : page 8 

What good counsel comes to us in the words, applicable 
to all who desire to please and serve the Lord, 
"I will set a guard upon my lips, that I sin not with 
my mouth." How many heart-aches and heart burnings 
would be saved by a careful compliance with this 
good counsel. And a great blessing comes from every 
attempt to follow it; because, the lips merely give expression 
to that which is in the heart. "Out of the 
abundance of the heart the mouth speaketh." Whoever, 
therefore, starts to guard his lips will find if he 
be a child of God, if he have a new heart, that the controlling 
of the lips will necessarily mean a correction 
of the heart in righteousness. He who would guard 
his lips will soon find that the easiest as well as the 
best way to do it is to get his heart filled with love and 
good wishes— to the Lord's people and to all others; 
then the good thoughts and good sentiments within 
will leave no room for bitter expressions, slanders, 
malice, expressions of hatred or strife, which gender 
roots of bitterness and defile many. 

Another counsel of the Lord which seems to be 
overlooked of late is, "Be not forgetful to entertain 
strangers, for some thereby have entertained angels 
unawares." In olden times the spirit beings on 
numerous occasions presented themselves in human 
form to deliver messages to mankind, but the Lord's 
general method during this Gospel age seems to be to 
use his people in the flesh as his messengers. Yet, it 
is nevertheless still true, that all who have the Lord's 
spirit should be hospitably inclined; especially toward 
any whom they may have reason to believe are fellow 
pilgrims in the path of life and fellow servants of the 
great King. And all who are ever thus entertained as 
the Lord's servants, and because they are his, should 
be extremely careful that as ambassadors for God their 
influence, wherever they may go, may be an influence 
for good, a blessing upon their fellow servants, an influence 
that will glorify our Lord. 



We might take up hundreds of the testimonies of 
our great Counselor and find them full of wisdom and 
blessing to us; yet the blessing would be not merely 
in the knowing of his counsel, but in proportion as we 
should obey the counsel, and thus do the will of our 
Father who is in heaven. We will not go further with 
this part of the subject, except to call to memory that 
the point of the Lord's counsel most prominently set 
forth is, as the Apostle declares, summed up in the 
word, Love— to God and to our fellows. All the meekness 
that he instructs us to have, all the patience, together 
with all the experiences in life which he permits, 
are designed merely to cultivate, and to bring to 
a large development in us, the spirit of Love which, 
as our Counselor declares, is "the bond of perfectness;" 
because Love represents the only condition of the heart 
which could be entirely acceptable to God. 

While the outward affairs of life are to be regulated 
and harmonized with the Lord's character and will, 
as expressed to us in his Word, yet the object sought 
is to have these good qualities proceed from an inward 
source, a regenerated heart; a heart from which Selfishness 
has been dethroned, and in which Love has 
been enthroned as the moving impulse of life. Love 
to God will regulate all of our obedience to him, so 
that it will not be merely outward and formal ceremonies, 
but worship in spirit and in truth. Love to fellow-men 
—especially to the household of faith— will 
guide us in our dealings with them; for love thinks 
no evil, love slanders not, love backbites not, love 
bears no false witness, love seeks not her own interests 
merely, but also the welfare of others, is not proud, 
but humble, meek, gentle, easy to be entreated, long-suffering 
and patient. 

Let us remember, however, that this condition of 
perfect love is not to be attained in a moment, but is 
to be the result of the experiences of the present life, 
in obedience to the divine counsel. However, the degree 
of success and rapidity in cultivating this spirit 
depends very largely upon our zeal, and the heed 
which we give to the great Counselor. Those who 
have given themselves wholly to the Lord and who 
have been accepted of him, have doubtless even from 
the beginning of their new life in Christ known considerable 
of this devotional love for God and for his 
people, which should increase daily. But the devotional 
flame which at the beginning of the Christian's experience 
is fearful and merely seeks the Lord for safety, 
may by and by reach such a development that it cries 
out to God, "Oh Lord, I delight to do thy will. Gladly 
will I toil and suffer, or bear thy reproaches, and 
serve thy people; if thus I may know that I am pleasing 
and acceptable to thee!" This is the right spirit, 
and this spirit should continue all the way down to the 
close of the battle. But such will find testings and 
trials by the way, to prove how deep and how sincere 



is their spirit of love: and where it is genuine, where 
the good seed of the divine truth has fallen into an 
honest heart, it will grow, it will thrive upon trials, 
disappointments; and against every opposition it will 
bring forth in life a fruitage of good works, of service 

R2242 : page 9 

for the Lord and for his people,— which may be large 
or small according to the opportunities enjoyed by all 
the "overcomers." 

"AND AFTERWARD RECEIVE ME TO GLORY.' 



It will be noticed that this prophetic promise is 
not, "Thou shalt guide me by thy counsel" and if I 
will render obedience to the counsel, I will afterward 
be received to glory. On the contrary, the statement 
is made, not to nominal Christians, nor even to all who 
make a consecration to the Lord; it refers merely to 
those who will ultimately be overcomers and constitute 
the body of Christ, the glorified Church, the bride. 
The promise in other words is to the entire Christ, 
Head and body. Each member of the Christ will be 
guided by the divine counsel and as a result will be 
received to glory. All who hear the counsel of the 
Lord and are guided by it in this present time, will be 
ultimately accepted as members of the body of Christ, 
and as such will be received to the divine glory. 

The Counselor is wise, infallible, unerring; he 
knows the end from the beginning, he knows exactly 
what will please himself; he knows therefore how to 
direct us in his way. His Word of counsel "is sufficient' 
His spirit is the spirit of holiness, the spirit 
of love, the spirit of the truth; and wherever this spirit 
dwells in the hearts of his people it must be through a 
conformity to his Word of counsel, his guidance. For 
all who thus put themselves completely under the 
Lord's supervision, and who resign their wills entirely 
to his will, there can be no question as to the result. 
Assuredly, such will afterward be received into glory. 

Our Counselor through his Word tells us that there 
is an earthly or terrestrial glory, and that there is a 
heavenly or celestial. (1 Cor. 15:40,41.) Hence his 
counsel is appropriate not only to the class which is 
now running for the prize of the heavenly glory— seeking 
to make their calling and election sure through 
faithfulness unto sacrifice— but the same counsel will 
be appropriate to the world in the coming age. It will 
be just as necessary for the world to hear the Voice of 
the great Counselor as for us. They, too, will need to 
learn the various lessons which the elect learn in the 
present life. 

Those who will hear the Voice of the Counselor 



then, in the Millennium, will hear it through the glorified 
High Priest; and those who will render obedience 
to that counsel will be received to the earthly 
glory while those who will not hear his Voice will be 
cut off in the second death. (Acts 3:23.) The earthly 
glory was represented in the first man, Adam, and 
such as attain to it will attain to a condition of glory 
similar to that which he enjoyed before he sinned. The 
heavenly glory is represented in our Lord Jesus since 
his resurrection, highly exalted, the express image of 
the Father's person, and all the faithful of this Gospel 
age (tested by the severe trials of the present time) 
shall be made like unto their Lord and share his glory; 
as it is written,— "We shall be like him and see him 
as he is"— "partakers of the divine nature." 

If there are difficulties in the race-course set before 
us in the Gospel age, there are advantages also. 
If we are required to walk by faith and not by sight, 
nevertheless the Lord's grace is sufficient for us, and 
the results promised are "a far more exceeding and 
eternal weight of glory." If the trial is sharper and 
the conflict more intense, it has also the advantage of 
being shorter than that coming upon the world in the 
Millennial age; so we may say with the Apostle, these 
"light afflictions which are but for a moment," work 
out for us a better hope. 

Let us, dearly beloved, take yet more earnest heed 
to the Word which has been spoken, remembering the 
Master's expression, He that heareth these sayings of 
mine and doeth them, I will liken him to a man who 
builded his house upon a rock and the rain descended 
and the floods came and the storm beat upon that house 
and it fell not; for it was founded upon a rock— a sure 
foundation. 



R2243 : page 9 

"TEMPTED IN ALL POINTS LIKE AS WE ARE." 

-JAN. 9.-MATT. 4:1-11.- 

"For in that he himself hath suffered, being tempted, he 
is able to succor them that are tempted."— Heb. 2: 18. 

IMMEDIATELY after his consecration to death, 

in harmony with the Father's plan, and after he 

had symbolized that consecration by baptism in Jordan, 

our Lord, instead of beginning at once his ministry, 

turned aside into the wilderness. The record is that 

he was led of the spirit to do this, and that it involved 

very trying temptations. We may readily surmise the 

reason why our Master took this course. He knew 

that he had come into the world to fulfil a great mission, 

to perform the Father's will, whatever that might 



be: he knew that it involved the rescue of mankind 
from sin and death: and, since it was the Father's will, 
he had left the glory which he had with the Father 
from before the world's creation, and had willingly 
come to a lower nature, human nature, in order to 
carry out to the full the divine plan. But the divine 
plan could not be carried out by him as the babe of 
Bethlehem, nor as the boy of Nazareth, nor until he 
had fully reached manhood's estate at thirty years of 
age. We saw in our last lesson that he waited not a 

R2243 : page 10 

moment, but started to come to John for baptism before 

he was quite thirty, in order that at the very earliest 

possible moment he might make his full consecration 

to the Father's will and begin the Father's business 

—the work he had given him to do. We have seen, 

also, that the holy spirit without measure was granted 

to our Lord as soon as he had finished his consecration 

and its symbol, as he came up out of the water. It 

was under the enlightening influence of this holy power 

that he had just received, and by means of which he 

was enabled to see and understand much more clearly 

than before the things of God— the divine plan and his 

connection therewith— that he sought the wilderness 

solitude for study, prayer and reflection. He took this 

course because he realized the importance of the work 

he was beginning, and desired to make no mistake respecting 

the same, and its proper method. He 

turned aside and, freeing himself from all uninspired 

earthly counsel, sought to know by the holy spirit given 

unto him the true import of those Scriptures with 

which he was already familiar, and concerning which 

he had disputed with the Doctors of the Law in the 

temple as early as his twelfth year. (Had there been 

other spirit-begotten ones then, our Lord no doubt 

would have communed with them; just as his followers 

are instructed to do.-Heb. 10:25; Jude 19-21.) 

We can imagine our Lord during those forty days 
praying to the Father for counsel and guidance, and 
searching the Scriptures which he already had stored 
in his memory, to find the answer to his prayers written 
aforetime in the types of the Law and the writings 
of the prophets. The various features were called up, 
and the harmony between them sought;— the prophecies 
which refer to Messiah as the Lamb led to the 
slaughter, and the other prophecies which describe the 
glorious majesty and power of Immanuel as King of 
kings. He saw also that the typical lambs and bullocks 
sacrificed must have an antitype, because their 
continued repetition showed that they never really cancelled 
sin: and furthermore that in some way there was 
an identity between the Priest who offered the sacrifice 
and the sacrifice itself; and that the same Priest 
was typified in Melchisedec as no longer a sacrificer, 



but enthroned in power. The putting together of these 
different features of the divine Word, and weaving out 
of them a knowledge of the divine plan, and of his own 
relation thereto, was probably a large and important 
part of our Lord's occupation during those forty days 
in the wilderness. The more he studied the picture, 
the more he saw that it represented ignominy, shame 
and death as preceding the glory of his Kingdom. 
Naturally the influence of these reflections would weigh 
heavily upon him, rather depressing him in spirit- 
particularly since the continuous fast necessarily weakened 
him mentally as well as physically. 

Whether or not the tempter was with the Lord, 
testing him throughout the forty days, we do not know; 
but we know that the severity of his trial came at its 
close;— when he was at his weakest, physically, and 
when consequently the prophetic study, which indicated 
to him his path of suffering, exercised upon him 
its most depressing influence. 

The first of the recorded temptations was a very 
subtle one. (1) It implied a sympathy on the part of 
the tempter, a desire for the Lord's welfare. (2) It 
implied a doubt on the part of Satan respecting our 
Lord's identity, and a desire for proof, with the indirect 
intimation that, if such a proof were given, Satan 
himself would believe and be ready to fall into line as 
a servant of righteousness. (3) Knowing that he 
was the Son of God and that he had been anointed 
with the holy spirit, this demand of the tempter would 
seem to be a challenge to prove himself to be the Son 
of God, and to prove that he had received the holy 
spirit in full power, and that, if he did not do so, his 
claim might be considered fraudulent. (4) It was an 
appeal to one of the strongest cravings known to human 
nature; one which we, who have never fasted 
much, can with difficulty conceive. The gnawings of 
hunger are said to be terrible, and it has become a proverb 
that hunger or "necessity knows no law." Shipwrecked 
sailors have been exonerated for turning cannibals 
under the stress of hunger when they have been 
without food much less than forty days. As foretold 
by the prophet, and recorded by the historian, mothers 
ate their own children during the siege of Jerusalem, 
under the stress of hunger. All these circumstances 
considered together prove that this was a most severe 
temptation upon our Lord, perhaps as severe as any. 

But the question arises, Wherein was the sin? 
Why should not our Lord use his power for the preservation 
of his own life? 

We must assuredly look for the answer to these 
questions, because if obedience to Satan's proposition 
had not been wrong, a serious wrong, there could have 
been no temptation in the matter. The fact that it was 
a temptation proves that for our Lord to have created 
bread out of the stones would have been a sin. It 
proves also that he had the power thus to transform 



the stones into bread, otherwise there would have been 

no temptation. The wrong, as we understand it, would 

have consisted in the misuse of the holy spirit or holy 

power so recently conferred upon him. This spirit was 

poured upon him because of his consecration, his self-sacrifice 

to do the Father's will in the interest of others 

and to lay down his life in this service. Consequently, 

to have used that power in harmony with any other 

purpose than that for which it was given would have 

been a misuse of it. This avoidance of the use of his 

R2243 : page 1 1 

special powers for or upon himself may be noticed in 
connection with our Lord's entire ministry. All of his 
miracles were in the interests of others; none of them 
for selfish purposes. For instance, when at Cana the 
water was turned into wine, while our Lord may have 
partaken of the wine with the rest, it was made for 
their use and to manifest forth his glory, and was not 
for himself. The same was true when the five thousand 
were fed in the wilderness, and again when the 
four thousand were miraculously fed. But to have 
turned the stones into bread would not have fed others 
either physically or mentally. Indeed, so far from 
using his miraculous powers selfishly, we find that 
many of our Lord's miracles, especially those of healing, 
were done at his own personal expense— at the 
expense of the loss of vitality; as it is written, "Virtue 
[vitality] went out of him and healed them all." 

There is a lesson in this for the Church, which is 
the body of Christ; for we are tempted like as he was. 
It is well to note that it is not all mankind that is 
tempted as he was tempted, but only his "brethren," 
the members of his body. These are tempted like as 
he was, and for the same reasons. A failure to realize 
this fact has led many to inquiry as to how our Lord 
was tempted in all points as every father and mother 
is tempted, and as every husband and wife is tempted 
and tried, as drunkards are tempted, etc. But all these 
fail to get the thought. Our Lord was not so tempted, 
but merely tempted on the same lines of testing and 
trial that apply to his consecrated Church. 

Applying this lesson to the Church, the body of 
Christ, we find it applicable. We, having been justified 
by the grace of God through faith in the precious 
blood, are reckoned as perfect; in order that we may 
present our justified selves as living sacrifices to God, 
under the conditions of the New Covenant. With our 
Master this signified a consecration or baptism into 
death: so with us, it signifies a giving up of human 
rights, that we may obtain the more excellent inheritance, 
of which the holy spirit now given us is a foretaste. 
But the tempter comes to us to suggest such a 
use of our new nature, its talents, privileges and opportunities 
as would make it the servant of our earthly 



nature and its appetites. This temptation should be 
resisted as from the evil one. To our understanding 
this temptation may come in various ways; for instance, 
(1) our privilege of communion with the Lord might 
be perverted into merely an opportunity for begging 
for temporal blessings, wealth, or ease, or health. On 
the contrary we are to realize that our earthly interests 
have all been consecrated to the Lord, and we are to 
seek chiefly the interests of the heavenly Kingdom— 
to spend and be spent in its service, according to our 
covenant; and to commit all earthly interests unto him 
who careth for us, and who has promised that they 

R2244 : page 1 1 

shall work together for good to those who love him, 
and are called according to his purpose. 

(2) Another form of this temptation might be to 
use heavenly gifts to earthly advantage; as for instance, 
a minister, finding the truth unpopular, might 
be tempted to sacrifice it in the interest of his daily 
bread, or comforts, or luxuries or fame. The same 
temptation is common to all; for all the members of the 
body of Christ are members of the "royal priesthood" 
whose commission is to minister to truth, "holding 
forth the Word of life." And suggestions will naturally 
come to all, to the effect that boldness and fearlessness 
in the use of their spiritual talents would soon 
or later lead to temporal losses and crosses; and thus 
to these also the Tempter suggests that the truth be 
used only in such a manner as will bring the largest 
proportion of the loaves and fishes. We all, therefore, 
should remember well our Master's answer to the 
Tempter along this line: "Man shall not live by bread 
alone, but by every word that proceedeth out of the 
mouth of God." The word from the mouth of God is 
that if we are faithful in laying down our lives now we 
shall have eternal life and jointheirship in our Master's 
Kingdom. His word is that "whosoever seeketh to 
save his [earthly] life [at the expense of his covenant] 
shall lose it, and whosoever shall lose his [earthly] 
life [laying down his life in harmony with his covenant 
of consecration, faithfully, unto death] shall find it 
[eternal life]." 

The second temptation was a challenge to our Lord 
to prove his relationship to God, and the divine providence 
over him, by leaping from the highest point of 
the temple into the valley below. We need not suppose 
that our Lord was taken physically to the top of 
the temple, but that he was taken mentally there by 
the suggestion which, if amplified, no doubt would be 
somewhat as follows: If you are the Son of God, it is 
proper that you should give some test or proof, and I 
suggest that it be a leap from the top of the temple into 
yonder valley: which would be proof not only to me 
but to the most zealous of the Jews, who would then 



know of a surety of your divine power and commission, 
by seeing you arise unhurt after the fall. Satan even 
sought to back up this temptation by a text of Scripture, 
quoting from Psa. 91:11,12. It was a misapplication 
of Scripture, however, for the prophecy relates 
to the symbolical feet of Christ— the last members of 
the body of Christ in the end of the Gospel age— pointing 
out how these will be preserved and helped in the 
time of trouble and stumbling with which this age 
will close. 

Our Lord's answer shows that he possessed the 
"spirit of a sound mind." He answered the Tempter 

R2244 :page 12 

that it would be wrong, sin on his part, thus to tempt 
the Almighty, to tempt Providence, no matter how 
good the objective result. 

There is a lesson here also for the members of the 
body of Christ, the royal priesthood. In seeking to 
serve the Lord we are not to tempt Providence by expecting 
miracles where they are unnecessary. As it 
would have been sin for our Master to have leaped 
from the roof of the temple, so the temptation may 
come to us to fearlessly put ourselves into positions of 
difficulty and danger (moral or financial, physical or 
spiritual) and expect God to work a miracle in our deliverance. 
For instance, we have known Christian 
people who would go into debt without any assurance 
of being able to pay, and who explained the matter by 
saying that they had faith in the Lord that he would 
provide the money by and by, and not suffer them to 
be put to shame, as frauds, and thus to put him to 
shame. These people were jumping off the pinnacle of 
the temple financially and morally without any authority 
in the Word of God for so doing. Such are likely 
soon or later to meet with disaster. Their duty would 
be rather to remember that obedience is better than 
sacrifice, and that obedience demands that they "owe 
no man anything." Another temptation of this same 
character comes to some people in connection with the 
Lord's work: urging them to expect divine interposition 
and miracle to put the truth into their mouths and 
hearts while they fail to obey the divine instruction to 
"Search the Scriptures" that they may be "thoroughly 
furnished" unto every good word and work. Our 
Lord's reply to Satan is one that should be treasured 
by all of his followers for use under all such temptations; 
namely, "Thou shalt not tempt the Lord thy 
God." 

Our Lord's final temptation in the wilderness was 
the display to him of the kingdoms of the world, their 
power and magnificence, and the proposition that all 
of these should be turned over to him if he would but 
acknowledge Satan and become a cooperator with him. 
We do not suppose that the high mountain to which he 



was taken was a literal mountain, but suppose that our 
Lord was all the while still in the wilderness of Judea, 
and that mentally he was taken into Satan's mountain 
and given a view of the majesty of the earthly dominion 
and the subserviency of all the kingdoms of the 
world to Satan the "prince of this world, who now 
worketh in the hearts of the children of disobedience." 
Here, as elsewhere, "mountain" stands for kingdom, 
and the high mountain, from which earth's kingdoms 
were viewed, was the Kingdom of Satan, his rule and 
authority over mankind. Satan in the first temptation 
had found our Lord fully obedient to his consecration 
and unwilling to use his heavenly powers selfishly. In 
the second, he had found him unwilling to exercise 
anything but a proper, rational trust in God, in harmony 
with the Lord's Word. 

Now he tried a new plan, wholly different: He 
would no longer dispute with Jesus that he was the 
Son of God, he would no longer ask him to prove that 
proposition; but taking that for granted, and taking 
for granted his divine title to the dominion of the world, 
he now proposed a compromise. He said in effect, You 
are anointed of God to be the King of Earth; yet you 
yourself must see what difficulties must lie in your 
way. You see how the whole world is under my sway, 
and even according to your own expectations (as you 
have been reasoning the matter over from the Scriptures) 
the divine plan for blessing mankind, which you 
have undertaken to carry out, would be at very best a 
slow, tedious plan, full of difficulties if indeed at all 
practicable. And as for yourself, you perceive that 
the path marked out for you in Jehovah's arrangement, 
by which he proposes that you shall become the Lord 
and King of the earth, is a path of severe trials, difficulties 
and dangers, amidst which, if you make but 
one misstep, you will forfeit all. Now, therefore, my 
suggestion is this: I am not so bad, not so evilly disposed, 
as I am reputed to be. True, I did instigate 
sin, but not because I preferred to see mankind in sin, 
but because I wished to have an empire of my own, 
and to have mankind as my subjects. Really, I should 
be glad to have you undertake the work of rescuing 
mankind from its degradation and establishing just 
such a kingdom as you propose to establish— a reign of 
righteousness, justice, peace and love; and I would be 
willing to cooperate. Now, therefore, my suggestion 
is that, instead of combatting me and incurring my opposition 
and enmity, you recognize me in connection 
with this world of mankind, and undertake the work 
of bringing mankind to righteousness under my patronage, 
and I, on the other part, will promptly and 
speedily, and without contention or strife, deliver to 
you, to be blessed, all the families of the earth, according 
to the desire of your heart. Consider well now, 
how much better is this plan which I suggest than the 
one which you have been entertaining as outlined in 



the Scriptures. Furthermore, this would involve my 
own conversion to righteousness, which surely would 
not be amiss either in your sight or in the sight of Jehovah. 
You need have no hesitation about adopting 
this my plan, because you do not find it in the Scriptures; 
for of course God never anticipated that I would 
make such an offer, a free delivery up of the world to 
you and to a reign of righteousness. 

Here was the strongest temptation of all. Our 
Lord knew that the Father's will was to reconcile the 
world unto himself; he knew that it was for this purpose 

R2244 : page 13 

that he had come into the world; he foresaw that 
according to the divine arrangement (as outlined in the 
Scriptures, in type and in prophecy), a long, tedious 
battle with evil was involved; and now, here, suddenly, 
a door of escape from his anticipated troubles was 
opened almost seemingly providentially at the beginning 
of his ministry: this path led upward at once to 
the glory and power and dominion of earth, and speedily 
to the blessing of all mankind; whereas the divine 
plan led first down into the valley of the shadow of 
death, humiliation, ignominy, suffering, trials and, by 
and by, a long way off, promised glory to follow. 

Which path should he choose? There were many 
strong reasons pointing to the proposition of Satan, and 
the depression of spirit which had come over him 
through the study of the Scriptures, and finding the 
narrowness and difficulty of the path of life which the 
Father had marked out, combined with the physical 
weakness resulting from his forty days fast, placed our 
dear Master at a great disadvantage, and served as a 
test of the severest kind to his love, faith, and loyalty 
toward God. But he came off victorious, and promptly 
so; answering, "Get thee hence, Satan [do not try 
to tempt me to become your follower and servant], for 
it is written, "Thou shalt worship the Lord thy God, 
and him only shalt thou serve [I will follow the divine 
program at any cost]." 

A temptation similar to this comes to the members 
of the body of Christ through the same Adversary and 
his various agencies. It is a temptation to adopt some 

R2245 : page 13 

other plan than the Divine plan for doing good, blessing 
mankind and establishing a Kingdom of righteousness 
in the earth. How many honest Christians, finding 
the Lord's way very narrow and yielding good results 
very slowly, have undertaken to improve upon 
the divine method by schemes and arrangements devised 
by themselves or by others. For instance, altho 
Christian people in general admit that sectarian divisions 
in the Church are entirely contrary to the divine 



instructions, they nevertheless lend their influence to 

these systems, declaring that they yield better results 

than the Scriptural plan, and supposing that, however 

good the Lord's plan might have been at first, they 

have found a better one for the present. They find in 

the Scriptures a very simple outline of faith,— "One 

Lord, one faith, one baptism and one God and Father 

of all:" but not satisfied with this, every denomination 

makes for itself certain doctrinal tests, and holds that 

it has a right so to do; because times have changed, 

and the divine plan in its simplicity would not be appropriate 

now. 

It was not long after the apostles fell asleep in 
death that the Adversary succeeded in deluding the 
Church to try his easier way of reaching the desired 
results;— blessing the world and establishing it in righteousness. 
When Satan succeeded in getting some of 
the principal ones in the Church to hearken to his 
schemes and to go into partnership with him for the 
control of the world and its blessing through a combination 
of religion and politics, the organization called 
itself the "Church of Rome," "The Holy Catholic 
Church." After corrupting her through priestcraft 
and superstition, and introducing into her system and 
worship the greatest of blasphemies, he had measurably 
succeeded in making the world believe that it was 
living under the dominion of the Kingdom of God, for 
which Christ had taught his people to pray,— "Thy 
Kingdom come." Yet not all were deluded thus; a 
remnant still remained loyal to the Lord and his Word, 
and preferred persecution for righteousness' sake rather 
than share the pleasures of sin and the glories of the 
false kingdom for a season. 

When by and by under divine providence the torch 
of truth was caused to blaze forth in the hands of the 
Reformers, a new era was ushered in, and the Adversary 
immediately set about to oppose the truth and its 
servants who were denouncing him and his false Antichrist 
kingdom. He persecuted at first with sword 
and flame and rack and dungeon; but later he has taken 
new methods, and, persuading each band of reformers 
(each sect) that they have won a great victory, he has 
gotten them settled down self-satisfied in the belief 
that, while Papacy was corrupt, it was nevertheless the 
Kingdom of God; and that now both they and Papacy 
are unitedly God's Kingdom blessing the world by the 
establishment of civilization;— by political reforms, 
temperance reforms, social reforms; and converting the 
heathen by sending war vessels, seizing their territory, 
appropriating their customs duties, and forcing upon 
them Christendom's whiskey, tobacco and profanity in 
combination with monopolies and trusts. 

Nor is this temptation confined to those who are 
identified with the grossest errors of sectarianism. 
Many who have a considerable knowledge of the present 
truth seem willing to bow the knee to wealth, to 



influence, to Satan's various systems, hoping thereby 
to have better opportunities of serving the Lord and 
his truth, than they could find by following in the path 
which the Lord himself took, and directs his followers 
to take;— the "narrow way." Let us each see to it 
most carefully that we worship and serve the Lord 
only, and that we follow only his directions. All other 
voices, except those which merely reecho the Shepherd's 
voice lead more or less astray. All other paths 
are violations of our engagements with the Lord. In 
victories over such temptations we are overcoming the 
world: and in order to have such victories and to overcome 
the world absolute faith in the Lord is indispensable. 
We must realize that, however matters may appear 
on the surface, the Lord's way, the narrow way, 
is the best way, and the only way, that leads to the 
prize of our high calling in his Kingdom. 



R2245 : page 14 

THE BEGINNING OF JESUS' MINISTRY. 

-Jan. 16.-Matt. 4:17-25.- 

"The people which sat in darkness saw a great Light." 

FOR a while after the temptation of the wilderness 

our Lord's ministry was of a private character, 

until after John had finished his ministry and been cast 

into prison. This interim of time before our Lord began 

his public work is frequently estimated at from six 

months to a year. To have begun sooner might have 

aroused some rivalry between his followers and the followers 

of John; but even as it was, we are informed 

that Jesus baptized more disciples than John, tho Jesus 

himself baptized not, but his disciples. The calling 

of Peter and Andrew mentioned in this lesson was not 

their first introduction to Jesus, but merely our Lord's 

invitation to them to become special associates in the 

work of proclaiming the Kingdom. The account of 

their first introduction to Jesus is found in John 1:36-42. 

Our Lord evidently resided for some time at 

Nazareth with his mother and brethren,— until the 

time of John's imprisonment and the consequent stoppage 

of his mission-work. It was then that our Lord 

with his mother and brethren removed as a family to 

Capernaum. (Compare Matt. 4:13; John 2:12.) "From 

that time Jesus began to preach, and say, Repent; for 

the Kingdom of Heaven is at hand." 

For centuries Israel had been looking for the Kingdom 
of Heaven— the Kingdom of God— expecting according 
to their covenant that the chief place in that 
Kingdom should be theirs, as the servants of God, the 
ministers of righteousness and truth; and that they 



should be used of the Almighty to rule and instruct 

all nations: in fulfilment of the promise made to Abraham, 

that in his seed all the families of the earth 

should be blessed. All true Israelites had this promise 

distinctly before their minds as their great hope, and 

indeed the only object of their national existence.— 

See Acts 26:6,7. 

To these, therefore, the proclamation, "Repent, for 
the Kingdom of Heaven is at hand," meant,— God's time 
has now come for the fulfilment of his promise to this nation, 
in its establishment as his representative kingdom 
to rule and to bless the world; but in order to be fit 
for this Kingdom every Israelite should prepare his 
heart, humble himself before God, repenting of sins 
and thereby reforming his life, seeking a readiness for 
the divine blessing and exaltation, in whatever form 
it might come. This message was the same which 
John delivered in his public ministry; the same also 
that was given to the twelve disciples, and afterwards 
to the seventy also, whom Jesus sent forth, clothed 
with a share of his power over diseases and unclean 
spirits, to announce him in all the cities which he later 
would visit. 

Thus did God fulfil toward Israel both the letter 
and the spirit of his engagement; but while the people 
of Palestine were the children of Abraham, and professedly 
God's covenant people, yet with the vast majority 
this was but an empty profession and an outward 
form; for their hopes respecting the great promise of 
which they were heirs were not the proper, laudable 
ambitions to be God's servants and messengers in carrying 
his blessings to mankind, but a selfish, arrogant 
pride, which concluded that there must have been some 
special merit in their race, which led God to seek it, 
and on account of which God would be rather obligated 
to that nation, as the only people capable of carrying 
out his benevolent designs. Against this arrogance 
our Lord warned them frequently; and assured them 
that God could get along without them entirely, and 
was able to raise up for his purpose, instead of them, 
children of Abraham, who would have Abraham's loyalty 
of spirit,— even if it were necessary to create these 
out of the stones. (Matt. 3:9; Luke 3:8.) As a matter of 
fact we know that after the "wheat" class had been 
separated from the "chaff" of that nation, and been 
gathered into the Gospel "garner," the Lord has been 
seeking others from among the Gentiles during the past 
eighteen centuries, to complete the elect number of 
Israelites indeed, the true seed of Abraham, to constitute 
this promised Heavenly Kingdom, whose mission 
it shall be, as the divine representatives, to bless all 
the families of the earth— "in the world to come"— 
in the age to follow this Gospel age— in the 
Millennium. 

And the same message, "Repent, etc.," has come 
all the way down the centuries, notifying us that whoever 



would be of this holy Kingdom must reform his 

course of life and come into heart-harmony with the 

laws of this Kingdom: Otherwise they would not be 

in a condition to be made members of the "royal priesthood" 

which is to offer the great blessings which God 

has designed and promised to the world. 

While the four fishermen mentioned in this lesson 
were already at heart disciples of our Lord Jesus, and 
recognized him as the Messiah, this was the first call 
to public ministry as his colaborers, and their promptness 
in obeying the call is worthy of notice as a mark 

R2246 : page 14 

of their earnestness and faith; for our Master declared, 
He that obeyeth my words he it is that loveth me, and 
he shall be loved of my Father. There is a good lesson 
here on promptness of obedience for all of the 
Lord's people. It is worthy of note also that our Lord 
called to the special, active service of preaching the 
Gospel, men who were not "slothful in business:" they 

R2246 : page 15 

were not idlers, nor did they join the Lord's company 
with the expectation of becoming idlers. Doubtless 
they had already heard our Lord's dissertation to the 
effect that no man need come after him except prepared 
to take up a cross in the service. No doubt they knew 
already that our Lord was poor and without standing 
before the influential of that day. Nevertheless, they 
gladly joined his company upon his assurance that under 
his direction, altho their work would be no less arduous, 
they should be "fishers of men." 

For a considerable time our Lord's ministries were 
confined to Galilee, except as occasionally he went up 
to Jerusalem on national holidays. His message is 
called the gospel— the good news: because Israelites, 
like the rest of the groaning creation, had been long 
waiting for the promised Golden Age, when all the 
bitterness of the curse would be removed, and when 
the blessings of the Lord would come down richly and 
bountifully upon the earth. It was indeed good news 
then as it is good news now to everyone that believeth. 
But then, as now, it was difficult to believe. Then the 
Scribes and Pharisees and Doctors of the Law rejected 
Jesus, repudiated his claims and jested about him and 
his followers, that they must be lunatics to think that 
any knowledge on this subject of the Kingdom of God 
could come through the carpenter and some fishermen 
associates, and not through the great and notable 
Chief Priests, Scribes, Pharisees and Doctors. Moreover, 
they ridiculed the fact that without wealth and 
social influence, and by the preaching of the Gospel of 
repentance, an army could ever be raised which could 
vanquish the Roman legions, and deliver Israel and 



conquer the world before her, so as to give her the 
chief position of authority as the Kingdom of God. 
Their hearts being in the wrong condition, the religious 
rulers were less prepared to grasp the truth then due 
than were the hearts of the humble, faithful, unlearned 
fishermen. Likewise to-day, the Doctors of Divinity 
and all the socially and religiously great of Christendom 
scout the idea of the establishment of the Kingdom 
by the power of God in the hands of Christ and 
his little flock of the royal priesthood; and declare on 
the other hand that they are the Lord's Kingdom, and 
leave us to infer that notwithstanding all the pride and 
crime and ungodliness abounding in so-called Christendom, 
nevertheless, God's will is "done on earth as 
it is done in heaven." And, with their show of wealth 
and power and learning and dignity and influence they 
say to-day as the Scribes and Pharisees said of old- 
Have any of the great ones of church or state believed 
in this coming Kingdom of God which you preach, 
saying that the Kingdom of heaven is at hand, and the 
elect membership being gathered? The answer to the 
question now, as in the past, must be No; not many 
great, not many wise, not many rich, not many learned 
according to the course of this world have believed in 
the coming Kingdom and are looking for it, and are 
waiting and laboring to enter into it; but chiefly the 
poor of this world, rich in faith, whom God has ordained 
to be heirs of the Kingdom.— 1 Cor. 1:26,27; 
Jas. 2:5. 

The healing of sicknesses by our Lord and his 
followers at the first advent was a foreshadowing of 
the blessings which would more fully come when the 
Kingdom itself would be established; and the miracles 
served also to draw the attention of the people to the 
message proclaimed, and to spread abroad the fame of 
the Teacher, and, incidentally, his message respecting 
his Kingdom to come, and the repentance necessary to 
a share therein. This multitude was not merely a local 
gathering, but one from various quarters, some coming 
great distances, as people naturally will do in hope 
of relief from physical disease. Alas, how much more 
anxious people seem to be to get rid of diseases of the 
flesh than to be rid of the diseases of the soul— sins: 
yet of the two the latter is the much worse disease and 
the more difficult to cure, and in our Lord's preaching 
these were given first place, as of greater importance, 
as expressed in the word "Repent;" the physical 
healing being merely an incidental matter, unworthy 
to be mentioned in the general proclamation. 

We will not dispute as to whether or not the 
period of miracles is wholly in the past: we will even 
admit that since we are in the Dawn of the Millennial 
age a certain beginning of restitution work may be 
properly due to the world as a part of the divine plan. 
We urge, however, upon the Lord's people, as a matter 
of far greater importance than any physical healing, 



the necessity of bringing their friends and coming 

themselves to the Great Physician for healing of soul-sickness, 

—for the opening of their eyes that they may 

see clearly the "goodness of God as it shines in the 

face of Jesus Christ our Lord;" for the opening of their 

ears that they may hear fully and clearly the great 

message of salvation and understand distinctly the 

terms and conditions of self-sacrifice upon which depends 

their attainment to the Kingdom glories as members 

of the "little flock" to whom it is the Father's 

good pleasure to give the Kingdom. Let those who 

are lame through pride and self-will, and unable to 

follow in the "narrow way," cast away these crutches, 

and, coming to the Lord in full submission and contrition 

and humility, let them learn to walk in his ways 

of meekness and gentleness, patience and suffering and 

brotherly-kindness, that he may exalt them in due 

time. These sicknesses, these infirmities, these diseases, 

with which the new nature contends, and the 

evil spirits of selfishness and pride, and the palsy of 

fear of man, which bringeth a snare, are diseases far 

more terrible than earthly sicknesses, and from these, 

we are sure, the Great Physician is both able and willing, 

yea anxious, to relieve us. 



page 16 

INTERESTING LETTERS. 



California. 

DEAR SIR:— I received your valuable paper ZION'S 
WATCH TOWER this afternoon and I thank you very 
much. It made my heart glad. I love the glad tidings, 
though it is sometimes hard to apprehend it. In my 
21 years of Christian experience I never heard of anything 
like it, until I saw the MILLENNIAL DAWN in 
our Sunday School library catalogue. Being hungry 
to learn about my Lord's return I got it to read, and I 
have read it over and over again. It has greatly 
strengthened my faith in the Lord. I want to know 
more, so enclose one dollar for which please send me 
the three volumes of your book, and ZION'S WATCH 
TOWER for the next three months. 

Respectfully yours, MRS. J. BENGSTON. 



New Jersey. 
DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL: I have just returned from 
a little missionary tour. The Lord blessed me wonderfully, 
and I succeeded in making the truth plain to 
some very hungry individuals. Please send me some 



tracts— as many "Do You Know?" as you can spare, 
for it is the most wonderful tract that ever was printed. 
I distributed them everywhere I went. 

You will see throughout eternity the good you 
have done by having the TOWER readers read Matt. 5:1-16, 
and 1 Cor. 13. They have borne me out in 
many difficulties, and pictured to full view so many 
of my shortcomings. Sister Neely wishes to be remembered 
to you and says she has been greatly helped 
by the Sunday morning reading, and has been able to 
overcome many things that overcame her in the past. 

Your sister in Christ, CAROLINA A. WAYMAN. 



Rhode Island. 

DEAR SIRS:— I desire to express my thanks for 
the fourth volume of the DAWN series. I believe these 
books contain a wonderful unfolding of God's great 
plan of the ages. The last issue is a most remarkable 
volume, and in its gathering together of the views held 
by some of the most eminent men of our day, in all 
the walks of life, touching the great crisis ahead, is a 
most valuable addition to the library of the student of 
latter day truth. May we meet the obligations which 
so much light entails upon us, and be ready to hail 
with joy the ushering in of the Millennial day, when 
the mystical body of Christ will be made complete 
and share with him his throne. Again let me thank 
you for your kindness in sending me the book. 

Yours in the Master, R. E. STREETER. 



R2246 : page 16 

Pennsylvania. 

DEAR FRIEND:-Your fourth volume of MILLENNIAL 
DAWN came duly to hand. I have just read it 
through the second time. Many books are not worth 
reading at all; others will bear reading but once; and 
some can be read with profit two or three times. There 
are others again that are indispensable as text books. 
Of the latter class is volume four of M. DAWN. It is 
indeed a rich storehouse of information that I believe 
can be found nowhere else in modern literature. It 
gives us a birdseye view of the present condition of the 
nations of the world— moral, political and financial— 
and also spreads out before our eyes the hopeless condition 
of modern nominal Christendom. 

Many do admit that there will be great changes in 
the near future, but they are all to be of a pacific character. 
Babylon is fully equipped with men and money 
to convert the world. Her missionaries will soon be in 
all lands; the present nations of the world will soon be 
Christianized; all that is needed for this purpose is men 



and money. Your neighbor the Rev. I. W. Sproull, 
D.D., writes: Money, money, money! Give me the 
money and I will evangelize the world in three years. 
Mr. Sproull forgets that he is at the head of a foreign 
mission in Syria which has been in existence since the 
year 1850 at an expense to his church of about $15,000 
per annum. And what is the result to-day? Not a 
single native teacher; but expensive mission buildings 
with high stone walls built around them for protection. 
These buildings are simply boarding houses for native 
children whom their parents allow the mission to feed 
and clothe until they get able to work; that is all. And 
the missionaries themselves admit that they could not 
stay in Syria a single day were it not for the protection 
of American war ships cruising in the Mediterranean 
sea. Here then we have an expenditure of about 
$600,000 on one little spot in Asia Minor with no result 
as yet. How much money would Mr. Sproull 
need to evangelize the heathen world in three years? 
We will not wait to count. Such a computation would 
be utterly beyond our reach. Does our reverend doctor 
really believe that the establishment of Christ's 
Kingdom on this earth is a matter of dollars and cents, 
or that it is dependent on the contributions wrung out 
of a deluded people? So he writes— "Hundreds and 
thousands of the heathen are descending into everlasting 
torment every day— and their blood will be required 
of all those who refuse or neglect to support foreign 
missions." 

Yours respectfully, JAS. N. DOWNEY. 

[Many of the Lord's people have been blessed in 
giving to missions, whatever the good to the heathen. 
An increase of light should not deprive us of the blessing 
of giving, but should guide us to the choice of the 
best ways and means, and redouble our zeal.— EDITOR.] 



Illinois. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-Seven years ago I was 
on the eve of infidelity, and had given up all hope, 
when I by chance came in possession of the first volume 
of DAWN. Since then I have read and re-read each 
volume as it has come out, and the last one I have just 
completed. Some of them I have gone through three 
times. 

Do you want to know what the truth has done for 
me? At the time I was led into this marvelous light 

R2247 : page 16 

I was one of the worst cases of bedridden paralytics in 
town. I had become addicted to the morphine habit, 
and used sixty grains of the drug in one week; but 
by the grace of almighty God I have overcome the 
habit and have not touched it for over four years. I 



have been able to walk without crutches now for over 
two years. I have vowed to God to labor in the vineyard 
to the best of my ability. 
Yours in Christian love, C. M. CARPENTER. 



page 17 
VOL. XIX. JANUARY 15, 1898. No. 2. 



CONTENTS. 



Views from the Watch Tower 19 

"Agnostics in Heaven" 19 

"Admits He Lived a Lie" 20 

"An Invisible Hand is Shaking" 20 

Poem: What the Prince of Peace 

Might Say 21 

Secret Faults and Presumptuous Sins 22 

The Blessed Ones Portrayed 24 

"After this Manner Pray Ye" 27 

Interesting Letters 31 

page 18 

SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
-ADDRESS TO- 
TOWER PUBLISHING CO., BIBLE HOUSE, 58 ARCH ST., 
ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 



SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, N.Y. DRAFT, MONEY ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS: 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age or accident, or other 
adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, if they 
send a Postal Card each December, stating their cases and requesting the paper. 



R2247 : page 19 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 



"AGNOSTICS IN HEAVEN. 



DR. Lyman Abbott, like other thinkers, finds it 
difficult to believe that the divine plan is as 
narrow as Calvin's creed would make it appear. But 
Dr. Abbott is more fearless than many preachers and 
hence keeps well to the forefront as an expounder of 
the advanced thought which is invading all denominations. 
He is reported in the public press as having recently 
expressed the belief that there would be agnostics 
in heaven. It would appear that he received a 
considerable number of letters criticising his position, 
and urging that, tho hope might be entertained for the 
heathen, none should be extended to unbelievers in 
Christian lands. In response he preached a discourse 
from the words, "He that believeth in me, believeth 
in him that sent me." 

Discoursing on the text, he is reported to have 
declared, "There is more faith in Christ in many an 
agnostic who spends his life in the service of humanity, 
than there was in Torquemada. There are many 
people who are trying to believe in Christ but cannot, 
and so call themselves agnostics." 

The Doctor is sure that many unbelievers are far 
too good to be everlastingly tormented, and who in 
justice should not be punished in any manner for not 
believing creeds and theories contradictory to each 
other, and to reason, and much of which their own 
adherents repudiate unqualifiedly. Mr. Abbott feels 
that these moral people should not be consigned to 
torment for not acting the hypocrite and professing to 
believe what they do not believe, as so many professors 
in the churches do. 

Quite right thus far, Dr. Abbott. But are you not 
wresting the Scriptures, and perverting the Lord's 
word of your text, in trying to convince these unbelievers 
that they are saved by morals and good works, 
and that these constitute faith? Are not these unbelievers 
better men for confessing their lack of faith, 
than many in the churches who profess faith and have 
it not? Are you not in danger of making these honest 
unbelievers two-fold more the children of Gehenna, 
than they are at present, by getting them to profess 
a lie; as the Master said to some of the Doctors of the 
Law at his first advent? 

But if God were to let Dr. Abbott have his way, 
and take to heaven all the unbelievers and all the 
heathen who cannot believe for similar reasons, we 
fancy that heaven would be so barbarous and uncouth, 
and its denizens so characterless, that Dr. A. and others 
who advocate the same unscriptural theory, that faith 
in the precious blood of Christ is unnecessary to salvation, 
would like to get away from such a heaven to 
some more civilized place. 

How strange that, seeing the difficulties and unreasonableness 
of their unscriptural position, Dr. A. 
and the growingly large class who think along the 



same lines do not see and accept heartily the Scripture 
position,— (1) That faith in Christ is essential, and a 
development of character also, to any who would receive 
the gift of God, everlasting life; (2) That the 
present Gospel age is intended merely for the selection 
of a "little flock" along a "narrow way" which "few" 
find and still fewer care to walk in; (3) That another 
age of a thousand years is to follow this and be the 
Kingdom age, in which Christ and the "little flock," 
developed in the Gospel age, will be the world's instructors 
and judges— "kings and priests unto God" 
(Rev. 1:6; 5:10; 20:6) whose reign shall bless the 

R2247 : page 20 

world with full, clear knowledge and opportunity for 
the development of character and its reward of eternal 
life. 

How strange that men, learned and thinking men 
too, will oppose this divine scheme of "restitution" 
which St. Peter tells us God has declared through all 
the holy prophets since the world began! (Acts 3:19-22.) 
Doctor Abbott and all thinking people see the 
necessity for just such an opportunity of salvation, for 
the ignorant heathen and others, whom the "god of 
this world has blinded" so that they cannot now see and 
accept the divine provision (2 Cor. 4:4); yet these 
thinkers prefer to wrest and twist the divine Word, 
and teach the salvation of unbelievers in heaven in 
preference to the better as well as Scriptural plan of 
restitution and education and trial for eternal life on 
the earth during the coming Millennium. 

This is passing strange indeed. Surely, they are 
"blind guides," as the Scriptures declare, and are 
leading their followers into the ditch of doubt and 
skepticism. Surely, they are not wilfully choosing the 
error! Surely, they do not see the beautiful, reasonable, 
Scriptural plan of God! The matter reminds us 
of an incident that is related respecting the great river 
Amazon. A sailing vessel at sea had encountered adverse 
winds and had lost its way, and had exhausted 
its supply of fresh water and the crew was famishing 
for water. Sighting another vessel, they signaled, 
"Famishing for water. Can you supply us?" The 
other vessel signaled back, "Throw your buckets overboard 
and dip all the fresh water you want." They 
were in the mouth of the Amazon River while still out 
of sight of land. The water they craved was all about 
them, but they knew it not. So it is with our friends 
who want to find some way of salvation for the heathen 
and honest skeptics: if they would only taste and see, 
they would find in the Bible on their pulpits and in all 
their homes the very water of life for all the willing 
and obedient, which their reasons crave and their hearts 
seek: they would find a plan of salvation there which 
fully meets every reasonable requirement. 



Thanks be unto God for his grace which has 
brought some of us "out of darkness into his marvelous 
light." 

"ADMITS HE LIVED A LIE." 



Under the above and similar captions the daily 
press of our land is calling attention to Mr. Henry 
Morehouse Taber, deceased, President of the Board of 
Trustees of the First Presbyterian Church, New York 
City, and long highly honored as a Christian millionaire, 
and prominent in Presbyterian circles. But tho 
Mr. Taber did not have the courage of his convictions 
while he lived, he at least wished to be honest in his 
death; and hence he left a Will, recently probated, 
which has caused quite a stir by its candor respecting 
his total unbelief. It denounces all religions as frauds 
and shams based on superstition. In it he desires that 
no funeral services be held over his corpse, and that 
the same be cremated, instead of buried. 

Was not this man positively injured by reason of 
being cajoled into a dishonest profession of faith in the 
Westminster Confession, by membership in the Presbyterian 
Church? Who will deny that this man would 
have been in a much better condition to meet his Redeemer 
and Judge in the General Judgment of the 
Millennial Day, if he had not lived a lie respecting 
his faith? There are thousands, we doubt not, in the 
pulpits as well as in the pews of all denominations, 
who are similarly living a lie; and the majority are not 
honest enough to make even a post-mortem confession, 
as Mr. Taber did. 

These dishonest people do not wish to be dishonest, 
but act a lie for fear the truth would do injury to 
the Church. How much better to be honest and let 
God take care of all consequences. "Come out of her, 
my people, that ye be not partakers of her [Babylon's] 
sins and that ye receive not of her plagues," is the 
Lord's command to all who are his people, as soon as 
they get the light of present truth and thus get out of 
harmony with the falsities of Babylon's professions and 
confessions. 

"AN INVISIBLE HAND IS SHAKING." 



Rev. R. Heber Newton, one of the prominent 
New York preachers, on January 9, among other things 
said (as reported in the New York Herald):— 

"All religions are moving in the same direction- 
reaching forth toward something new. The end of 
this century has been looked to by prophetic students 
as the end of a dispensation— the opening of a new 



order. Our fathers believed that Jesus Christ was to 
come again somewhere about this time. 

"An invisible hand is shaking the intellectual 
kaleidoscope, and the figures familiar to generations 
are changing before our eyes. The traditional systems 

R2248 : page 20 

of divinity seem to hosts of men to-day of as much help 
as the charts of New York harbor drawn up by the 
primitive Knickerbockers would be to our steamers. 
Men are slowly and painfully realizing that there is no 
answer in the Thirty nine articles and Westminster 
Confession for us in the year 1898. Their whole 
thought is as antique and obsolete as the language of 
Chaucer and Spenser. Men ask now for a gospel in 
the vernacular of the nineteenth century: not necessarily 
a new gospel, but at least a translation of the 
old gospel of the mediaevals and ancients into a 'tongue 
understanded of the people.' 

"Sublimely unconscious of the day that is breaking 
outside the church walls, our priests go on droning 
the old refrain about an impossible Bible and an unnatural 

R2248 : page 21 

Christ, and anathematizing those who don't 
care to come in and listen to their music of the past. 
Pulpits are timorous and silent on questions of the age. 
Conventions reauthorize, at every triennial session, as 
text books for theological seminaries, treatises which 
are as accurate maps of our present knowledge as the 
celestial charts of the Ptolemaic astronomers.... 

"What is needed is not denunciation, but the 
quickening of a new idea and the kindling of a new 
ideal which shall once more guide and inspire man to 
a life higher than that of pleasure. 

"The close of this century has witnessed the growth 
of monster nationalities. Are they under the inspiration 
of the Christian law? It does not look much like 
it, as we see the great Christian powers standing around 
China, waiting to dismember it. Have our Christian 
States become pirates, flaunting above their ensigns 
the black flag? The bishop of Breslau may invoke a 
benediction upon the fleet which goes forth for the 
protection of the cross, but the average man smiles 
cynically at such conception of Christianity. 

"Every new advance of humanity is won against 
obstructiveness of the churches. Every social and political 
injustice that, one after another, is swept violently 
away— slavery, land monopoly, the tyranny of 
capital, war— is defended, up to the last, by the sign 
of Him who came to break every yoke and to let the 
oppressed go free; over whose cradle the angels sang, 
'Peace on earth, good will among men.' 

"Humanity is growing conscious of its magnificent 



possibilities of glorious life, which are still postponed 
from generation to generation because the 
churches, which should be consecrated to this task of 
social regeneration, have not the mind nor the heart 
to grapple with it. They are busied, as their prototypes 
of old, with their pretty, petty play of charities, 
while neglecting the weightier matters of the law, the 
stern and solemn sentences of justice. 

"A GREAT REVOLUTION POSSIBLE." 

"The era of competition is ended. The era of 
combination has opened. All business is concentrating. 
In this massing of capital there is coming to be 
an absolute domination over the wage worker, over 
the interest of the people at large, over the life of the 
State itself. Yet this movement is natural and necessary. 
It is in the line of economic progress. The real 
question concerning it is, Can this new order grow a 
soul within it, a spirit capable of mastering these monster 
powers and using them, not for self-aggrandizement, 
but for human service? If it cannot, there is a revolution 
ahead worse than any the world has hitherto 
known. If it can, there opens an era of boundless, 
beneficent progress. This is a question of religion. It 
is the old need of an ever fresh faith and hope and love. 

"Plainly a real religion of some sort is needed, 
more needed than ever," said the speaker in conclusion. 
"It is the one thing which alone is really needed. 
All else will flow from it. Without it all else 
will disappear— political institutions, wealth, civilization, 
everything. Our duty as we find ourselves in 
this epoch of transition is to keep our minds open for 
the new light that God is preparing to send forth into 
the world, and our hearts eager for the new life into 
which he is preparing to lead us." 



How many more see the same thing? and fear the 
same thing? What is lacking that these people do not 
receive the "present truth," the "meat in due season" 
for the household of faith? The trouble is that they 
have too much faith in each other, and not sufficient 
faith in the Lord and his Word. The blind people are 
looking to and following the blind leaders; and the 
latter are looking in the wrong direction to see "the 
Sun of Righteousness arise with healing in his beams." 
If the Lord's message of "present truth" and Scripture 
harmonization presented in the four volumes of 
MILLENNIAL DAWN were promulgated from some 
source more "highly esteemed among men," who can 
doubt that it would— 

"Satisfy men's longings, as nothing else can do?" 

So also, if our Lord Jesus had been a Pharisee and 
from a notable family and city, his message would 



have been received, and he would not have been crucified. 
God still hides his truth from the great and 
wise and prudent, and reveals it unto babes— the humble 
minded, the teachable. Nevertheless, the congregation 
of "All Soul's Church" which heard the above 
sermon should be an excellent field of labor for some 
earnest friends of the truth to labor in,— seeking to 
present the "harvest" message contained in MILLENNIAL 
DAWN volumes. And while a discourse like the 
above may not convert any one to Christ, it undoubtedly 
may shake loose some of the true "wheat" from 
Babylon's bundles and thus prepare this class for the 
food for which they are starving spiritually. 



R1716 : page 21 

WHAT THE PRINCE OF PEACE MIGHT SAY, 
IF HE WOULD SPEAK TO-DAY. 



"I have come, and the world shall be shaken 

Like a reed at the touch of my rod, 
And the kingdoms of men shall awaken 

To the voice and summons of God. 
No more through the din of the ages, 

Shall warnings and chidings divine 
From the lips of my prophets and sages 

Be trampled like pearls before swine. 

"Have ye 'seized' all my lands and my cattle? 

Would ye keep back from labor her meed? 
Would ye challenge the outcasts to battle, 

When they plead at your feet in their need? 
And when clamor of hunger grows louder, 

And the multitude prays to be fed, 
Will ye answer with prison and powder 

The cries of your brothers for bread? 

"I'd turn from your altars and arches 

And the mockings of steeples and domes, 
To join in the long, weary marches 

Of the poor ones bereft of their homes; 
I'd share in the sorrows and crosses 

Of the poor, the hungry and cold, 
For dearer to me are their losses 

Than your mines and your altars of gold. 

R1716 : page 22 

"I will wither the might of the Spoiler, 

I will end the reign of his hate; 
The servants of Sin shall no longer 



Be prospered in Church and in State. 
Aye, the prayers of the poor are ascending 

To be written with lightnings on high! 
And the wails of all captives be blending 

With bolts that shall leap from the sky. 

"Then the thrones of your kings shall be shattered, 

And the captives and surfs shall go free; 
Then I'll harvest from seed that I scattered 

On the borders of blue Galilee. 
Yea, I come not now as a stranger— 

Lo, my reapers shall sing through the night, 
Till the star that stood over the manger 

Shall cover the world with its light." —Selected. 



R2248 : page 22 

SECRET FAULTS AND PRESUMPTUOUS SINS. 



"Cleanse thou me from secret faults. Keep back thy servant also 

from presumptuous sins; let them not have dominion over me: 

then shall I be upright, and I shall be innocent from the 

great transgression. Let the words of my mouth, and the 

meditation of my heart be acceptable in thy sight, 

O Lord, my strength and my Redeemer.— Psa. 19:12-14. 

THIS prophetic prayer represents well the heart 

attitude of the fully consecrated and earnest 

Christian. While realizing a forgiveness of the "sins 

that are past through the forbearance of God," through 

the grace of God which was in Christ Jesus, which imputed 

our sins to him and his righteousness to us who 

believe in him, nevertheless the well-instructed soul 

realizes its faults, its short-comings. These secret faults 

may be of two kinds: (1) They may be faults which 

were secret to ourselves at the time committed— slips, 

unintentional errors. Of course the earnest heart, desiring 

full fellowship with the Lord, will regret even 

his unintentional short-comings and will strive and 

pray for divine grace to get the victory over these: 

but besides these there are other secret faults, which 

are secret in the sense of being unknown to any one 

but ourselves and the Lord: imperfections or faults of 

the mind before they take the outward form of actual 

and presumptuous sins. 

All Christians of experience in the good way and 
in the battle against sin and self have learned that there 
can be no outward or presumptuous sins that have not 
first had their beginning in secret faults of the mind. 
The sinful thought may be one of pride suggesting 
self-exaltation; it may be one of avarice suggesting unlawful 
acquisition of wealth; or it may be some other 



fleshly desire: the mere suggestion of the thought before 
our minds is not sin; it is merely the operation of 
our faculties, and of the influences which surround us, 
inquiring of our wills whether or not we will consent 
to such thoughts. Many consent to thoughts of evil 
who at the time would utterly repudiate any suggestion 
to commit evil deeds; but if the thought be entertained 
it is a secret fault, and the growing tendency 
would surely be toward the more outward and presumptuous 
sinful conduct, the tendency of which is always 
from bad to worse. For instance, to illustrate, 
suppose the suggestion should come to our minds of a 
method by which we could advance our own interests 
of fame or honor or reputation by the undermining of 
the influence and reputation of another, how quickly 
the evil, selfish thought, if entertained, would lead to 
envy and possibly hatred and strife. Almost surely it 
would lead to back-biting and slander and other works 
of the flesh and the devil. The beginnings are always 
small, and correspondingly much easier to deal with 
than in their developed form. Hence, the prophetic 
prayer, "Cleanse thou me from secret faults" and thus 
restrain or keep me back from presumptuous sins. 

In the Epistle of James (1:14,15) we read, "Every 
man is tempted, when he is drawn away of his own desire 
and enticed. Then when desire hath conceived it 
bringeth forth sin: and sin, when it is finished, bringeth 
forth death." Here we have the same thought 
differently expressed. The temptation consists at first 
in the presentation to the mind of suggestions which 
are impure or unkind or unfaithful to obligations; but 
there is no sin, no fault, as yet. The fault begins, 
when we harbor the evil suggestions, begin to turn them 
over in our minds and to consider the attractions which 
they may have to offer. This is where desire (taking 
hold of the evil thing instead of resisting it) causes a 
beginning of the secret fault; and it is only a process 

R2249 : page 22 

of development which in many instances under favorable 
circumstances may be very rapid, that sin, the 
presumptuous or outward acts of sin, results;— for instance, 
bearing false witness against a neighbor, or 
slander, or other evil deeds. And the evil course having 
begun in the fostering of the evil suggestion, and 
having progressed to presumptuous sin, there is a great 
danger that their entire course of life will be ultimately 
affected thereby and bring the transgressor into that 
condition where he will commit the great transgression 
—wilful, deliberate, intentional sin— the wages of 
which is death, second death. 

It would appear then that every intelligent Christian 
would continually pray this inspired prayer, for 
cleansing from secret faults that he might thus be restrained 
from presumptuous sins; and thus praying 



heartily, he would also watch against these beginnings 
of sin and keep his heart in a cleansed and pure condition, 
by going continually to the fountain of grace for 

R2249 : page 23 

help in every time of need. He who seeks to live a 

life of holiness and nearness to the Lord by merely 

guarding and striving against outward or presumptuous 

sins, and who neglects the beginning of sin in the 

secrets of his own mind, is attempting a right thing in 

a very foolish and unreasonable way. As well might 

we seek to avert the smallpox by outward cleanliness, 

while permitting the germs of the disease to enter our 

systems. The bacteria or germs of presumptuous sins 

enter through the mind, and their antiseptics and bactericides 

of the truth and its spirit must meet them 

there and promptly kill the bacteria of sin before it 

germinates and leads us to such a condition of evil as 

will manifest itself in our outward conduct. 

For instance, whenever the bacteria of pride and 
self-importance present themselves, let the antidote be 
promptly administered from the Lord's great medical 
laboratory for the healing of the soul: the proper dose 
to offset this species of bacteria is found in the words, 
"He that exalteth himself shall be abased, and he that 
humbleth himself shall be exalted;" and "Pride goeth 
before destruction, a haughty spirit before a fall." 

If the thought presented to our minds be the bacteria 
of envy, then let us promptly apply the antidote 
which declares that envy is one of the works of the 
flesh and of the devil, and contrary to the spirit of 
Christ, which by our covenant we have adopted as ours. 
And let us remember that envy is closely related to 
and apt to be followed by malice, hatred and strife, which 
under some circumstances mean murder, according to the 
New Covenant and our Lord's interpretation.— 1 John 3:15; 
Matt. 5:21,22. 

If the bacteria which presents itself to our minds 
is avarice, with the suggestion of unjust methods for 
its gratification, let us promptly apply to it the medicine 
furnished in the Lord's Word, namely, "What 
shall it profit a man if he gain the whole world and lose 
his own soul?" "For the love of money is a root of all evil, 
which some, coveting after, have erred from the truth 
and pierced themselves through with many sorrows." 

The more attention we give to this subject, the 
more we will be convinced, from our own personal experiences, 
of the truth of the Scriptural declarations 
respecting the beginnings of sin as secret faults in the 
mind; and the more we will appreciate the statement 
of the Word, "Keep thy heart [mind, affections] with 
all diligence; for out of it are the issues of life." — 
Prov. 4:23. 

But we are not to wonder that God has so constituted 
us as to permit temptations to come to our minds, 



nor are we to pray that we may have no temptations; 

for if there were no such presentations, no such temptations, 

then there could be no victories on our part, 

no overcoming of sin and of the wicked One. But we 

know that for this very reason we are now in the school 

of Christ; not that we shall there be shielded from all 

temptation, but that we may learn of the great Teacher 

how to meet the Tempter, and by our Master's grace 

and help to come off conquerors, victors in the strife 

against sin. The degree of our success in this conflict 

will depend largely upon the keenness of our faith and 

trust in the great Teacher. If we feel confident in his 

wisdom, we will follow closely his instructions and 

keep our hearts [minds] with all diligence. Faith in 

the Lord's wisdom and in his help in every time of 

need is necessary to us in order that we may be thoroughly 

obedient to him; and hence it is written, "This 

is the victory that overcometh the world, even your 

faith;" i.e., it will be by the exercise of faith and the 

obedience which flows therefrom that we will be enabled 

to "come off conquerors and more than conquerors 

through him that loved us and gave himself for us." 

Nor are we to seek divine aid far in advance, as, for 
instance, to be kept throughout the year to come, or 
month to come, or week to come: rather we are to know 
that if we have made a covenant with the Lord and are 
his, that he is near us at all times in every trial, in 
every temptation; and that his assistance is ready to 
our use, if we will but accept it and act accordingly. 
Hence, our prayers should be for help in the time 
of need, as well as general prayers for the Lord's blessing 
and care for each day. In the moment of temptation 
the heart should lift itself to the great Master, in 
full assurance of faith, recognizing his love, his wisdom 
and his ability to help us, and his willingness to make 
all things work together for good to those who love 
him. Asking for assistance in such a time of need 
would surely draw to us the Lord's counsel and help 
and strength for righteousness, truth, purity and love; 
and thus we should be hourly victorious, daily victorious, 
and finally victorious. 

The difficulty with many is that they are looking 
for some great battles, instead of averting the great 
battles by availing themselves of the Lord's provision, 
and keeping their minds cleansed from secret faults. 
The little battles, and much more numerous, are the 
ones in which we gain the victories with their ultimate 
rewards. "Greater is he that ruleth his own spirit 
[mind, will] than he that taketh a city." 

Finally, the grand results of obedience to this counsel 
of the Lord, the grand attainment of those who 
have faithfully kept their hearts with diligence, is expressed 
in our text, and may well be the repeated earnest 
prayer of all the sanctified in Christ Jesus,— "Let 
the words of my mouth, and the meditation of my 
heart, be acceptable in thy sight, O Lord, my strength 



and my Redeemer." 

A year from now we hope to hear from very many 
of great blessings received through this counsel of the 
Lord's Word, as suggested in our last issue. 



R2249 : page 24 

THE BLESSED ONES PORTRAYED. 

--JAN. 23. -MATT. 5:1-12.- 

"Ye are the Light of the World. "-Matt. 5:14. 

THE beatitudes— or the blesseds— designate the 

particular graces necessary to our Lord's followers, 

if they would receive the blessings which the 

Father designed they should enjoy through Christ. 

These constitute the text as it were of our Master's 

great "Sermon on the Mount." It is supposed to have 

been delivered from a site known as the Mount of Beatitudes, 

sloping gradually, about sixty feet in height 

and situated about seven miles South-west from Capernaum 

where, as we saw in our last lesson, Jesus had 

taken up his residence. Strange to say, it was on this 

very site on July 5th, 1 187, that the last remnant of 

the Crusaders was destroyed, after their army had been 

defeated by Saladin in the valley below. Those Crusaders 

claimed to wage their warfare in the interest of 

the Lord's cause, but had they remembered and properly 

applied to themselves even remotely the lesson 

which we are about to consider, spoken by our Lord 

on this very Mount, they would not have been defeated 

and exterminated, for they would not have been 

Crusaders at all. Alas, how many cry, Lord, Lord, 

and attempt in the Lord's name to do many wonderful 

works who, neglecting his Word, are not his people 

and fail to get the blessings now offered. 

At this time our Lord's ministry was fully inaugurated: 
he had collected his first disciples, had performed 
some miracles, and the multitudes began to 
follow him, saying truly, "Never man spake like this 
man." With his disciples nearest to him and the multitudes 
surrounding, he began his celebrated discourse 
the text of which we have under consideration. 

(1) "Blessed are the poor in spirit: for theirs is 
the Kingdom of Heaven." This first beatitude or 
blessed state really in some respects comprehends all 
the others. Through it the other graces and blessings 
are accessible. It is the gateway and the main roadway 
from which all the other avenues of blessing 
branch off. Some one has said, it is the hallway of 
the house of blessing, from which all the various rooms 
or apartments are accessible. 

The word blessed signifies much more than happy; 



happiness proceeds usually from outward causes, while 
one might be blessed while in misery, in pain, not joyous 
but grievous. The root of the word blessed here 
carries with it the thought of great or honorable: our 
Lord is describing the characters which from his standpoint 
and that of the Father are truly great, honorable 

R2250 : page 24 

characters, which God is pleased to bless and ultimately 
to reward. 

The Greek word here translated poor has the significance 
of utter destitution, extreme poverty. Hence, 
the thought is that a full appreciation of our own spiritual 
destitution is essential before we will be ready to 
receive the measures of divine grace provided for us 
by the Father in Christ Jesus, our Lord. And not only 
must this destitution be realized at the beginning of 
our approach to God, but it is necessary that the same 
dependence upon divine grace and realization of our 
own insufficiency shall continue with us all our journey 
through, if we would finally be acceptable and be 
granted a share in the Kingdom which God has promised 
to them that love him. There is nothing in this 
text to signify earthly poverty and destitution: nevertheless 
we know from experience, as well as from the 
Lord's Word, that not many rich or great, but chiefly 
the poor of this world, rich in faith, shall be heirs of 
the Kingdom. Very evidently moderate poverty is the 
most favorable condition for us in our present weak 
and fallen condition: earthly prosperity and riches very 
frequently tend to choke the new nature and hinder it 
from bringing forth the peaceable fruits of righteousness 
—tending rather to a spirit of self-sufficiency, pride, 
etc. As our Lord Jesus expressed it, "The cares of 
this life and the deceitfulness of riches choke the Word, 
and it becometh unfruitful." Let us all then in seeking 
the character which will be approved of God and 
accepted to the Kingdom of God's dear Son, seek more 
and more continually this humility of mind which so 
far from being boastful and self-sufficient, humbly accepts 
with gratitude every good and every perfect gift 
as coming from the Father of Lights. 

(2) "Blessed are they that mourn: for they shall 
be comforted." We apply this in connection with the 
first blessing; for it is not every one who mourns who 
will be comforted, but merely the poor in spirit: their 
mourning will be from the right standpoint and will 
bring a blessing of heavenly comfort— a realization of 
sins forgiven, iniquities covered and divine reconciliation 
and favor. We sometimes sing, 

"Why should the children of a King 
Go mourning all their days?" 

There is a proper thought in the poet's expression: 
for we need not continue to grieve over our "sins that 
are past through the forbearance of God," which are 



"covered" by the merit of the precious blood: nor 
should our lives be destitute of the "joys of the Lord" 
and the "songs in the night" which he gives, according 
as it is written, "He hath put a new song into my 
mouth, even the loving kindness of our God." But 
hilarity and boisterous "gayety" are certainly inappropriate 
to the children of the Great King. Why? 
Because all such should realize that life is a stern reality, 

R2250 : page 25 

not only to the Christian but to the whole world, 
"the groaning creation." A sympathy with the sorrows, 
difficulties and privations of the masses, at home 
and in heathen lands, no less than a realization of the 
grandeur of the high calling of the Church in this Gospel 
age and of the exceeding great and precious things 
which hinge upon our faithfulness to him who hath 
called us out of darkness into his marvelous light, — 
these all should be saying to us continually, in the 
language of the Apostle, Be vigilant! Be sober! Watch! 
Quit you like men! 

Besides, all who are earnestly striving for the victory 
over self, and the world, and sin, are sure to make 
a sufficient number of failures along the way to insure 
them considerable experience in mourning for these 
deflections,— if their hearts are in the right attitude 
toward the Lord. Gracious indeed is the promise to 
such, "They shall be comforted." Our Lord does 
comfort such with the assurance that he notes their 
tears as well as their efforts in opposition to sin, and 
that he is thus preparing them through present experiences 
and the development of character for the 
Kingdom. 

(3) "Blessed are the meek: for they shall inherit 
the earth." Nothing can be more evident than the 
fact that this promise also waits for the establishment 
of the Kingdom, for its full fruition. Certainly the 
meek are not in this age favored with the ownership 
or control of any considerable proportion of the earth's 
surface. Rather it is the arrogant, the proud, the domineering 
the selfish and pushing who chiefly inherit 
the earth at the present time— under the rule of "The 
Prince of the power of the air, who now worketh in 
the hearts of the children of disobedience." Very evidently 
this blessing also belongs to those who inherit 
the first blessing— those poor in spirit who shall be 
heirs of the Kingdom. The Kingdom class— Christ 
Jesus and his Church, his body, will inherit the earth 
—purchased, as well as man, by the great sacrifice finished 
at Calvary. And when this Kingdom class shall 
inherit the earth, it will not be to oppress mankind, 
but on the contrary for their elevation, restitution and 
blessing. This is in harmony with the Heavenly 
Father's promise,— "I will give thee the heathen for 
thy inheritance; and the uttermost parts of the earth 



for a possession." 

But the time for this inheritance has not yet come. 
It will be introduced as soon as the last member of the 
elect Church has been fitted and prepared for the inheritance 
by the development of the graces of character 
here portrayed by our Lord. Yes, blessed are the 
meek— all who shall be accounted worthy of a share in 
the Kingdom and in its inheritance must be meek, 
teachable, humble, for "Jehovah resisteth the proud 
but showeth his favor to the humble."— James 4:6. 

(4) "Blessed are they which do hunger and thirst 
after righteousness: for they shall be filled." To whom 
is this blessed promise applicable? Surely to none 
other than "the elect," the Church, referred to preceding 
as "the poor in spirit," "the meek." These, 

and these alone at the present time, are hungering and 
thirsting for truth and righteousness, in respect to the 
divine revelation on every subject and affair of life. 
Others may have a little hunger for truth, but they 
are soon satisfied;— especially when they find the truth 
unpopular and that, however sweet to the taste, it afterward 
brings bitter gripings of persecution and ostracism 
under present unfavorable world-conditions. To 
a considerable number honesty and righteousness are 
the best policy, to a limited degree,— so far as public 
opinion sustains them; but a righteousness and honesty 
and love of the truth at the cost of persecution, at the 
cost of having men "separate you from their company," 
is only hungered and thirsted after by the "little flock" 
— the overcomers. "They shall be filled." They will 
be filled to the full by and by, very shortly, in the 
"change" of the "first resurrection," when this mortal 
condition shall be exchanged for immortality; when 
this animal body shall give place to a perfect spirit-body. 
Then partial knowledge and partial attainment 
of righteousness shall be superseded by a full, complete 
knowledge, then "we shall know, even as we are 
known." But even now this class enjoys much larger 
measures of knowledge of the truth and experiences 
in the blessings of righteousness than are possible to 
any other class. 

(5) "Blessed are the merciful; for they shall obtain 
mercy." Human mercy, sympathy, pity, compassion, 
are but reflections of the divine character: 

these qualities may be found in the natural man, but 
not infrequently when so found they are traceable to 
some extent to pride, selfishness, ostentation, show. 
The mercy, pity and sympathy which would exercise 
themselves irrespective of human knowledge and approval, 
and irrespective of divine reward, are not frequently 
met with except in the "poor in spirit, heirs 
of the Kingdom." And all who are of this class must 
be merciful, pitiful, loving: their own relationship with 
the Lord and all their hopes respecting the Kingdom 
to come depend upon their being merciful; for only the 
merciful shall obtain mercy, and those who pray, "Thy 



Kingdom come, thy will be done on earth," are instructed 
to pray at the same time for the forgiveness 
of their trespasses (only) as they also forgive the trespasses 
of others, their fellow-creatures. 

(6) "Blessed are the pure in heart: for they shall 
see God." We are to distinguish sharply between 
purity of heart, will, intention and absolute purity of 

R2250 : page 26 

every word and act of life; for the one is possible while 
the other is impossible, so long as we have our present 
mortal bodies and are surrounded by present unfavorable 
conditions. The standard set before us in this 
very sermon however is a standard not only for the 
heart but for all the conduct of life, "Be ye perfect 
even as your Father in heaven is perfect." By this 
standard we are to measure ourselves, and that continually, 
and not with one another; and to this standard 
we are to seek to bring the conduct of our lives 
and the meditation of our hearts. But only our wills 
(hearts) have yet been transformed and renewed and 
purified: our present imperfect earthen vessels in which 
we have this treasure will not be "changed" or renewed 
until the resurrection. Then, and not until 
then, will we be perfect in the divine likeness, but now 
nothing short of purity of heart, will, intention, can 
be acceptable to God and bring the blessing here 
promised. 

In whom do we find the new hearts, renewed hearts, 
cleansed hearts, pure hearts? Surely, in none except 
those who are called, chosen and faithful,— the poor in 
spirit class, the meek, the "little flock," heirs of the 
Kingdom. 

(7) "Blessed are the peace-makers: for they shall 

be called the children of God." None will be accounted 
worthy to be called children of God who shall not 
have developed peace-loving dispositions. The anger, 
malice, hatred, envy, strife and generally quarrelsome 
disposition, which to some extent is inherited through 
the fall by every member of the race, must be recognized 
as belonging to "the works of the flesh and of 

R225 1 : page 26 

the devil, and must be resisted in heart fully, and in 
outward conduct as fully as possible. Peaceableness 
must supplant quarrelsomeness in all those who would 
hope to share the Kingdom and be recognized as children 
of God. "So far as lieth in you live peaceably 
with all men." This of course does not mean peace 
at any price, otherwise our Lord, the apostles and the 
faithful body of Christ throughout this age might not 
have suffered, or at least might have endured very 
much less suffering for righteousness' sake. Hence, 
the significance of our Lord's statement, "In the world 



ye shall have tribulation; in me ye shall have peace." 

But surely, as we should be at peace with the 
Lord, so we should desire and strive and expect to be 
at peace with all who love the Lord, who have his 
spirit, and who are seeking to walk in the same way 
toward the Heavenly Kingdom. "Live in peace [among 
yourselves]" (2 Cor. 13:11), is the injunction of the 
Apostle to the Church. There is a great lesson in 
these words for all who are seeking to be heirs of the 
Kingdom and to inherit these blessings which our Lord 
enumerates. With perverse natural dispositions it may 
require considerable time and practice to learn to know 
and choose and love the path which leads to peace 
among God's people. This path is love;— love which 
thinketh no evil, vaunteth not itself, is not puffed up, 
seeketh not her own, but beareth all things, endureth 
all things, hopeth all things. And to be a peace-maker 
one must first be a peace-lover himself: to attempt to 
make peace without first having the spirit of love ourselves 
is to blunder, and will surely result in failure. 
Those who, wherever they go, make for peace, righteousness, 
love and mercy, in meekness, thereby prove 
themselves to be children of God. 

(8) "Blessed are they which are persecuted for 
righteousness' sake, for theirs is the Kingdom of 
Heaven." This blessing also applies only to "the 
faithful in Christ Jesus." The elements of character 
which constitute righteousness, and imply harmony 
with God and heirship to the Kingdom which he has 
promised, have already been stated in the seven propositions 
preceding; and now our Lord calls attention to 
the fact that with all these graces and elements of 
righteousness, far above the standard of the world, 
this class would nevertheless be persecuted and suffer; 
because of these very elements of character which he 
approves. This is because the world in general throughout 
this age will be so blinded to the truth, and so in 
harmony with sin, that righteousness will be hated in 
proportion as sin is loved. But in order to be heirs of 
the Kingdom we must not only love righteousness, 
meekness, purity of heart, humility of spirit, etc., but 
must be ready and willing to endure persecution in 
support of these heavenly principles. 

The great Apostle, Paul, declared, "All that 
will [in this present time] live godly in Christ Jesus 
shall suffer persecution." (2 Tim. 3:12.) Hence, the 
implication is that we must have all of the foregoing 
seven characteristics so deeply imbedded in our characters 
that we will endure the persecutions which they 
will bring, unflinchingly. Such the Lord elsewhere terms 
overcomers, saying, "To him that overcometh will I 
grant to sit with me in my throne." So then, to have 
a share in the Kingdom implies a share in the persecutions 
which the Kingdom class will endure faithfully. 
The same thought is amplified in the two succeeding 
verses, which inform us that we should not only be 



ready to endure persecution, but, rightly informed, 
will realize that the more we endure along proper lines 
the more cause we will have for rejoicing in heart, 
however sorrowful our outward conditions and circumstances 
may at times be. 

Nor does the Lord leave us to suppose that the 
only persecutions to be endured are those of physical 
culture; he specifies that some of these persecutions, 
the endurance of which will be acceptable with him as 

R225 1 : page 27 

proofs of our love for him, his kingdom and its rules 
of righteousness, are "revilings," "false-witnesses" 
and "all manner of evil" misstatements, because we 
are his, loyal to his Word and cause. Let us remember 
also that as the persecutions, misstatements, slanders, 
revilings, misrepresentations, against the early 
Church came not so much from the world as from 
those who professed to be God's people, Israel according 
to the flesh, so now we must expect that persecutions 
will come from professing Christians, who are not 
in heart-harmony with the Lord, and his Word, and 
the rules of righteousness which our Master laid down. 

These same rules of course apply in a modified degree 
to the whole world, in proportion as they have 
these traits of character: even in uncircumcised hearts, 
and even tho they be only outwardly practiced and for 
effect, nevertheless to that degree do blessings attend. 
And we may reasonably suppose that when the Kingdom 
class, the Church, shall be exalted with their Lord 
and head, to share his Millennial Kingdom, and to 
bless the world of mankind with a righteous government, 
and to bring all to a knowledge of the Lord and 
of the truth,— then practically these same rules will 
apply to all who then will be on probation for divine 
approval and eternal life. Now however, during this 
Gospel age, these lessons are fully applicable to the 
elect Church, the "little flock," to whom only it is the 
Father's good pleasure to give the Kingdom. 



R225 1 : page 27 

"AFTER THIS MANNER PRAY YE." 

-JAN. 30. -MATT. 6:5-15.- 

"Pray to thy Father which is in secret." 

"PRAYER is the soul's sincere desire, uttered 
or unexpressed," says the poet: and 
he says truly, for the Scriptures inform us that God 
is a "discerner of the thoughts and intents of the 
heart;" and again, that in the case of the saints the 



spirit or intention is accepted by the Lord when we approach 

him in seasons of distress, when we can find 

no language in which to clothe our feelings and desires, 

—when we come to him with spirit-groanings which 

we cannot utter in words. (Rom. 8:26.) Nevertheless 

both by words and example our Lord instructed 

us that our prayers should be uttered, formulated, and, 

if possible, not be left merely to incoherent feelings and 

groanings. It was to this end that he gave the instructions 

of the present lesson, in answer to the request 

of the apostles, "Lord, teach us to pray."— Luke 11:1. 

While certain rules should govern all prayers, all 
approaches to God for communion, namely, that we 
should approach with humility and simplicity and 
reverence and in the name of Jesus, yet circumstances 
may govern in certain particulars:— 

(1) The prayer of the sinner, the alien and stranger 
from God, should differ from that of the child of 
God who has received pardon and reconciliation along 
the divinely appointed lines. For instance, the prayer 
of the publican, approved by our Lord, did not address 
Jehovah as "Father" but as God— "God be merciful 

to me a sinner." On the contrary, those who come 
into relationship with God under the terms of his covenant 
in Christ have the privilege not only of recognizing 
God as the Creator and Ruler, but also as their 
"Heavenly Father," and of addressing him as such. 

(2) Amongst those who approach God in prayer 

as his children, different circumstances and conditions 
may have a bearing as respects the manner of worship: 
at times they may properly go aside and hold communion 
with the Father in secret,— where no earthly 
eye will see and no earthly ear will hear. Our Lord's 
own example should be an illustration of this privilege: 
we remember how it is written of him frequently that 
he went apart from his disciples and prayed alone, and 
how sometimes he spent the entire night in solitary 
prayer. 

(3) Prayer at other times may properly and profitably 
be offered in the presence of fellow-believers and 
audibly, as the prayer of all and in which all are interested 
and join. An illustration of this may also be 

drawn from our Lord's example: for instance, his 
prayers recorded in John 11:41,42; 17; Matt. 11:25,26; 
Luke 10:21; 11:1. These prayers could not have been 
recorded if they had not been heard by the apostles: 
and the very object of their utterances in their presence 
was evidently for their benefit and blessing, as well 
as for the benefit and blessing of all the household of 
faith since then. The prayers of Moses and Solomon, 
David and Jeremiah, Ezekiel and Daniel are also recorded, 
and hence were made publicly, at least before the 
Lord's people. The record respecting the early Church 
seems to imply that they met together as one family 
and that their prayers as well as their hymns and song-prayers 
were general, in common, for the benefit of 



the whole company present. This is implied in the 
account given in Acts 1:14 where it is declared, "These 
all continued with one accord in prayer and supplication, 
with the women, and Mary the mother of Jesus, and 
with his brethren." Again, the words of one of their 
prayers are quoted in Acts 1:24; evidently this prayer 
was uttered audibly and in common. Again in 1 Cor. 14:16 

R2251 : page 28 

the Apostle shows the thanksgiving of the congregation 

was and should be presented before the Lord 

not only audibly but in a language heard and understood 

by the worshipers, so that all might be able to 

say "Amen" to the thanksgiving and petition. 

(4) At times it may not be improper to give thanks 
to God in the presence of a mixed company— believers 
and unbelievers. Illustration of this course is found 

R2252 : page 28 

in our Lord's own conduct. His prayer at his baptism 
in Jordan was witnessed evidently by the multitudes. 
(Luke 3:21.) Again our Lord prayed in public, in 
the hearing of the mixed gathering, at the grave of 
Lazarus. Again at the close of our Lord's ministry, 
when he prayed, "Father, save me from this hour," 
"Father, glorify thy name," the multitudes surrounding 
evidently heard or in some manner knew of the 
prayer, as is shown by the statement of John 12:29. 
Again our Lord's last prayer, on the cross, was audibly 
heard even by his enemies.— Matt. 27:46,50. 

We have gone into details of proof respecting this 
subject because some of God's dear people have fallen 
into the error of supposing from this very lesson which 
we are about to consider, that it is wrong, sinful, to 
pray with or in the presence of others, either the Church 
or the world; they evidently put more stress upon our 
Lord's words, "Enter into thy closet, etc.," than our 
Lord intended, as we have shown from his own course 
of conduct, which certainly is the best illustration of 
the spirit of his teachings,— for "In him was no sin, 
neither was guile found in his mouth." We remark 
incidentally, however, that we have no sympathy whatever 
with a practice which seems to be very common 
with the majority of Christians, namely, that of preaching 
at transgressors and scoring them, in prayers ostensibly 
offered to God. That this general disposition 
is recognized by others, is well illustrated by the following 
statement which appeared in a Boston secular 
journal, in a favorable comment upon the discourse of 
a very popular minister in that city. It said: "His 
prayer was generally acknowledged to be one of the 
finest ever offered to a Boston audience." There are 
indeed strong reasons for believing that many of the 
prayers offered are offered more to the congregations 



who hear than to the Almighty. This is a gross perversion 
of the wonderful privilege of prayer granted to 
God's children, and is of a piece with the hypocrisies 
of our Lord's day against which he warned his disciples, 
saying that those who thus pray are hypocrites and 
have their reward in being heard of men; for that is 
the reward they seek. 

To this day the traveler in the far East will see 
and hear prayers in every direction. Some of them 
may be results of misdirected energy and conscience, 
but many of them no doubt, as intimated by our Lord, 
are the results of spiritual pride and desire to be 
thought pious. A traveler in the East writes: "I was 
awakened in the early morning by a sound of prayer 
that was evidently intended to be heard of men whether 
God should hear it or not; it was a prolonged and 
energetic intoning, with an occasional rise in the voice 
that would be sure to start the soundest sleeper— it 
was the dragoman [guide], who after the morning 
greeting, added, 'Did you hear me pray this morning, 
my master?' Indeed I did, was my reply. And then 
he told me of his zeal and earnestness in prayer." The 
customs of Christendom differ; and yet in every direction 
we may find evidence of the same spirit,— ambition 
to be thought pious, effort to make an impression upon 
men and women, rather than to hold communion 
with the Heavenly Father. Such hypocrisies cannot 
be too strongly guarded against in all those who seek 
and enjoy communion with the Father and with our 
Lord Jesus Christ. 

TO WHOM SHALL WE PRAY? 



Our Lord's instruction is, "Pray to thy Father," 
"Pray, our Father which art in heaven." But this 
instruction is to be coupled with the further instruction, 
"Whatsoever ye shall ask of the Father in my 
name he will give it you." (John 15:16; 16:23.) "No 
man cometh unto the Father but by me." (John 14:6.) 
This excludes Jews, excludes Mohammedans, excludes 
the heathen, excludes all who have not a knowledge 
of Christ and a faith in him as the Redeemer. Only 
believers who have accepted Christ may approach God 
in prayer and call him "Father;" others may formulate 
petitions, but need expect no answers. It is only 
after we have accepted Christ and had our sins forgiven 
through faith in his blood that we may have 
the "boldness to enter into the holiest by the blood of 
Jesus by a new and living way which he has consecrated 
for us." (Heb. 10:19,20.) These privileges 
which we enjoy under the New Covenant sealed and 
ratified by the blood of Jesus, had their correspondence 
and type in fleshly Israel and the Law Covenant 
sealed with the blood of bulls and goats; hence it was 



that the Jews as a people under their covenant were 
permitted to have access to God in prayer— tho not so 
directly and closely and intimately as we of the New 
Covenant. 

"Use not vain repetitions as the heathen do." 
The natural tendency of the human mind in approaching 
the Creator seems to be to feel its own poverty of 
expression, and to attempt to make up for this by repetitions. 
Thus the Chinese have the "praying 
wheels" in which long prayers that the worshiper 
cannot remember to repeat are turned round and round 
by him as representing his will, his wish, his prayers. 

R2252 : page 29 

The same principle is used amongst Roman Catholics, 

who repeat the same prayers scores and hundreds of 

times, and are promised by their priests certain special 

rewards for "saying" these prayers, a certain number 

of times,— the omission of so many days or years of 

future purgatorial sufferings. The same influences 

seem to operate upon Protestants tho less grossly, and 

often leads to long prayers and improper details of instruction 

to the Almighty. The Lord wished his followers 

to pray intelligently and realize that they were 

approaching an intelligent and reasonable God who 

knows already, far better than we, what things we 

have need of; and who is more willing to give them to 

us than earthly parents are to give good gifts to their 

children. Hence to repeat our petitions over and over 

is not only vain, in the sense that it will profit us 

nothing, but it indicates a low degree of spiritual development, 

very imperfect ideas respecting God, and a 

very imperfect relationship with him. The Christian 

neither needs to repeat certain prayers indefinitely, nor 

does he need to take up in prayer all the affairs of the 

world and the affairs of the Church, to tell God all 

about them and how they ought to be regulated. We 

have heard public prayers which implied that the worshiper 

had as much or more wisdom than the Almighty; 

because in them he undertook to tell the Almighty 

how, when, where and what should be done the world 

over, at home and abroad;— how many should be converted 

at the meeting in which he was praying, and 

how the heathen everywhere, the world over, should 

be dealt with. 

All this is monstrously wrong. No man is in a 
fit condition of heart to approach God in prayer who 
has not first learned of his own ignorance and lack of 
wisdom, and learned also of the Lord's infinitely superior 
knowledge and wisdom and power and love. The 
Christian who is advanced in knowledge and experience 
in the heavenly way will on the contrary be so filled 
with a realization of his own ignorance and insufficiency 
that he will rather go to the Lord praying, Lord teach 
us thy will, show me what is thy way and plan of salvation 



for Christendom and for the heathen, and show 

me how I may best be a co-worker with thee in the 

accomplishment of thy great and wonderful, wise and 

good purposes. Indeed, as the Christian's experience 

grows he is apt to come more and more to the condition 

of heart where his prayers to God will be chiefly 

thanks for mercies and favors already received, expressions 

of confidence in the Lord's willingness and ability 

to fulfil all the gracious promises of his Word, temporal 

and spiritual, and request merely that the divine will 

be done. 

"Your Father knoweth what things ye have need 
of before ye ask him." The Christian's prayer therefore 
is not for the purpose of giving information to 
God, nor for the purpose of calling attention to matters 
which he might overlook or forget; but on the contrary 
he is enjoined to pray and required to pray, because 
it will benefit himself: God withholds many of his 
blessings until we approach to ask them in prayer, in 
order that we may realize our need of his aid, and our 
dependence on him. Our prayers therefore are not to 
induce God to give us things which he desires to withhold 
from us, but are merely to secure the things which 
he desires us to have and has promised to us, and is more 
willing to give than to withhold. And how wise is 
this divine arrangement: how many of God's people 
have realized great benefit from this divine arrangement 
that we must ask if we would receive, must seek 
if we would find, must "knock if it be opened unto us." 
And thus, in addition to the favors asked and received, 
the very necessity of prayer itself has brought us into 
close fellowship with the Lord— into the enjoyment of 
one of our greatest privileges and blessings. 

"AFTER THIS MANNER PRAY YE." 



"Our Father which art in Heaven, hallowed be 
thy name." This address of God as our Father, as we 
have just seen, does not imply the fatherhood of God 
to all mankind; for on the contrary we remember that 
our great Teacher declared to some, "Ye are of your 
father, the devil." And the Apostle declares that we 
were "children of wrath" even as others still are. We 
have "escaped the condemnation that is on the world," 
and have been translated out of the kingdom of darkness 
into the Kingdom of God's dear Son— out from 
amongst those who are children of wrath into the family 
of God; so that now, as sons of God, all who believe in 
Jesus may pray, "Our Father, which art in Heaven." 
This portion of the petition is an address of reverence, 
an acknowledgment of God's greatness, and implies our 
humility and littleness. It implies that the worshiper 

R2253 : page 29 



reverences God and is not undertaking to address him 
in a light or irreverent manner: even his very name is 
revered as holy by the true worshiper. 

"Thy Kingdom come: thy will be done in earth 
as it is in heaven." This petition is not in the nature 
of a demand, nor even an expression of impatience. 
Rather it is an acknowledgment on the part of the 
worshiper that he has faith in the divine promise that 
a Heavenly Kingdom shall in God's due time be established 
in the earth. It is an acknowledgment that 
the worshiper not only believes God's promise but that 
he is in sympathy with it and desires the Lord's Kingdom 
—longs for it. It thus implies that he is not in sympathy 
with sin, nor with the kingdoms of this world and 
the present order and its imperfect social, financial, political 
and ecclesiastical arrangements. It is an acknowledgment, 

R2253 : page 30 

furthermore, that the worshiper is longing for 
the condition in which no sin will be possible;— in which 
God's will shall prevail on earth as well as in heaven. 
It thus implies that he is out of harmony with sin and in 
harmony with righteousness, truth, goodness. It is 
an acknowledgment, nevertheless that God's will is 
not done on earth, that his Kingdom has not come to 
earth as yet; for when his kingdom comes, when Christ, 
the appointed King, shall take unto himself his great 
power and reign, the result will speedily be as shown 
in the Scriptures, that Satan will be bound, evil in 
general restrained, and on the contrary knowledge, 
peace and blessing shall fill the whole earth. (Rev. 20:1-3; 
21:1-5; 22:1-6.) There is no attempt here to 
tell the Lord, what must be done, and how and when 
his Kingdom must be established: the rightly instructed 
worshiper is supposed to know that he who made 
all things is thoroughly competent to govern and direct 
and overrule all things, and that he is "working all 
things according to the council of his own will." The 
worshiper, it is supposed, has gone to the divine Word 
for instruction and will continue to receive his instructions 
there respecting the divine purposes: in this petition 
he is merely expressing his full acquiescence to 
the divine arrangement and rejoicing therein. 

"Give us this day our daily bread." The words 
of Matthew here differ slightly from those of Luke. 
Literally translated Luke's statement is, "be giving 
continually our daily bread." Matthew says "this day," 
while Luke says "day by day." The thought is practically 
the same, however. It is not an appeal to God 
for superabundance and much goods laid up for many 
days; nor is it a request for luxuries: but merely asking, 
Lord, give us those things which are needful to 
us daily. Contentment is the very spirit of this petition. 
Whoever prays to the Lord after this manner, 



and from the heart, will surely be a very thankful and 
very contented person. And this petition is as broad 
as the divine promise respecting earthly things would 
warrant. "Thy bread and thy water shall be sure," 
leaves no room for requests for luxuries. Moreover, 
while this petition is the only one in the prayer of an 
earthly character, the only one taking hold upon earthly 
affairs and interests, it also may be understood as 
relating to spiritual things; indeed, we believe it will 
be so applied by all God's children, in proportion as 
growth is made in grace and knowledge and spirituality. 
The spiritually minded will be asking for the 
spiritual food, the spiritual necessities, day by day and 
will more and more realize that as the Heavenly Father 
clothes the lilies and feeds the ravens, so, much more, 
he will care for the temporal interests of all who are 
seeking first the Kingdom of Heaven and its righteousness, 
—the righteousness which it will enforce. 

"And forgive us our debts, as we forgive our debtors." 
What a thought! Who can offer a prayer "after 
this manner" and yet be under control of the evil 
spirit— filled with malice, anger, envy, hatred, strife, 
being unforgiving, unthankful, resentful, backbiters, 
slanderers? All these works of the flesh and the devil 
proceed from evil conditions— not one of them is prompted 
by true love, such as the Lord inculcates and his 
spirit inspires. The very essence of Christian principle 
is love, sympathy, forgiveness of the faults of others, 
even as we realize we have faults ourselves and that 
God has graciously forgiven us these for Christ's sake. 
Our Lord emphasizes the importance of this forgiving 
spirit before we can be children of our Father in 
Heaven, saying, in another place, "With what judgment 
ye judge, ye shall be judged;" and with what 
measure ye measure others, your own conduct shall be 
measured. (Matt. 7:2.) We remember, also, that he 
gave a parable illustrating the subject, representing 
his forgiven disciple as a servant who owed ten thousand 
talents, whose debt he had freely set aside, and 
did not press; but when that follower manifested so 
different a spirit that, finding a fellow servant who 
owed a few pence, he treated him unmercifully, then 
the Lord's mercy and generosity were likewise withdrawn 
from him.-See Matt. 18:23-35. 

Let every Christian in approaching the throne of 
the heavenly grace, daily inquire of his own heart, 
whether or not he has forgiven those who are indebted 
to him, as he desires that God should freely forgive 
him for Christ's sake. This does not mean the forgiving 
of financial indebtedness and destruction of our account 
books, except that on the debtor willing but unable 
to pay, we should have mercy and patience, even 
as we hope for mercy of our Lord. Its special application 
is to moral obligations, transgressions and indebtedness. 
Nor does this imply that we should pay 
no attention to the transgressions of others against 



ourselves— that we should not recognize offences. True, 

we should not be swift to take offense, we should be 

slow to anger, we should never take offense unless offense 

is most evidently intended. And then, while we 

may not forgive in the absolute sense until our forgiveness 

is asked, according to divine pattern on this 

subject, yet we should be always in a forgiving attitude 

of mind: that is to say, we should harbor no vindictive 

or malicious feelings, we should have no feelings 

except those of love and sympathy, and a desire 

to forgive the wrong that has been done us, as soon as 

possible, and an anxiety to make the way of reconciliation 

as smooth and easy as possible for the wrong-doer; 

and we should be on the alert to discover and prompt 

to rectify any missteps or wrong doings on our own 

parts. 

R2253 : page 31 

And "Lead us not into temptation, but deliver us 
from evil." The thought here is slightly obscure; for 
we all remember that "God tempteth no man." Amplifying 
the sentence so as to give us what we believe 
is the literal translation of it, and adding in brackets 
some suggestive words to make more plain our conception 
of the Lord's full thought here, as it was understood 
by those who heard him, this passage reads 
thus:— "And bring us not into temptation [merely], 
but [also] deliver us from the Evil One." It is a part 
of the divine arrangement to bring us or permit us to 
be put into positions of trial or testing. We are not 
to rebel against the divine wisdom in this matter, but 
quite to the contrary to acquiesce in it, and to realize 
that trials are essential to our development. Hence, 
instead of praying to be kept from temptations, our 
prayer rather is that when our Lord in his providences 
brings us into places of testing, he will also stay with 
us during the trial, and let his grace be sufficient for 
us, and not suffer us to be tempted above that we are 
able to bear, but with the temptation provide also a 
way of escape— delivering us from the Evil One, Satan. 

"For thine is the kingdom, and the power and the 
glory, forever. Amen." These words, altho found in 
our Common Version and in some of the Greek manuscripts, 
are not found in the oldest Greek MSS., the 
Sinaitic and the Vatican. These would therefore seem 
to have been human words added to the words of our 
Lord. So far as this earth is concerned, these words 
have not been true throughout the Gospel age; the 
dominion of the earth has not been the Lord's; the 
power of earth has not been the Lord's; and the glory 
of the earth has not been the Lord's. On the contrary, 
Satan has been "the prince of this world" and has 
worked in the hearts of the children of disobedience, 
and has blinded the minds of them that believe not the 
gospel. And the kingdoms and powers of this world 



have been Satan's, and God's people are waiting for 

God's Kingdom to come, as represented in verse ten, 

to overthrow the kingdoms of this world, and to establish 

the Kingdom of righteousness: to bind Satan 

and to destroy the works of the flesh and the devil. 



page 3 1 

INTERESTING LETTERS. 



Kansas. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-It seems to me there 
should be a million of the booklet on Spiritism circulated 
this year. The error of Spiritism is increasing 
in a wonderfully rapid manner, and the regions here 
about seem pervaded with it. The "angel of light" 
phase seems to be wonderfully successful. How blessed 
the thought that the Lord will take care of his own. 
"I pray for them which thou hast given me out of the 
world." What joy to know that the Father hears the 
prayer of his dear Son. What a privilege to know 
that we may "abide under the shadow of the Almighty." 

I enclose you a little booklet which I think should 
be titled "The Methodist Tenth," instead of "God's 
Tenth." I sometimes think if the Lord wanted to get 
money as badly as the preachers do he would get it. I 
hope it is not wicked to think such thoughts. Certainly 
my ideal of the Most High is very different from 
that. When the great work is completed, we will all 
see that He has done it all, and to Him belongs all the 
glory. Blessed be his holy name! 

Yours for the truth, W. H. HOUGHTELIN. 



Missouri. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I have to report a 

splendid meeting at ; a regular camp meeting, 

where my audiences varied all the way from 50 to 200 
people, many of whom were deeply interested in the 
truth, as never before. Three Universalists threw 
away their arms of rebellion, came forward, two of 
them for the 1st volume of DAWN, and the third one 
subscribed for the TOWER, overjoyed at the wonderful 
plan of redemption when brought forward from a true 
and reasonable standpoint. Many others were deeply 
affected by such a grand harmony of the Word of God. 
Certainly it was a feast of fat things. 

With Christian greetings to yourself and Sister 
Russell and all the dear brethren and sisters, 

Yours in the bonds of love and service, 
Z. A. RANSOM. 



Ohio. 

DEAR FRIENDS: -Please find enclosed M.O. for 
$1.00 to pay for my TOWER of '98. "To pay for" are 
not the words, however, to express my sentiments, as 
there is not money enough in the world "to pay for" 
the grand things it has been my great privilege to 
have, through the TOWER. May it please the Lord to 
continue the TOWER a true Herald of Christ's Presence 
and a firm defender of the Ransom, so as to keep it a 
true helper to us at all times. 

Yours very truly, J. G. KUEHN. 



R2253 : page 31 

Illinois. 
DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-The TOWER arrived 
this morning, announcing the death of your father. I 
was deeply touched by your article, and you have my 
earnest sympathy in your loss. What you said of his 
burdens and disabilities made me think of some verses 
in the poem, "Mortally Wounded,"— 

"I lay me down to sleep, with little thought or care 
Whether the waking find me here— or there; 

A bowing, burdened head, only too glad to rest, 
Unquestioning, upon a loving breast; 
Not eager, bold nor strong— all that is past, 
Willing not to do, at last, at last! 

My long day's work is done, and this is all my part; 
I give a patient God my patient heart." 

R2254:page31 

What a great blessing this dear old father must have 
been to you ! In his own quiet way, loyal to the truth 
and to you. I can understand well how his noble efforts 
to "hold up your hands" must have comforted 

R2254 : page 32 

and strengthened you through dark times when Satan 
assaulted the work. His was indeed— 

A ROYAL SERVICE. 

"Among the Master's callings of high honor, 

One oftentimes we miss, 
Because our hearts in their impatient yearning 

Fail to perceive its bliss; 
Fail to perceive the grandeur of its service, 

The deep, sweet joy it brings, 
And deem some other easier, or nobler, 



With richer harvestings. 

"And so we may not choose, but Christ appoints us 

The work of sitting still, 
And saith, My child, in quietness and patience 

This service now fulfil. 
We learn that we are given this sweet service, 

Because the Master sees 
That thus his delegates must oft be fitted 

For higher embassies. 
Until at last we hear his dear voice saying, 

Child, I have need of thee 
To fill this vacant place of trust and honor, 

To do this work for me. 

"And then, as fellow-workers with the Master, 

We shall arise and go 
Forth to the harvest fields of earth, it may be, 

The reaper's joy to know; 
Or to some perfect, wondrous service yonder, 

Within some Holy Place, 
Where, veilless, in its full transfigured glory, 

His servants see his face." 

Your father's humility and child-like faith in our 
blessed Lord were beautiful: and you could not have 
paid a higher tribute to him than this brief, loving article 
in the TOWER. While your present separation 
from him is sad, yet we sorrow not as those who have 
no hope, and we have probably only a few more years 
in the flesh. Then we, too, shall enter that better, 
more blessed life, and understand fully what now we 
know only in part. With much Christian love to you 
and to Sister Russell, I am 

Yours in our dear Redeemer, 

HATTIE O. HENDERSON. 

[The EDITOR desires to express deep appreciation 
of all the many loving and sympathetic letters received 
from every quarter;— Love's testimonies and benedictions. 
What better evidences have we of the Lord's 
spirit than "brotherly love" and sympathy? Verily, 
"If one member suffers, all the members suffer with 
him." Please, dear Brethren and Sisters, accept this 
as an acknowledgement of all your kind and highly 
esteemed expressions of sympathy; and excuse me 
from a personal reply by letter, for we are extremely 
busy with the "harvest" work— as you will be glad 
to know. -EDITOR.l 



New Zealand. 
DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I cannot tell you how 
deeply thankful I feel for being enabled to come to a 
knowledge of present truth as set forth in MILLENNIAL 
DAWN and ZION'S WATCH TOWER. It has strengthened 



and deepened my love for God and my desire to 
be of some use in the work of the present "harvest." 
There is a good field here for work, and I earnestly 
desire to engage in it. I do firmly believe that the Lord 
is calling me to it. 

I have fully counted the cost, and I am prepared 
to devote my time, my talents, my all, in the Lord's 
work, and I wish to colporteur and devote the most of 
my time to spreading the truth. I have no one depending 
on me, so that I am entirely free to devote 
myself to the work. I enclose five dollars for renewal 
of TOWER and tracts, also some 1st volumes of DAWN. 

Yours in the Lord, ANDREW ANDERSON. 



Denmark. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL: --MILLENNIAL DAWN, 
VOL. IV. and your welcome letter of the 12th inst. came 
safely to hand. Many thanks ! I am reading the book 
with much interest and profit. It opens up many 
truths to me, so important for God's people to know; 
it is "meat in due season" for me. Oh, how I wish 
those books could have a wide circulation among the 
people, and enable many to see this wonderful light! 

On the 17th of October there happened an event 
here that should not be left entirely unnoticed. The 
Salvation Army was then officially legitimized in Denmark. 
General Booth was then visiting here and 
opened up several new homes for destitute. And at 
one of his meetings he had some very big(?) people on 
the platform. Judge of Supreme Court F. Larsen, privy 
Counselor of State Goos, Lieutenant-General Bahnson, 
Secretary of State Tierry, Chief of Police Madsen, 
and several others, solemnly pronounced the Salvation 
Army legitimized as a useful institution for the present 
order of society, and promised it their best support. 

But, for all that was said there, we know that it 
is not the promotion of Christianity these men are 
expecting by the efforts of the Salvation Army. It is 
not for the sake of Christianity, but for their own sakes, 
for the sake of Capitalism, that they have now legalized 
the "Army." And because the "Army" supports 
Capitalism, the great men bless its doings and step forth 
on the platform to thank the "Army" for all the good 
it has accomplished. 

Please give my Christian love and regards to the 
office helpers and receive a large share to yourself and 
Sister Russell, from 

Your loving brother in Christ, J. S. WINTER. 



Bermuda. 
MY DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I am writing to 
thank you for the generous supply of tracts you sent 



me and to tell you I arrived here after a very smooth 
and pleasant voyage. The people are very much scattered 
over the island, and in no place is there any very 
dense population, and as horse, steam or electric cars 
are entirely unknown here it entails considerable walking 
to make a thorough canvass of the entire colony; 
but (D.V.) I hope after about a week to start in and 
distribute the tracts and at the same time solicit orders 
for DAWNS, and as this is a virgin field, I trust my labor 
will not be in vain. 

I hope, dear Brother, that you will remember me 
at the throne of grace that He may use me in this 
solemn harvest time in making me His humble instrument 
in this colony for separating the wheat from the 
tares, and that whatsoever I may do, it may be entirely 
for His honor and glory who has called us to be fellow-heirs 
with Jesus. 

"Emptied, that so he might fill me, as forth to his service I go; 
Broken, that so unhindered his love through me might flow." 

Yours in the love of Jesus, WALTER YARDLEY. 

[This dear brother has already had 100 copies of 
VOL. I., and about all sold now. --EDITOR. 1 



page 33 
VOL. XIX. FEBRUARY 1, 1898. No. 3. 



CONTENTS. 



Views from the Watch Tower 35 

Christianity and Conquest 36 

United States a Kingdom of God 36 

The Church a Social Club 36 

Evangelist B. Fay Mills' Theology 37 

Zionism and the Messianic Prophecies 37 

"To Whom Shall We Go?" 38 

"Ye Cannot Serve God and Mammon" 42 

"They that be Whole Need Not a 

Physician" 44 

"Freely Ye have Received, Freely Give" 45 

Interesting Letters 48 

page 34 

SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
-ADDRESS TO- 
TOWER PUBLISHING CO., BIBLE HOUSE, 58 ARCH ST., 
ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 



SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, N.Y. DRAFT, MONEY ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS: 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age or accident, or other 
adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, if they 
send a Postal Card each December, stating their cases and requesting the paper. 



R2255 : page 35 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 



CHRISTIANITY AND CONQUEST. 



"IT WOULD be difficult for a confirmed cynic 

to make a more bitter comment upon what we 

may term political Christianity than has just been offered 

in the conduct of the European Powers toward 



China. In considering the partition of that Empire, 
the natural rights of its Government and people have 
not been taken into account, but only the desires and 
covetousness of the rival spoliators. And, however 
mild may be the later negotiations of the Germans at 
Kiao-Chau, their first intent, and the direct command 
of the Emperor, was to 'strike with a mailed fist' and 
take whatever they wanted by force. That is, or was, 
the attitude of that nation of Christian Europe, whose 
ruler most vaunts himself upon his divine right. 

"Briefly stated, the doctrine is that heathen nations 
have no rights which Christian nations are bound 
to respect. The powerful Christian nations of Europe 
approach the weak heathen nations of Asia, to oppress 
and rob and murder. They say, 'Let us rob them of 
their land, which we covet'— in the name of him who 
commanded, Thou shalt not steal' and 'Thou shalt 
not covet' They say, 'If they resist us, let us kill 
them'— in the name of him who said, 'Thou shalt not 
kill.' They say, 'Let us oppress them and compel 
them to do our will'— in the name of him who said, 
Thou shalt love thy neighbor as thyself.' That is 
what the Christian nations are practically saying and 
are actually doing.... 

"For Prince Henry of Prussia, who leads this great 
campaign against the Orient, and who goes thither to 
avenge the death of missionaries and to carry the beneficence 
of Europe to the benighted heathen, declares 
in terms that he will preach not Jesus of Nazareth, 
but William of Germany; not Christ crucified, but 
William crowned! Let there be no injustice done. 
Here are his identical words, spoken with the foreknowledge 
and approval of the Emperor himself: 'One 
thing,' he said, 'is the aim that draws me on. It is to 
declare in foreign lands the gospel of Your Majesty's 
hallowed person (das Evangelium Eurer Majestats geheiligter 
Person), to preach it to every one who will 
hear it, and also to those who will not hear it. This 
gospel I have inscribed on my banner, and I will inscribe 
it whithersoever I go.' Such, then, is the evangel 
of these few closing years of this nineteenth century 
of the Christian era. 

"The German seizure of a part of China is probably 
the consummation of a long laid plan. There is 
reason to believe that such action was decided upon 
some years ago, to be taken as soon as a pretext was 
afforded. The pretext came in the murder of a couple 
of missionaries, and the seizure of Kiao Chau immediately 
followed. That the murders occurred when they 
did was a matter of chance, but the time could not 
have been chosen more opportunely to serve the German 
Emperor's ends. A foreign campaign for the acquisition 
of a new empire in China will give him the 
greatest possible aid in getting his Navy bill through 
the Reichstag, especially since the murdered missionaries 
whom he is avenging were Roman Catholics, and 



it is the Roman Catholic vote in the Reichstag that he 
most needs. It will also serve to divert German attention 
from domestic distress and to make the people 
forget their poverty for a time in their enthusiasm for 
what is termed the honor of the Fatherland. 

"There is perhaps no need greater than this latter, 
unless, indeed, it be to remedy the poverty, instead of 
merely glossing it over with military glory. For Germany, 
with all her progress, is wretchedly poor. With 
one of the greatest armies in the world and with commerce 
whitening— or blackening— every sea, her people 
are grovelling in abject poverty. The facts in the case 
are actually startling. In England the line of exemption 
from income-tax is drawn at $800. In Prussia 
it is drawn at $225. One would think that would leave 
all except paupers subject to taxation. On the contrary, 
it taxes only 8.46 per cent, of the people. No 
less than 91.54 per cent, of the people of Prussia, then, 
have to live on incomes of less than $225 for each family! 
That is a picture of poverty literally appalling. 
That more than 29,000,000 out of 32,000,000 people 

R2255 : page 36 

should be living on incomes of less than 62 cents a day, 
such an income generally having to suffice for a whole 
family, is the blackest picture of German social economy 
that any enemy of the Fatherland could wish to 
draw. 

"A generation ago matters were not as bad as they 
are now. Or, if they were, the people had not yet 
been waked to a realization of the fact, and they had 
no one in particular to blame for it. But Germany is 
now wide awake. The people know and feel how 
wretchedly poor they are. Rightly or wrongly, they 
blame the Government for it. Some demand more aid 
from the Government, in tariff protection and bounties. 
Others clamor for free trade, which may not increase 
their incomes, but would, they imagine, lessen their 
expenses. Others see in the vast expenditures for 
army and navy the source of all their woes. And others, 
weary of the problem, seek to escape it by expatriation. 
There is a desperate chance that foreign war, 
or at least colonial conquests, may for a time allay the 
rising discontent. But that will be an anodyne for the 
pain, not a remedy for the disease. The latter is 
something that is to be sought through other mediums 
than blood and iron." 



Thus does the New York Tribune comment on the 
greed of the so called Kingdoms of God and of Christ 
—"Christendom," whose kings and emperors claim to 
reign "by the grace of God." No wonder, then, that 
people whose religious theories are in line with and 



built upon such claims, and who believe that the Bible 
so teaches, are inclined to repudiate the Bible and to 
modernize Christianity and make of it a society for social 
and political reform, and without creed or any tests 
as to religious faith. Alas! that God's wise and gracious 
plan and its record, the Bible, should be so misrepresented 
amongst those who love and seek righteousness, 
justice. 

THE UNITED STATES TO BE A KINGDOM OF GOD. 



Notwithstanding the foregoing and all the records 
of the past fourteen centuries that claims on the part 
of worldly governments to be Kingdoms of God are 
hypocritical and blasphemously false, there are quite 
a number of very good but very much blinded people, 
who think that they could add to these Kingdoms of 
God another, if they could but get the name of the 
Creator into the Constitution of the United States. 
These people recently held a convention in the City of 
Philadelphia to forward their views and unanimously 
passed the following resolution without debate:— 

"We recognize in our various young people's societies, 
in connection with the visible church, one of the 
mightiest forces on the side of Christian citizenship, 
and that we gladly anticipate the day when the united 
forces, now for many years drilled for active service, 
will, in connection with other Christian forces, so control 
the Constitution and administration of our Government 
that this nation will be a confession before the 
world, and, in fact, a kingdom of our Lord." 

THE CHURCH A SOCIAL CLUB. 



The Rev. Dr. Rainsford (Episcopalian) who is a 
leader in the Social Uplift movement in New York 
City recently preached a sermon to men, in which social 
and political and moral reasons only seem to have 
been advanced as reasons for joining and attending 
church. Commenting on quotations from that sermon 
a metropolitan editor says:— 

"It will be seen that in all this there is no reference 
to the Church as a divine institution, in which 
lies the means of salvation for men. It is treated as a 
fallible human institution, which commends itself to 
men as a voluntary association simply, of moral and 
religious usefulness to them. That there is any divine 
obligation to join the Church and that its sacraments 
are a means of salvation is not contended by Dr. Rainsford. 
With all its faults, his argument is, the church 
is a desirable association for men, and attendance upon 
its services is of moral advantage to them. 



"That is, in the view of Dr. Rainsford, the church 
is a sort of religious club to which a man should go for 
moral improvement. He says nothing about any religious 
belief required by it from him, but inferentially 
leaves him to believe or deny according as he is 
minded. So far as the Bible is concerned, he gives 
men an example of denial by himself refusing to accept 
its infallibility. Go to church, he says in substance, 
because the influences in it are good and pure, 
as a man might say, associate with refined people if 
you wish to take on refinement. 

"Dr. Rainsford, moreover, commends the church 
specifically as a political club, and he referred to the 
late municipal election to illustrate its advantages as 
such. In that campaign his particular church was especially 
active as a political club. The Citizens' Union 
movement, so-called, was started in St. George's 
Church. Its candidate for Mayor was one of its vestrymen; 
the Chairman of the concern was another, and 
among the officers generally were a majority of that 
vestry. Dr. Rainsford, therefore, calls on men to join 
St. George's as a political club." 

Thinking people have seen for some time that the 
religious features are gradually being dropped out of 
the "churches" and "gospels" of our day. This began 

R2256 : page 36 

in the centres of culture, but it is spreading 
everywhere. 



Another earnest Christian gentleman, Rev. Robt. 
Johnston of London, Ontario, speaking at another convention 
for social uplift, said:— 

"I utter no slander upon our own time nor upon 
any nation when I say that as an age we have lost the 
vision of the Almighty. The remarkable resources of 
our great continent, resources that multiply in variety 
and increase in vastness the more we learn of them, 
throw in the path of the nation exceptional dangers. 
History has written it in letters big with the ruin of 

R2256 : page 37 

nations and vivid with the fires of devastating armies, 
that an age of mammon worship and of luxury is ever 
an age of withering blight upon all institutions of social 
and civic strength. And such, in this free land of 
ours, this age threatens to be, unless God in his mercy 
turns us from our infatuation. The age needs heroic 
souls who, with clarion call, will, in the old prophetic 
spirit, lead us back to a sight of things that are true 
and eternal." 
These men see clearly enough that our civilization, 



energized by the spirit of selfishness, is leading the 
world to the great whirlpool of discontent and destruction 
which the Scriptures have distinctly portrayed, but 
which they have misread because of their false creeds 
and theories which have led them to believe that human 
efforts are to bring in the Millennium of blessing 
and peace in which God's will shall be done on earth 
as it is done in heaven. 

Mark the earnest prayer for heroic souls to lead 
the Lord's people back "to a sight of things that are 
true and eternal." We cannot question the sincerity 
of this prayer, and yet, strange to say, experience 
proves that nine out of ten, if not ten out of ten, of 
those who use similar language, are thoroughly unapproachable 
so far as the truth and appeals to God's 
Word are concerned; and the "heroic soul" that ventures 
to present the real "glad tidings of great joy, 
which shall be unto all people," is tolerably sure to 
need a great deal of heroism and divine grace to take 
meekly and patiently the disdainful, cold reception 
which he will encounter and the calumnious epithets 
that will be hurled at him. 

But why should good men be so bound up with 
error? It is the influence of sectarianism and is undoubtedly 
a part of the blinding influence of Satan, 
which the Apostle Paul describes in 2 Cor. 4:4. And 
such bounden and deceived ones deserve our sympathy 
rather than any unkind feelings. We can rejoice in 
the fact that the time is near when Immanuel with his 
elect and then glorified "little flock," the true Church, 
shall bind Satan and set at liberty his blinded captives. 
-Rev. 20:2,3; Isa. 61:1. 

EVANGELIST B. FAY MILLS' THEOLOGY. 



Evangelist Mills, after for a long time preaching 
hell and damnation instead of the Gospel of Christ— 
that the entire race is doomed to everlasting torment 
because father Adam ate the forbidden fruit, found it 
too much for his heart as well as too much for his intellect 
to believe. Consequently, some time ago he 
changed and switched off to another gospel— equally 
unscriptural: he is now a Universalist. Note his 
statement of his present faith as presented in a Boston 
sermon and reported by the Boston Herald, as follows: 

"You need not ever give yourselves the least concern 
about the old question of God's forgiveness for 
the past. You have had wrong ideas of God. The 
past does not need forgiveness or atonement in his sight. 
It is only the present that needs correction and the 
future that needs inspiration. 

"I realize to-day that the only real, powerful 
motive for the future for intelligent people, that shall 
lead them to practice purity and to grow in all that is 



good and beautiful, will be what might well be called 
'the social motive for individual righteousness.' As I 
said in a former sermon, the old individualistic motives, 
and the appeal to man to be good on the ground of 
personal reward or punishment, has become an ignoble 
appeal, and has been abandoned by the best minds and 
noblest souls. Woe be to us if the stronger motive and 
impulse for righteousness does not take its place, and 
this motive is nothing more nor less than the realization 
that we are all bound together in a common body 
of humanity— that if one suffers, all must suffer; that 
if one sins, all must be hampered in their development, 
that "no man liveth unto himself," and that in any 
real sense, no individual can be truly saved until the 
whole community is saved." 

How remarkable it does seem that the great Adversary 
is so successful in getting people to believe 
either one or the other of errors, extremes, and 
keeps hid from them the golden truth between!— that 
the penalty of Adam's sin was death, destruction, and 
not life in torment, and that this death sentence has 
been inherited with its mental, physical and moral 
blights in a natural way, by heredity (Rom. 5:12); 
and that a ransom for Adam (and hence for all lost 
through him) was paid by the death of our Lord Jesus, 
who died, the just for the unjust, to open for man the 
way back to life, and whose second advent is to be for 
the double purpose of glorifying his elect little flock 
and restoring to perfection and life so many as will 
accept divine favor on divine terms. 

ZIONISM AND THE MESSIANIC PROPHECIES. 



Some years ago, being curious to know how learned 
Hebrews view the Old Testament references to Christ, 
—as "a lamb for the slaughter," etc., we visited a 
friendly Rabbi, and asked him the question. He replied 
that Hebrews apply those prophecies to the Hebrew 
people and their centuries of bitter experiences 
under more or less of persecution. We are forcibly 
reminded of this false method of interpretation by the 
statement of Dr. Herzl at the Basel Congress, held 
Aug. 29th, last;— to the effect that that Congress was 
the birth of their Messiah;— that the Messiah class 
which they hope will fulfil all the good promises of 
Scripture concerning Abraham's seed was there organized. 
It appears, too, that the date (Aug. 29) was 
selected in harmony with a tradition prevalent among 
the Bulgarian Jews to the effect that Messiah would 
be born on that date. 

R2256 : page 38 

This is quoted with some assurance of endorsement 



by Rabbi Joseph Krauskopf in a recent discourse 
from which we quote the following comment on the 
Zionist movement and Congress. He said:— 

"The boldness of that dream startled the world. 
As for me, when the full report reached me and I read 
the fearful story of the 'Judennoth,' that was submitted 
to the congress, I could not wonder at the statement 
made by Dr. Herzl, the president of the congress, 
during the first day's session: 'The Bulgarian Jews 
have long believed that the Messiah should be born on a 
29th of August. They were right, THE MESSIAH HAS 
BEEN BORN TO-DAY in the Zionist Congress.' 

"It was a magnificent assemblage of Israelites 
that had gathered there in congress. Two hundred 
delegates, representing as many hundreds of thousands 
of people, had come with a most sacred purpose, that 
of putting an end to the persecutions and miseries of 
millions of Jews, by reacquiring for them of their own 
native Palestine and reestablishing them there in peaceful 
and honorable industries. 

"It was beyond doubt the most remarkable gathering 
in the whole history of Israel. The venerable Dr. 
Lippe opened the congress and Dr. Herzl gave the key 
note of the movement, comparing the inflictions of the 
modern anti-Semite with the Jew baiter of former 
centuries. A similar tale of woe was told by Max 
Nordau. It was the same refrain by all, and the congress 
concluded that the settlement of Palestine was 
the only solution of the Jewish question. 

"It was a dream and yet not all a dream. Some 
very stern reality was beneath it all, which neither 
skeptic nor scoffer can sneer away. It has come to 
stay. The superstructure of the castle will, in all 
probability, take a different and more practical form 
from that outlined in its first designs, but the foundation 
upon which it rests will remain unchanged. Among 
those builders who had come from different parts of 
the world to discuss the plans for an ark of safety, 
there may have been many a visionary, but there were 
also those who know from personal bitter experience 
the real need of an ark that is to bear the Jew high on 
the crest of the flood of the 'Judennoth' that is rushing 
in upon us from all sides. The foundation timber 
is: Relief of the fatally congested centers of Jewish 
population by means of agriculture and colonization at 
home, abroad, in adopted lands, in Zion, anywhere, 
everywhere, but always agriculture with its accompanying 
handicraftsmen, industrialists and men following 
professions. 

"Upon research, I have found that Palestine, with 
the adjacent countries stretching between the Euphrates 
and the Tigris, that are now almost deserted, could 
amply support millions of agriculturists. The soil is 
luxuriantly fertile, the climate salubrious, the water 
pure and abundant, the irrigation canals of the ancients 
still available. The winters are short and mild, the 



summers long enough to ripen two harvests. The 
products of all the land can be laid down in the capitals 
of Europe within five days after their shipment 
and in price and excellence they can drive from the 
market those of other competing countries. Because 
of these conclusions I have been proclaimed a Zionist 
and asked to attend the second congress at Jerusalem 
next summer." 



R2257 : page 38 

"TO WHOM SHALL WE GO?" 



"Lord, to whom shall we go? Thou hast 
the words of eternal life."— John 6:68. 

THERE are numerous voices in the world, calling 

mankind to follow in the pursuit of pleasure, 

of riches, of wisdom, etc., and various are the inducements 

presented, and to the young and inexperienced 

the bewilderment of so many attractions is great. 

But experience has taught many of us, that these seductive 

Siren voices would but lead us to shipwreck 

upon hidden rocks and shoals, and that "all that glitters 

is not gold." We have learned that the cravings 

of our own human natures are quite unreliable, that 

we are fallen beings, that our tastes and appetites are 

perverse, and so depraved that frequently we crave the 

things that tend to do us injury, and are inclined to reject 

the things which are best for us. Our Lord speaks 

of these various voices calling mankind and leading 

astray, and contrasts them with his own call of his own 

"sheep" who hear and obey it, saying, My sheep hear 

my voice, and they follow me; strangers will they not 

follow, because they recognize not the voices of strangers. 

-See John 10:3-5. 

Not all are able to hear and recognize the Shepherd's 
voice in the present time; the majority are deaf 
on this subject, however acute their hearing may be as 
respects the inducements held out to them by the world, 
the flesh and the devil. Consequently the Scriptures 
say, "He that hath an ear to hear [the gospel] let him 
hear." But the opening of our ears to hear the good 
tidings, of which Christ is the center, does not close 
them to the various voices of selfishness, ambition, pride, 
avarice, and vain-glory, and the other voices proceeding 
from the world, the flesh and the devil: it would seem 
indeed that, after accepting us to be his sheep, and 
after giving us some opportunity to learn the sound of 
the Shepherd's voice, the voice of Truth, we are intentionally 
exposed to the various voices which would 
call us away from our Shepherd, and from following in 



his footsteps. And Oh, how many stray away! "Walking 
after their own desires." How many thus become 
side-tracked on the way to the heavenly city! How 
many are ultimately entirely switched off into another 
direction! How many have thus gone "back and 
walked no more with him!" How few, what a "little 
flock," they are that follow on, day by day, to know the 
Shepherd more fully, to walk in his paths, and ultimately 

R2257 : page 39 

with him to reach the heavenly Kingdom ! 

It will be remembered that the words of our text 
were called forth by a certain sifting of the discipleship. 
Our Lord's ministry had progressed considerably: 
at first, the people hung upon his words and said, 
"Never man spake like this man," and "great multitudes 
followed him." But towards the close of his 
ministry, as the jealousy and animosity of the "Doctors 
of Divinity" and the Pharisees began to manifest itself, 
he became less popular, and in our context we 
find that many of his hearers were leaving him, and he 
said, "Therefore said I unto you, that no man can 
come unto me, except it were given him of my Father. 
From that time many of his disciples went back, and 
walked no more with him. Then said Jesus unto the 
twelve, Will ye also go away? Then Simon Peter 
answered and said unto him, Lord, to whom shall we 
go? thou hast the words of eternal life." Such sittings 
and testings of the Lord's disciples have been in 
progress throughout the Gospel age, and still continue. 
Many have directly or indirectly, intentionally or unintentionally, 
repudiated the great Shepherd, his leading 
and his instruction. Some, because the chief 
priests, scribes and Pharisees said, "He hath a devil 
and is mad. Why hear ye him?" Some, because they 
did not understand his teachings, and they said, "This 
is a hard saying: who can believe it?" Others, because 
his teaching drew the line too sharply between righteousness 
and sin, between God and Mammon; and we 
may understand as literal our Lord's statement that 
eventually only a "little flock" will be found worthy 
of the Kingdom. 

It may sound harsh to some, because of their misconception 
of the subject, when we say that the Lord's 
message and leading were as much intended to shake 
off and repel one class, as to attract and to hold another 
class. That would be inconceivable, if the ones repelled 
and shaken off were understood to be shaken into a 
hell of eternal torment, and such is the general misconception 
of the subject. On the contrary the attraction 
and the drawing was to the Kingdom, and the 
repulsion was from the Kingdom, and the sifting and 
separating of our Lord's day, and since and at the 
present time, is to the intent that the Lord may gather 
out and separate from those who nominally profess to 



be his followers, and to be seeking heirship with him 
in his Kingdom, all who are unworthy of those blessings. 
As it is written, concerning the end of the Gospel 
age, and the final glorification of the "little flock," 
"He shall gather out of his Kingdom [class] all things 
that offend and them that do iniquity. ...Then shall 
the righteous shine forth as the sun in the Kingdom of 
their Father." We may rest assured that none who 
are fit for the Kingdom will be sifted out. Of such it 
is written, "No man is able to pluck them out of my 
Father's hand;" and again, "If ye do these things 
[hearken to the voice of the Lord and cultivate his 
spirit and walk in his ways], ye shall never fall [for 
so doing], and an entrance shall be ministered unto 
you abundantly into the everlasting Kingdom of our 
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ." 

How all-important then it is, that we have our 
minds thoroughly made up respecting the voice that 
we will obey and the footsteps that we will follow— for 
"a double-minded man is unstable in all his ways." 
We "cannot serve God and Mammon," however much 
we try. We cannot hear and obey the voice of Satan 
and Sin and the World and Self and the Flesh, and at 
the same time hear and obey the voice of the Good 
Shepherd, the voice of Truth, the voice of Love. 
Let this be settled and fixed in our minds, that it may 
keep us from all wavering after we have once taken 
our place amongst the Lord's sheep. 

In order that the decision may be the proper one, 
and in order that it may be the final decision, from 
which we will not think to turn, it is well that we 
should note the different voices calling us, and to what 
they lead. We will not notice these voices as they appeal 
to the world in general, but merely as they appeal to 
those who have already heard the voice of the Good 
Shepherd. They assume that they will not antagonize 
our faithfulness to the Shepherd, but that they will 
heartily cooperate. The Shepherd, however, declares 
that this will not be the case; that the selfish voices of 
the world are calling, influencing, drawing away from 
him and the path in which he leads his sheep. 

Wealth calls to us, holding out its golden charms, 
and promising great things; suggesting meanwhile that 
our religious zeal is right enough, but overwrought, 
fanatical, and that in this measure only it is in opposition 
to wealth; and that even if obliged to leave the 
Lord for the sake of wealth it need only be temporarily, 
and that soon, having acquired wealth, we could 
pursue after him with redoubled energy and thus gain 
the Kingdom. Alas, how delusive! and yet how many 
are attracted by this call and presentation! Well does 
the Apostle say that "The love of money is a root of all 
evil, which some coveting after have erred from the 
faith and pierced themselves through with many sorrows.' 
Then, too, how false are these hopes, how 
few amongst the many who pursue wealth ever attain 



it! Indeed, it is not the wealth that is the evil, for 
God is rich above all; it is the love of earthly wealth 
and the manner in which it absorbs the heart affections, 
away from the truth and its service and heavenly 
things, that constitutes the evil and the snare of 
wealth which remarkably few ever resist, overcome 
and bring into subjection to the divine will. 

R2257 : page 40 

Many hear the voice of Fame, and pursue it, if 
peradventure they will become famous, highly esteemed 
among men. The impelling motive here is, in part at 
least, pride and approbativeness— ambition for self— 
not for God, nor for righteousness. And how few 
who turn aside from the Lord's way, in whole or in 
part, to gain fame, worldly renown, honor of men, 
ever attain to fame in any considerable measure! It is 
a false voice leading on to false hopes, soon shattered 
in death, if not before: it would induce us to turn aside 
from the humble path of obedience and self abasement 
in the divine service whose reward is "Glory, honor 
and immortality" at God's right hand of favor. 

Others hear the voice of worldly pleasure, and see 
the millions of earth seeking it in the gratification of 
the flesh: and there is a great drawing to go with the 
multitude, seeking pleasure through the gratification 
of our perverted natural tastes. How long it takes us 
to learn assuredly that worldly pleasures are fleeting, 
and that they have a bitter which counterbalances 
every sweet, and that the tendencies of Vanity Fair 
are quite contrary to the new ambitions, new hopes, 
new desires of our new natures! How many efforts all 
of the Lord's people have made, to blend or mix the 
pleasures of the world with the heavenly joys, only to 
find that they will not blend, and that true happiness 
for those who would abide in Christ and follow in his 
footsteps, means the rejection of all pleasures which 
have a sinful combination or tendency! How long it 
takes us to learn that the only pleasures which the new 
creature can truly enjoy, are those in which our Lord 
can be our companion, those which we can discuss with 
him and in which we can enjoy his fellowship! 

All of these besetments, be it noticed, have their 
roots in selfishness— they are all in some form inclinations 
to self-gratification: on the other hand the voice 
of the Good Shepherd is calling us away from our debased 

R2258 : page 40 

selfish conditions, moods and desires, to a higher 
plane of sentiment, a plane of benevolence, love of God 
and righteousness and fellow men, which seeks to "do 
good and to communicate." We see, too, that having 
set before us the new conditions, our Lord, our 
Teacher, is permitting the selfish tendencies of our 



natural hearts and of the world in general to call us in 
other directions; so that by learning to resist these, we 
may more and more establish for ourselves strong 
characters, rooted, grounded, fixed, in righteousness 
and love, strong and able to resist the weaknesses of 
our own flesh as well as the influence of friends and of 
the world in general. 

Only such as thus develop character can possibly 
be "overcomers" of the world, and only such will be 
accepted of the Lord as his joint-heirs in the Kingdom. 
It will thus be seen that the Lord is not merely seeking 
for those who will make a covenant with him, but 
by lessons of trial and discipline and testings by the 
way he is seeking to prove his people— to test them, to 
find and to separate to his own service not those who 
are strong in self-will, strong according to the flesh, 
but those who, abandoning the will of the flesh, give 
themselves so completely to the Lord that they become 
transformed by the renewing of their minds,— "strong 
in the Lord and in the power of his might." 

In harmony with this thought are the words of the 
Lord to fleshly Israel, the typical people,— "The Lord 
your God proveth you to know whether ye love the 
Lord your God with all your heart and with all your 
soul." (Deut. 13:3.) This explains the object and 
intent of the divine course with us, the true Israel, 
throughout the Gospel age: he has been proving his 
people, testing them, to ascertain the degree and the 
strength of their love for him. He tells us that "Not 
everyone that saith, Lord, Lord, shall enter the Kingdom:" 
that many who make the covenant of full consecration 
will fail to keep it, fail to obey its requirements, 
and that their failure will indicate a deficiency 
of love for him, and that self-will still reigns in their 
hearts, giving God only the secondary place. And the 
Kingdom is only intended for those who by God's 
grace shall at heart become like to the Lord Jesus, in 
that they will love the Lord with all their hearts, with 
all their souls, and be able to say, "Not my will, but 
thy will, O Lord, be done." No other condition than 
this condition of full submission to the Lord can make 
us acceptable for the Kingdom; for no other condition 
represents full self-submission and full love to God. 
And let us not forget that all the heavenly things 
which "eye hath not seen nor ear heard, neither have 
entered into the heart of man," God hath reserved for 
them that love him supremely. 

Hence, however desirable it may be that our 
friends and neighbors should surrender themselves to 
the Lord on their death-beds, if they will not sooner 
surrender, it is nevertheless very evident that those 
who so repent in their dying hours, are not to be regarded 
as in any sense of the word, "heirs of the Kingdom;" 
for it is not supposable that in the few short 
hours or days after their repentance they could develop 
the requisite staunch characters: they have not passed 



through such testings of faith and love and zeal for 
the Lord as would develop in them the characteristics 
of "overcomers"— the Kingdom class. Those who 
surrender to the Lord on their death-bed may, however, 
be encouraged to hope for his blessing in the Millennial 
age, and for an opportunity to come to a fuller 
knowledge of the Lord and to have an opportunity to 
cultivate character in that Paradisaic condition— as the 
Lord promised to the dying thief. 

R2258 : page 41 

If we could but keep in memory the fact that every 
trial, every persecution, every difficulty of life, permitted 
to come upon those who have made the covenant 
of sacrifice with the Lord, is intended to prove 
them, to test their love, to see whether or not their characters 
are fixed, rooted and grounded in righteousness 
and being built up in love, it would put all these trials, 
difficulties and temptations in a new light before us, 
and greatly assist us in fighting a good fight and overcoming. 
We would say, If by these little trials the 
Lord is proving my love and devotion to him, then, 
however trifling they may be or however important, 
I will diligently use them as favorable opportunities to 
demonstrate to my Lord the fulness of my love and 
devotion to him and his cause. Thus viewed and thus 
met, every trial and every difficulty would prove to be 
a blessing: as the Apostle puts it, "Beloved, count it 
all joy when ye fall into divers temptations;" "greatly 
rejoice, tho now for a season ye are in manifold 
temptation, that the trial of your faith, being much 
more precious than that of gold that perisheth, tho it 
be tried by fire, might be found unto praise and honor 
and glory at the appearing of Jesus Christ." "Blessed 
is the man that endureth [faithfully under] temptation; 
for after his trials he will receive the crown of life 
which the Lord hath promised to them that love him." 
"These light afflictions, which are but for a moment, 
work out for us a far more exceeding and eternal weight 
of glory"— if rightly utilized.— 1 Pet. 1:7; Jas. 1:2,12. 

Thus we are again assured that those who love the 
Lord, and who in consequence will receive the Kingdom, 
will be those whose love will have been tested by 
trials and temptations on the way to it. Those who do 
not love the Lord with all their hearts, in whom self 
or some other idol has first place, will be seduced by 
the world, the flesh or the devil into some form of rebellion 
against the divine Word or divine providence: 
they will have schemes and theories which they will 
prefer to the Lord's plan, and their own theories and 
plans when analyzed will usually be found to be based 
either upon selfishness or ambition or upon an evil 
spirit of envy, hatred, jealousy, etc. 

The Lord's leading and the Lord's words lose their 
attraction to such, and they lose their interest correspondingly, 



and like those who turned away from the 

Lord at the first advent, saying, "This is a hard saying" 

—they walk no more with him. But some will 

continue to walk with the Lord; some will not be driven 

from him by any of the arts and wiles of the evil one. 

They are such as are at heart fully the Lord's, not 

their own; they will follow wherever the Lord may 

lead, because they have no will except his will. These 

will follow the Lord in the narrow way of trial, discipline 

and testings during the present life, and by and 

by, as he has declared, "They shall walk with me in 

white: for they are worthy." (Rev. 3:4.) Nor will 

this company lack in numbers by reason of the falling 

away of some. No, it will be full, complete, the predestinated 

number which God foreordained he would 

select to be joint-heirs with his Son, our Lord Jesus. 

His foreknowledge permitted him to make full allowance 

for all who would turn back, as well as to foreknow 

that the requisite number would go on. 

Those who go on will all have the general character 
of Christ— faithfulness to the Lord and to his word 
of promise: and when various voices call in various directions, 
away from the narrow way of consecration 
and sacrifice, humiliation and self-denial, they, in answer 
to the Lord's query, "Will ye also go away?" 
will answer as did the apostles of old, "Lord, to whom 
shall we go? thou hast the words of eternal life." They 
know nowhere else to go; they cannot turn back, for 
they can see clearly that to turn back on their part 
would be as the Scriptures express it, to "turn back 
unto perdition," to the second death. Having heard 
the calls of the world, the flesh and the Devil, they 
have seen also the emptiness of all their false promises, 
and how none of them can give a satisfying portion. 
But in our Lord's call they have recognized not only 
righteousness, justice, but have recognized, also, the 
promised reward of righteousness through Christ, 
which he has promised to them that love him— namely, 
eternal life. 

Nowhere else is there such a promise; from no 
other quarter comes such a hope; in no other service, 
therefore, could they think of engaging but in this 
service. With the hope of obtaining this prize of eternal 
life, they could rejoice even in laying down this 
present life. Truly, this is that "blessed hope." With 
such hopes before them, clearly understood, and with 
the narrow way distinctly marked out, and with an 
understanding of why it is so narrow and why so few 
find it (because it leads to the great exaltation of the 
Kingdom and its joint-heirship with Christ), who could 
think for a moment of turning aside, or even listening, 
to the voices calling to wealth, honor, fame, pleasures 
of this life, etc., seeing that even hearkening to 
them would interrupt our progress in the way to the 
Kingdom, and thus frustrate our hopes and make the 
exceeding great and precious promises of none effect to 



us. The rather, therefore, will we lay aside every 
weight and the sin that doth so easily beset us, and 
run with patience the race set before us in the gospel. 

As the faithful disciples realized a meaning in the 
Master's teachings at the first harvest which the majority 
could not realize, so now at the second advent 
his words have a preciousness and a meaning and a 
force to those who are in heart-harmony with him, 

R2258 : page 42 

which they do not have to others; hence now, as at the 

first advent, some are stumbling and going back, and 

others are being drawn to the Lord more closely than 

ever, by the "present truth" which he is supplying as 

"meat in due season." As we progress in the way, 

toward the close of this harvest, we shall not be surprised 

if the way should grow still narrower, more difficult, 

and if the tendencies to "stumble" should become 

more frequent. Let us each, therefore, more 

and more be on our guard against the wiles of the Adversary; 

and let the perfect love of God rule in our 

hearts, driving out self-love and world-love, and their 

pride and ambition and folly; and let this devotion to 

God bring into our hearts the promised fulness of joy 

R2259 : page 42 

and rest and peace; and let us abide in him, the Vine, 
and be fruitful branches, responding to all the prunings 
of the great husbandman with more abundant 
fruitage; and if beguilements come to us, let us view 
the matter as did the apostles and say, "Lord, to whom 
should we go? thou hast the words of eternal life." 



R2259 : page 42 

"YE CANNOT SERVE GOD AND MAMMON." 

-FEB. 6.-MATT. 6:24-34.- 

"He careth for you."— 1 Pet. 5:7. 

PROBABLY no other period of the world's 

history ever had as great need, as our own, 

for this lesson. The spirit of our times seems to lead 

directly to the service of Mammon— wealth, earthly 

advantages and comforts. The attainment of Mammon's 

reward would appear to be the main object of 

life, to which every other interest is made subservient, 

so far as Christendom is concerned. As we look into 

the far East this is less so; the millions of India and of 

China know far more contentment in their ignorance, 

than do the millions of Christendom with their large 



degree of knowledge. Knowledge evidently is not conducive 
to peace, happiness, contentment:— "Godliness 
with contentment is great gain."— 1 Tim. 6:6. 

What is known as the progress of civilization is in 
many respects good, excellent; but it has a wrong motive 
power. The motive power of modern progress is 
selfishness— Mammonism— and increasingly so. Nor 
can we imagine that the civilized world, intellectually 
awakened but not in heart regenerated, not possessed 
of the spirit of Christ, the holy spirit, the spirit of love, 
could be in its present condition moved by any other 
spirit than that which possesses it— the spirit of selfishness, 
the spirit of Mammon. We are not, therefore, 
surprised to see what we do see on every hand— a mad 
rush and struggle for wealth, and for position and fame 
which are wealth of another kind and bring financial 
wealth. The spirit of selfishness in the millionaire 
stirs him to activity and to the use of his opportunities, 
not because he needs more, but because he is possessed 
of the spirit of avarice, the spirit of Mammon: the same 
spirit exactly takes hold of the artisan who, with a 
moderate income, has secured for himself and family a 
modest little home and a frugal competence. Many of 
these are now reaching out after wealth, and finding 
by experience the truth of the Apostle's words, "They 
that will to be rich [whether they succeed in carrying 
out their will or not, if they have the will, the 
Mammon spirit] fall into temptation and a snare, and 
into many foolish and hurtful lusts [desires and habits] 
which drown men in destruction and perdition. For 
the love of money [the Mammon spirit] is a root of all 
evil: which, while some coveted after, they have erred 
from the faith [crowding out the spirit of love and wisdom 
from above, and losing the spirit of the truth, also 
the letter of the truth and the faith], and pierced themselves 
through with many sorrows."— 1 Tim. 6:10,11. 

It is impossible for us to read each other's hearts and 
to know positively the mainsprings of activities in each 
others' lives; and hence the Lord's people are likely to be 
misunderstood by the world. The child of God is commanded 
to be "not slothful in business, fervent in 
spirit, serving the Lord;" he is also commanded to 
provide things needful for those dependent upon him: 
thus required to labor for his daily bread, he is 
brought in contact with others not begotten of the 
heavenly spirit like himself, but who have as the mainspring 
of activities the love of money— Mammon. It 
may be difficult from the world's standpoint to note the 
difference in the two spirits in the two classes, for both 
are active, energetic, patient and persevering; and both 
are paid at the end of the week in the same coin, and 
both are counted by the world as servants of Mammon. 
Wherein then lies the difference?— Which are the 
servants of God? and how can we know them? 

"By their fruits ye shall know them," said our 
Master. What will be done with the proceeds of the 



labor, is the only outward evidence we could have respecting 
what was the motive of the laborer. If the 
proceeds of the labor are merely accumulated in property 
or in banks or in old stockings, or if the proceeds 
of the labor over and above the necessities of life are 
merely used in gratification of the flesh, in trinkets, 
bric-a-brac, or other forms of self-gratification, or for 
evil purposes, the only reasonable deduction would be 
that the laborer was inspired to his energy by the spirit 
of selfishness, and that he is a servant of Mammon. 
But if on the other hand the proceeds of energetic 

R2259 : page 43 

labor, after appropriating for the necessities of life, are 

used benevolently in the Lord's service, in the service 

of the Lord's people, in "distributing to the necessities 

of the saints," either temporally or spiritually, or 

to the necessities of "the groaning creation;"— if this 

be the use to which surplus moneys are put, the reasonable 

inference is that the laborer was energized not 

by a spirit of Mammon, a spirit of selfishness, but by 

the spirit of the Lord, the spirit of love; because the 

use of the same in the Lord's service would be a proof 

of the motive and object of the laborer. 

This simple rule (by which we may all test ourselves, 
even if we may not measure others by it too 
carefully) would seem to show us that the great mass 
of mankind are servants of selfishness, servants of 
Mammon, and not servants of God, whose main object 
in life after providing things decent, and honestly, for 
themselves and their dependents, would surely be to 
use it to glorify God and to bless their fellow creatures. 
Let each one who has named the name of the Lord 
judge himself very carefully along this line:— scrutinizing 
his own objects and methods, and determining 
according to this lesson whose servant he is— a servant 
of selfishness and of Satan, or the servant of love 
and of God. 

Nothing in what we have said is intended to imply 
that it would be wrong for any of the Lord's people to 
own his own home or to enjoy some of the comforts 
of life; nor to make a reasonable provision for tomorrow, 
with a view to the necessities of his family, and 
for such uses as he may consider to be the Lord's will 
respecting him and the means entrusted to his stewardship. 
(2 Cor. 8:21.) But it would be a great mistake 
for the child of God to make, should he conclude that 
he must spend no money in the service of the Lord 
and of humanity until he has attained a certain competency 
in life. Whoever adopts this theory and 
plan will almost assuredly find by the time he obtains 
a competency, that he has gained so much of the spirit 
of Mammon as to be less satisfied, less contented than 
ever; and that he has lost so much of the spirit of the 
Lord, the spirit of love and generosity, that he has 



little disposition to spend his strength for anything 

that will not selfishly minister to his personal comfort 

or the gratification of selfish aims. And if he who 

earns $ 1,000 a year should have the spirit of devotion 

and is sure to be blessed in its exercise, the same is 

true of the man who earns but $100 per year: even if 

he have difficulty in obtaining the necessities of life, 

he will be blessed in heart, in mind, in spirit, if he will 

deny himself, sacrificing something of earthly gratification, 

in order to render some thankoffering to the 

Lord. 

The great argument which the Adversary uses to 
enlist servants for Mammon, and to get the servants of 
God to attempt to serve both God and Mammon, is 
fear: fear of want, fear of distresses. In our lesson, 
therefore, the Lord takes up this feature first, urging 
his followers, not as verse 34 would represent the matter, 
to be thoughtless, indifferent and careless in respect 
to our food and clothing, but, to be without 
worry— not anxious and fearful and troubled about tomorrow 
and its affairs. The plowman, when he breaks 
up the land, and the sower, when he scatters the grain, 
are taking thought for the morrow, in a proper, legitimate 
manner that has the divine approval: if they are 
God's children they are to plow in hope, and sow in 
hope, and wait for the crop in hope; and to trust that, 
if the Lord should permit some blight or drouth to 
render their labors unfruitful, he nevertheless will not 
leave them destitute, but will care for them and provide 
for them in some way. And they are to exercise their 
confidence in his goodness and to expect that all the 
lessons of life are profitable ones in preparation for the 
eternal life, if they will be rightly exercised by them. 

Our Lord's words in this lesson in which he 
encourages confidence and trust in the Heavenly 
Father, are not addressed to mankind in general— not 
addressed to the "children of wrath," but addressed 
to those who have become "children of God" upon the 
terms of his Covenant. This point cannot be too 
strongly urged: it is very necessary that those who 
have never made a covenant with the Lord should 
know that the promises and blessings of the divine 
Word are not theirs and will never become theirs until 
such times as they come unto God in his appointed 
way, and take upon them his prepared covenant. All 
his promises are yea and amen only to those who are 
in Christ Jesus. 

This class, while just as busy, just as active, just 
as fervent in spirit as any of the worldly, have not the 
fret, have not the worry of the others; because the 
Lord Almighty has covenanted with them that he will 
do for them according to heavenly wisdom what would 
be for their highest welfare. So then, these can rejoice— 

R2260 : page 43 



"In every condition, in sickness, in health, 
In poverty's vale or abounding in wealth." 
The Lord's people, while active in the affairs of 
life, are not working for the things of this life, but are 
seeking the Kingdom of God: it is the first thing, the 
principal thing, the principal object of life and energy. 
God has promised his people a share in an everlasting 
Kingdom which shall bless the whole world, and this 
exceeding great and precious promise fills the heart, 
fills the mind and constitutes with love and hope the 
mainspring of every question in life. And in seeking 
the Kingdom, they are also seeking God's righteousness; 
because no one who loves unrighteousness will 

R2260 : page 44 

love God's Kingdom which will be the foe of all unrighteousness 

and sin. And only those who love righteousness 

and who labor for righteousness are in any 

proper sense seeking God's Kingdom and its reign. 

An earnest Christian traveling salesman was once asked 

the question: "What is your business?" He replied, 

"I am preaching the Lord Jesus Christ, and selling 

hardware for & Co. to meet my expenses." This 

is the relationship between God's people and their 
earthly occupations that should be recognized and fully 
lived up to by all who win the prize. 

Our Lord assures us that if the main thought of 
our hearts is his service and the promotion of righteousness 
and an attainment of the Kingdom which God 
has promised to them that love him, then we need 
carry no anxious cares respecting the future. As his 
disciples we will have trials and tribulations enough, 
day by day, and will need daily to lean upon the Bridegroom's 
arm as we seek to walk the narrow way. Sufficient 
for each day will be the evil of itself: and thanks 
be to God also, we have the promise that daily his grace 
shall be sufficient for us. 



R2260 : page 44 

"THEY THAT BE WHOLE NEED NOT A PHYSICIAN. 

--FEB. 13. -"FOLLOW ME!"-MATT. 9:9-17.- 

HERE we have Matthew's own account of his 
acceptance to the apostleship. He had undoubtedly 
been acquainted with the Lord and his work, 
and the Lord acquainted with him, prior to this call. 
The Lord had evidently seen in his heart an honesty 
of intention that made him worthy, not only of the 
truth, but of this great favor— the apostleship. It 
is worthy of note that Matthew tells us of himself that 
he was a publican (Matt. 10:3), while none of the 



other evangelists make this comment, doubtless because 
the occupation of a publican was considered a very 
dishonorable one— unpatriotic. Publicans were usually 
men of some ability as business men, sharp, shrewd, 
quick at accounts and discerning. Their occupation 
was that of collecting taxes for the Roman government, 
and it must be said that, while there may have been 
honest publicans who collected their taxes with justice, 
both to the Roman government and to the tax -payers, 
yet the class as a whole had the name of being tricky, 
unscrupulous, dishonest. It was claimed on the part 
of the taxpayers that they were frequently oppressed 
and made subjects of extortion by the tax-collectors 
who thus accumulated wealth not only as foreign emissaries, 
but as leeches and parasites upon their own 
suffering countrymen. 

Hence, for Matthew to tell us of his previous occupation 
as a publican may be esteemed an evidence of 
his humility, and his desire not to represent himself 
more honorably than was truthful. On the other hand, 
our Lord's choice of a publican to be one of the favored 
apostles indicates the impartiality of his selections; and 
implies that Matthew could not have been one of the 
dishonest publicans. It shows us also that our Lord 
passed by no Israelite indeed merely because there was 
prejudice amongst the people against him or his class. 
As an evidence of the detestation in which the publicans 
were held by their Jewish brethren, we note the 
fact that they were classed with sinners and harlots in 
New Testament usage, and that the Hebrew Talmud 
classes them with murderers and thieves, and regards 
their repentance as impossible. 

Matthew was known by the name of Levi, while 
he was the publican (Luke 5:27), but his name was 
changed when he changed his occupation and became 
a member of the Lord's company. His new name, 
Matthew, signified "the gift of God," just as Simon, 
the son of Jonas, had a new name given to him, namely, 
Peter, "a rock." But how great a change the gospel 
of the Kingdom produced upon Matthew, to lead 
him to forsake all— the profitable income of his occupation, 
leaving it to others— and to become a follower 
of the despised Nazarene! 

The influence of the fact that our Lord would accept 
a publican to be his disciple, was far-reaching, 
and no doubt inspired an interest in our Lord amongst 
the degraded and outcast classes. We are not surprised, 
therefore, when we are told shortly afterward, 
that many publicans and sinners resorted to our Lord, 
and gave ear to his teachings. Nor did he treat them 
after the manner of the scribes and Pharisees, but on 
the contrary received them as the children of Abraham 
—as some of the lost sheep of the house of Israel. 

This breech of the rules of etiquette amongst 
the Jews was a great surprise to the scribes and Pharisees 
who, however much they opposed the Lord, recognized 



him as a great teacher; hence, they did not 
think of him as demeaning himself or degrading himself 
by receiving sinners, but asked the question, Why 
he did this, and promptly received the answer that the 
more sick a man is, the more need he has of a physician. 
They were ready to admit that the publicans 
and sinners were in need of a physician, but many of 
them did not realize their own need of a physician: 
hence, Jesus was certainly giving his services where 
they were needed. This furnished our Lord with an 
opportunity to preach a very short sermon from a text 
in Hosea (6:6) to the effect that his message was not 
a message of destruction, but a message of mercy, and 

R2260 : page 45 

that his call to the Kingdom was not a call of the 
righteous, but of those who realized themselves to be 
imperfect. And herein lay the distinction between the 
two classes and the reason why publicans and sinners 
were more attracted than the self-satisfied Pharisees: 
the latter trusted in themselves that they were righteous 
and spurned to ask or accept mercy; the former 
admitted that they were unrighteous and had need of 
mercy. Humility and a realization of the need of a 
Savior, and a great one, are essential to all who would 
come unto the Father through Christ and his 
atonement. 

The influence of Jesus' ministry was beginning to 
be recognized; it was increasing while John's work had 
for some time been decreasing, and comparisons were 
naturally instituted. One of these was respecting the 
fact that Jesus had given his disciples no specific directions 
respecting fasting; and the inquiry as to why 
this was so. Did our Lord disapprove of fasting? The 
answer came promptly to the effect that fasting is a 
concomitant of mourning and sorrow, and that our 
Lord's disciples could not consistently fast and be 
troubled at this time;— because the Bridegroom was 
with them and their joy was at its full. He pointed 
out, however, that, later on, times of trial and sorrow 
and fasting would come to his disciples. 

Fasting is proper enough when intelligently done 
and from a right motive, but it is certainly worse than 
useless when done as a formality or ceremony, or to be 
seen of men, that they might think us holy. Fasting 
is specially commendable to the Lord's people at times 
when they find themselves lacking in spirituality and 
exposed to severe temptations from the world, the flesh 
and the devil; for by impoverishing the physical force 
and vitality, it may assist the full blooded and impulsive 
to self control, in every direction. We believe 
that a majority of Christians would be helped by occasional 
fasting,— a very plain diet for a season, if not 
total abstinence. But fastings, to be seen and known 
of men or to be conjured up by our own minds as marks 



of piety on our part, would be injurious indeed, and 
lead to spiritual pride and hypocrisy which would far 
outweigh their advantages to us in the way of 
self-restraints. 

The Lord wished his disciples to recognize the 
difference between the work he was doing in starting 
a new dispensation, and the work that John the Baptist 
and the Pharisees had been doing in attempting to reform 
the Jewish nation. He illustrated this under the 
figure of patching an old garment with a piece of new 
cloth, or putting new wine that had not yet fermented 
into old wine-skins whose strength and elasticity were 
gone and which would be sure to burst under the pressure 
of the fermentation. This was perhaps the first 
intimation our Lord had given of the fact that Israel 
as a nation would not be found worthy of the Kingdom 
and would be rejected. Likewise, it was the first intimation 
that the class which he was gathering was not 
being gathered with a view to reforming the nation or 
readjusting its affairs, but with a view to constituting 
the nucleus of a new nation, "a holy nation, a peculiar 
people," which, when fully developed, would be fit to 
be his joint-heirs in the Kingdom and to engage with 
him as his bride in inviting all the families of the earth 
to receive divine favor, symbolized as "water of life," 
which will be offered free.— Rev. 22:1,17. 



R2261 : page 45 

"FREELY YE HAVE RECEIVED, FREELY GIVE." 

-FEB. 20.-MATT. 10:2-15.- 

THE LORD selected his disciples from time to 

time during the earlier part of his ministry, but 

it was not until they had received considerable instruction 

from him that they were recognized in their office 

of apostles, and fully empowered for their special work. 

They had freely received of the Lord the good tidings 

of great joy that he was the Messiah, and that the time 

for the establishment of the Kingdom was at hand; and 

now they were to give this message to all those who 

were in the condition to hear it. "He that hath an 

ear to hear, let him hear." 

The twelve apostles are mentioned by Matthew 
apparently in the order of their sending forth, two by 
two. As someone has said, "One of the ways Jesus 
took to overcome the imperfections of his followers and 
to the better prepare them to do a work which required 
perfection, was by his grouping of the apostles, whose 
imperfections were perhaps like our own, of the nature 
of halfness: we too frequently see one side of a truth 
and not the other. We too frequently feel the greatness 
of some quality to such an extent that we depreciate 



some other quality which seems contrary but is 
really complementary. Our Lord seems to have acted 
with careful reference to this, in sending out his apostles 
two by two in the order indicated. Peter, the bold, 
impetuous man, is joined with Andrew, the apostle 
chosen by the Scotch as their national patron— as far-seeing, 
careful, cautious. James and John were paired, 
the former elderly, the latter young. Philip, the slow-witted 
was paired with Bartholomew (Nathaniel), the 
quick-witted. Thomas, the doubting, skeptical intellect 
was joined with Matthew, one of the heroes of 
faith. James, the son of Alpheus, the advocate of 
works, was united to Jude, a man of doctrine. Simon, 

R2261 : page 46 

the zealot, a man of enthusiasm and independence, 

was linked with Judas Iscariot, the conservative economist. 

So, the Master made one full man out of two 

half men in each case." 

Having grouped his disciples, our Lord endowed 
them with power, gave them of his spirit or power over 
various diseases (Luke 9: 1) and sent them forth. But 
they were not to go at random, anywhere and everywhere; 
a particular work was to be done, and no other 
—the true Israelites only were to be sought, and hence 
the charge, "Go not into the way of the Gentiles, and 
into any city of the Samaritans enter ye not, but go 
instead to the lost sheep of the house of Israel." How 
evident it is from this that our Lord's work at the first 
advent is considerably misapprehended: he very evidently 
was neither dealing with the world nor teaching 
the world, but fulfilling his own commission to the seed 
of Abraham, as he elsewhere expresses it, saying, "I 
am not sent, save to the lost sheep of the house of Israel." 
The message which the apostles were to deliver 
was not for the Gentiles, neither was it for the Samaritans 
even, altho the latter were a mixed people and had 
been dwelling for centuries in the land of Israel and 
claimed Jacob as their father also;— it was a message 
only to the legitimate Israelites. These were called 
lost sheep, not because they had wandered out of the 
land of Israel, for they were in it; nor because of having 
lost their identity as Israelites, for they had not; 
but because they had wandered from the Lord and 
from their covenant. They are similarly spoken of by 
Isaiah, the prophet (53:6), "All we like sheep have 
gone astray; we have turned every one to his own way; 
and the Lord hath laid on him the iniquity of us all." 

The reason for sending the disciples only to the 
legitimate Israelites is evident when we notice the message 
they were to carry: "The Kingdom of Heaven is 
at hand." God had promised Abraham that of his 
seed he would raise up the great ruler of the world, 
Messiah, and the hope that Israel long enjoyed was 
that when Messiah would come as one of their brethren, 



they, as his family or nation, would be specially 
blest and made associates with him in his Kingdom. 
For eighteen centuries they had been waiting for the 
fulfilment of this Abrahamic covenant, and now Messiah 
having come, all the gracious promises of God, 
made to them, were ready to be fulfilled through him. 
And therefore, the message was as above. 

The ears of all true Israelites would certainly 
tingle, as they would hear such an announcement; but 
inasmuch as they had waited long, and with much disappointment, 
it need not surprise us that they were 
generally skeptical, and refused to believe that theirs 
was the favored day, and that the unpretentious Nazarene 
and his heterogeneous company of disciples were 
the nucleus of a great Kingdom which should bless the 
world. Their faith staggered,— that is, the faith of 
all those who did not have sufficient faith. But, as we 
have elsewhere seen, the Lord gave special helps to all 
those who were right at heart; true Israelites indeed 
—such as Nathaniel, subsequently called Bartholomew. 

It will be noticed that the preaching commissioned 
was wholly different from that done by "Evangelists" 
to-day. The latter no doubt would feel like criticising 
our Lord for sending out twelve teachers with any such 
commission, because their views of what should be 
preached are so different from our Lord's views. Had 
they lived at that day, and been confidential friends of 
our Lord, they no doubt would have offered a suggestion 
like this: Master, with all deference to your abilities, 
we want to suggest that the message is not the 
proper one: you should instruct these evangelists to 
give the pure gospel. They should tell the people 
plainly and distinctly, "You are all miserable sinners 
straight on the road to hell fire and eternal torment; 
repent, therefore, and come to the mourner's bench, if 
you would escape it." This, Master, is the true gospel 
that you should send forth, and if you neglect it, these 
disciples themselves ought to disregard your instructions 
to the contrary and should go forth to save souls 
from hell, and to preach accordingly. 

But we, dear readers, are not to suppose that our 
Lord made a mistake, but rather that some of his deluded 
followers of the present day are mistaken respecting 
what constitutes the gospel. The gospel 
which our Lord and the apostles preached was really 
gospel,— "good tidings of great joy:" it was, then, a 
message to that one nation only, but later, in its full 
development, it will be unto all people— to every member 
of Adam's race. 

In announcing that the Kingdom was ready, if 
Israel was ready to receive it, and to constitute its 
channels of mercy for the blessing of all nations, it was 
appropriate that some signs or proofs respecting this 
matter should be given. Hence, the miracles which 
our Lord performed, his apostles were commissioned 
to perform also. These were to be understood as manifestations 



of divine favor coming with the Messiah as 
proofs of his Messiahship; and they were so understood, 
and the disciples merely represented themselves 
as being the advance agents and heralds of Messiah, 
and properly did not claim any of the powers exercised 
as being their own. The cures performed were merely 
foregleams of the blessings which in fuller measure 
would result from the inauguration of Messiah's kingdom, 
in which, according to the prophets, they understood 
to expect that all the blind eyes would be opened, 
all the deaf ears unstopped, all the lame leap for joy, 
etc. 

R2261 : page 47 

The apostles had something to give, but not to 
sell; freely they had received, freely they were to dispense 
God's mercies. They were, nevertheless, to live, 
to obtain their daily bread, from those to whom they 
ministered. To this intent they were not to make advance 
provision, neither in money nor in clothing, nor 
even an extra cane: in other words, they were not to 
go as travelers, but rather as persons who were thoroughly 
at home, and who expected to find a home and 
the necessities of life wherever they went, giving back, 
in exchange for these temporal blessings, the blessings 
they had been empowered to bestow; namely, (1) the 
physical healings and (2) their peace or blessing. The 
Lord evidently intended by this method that all should 
be witnesses that his gospel was not one of self-seeking, 
nor for show, nor for money making. Not only 
was there no uniform provided, but no arrangement 
was even made for carrying gifts, let alone taking up 
collections, for they were to take with them no scrip; 
that is, no valise or satchel wherein to carry surplus. 

On entering a city they were to seek for the worthy 
ones— they were not to be careless respecting where 
they lodged, nor to expect that any except the worthy 
would appreciate their message: nor were they to go 
from house to house as beggars for their meals and 
lodging, but rather to expect to remain with some true 
Israelite during the period of their brief stay in each 
village. If received into a house, their peace or blessing 
was to be with it— they were not to stay in any 
place where the Lord's blessing would not be appreciated. 
There is a special sense in which a blessing goes 
with every true child of God wherever he may go, now 
as well as then; but apparently a special blessing was 
designed of the Lord to rest upon those who entertained 
his special representatives, when bearing the 
harvest message in the end of the Jewish age. The 
family would be blessed of the Lord because of the 
presence of his representatives, and they would lose 
nothing by having entertained a herald of the Kingdom. 
Similar instances are recorded of olden times, 
for instance, Elijah's stay with the widow and her son: 



the divine blessing going with the prophet caused that 
the barrel of meal did not exhaust, neither the cruse 
of oil. Likewise we remember it is written that while 
the ark of the Lord was in the home of Obed-Edom, a 
special blessing rested upon his house, his family, his 
affairs. Here we have a lesson respecting hospitality 
and how the divine blessing rests upon all those who 
endeavor to do anything for the Lord's disciples, because 
of love and respect for him— even a cup of cold 

R2262 : page 47 

water to one of the least of these shall have a reward, 
we are assured. 

We are forcibly reminded here of the fact that we 
are now living in the harvest time of the Gospel age, 
the exact parallel of the Jewish harvest; and that our 
same Master and Lord is now sending forth to the nominal 
"holy nation and royal priesthood," Christendom, a similar 
message, "The Kingdom of Heaven is at hand!" and 
is sending this message in much the same manner that 
he sent the message to the fleshly house of Israel. It 
seems now also to be his general method to send the 
messengers, who bear to the household the present 
truth, in couples. These take with them a more elaborate 
message as represented in the various volumes 
of MILLENNIAL DAWN; but it is the same message that 
was carried at the first advent, namely, "The Kingdom 
of Heaven is at hand." True, the method are slightly 
different as the times are different, but the general 
principle is the same, in that the messengers in the 
present truth are not self-seekers or money-gatherers, 
but merely accept, in exchange for the blessings which 
they confer, enough financial support to meet their expenses, 
economically. And we have no hesitation in 
saying that whoever may receive these representatives 
of the Lord and the present truth will receive into their 
homes with them some measure of the divine blessing 
in compensation for any service they may render them. 

The shaking off of the dust from the apostles' feet 
when leaving a house or a city where they were not 
received, was not to be done as a vindictive expression 
of hatred, but rather as a closing part of their declaration, 
namely, that if their message was not received, 
if their hearers were not interested in the Kingdom, 
the result would be that they would fall under judgment 
as being unworthy of any part or lot in that 
Kingdom. It was a symbolic act implying that they 
renounced all responsibility for what the consequences 
of the rejection might be. 

Our Lord's words confirm this thought, for he 
says, "It shall be more tolerable for the land of Sodom 
and Gomorrha in the day of judgment than for that 
city." As a matter of fact, the people and cities of 
Israel, after the rejection of our Lord, were given over 
to a great time of trouble which resulted in very general 



loss, trouble, calamity upon all except the few 
who did receive the Messiah, and who were gathered 
out as "wheat" for the garner of the new dispensation. 
It may be said truly, that in some respects the destruction 
which came upon Sodom and Gomorrha was less 
awful than the destruction which came upon Jerusalem 
and other cities of Palestine during the burning day at 
the close of the Jewish "harvest." 

The remainder of the discourse (vss. 16-42) would 
seem to indicate that the work done by the apostles 
then sent forth was designed to be representative or 
typical of the entire work of the Gospel age; and so it 
has proved: not many have received the Kingdom message 
gladly; but enough will be found to complete the 
elect "little flock" to whom it will be the Father's 
good pleasure to give the Kingdom. 



page 48 

INTERESTING LETTERS. 



England. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-Our little band still 
gather together to commune on those most precious 
truths which have been shown to us of late, and we 
have been helped in a marvelous way. In several instances 
at our meetings we have dwelt upon difficult 
questions which have been put forward by brethren or 
others, and of course many times we have not quite 
gained a conclusion which seemed satisfactory. But 
peculiarly the very next TOWER that appeared contained 
some helpful solution, and that before any mail 
could get to you. This has occurred not once but several 
times and has greatly stimulated us. 

Three weeks ago our brother Thirkettle took a 
few tracts, etc., to a spot a mile or two away from town 
and commenced distribution. This was Sunday morning, 
and in the same week he had communication from 
a gentleman who had received a "Do You Know?" 
tract and was much impressed by it. The gentleman 
stated that he had never before to his remembrance 
been absent from early prayer meeting and morning 
service at Chapel, but on that morning he seemed impelled 
to take a walk rather than attend chapel. He 
took his walk, though from quite a different district 
and by a different way, which brought him to where 
Bro. T. was giving his tracts. I had a long talk last 
Sunday with him. He confessed his desires had continually 
been for something higher than the formalism 
of Christendom, and now he's got it. He has already 
finished DAWN, VOL. I., and says that he feels convinced 
of its teaching. This is the latest instance of 



God's dealing. Bless his name! We also have with 
us a brother who was once an active spirit medium, but 
is now a medium [or holy temple] of the spirit of truth. 
Yours in the Lord Jesus, FRED. GUARD, JR. 



California. 

EDITOR WATCH TOWER:-I received MILLENNIAL 
DAWN, VOL. IV., and have been privileged to read I., 
II. and III. during the past year, through the kindness 
of friends in Oregon. I think I can imagine the 
feelings of a miser who should suddenly find a pile of 
gold as large as Mount Shasta. How helpless he would 
feel, because he could carry so little away. The books 
are stupendous! 

Kindly give me a little information as to the best 
way to circulate them and oblige, 

Yours in His Name, J. L. BROWN. 



Kansas. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-After I clearly understood 
the necessity of withdrawing from the Nominal 
Church, and fully determined that I would do so, I 
delayed, allowing myself to think that I could reach 
many with these truths that I could not if I separated 
myself. The Master has been very good to me in enabling 
me at all times to clearly see that I must do so, 
but the delay was until I thought I had reached all 
that it was possible to reach. However, now I can see 
that the delay has been not only of no advantage so 
far as teaching was concerned (for no one has been 
reached who could not have been under other circumstances), 
but my continuance in the denominational 
fold has been deleterious to my growth in grace;— for 
altho I have had great liberty and freedom, yet it has 
had an insensible reactive influence, for I can see that 
it has required a discipline of the spirit to maintain 
my growth that I would very probably have not required. 
And among other things the Word has taught 
me that it is best to first obey a positive command of 
the Lord, and then wait for the spirit to give us wisdom 
later to clearly understand why. If we do this 
—render absolute obedience— wholly trusting in the 
wisdom and power of our Lord, instead of waiting to 
learn the why and the wherefore, it will be conducive 
to more rapid growth in grace than anything else we 
can do. We will learn when we render prompt 
obedience and implicit trust to not only this command 
("Come out of her [Babylon— Nominal Church], my 
people!"), but all others, that "Obedience is better 
than sacrifice," for we will receive the blessing of the 
obedient. 

With love to all, and praying that these thoughts 



will be helpful to some brother or sister still hesitating, 
I remain, Yours in fellowship and service of our Lord 
and Master Jesus Christ, C. C. SEABROOK, M.D. 



Jamaica. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I have been lending 
both the TOWER and DAWN to a few friends. I am so 
full of the new and glorious teaching that I am anxious 
that others should see it too. Since I have read your 
books I see the Bible in a different light; once it was 
all a dark and mysterious composition, now it is all 
a glorious light, and God a different God, a God that 
the poor sinner can venture to approach through Christ, 
and not the dreadful being that we have been made to 
believe he is by the various teachers of the present day. 

In conversations I have had with some about the 
books a few have expressed a desire to read them while 
others are indifferent; the general idea is that any 
teaching which differs from what the parsons preach 
must be something dangerous and would better be 
avoided. However, I am determined to do what I can 
at my own cost to introduce this precious knowledge 
of the Lord's gracious mercies toward fallen man, and 
so have enclosed $5 in greenbacks and ask you to send 
me tracts and DAWNS. 

I will ever pray the Lord to bless and prosper you 
in this glorious work. Pray for me also that I may 
ever keep close to the Lord under all circumstances. 

Yours in the Lord, JOHN SMYTH. 



Texas. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I have been reading 
the 4th volume and find the array of evidence simply 
overwhelming. How any can shut their eyes to the 
impending convulsion is more than I can see. God 
bless your and the Church's work in sealing the foreheads! 
The holding back of the four winds is as much 
of a standing miracle as the standing walls of water 
on either side as the Israelites passed through the 
Red Sea. 

Of course, you, too, have your discouragements 
and trials, but bear up, brother. My kindest thoughts 
and regards to you and the Church in Allegheny. 

Yours in Him, E. C. LEIGH. 



page 49 
VOL. XIX. FEBRUARY 15, 1898. No. 4. 



CONTENTS. 



Our Sufficiency is of God— in 

Christ Jesus 51 

Christ Our Wisdom 51 

Poem: Sweet the Hour at Jesus' Feet 54 

"Think it Not Strange" 54 

"A Double Minded Man is Unstable" 58 

"More Tolerable for Sodom in the 

Day of Judgment" 59 

It was Hidden from Them 60 

"Remember the Sabbath Day" 61 

Jewish Vs. Christian Sabbath 63 

Interesting Letters 64 

page 50 

SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
-ADDRESS TO- 
TOWER PUBLISHING CO., BIBLE HOUSE, 58 ARCH ST., 
ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 



SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, N.Y. DRAFT, MONEY ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS: 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age or accident, or other 
adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, if they 
send a Postal Card each December, stating their cases and requesting the paper. 



R2262 : page 51 

OUR SUFFICIENCY IS OF GOD-IN CHRIST JESUS. 

-CHRIST OUR WISDOM- 

"Christ Jesus, who of God is made unto us wisdom, and righteousness 
[justification], and sanctification, and redemption [deliverance]: 
he that glorieth, let him glory in the Lord."— 1 Cor. 1:30. 

"WISDOM is the principal thing:" "With 
all thy getting get understanding," thus 
wrote the wise man, Solomon, and so we all agree: 
wisdom is necessary at the very beginning of any matter 
that would result favorably. Wisdom is craved by 
the whole world of mankind, and the majority, even 
while going in divers directions, would claim to be 
seeking to walk in wisdom's ways. How important, 
then, that we discriminate as between the true wisdom 



and that which is so frequently misnamed wisdom, 
which is really folly ! 

Mother Eve in her perfection had a craving for 
wisdom, but inadvertently took the wrong advice and 
the wrong course in seeking its way. It would appear 
that the very basis of her temptation, through which 
she fell from divine favor and into sin, was the exercise 
of this laudable ambition to be wise. She perceived 
that the serpent was the most cunning, most wise, 
amongst the beasts, and she perceived that the serpent 
ate the fruit of a particular tree which Adam and herself 
had been forbidden to eat of. She gave credit to 
the tree and its forbidden fruit for the wisdom of the 
serpent, and concluded that its fruit was "to be desired 
to make one wise." The desire for the wisdom led to 
the disobedience— to the fall from divine favor, under 
the penalty of sin— death, and its associated troubles 
and miseries. 

Many of Eve's children are seeking wisdom in a 
similarly wrong direction. Her proper and wise course 
would have been to have acknowledged that she knew 
comparatively little, was seriously lacking of wisdom, 
and that God, the very embodiment of wisdom, was 
also the embodiment of love and her truest friend, and 
that his command was the command of wisdom. Had 
she followed the divine command, trusted the divine 
wisdom, she would have been saved from her great 
mistake and its terrible consequences. She needed to 
learn that "the fear of the Lord is the beginning of 
wisdom," and obedience to him the completeness of 
wisdom. Had she been obedient to the Lord, no doubt 
in due time and in a much better way he would have 
granted her all the wisdom she desired and was capable 
of using. The same principles hold true with Eve's 
children: all who would walk in wisdom's paths should 
learn that all true wisdom "comes from above" and 
that any other is "earthly, sensual, devilish." 

One of the first lessons of life to be learned is, that 
our own judgments are unsafe, and even those who are 
least unbalanced by the fall and who, therefore, more 
closely resemble mother Eve who was perfect, are as 
liable as she was to make the mistake of seeking wisdom 
in a wrong direction— leaning to their own understanding. 
(Prov. 3:5.) Those, therefore, who would 
take the wisest course should promptly admit their own 
unwisdom and seek for divine direction, divine wisdom. 
"If any of you lack wisdom, let him ask of God who 
giveth to all liberally and upbraideth not."— Jas. 1:5. 

But alas, how few are disposed to accept the wisdom 
that cometh from above! The majority have so large 
a degree of selfishness that they seem indeed to make 
miserable failures out of the best opportunities of their 
lives, before they realize that they lack wisdom and 
need guidance by the great Teacher. Hence, as the 
Lord declares, only the humble, only the "poor in 
spirit," are in the way that leads to eternal life and 



the Kingdom— because only these will seek for and 

R2262 : page 52 

obey the heavenly wisdom from the great Counselor. 
This class alone is in the condition to be taught of God: 
and concerning all who shall attain to the fulness of 
divine favor it is written, "They shall all be taught 
of God." 

It is for this reason that, as we look about us in 
the world, we find just the condition of things which 
the Apostle described in the verses preceding our text, 
namely, that "not many wise men after the flesh, not 
many mighty, not many noble, are called: but God 
has chosen the foolish things of the world to confound 
the [worldly] wise; and God has chosen the weak 
things of the world to confound the things which are 
mighty; and base things of the world, and things 
which are despised, hath God chosen." Do we not 
see that as a rule the men and women of largest natural 
ability, and greatest natural wisdom, fail to obtain the 
riches of divine grace in knowledge and in experience, 
which some of the less favored naturally do attain? 
Surely, the reason of this generally is that the greater 
our mental poverty, the greater our humility, and consequently 
the greater our trust in the Lord's wisdom, 
and reliance upon his instruction, and obedience 
thereto. 

Not always is this true, of course; for we find that 
some of the most haughty and self-conceited of our 
race are really the most poverty stricken as respects real 
ability: and occasionally we find some possessed of rare 
abilities, who are extremely humble minded and very 
reliant upon God; but neither of these cases is the 
rule: they are exceptions to the rule. Gather together 
a company of God's devoted, consecrated people in any 
place and scan them critically, and you will be convinced 
that not many wise, or great, or mighty are being 
chosen; but chiefly the poor of this world, rich in 
faith to be heirs of the Kingdom. The worldly-wise 
to-day are not to be found among the open scoffers and 
infidels, for worldly wisdom dictates to them a different 
course; they are to be found rather in the most respectable 
and aristocratic congregations of professed 
Christians. Many of them are too honorable to be 
open hypocrites, and therefore rarely take part in meetings 
or say anything respecting their inmost convictions, 
—their inmost thoughts or doubts respecting the 
creed of their own church and the creeds of all other 

R2263 : page 52 

churches; nevertheless they feel that it is wise to support 
Christianity, because of its moral influence on 
their families, their employes and their neighbors; 
besides even the doctrines which they at heart repudiate 



have, they believe, a restraining influence upon the 
"lower classes:" hence their wisdom, worldly-wisdom, 
guides them into the support of Christianity, but forbids 
them to go to any extreme, such as annunciation 
of faith in Christ or full consecration to his service. 

For the humble, however, God has provided true 
wisdom in Christ. His words no less than his example 
show us that we are sinners and that "no man cometh 
unto the Father" except by him. He tells us of the 
Father's pity, and of the redemption provided through 
his own blood, and of our privilege to accept of divine 
grace unto full forgiveness and reconciliation, and of 
our need of the heavenly wisdom for every step of the 
journey, if we would walk the narrow way, which leads 
to the glory of the Kingdom and life everlasting. And 
all who accept this "call" accept the great Mediator's 
instruction and guidance, as the very essence of divine 
wisdom. With varying degrees of promptness and 
after varying degrees of wandering from this good 
Shepherd, and being sought and found by him, the 
faithful eventually reach the position where they put 
no confidence in themselves and their own wisdom, but 
all confidence in the wisdom of him whom God hath 
appointed to be our wisdom— "who of God is made 
unto us wisdom." When this degree of progress has 
been attained, a measure of rest and contentment takes 
possession of the true sheep, which permits them to 
look up to God with confidence in every matter and at 
every time— especially in seasons of distress and grief 
and trial. They learn not to trust to their own wisdom 
any longer; but to trust implicitly to the wisdom 
and goodness of the great Shepherd. 

But not for a considerable time is such a development 
of confidence in the Lord's wisdom attained: 
meantime, they have many battles and contentions 
against the wiles of Satan, who would tempt them to 
use their own wisdom or the wisdom of other men 
and to doubt the results of following the divine wisdom 
and its program. On every hand, the flesh, assisted 
by the devil, offers inducements and seductions to follow 
its way and to cease to follow in the Lord's way. 
In business affairs, in church affairs, in home and family 
affairs, the temptation is continually advanced, that 
we should choose our own way, follow our own preferences 
and thereby reap larger and better results. It 
is only after considerable experience, and frequently 
after many failures, that the "pilgrim" for the heavenly 
country learns to trust no wisdom but that which 
cometh down from above and is in accordance with the 
divine Word. Describing the attitude of the true 
children of God, abiding in Christ as branches in the 
vine, the Apostle says:— 

"He hath abounded toward us in all wisdom and 
prudence; having made known unto us the mysteries 
of his will."— Eph. 1:8. 

"We also pray for you and desire that ye might 



be filled with the knowledge of his will in all wisdom 
and spiritual understanding, that ye might walk worthy 
of the Lord unto all pleasing, being fruitful in every 

R2263 : page 53 

good work, and increasing in the knowledge of God." 
-Col. 1:9,10. 

Let your hearts be "knit together in love, and 
unto all riches of the full assurance of understanding, 
to the acknowledgment of the mystery of God, and of 
the Father and of Christ; in whom are hid all the 
treasures of wisdom and knowledge."— Col. 2:2,3. 

Notwithstanding the fact that those who accept 
Christ are the "meek," "the poor in spirit," and lower 
than the average standard along the lines of worldly 
wisdom and power and wealth, yet nevertheless, the 
acceptance by these of Christ as their wisdom makes 
them really wiser than others;— not only in respect to 
the greater riches which they are laying up in heaven, 
but also wiser in respect to the most ordinary affairs of 
this present life. This is not because they miraculously 
receive new brains or a better and more orderly arrangement 
of the brains they have, but because submitting 
their judgments on every subject to the will of 
the Lord, and walking according to his directions in 
every matter and in every particular, they have his 
wisdom, his spirit, to guide them. Hence, altho their 
own minds are imperfect and unbalanced, as much or 
more than the average of the race, the Apostle is able 
to say of such, "God hath given us the spirit of a 
sound mind."— 2 Tim. 1:7. 

The spirit of a sound mind enables its possessors 
to view things more correctly than they would be able 
to view them of themselves; for instance, it cautions us 
not to think of ourselves more highly than we ought 
to think, but according to the measure of the Lord's 
spirit possessed. Yet while cautioning us to be very 
humble, it guards us against being fearful, men-pleasers, 
sycophants. While constraining us to be peace-lovers 
and peace-makers, and kind, and forgiving, and 
generous, without maliciousness or vindictiveness, it 
nevertheless cautions us to be firm respecting principles 
of righteousness and truth. We may and should gladly 
yield our own preferences to those of others, for the 
sake of serving others or doing them good, yet we must 
never do so at the expense of the truth and principle. 
In the family, love is to be the rule, blended with mercy 
and justice, kindness and generosity; nevertheless, 
the rod is not to be spared if its use be necessary to the 
proper training of the child. And the Christian father 
is not only to be "kind and gentle toward all," but is 
to "rule his own family well, having his own children 
in proper subjection." Thus, we might multiply the 
various counsels of the heavenly wisdom, as it enters 
into the lives of those who are fully devoted to the 



Lord and gives them wisdom and grace for the affairs 
of life far beyond any that they would have had without 
it. 

After exhorting us that "If any of you lack wisdom, 
let him ask of God," the Apostle James (1:5) says, 
"Who among you is a wise man and endued with 
knowledge? Let him show out of a good conversation 
his works with meekness of wisdom. But if ye have 
strife in your hearts, glory not [to think yourselves 
led of the Lord and guided by his true wisdom], and 
lie not against the truth. This wisdom [which in 
selfishness seeks its own gratification and advancement, 
envying others and striving selfishly for its own advancement] 
descendeth not from above but is earthly, 
sensual, devilish. For where envying and strife is, 
there is confusion and every evil work; but the wisdom 
that is from above is first pure, then peaceable, gentle, 
and easy to be entreated, full of mercy and good fruits, 
without partiality, without hypocrisy. And the fruit 
of righteousness is sown in peace of them that make 
for peace."— James 3:13-18. 

Let us remember well this analysis of the wisdom 
that comes from above. 

First, It is pure, guileless, sincere, honorable, 
open, above board: it cometh to the light, loveth the 
light, it is not of the darkness, nor of sin, it is utterly 
opposed to secret whisperings, back bitings and all 
slanderous and underhanded works and ways. It takes 
the Lord at his word, receiving the pure word of wisdom 
into a good and honest heart. It is honest: it does 
not deceive itself into believing that self-will is the 
Lord's will. 

Secondly, It is peaceable: that is to say, so far as 
is possible and consistent with honesty and purity it is 
peaceable. It loves and desires peace, harmony, unity; 
but since peace is not first, but purity first, therefore 
it can only be fully at peace and fully in harmony 
with that which is pure and honest and good. 

Thirdly, It is gentle— it is not rude, course, rough, 
and has no sympathy with such a spirit and such methods. 
It is not only of God, but God like. Nevertheless, 
its gentleness follows its purity and peaceableness: 
those who receive this wisdom are not first or primarily 
gentle, and therefore peaceable and pure, but they are 
primarily pure, sanctified with the truth, and therefore 
are peaceable, and therefore are gentle, and therefore 
are easy to be entreated. But they can only be 
easily entreated in harmony with purity, peace and 
gentleness: they cannot be easily entreated to assist in 
any evil work of bearing false witness or scandal-mongers, 
or slandering, or evil-speaking, nor into any of 
the works of the flesh and the devil. 

Fourthly, It is full of mercy and good fruits: it 
rejoices in mercy, because that is a part of its very 
self; mercy and all the good fruits of the spirit of the 
Lord are sure to proceed from the heart in which rules 



the spirit of love, honesty, purity, peaceableness and 
gentleness. But this mercy, while taking hold upon 

R2263 : page 54 

the ignorant and the unintentional evil-doers with sympathy 

and help, cannot have the slightest sympathy or 

affiliation with wilful wrong-doers, because the spirit 

of wisdom is not first mercy, but first purity; hence, 

the mercy of the spirit of wisdom can only exercise itself 

upon the unintentional wrong-doers, or the ignorant 

wrong-doers. 

Fifth, Without partiality (which would signify 
injustice): the purity and peace, gentleness, mercy and 
good fruits of the spirit of wisdom, lead us to be no 
respecters of persons, except as character shall demonstrate 
real value: the outward features, the natural 
man, the color of his skin, etc., are ignored by the 
spirit of the Lord, the spirit of wisdom that cometh 
from above. It is impartial and loves that which is 

R2264 : page 54 

pure, good, peaceable, gentle, true, wherever found 
and under whatever circumstances it exhibits itself. 

Sixth, It is without hypocrisy. This heavenly 
wisdom is so pure, so peaceable, so gentle and so merciful, 
toward all that are worthy of consideration or 
notice, that there is no necessity for hypocrisy where 
it controls. And it is bound to be out of harmony, out 
of sympathy and out of fellowship with all that is sinful; 
and in fellowship and in sympathy with all that is 
pure or that is making for purity and peace and gentleness 
—so that it has no room for hypocrisy. 

Let us, dearly beloved, as children of God, more 
and more fully accept Christ as our wisdom, for all 
of the affairs of life— little as well as great, temporal 
as well as spiritual. Let us seek to be more and more 
filled with the spirit of true wisdom that cometh from 
above, whose ultimate teaching is holiness to the Lord. 



R2270 : page 54 

SWEET THE HOUR AT JESUS' FEET. 



Sweet is the hour to those who meet 
In fellowship at Jesus' feet, 
Communing of the wondrous love 
That drew him from his home above 
Down to this world of sin and woe, 
That we the way of life might know, 
Might here by faith in Him prepare 



That precious robe the "bride" shall wear. 

Sweet is this hour; but none can tell 
What glories in those mansions dwell, 
Reserved beyond life's rolling tide; 
For those who in the Lord confide, 
Who bear the toil, the cross sustain, 
And know to die in Christ is gain, 
Shall in his Kingdom glories share 
And shine as jewels bright and fair. 

Sweet is this hour; but oh how blest 
The one that ushers in our rest!— 
That ope's to our enraptured eyes 
The glories of our heavenly prize, 
Where clothed in bridal robes we'll stand 
As kings and priests at Christ's right hand, 
While heavenly hosts before him fall 
And hail him King and Lord of all. 
—A. H. Bigelow. 



R2264 : page 54 

"THINK IT NOT STRANGE.' 



"Beloved, think it not strange concerning the fiery trial which 
is to try you, as tho some strange thing happened unto you: but 
rejoice, inasmuch as ye are partakers of Christ's sufferings; 
that, when his glory shall be revealed, ye may 
be glad also with exceeding joy."— 1 Pet. 4:12,13. 

NEVER have we known a time when the Great 
Adversary seemed more energetic in his 
assaults upon the "harvest" work, than now. Information 
comes from every quarter of fiery trials, pitfalls 
and persecutions being operated or prepared against 
those who have followed the light of present truth, and 
who have set their faces to stand fast in the liberty 
wherewith Christ hath set us free. It is not best that 
we should publish all that reaches us, for, while there 
is much to discourage, there is much also to encourage; 
which, we thank the Lord, more than counterbalances. 
We do, however, desire that all should know in a general 
way, for two reasons, (1) It will help to fortify 
them for their turn, when it shall come; and (2) it will 
develop in them sympathetic love: for when one member 
of the body suffers, all the members are benefited 
by suffering with it. 

We will mention one case here because its narration 
may serve to point a lesson to some. Brother 
Bahret's letter states the trouble as follows— 
New York. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I must tell you of our 
experiences. Some time last June Brother W. de Ronden 
Pos came here from N.Y. City and held a meeting 
in the evening, speaking on Rom. 8, and I would say 
that it was a very good and blessed meeting. He expressed 
at the time his intention of leaving the nominal 
church and engaging in some other pursuit and said 
that, if he could, it might be possible that he would 
come here to live. Of course, we expressed our desire 
that we should be glad to have him in our midst, 
but nothing further was done. Later on he was in the 
city again for a week's visit and held a few meetings, 
but my brother and I, being in Germany, were not 
present and did not know what arrangements had been 
made till we came back. I was told that he had concluded 
to come here and take up any occupation he 
could find, as for instance an agency, or that he buy a 
place in the suburbs of the city where he could raise 

R2264 : page 55 

some vegetables and chickens to help to make a living. 
I was given to understand that he was a man of some 
means who was not entirely depending on his work. 
We thought our meetings would be continued in the 
same way as before, only he taking the lead for the 
most part of the time. 

We intended to assist him with temporal things to 
the extent of our ability, and when he came here a 
short time after my return from Europe, I said we 
ought to make it $15 per month, and informed our treasurer 
that I would make up any deficiency. 

We had a few good meetings after he came. At that 
time in one of the Wednesday night meetings he made 
the proposition that we should organize. I made the suggestion 
that we would better consider everything well 
before taking action; but then he put the vote that all 
those in favor of organizing should signify it by rising, 
and all arose; I did the same rather hesitatingly, altho 
I had no definite objection to offer, and did not want 
to vote No. However, I said that we ought to have 
another meeting before the time set for organization— 
a week afterward, on Dec. 15th. 

We brothers then held a meeting, he being present, 
but all the time was taken up by speaking on baptism 
which he thought ought to be enforced, we urging 
that we should not force anybody or exclude anybody 
because he cannot just see as we do respecting 
water baptism, if otherwise they are children of God, 
believers in Jesus Christ. We supposed he had agreed 
with us on that point, and so on the evening of 
Dec. 15th we had a meeting, and after some words by 
him, reading the "Confession" which he had formulated, 
we signed it: I one of the first, because I said I 
can subscribe to that anytime. The confession we subscribed 
to was a very simple one which acknowledged 



the Heavenly Father and Jesus his Son our Savior and 
Master. I think twenty-two subscribed that night, 
some of them people we had never seen before, who 
were no more of us than other people of the world. 
Brother de Ronden Pos spoke then on baptism at some 
length, saying that he would not let any go to the Lord's 
supper if not immersed, not even his own mother, and 
tho it should break her heart. Some of our number 
then asked their names to be erased from the roll, 
others objected, and then the trouble commenced. 

In this same meeting Bro. Pos expressed his position 
to the effect that he was no more nor less than 
any other member, and if at any time he had had any aspiration 
of being "something," he had entirely given 
it up, and that any of the brethren stood on the same 
level with him, and therefore he would not put his 
name down first on the roll of membership, and only 
signed towards the last. It therefore seemed strange 
to some that he should take the liberty at the same 
meeting to declare that he would not let any come to the 
Lord's table that were not immersed, when he knew that 
the others thought differently. 

Before I go any farther now I must give another 
explanation: the Sunday before this Bro. Pos brought 
before the meeting his thoughts that the "Lord's Supper" 
ought to be observed every week. Some agreed 
and others did not agree with him on this subject. 

The next Sunday we observed Lord's Supper and 
Brother Pos read Rom. 14 and stated that the Lord 
showed him through the very circumstances what to 
do in the case of the unimmersed (for, as I said before, 
there were some who subscribed whom we really did 
not know, as they only attended a few times at previous 
meetings and a few not at all; but they were of the denomination 
called "Disciples;" they had been immersed, 
but were yet to all appearances only nominal 
Christians); he said to enforce this rule would 
let in some people who, altho immersed, were yet of the 
world, while others who were much more in harmony 
with us would be excluded, and so he readmitted these 
and rejected the others for the time: but later on he 
let them in again; and these are the ones who are now 
his chief standbys. Things went along with ups and 
downs, till about the first week in January; by that 
time we saw the necessity of having some system, and 
it was proposed that some elders be elected, which we 
found Scriptural and your advice in the Nov. 15, '95, 
WATCH TOWER. Meantime I wrote you a letter that 
I thought he had much ability to preach, and it would 
be a pity if he could not make full use of it, and suggested 
to you the plan that he be employed in part by 
the Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society. It seemed 
rather strange when I heard from you that you had 
heard very little of him of late, as I thought you were 
in steady correspondence; but still I thought I would 
let him know that I had written to you and that you 



considered it favorably, but would like to hear from 
himself. I intended to speak to him on a Sunday afternoon, 
after the meeting, and was only waiting till 
he should be through speaking to somebody else, when 
all at once he commenced to denounce the doctrines of 
MILLENNIAL DAWN as from the pit; and he said, may 
the Lord forgive those people who say the Lord has 
come. I said then, "Brother, be careful what you are 
saying: do not say hastily that a thing is from the devil." 
He said then, "I do say it's from the devil, and a good 
many have stumbled over these doctrines," and he denounced 
them even more. 

We were all shocked, at least I was; but I did not 
want to write anything to you about it then, as I hoped 
that when I would get opportunity to speak to him 
about it and explain, he would see his error. But matters 
went from bad to worse. 

Two weeks ago we had a meeting appointed for 
the election of elders. It was only a meeting of the 
brothers, as Bro. Pos said (and we partly agreed with 
him) that in the ruling of the church the women should 
be silent according to Paul's teaching. He said that 
the women are so easily deceived that it is not safe to 
let them vote, for they are much more apt to choose 
according to personal liking than qualification. The 
question came up, How should elders or overseers be 
chosen? I suggested that their qualifications be made 
plain, as we read in Timothy and Titus, and then let 
each one choose according to his best judgment. Bro. 
Pos objected to that and thought that he as the pastor 

R2265 : page 55 

should have the right to choose or nominate those 
whom he thinks would work best in harmony with 
him; we could then agree with his choice or, if not, he 
would make another choice. The suggestion was then 
made that so far as we knew it was not generally understood 
that he was the pastor. 

Well, he said, if we have no pastor and if I heretofore 
have only been pastor pro tern., the first thing 
we have to do is to choose a pastor; and if I am not 

R2265 : page 56 

your pastor I will not take the leading of another meeting. 
Why, we said, we only want to do what the 
Bible authorizes us to do; if it authorizes us to elect a 
pastor in that sense, we will do so; but we will first 
satisfy ourselves about the matter. 

We asked him to lead the meeting meanwhile as 
before. This he agreed to do, but said, In the election 
of a pastor it's different: the sisters have then just as 
much to say as the brothers, because they are just as 
much concerned. We answered that whatever way 
we should find the Bible to teach we would do, but 



that we were not ready to act on that night. He said, 
I know the sisters will be satisfied with whatever you 
say; and what would the people (the public) say, if they 
thought you had a pastor, and it turns out now that 
you have not? We said, we did not care what the 
world might say. Then, when he saw that we would 
not act on that night, he said, "I came here by the holy 
spirit, organized the church, gathered the flock, and am 
therefore the shepherd (pastor), and I DECLARE MYSELF 
AS SUCH, whether you will have me or not." 

We said, if we find that to be the Scriptural way, 
we will accept it, otherwise not; and as it was getting 
late, the meeting was adjourned till a week later on 
Monday. On Sunday following he preached a sermon 
on Nehemiah (putting himself entirely in his place), 
and showed others trying any way and every way to 
destroy his work but he victorious at last because the 
Lord is on his side. 

On Monday he went away to a convention of the 
"Disciples," where he was till Wednesday afternoon. 
Monday night the meeting was held, two Elders being 
chosen, Bro. Knauss and myself; but the proposition 
was then made that as we thought there was better 
talent in our midst to teach and lead the meetings an 
assistant minister or Deacon be chosen and Bro. Pos 
was chosen. A committee was appointed to inform 
the Brother of the results of our meeting. Bro. Knauss, 
Bro. Doughty and myself were appointed and we went 
to his house and told him. He then said, "I cannot 
accept that. I came here an ordained Elder and evangelist, 
and I am your first elder, and I will call a meeting 
of the church and let all know of it; and they can 
say then if they stand by me or not. Besides, a brother 
of the Disciples is coming here in a week or two, and 
we are going to put up in this city a wooden structure 
seating a couple hundred people; and if you will not 
stand by me you can hold your meetings as before." 

I then asked for the privilege of leading the meeting 
for that evening. I should have liked to speak on 
our duty in this present time of the "harvest," whether 
it is our principle duty to reap or to sow more seed. 
I had hoped that perhaps I could have made some 
things plain: but he said, "I must first present a few 
things to the people, and if they then want to listen to 
you they can do so." In the meeting he first brought 
up the subject, saying that some seem to think that he 
had so far only been pastor pro tern., and that he wanted 
to know his position, and whether this church had a 
pastor or not, and therefore he made it the first business 
of Sunday afternoon that the church declare its 
position. 

After he got through I wanted to say a few words, 
but he would not let me, saying, This is not a business 
meeting, we are come together for edification, and 
started to read from the Scriptures. I said, I will wait 
till after the meeting is over, and any that would like 



to hear a few words of explanation could stay. After 
the meeting he said that he advised every one to go 
right home and pray. They should do so if only to 
please him, and if they considered his judgment better 
than anybody's else. I said, All those that are satisfied 
with a one sided presentation of a case have, of 
course, privilege to go home, the others are invited 
to stay. Some went and some stayed. Before that the 
suggestion was made, by Brother Knauss, that this 
matter should not be brought up on Sunday, but ought 
to be settled on another day, but he insisted on having 
it on Sunday; and as I now see it, his object was to get 
a big crowd there whereby the others would be scared. 
But it only worked to his own disadvantage. To avoid 
trouble as much as possible, we wrote out in few words 
that we were not willing to be joined to a denomination, 
as his plans were, and as he had caused to be 
published in the newspapers, using some of the names 
without consent. I handed him the papers with the 
signatures Saturday night and informed him that we 
did this in order to simplify matters, and that it had 
been agreed by the brethren that on Sunday afternoon 
we would better only have a Bible study and prayer 
meeting. He then said that as all his friends were 
coming there, he would present his case first and then 
give me ten or fifteen minutes to state our side; and 
then he would preach, and we could do what we liked 
after that. 

So Sunday afternoon came, and quite a few strangers 
were present. He took his seat amongst the rest, 
and when the time had finally arrived he said, As long 
as nobody occupies the chair I think we better elect a 
chairman. I said then, that I, as the appointed Elder 
of the church take the liberty to occupy the chair, and 
I did. We sang a hymn and had prayer, then I stated 
the case as nearly as I could, also announcing the 
meetings for the week; and said that as Bro. Pos had 
expressed his intention to preach, we give him the 
opportunity to do so, or if he had any statements to 
make, he might make them. 

He said that he could not preach under the circumstances 
and that it was not true that he wanted us 
to join another denomination, but that the question 
was whether we would fellowship with brethren that stand 
on the same foundation as we do. 

Now as to Brother Draper's coming here I would 
say, We will be only too glad to have him here any 
time, but whether he can change the result is very 
doubtful, only it might strengthen those that are left. 
We were greatly helped by his former visit, and I am 
sure it gave us courage to stand through this fiery trial. 

Yours in Christian love, C. F. BAHRET. 



We congratulate the dear friends who have stood 



this shaking, that they so loved the liberty wherewith 
Christ makes free, that they were unwilling to be led 
back again to Babylonian bondage and darkness, by a 
self appointed pastor or shepherd— even tho he at first 
came to them as a messenger of the light of present 
truth! 
These dear friends might have been saved some of 

R2265 : page 57 

this trial had they taken heed sooner to the Scriptural 
advice we laid before them in the WATCH TOWER of 
Nov. 15, '95, respecting Order in the Church: the 
proper course for preserving their liberties in Christ 
from those who would "lord it over God's heritage," 
who would undertake to appoint themselves pastors, 
superior to the choice of the church; and who would 
attempt to dictate their own views and to determine 
whom they would let and whom they would hinder from 
partaking of the Lord's supper, etc. Their neglect on this 
point left them open to confusion when their liberties 
were attacked. We congratulate them, however, and 
praise the Lord for his deliverance of them. 

The friends erred in their supposition that a pastor 
is a deacon. Deacons were chosen in the early Church 
to look after the more secular interests of the Church, 
while the Elders were all pastors or overseers, who 
looked after the spiritual interests of the Church. If 
one were chosen as pastor-in-chief and others as his 
associates and assistants and advisers, we cannot see 
that this would have been contrary to any Bible instruction. 
But they were quite right in not choosing, 
and in supposing that God would not have them choose 
any one who either directly or indirectly sought to 
grasp the position, and to browbeat and override the 
Lord's Church. 

Too frequently the real idea of church meetings 
"for edification" is lost sight of under the popular desire 
for preaching— through a spirit of conformity to 
Babylon. Ability as a public speaker should never be 
despised or ignored, but it should be sought and appreciated 
only as it is unto edification. The more 
preaching, the worse if it be along wrong lines. 

We commend also the moderation with which the 
matters were held straight— only that there was too 
much moderation at first. They were misled on the 
subject of the "Lord's Supper." They should have 
asked, Where in the Scriptures is it suggested that 
morning and noon meals are "suppers" or by what 
manner of twisting is the word supper to be distorted 
out of all meaning and sense. The word in the Greek 
signifies "An evening meal" and not otherwise. Why 
did they not inquire respecting the commemoration of 
his death on a day (Sunday) specially set apart to commemorate 
our Lord's release from death? Why did 
they not point out that the "breaking of bread" practiced 



by the early Church was no more "the Lord's 
Supper," commemorative of his death, than was the 
"breaking of bread" at Emmaus? (Luke 24:30; 
Matt. 14:19.) They should also have asked why the 
"cup," the wine, emblematic of our Lord's shed blood, 
is not mentioned in connection with any account of the 
"breaking of bread" if these were memorials of the 
Last Supper— while it is given full importance in the 

R2266 : page 57 

narrative of the Last Supper in 1 Cor. 1 1:23-34. 

It was a mistake for the brothers to elect the Elders 
without the concurrence of the sisters; "all are one in 
Christ Jesus." The limitations respecting public speaking 
should not be stretched. Our views of the Scripture 
presentation on this subject are given fully in 
the WATCH TOWER of July, 1893. The election 
should be held over again, when all who usually meet 
with you and who trust in the ransom and who profess 
full consecration to the Lord, should be invited to express, 
not their choice: but their judgment respecting 
the Lord's choice as gauged by the declarations of 
Scripture. 

We rejoice, too, that the brethren rejected the 
water baptism test as to fellowship; and that they fully 
declared their desire to fellowship all who love and 
serve our Lord irrespective of the lengths and depths 
of their knowledge: for those who love the Lord will 
seek to know more and more of him through his Word. 

We may be asked here, What is the difference 
between the profession of the "Disciple Denomination" 
and our position as Bible Christians, so we will here 
state the differences briefly. 

(1) If the "Disciples" would live up to their professions 
they would be with us in short order. Their 
professions are quite right— the Bible as the only rule 
and guide respecting the one Lord, one faith and one 
baptism, and respecting our duty to God and man,— 
with full freedom from ecclesiasticism. 

We endorse all this and live up to it; but do the 
"Disciples?" Surely not! Attempt to go amongst 
them to present the "harvest" message of present 
truth, and see how much of an unwritten creed they 
have and how tightly it binds them. Indeed, while 
professing in their formal statements that they are the 
most liberal of the sects of Babylon they are (unwittingly) 
the most narrow and most exclusive. We will 
prove this statement in our second proposition. 

(2) They make a test of water immersion; and 

by declaring that it is for the remission of sins they assent 
to the proposition that all the Presbyterians, 
Methodists, Episcopalians, Lutherans, Reformed and 
United Presbyterians, Protestant Methodists and all 
others who have not been immersed in water, with a 
certain formula of words, are all sinners— strangers 



from God and aliens and foreigners as respects his 
grace and truth in Christ. Could any narrower creed 
than this one be found? If so let us know of it! Yes, 
we think of just one that is narrower, namely that of the 
Christadelphians. But then the Christadelphians consign 
others to destruction while the Disciples send the 
sinners to a hopeless eternal torment;— nor will they 
give an opportunity to show from the Bible the fallacy 
of this view. If we are incorrect we will be pleased 

R2266 : page 58 

to receive official notification to this effect, and will see 
that the truth is presented to them forthwith. 

"A DOUBLE MINDED MAN IS UNSTABLE." 



We first knew of Rev. de Ronden Pos in California, 
when he sent us the following letter which we published 
in our issue of Feb. 1, '92. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I must write to tell 
you how exceedingly interested I have been in MILLENNIAL 
DAWN VOL. III., which I spied out in a book 
store in Los Angeles. I enclose 50 cents, for which I 
would like you to send me, at once, VOLS. I. and II. of 
the series. I would also much like a sample or two of 
your paper-ZION'S WATCH TOWER -for if it is what I 
expect it to be, after DAWN VOL. III., I shall at once 
become a subscriber. VOL. III. is already circulating 
among my friends. 

Yours in the waiting for Christ's Kingdom, 
W. DE RONDEN POS, 
Pastor First Baptist Church. 

Next we heard from the gentleman from the 
neighborhood of Kentucky, still later at Washington, 
D.C.; afterward he wrote us from Montreal, Canada, 
that he was pastor of an Episcopal church there, and 
subsequently he was officiating as pastor of a Reformed 
Episcopal church in Baltimore, Md. We were glad 
to hear that the gentleman had finally concluded to 
stand free with us, in the liberty wherewith Christ 
makes free from sectarianism and its bondage. We 
hoped much from his association with the friends, yet 
feared that they were expecting too much from one 
who had for years shown so great a weakness for 
"Babylon and its corn-crib"— tho we gave no hint 
of our fears to any. 

In view of this our knowledge of the gentleman's 
past affiliations it caused quite a smile when we read 
as above of his heroic determination that he would allow 
no unimmersed person to come to the communion 
table. We wonder where his courageous soul stood 
for the years he preached for and pastored the Episcopalian 
and Reformed Episcopalian sheep and sprinkled 



their infants, and in due form and ceremony administered 
"sacraments" to them. According to his present 
"faith" those "sheep" were not "sheep" at all, but 
were yet in their sins— not having been baptized for the 
remission of sins. He received their dollars regularly, we 
suppose, for Episcopalians are counted good payers; 
but did he fulfil his trust and tell them his belief that 
they were all condemned sinners? Did he point them 
to water as the way to eternal life? or did he deceive 
them and receive their money under false pretence? 
Of course, we could not say so! we cannot judge the 
hearts of such people! possibly his conscience slept all 
those years, or possibly he has no conscience. 

At all events we are confident that the truth has 
met with a valuable loss. We expect the opposition of 
such people and prefer it to their hypocritical and blatant 
pomposity. We have no reason to believe that 
the knowledge of the deep things of God, including the 
parousia, is intended for such. God is choosing the 
worldly-foolish and weak and insignificant honest "overcomers" 
of the world to be his joint-heirs and is passing 
by the "trimmers," "men-pleasers," mammon-worshipers. 
"Even so Father, for so it seemed good 
in thy sight!" And beloved fellow "sheep," let us 
remember that those who resist the Adversary's encroachments 
and allurements and wiles and attacks, 
from any quarter, will be the stronger therefor, and be 
the more closely bounden together in love and sympathy 
and the more firmly established in the letter and 
spirit of the "perfect law of liberty." 



A letter from another brother at the same place 
says:— 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-"Praise the Lord, O 
my soul. While I live will I praise the Lord: I will 
sing praises unto his name while I have any being." 

To these words, dear Brother, I can also give utterance 
at this time with my whole heart. I am sure 
I cannot find words to express my thankfulness to the 
Lord, for his powerful hand by which he has been leading 
us in the weeks gone by. I am glad that the Lord 
stood by us to enable us to stand for the truth; and it 
is my prayer that it may be also true of us, that we 
came out of the fire purified and more refined, so that 
these experiences may have been among the all things 
which will work together for good, to those who love 
the Lord. I think it has brought more forcibly to us 
than ever before the Psalmist's words, "Put not your 
trust in princes nor in the son of man, in whom there 
is no help." Truly, we are living in a time when we 
must put our trust in God and his Word, if we wish to 
stand; we are living in a time when deceptions are coming 
to us which are so strong that they would almost 
deceive the very elect. But thank God that is not possible 



because we have the sure word of prophecy that 

shineth into the dark places and will establish our footing, 

if we take heed to it. 

I consider it a great privilege to write these few 
lines to you at this time, for I know that you are in 
sympathy with us in these afflictions which have come 
upon us. Yes, and we are told in God's Word that we 
should share our sorrows as well as our joys, "weep 
with those who weep, and rejoice with those that do 
rejoice." 

When I last wrote you I had no idea that we were 
standing before such a sifting time and therefore did 
not mention anything; everything seemed to be in harmony, 
altho I mentioned in my letter that Bro. de Ronden 
Pos had some very peculiar ideas on some things. 
Yet, we all thought that, as he had just come out of 
the nominal system, it could hardly be otherwise, and 
that, as he would look further into the Word, with the 
desire to follow the Lamb, he would lose these ideas, 
and be brought into the full light, and stand with us, 
free in the liberty wherewith Christ hath made us free. 
But we have since discovered that, altho he had laid 

R2266 : page 59 

his hands to the plow, was sincere at the time, yet he 
looked back and desired to go back into bondage and 
draw others with him. 

Hoping that you will remember us in your prayers 
that we may at all times prove faithful towards our 
Heavenly Master (it has given me great comfort to 
read the article in the last TOWER, "To Whom Shall 
We Go?"— I think it just fitted our case), 

I remain as ever in Christ, Your brother 
FREDERICK KNAUSS. 



R2267 : page 59 

"MORE TOLERABLE FOR SODOM IN THE DAY OF JUDGMENT. 

-FEB. 27.-MATT. 11:20-30.- 

"Come unto me, all ye that labor and are heavy 
laden, and I will give you rest."— Matt. 11:28. 

OUR LORD'S many miracles in Capernaum 

and vicinity during the period of his residence 

there had apparently but slight effect upon the masses 

of the people— those who heard him gladly, and who 

heartily espoused his cause, were comparatively few. 

But the upbraiding mentioned in this lesson was not in 

the form of a tirade of scolding and abuse: it was a 

simple statement of facts respecting their indifference 

to the privileges and opportunities which God had presented 



to them, and the sure punishment which lay 
before them in consequence. The punishment would 
not be merely for their lack of interest in the Kingdom 
promised, for that was a favor, and the rejection of a 
favor need not of itself imply vengeance against the 
indifferent on the part of the one whose favors were 
declined: but their rejection implied more than this, 
for altho still professing to desire the Kingdom, they 
were evidently unready to receive it on the only conditions 
on which God was pleased to offer it; and this 
inability indicated a condition of heart seriously out of 
harmony with God— a wicked, sinful condition: hence, 
the offer of the Kingdom and their inability to receive 
it on God's terms proved that they were so sinful, so 
alienated from God, that very evidently they would be 
worthy of serious punishment, not for rejecting the 
favor of the Kingdom, but for the sinful conditions 
which hindered their acceptance of it. 

By way of illustrating the degree of their hardness 
of heart, our Lord compared them with people of 
other cities, which they themselves recognized as very 
wicked, and whose overthrow was recognized as a divine 
judgment because of that wickedness. The comparison 
was much to the disadvantage of the Jews, and 
was calculated to arouse their fears that, after all, the 
boastings of their religious classes of their holiness and 
piety, were probably only empty hypocrisies when 
judged by the Lord's standard— love for truth and 
righteousness. Our Lord began by comparing Chorazin 
and Bethsaida, cities of Israel, with Tyre and Sidon, 
two Gentile cities on the Mediterranean seacoast. He 
assured his hearers that even less teaching and miracles 
performed in the Gentile cities would have led 
their people to repentance, whereas, the people of 
Chorazin and Bethsaida gave no sign that they could be 
brought to repentance by any amount of teaching and 
miracles. Divine judgment would, therefore, rest 
most heavily upon those who had enjoyed the greater 
privileges, and who, because of hardness of heart, had 
failed to utilize them. 

Then, coming to Capernaum, the city which he 
had made his home, and which had thus been specially 
favored— "exalted unto heaven" in the matter of privileges 
and opportunities— he declares that it shall be 
brought down to hades,— to death, the grave. The 
reason for this is stated, namely,— the mighty works 
should have led to repentance, would have led to repentance, 
had not the people been very perverse at 
heart. To convince them of their deplorable condition, 
our Lord compares them to the people of Sodom, and 
assures them that they are far worse than were the 
people of Sodom, whom they despised, and whom God 
judged to be unworthy to further enjoy the present 
life, raining down upon them destruction, fire and 
brimstone. Our Lord's assurance that the Sodomites, 
if blessed with similar opportunities to those granted 



to the people of Capernaum, would have repented and 
would not have been destroyed, naturally leads us to 
inquire, Why this partiality on God's part? why withhold 
from Sodom privileges and opportunities which 
would have led to its repentance, and why grant these 
privileges and opportunities to a people so unworthy of 
them as those of Capernaum proved themselves to be? 

These questions are unanswerable from the standpoint 
of all the popular theologies of to-day— orthodox 
and heterodox. They are explainable only from the standpoint 
of the Bible and its plan of the ages rightly understood. 
From this quarter we see that the Sodomites 
were not really on trial for eternal life in their day. 
They merely enjoyed an experience with the evil side 
of existence, but making so poor a use of it as they 
did, they were cut off from their privileges as a type, 
example, or illustration of the fact that those who willingly 
do wickedness shall ultimately be cut off from all 
of God's favors and blessings. However, the Sodomites 
only enjoyed and lost the remnant of Adamic life, 
already forfeited. Like others, they were born under 
condemnation of death: they never enjoyed any of the 
blessings or opportunities which Christ's death as a 
great "ransom for all" has secured for all mankind— 
namely, a hope of a future life and an opportunity or 

R2267 : page 60 

trial for its attainment. The sin of Capernaum, therefore, 
was not only a sin against a greater light, but 
since it was Christ the true light himself who was making 
the offer to them, their rejection of him much more 
resembled the condition of wicked rebellion against 
God that would lead to the second death, than did the 
conduct of the Sodomites. 

But the people of Chorazin, while greatly privileged 
above others, had not yet enjoyed all the privileges 
and opportunities which God designs shall be 
given. Their misuse of their opportunities brought 
against them our Lord's censure and his declaration of 
the destruction of their city, as a judgment against 
them, just as Sodom had been destroyed as a sentence 
against it. Nevertheless, our Lord intimates clearly 
and distinctly another trial still future, for the people 
of Capernaum as well as for the people of Sodom— a 
future "day of judgment" or trial. 

Verse 24. In the future judgment, our Lord declares 
that the Sodomites will have a better standing 
and be more likely to pass satisfactorily the divine inspection, 
than the Capernaumites. That judgment 
day, as we have elsewhere seen,* will be the Millennial 
day or age, in which all the families of the earth 
will be judged (tried for eternal life) by the Christ, 
Head and body, the "little flock," the Kingdom class. 
Our Lord who will be the Head Judge at that time has 
already declared in these words that the trial will not 



be intolerable for the Capernaumites, but will be "more 
tolerable" for the Sodomites, in that they had evidenced 
already that, notwithstanding their wickedness, 
they were not so hard-hearted, so calloused against 
divine grace. 

This reference to the Sodomites shows conclusively 
the divine purpose, as elsewhere plainly stated, 
namely, that all that are in the grave shall hear the 
voice of the Son of Man, and shall come forth— to be 
judged, to be tried, whether or not they will accept 
the grace of God in Christ Jesus, or reject it. This is 
the inevitable conclusion, because, as our Lord declares, 
as it is recorded in Genesis, none of the Sodomites escaped 
the destruction, "It rained down fire from heaven 
and destroyed them all;" hence, if they are to stand up 
in judgment with the people of Chorazin, and be found 
in a more tolerable condition than they, it must be as 
a result of an awakening of the dead, the very result 
which the Scriptures inform us has been assured by 
our Redeemer's sacrifice for all. In this connection 
note also Ezek. 16:48-55,60-63. 

IT WAS HIDDEN FROM THEM. 



Why did not the people of Chorazin, Bethsaida 
and Capernaum believe on the Lord Jesus? Why did 
not his teachings and miracles convince them? The 
Apostle Paul answers the question, saying, "The God 
of this world hath blinded the minds of them that believe 
not" (2 Cor. 4:4), and our Lord Jesus' words 
are in harmony with this, for, after upbraiding the 
people as above, he rendered thanks to God nevertheless, 
that his gospel was hidden from many, the wise 
and the prudent and the self-satisfied, and revealed unto 
"babes"— the honest-hearted, the unsophisticated. 
"Even so, Father, for so it seemed good in thy sight." 

To the majority of people, misunderstanding the 
divine plan of the ages, our Lord's prayer here recorded 
must seem strange indeed. They cannot see how 
or why he should thank God that some could not and 
did not receive his message. It is utterly impossible 
to harmonize such a statement with the common, but 
unscriptural, false views, that the blinded people of 
Chorazin, Bethsaida, Capernaum, Tyre, Sidon and 
Sodom, had gone or were going straight to a place of 
eternal torment. Had such been the case, our Lord 
could never have said, I thank thee, Father, that thou 
hast hidden these things from them: rather he would 
have entreated the Father for the opening of the eyes 
of their blinded understandings, for the immediate 
binding of Satan that he should blind and deceive the 
people no more: and he would have been excusable for 
making frantic efforts in harmony with such a prayer; 
just as some to-day are entirely excusable for the frantic 



and unscriptural efforts which they make in their 
endeavor to have the blinded minds of to-day recognize 
our Master. 

But all such efforts and prayers would be vain, 
because God has a definitely fixed plan, respecting this 
great work which he is accomplishing amongst men. 
In accordance with that plan, the present time is merely 
for the selection of the Kingdom class: and because 
the wise and prudent and self-satisfied of the present 
time, are not the class which the Lord wishes for his 
Kingdom, therefore Satan is permitted to blind them 
to the truth, because of their unfitness for it. But God 
is finding the very class which he desires to find, meek 
and poor in spirit, to be heirs with Christ in the Kingdom; 
and these, "babes" so far as human craft and 
policy are concerned, are kept from the Adversary's 



*MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOL. I., Chap. 8. 

R2268 : page 60 

blinding influences, and on the contrary have the truth 
revealed to them;— "They shall all be taught of God." 
Our Lord did not want to receive any except those 
whom the Father drew to him, "No man cometh unto 
me except the Father which sent me draw him, and 
whosoever cometh unto me [drawn by the Father] I 
will in no wise cast out." (John 6:44.) This is the 
sense of verse 27. "All [that come unto me] are given 
to me by my Father, and no one can recognize the Son 
except by the [aid of the] Father, neither recognizes 

R2268 : page 61 

any man the Father, except by the [aid of the] Son, 
and he to whom the Son will reveal him." 

The class that the Father and the Son unitedly 
are seeking during this Gospel age, are a class who 
feel oppressed of the Devil, oppressed by sin, and who 
desire the great Deliverer and his salvation. Such 
"babes," and from the human standpoint foolish, are 
invited to accept Jesus; to believe in him as their Redeemer, 
and to follow in his footsteps as their guide: 
"Come unto me all ye that labor and are heavy laden 
and I will give you rest." The rest and peace which 
the Lord gives are not entirely, nor sometimes at all, 
physical rest and earthly peace. This, he himself declares, 
saying, "My peace I give unto you, not as the 
world giveth." The peace which our Lord gives is a 
rest of heart, a trust, a confidence— based not upon 
things that are seen, which are temporal, transitory, 
unreliable, but based upon things that are not seen, 
the eternal things which can be grasped only with the 
arms of faith and seen only with the eye of faith; but 



here is rest and here is peace, such as the poor troubled 
world knows not of, and cannot understand. "Godliness 
with contentment is great gain." 

Our Lord calls us to freedom from sin, and from 
Satan, the great task -master; and the Apostle urges us 
to "stand fast in the liberty wherewith Christ makes 
free" indeed; and yet it is a great mistake that some 
make, to suppose that there are no restraints or limitations 
upon the "new creatures in Christ Jesus:" our 
Redeemer has a yoke and a burden for all who become 
his followers. (Verses 29,30.) The yoke, however, 
is easy for those whom it fits; and with that yoke the 
burden is light. The yoke is a self-imposed one, very 
different, therefore, from the yoke of Satan, which is 
fastened upon his slaves, the galling yoke of sin, attached 
to which is a heavy penalty or burden,— sorrow, 
death. Those who accept Christ and whom he sets 
free from Satan's yoke are invited to "take" the yoke 
of Christ and to put it upon themselves. This means 
consecration, the binding of ourselves, our time, our influence, 
means, opportunities, all, to the Lord's service. 
The burden it brings might be esteemed a heavy 
one by some: it is esteemed very heavy by the world 
who know not of the counterbalancing peace and joy 
and blessing. Our burden means, sometimes, the loss 
of all earthly things which we have held most sacred 
and most dear; yet even such a burden is light by reason 
of the joy and peace of the Lord counterbalancing 
it. As the Apostle Paul expressed it, we may well 
count all our losses, all our crosses, our burdens, as 
light afflictions, because of the excellency of the knowledge 
of divine favors and blessings which we have received 
through Christ Jesus our Lord. Yea, we count 
all things that we have sacrificed for the Lord and his 
cause but as loss and dross that we may win Christ and 
joint-heirship with him in his Kingdom. 



R2268 : page 61 

"REMEMBER THE SABBATH DAY." 

-MAR. 6.-MATT. 12:1-13.— 

"The Son of Man is Lord even of the Sabbath day." 

THOSE who have little of the truth are sometimes 

great sticklers for formalities. This was true 

of the Jews at the first advent. Feast days, fast days, 

sabbaths and tithings were very carefully attended to 

by them but the weightier matters of the Law, respecting 

justice and love to God and man, were sadly neglected. 

This is our Lord's testimony. So to-day there 

are people who give strict attention to church attendance 

and to various religious formalities, who wholly 



overlook the real spirit and intention of the Scriptural 
commands. Their attention to the formalities seems 
to satisfy them that they are good, as good as need be, 
and thus hinders them from making a thorough 
reformation of life, and seeking to bring all its affairs 
into harmony with the divine law, love to God and for 
our fellows. 

The Jews of our Lord's day laid great stress upon 
Sabbath keeping, which fact, according to some people 
of our day, should have been ample evidence of their 
holiness and full harmony with the entire Law,— but 
such was not the estimation of our Lord. They even 
undertook to chide our Lord and his disciples respecting 
neglect of the Sabbath, altho they generally admitted 
the blamelessness of their characters. On one of 
these occasions in which reproof was administered by 
the Pharisees, our Lord took up the subject and explained 
it, showing that they had wholly misapprehended 
the divine intention respecting the Sabbath. 
It was not intended to be a burden but a blessing; it 
was not given for God's sake, but for man's sake. He 
called them to witness that his disciples were doing no 
harm, that they were merely satisfying their hunger, 
lawfully. He then proves the correctness of his position, 
from authorities they would be willing to accept. 
They recognized David as a holy man approved of God, 
and he pointed out to them how that David under 
stress of hunger, had eaten bread that otherwise 
would have been unlawful to eat. Then he laid down 
the general principles, that altho labor was prohibited 
under the Law, it was in order to bring rest, comfort, 
refreshment and blessing, and not to bring hunger, 
inconvenience and distress upon either man or beast. 

R2268 : page 62 

He cited them to the fact that certain work was done 

on the Sabbath by the priests, and under divine direction, 

and that this proved that labor done sacrificially 

for the assistance of others, as well as for their own 

necessities, could be no violation of the fourth commandment. 

After declaring himself fully qualified to decide 

the Sabbath question, he tells them that, watching out 

for the letter of the Law, they were neglecting its 

spirit, and should learn that the Lord desires mercy, 

sympathy, pity, love, more than he desires sacrifice, 

and consequently that any deeds of mercy, sympathy, 

pity, love, done on the Sabbath day, are more pleasing 

in God's sight, than were those sacrifices which were 

performed on the Sabbath as well as on other days, in 

the typical temple. With this proper view before their 

minds, they would not have condemned his disciples, 

whom he, the Master of the Sabbath, did not condemn. 

The blindness of the Pharisees respecting the 
proper interpretation of the Law of the Sabbath, is 
shown by the fact, that even after our Lord had given 



them this explanation, they evidently still supposed 
that while it would be right for a priest in the temple 
to labor in the offering of a sacrifice, it would be contrary 
to the same law for someone to heal the sick and 
relieve distress. Our Lord, however, soon discovered 
to them the error if not the hypocrisy of their own 
hearts. He well knew that in their love of gain, 
they would help a sheep or an ass out of a pit on the 
Sabbath day because it represented value, and its remaining 
in the pit over the Sabbath might mean its 
death, and hence a financial loss. Thus he showed 
them that they well knew how to interpret the Law 
correctly, liberally, when it touched their purse, but 
that they were so lacking in mercy, sympathy, love, 
that they failed to properly interpret it as respects acts 
of mercy, where financial loss or gain were not involved. 

Our Lord, as a Jew, was bound under the Jewish 
Covenant so long as he lived; because he did not in 
any sense of the word make an end of the Law Covenant 
until his death— there he became "the end of the 
Law [Covenant] for righteousness [justification], to 
every one that believeth." Consequently, during his 
ministry it would have been unlawful, sinful, for our 
Lord to have violated any of the terms of the Law 
Covenant. We are therefore to understand from the 
discourse here presented to us that the Jews, while 
neglecting the weightier matters and the real interest 
of the Law Covenant, had fallen into certain habits of 
thought and certain customs which were perversions of 
the Law and wholly inconsistent with its real sentiment. 
Phariseeism had become formalism in many 
respects. It is claimed that according to their definition 
of Sabbath-breaking the disciples had threshed the 
wheat when they rubbed it in their hands. So also it 
was claimed, and so argued with apparent seriousness, 
that if any one walked upon the grass with nailed 
shoes, upon the Sabbath day, that would be a violation 
of the Law, because that would produce a kind of 
threshing, since one might trample out some of the 
seeds. With equal seriousness it was claimed that to 
catch a flea upon one's person would be a kind of hunting 
and thus a violation of the Sabbath. It is even 
said to have been debated whether or not a fresh egg 
should be eaten on the first day of the week since it 
implied work on the part of the hen on the seventh 
day; and quite probably if clocks had been invented 
at that time they would all have been stopped over the 
Sabbath. Our Lord shows by his criticism that this 
was merely hypocrisy and self-delusion on the part of 
the Pharisees, who found it easier to make a show of 
righteousness in such trifling things than to consider 

R2269 : page 62 

and seek to obey the weighty matters of the Law- 
justice and mercy. Our Lord showed them that God, 



as he had foretold, had more pleasure in mercy than 
in sacrifice and that if they had his spirit in respect to 
the matter, they would not be hypocritically condemning 
their fellow creatures who were really doing no 
wrong, nor yet justifying and priding themselves in 
their superstition and hypocrisy. 

This was a prelude to what followed, and prepared 
the way. For coming into the synagogue the same 
day, our Lord found a poor cripple who needed help, 
and while the Pharisees were looking on, waiting for 
a chance to condemn him for violating the Sabbath according 
to their false assertions respecting it, he took 
the opportunity to administer a rebuke before performing 
a cure, realizing, no doubt, that the effect upon 
his hearers would thereby be more favorable. 

He knew what to teach them— he knew their tender 
spots of selfishness; and that however much they might 
delude themselves and others in theorizing respecting 
observance of the Sabbath, when it would come down 
to a matter of loss or gain they would be well able to 
rid themselves of their superstition and act accordingly, 
hence he put the question whether or not they would 
deliver a sheep or an ass on the Sabbath day, if it 
should fall into a pit. He and they well knew what 
they would do, what was the custom, and hence, 
without waiting for an answer, but taking it for granted, 
he proceeds to show that the poor cripple before 
him was much better than the sheep or the ass, and 
that he had been trapped into sin and sickness by the 
Adversary, and that if it were right to deliver the sheep 
or the ass, much more would it be right on the Sabbath 
day to help a fellow creature in distress. 

Having thus answered their difficulties in advance 
and reproved their wrong spirit, our Lord proceeded 
to heal the cripple and thus to manifest beforehand, 

R2269 : page 63 

the glorious power and blessings that will come more 
abundantly with the establishment of his Kingdom— 
during the Millennium. 

JEWISH VS. CHRISTIAN SABBATH. 



Every human obligation is based upon some divine 
law. Looking to the Jewish Sabbath, we find that it 
was the seventh day of the week, and was made obligatory 
through a divine command— being one of the 
ten commandments given to Israel at Mt. Sinai, consequently 
it was not optional with them how they should 
keep it, but was obligatory upon the terms explicitly 
stated. To violate it, the Fourth Commandment of 
the Decalogue, was to violate one point of the Law; 
and to violate one point of the Law was to violate the 



entire Law; because the offer of eternal life to the Jew 
was based upon his absolute obedience to this Law— 
not his obedience to a majority of its precepts, but his 
obedience to all its precepts, without a solitary exception. 
As we have heretofore seen, however, and as 
our Lord and the apostle expressly declare, no Israelite 
did keep or could keep inviolately all the items of their 
Law, and consequently, according to their covenant, 
not one of them was ever justified to eternal life. In 
view of this, the particularity of the Pharisees, that 
even a good deed should not be performed on that day, 
is as amusing and as foolish as their claim that they 
were holy, thoroughly acceptable to God, because of 
their over-particularity in the outward formal and typical 
features of the Law, while they neglected the spirit 
of the whole Law— supreme love to God and love of 
their neighbors as themselves. 

The Christian has come into relationship to God, 
not under the terms of the Law Covenant made with 
the Jew, but under the terms of the New Covenant, 
sealed and ratified with the precious blood of Christ; 
he therefore has nothing whatever to do with the terms 
and conditions of the Jewish Covenant which bore only 
upon Israel after the flesh. The fact that by the deeds 
of the Law Covenant, no flesh was justified in God's 
sight (Rom. 3:20) leads us to rejoice that we have a 
"better" covenant with God through Christ,— sealed 
by a greater sin-offering and accompanied by "better 
promises." Ours, the New Covenant, is very much 
higher than the Law Covenant, just as its Mediator, 
Christ, is much higher than was the mediator of the 
Law Covenant, Moses; as also spiritual Israel is much 
higher every way than was fleshly Israel. The basis 
of our covenant is not the Ten Commandments, written 
in stone, delivered at Sinai, but a much higher statement 
of that divine law— the spirit of that law, the 
meaning, the intent, the grand completeness of the 
divine law, of which the Ten Commandments was but 
an incomplete statement brought down to the measurable 
comprehension of that people. Our New commandment, 
our new law, as expressed by our Master, 
Jesus, is not composed of a number of threats, Thou 
shalt not! Thou shalt not! but is composed of one 
commandment, Thou shalt love— the Lord thy God and 
thy fellow creatures. 

Love is the fulfilling, not only of the Jewish code, 
but a fulfilling also of the entire Law of God, as it relates 
to himself and to all his creatures. In this new 
commandment, the basis of the New Covenant, there 
is no reference whatever to a Sabbath day. Nevertheless, 
as the Ten Commandments to Israel and their 
Covenant and their mediator, foreshadowed this higher 
law of Love and our New Covenant and our Great 
Mediator, so we find that the Sabbath feature of the 
Jewish Law has an antitype on a higher plane in the 
Christian's experience,— a better Sabbath. In the 



type it was a physical rest to the natural, typical Israelite; 
in the antitype it is a mental rest, a heart rest to 
the antitypical Israelite. As the Jewish Sabbath day 
typified the rest of heart, the joy and peace which 
Christians may possess through faith in Christ— in 
realizing their sins forgiven, their iniquities pardoned 
and themselves reconciled to God through the death 
of his Son— so also the Law of the New Covenant, 
Love, commands all who are in Christ Jesus to rest in 
full faith in the great work finished for us, by our 
Mediator, at Calvary. As the Apostle declares, "Being 
justified by faith we have peace [rest] with God 
through our Lord Jesus Christ." Thus we enjoy the 
rest or Sabbath of our New Covenant. Thus the new 
Mediator has provided for the spiritual Israel a very 
much better rest than that which was provided by the 
typical mediator for the typical Israel. As seven is a 
type of perfection, of completeness, so the seventh day 
rest was a type of the complete or perfect rest which we 
have in Christ, which Israel after the flesh never did 
and never could enjoy. 

The Sabbath or rest under the New Covenant is 
not merely for a day— alas, how weary we would be if 
we could only rest in the sufficiency of Christ, one day 
in seven! But we may rest continually in Christ, 
"every day and every hour"— trusting not to our own 
sufficiency, but to his. Thus we rest from works of 
self-justification, from all efforts to justify ourselves 
before God. Accepting the justification freely offered 
to us through the precious blood, and resting in it continually, 
we give our little all of loving service on the 
Lord's side, and in opposition to sin; not to secure rest 
and justification, but as thank-offerings that we have 
already received this blessing through divine grace. 
Thus, as the Apostle declares, "We rest from our 
works as God did from his." God gave over the matter 
of the world's redemption into the hands of Christ, 

R2269 : page 64 

and we read that "the Father judgeth no man, but 
hath committed all judgment unto the Son." Likewise 
we have committed all our affairs into his hands, 
and are resting in him— keeping a continual Sabbath 
all the days of the week and all the weeks of the year. 

As respects physical rest, however, we are under 
no commands respecting this so far as the Lord and 
his Word are concerned, except that our Law of Love 
requires that we shall glorify God in our bodies and 
our spirits which are his, and hence that we shall observe 
such rules and regulations in our physical systems 
in relation to our food and clothing and rest as 
would best qualify us and enable us to perform the 
divine service. While we would be glad that all people 
might recognize this matter from this standpoint 
of the New Covenant, yet we know that none can view 



it and observe it from this standpoint, except those 
who have entered into the New Covenant relationship 
with God, and these we know are comparatively few 
of the world's population— altho our hope is that in 
God's due time, the Millennial age, all mankind shall 
be brought to the knowledge and appreciation of this 
New Covenant, and may then, if they will, enjoy all 
of its provisions including this rest of faith, the antitypical 
Sabbath— which can be enjoyed only by God's 
faithful people. 

Meantime, however, the world of mankind, amongst 
whom we live, have through various misconceptions, 
both of the Law Covenant and the New Covenant, set 
apart one day of the week as a Sabbath or rest day, 
and as Christians who enjoy the real Sabbath of rest 
and peace in Christ, we are glad to avail ourselves of 
the regulations of the world to abstain from worldly 
labor and to devote ourselves to spiritual works, spiritual 
feasting and spiritual upbuilding of character in 
righteousness on that day. But while recognizing and 
observing it carefully, because it is the law of the land, 
and while pleased to have this special opportunity for 
Christian fellowship and spiritual cooperation, we deny 
in toto that it is of divine obligation. And while we 
should observe whatever day might be appointed by 
the "powers that be," we are especially glad that they 
have by common consent adopted the day, which we 
prefer to all others because it commemorates the resurrection 
of our Lord and Master, and hence the beginning 
of our rest of faith in him. 



R2270 : page 64 

INTERESTING LETTERS. 



California. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I have just returned 
from the trip to San Jose, and I assure you there has 
been no time lost. I have been greatly blessed in 
meeting those in the truth all round. I am blessed 
and more satisfied with and in the work all the time, 
and tho the opponents get bolder and more numerous, 
it only forwards me on stronger in the work, 
while I look at the things that are not seen— except to 
the eye of faith— which are eternal. 

If I have kept the right account in the last 33 
months, I have worked in 72 towns, traveled with the 
horse and rig 8,000 miles, made 18,000 calls, given 
away 40,000 tracts, sold 4,500 DAWNS, taken 125 TOWER 
subscriptions, met 400 interested ones, and baptized 
24. I know forty who have come into the truth and 
are now helping to spread it. Those who have come 



out are all the way from preachers to infidels. This 
is encouraging, tho I should have done better, and trust 
I will from this on. 

In Christian love, I am your colaborer in the 
harvest work of our King. O. A. FLOREY. 

page 64 

New York. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I write to tell you of 
the most blessed time we had during Brother Draper's 
visit to us. His talks and his fine Christian character 
impressed us very much, and we want to express our 
gratitude for the helpful occasion. He has a remarkable 
talent for presenting the truth; so easy do the 
words flow and so forceful, that they impress the candid 
hearer. He spoke Saturday evening at Troy and 
Sunday morning at my home to sixteen of us on 
the "Narrow Way," and in the evening on the upper 
features of the chart to about twenty-five, mostly interested 
ones. The talks did me much good, as I learned 
how to arrange the talks, and will make use of his 
plan when I have occasion to speak in public. A number 
of us expect to go to Albany to hear him again on 
Wednesday evening at Bro. Fletcher's home. 

I would say that our little church here is progressing 
on the way, daily striving to put down the old man 
and endeavoring to build up the new man. 

There is a fair in progress in the Catholic church 
here, and a few days ago the priest gave it out that 
every merchant had given a present to the fair, except 
one (myself), and forbade his people trading 
with me. Of course I know that the dear Lord has 
not promised us temporal prosperity, so if this affects 
me, why, the Lord knows what is best for development 
of character. I count it all glory to suffer even a little 
for the truth's sake. 

I want to express myself in regard to the work 
that Bro. Draper is doing. I think it is one of the 
best opportunities to help on the cause, and I almost 
envy the dear Brother the great blessing he must get 
in going around and meeting and helping the friends. 
What a joy his must be. 

Your brother in the most blessed truth, 
MORGAN T.LEWIS. 

New York. 
DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL: --MILLENNIAL DAWN 
has been widely read in our village of 2,200 inhabitants 
and five "orthodox" churches and is bearing some 
fruit, greatly to the worry of the "Scribes and Pharisees." 
About twenty who have been indoctrinated 
into present truth from four of the churches have meetings 
every Sabbath morning and Tuesday evening, 
and the spirit of the dear Lord is with us in a marked 
degree. We were once very influential in our different 



churches, but are now characterized as a "gang," and 
by kindred epithets. But there is an increased reading 
of the DAWNS and Tracts, and much searching of the 
Scriptures on our account, and therein we do and will 
rejoice. 

The WATCH TOWER increases in interest and usefulness, 
and I long for it more than for anything else 
in periodical literature I receive. 

Fraternally, P. H. HULST, M.D. 



page 65 
VOL. XIX. MARCH 1, 1898. No. 5. 



CONTENTS. 



The Coming Anniversary Supper 67 

Ye do Shew Forth the Lord's Death 69 

"Till He Come" 70 

Who May Partake? 71 

Only the Baptized 72 

How to Partake 73 

The Celebration at Allegheny 74 

Strong Delusion 74 

The Wheat and the Tares 77 

Interesting Letters 80 

page 66 

SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
-ADDRESS TO- 
TOWER PUBLISHING CO., BIBLE HOUSE, 58 ARCH ST., 
ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 



SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, N.Y. DRAFT, MONEY ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS: 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age or accident, or other 
adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, if they 
send a Postal Card each December, stating their cases and requesting the paper. 



R2270 : page 67 

THE COMING ANNIVERSARY SUPPER. 



COMMEMORATIVE OF OUR LORD AND HIS DEATH FOR OUR SINS. 



THE Supper which our Lord instituted as a remembrancer 

of his great sacrifice for our sins, 

and not for ours only, but also for the sins of the whole 

world, is striking in its appropriateness and its simplicity. 

The world's great men have always sought 

very different means of perpetuating their memories. 



In whatever way they would remind their followers of 
their merits and their greatness, it surely has not been 
by a reminder and commemoration of their death— 
especially if, as in our Lord's case, it was a death of 
ignominy and shame, a death as a malefactor and criminal. 
Another, more probably, would have left instructions 
for medals to be struck commemorating some 
of his mighty works; such, for instance, as the 
awakening of Lazarus, or the stilling of the tempest on 
the sea, or the triumphal entry into Jerusalem, while 
the multitude strewed the way with palm branches, 
and cried, Hosanna to the King, the heir of David! — 

But our Lord chose as his remembrancer that which 
represented what was, in his and in God's estimation, 
his mightiest work— his sin-offering on our behalf; and 
that which his real followers, and they alone, would 
appreciate more than any other feature of his mission. 
True, his followers would have appreciated something 
commemorative of his wonderful words or works, but 
the worldly also could have appreciated those things. 
But not so the value of his death as our ransom-sacrifice, 
the basis of our reconciliation and atonement, which 
has never yet been fully apprehended by any but the 
consecrated little flock— the elect. And it was for these 
that the remembrancer was arranged and instituted. 
And tho a Judas was present, he was given a sop and 
went out from the others before the supper was ended; 
thus no doubt representing that in the close of this age, 
before the little flock will have finished their part of 
having fellowship with their Lord in his suffering, the 
sop of truth will have become so strong as to drive 
forth from the company and communion of the faithful 
all who do not rightly appreciate and value the ransom 
accomplished by the Lamb of God for the taking away 
of the sins of the world.— 1 John 2:19. 

The date of the Paschal Supper at which the Jews 
ate a lamb, commemorative of their deliverance from 
Egyptian bondage and of the sparing of their first-born 
at that time, was of course calculated by the Jewish 
method of reckoning time; viz., lunar time. (Exod. 12:2-14.) 
Instead of dividing the months as we do, 
they allowed the new moon to mark the beginning of 
a new month; and the difference between the sun time 
(solar time) and moon time (lunar time) was equalized 
every year by always beginning the new year with 
the appearing of the new moon about the Spring 
equinox. In celebrating their religious festivals the 
Jews still maintain this method of reckoning. And 
since our Lord, the apostles and the early church followed 
this same rule for determining the date for the 
annual celebration of our Lord's Last Supper, we also 
follow it. 

The first moon after the vernal equinox counts 
March 23d in Hebrew almanacs— probably Jerusalem 
obs. At 6 P.M. on that day begins the first day of 
the Jewish month Nisan, the first month of the Jewish 



sacred year. Beginning with the 1st of Nisan the 
Hebrews counted, and on the tenth day the Paschal 
lamb was chosen or selected from the flock. On the 

R2270 : page 68 

fourteenth day (the full of the moon*) "between 
evenings" (at any time between 6 P.M. of the 13th 
and 6 P.M. of the 14th of Nisan) the lamb was to be 
killed and eaten. On the fifteenth day their Passover 
Feast began, lasting seven days, the first and the seventh 
days being observed as specially holy, as 
Sabbath days or "high" days. (Exod. 12:16.) On 
the sixteenth day the omer of the first-fruits of the 
barley harvest was offered to the Lord, and fifty days 
after (Pentecost Day) they offered before the Lord two 
wave loaves.— Lev. 23:17. 

These things done by the Jews every year were, 
as we have already seen, types of greater and grander 
occurrences. The choosing of the lamb on the tenth 
day typified how, if Israel would be blessed and recognized 
as first-born in the antitypical Passover, they 
must accept Jesus then, five days before that Passover 
Feast, and four days before his crucifixion. And 
it evidently was on that very date that our Lord offered 
himself finally to that nation— when, as their King, he 
rode into the city on the colt. (Compare John 12:1,12.) 
They, however, neglected to receive the Lamb 
of God, at once were rejected, and ceased from being 
the typical first-born. 

The 14th day (which this year will begin at 6 
o'clock on the evening of Tuesday, April 5th, and last 
until 6 P.M. of the 6th) was the day in which the 
Paschal lamb was to be killed and eaten; and the 
Hebrew counting of time (doubtless divinely arranged 
for this very purpose) permitted the eating of the 



*As the Sun is a symbol of Christ's Kingdom, so the Moon 
symbolized Israel as a nation. (Rev. 12:1.) The 12 and sometimes 
13 lunations symbolize the tribes of that nation. The 
moon was at its full at the time of Christ's crucifixion. There 
it immediately began to wane and waned for as long as it had 
previously increased. So Christ's death was the turning point 
between the two equal parts of Israel's history. See M. DAWN, 
VOL. II., p. 218. 

As those Jews who were unclean, and hence could not keep 
the Passover properly in its proper season, were permitted to do 
so on the 14th of the second month (at the full of the next 
moon— Num. 9:8-13), the lesson taught seems to be that all 
prevented (by ignorance) from accepting Messiah as their Redeemer, 
when offered to them, will have an opportunity of doing 
so when, in the times of restitution of all things, their nation 
(moon) shall again be full of blessings in the latter harvest. 



R2271 : page 68 

"Last Supper" upon the same day that the Lord was 
crucified. The Passover supper of lamb and herbs 
and unleavened bread (fulfilling the Law, which was 
not ended until the cross) was eaten shortly after 6 P.M. 
Then followed the institution of the Memorial 
Supper of bread and wine, representative of the body 
and blood of the antitypical lamb. This thereafter, as 
often as the occasion returned (yearly), was to be observed 
by his followers instead of the eating of the 
literal lamb— as the commemoration of the antitypical 
lamb and the greater passing over of the antitypical 
first-born which his blood effects. 

The waving of the barley sheaf of first-fruits on 
the 16th of Nisan ("the morrow after the Sabbath" 
or Passover of the 15th-Lev. 23:5,6,11,15,16) 
typified the resurrection of Christ our Lord, as "the 
first fruits of them that slept."*— 1 Cor. 15:20. 

The two wave loaves offered on the fiftieth day, Pentecost, 
represented the presenting of the Church before 
God and its acceptance through the merit of the great 
High Priest, indicated by the anointing of the holy 
spirit at Pentecost. The Church really is but "one 
loaf" (1 Cor. 10:17), the two loaves representing the 
same thing as the two goats presented on the Day of 
Atonement. It indicated that, altho all presented 
were acceptable to God through Christ Jesus, he yet 
knew that all presented would not come up to the condition 
of faithfulness to the end. The two loaves represented, 
therefore, the two classes of the consecrated 
—the overcoming little flock and the "great company" 
of the consecrated servants of God who do not make 
the high calling theirs, by overcoming the world as 
they might and should do. 

The method of calculating the date for Good Friday 
and Easter Sunday in vogue among Episcopalians 
and Roman Catholics differs from the foregoing in this: 
They celebrate as Easter Sunday the first Sunday following 
the first full moon after the Spring equinox, 
and the preceding Friday is recognized as Good Friday. 
This method of counting was instituted by the 
Council of Nice, A.D. 325, as instead of the Jewish 
method which we recognize. But the name "Passover" 
continued to be used (not Eastern- Sunday)— 
for a long time; it was after Papacy had become established 
in political influence, and the ignorant pagans 
began to flock to the system which enjoyed the favor 



*Here is the strongest possible confirmation of the correctness 
of the position taken in MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOL. IL-that 
our Lord was not three full 24-hour days in the tomb, but only 
parts of the three days and nights; that he was crucified on the 
day corresponding to our Friday afternoon, and arose on what 



corresponded to our Sunday morning. The showing of this type 

that the Paschal lamb was to be killed sometime during the 14th 

of Nisan, and the wave offering of the sheaf of first-fruits was 

to occur on the 16th, should settle the matter for all. It agrees 

with the repeated statement (1 Cor. 15:4; Luke 24:46) that our 

Lord rose on "the third day, according to the Scriptures." This 

Scripture concerning the first-fruits is the only one which we 

recall as in any way pointing out the time of our Lord's resurrection. 

Then, too, the fact that history, as represented in the 

traditions and customs, points out Good Friday and Easter Sunday 

as celebrations of our Lord's death and resurrection, should 

have some weight on so trivial a matter, unless some motive or 

reason for misstating the dates can be assigned. The only 

Scripture seeming to oppose all these facts is the declaration that 

our Lord would be three days and three nights in the earth; 

and the only explanation that can be offered to this is, that the 

expression is used in a general and not in a specific manner, the 

nights being mentioned to preclude the idea of any cessation of 

death until the third day. Thus understood, the expression 

would signify that during portions of three days and nights our 

Lord would be in the tomb. At all events the evidence is overwhelming 

that he died on the 14th of Nisan and rose on the 

16th— the third day after. 

+The use of the word Easter in Acts 12:4 is a mistranslation; 
it should be rendered Passover.— See Revised Version. 

R2271 : page 69 

of the government, that the name "Easter" was substituted 

for "Passover," because about the same time 

as the Passover the pagans had been in the habit of 

celebrating the festival of their goddess Easter (German 

Ostera)— Estera, goddess of the East. This was 

one of the many methods adopted by an ambitious 

"clergy" for gaining numbers and influence. 

Sometimes the two methods of counting, Jewish 
and Roman Catholic, indicate the same days, but not 
often; and occasionally their results are nearly a moon 
or month apart. 

The Jews will celebrate as a "feast" the Passover 
week, beginning April 7th (at 6 o'clock P.M. April 
6th), the 15th of Nisan. We in the Memorial Supper 
do not celebrate the feast-week but the day previous, 
the 14th of Nisan, beginning on the evening of the 
13th (April 5th, '98) which is the anniversary of the 
proper date for killing and eating the Paschal lamb— 
the anniversary of the death of our Lord Jesus; the 
true Lamb of God, because of whose sacrifice we the 
"Church of the first-born" are passed over from death 
unto life— already by faith or reckonedly, by and by 
actually in "the first resurrection." The antitype of 
the Passover Feast week is found in the rejoicing of 
heart of all the first born of true Israel— the seven days 
signifying the perfection or completeness of the joy 
and the salvation. 

We have given the details as to the counting as a 



general answer to many questions on this subject, and 

not because of any weighty importance or bondage 

attaching to the exact anniversary day. We recognize 

no such bondage upon those made free by Christ. For 

tho desirous of observing the Memorial Supper properly, 

upon its proper anniversary, as intended by our Lord 

when he said, "This do ye [every time you celebrate 

this yearly memorial] in remembrance [lit., for commemoration] 

of me," we esteem it more as a privilege 

than as a duty; and if we should err in the matter of 

selecting the day, through ignorance or misunderstanding, 

we believe the Lord would accept our good intentions, 

and forgive the error and grant his blessing. 

Indeed, we believe that the Lord owns and accepts the 

good intentions of many of his children who, because 

of erroneous teachings and human traditions, select 

various other times and seasons for celebrating this 

memorial of his death, instead of its anniversary which 

he designated. Similarly we would sympathize with 

the patriotic intentions of the man who should "celebrate" 

the independence of the United States three, 

four, or fifty times a year, forgetful of the date, or ignorant 

of the fact that the Fourth of July is the anniversary 

of the event, and was appointed as the appropriate 

date for celebrating it. 

This like other truths long buried under the rubbish 
of the dark ages, God is now making clear to his 
people. And all who are truly his people are anxious 
for the truth and the right upon this, as upon all other 
subjects revealed in God's Word. 

YE DO SHEW FORTH THE LORD'S DEATH. 



"For I received from the Lord, what I also delivered 
to you— That the Lord on the night in which he 
was delivered up took a loaf, and having given thanks, 
broke it and said, This is that body of mine, which 
is broken on your behalf; this do ye in my remembrance.' 
In like manner also, the cup, after the supper, 
saying, 'This cup is the new covenant in my blood; 
this do ye, as often as ye may drink, for my remembrance.' 
For as often as you may eat this bread or 
drink this cup you declare the death of the Lord till he 
come."-l Cor. 11:24-26. 

There is no necessity for discussing with honest 
minds what is and what is not meant by the expression 
—the Lord's death. Some, in an anxiety to get away 
from the doctrine of the ransom, or, rather, in their 
anxiety to get away from the logical deductions associated 
with the doctrine of the ransom, are claiming, 
regardless of all Scripture to the contrary, that our 
Lord Jesus had two deaths, one when he came into 
the world, and the other at Calvary; and that the 
death of the "man Christ Jesus, who gave himself a 



ransom for all," at Calvary, was of small importance 

as compared with the other. They seem willingly ignorant 

of the fact that the Scriptures declare, "In that 

he died, he died unto sin once;" and that that one 

death, and the only one ever referred to by our Lord 

or his apostles, was the death at Calvary. 

The apostles declare that he spoke of the death 
which he should accomplish at Jerusalem. This one 
and only death of our Redeemer is what is symbolized 
by this Remembrancer,— his body, his flesh broken for 
us, and of its merits and life all who would have life 
everlasting must partake. "Let no man deceive you 
by any means," on this important question. 

But as water baptism is not the important baptism, 
but only the symbol representing the real, so 
partaking of the emblematic bread and wine is only 
the symbol of the more important feast— our appropriation 
of the merit of Christ, which secures to us eternal 
life through his broken body and shed blood. Thus 
by faith accepting his finished sacrifice, and by similar 
faith, as instructed by him, appropriating to ourselves 
all the merits and perfections and rights which the 
man Christ Jesus possessed and laid down in death for 
us, we really feed our hearts upon the bread of everlasting 
life, the bread which God sent to us from 
heaven. This is the true bread of which if men will 
eat they will never die— the flesh which he gave for 

R2271 : page 70 

the life of the world, that all the dead and dying race 
may have life. This is, primarily, what the literal 
bread symbolizes and signifies to all who partake of it 
rightly and intelligently. It is a memorial of the ransom 
of Adam and his family from the bondage of sin 
and death. 

Another thought: the bread was unleavened. 
Leaven is corruption, an element of decay, hence a type 
of sin, and the decay and death which sin works in 
mankind. So, then, this symbol declares that our Lord 
Jesus was free from sin, a lamb without spot or blemish, 
"holy, harmless, undefiled." Had he been of 

R2272 : page 70 

Adamic stock, had he received his life in the usual 
way from any earthly father, he, too, would have been 
leavened with Adamic sin, as are all other men; but 
his life came unblemished from a higher, heavenly 
nature, changed to earthly conditions; hence he is 
called "the bread from heaven." (John 6:41.) Let 
us then appreciate the pure, unleavened, undefiled 
bread which God has provided, and so let us eat of 
him— by eating and digesting the truth, and especially 
his truth— appropriating to ourselves, by faith, his 
righteousness; and let us recognize him as both the 



way and the life. 

The Apostle, by divine revelation, communicates 
to us a further meaning in this remembrancer. He 
shows that not only did the loaf represent our Lord 
Jesus, individually, but that after we have thus partaken 
of him (after we have been justified by appropriating 
his righteousness), we, by consecration, become 
associated with him as part of the one broken loaf- 
food for the world. (1 Cor. 10:16.) This suggests 
the thought of our privilege as justified believers to 
share now in the sufferings and death of Christ, the 
condition upon which we may become joint-heirs with 
him of future glories, and associates in the great work 
of blessing and giving life to all the families of the earth. 

This same thought is expressed by the Apostle 
repeatedly and under various figures, but none of them 
more forceful than this, that the Church, as a whole, 
is the "one loaf" now being broken. It is a striking 
illustration of our union and fellowship with our Head. 

We quote: "Because there is one loaf, we, the 
many [persons] are one body; for we all partake of 
the one loaf." "The loaf which we break, is it not 
the participation of the body of the anointed one?"— 
1 Cor. 10:16,17.-Diaglott. 

The "fruit of the vine" represents the sacrificed 
life given by our Lord. "This is my blood [symbol 
of life given up in death] of the new covenant, shed 
for many, FOR THE REMISSION of sins." "Drink ye 
all of it. "-Matt. 26:27,28. 

It was by the giving up of his life as a ransom for 
the life of the Adamic race, which sin had forfeited, 
that a right to LIFE may come to men through faith 
and obedience under the New Covenant. (Rom. 5:18,19.) 
The shed blood was the "ransom [price] for 
ALL," which was paid for all by our Redeemer himself; 
but his act of handing the cup to the disciples, 
and asking them to drink of it, was an invitation to 
them to become partakers of his sufferings, or, as Paul 
expresses it, to "fill up that which is behind of the 
afflictions of Christ." (Col. 1:24.) It was the offer to 
us that if we, after being justified by faith, voluntarily 
partake of the sufferings of Christ, by espousing his 
cause, it will be reckoned to us as tho we had part in 
his sacrifice. "The cup of blessing, for which we bless 
God, is it not a participation of the blood [shed blood 
-death] of the Anointed one?" (1 Cor. 10:16- 
Diaglott.) Would that we all might realize the value 
of the "cup," and could bless God for an opportunity 
of sharing with Christ his "cup" of sufferings and 
shame: all such may be assured that they will be glorified 
together with him.— Rom. 8:17. 

Our Lord also attached this significance to the 
"cup," indicating that it signified our participation in 
his dishonor, our share in his sacrifice— the death of 
our humanity. For instance, when asked by two of 
his disciples for a promise of future glory in his throne, 



he answered them: "Ye know not what ye ask; are 
ye able to drink of the cup that I shall drink of?" On 
their hearty avowal he answered, "Ye shall indeed 
drink of my cup." The juice of the grape not only 
speaks of the crushing of the grape till blood comes 
forth, but it also speaks of an after refreshment; and 
so we who now share the "sufferings of Christ" shall 
shortly share also his glories, honors and immortality— 
when we drink the new wine with him in the Kingdom. 

"TILL HE COME." 



"Till he come." What is the full significance of 
this expression? 

Since our Lord who instituted the Memorial Supper 
placed no limit upon its observance, this expression by 
the Apostle is not to be understood as limiting the 
length of time in which it will be appropriate to commemorate 
the death of our Lord Jesus, our ransom 
sacrifice, and our consecration with him to sacrifice. 
Rather, he is showing that it was not to be considered 
a limited arrangement, for a few years, but was to be 
continually observed until the Lord's second coming. 
Looking down to and speaking of the second coming 
of our Lord, the Apostle includes in his expression the 
gathering and exaltation with Christ of his Church or 
Kingdom to rule and bless the world. This is even 
yet a common and proper way of speaking of matters 
so closely identified and so dependent one upon the 
other. The Christ, Head and body, is coming to rule 

R2272 : page 71 

the world in power and great glory. The presence of 
the Lord or Head is necessary first; then commences 
the change of the sleeping members of his body, the 
sifting of the living members, and their gradual gathering 
together unto him. 

Even tho the Kingdom may be considered as begun 
from the time the King began the exercise of his 
great power (Rev. 11:17) in 1878, it will not be "set 
up," in the full sense of the word, until the last member 
of the Kingdom has been changed or glorified— 
until the breaking of the "loaf," the Church, Head 
and body, is completed. While one member suffers 
the body suffers; while one member is unglorified the 
Kingdom is not fully come into power and dominion. 

It is the coming of Christ as including the full exaltation 
of his Church or Kingdom that the Apostle 
evidently meant when he said, "As often as you may 
eat this [Passover] bread and drink this cup, you declare 
the death of the Lord [as your hope and confidence] 
till he come. The same thought of the Kingdom 
glory being the end of the symbol may be gathered 



from our Lord's own words on the occasion of the 
institution of the memorial— "I will not drink henceforth 
of this fruit of the vine, until that day when I 
drink it new with you in my Father's Kingdom."— 
Matt. 26:29. 

And surely if it were ever proper and expedient 
for those who believe that our Lord's death was the 
ransom-price for sinners to confess it— to show it forth 
as the basis of all their hopes— it is now, when this 
foundation doctrine of God's Word is being traduced 
and misrepresented. 

Let all who hold fast the confidence of faith in his 
precious blood [his sacrificed life] as the propitiation 
[satisfaction] for our sins, and not for ours only, but 
also for the sins of the whole world, be more zealous 
and fervent than ever before in confessing this great 
truth; "for even Christ our Passover [sacrifice] is slain; 
therefore, let us keep the feast." None of the nominal 
first-born shall be passed over, and become members 
of the Church of the first-born in glory, except those 
who, during this night, abide under the blood, and 
partake of the merits of the Lamb of God which taketh 
away the sin of the world,— just as in the type.— 
Exod. 12:7,8,13. 

WHO MAY PARTAKE? 



The Lord's Supper is not for the world, nor for 
merely nominal believers, but only for those who, 
(1) accepting of Christ as their Redeemer and sin-bearer, 
are (2) consecrated to him and his service. 
But it is not for us— nor for any man or set of men— 
to decide who may and who may not partake. It is our 
duty to point out from the Word of the Lord what are 
the proper qualifications for participation in the "cup" 
and in the "loaf," and then to say as did the Apostle, 
Let every man examine himself, and then, if he think 
proper, let him partake.— 1 Cor. 11:28. 

Now that God's people are emerging from the 
errors of the dark ages, when this Memorial can be 
more clearly understood, the judging or examining of 
one's self can be more thorough than ever before. Let 
each ask himself;— 

(1) Do I believe the Scripture teaching that I, 

as a member of the human family, was under that condemnation 
to death which passed upon all because of 
original sin? 

(2) Do I believe that my only hope of escape 
from that condemnation of sin and death was through 
the ransom-sacrifice of the man Christ Jesus, my Lord? 

(3) Do I believe he gave himself— his flesh and 
blood, his humanity— as my ransom-price, pouring out 

his soul unto death, making his soul a sin-offering (Isa. 53:10,12) 
on this behalf? 



(4) Do I see that the consecration to death, made 
at Jordan when he was baptized, was fulfilled by his 
sacrifice of himself for mankind, which beginning 
there, was finished on the cross when he died? 

(5) Do I see that the rights under the Law, 

which he secured by obedience to it (the right of lasting 
life and the dominion of earth), were what he 
through that same sacrifice bequeathed to the fallen, 
dying race— to as many as shall accept the blessings 
under the conditions of the New Covenant? 

(6) Do I see that his flesh and blood, thus sacrificed, 
stood for, represented, those blessings and favors 
which they purchased for us? 

(7) Do I see that the partaking of the bread and 

wine symbols of his flesh and blood signifies my acceptance 
of those favors and blessings which the flesh 
and blood of my Lord bought for me and for all? 

R2273 : page 71 

(8) And if I do thus heartily accept of the ransom 
thus memorialized, do I consecrate my entire being— 
my flesh and blood, justified through that ransom 
—to the Lord, to be broken with him, to suffer with 
him, to be dead with him? 

If we can answer these questions affirmatively we 
clearly or fully discern the Lord's body, give credit to 
his meritorious sacrifice and may eat— should eat— 
"Eat ye all of it." 

Those, however, that deny that a ransom for sin 
and sinners was required and given, who feel that they 
need not to partake of Christ's merit, who deny that 
the merit of one can be imputed to another, who have 
cast off the wedding garment of Christ's righteousness, 
who feel "happier" and "freer" in the filthy rags of 
their own righteousness, and who now consider the 
precious blood wherewith they were once sanctified a 

R2273 : page 72 

not-holy or an ordinary thing— such we advise to stay 
away from memorializing that in which they no longer 
believe; for they would merely be adding hypocrisy to 
unbelief. For such to partake, is to add condemnation 
to themselves and their no-ransom theories. 

But, better still, let us advise all who have merely 
been entrapped into this error, by the sophistries promulgated 
through various channels by the great Adversary, 
to reject all vain human philosophies and to 
receive again the simple Word of God, the truths 
therein set forth;— that all are fallen, and that the only 
way open for our reconciliation and restitution consistent 
with the divine law and sentence was the giving of 
the full and exact corresponding price or ransom for our 
sins;— that in no other way could he be just and yet justify 
sinners. Let them recognize the fact that our Lord 



Jesus, as the Lamb of God, bore the full penalty for our 
sins in his own body on the tree— that he gave full 
ransom for all. 

The philosophy is very plain, but if such cannot 
grasp it, at least let such grasp the fact that God declares 
it to be so, and let them return unto the Lord 
and he will abundantly pardon. Let them ask for the 
guidance of the spirit and the anointing of the eyes, 
that they may be able to comprehend, with all saints, 
this, the foundation of all the grace of our God in 
Christ. Thus in true acceptance of the broken body 
and the shed blood— realizing that the sacrifice was 
for their sins and that the blood shed [life given] seals 
the New Covenant for all— let them commemorate the 
greatest event of history, the shedding of the precious 
blood, the sacrifice of the precious life of God's dear 
Son for our sins. Nevertheless we know from God's 
Word that these words or any words will not succeed 
in turning back to the way, the truth and the life those 
who have wilfully and knowingly gone out from under 
the blood of sprinkling. There will be no pass-over 
for them. "It is impossible to renew them again unto 
repentance." (Heb. 6:4-10 and 10:26-30.) We 
well know that even these words of loving admonition 
and these faithful references to the words of inspiration 
will be attributed to hatred, malice, envy and every 
wicked feeling on our part, instead of to the real motive— 
a desire to serve the Lord and the truth, and 
any brethren or sisters unwittingly stumbling. 

Many in the past have partaken of the emblems 
of the Lord's body and blood without fully appreciating 
the philosophy of the ransom, who nevertheless did 
so with reverent appreciation of the fact that the death 
of our Redeemer had purged us from our guilt and relieved 
us from its penalty. Such discerned the real 
significance of the Memorial, though, because of gross 
errors associated with the truth, they did not discern 
its simple philosophy as many of us may now do. 

ONLY THE BAPTIZED. 



But some Baptist brother will perhaps remark— 
You have forgotten to mention baptism as a necessary 
qualification to partaking of the Memorial Supper. 

No, we have not forgotten baptism. We agree 
with you that the baptism is necessary— that the 
Memorial Supper is only for the Church; and that baptism 
is necessary before one can belong to the Church. 
But we differ with you as to what the Church is. We 
hold that the Baptist church is not the Church. Like 
all other churches organized and governed by fallen 
men, the Baptist church contains "tares" as well as 
"wheat;" but the Church contains wheat only. Surely 
no one will claim for any sect of Christendom that his 



sect contains all the "wheat" and no "tares." But 
the Church, "whose names are written in heaven," 
includes all the "wheat" and has not a "tare" on its 
roll. This is the one Church which our Lord established, 
and of which all the elect must become members— 
the Church Passed-over— "The Church of the 
First-born ones, whose names are written in heaven." 
-Heb. 12:23. 

Nor can we admit your claim with reference to 
baptism. The Scriptural view is still more exclusive 
than yours. You have in the membership of the Baptist 
church some who would be far from acceptable as 
members of the "Church of the First-borns." They 
passed your test of water-baptism, but they have not 
passed the test of the greater baptism which is required 
of all members of the Church whose names are written 
in heaven. The real baptism is a baptism into Christ's 
body— the Church— by a baptism or immersion into 
Christ's death, and a resurrection therefrom in his likeness. 
Water immersion is a beautiful symbol of the 
real immersion of the human will into the will of 
Christ, a beautiful illustration of a full sacrifice even 
unto death; but it is only an illustration or symbol- 
just as the bread and wine of the Supper are not the 
real life-giving elements of our Lord's sacrifice of 
which we are to eat, but merely their symbols. 

We agree, therefore, that none but the Church, 
the immersed, should partake of the Supper; but we 
recognize as really immersed all whose wills are dead 
and buried in the will of Christ, and who, as new 
creatures in him, are risen to walk in newness of life, 
while waiting for the consummation of their course in 
literal death and their awakening as actual new beings 
in the first resurrection. All such, whoever and 
wherever they may be, are the real members of Christ's 
body, the Church, whether they have performed the 
enjoined water symbol or not. Of course, when such 
consecrated ones, dead to their own wills and alive only 
to the will of Christ, come to see that our Lord's commands 

R2273 : page 73 

include the symbol of water immersion or burial, 

as well as the burial of their wills, they will be glad to 

follow and to obey their Head and Lord in all things 

—especially when as infants they were not "believers" 

and that a drop of water could not in any degree symbolize 

burial and resurrection. Such as see the value 

and beauty of this injunction of God's Word should, 

if possible, be buried in water also (as our Lord and 

his apostles showed us) before partaking of the Memorial 

Supper. See TOWER for June 15th, 93,-article 

headed "Baptism and its Import." 

Of course, we cannot hope that only true "wheat" 
will present themselves at the Lord's table; we expect 
that some "tares" will come also, as Judas was present 



at the first gathering. But since we cannot judge 

the heart nor separate the "wheat" from the "tares," 

we fulfil the whole duty when we "declare the whole 

counsel of God" as revealed in his Word on this subject, 

and should leave the decision as to whether or 

not he partake to each individual who professes faith 

in the atoning blood and consecration to the Redeemer. 

HOW TO PARTAKE. 



If there are in your neighborhood others of God's 
consecrated people besides yourself, you should know 
it. Your faithful love for them and for the truth 
should have led you to seek them out to bless them 
with the truth shortly after you yourself received it. 
If there are such with whom you can have communion 
and fellowship invite them to join you in the Memorial; 
but not if you know them to be deniers of the ransom, 
lest you assist in bringing additional condemnation 
upon them. 

Meet with few or many, as circumstances will permit, 
but better far with a few who can enter with you 
into the spirit of the Memorial, than with a throng 
devoid of that spirit of fellowship and union in Christ. 

Provide for the occasion, if possible, unleavened 
bread (or crackers), such as the Lord used, and such 
as Hebrews now use; because the pure, sweet, unleavened 
bread best symbolizes the sinless flesh of the 
Lamb of God, who knew no sin [of which leaven is a 
symbol], who was holy, harmless, undefiled and separate 
from the race of sinners. Provide some drink from 
"the fruit of the vine," as the Lord directed. Undoubtedly 
he and the disciples used light wines, and 
we regard wine as unquestionably the more appropriate 
symbol; but since our Lord did not stipulate wine, but 
merely the "fruit of the vine," we can conceive of no 
objection that can be urged against the strained juice 
of boiled raisins, which are dried grapes. And surely 
this would be "the fruit of the vine" as really as wine 
is. We do not urge this raisin-liquor upon any who 
feel a conscientious desire to use wine; we merely remind 
all that our circumstances, climate, habits, etc., 
differ greatly from those of the early Church, and we 
very much doubt if our Lord would have us symbolize 
his blood with many of the intoxicating wines of our 
day— especially in view of the fact that some of the 
saints may have an inherited weakness of the flesh, 
which one taste might reenkindle into a great temptation. 
"Let each judge not to cast a stumbling-block 
before his brother." If wine is conscientiously preferred, 
choose a light wine, or mix a little wine with 
the raisin-juice. 

The memorial service should be very simple— it is 
chiefly a season of communion. Have a table in the 



midst of the assembly for the bread and wine. After 

R2274 : page 73 

the singing of a hymn one of the brethren should, in 

a few chosen words, express the object of the service 

and read a few verses from the Scriptures on the subject; 

another might then give thanks for the bread of 

life, the broken body of our Lord; after which the unleavened 

bread (or soda biscuit if more convenient) 

should be passed to all the communicants. An opportunity 

for remarks on the bread of life might here be 

given. Then a prayer of thanks for the cup, and for 

the precious blood symbolized in it, should be offered, 

and the cup of "fruit of the vine" passed. Here an 

opportunity might be given for remarks on the precious 

blood. But avoid discussions at this meeting. However 

appropriate to contend earnestly for the faith on 

other occasions, this is not such an occasion. This is 

a meeting for fellowship and communion with the 

Lord, our Redeemer and present King. If any seem 

contentious, let him have his say, and let the others 

refrain from discussion, that the holy moments of 

special communion with himself, which the Master 

appointed for our blessing, be not marred. 

Those who celebrate the Memorial with guileless, 
earnest hearts receive a great and refreshing blessing, 
and for this it is well to have seasons of quiet in the 
midst of the service, when no one will be speaking 
audibly and when the hearts of all can come very close 
to the Master in communion— in realization of his love, 
past and present, in renewing the pledge made to be 
his faithful followers even unto death, in considering 
how that pledge has been kept or violated during the 
year preceding, and in resolving afresh to run with 
patience the race for the prize of joint-heirship with 
our Lord, to which we are invited. 

A beautifully appropriate hymn for closing the 
Memorial is No. 276 in our hymn-book. And it will 
surely add to our joy to realize that some of like precious 
faith in all parts of the world are celebrating the 
same great sacrifice, thinking of the same gracious 
Lord, being comforted and encouraged by the same 
exceeding great and precious promises, resolving by 

R2274 : page 74 

the grace of the same gracious King to do greater service 
and to make greater sacrifices in his service and 
in the service of his people thenceforth, and closing 
with the same song of praise and worship. 
"Sweet the moments, rich in blessing, 
Thus before the cross we'll spend; 
Life and health and peace possessing 
From the sinner's risen Friend." 
Of the first Supper it is written: "They sang a 



hymn and went out." Let us do the same. Let each 
go to his home with his heart full. We suggest the 
omission on this occasion of the usual, general and 
proper after-meeting greetings, and all commonplace 
remarks and thoughts, thus we may prolong our communion 
and fellowship with the Master. Keep within 
sight of him throughout the next day. Hear the 
clamor of the people against the guileless one; see them 
incited by the clergy of Jerusalem; see him before 
Herod and his soldiers; see him arrayed in robes of 
mock -royalty and crowned with thorns, then buffeted 
and spat upon. 

See him crucified as a criminal, and taunted with 
the very gracious deeds which he had performed— "He 
saved others, himself he cannot save." Remember 
that he could have saved himself; that he could have 
asked for, and would have received, "more than twelve 
legions of angels" to deliver and protect him; that 
he could have destroyed his enemies and villifiers, instead 
of dying for them; and that our hope of a resurrection 
and everlasting life depended upon his willing 
offering of himself as our ransom-price. Considering 
his love for us and for all it will surely strengthen us 
as his followers to endure more and more hardness as 
good soldiers of the cross. Aye, let us consider him 
who endured such contradiction of sinners against himself, 
lest we become weary and faint in our minds under 
the light afflictions now permitted for our trial and 
discipline, which, if faithfully endured, will work 
out for each a far more exceeding and eternal weight 
of glory. 

THE CELEBRATION AT ALLEGHENY. 



As usual the Church at this place will celebrate 
Christ our Passover slain for us. The service will be 
in Bible House Chapel, No. 56 Arch street, at 7.30 P.M.. 
on Tuesday, April 5th. We no longer hold general 
Bible Study Conventions in connection with this 
Memorial; for it is at a usually inclement season. 
And, furthermore, we found that as only the few 
could attend from other places, their coming detracted 
from the interest in the home celebrations. Our advice, 
therefore, is that each little gathering seek to 
make these occasions of special interest at home. 
Nevertheless we shall be most glad to welcome all who 
may find it convenient to attend the Allegheny meeting. 



R2274 : page 74 

STRONG DELUSION. 



"For this cause God shall send them strong delusion, that 
they should believe a lie, that they all might be condemned [as 
unfit for the honors of the high calling] who believed 
not the truth, but had pleasure in unrighteousness." 
-2Thess. 2:11,12. 

A DELUSION is an error which, when viewed 

from certain standpoints of observation, has 

the appearance of truth. A delusion is more or less 

dangerous according to the importance of the truth 

which it misrepresents, beclouds or falsifies; and, if followed, 

it leads accordingly to more or less disastrous 

consequences. If a merchant be deluded and misled 

by an apparent boom in his line of industry, the result 

to him may be financial disaster. If a man or woman 

be deluded by false ideas of life or by false appearances 

of character when choosing a partner for life, the result 

may be long years of domestic misery. And, likewise, 

eternal interests may be, and are, continually affected 

by the delusions of error on religious subjects. 

When a man is deluded, he verily thinks he is 
right. He claims to be honest in his convictions, and 
he is so. "There is a way that seemeth right unto a 
man; but the end thereof [where the subject of delusion 
is of vital interest] are the ways of death." (Prov. 16:25.) 
The world to-day is full of delusions, and of 
deluded people who verily think they are right, and 
who expect in due time to realize their delusive hopes. 
There are political delusions, financial delusions and 
religious delusions of every shade and hue; and thousands 
and millions of people are following them, and 
devoting all their time and energy to them, only to 
realize in the end a whirlwind of confusion, disaster 
and the utter wreck of all their hopes. 

The questions then arise, Who can escape these 
delusions so common among men? The fact is that 
no member of the fallen race is, of himself, proof 
against them. We are all, in consequence of the fall, 
both physically and mentally impaired; our experience 
is brief and varied, and our knowledge is necessarily 
very limited. 

Tho we see that financial delusions are continually 
misleading men and blighting their hopes of temporal 
advantage; and tho we see that political delusions are 
forming various factions among men and leading them 
to strive for the realization of numerous delusive hopes, 
which, in the end, will bring only anarchy and a time 
of trouble such as was not since there was a nation; 

R2274 : page 75 

yet those which chiefly concern the children of God 
are the religious delusions, or those capable of affecting 
their eternal interests. The saints have little to 



fear from financial delusions or disasters, since they 
are generally the poor of this world who have little to 
lose, but whose bread and water are sure (Isa. 33:16), 
and whose treasures are not laid up here, but in heaven. 
Nor are they specially concerned with the political delusions 
which we are told shall ere long lead to the 
great political disaster, which is even now imminent. 
These are important to the world, whose only concern 
is their temporal interests. But the questions with us 
are, How shall we escape the religious delusions so 
prevalent everywhere? and what proof have we that 
we are not now under such hallucinations? 

These are important questions which no child of 
God can afford lightly to set aside. But note the words 
of the Apostle above quoted, which seem to imply that 
God is desirous that some should be snared, and to the 
very intent that they might be condemned— "God will 
send [permit to come upon] them strong delusion, 
that they should believe a lie, that they all might be 
condemned." 

Who are these whom God thus desires to be snared 
and condemned? Paul answers, They are those who 
believed not the truth, but had pleasure in unrighteousness. 
They are not those who never heard the 
truth, but those who, having once heard and understood 
it, turned from it, rejected it and had pleasure in 
unrighteousness— not necessarily in gross unrighteousness, 
such as crime, but in some measure of unrighteousness; 
often a desire for a little more liberty of self-will 
instead of close conformity to the divine will, and 
consequently a preference for the error which would 
grant such liberty and silence the promptings of conscience 
and the voice of truth. Such prefer the error 

R2275 : page 75 

to the truth. Those who receive not the truth in the 
love of it are not worthy of it, and they, therefore, 
must go away from it into the outer darkness that envelops 
the world. To these error comes in its most deceitful 
forms, and they quickly fall a prey to the delusion. 

With the Psalmist, therefore, we may well inquire, 
"Who," then "shall be able to stand?"— "Who shall 
ascend into the hill [kingdom] of the Lord? or who 
shall stand in his holy place?" Now mark the answer: 
"He that hath clean hands and a pure heart; 
who hath not lifted up his soul unto vanity, nor sworn 
deceitfully. He shall receive the blessing from the 
Lord, and righteousness from the God of his salvation." 
(Psa. 24:3-5.) Here is the class among whom 
the delusions of error can make no headway. These 
have a standpoint of observation from which every 
error appears in its true colors, and every truth in its 
proper light. 

Mark the peculiar features of this class: They 
have "clean hands:" Their work for the Lord may be 



very imperfect; they may tell the story of his love and 
grace in a very halting, awkward manner; they may 
minister to the temporal or spiritual necessities of the 
saints, or others, from a very frugal and plain store of 
their own; but their work will be clean; their story will 
be free from self-emulation and human glorying, and 
their works will be free from both ostentation and 
parade. What they do will be done with simplicity 
and meekness, as unto the Lord, and not for the praise 
of men. 

They have "pure hearts:" Under divine inspection, 
their motives are seen to be pure. Their whole 
purpose and endeavor is to glorify God and to bless 
their fellow-men, especially the household of faith. 
They have not lifted up their soul unto vanity: They 
have no vain worldly ambitions, either secretly or 
openly cherished and ministered to behind the outward 
profession of entire consecration to God— no ambition 
to be great, or good, or wise in the eyes of men, nor to 
grasp the fleeting earthly treasures once consecrated to 
God. Nor have they "sworn deceitfully:" They have 
not made a covenant with God of entire consecration 
to his service, with a secret determination to keep back 
part of the price: nor have they since making the covenant 
repudiated its obligations. 

The whole course of this class is one of sincerity 
and truth. Their character is that of meekness and 
faith; they love righteousness and desire to be molded 
and fashioned after the principles of righteousness; and 
they correspondingly hate wickedness and every evil 
way. With a realization of their own short-comings 
from the standard of perfection, they put no confidence 
in the flesh, but humbly and implicitly submit their 
will and judgment to the will and plan of God. So 
they have no schemes or plans of their own, but are 
fully devoted to the accomplishment of God's plan, in 
God's own way and time, having full faith in his sure 
word of prophecy and promise. 

Those who have such a spirit come reverently to 
the Word of God to learn God's will and way, and with 
a desire to walk accordingly; and here they receive the 
divinely-provided armor of God which will protect all 
who carefully put it on from all the fiery darts of the 
enemy. Without this complete armor, no child of God 
is safe in this evil day. "Wherefore," says the Apostle, 
"take unto you the whole armor of God, that ye 
may be able to withstand in the evil day, and having 
done all, to stand."— Eph. 6:13. 

The evil day here referred to is this Day of the 
Lord, in which we are now living, wherein every man's 
work shall be tried, so as by fire. These are the "perilous 
times" of which the Apostle forewarned the 

R2275 : page 76 

Church— times peculiarly perilous to Christian faith, 



because of the many subtle and delusive forms of error 

now springing up to intercept the progress of the truth. 

But God's provision for his saints is equal to the emergency 

of the perilous hour. Never before this "evil 

day" was it possible for the saints to put on the whole 

armor of God; and never before was it needed. For 

some years past the Lord has been handing us this armor, 

piece by piece, and has been telling us to put it 

on and wear it that we might become accustomed to 

it and feel at ease and at home in it, because the time 

is shortly coming when it will be impossible to stand 

without it. 

Some— a few— have been heeding the counsel. 
Carefully they have buckled on every part of the armor 
as fast as they received it, and in consequence, today 
they stand completely clothed with the truth. 
Their loins are girt about with it; their feet are shod 
with it; and it covers their head (their intellectual faculties) 
as a helmet of salvation (salvation from the 
snares and delusions of error). Then they have on the 
breastplate of righteousness— a righteous character, 
which the truth has developed in them; and in their 
hands they bear the sword of the spirit, which is the 
Word of God, which they are now able to handle with 
ease and vigor in defense of the doctrines of Christ; 
while their ample shield of faith is an able defense 
against all the fiery darts of the enemy, so that the flying 
arrows do not even jar the armor or for a moment 
stun the inner man. 

Praise God for such an armor! Brother, have you 
put it on? Do not rest satisfied with the idea that you 
can get along as well as your fathers did with only a 
part of it. The time is coming, yea, and now is, when 
you must have it complete, or you will surely fall. The 
portions of the armor presented to the saints of the past 
were sufficient for their day and trial; but a greater 
trial of faith in this "evil day" necessitates a more 
complete defense. 

Do not say to the Lord, "Well, I have the breastplate 
and the shield; no, thank you, I think I shall not 
need the helmet;" or, "I think I can get along without 
the sword." I tell you, you will need them all; 
make haste and put them on without delay. Some of 
you should have had them on long ago, and should be 
able to help others don them now. Many are already 
falling, and sadly many are feeling their lack of the 
helmet. Some with mere curiosity-interest have spent 
much valuable time in looking at the various parts of 
the armor as presented to them for the past few years, 
instead of earnestly buckling them on and proving 
them: and they have become so used to merely looking 
at the beautiful pieces of the armor that they expect 
the process of bringing forward new pieces to continue 
forever. Let such wake up to the fact that the armor 
is already complete, and that no more can be added to 
it, because anything more would be a superfluity. The 



Lord has graciously shown us its entire outline, as well 
as the manner in which the various parts of it work 
together. Look at your hand: it has four fingers and 
a thumb. You do not say, Well, perhaps another 
thumb or finger will appear by and by. You know 
there will be no such thing. That hand is complete 
and another member added to it would be superfluous. 

Just so those who have come to view the full completeness 
of God's plan, as now unfolded to us, know 
that nothing more could be added to it. It is gloriously 
complete and worthy indeed of its great Author. 
But, while the outlining, the general harmony and the 
working together of the various parts are all clear to 
us now, we yet have room for profound thought and 
study of it, and probably will still have even after we 
are glorified. Some make a great mistake in continually 
putting on and taking off various proffered armors. 
There is but one armor that will be of any use or protection 
to us, and that is that which is stamped with 
the scarlet stamp of the precious blood of Christ. Every 
piece of this divine armor is so stamped, and it all fits 
together. If you think to change your helmet of salvation 
for some other helmet, you will very soon want 
another breastplate to match it. And you will want 
another sword; for this sword will not match with any 
other helmet. And this shield of faith will not match 
with any other armor. Do not allow your head to 
grow too big for the helmet which the Lord has provided, 
and then go around hunting a new helmet to fit 
your swelled head and wrong ideas. If the helmet supplied 
in God's Word will not fit you, do not fancy the 
increase is real wisdom, and try to stretch the old one or 
to get a new helmet; but freely apply the liniment of 
humility and reduce it till the helmet does fit. 

Put on the whole armor of God. And make sure 
that you accept no spurious brand. Every piece of the 
genuine is stamped with a cross and the words— To be 
worn only by the redeemed. Put on piece by piece, 
quickly; buckle it on securely; and, having done all, 
STAND. The position thus suggested implies an attack: 
the attack will surely come, and indeed has already 
come to many. Are you ready now to do good service 
as a valiant soldier of the cross of Christ? Stand! do 
not run away; stand your ground and battle for the 
truth. 

As we have already observed, it is as truly a part 
of God's purpose to let some fall in this evil day, as it 
is to enable others to stand. He therefore permits the 
strong delusion to take possession of all who have 
pleasure in unrighteousness, and who therefore do not 
believe the truth. Such are unworthy of the truth, 

R2275 : page 77 

and soon or later every such one must fall. All such 
are condemned as unworthy of membership in Christ, 



the vine; and as the time for the exaltation of the 

Church draws nearer and nearer, the testing may be expected 

to increase until all the unworthy ones are weeded 

out. "He will gather out of his Kingdom all things 

that offend [those who put off the wedding garment of 

Christ's imputed righteousness, etc.], and them which 

R2276 : page 77 

do iniquity [those who practice sin, who are not fully in 
sympathy with the principles and ways of righteousness 
as laid down in the Lord's Word]." And "then 
shall the righteous shine forth as the sun in the Kingdom 
of their Father." 

If, then, we would escape the delusions of this evil 
day, let us see to it that we are in deed and in truth 
lovers of righteousness; let us receive the truth in 
meekness, hold it with humility and thankfulness, and 
serve it with energy and zeal. 



R2276 : page 77 

THE WHEAT AND THE TARES. 

MAR. 13.--MATT. 13:24-30,36-43. 

"He that soweth the good seed is the Son of Man."— Matt. 13:37. 

COMMENTATORS in general notice that the 

cluster of our Lord's parables, one of which 

is dealt with here, all relate to "the Kingdom of Heaven." 

Yet strangely enough they almost all ignore 

this Kingdom feature in interpreting these parables. 

Of this one, for instance, it is customary to say that 

God began sowing the good seed, the "wheat," in the 

Garden of Eden; and that there also shortly after Satan 

sowed the "tares." Their difficulty seems to be a 

failure to apply rules of order and logic— they fail to 

rightly divide the Word of truth. Certain false principles 

of theory and interpretation are at the bottom of 

their difficulty. It is essential that we empty ourselves 

of the many false doctrines "received through the traditions 

of the elders" and from the dark ages, if we 

would hear (understand) the Word of the Lord— if we 

would be taught of him. 

The gospel of the Kingdom was not preached in 
Eden. It was implied but not clearly stated in the 
promise made to Abraham, "In thy seed shall all the 
families of the earth be blessed." This Kingdom was 
hoped for and expected by Israel, because they were 
the natural seed of Abraham. The Kingdom which 
began in Israel with the reign of Saul, succeeded by 
David and Solomon, and reached its climax in the latter 
and thenceforth deteriorated, never was the Kingdom 



of God in the full sense of the promise to Abraham. 
At the very most it was a typical Kingdom of 
God, in the hands of a typical people of God— Israel 
after the flesh. The Israelites themselves recognized 
this fact and waited for Messiah the great King, to 
come and establish his Kingdom and to rule the world. 
Consequently there could be no proper application of 
these Kingdom of Heaven parables, in any manner or 
degree, previous to that event. 

On the contrary, when our Lord began his ministry, 
the message sent forth was, "The Kingdom of 
Heaven is at hand"— "is come nigh unto you." The 
commission to the disciples was to proclaim Jesus the 
King and to announce that he was ready to establish 
his Kingdom. Yet his ministry with that nation 
closed a few days before his crucifixion, when he, weeping, 
uttered the solemn denouncement, "O Jerusalem, 
Jerusalem, which killest the prophets, and stonest them 
that are sent unto thee; how often would I have gathered 
thy children together, as a hen doth gather her 
brood under her wings, and ye would not! Behold, 
your house is left unto you desolate." (Luke 13:34.) 
The literal seed of Abraham having thus failed to accept 
the Kingdom (as God foreknew and foretold 
through the prophets), the next step was to find another 
nation more worthy than the Jews. 

But no other nation could be found suitable to 
God's purpose, and hence a new nation was to be 
formed: and this has been the work of the Gospel age, 
to call out "a holy nation, a peculiar people" from 
every nation, kindred, people and tongue, to constitute 
this Kingdom of Heaven. The "Israelites indeed," 
but a small remnant of the Jewish nation, were attracted 
by the truth and were the first accepted members of 
the "holy nation," at Pentecost. They in turn as ambassadors 
for God, were sent with the King's good 
tidings of the coming blessed Kingdom to us Gentiles, 
—to gather from all nations, kindreds, peoples and 
tongues a sufficient number to complete the "holy nation," 
"worthy" to be the Kingdom of Heaven and as 
such to bless the world.— Rev. 5:9,10. 

It is this "holy nation" in its preparatory and embryotic 
condition that is referred to in the parables of 
the Kingdom of Heaven. These parables of the Kingdom, 
therefore, gave prophetically the Church's experiences 
from various standpoints,— from the time the 
work of selecting began, to the time when that work 
will be completed: when the full number of the elect 
"little flock" will have been called, found faithful under 
the tests and disciplines and polishings of the great 
Master. Then as a whole it shall be glorified, and 
shine forth a glorious Kingdom, full of the excellency 
and power of God and in every way fully qualified to 
fulfil the original promise to Abraham, by blessing all 
the families of the earth with the true light, and drawing 
them all (through a knowledge of the truth) to the 



great Life-giver, that whosoever will may take of the 
water of life freely. 

R2276 : page 78 

Our Lord tells us why he uttered his teachings in 
parables;— that it was because the truths he taught 
were intended only for the Kingdom class, not for the 
average hearer; and his words are very plain to this 
effect: "To you [my believing and obedient disciples] 
it is given [granted] to know the mystery of the Kingdom 
of God; but to all those who are without [outside 
—strangers to God and unconsecrated] all these things 
are spoken in parables: that seeing they might see and 
not understand, and hearing they might hear and not 
believe." In this instance our Lord, we are told, first 
dismissed the general multitude and then expounded 
the parable to his disciples privately. And this was 
his general custom— "Without a parable spake he not 
unto the [general] people."— See verses 10-16. 

Our Lord himself "soweth" this good seed of the 
Kingdom, which germinating constitutes his Church, 
spiritual Israel. This is shown in his exposition (vs. 37), 
"He that soweth the good seed is the Son of Man." 
The good seed itself, we are told, was the message respecting 
the Kingdom— "the word of the Kingdom." 
(Vs. 19.) This word, or message of the Kingdom was 
planted by our Lord and his servants the apostles, as 
it is written, "Which at the first began to be spoken 
by our Lord, and was confirmed unto us by them that 
heard him, God also bearing witness both with signs 
and wonders."— Heb. 2:3,4. 

So long as our Lord lived, the Adversary, Satan, 
found no opportunity for sowing the seeds of error 
amongst the seeds of truth: our Lord declares, "While 
I was with them in the world I kept them in thy name: 
those that thou gavest me I have kept." (John 17:12.) 
And so long as the apostles lived the Church was similarly 
protected from the errors which the Adversary 
fain would sow: the apostles for this very purpose, we 
understand, were specially holden and guided of the 
Lord, so that whatever they bound on earth might be 
understood as having the full confirmation in heaven, 
and whatever things they loosed or abrogated or set 
aside on earth, might be understood as having the full 
heavenly sanction. And the Church did recognize 
this divine supervision and accepted the apostolic rulings 
as inspired and authoritative.— See 
Acts 15:24-29,31. 

"But while men slept"— after the apostles had 
fallen asleep in death, Satan, the great enemy, found 
little difficulty in sowing the seeds of error,— false doctrine. 
And as the true doctrine produced true children 
of the Kingdom only, so the false doctrines introduced 
produced false children of the Kingdom only. The 
wheat seed could not produce tares; the tare seed could 



not produce wheat. 

The difference between wheat and tares is very 
great. Wheat is the standard food of the world and is 
said to contain the elements of nutrition in the best 
proportions for man's use: how apt a symbol the Lord 
chose when he would represent the truth, the whole 
truth, and the children of the truth— the children of 
the Kingdom. The tare as a symbol is likewise very 
appropriate. It resembles the chess or cheat of America 
and the darnel of Europe. The tare seed is poisonous 
and acts as an emetic, causing vomiting; and it 
occasions the husbandman great annoyance, because it 
must be thoroughly separated from the wheat before 
the latter can be used. The statement here in the 
Greek implies that the tares were over-sown— intentionally, 
maliciously sown in the midst of the wheat, 
for the very purpose of damaging or totally spoiling 
the entire crop. Such malice would probably be understood 
very well by our Lord's hearers, even if they 
did not comprehend the import of the parable. Professor 
Shaff mentions a similar act of malice in Ireland, 
where an out-going tenant, in spite, on account of his 
ejection, sowed wild oats in the fields which ripened 
and seeded before the crops and caused great difficulty 
to the farmer. Wheat and tares, while growing, look 

R2277 : page 78 

exactly alike until they head out: then the difference 
is very apparent. The wheat heads, full of heavy 
wheat, bend over with the weight, while the tares are 
very erect and have the appearance, where they are 
thick, of being the superiors, the masters of the field. 
What a beautiful illustration of the modesty and meekness 
of the true and fruitful Christian, and of the proud 
boastfulness of those who are Christians in association 
and outward appearance only. 

As in the parable the servants inquired of the 
Master whether or not the seed sown had been good 
(pure, free from weed and tare seed), so to-day and all 
down through the Gospel age, the Lord's people have 
sometimes wondered how it comes that the Church is, 
and always has been from the first, infested with a 
class of people who have a form of godliness, but not 
its power and spirit. They have wondered whether or 
not the truths sown by the great Teacher could possibly 
produce such a varied crop as is seen in the church 
which nominally is his Church. The Lord answers 
our question, assuring us that the seed truths which he 
planted were pure, good, and that the tare seeds were 
planted by his enemy, Satan. And looking over the 
field, the world of mankind (the kosmos, not the ge, 
the earth, nor the aion, the age, tho both of these are 
often elsewhere improperly translated "world"), we 
can readily see its wheat-field,— the field wherein the 
truths and the errors respecting the Lord's coming 



Kingdom have been planted,— where these plantings 
have brought forth correspondingly, a true and a false 
Kingdom class. 

The kosmos, the world of mankind as a general 
field, was all more or less adapted to use as a wheat 
field; but it was not all planted with the good seed: the 
good seed was planted in Palestine, Asia-Minor and 
Europe, and from thence has spread to America and 
to some slight extent elsewhere. But, strictly speaking, 
Europe and North America are the wheatfield in 
which grows side by side, intermingling, and often 
with their roots tangled, the wheat, the children of the 
Kingdom, begotten of the truth, and the tares, children 
of the evil one, begotten of error; and the name of 
this wheat field in common parlance is "Christendom," 
—i.e., Christ's Kingdom; for the "tares" claim to be 
the true Kingdom class and that the "wheat" are 
fanatics. 

The fact that the wheat-field was not free from 
tares was not discovered by some of the faithful servants 
(and indeed was difficult to discern) until the 
fruit began to appear;— then the question was, How 
should the matter be dealt with? Any attempt to root 
out the tares— to separate between the children of God, 
the children of the truth, and the children of Satan, 
the children of error— any attempt at positive judgment 

R2277 : page 79 

along these lines was positively forbidden; the 
instruction being, "Let both grow together until the 
harvest." While therefore God's servants were not to 
attempt the separation, the true from the false, throughout 
the Gospel age, they nevertheless were to understand 
that the mixed condition would not be permanent 
—that a time of separation would surely come- 
in the harvest, in the closing time of the Gospel age. 

Apparently the tares have grown more thriftily 
than the wheat; no doubt indeed the intention of the 
Adversary was to utterly choke the true wheat, and 
hence he has sown the tares with extremely liberal 
hand, so that our Master informs us that out of the entire 
wheat-field, he looks only for a small harvest of 
good, fully ripe wheat— "Fear not, little flock, it is 
your Father's good pleasure to give you the Kingdom." 
By reason of the choking influence of the tares, however, 
there will apparently be much of the true wheat 
not fully ripe for the harvest— not "overcomers," but 
merely "babes in Christ." 

It would be a great mistake to suppose that the 
"tares" of Christendom are merely the murderers, 
thieves, knaves, etc., morally corrupt: on the contrary, 
the "tares" are not on the low level of the field, but 
rise up out of the field (the world) as does the wheat, 
proclaiming that they are Christians by associating 
themselves in religious institutions, and with much 



profession holding their heads higher, and making their 

boasts louder than the true "wheat" class. They are 

generally moral people: this is implied in their association 

with the wheat class, they have "a form of godliness." 

Are we not told by the Lord that such people 

are "children of the wicked one?" Does not this seem 

rather harsh, considering that none of them sprang 

from the good seed of truth, but that they were all begotten 

of error— with which fact they themselves possibly 

had little to do? 

The general view of this matter is, we think, not 
only unkind, but unjust and unscriptural. To our understanding 
the whole world of mankind (excepting 
the true Christians), born in sin and shapen in iniquity, 
aliens and strangers from God, may be spoken of 
as "children of the wicked one," because they came 
into their condition of alienation from God more or less 
directly through Satan's instrumentality. And considering 
that merely nominal Christians were brought 
into Christian profession not by the truth but by falsehood, 
by Satan's misrepresentations and perversions of 
the truth, and that deluded by these errors many of 
them are what they are in all good conscience— we can 
think of them sympathetically; for they do not appreciate 
the hopes and aims and sentiments of the true 
"wheat" class, but think of these as deluded, fanatical, 
over-enthusiastic, visionary zealots. The "tares" 
consider themselves to be the real Church, the real 
crop, sown by the Master, and look with pity often 
upon the true "wheat" class, considering them abnormal 
growths of piety and superstition. The "tare" 
idea of religion is that it is for the restraint of vice, 
for the promotion of civilization and for the cultivation 
of social qualities in humanity. This is the Kingdom 
by which now and for centuries past the "tare" class 
has sought to rule the world— with sword and gun and 
prison, in concert with the preaching of good morals, 
to be preferred when they do not cost too much. The 
"tares" are far too respectable a class of people to have 
been planted by the great Enemy, for any other purpose 
than to act as a powerful antidote or offset to the 
influence of the truth and the true children of the 
Kingdom. Had he been able to keep the world in the 
darkness of heathen superstition, he never would have 
planted so respectable and orderly and moral a class as 
the "tares"— imitations of the "wheat:" but seeing 
the influence of the truth in the world, Satan sought 
heroically to counteract it along advanced lines. In this 
he is true to his Scriptural character— ready to wear 
garments of light, as represented in the sciences, etc., 
and to put upon his faithful the same. 

With this view of the "tares" we may look upon 
them with respect and realize that altho they can never 
hope to enter the Kingdom, and altho they must be 
destroyed as "tares" in the fiery times of the day of 
vengeance just at hand, yet this need not suggest their 



utter destruction in the second death as human beings, 
nor that they will have no hope of any blessing under 
the Kingdom, when it shall be established in power 
and great glory. On the contrary, the "fire" of this 
day of wrath (into which we are already entered) is as 
symbolic as the "tares" it will burn. It will destroy 
the "tares" as "tares"— as pretended children of the 
Kingdom, of which really they never were a part, 
but intruders, deceived. It will still leave them as 
members of Adam's race, bought with the precious 
blood, amenable to the conditions of the New Covenant, 
and to all the blessings of the Kingdom, as they 
shall flow to all the families of the earth, after the true 
"wheat" class have been separated and caused to 
"shine forth as the sun [with their Lord Jesus] in the 
Kingdom of their Father." 

To our understanding of the Scriptures,* we are 
already in the "harvest" time of this age. The great 
Chief-Reaper, the Lord Jesus, is now, through his messengers 
or servants, gathering the harvest of the Kingdom 
truths which he sowed 1800 years ago; and very 
soon the last of the ripe wheat will be gathered into 
the "garner" (the glorified state— the heavenly condition 
—"changed") and then, very quickly, the sons 
of God will be manifested and their great work of 
blessing the world will begin. (See Rom. 8:21,22.) 
This Sun of Righteousness, composed of Christ our 
Lord and all the faithful overcomers of this Gospel age 
glorified, shall "shine forth" as the prophet has declared, 
with healing in its beams— provisions of mercy 
and restitution for all mankind. 

The furnace of fire in which the tares will be destroyed 
(as "tares," and fully and freely confess that 
they and their institutions are not the Kingdom of 
God, that they have neither part nor lot in that matter, 
but were mistaken) is the great time of trouble, 
the day of vengeance; the day of the overthrow of 
Satan and his representatives; the day of Satan's binding 
that he shall deceive the nations no more; the day 
when the rod of divine vengeance shall smite and break 
the systems of earth as potter's vessels, preparing the 
world of mankind thereby, for the blessings and favors 
which divine grace has provided in Christ Jesus our 
Lord, who gave himself a ransom for all to be testified 
in due time. 



*MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOLS. II. and III. 



page 80 

INTERESTING LETTERS. 



Ohio. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-Brother Arnold met 
with us, according to arrangements, to our joy. We 
found in him, we think, a loving Brother, possessed 
of the spirit of meekness. Notwithstanding the extreme 
cold weather, the meetings were well attended, 
and good interest was manifest all through. Those who 
bitterly opposed the truth could not stay away, even 
some who never ventured to show themselves in the 
house before, and I am satisfied the Lord will bless 
the brother's efforts. Many express their sorrow that 
the meetings closed so soon. 

I am very happy to inform you that never did a 
better feeling prevail among the brethren here, than at 
present; and some who a few months ago could not find 
words severe enough in the way of epithets against 
those who are of like faith in the truth can now be 
heard defending it. How true the word that God will 
make the wrath of man to praise him. 

Yours in the Lord, F. Z. GROFF. 



Tennessee. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-Enclosed you will find 
Express Money Order for $1.00, the price of TOWER. 

I received in due time the fourth volume of the 
DAWN series, and read it eagerly, without stopping, 
only to eat and sleep a little. After carefully reading 
and rereading it I feel that it is just the message the 
world is needing and waiting for, and therefore is of 
the Lord's leading and under his direction. I congratulate 
you my dear Brother upon the successful accomplishment 
of so great a task. 

I have suffered much of late, and, in addition, the 
increasing infirmities of accumulating years render 
me less and less inclined to exertion of any kind, physical 
or mental. Under such conditions we naturally 
seek the easy chair and the chimney corner, and live 
more in the memories of the past than in the activities 
of the present, and put off until to-morrow things that 
should be done to-day; but even the old are not justified 
in indulging in sentimental reveries or natural inclinations 
amid the astounding developments of these 
last days. The hope that the Master has some work 
for me in the stirring scenes of the near future bears 
me up amid the depressing environment. 

Yours in Christian love, S. G. KERR, Sr., M.D. 



R2278 : page 80 

"THE DAY OF VENGEANCE." 



"This is the fourth volume of a series of books 
dealing largely with eschatology, the views enunciated 
in which caused no little controversy in this county a 
year or two ago. Indeed, a specific doctrine in VOL. I. 
formed the subject of a set theological debate between 
the Rev. Mr. Davidson, lately of Canisbay, and Mr. 
C. N. Houston, Wick, an able and eloquent expounder 
of the views. Basing his position chiefly on the assertion 
of Scripture that the Atonement was "a ransom 
for all," Mr. Russell shows how God's purposes in the 
ages towards mankind have been revealed, notably in 
the typical kingdom of Israel and his dealings with 
them, as so minutely recorded in Holy Writ. The 
main contention is that these purposes involve the election 
or selection during the Gospel age of a Church— 
the body of Christ— which, when completed, will reign 
with Christ as a spiritual kingdom, through whom all 
the families of the earth shall be blessed during the 
Millennial age, which is due shortly to be ushered in. 

"In the present volume [IV.] the author steadily 
and logically pursues his theme, proving from the 
Scriptures that the 'Day of Vengeance'— the dark day 
prior to Millennial dawn— is upon us, and that this is 
the meaning of the unrest which is so prevalent on 
every hand and in relation to every subject. Not content 
with giving his own views (or rather the Scripture 
testimony which he applies), the author has fortressed 
these immensely by quotations from scores of prominent 
men— Doctors of Divinity, Statesmen, Jurists, 
Financiers, Historians and Editors— many of whom, 
we presume, realized but imperfectly the import of 
their own words as they are here quoted to prove that 
the history of our day is the fulfilment of prophecies 
eighteen to thirty centuries old. 

"The volume certainly will be valued for its extensive 
collection of facts and figures, relating to almost 
every phase of social, political, financial and religious 
matters as they bear upon the present situation. 
Nor are these dryly stated; on the contrary, they are 
introduced in such a manner as to fascinate every 
reader who is at all interested in the consideration of 
the wonderful events of 'our day.' We must compliment 
the book for its fidelity to the Scriptures and to 
principles of righteousness, and for the even-handed 
justice with which it deals with some vexing problems. 
It is a book that will probably make some warm enemies, 
but it is sure to make a host of warm friends. 
Its enemies as well as its friends will read it with more 
than ordinary zest, and will want it always by them 
as a work of reference. Its influence will surely be 
far-reaching, for its counsels are wholly on the lines of 
law and order and peace, even though it points out 
from prophecy that very shortly peace will be removed 



from the earth. A lengthy chapter entitled 'Our 
Lord's Great Prophecy' is devoted to an exposition of 
Matt. 24, and the views given forth cannot fail to interest 
Bible students. A shorter chapter, the last, entitled 
'Jehovah's Footstool made Glorious' will be found 
most interesting to the same class. Zech. 14:4 is wholly 
unique, and will be found deeply absorbing to Christian 
thinkers and others. 

"The author, while holding to the Second Advent 
of Christ and the then establishment of his Kingdom, 
very evidently has more exalted idea of those events 
than is common to 'Pre-millennarians;' he views it, as 
we have already indicated, as a spiritual Kingdom, 
though none the less a veritable dominion which shortly 
will be the channel of divine blessings to men— tho 
introduced by a 'day of vengeance' and trouble which 
will figuratively break and wound the hearts of men, 
preparatory to their healing with the 'Balm of Gilead.' 
There is so much thought on new lines to be met with in 
the volume that the value and ability of the work will 
be readily admitted even by those who may be unable 
to fall in with its conclusions."— John O'Groat Journal, 
Wick, Scotland. 



page 81 
VOL. XIX. MARCH 15, 1898. No. 6. 



CONTENTS. 



"Because the Days are Evil" 83 

Helpful Rules for the Daily Life 

Feet Washing 88 

"The Night Cometh wherein No Man 

Can Work" 89 

The Wheat Harvest— Its Close 

Nigh at Hand 90 

Where to Look for the Wheat 

The Length of the Harvest Day, etc. 

John the Baptist and His Murderers 94 

"The Dogs Eat of the Crumbs which 

Fall from the Children's Table" 95 

page 82 

SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
-ADDRESS TO- 
TOWER PUBLISHING CO., BIBLE HOUSE, 58 ARCH ST., 
ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 



SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, N.Y. DRAFT, MONEY ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS: 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age or accident, or other 
adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, if they 
send a Postal Card each December, stating their cases and requesting the paper. 



R2278 : page 80 

REMEMBER THE MEMORIAL SUPPER, APRIL 5TH, 
AFTER 6 P.M. 

IT HAS been suggested by some that the day preceding 
(April 5th) be spent, to some extent, as partially a fast day and 
a day of much private prayer for the welfare of Zion. Let each 
of us do as is in his heart, in this matter. We of the WATCH 
TOWER will remember you all on that day, as we do every day, 
but more particularly. "Brethren pray for us."— 2 Thess. 3:1. 

Answering a query, would say:— 

The Hebrews will celebrate Passover Feast for a week, beginning 
(Nisan 15th) 6 P.M. April 6th. We celebrate the death 
of the Lamb in the "Memorial Supper" (Nisan 14th) the night 
before, after 6 P.M. Read the TOWER article again. 



R2278 : page 83 

"BECAUSE THE DAYS ARE EVIL. 



"See then that ye walk circumspectly, not as fools but as wise, 
redeeming the time, because the days are evil."— Eph. 5:15,16. 

THE WORD "circumspect" is from circum, signifying 
around, and spectus, signifying to look, 
to watch. The true Christian pathway is so narrow, 
so beset with tests and pitfalls and wiles of the evil 
one that, if we walk carelessly even (not to say wickedly), 
we will be in great danger of mishap. It requires 
not only that we look all around at every step, 
but more than this, it requires that we be wise,— wiser 
than our fellow creatures of earth— wise with the wisdom 
that cometh from above, which is pure, peaceable, 
loving; yet first of all loyal to the Lord and his Word. 

At a centre to which flow by mail the records of 
the trials and difficulties through which many of the 
Lord's people are called to pass, we are in position to 
know that their trials are now more numerous and more 
severe than for a long time at least. Appeals for prayer 



on their behalf and for counsel respecting the way of 
the Lord come by nearly every mail from tried ones 
who are anxious to "walk circumspectly." These are 
gladly answered, to the best of our ability,— pointing 
out the Scriptural lines that must guide all who would 
walk with the Lord. 

We now wish to call attention to some general 
principles, applicable to every member of the body of 
Christ, at every time; and especially necessary to be 
remembered and practiced at the present time, because 
of the special activity of our Adversary;— "because the 
days are evil." For it would appear that, as in the 
"harvest" of the Jewish age, so in the present "harvest" 
of the Gospel age, opposition prevails not only 
in the synagogues, from the Scribes and Pharisees, but 
in the home circle— between parents and children, and 
husbands and wives— and among the Lord's people. 
And in proportion as the Adversary seeks to stir up 
strife, let each of the consecrated be the more on guard 
to give no avoidable offence either in word or deed. 
"Walk circumspectly, ...because the days are evil," 
—days of special trial and testing. 

HELPFUL RULES FOR OUR DAILY LIFE. 



The rules we have to suggest are as follows:— 

I. Let each resolve to mind his own business. 
The Scriptural injunctions along this line caution 

us not to be busy-bodies in other people's affairs. 

Everyone of experience in life has learned 

that this is a good rule; yet few walk by this rule, circumspectly. 

If we have not sufficient of our own business 

and of the Lord's service to fill our hands and 

moments and mouths, there is something wrong with 

us that needs careful prayer and study of the divine 

Word to set right. 

This does not mean that we should be indifferent 
to the welfare of others under our care, or for whom 
we are in any degree responsible; but, even in doing 
for these we should be careful to recognize their rights 
and the rights of others, and specially careful not to 
exceed our own rights. Let us never forget that justice 
must govern in our interferences with the affairs of 
others, tho we may not require full justice in respect 
to our own interests, but exercise mercy. 

II. We should exercise great patience with others 
and their faults— more than in dealing with ourselves 
and our own short-comings. 

When we remember that the whole world is mentally 
as well as physically and morally unsound through 
the fall, it should make us very considerate for their 
failings. Since the Lord is graciously willing to cover 
our blemishes with the merit of the precious blood, we 



R2278 : page 84 

cannot do less than be "very pitiful" and of tender 
compassion towards others;— even tho their failings be 
greater or different from our own. This general rule 
is specially applicable to your own children. Their defects 
to some extent came from you or through you; 
hence, in dealing with their faults, you should do just 
as in correcting your own faults,— earnestly, rigorously, 
for their correction in righteousness, but sympathetically, 
mercifully, lovingly. 

III. Do not be touchy and easily offended. Take 
a kindly, charitable view of the words and acts of others. 
A trifling slight or rebuff could well be passed 
unnoticed— covered with the mantle of generosity and 
love. A serious offense should be assumed to be unintentional, 
and inquiry should be kindly made in words 
that would not stir up anger, but in "speech seasoned 
with grace." In a majority of cases it will prove that 
no offense was meant. 

This rule in the Scriptures comes under the instructions 
not to indulge in "evil surmisings,"— imagining 
evil intentions and motives behind the words and 
acts of others. "Evil surmisings" is ranked by the 
Apostle as contrary to the words of our Lord Jesus, 
opposed to godliness, and of the same spirit as envy 
and strife— of a corrupt mind, works of the flesh and 
the devil.-l Tim. 6:3-5; Gal. 5:19-21. 

The other side of this subject is brought out by 
the Apostle's injunction respecting the elements of the 
spirit of love, of which God's people are begotten and 
which they are to cultivate daily,— the development 
of which is one of the chief proofs of their being "overcomers." 
He says, "Love suffereth long and is kind, 
...is not easily offended, thinketh no evil,...beareth 
all things, believeth all things [favorably], hopeth 
all things, endureth all things." 

It may be urged that such a disposition would be 
imposed upon frequently, by the evilly disposed. We 
reply that those who possess this spirit of love are not 
necessarily obtuse nor soft: their experiences in cultivating 
this degree of love have served to develop them 
and make them of "quick understanding in the fear of 
the Lord." They will be cautious where there is even 
the appearance of evil, even while avoiding the imputation 
of evil intentions until forced to concede them by 
indisputable evidence. Besides, it would be better far 
to take some trifling risks and suffer some slight losses, 
many times, than to accuse even one innocent person. 
And the Lord who has directed this course is abundantly 
able to compensate us for any losses experienced 
in following his counsel. He is both able and willing 
to make all such experiences work together for good to 
those who love him. He places obedience to his arrangements 
first (even before sacrifice) saying, "Ye are my 
disciples, if ye do whatsoever I command you." 



Whoever neglects the Lord's commands along this 
line of "evil surmisings" weaves a web for his own ensnarement, 
however "circumspectly" he may walk as 
respects other matters; for, a heart impregnated with 
doubt, and suspicion toward fellow creatures, is more 
than half prepared to doubt God: the spirit of sourness 
and bitterness implied is at war with the spirit of the 
Lord, the spirit of love. Either the one or the other 
will conquer. The wrong spirit must be gotten rid of, 
or it will defile the new creature and make of him a 
"castaway." On the contrary, if the new nature conquer, 
as an "overcomer," it will be along this line: if 
evil surmisings are overcome, half the battle against 
present difficulties and besetments is won. The surmisings 
are from the heart, and lead us either to good 
words and acts, or to evil words and acts. 

IV. If you have been slandered, you may explain, 
to set yourself right, either publicly or privately; 
but surely avoid doing more than this. If you 
slander in return you make two wrongs out of one. 
Let no man render evil for evil to any one;— no, not 
even if what you should tell be the truth, while what 
your neighbor told was falsehood. And in contradicting 
and explaining false charges, remember not to go 
beyond this to make counter-charges against your defamer; 
for thus you also would become a slanderer. 

This is the Scriptural rule. We are to do unto 
others as we would that they should do unto us, and 
not as they do unto us. The wrongs done toward us 
will never justify wrong doing on our part. God's true 
children are to have no sympathy with Satan's delusion 
—"Do evil that good may result." But while no 
Scripture forbids our explaining away the errors and 
false statements of slanderers, experience proves that, 
if we followed Satan and his deluded servants of unrighteousness 
around, to contradict every adverse criticism 
and evil report, we should be kept more than busy. 
And if Satan found us willing to do so, he would no 
doubt lead us such a chase as would prevent our having 
any time to tell forth the good tidings of great joy; 
thus he would gain a victory, and we should lose one. 

Rather let us commit our reputation to the Lord, 
as a part of the sacrifice we laid at his feet when we 
surrendered all in obedience to the "call" to run the 
race for the great prize of our high calling. If thus 
we suffer some loss of reputation, by reason of our 
resolution not to neglect the King's business to fight 
for our own tinsel, we may be sure that it will count 
with him as so much endured for Christ's sake; and so 
much the more will be our reward in heaven, when the 
battle is over and the victors are crowned. 

Meantime, however, it behooves each of the Lord's 
people to be as circumspect as possible at every step 
of the way. Remember that in proportion to faithfulness 

R2278 : page 85 



and zeal in letting the light shine we will have 
the malignant opposition of our great Adversary, who 
seeks to turn and twist and maliciously distort and discolor 
our every word and act;— because the accuser of 
the brethren can find no real charges; and because he 
is exceeding mad against the humble servants of the 
truth, as he was against the Chief Servant— our Lord. 
He, let us remember, was crucified as a law-breaker, 
at the instance of the prominent ones of the church, 
and betrayed to them by one of his own disciples. 

"Consider him who endured such contradiction of 
sinners against himself, lest ye be weary and faint in 
your minds" when attacked by the Adversary,— whoever 
may be his agents and whatever their missiles. 
He cannot harm but will only increase our reputation 
in the Lord's sight, if we endure faithfully; and he can 
do no outward harm that God cannot overrule for the 
good of his cause— tho that good may sometimes mean 
"sittings" of chaff and tares from the wheat. 

V. Evil speaking, backbiting and slandering are 
strictly forbidden to God's people, as wholly contrary 
to his spirit of love— even if the evil thing be true. As 
a preventive of anything of the nature of slander, the 
Scriptures very carefully mark out one only way of redress 
of grievances, in Matt. 18:15-17. 

Even advanced Christians seem to be utterly in 
ignorance of this divine ruling, and hence professed 
Christians are often the most pronounced scandal-mongers. 
Yet this is one of the few special, specific commandments 
given by our Lord; and considered in connection 
with the statement, Ye are my disciples if ye 
do whatever I command you, its constant violation 
proves that many are not far advanced in discipleship. 

Let us look carefully at this rule which, if followed, 
would prevent gossip, "evil-speaking," "backbiting." 

Its first provision, for a conference between the 
principals alone, implies candor on the part of the accuser 
who thinks that he has suffered; and whom here 
we will call A. It implies his thinking no evil of the 
accused, whom we will style B. They meet as 
"brethren," each thinking his own course the right 
one, to discuss the matter; to see whether they can 
come to the same view. If they agree, all is well; the 
matter is settled; peace prevails; the threatened break 
has been averted, and no one is the wiser. 

If they cannot agree, A may not start a scandal 
by relating his version;— not even to confidential friends 
may he disclose the matter, saying, "Don't mention it; 
and especially don't say I told you." No; the matter 
is still "between thee and him [A and B] alone." If 
A considers the matter important, so as to wish to 
prosecute the subject further, he has but one way open 
to him, namely, to ask two or three others to go with 
him to B and hear the case from both sides and give 
their judgment respecting its right and wrong sides. 



These should be chosen (1) as persons in whose Christian 
character and good sense and spirit of a sound 
mind A himself would have confidence, peradventure 
they should favor B's view of the matter. (2) They 
should be chosen as with a view to B's appreciation of 
their advice, if they should give their judgment of the 
matter in A's favor. 

It would, however, be wholly contrary to the spirit 
of justice as well as contrary to the spirit of the Master's 
instructions here, for A to "talk it over" with 
several friends from whom he desired to select these 
"two or three witnesses," to make sure that they favored 
his story (without hearing the other side) and 
would go to the conference prejudiced,— with their 
minds already determined against B. No; the matter 
is between A and B alone, until the two or three friends 
are brought in to hear both sides of the dispute in the 
presence of both parties. 

If the judgment of the "brethren" is against B, 
he should hear them, should accept their view of the 
matter as the just, reasonable one;— unless it involves 
some principle in which he cannot conscientiously acquiesce. 
If the "brethren" see the matter from B's 
standpoint, A should conclude that in all probability 
he had erred; and, unless conscience hindered, should 
accept the position and apologize to B and the brethren 
for the annoyance caused by his poor judgment. But 
none of the parties are at liberty to turn scandal-mongers 
and tell the matter, "confidentially," to others. 

If the decision went against A, and he still felt 
that he was injured and had failed to get justice through 
a poor choice of advisers, he might (without violence 
to the principles laid down by our Lord) call other advisers 
and proceed as before. If their decision were 
against him, or if he felt that he could not trust to the 
judgment of any, fearing that all would favor B, he 
should realize that part at least of his trouble is self-conceit, 
and would do well to fast and pray and study 
lines and principles of justice more carefully. But A 
has gained no right to tell anything to the Church nor 
to anyone, either publicly or privately. If he does so, 
it marks him at once as disobedient to the Lord and 
exercised by a bad spirit, a carnal spirit,— contrary to 
the spirit of the truth, the spirit of love. 

If the committee decide partly against B, and only 
partly in favor of A, the brethren (A and B) should 
endeavor to see the matter thus, and to arrange matters 
amicably. In this case there would be nothing respecting 
the matter to tell;— nothing that is anybody's 
business. 

If the committee decide wholly against B and 
wholly in favor of A, and if B will not heed 
them and make reparation for the wrong or cease 

R2278 : page 86 



from injuring A, the latter is still not at liberty to 
become a scandal-monger; nor are the brethren of 
the committee. If A considers the matter of sufficient 
importance to justify further action, there is just one 
course open to him: he with the committee may lay the 
matter before the Church. Then the Church shall 
hear the matter, both sides, and whichever (A or B) shall 
refuse to recognize the advice of the Church shall be 
thereafter considered and treated by all as an outsider 
—as not of the Church, not to be fellowshipped; as dead, 
until such time as he may repent and reform;— a not 
very likely thing after rejecting such faithful treatment. 

Thus did the Lord guard his true disciples from 
the insidious sin of slander which leads onward to 
other and grosser works of the flesh and the devil, and 
stops growth in the truth and its spirit of love. And 
let us note, too, that those who hear slanders and thus 
encourage slanderers in their wrong course, are partakers 
of their evil deeds; guilty partners in the violation 
of the Master's commands. God's true people should refuse 
to listen to slanders and should point the offender to 
the Lord's Word and the only method therein authorized. 
"Are we wiser than God?" Experience teaches 
us that we cannot trust to our own judgments and are 
on safe ground only when following the voice of the 
Shepherd explicitly. 

If any Brother or Sister begins to you an evil report 
of others, stop him at once, kindly but firmly. 
"Have no fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness 
but rather reprove them." Refuse to have any 
share in this violation of our Master's commands, which 
does great mischief in the Church. Supposing the 
Brother or Sister to be only a "babe" in spiritual matters, 
call attention to the Lord's ruling on the subject, 
Matt. 18:15, and 1 Tim. 5:19. If the conversation 
is not directed to you but merely in your hearing, 
promptly show your disapproval by withdrawing. 

If, after having his attention called to the Lord's 
command on this subject, the slanderer still persists in 
"evil-speaking," "back-biting" and telling you his 
"evil surmisings," reprove him more sharply, saying 
as you go,— I cannot, must not hear you; for if I did, 
I would be as criminal in the matter as you are— violating 
the Lord's command. And even if I were to 
hear your story, I could not believe it; for the Christian 
who does not respect the Lord's Word and follow 
his plan of redress for grievances, shows so little of the 
Lord's spirit that his word can not be trusted. He 
who twists and dodges the Lord's words would not 
hesitate to twist and misrepresent the words and deeds 
of fellow-disciples. Then withdraw fellowship from 
such until his error has been confessed with promises 
of reform. If to any extent you listen to such conversation 
or express "sympathy" with it or the gossiper 
or slanderer, you are a partner in the sin and in all its 
consequences; and if a "root of bitterness" is thus developed, 



you are more than likely to be one of those 
"defiled" by it.-Heb. 12:15. 

A slanderer is a thief according to worldly standard: 
as Shakespeare wrote, "He who steals my purse 
steals trash; but he who steals my good name takes 
that which doth not make him rich, but leaves me poor 
indeed." According to the Christian standard, still 
higher, as voiced by the Great Teacher, slanderers are 
murderers. (See Matt. 5:22; 1 John 3:15, Revised 
Version.) Thus seen, the very suggestion to slander 
is to be shunned, as of the spirit of Satan.— Jno. 8:44. 

VI. God's people should beware of pride as they 
would avoid the most deadly plague. 

This rule, always good, and well backed by Scripture, 
seems doubly needful to those who are blessed 
with the light of present truth. This may seem strange: 
it may be reasoned that the receiving of so much 
grander views of God's character and plan would make 
his people feel the more insignificant and humble, the 
more dependent on divine goodness, and the more 
trustful of God and the less trustful of themselves. 
And this should be the effect, always and ever: but alas, 
with very many it is not so. 

Many get to feel that the knowledge of the plan 
of the ages proves them specially wise or great or good: 
they seem to forget that God hides the truth from the 
wise and great— that no flesh should glory in his sight. 
They love the truth selfishly, as dealers love their merchandise, 
for the sake of what they can get for it. If 
they cannot hope for wealth in exchange for the truth 
they can hope for small notoriety— to appear wiser 
than others, that they may dole it out in fragments 
and thus perpetuate their notoriety for wisdom, and 
gratify their pride or vanity. Such people do little to 
help circulate the present truth. If they cannot avoid 
it, they may mention MILLENNIAL DAWN or ZION'S 
WATCH TOWER or Tabernacle Shadows or Food for 
Thinking Christians or About Hell or About Spiritism; 
but when they do so it is usually with some disparaging 
remark; as for instance, that they "disagree in a 
good many things;" or that "they pin their faith to no 
man's coat sleeve but go to the Word of God direct;" 
or that "the author isn't much, merely reprinted what 
wiser people had written, and was endeavoring to make 
himself famous at their expense." 

Beware of all such people; sooner or later they will 
fly the track entirely, and injure more than they ever 
helped. God does not wish such people to serve his 
cause, and will surely permit their vanity to stumble 
them,— however much their natural ability— and it is 
generally people of real or fancied ability who are thus 
afflicted with the spirit of pride and vanity. God opposeth 

R2278 : page 87 

the proud, but showeth his favor to the humble. 



We call every reader of our publications to witness that 
the author has never boasted of his wisdom or originality, 
either publicly or privately. We have boasted 
in the truth, and shall continue to boast of it— that no 
human philosophies can hold a candle to its brilliant 
electric ray; but we have never boasted of being its 
originator. On the contrary, it is because we did not 
manufacture it, but because God has revealed it "in 
due time" as "meat in due season," and because it is 
so much more wonderful than we or any other human 
being could originate or concoct, that we have confidence 
that none other than God is its Author and its 
Revealer. 

If by the grace of God we have in any degree been 
used by him in serving present harvest truths to others, 
we rejoice in the service, and will continue to strive to 
be faithful to our stewardship: but as for vanity on this 
account, we see no room or reason for it. We are well 
aware that our Master could readily have found many 
others as fit and worthy of the service, and many more 
capable naturally: we can only suppose, therefore, that 
herein as previously— "God hath chosen the foolish 
things of the world to confound the wise; and God hath 
chosen the weak things of this world to confound the 
things that are mighty,. ..and the things that are 
despised. ..to bring to naught things that are; that 
no flesh should glory in his presence."— 1 Cor. 1:27-29. 

We therefore caution all who by the grace of God 
have been translated out of darkness into God's marvelous 
light, that they walk proportionately the more 
humbly before the Lord: because, if the light received 
should become darkness, how great would be the darkness, 
and how hopeless the condition. It would, as 
the Apostle declares, be better for such never to have 
known the way of life. If salt lose its flavor it is good 
for nothing more than sand. 

VII. Be pure: maintain a conscience void of offense 
toward God and men. Begin with the heart— the 
thoughts: harbor no thoughts that in any sense of the 
word would be evil. To make sure of this, have Christ 
Jesus as your pattern, well and much before your mind. 
When evil is obtruded upon you, either from without 
or from within, lift your heart to him in prayer for 

the grace promised to help in every time of need. 
Keep constantly near you the thought and prayer, "Let 
the words of my mouth and the meditations of my 
heart be acceptable in thy sight, O Lord, my strength 
and my Redeemer." 

VIII. While treasuring and seeking to follow the 
various specific commands of Scripture, let us seek 
more and more to understand and come into sympathy 
with the principles which underlie the divine law: this 
will enable us to judge of the right and the wrong of 
such of our words, thoughts and acts as may not be 
particularly specified in the Lord's Word. Indeed, as 
we get to understand and sympathize with the principles 



of divine law, to that extent we are getting at the 
spirit of the divine Word.-See Psa. 1 19:97-105. 

IX. Shun a contentious and fault-finding disposition 
as contrary to the spirit or disposition of Christ- 
contrary to love. 

A certain amount of combative courage is demanded 
in overcoming the world, the flesh and the devil 
and their various snares, and this fighting disposition 
may become a valuable aid to ourselves and the Master's 
cause if rightly and wisely directed;— against sin, first 
in ourselves and secondly in others; if used for the Lord 
and his people, and against Satan and all his powers 
of darkness and superstition. This in the Scriptures is 
called fighting the good fight: and we all should be 
gallant soldiers in this battle for right and truth, lovingly 
defending our Captain's honor and his people's 
liberties. 

But such a good use of combativeness is not pleasing 
to the Prince of this world, and he will seek to pervert 
what he cannot directly use. Consequently he 
attempts with some to make combativeness appear a 
chief virtue: he encourages them to fight everything 
and everybody;— the brethren more than the powers 
of darkness;— nominal churchmen more than the errors 
and ignorance which blind them and make them 
such. Indeed his desire is to get us to "fight against 
God." 

Let us be on guard on this point. Let us first of 
all judge ourselves lest we cast a stumbling block before 
others: let us fight down in our own hearts the 
wrong spirit which seeks to make mountains out of 
trifles and disposes us to be captious and contentious 
over littles and nonessentials. "Greater is he that 
ruleth his own spirit than he that taketh a city." Let 
us guard ourselves that our defense of the truth be not 
from motives of self glorification; but from love for 
the truth, love for the Lord and love for his people, 
the brethren. If love be the impelling spirit or motive, 
it will show itself accordingly, in loving, gentle, patient, 
humble efforts toward the fellow-servants; and 
let us be "gentle toward all." Let "the sword of the 
spirit, the Word of God," which is quick and powerful, 
do all the cutting. 

X. Beware of all thoughts, feelings and conditions 
directly or remotely connected with malice, envy, 
strife, hatred. Give these no place in your heart even 
for a moment; for they will surely do you great injury, 
aside from leading to the injury of others. Keep your 
heart, your will, your intentions and desires full of 
love toward God and all his creatures,— the most fervent 
toward God, and proportionately toward all who 

have his spirit and walk in his directed way. 

XL Do not trust your conscience. If it were a 
sufficient guide you would have no need of the Scriptures. 
The majority of people have as good as no conscience; 
for they are blind to the principles and laws 



of God given to guide conscience. And still worse off 
than these are those mentioned in 1 Tim. 4:2. Hence 
the imperative necessity for carefully heeding the 
Lord's Word, and walking circumspectly according to 
its light. 

XII. Do not be bold, except for the right, the 
truth. So far as yourself is concerned preserve a reverential 
fear— of sin, and of displeasing the Master, 
and of losing the great reward— "the prize of our high 
calling." Nearly all who "fall away," first lose all 
fear and become self-confident. They forget that it is 
only "If ye do these things ye shall never fall." (2 Pet. 1:5-10.) 
"Let us fear, lest a promise being left us of 
entering into his rest, any of us should seem to come 
short of it." (Heb. 4:1.) Partly because of the loss 
of this proper fear, "It is impossible to renew them 
again unto repentance." 



R2278 : page 88 

FEET WASHING. 



SOME feel that the feet-washing mentioned in 
John 13:4-17 is as important as the Memorial 
Supper; and hence we will here consider the subject: 
altho only one of the Evangelists remembered even to 
mention it. 

In Eastern countries, where sandals were worn, 
and the feet thus exposed to sand and dust, feet-washing 
was a regular custom, and an actual necessity. This 
service was considered very menial, and the humblest 
servants or slaves performed it for the family and guests. 

Our Lord had noticed among his disciples a spirit 
of selfishness; he had overheard them disputing which 
of them should be greatest in authority and dignity in 
the Kingdom he had promised to share with them; 
and, foreseeing that this spirit would injure them in 
proportion as it grew and strengthened, he had rebuked 
them for their lack of humility. So indeed it did, in 
the fourth to the sixth centuries, blossom and yield 
bitter fruit, in the organization of Papacy, and the 
train of evils and errors which still flow from that impure 
fountain. 

To illustrate the proper spirit which should characterize 
all who would be his disciples, he took a little 
child and set him in the midst, and said, Except ye become 
(artless and simple) as a little child, you are not fit 
for the Kingdom for which I am calling you. Ye know 
how the Gentiles lord it over one another, and recognize 
caste and station, but it must not be so with you. 
Ye have but one Master, and all ye are brethren; and 
he that would be chief, let him become chief servant. 



(Mark 10:35-45.) They who serve you most, you 
must mark as your chief ones. I am the chief servant 
myself; for the Son of man came not to be served by 
others, and honored thus, but he came to serve others, 
even to the extent of giving his life in their service. 
As therefore my greatest service toward you renders 
me your chief, so shall it be among you. Esteem 
and honor one another in proportion as you find in each 
other unselfish sacrificing love and service. Esteem 
such very highly for their works' sake.— 1 Thes. 5:13. 

But for all this, the spirit of pride and a desire to 
"lord it" over others, and be reverenced as chief, was 
there, even after three and a half years spent with the 
Master, and under his example; and as he was about to 
leave them. Jesus sought, even on the last evening 
with them, to impress this lesson indelibly upon their 
hearts. So, after the Passover Supper, he arose from 
the table and performed for his disciples the most menial 
service, in washing their feet. They probably had not 
even thought of performing such a service for each 
other or for him, and even had consideration enough to 
object to his thus serving them in so humble a manner. 

When Jesus had finished, he said to them, "Know 
ye what I have done to you? You call me Master and 
Lord, and ye say well; for so I am. If I then, your 
Lord and Master, have washed your feet, ye also ought 
to wash one another's feet. For I have given you an 
example, that you should do as I have done to you. 
Verily, verily, I say unto you, The servant is not 
greater than his lord; neither is he that is sent greater 
than he that sent him." If ye know these things, happy 
are ye if ye do them. If you understand and appreciate 
the lesson I have given you, and will practice it, you 
will be blessed thereby, helped in my service, and prepared 
for the Kingdom in which I have promised you a 
share.— John 13:4-17. 

That the lesson had its designed effect we can 
scarcely doubt, as we look at the course of several of 

R2279 : page 88 

the apostles, and see how, with much self-denial, they 
served the body of Christ, of which they were fellow-members, 
following the example of the Head, who was 
chief servant of all. 

The question arises, What did the Lord mean 
when he said, "I have given you an example, that ye 
should do as I have done?" Was the example in the 
principle, in the lesson of service one toward another? 
or was the example in the method of service, in the ceremony 
of feet-washing? To suppose the latter would 
be to hide the real lesson under a form. And if the 
example were in the form, then every item in the form 
should be observed: an upper room; a supper; sandals 
should be worn; the same kind of garments; the towel 
girdle; etc. But no: the "example" which we should 



follow lay in the humble serving of the disciples by 
the Master, regardless of form. His example of serving 
the fellow-members in even the most menial manner 
is what we should follow— and blessed will we be 
in proportion as we do follow it. In that proportion 
we shall be prepared for the everlasting Kingdom and 
service of God. 

Those now living in Eastern countries, where sandals 
are still worn may find an opportunity now to follow 
the example, the same form which the Master used, 
as well as other forms; and those differently circumstanced 
may follow the "example" in a thousand forms. 
Some of the fellow-disciples probably live in your city 
and in mine. How can we serve them? How can we 
show them our love and sympathy according to the 
Lord's "example?" Not in this climate by washing 
their feet— this would be an inconvenience, the very 
reverse of a pleasure and service to them, and therefore 
contrary to the "example." But we can serve the 
"body" otherwise, and truly follow the example. We 
can improve our various opportunities to serve them in 
matters temporal as well as spiritual. We can be on 
the lookout, and when we see sadness or discouragement, 
we can lend a helping hand to lift our brother's 
burdens, or our sister's sorrows, and we can let them 
see by deeds, as well as words, our anxiety to serve 
them— figuratively speaking, to wash their feet. 

Do not wait until they request your assistance; 
for in proportion as they are developed disciples, 
they will not ask your aid. Do not wait until they 
tell you of their burdens and trials, but watch to anticipate; 
for in proportion as they partake of our Master's 
spirit, they will not be complainers, but will live "always 
rejoicing"— rejoicing even in tribulations. 

Be not ashamed of such service of the "body," 

R2279 : page 89 

but seek and rejoice in it— "ye do serve the Lord, 
Christ." But still more important than temporal service 
is our service one of another as "new creatures." 

The washing of the body with the truth— the 
sanctifying and cleansing of it with the word— is in 
progress now. (Eph. 5:26,27.) What are you doing 
to cleanse and purify the faith and lives of your fellow 
members? Do you approach them humbly with the 
truth, sincerely anxious to serve them, to bless and 
comfort and refresh them therewith? If so, go on; 
grand is your service; the Master served thus; this is 
his example; follow on. The more you can thus serve, 
and at the greater cost of time, and effort, and convenience, 
and self-interest, the greater will you be in 
the eyes of the Master, and the more honored and beloved 
of the body when they shall come to see and 
know you, as the Lord sees and knows your love and 
service. 



Follow closely, then, the noble "example" of Jesus: 
wash and be washed one of another, cleanse and purge 
away the defilements with which each comes daily in 
contact in the world, that ye may be clean, "through 
the word spoken unto you." Purge out the old leaven 
of hypocrisy, and envy, and self-exaltation, even as ye 
have already been justified from all things and reckoned 
pure and holy by the merit of the precious blood which 
the chief servant and Lord of all gave for all.— 
2 Tim. 2:20,21. 



page 89 
"THE NIGHT COMETH WHEREIN NO MAN CAN WORK. 



THE article from Brother Woodworth, which follows, 

will be read by all with great interest. If 

it be merely speculation, it is surely ingenious. We received 

it eight months ago, but after careful consideration 

wrote our dear brother W. that we enjoyed the 

reading of it but could not endorse it as truth— that it 

is more fanciful, inferential and speculative than anything 

we have ever published. Brother W. was by no 

means offended at this, but urged that if published even 

as a conjecture or with a suggestion that it may be only 

a cunningly devised fable, it might do some good by 

awakening some to the fact that whether this calculation 

be right or wrong, evidently "the time is short," 

anyway, for labor in this great harvest work. We 

give a portion of his letter:— 

February 16, 1898. 
DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-In reply to your loving 
letter of the 14th, I beg to assure you that I sympathize 
with your statement that you have considerable 
hesitation in respect to this matter, for I think I 
realize quite clearly just how important it is that you 
should be cautious in what you place before the Lord's 
hungry "sheep." If, therefore, after you have carefully 
considered the points, you still feel averse to 
publishing the article, how would it do to mention that 
you were considering some further points in the chronology, 
which, if correct, would show that the night 
will begin to settle down early next year— that you 
had not yet fully satisfied yourself as to their correctness 
and that since the time is now so near at hand you 
think best not to make any definite statements for the 
present, but to wait and see whether the date will be 
corroborated by developments? It would seem to me 
that you would thus be provided with a good opportunity 
for an exhortation to special effort during the 
year, and at the same time no harm can come in case 
we should find my arguments unsupported by the facts. 



However, this is merely a suggestion. 

I treat the Time of Harvest as one complete day, 
from sunrise to sunrise. It seemed to me clear that 
having established the proportion of 

light : darkness 14.6 : 9.4 
in its application to a representative harvest day of 24 
literal hours, the same proportion should hold good in 
the division into day and night of the great forty-year 
harvest day in which we are now living. Reasoning 
in this way I found the date February 1st, 1899. 

In my understanding the period from Oct. 1st, 
1874, to Feb. 1st, 1899, would therefore represent the 
12 Jewish hours of daylight, while the period from Feb. 
1st, 1899, to Oct. 1st, 1914, would represent the four 
"watches" of night, the night including a period of 
twilight at each end. 

Do as you may think best, and be assured I will 
continue to be, as ever, your brother and servant in 
the hope of the Gospel, CLAYTON J. WOODWORTH. 



We conclude to place the matter before the TOWER 
readers with the foregoing cautions against accepting 
this matter as of the same weight and authority as the 
more definitely stated prophecies treated in the MILLENNIAL 
DAWN volumes. Should the outward work 
of "sealing" with the truth be stopped at the date indicated 
it will surprise us greatly— our expectation 
being that it will continue for probably eight years 
yet, until the Religious Federation shall have been 
consummated and have gained sufficient political prestige 
to deprive us of our rights of publication, etc. 
Nevertheless, we wish to use this year and every year 
as tho it were the last for this precious service of the 
Lord, his Word and his "sheep." And this is the 
spirit of all possessed of the holy spirit of God's dear Son. 

Brother Woodworth's article follows. 



page 90 

THE WHEAT HARVEST. 



ITS CLOSE NIGH AT HAND. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-In a back number 
of the WATCH TOWER (1893) you quote from 
a subscriber who says:— "It is evident that a portion of 
the forty years of the Gospel harvest will be a 'night,' 
without opportunity for labor, and this harvest time 



is now nearly half consumed. Since there probably 
will be ten years of 'night' but little more than a decade 
remains for active service." 

Then follows an editorial comment in these words: 
"May not this imply that the forty-year day will be 
practically divided in the middle, and hence that from 
1895 onward the darkness may be expected to gather 
more and more?" 

These suggestions seem to me to be the first steps 
toward the unfolding of a great truth. It will occur 
at once to any person who gives the subject careful 
thought that as, during the harvest season, the days 
are somewhat longer than the nights, the same should 
be true of the Gospel harvest, and this is the experience 
of those who are now laboring as co-reapers with 
the Master. The time of harvest is more than half 
gone, but the daylight still continues; there is still 
here and there an "Israelite indeed" who, when he 
hears the "joyful sound" is glad to come "out of darkness 
into His marvelous light." 

But as, in a literal harvest day, the length of the 
daylight does not greatly exceed that of the night, so, 
in this harvest time, we should expect the present 
favorable opportunity for effective service to soon draw 
to a close; and indications are not wanting to the 
watchers in Zion that ere long the last "over-ripe" 
(parched, thirsty) head of wheat will have been gathered, 
and the harvest of this age will have been fully 
reaped.— See Matt. 13:30 and Rev. 14:16, Revised 
Version, margin. 

In Matthew 13:24-30,36-43, our great Teacher 
and Chief Reaper, in speaking of this time of harvest, 
has called it a wheat harvest, and it would seem that 
if we could by some means ascertain what is the representative 
wheat-harvesting day of the world, and 
what its length is, we might learn something of value. 
At first thought this may seem a difficult thing to do, 
but with the Lord's help the problem may be solved 
more easily than one would suppose. The first step in 
its solution is to find 

WHERE TO LOOK FOR THE WHEAT. 



Thanks to the labors of those who "run to and 
fro" in this day of increased knowledge, this is a very 
simple matter, and below are given, from the American 
Agriculturist hand book for 1897, the latest and most 
reliable statistics available of the wheat crop of the 
world. 

[Brother W. here furnishes statistics for each state 
in the United States and for the several wheat-producing 
countries of the remainder of the world. These 
statistics show that Minnesota and North Dakota produce 
the largest crops of the United States, and that 



Russia, France, Hungary, Germany and Italy are the 
chief wheat countries of Europe in the order named, 
British India being chief in Asia.] 

We give the summary as follows:— 

Continent 1895. 

Bushels. 

North America 538,563,000 

South America 85,000,000 

Europe 1,443,233,000 

Asia 404,578,000 

Africa 48,842,000 

Australasia 32,461,000 

Grand Total 2,562,677,000 

If you will kindly take an atlas and look up the 
location of these countries, you will be surprised, first, 
to find that in every instance the larger portion of the 
country named lies within the Temperate Zone (north 
or south), while in the great majority of cases the entire 
country lies wholly within that zone. But you 
will be still more surprised if you investigate the matter 
further, to find that in the few countries which do 
touch or project into other zones, the wheat producing 
provinces lie entirely within the Temperate Zone. 
This means that 

THE ENTIRE CROP IS GROWN IN THE TEMPERATE ZONE. 

Of the wheat production of India, the Encyclopedia 
Brittanica says:— "Broadly speaking, it may be 
said that wheat does not thrive anywhere south of the 
Deccan" (which lies on the border between the Torrid 
and Temperate Zones). The entire civilized region 
of Egypt lies in the Temperate Zone, and the sections 
of Western Australia and Queensland which extend 
north of the tropic of Capricorn are barren and uninhabited." 
It is interesting to note, however, from 
the Encyclopedia Brittanica that wheat has been 
"grown in Norway as far north as latitude 65 degrees," only 
1-1/2 degrees from the arctic circle. We thus have conclusive 
evidence that practically all of the wheat of the world 
is grown in the Temperate Zone. 

[Brother W. next proves satisfactorily (we omit 
the evidences which are lengthy) that the 45th parallel 
is the center of the wheat producing belt: and this 
line he finds runs through the principal wheat state 
of these United States— passing through its capital city, 
Minneapolis, the greatest wheat and wheat flour market 
in the world;— with twenty-six flouring mills producing 
over 10,000,000 barrels per annum. 

Seeking next for the date of harvest, he gives 
abundant statistics to prove that the first day of August 
would represent the average middle of wheat harvest 
the world over, and continues—] 



THE LENGTH OF THE DAY. 



Having thus ascertained beyond all reasonable 
question that the center of the world's wheat belt is 
the 45th parallel of latitude, and that its representative 
harvest day is August 1st, it becomes a comparatively 
simple matter to ascertain the length of the 
average wheat harvest day. It is only necessary to 
find the time of sunrise and sunset on the 45th parallel 
of latitude on August 1st. 

page 91 

[Further elaborate calculations are given here, showing 
that--] From 4.48 A.M. to 7.24 P.M. is 14 hours 
and 36 minutes, which, if these calculations are correct, 
is therefore the length of the harvest day of the world. 

FEBRUARY 1ST, 1899, MARKS THE CLOSE OF THE DAY. 



We are now ready to apply what we have learned. 
If the length of the harvest period from October 1st, 
1874, to October 1st, 1914, be considered as a day, part 
of which is light and part darkness, we can easily find 
what portion of the forty-year period will correspond 
with the daylight. To begin with, we will reduce the 
forty years of "harvest" to months. 40 times 12 
equals 480 months. Now, taking the length of the 
average harvest day, we have 14 hours and 36 minutes 
=14.6 hours=14.6/24 or 146/240 or 292/480 of the day. The 14 hours 
and 36 minutes from sunrise to sunset, therefore, corresponds 
to 292 months from the time when the Sun 
of Righteousness arose, October 1st, 1874. (MILLENNIAL 
DAWN, VOL. II., p. 188.) 292 months equals 24 
years and 4 months. 24 years and 4 months from 
October 1st, 1874, brings us to February 1st, 1899, as 
marking the close of this harvest day (sunset), and 
would seem to indicate that by that time the harvest 
work [of gathering from the world] will be finished 
[— tho much threshing and winnowing may still be in 
order]; i.e., that the last of the "overcomers" will 
have been sealed with the knowledge of present truth, 
and the shadows of the night, wherein no man can 
work, will then begin to settle down. 

But, even after the sunlight is withdrawn, it seems 
probable that there will still be a period corresponding 
to twilight, in which those who are really anxious to 
labor in the Master's cause may find the opportunity. 
It is plain that there must come a time when the last 
member of the prospective bride of Christ will come to 
a knowledge of the truth. It is clear also, that after 
that time has come, he or she must, to some extent at 



least, "spend and be spent" in the Master's service. 
This being the case, it follows as a matter of course, 
that the "door" of opportunity will not be immediately 
and forever closed when the last saint has been sealed, 
but that the shadows will gradually deepen. It seems 
clear to me, therefore, that while it will still be possible 
to work for the Master after February 1st, 1899, 
it will not be possible to do any further [outward] 
harvest work, for the last overcoming saint will have 
been "sealed in his forehead" with a knowledge of 
the truth before that time. It behooves us all to do 
with our might what our hands find to do, while it is 
called to-day. 

CONFIRMED BY THE TIME OF PUBLICATION OF THE 
"PLAN OF THE AGES." 

From a careful study of Revelation, I became convinced 
long ago that the 10th chapter refers, in general, 
to the rise and development of present truth, but specifically 
to MILLENNIAL DAWN; please see also pages 
88, 89 of Volume III. 

As nearly as I can ascertain, the publication of 
the first volume of this wonderful set of Bible helps 
was looked for eagerly by all the friends of the truth, 
and the book itself was and still is regarded by its 
author as his first clear and systematic presentation of 
the divine plan of the ages. In support of this I quote 
from pages 1 14, 1 15 of Harvest Sittings, as follows:— 

"It was about this time that. ..I took occasion 
to promise MILLENNIAL DAWN, which should present 
the Plan of the Ages in the clearer, more orderly manner 
made possible by the new light shed upon every 
feature of it by the lessons from the Tabernacle;" and 
again: "Some who have The Three Worlds or the old 
edition of Day Dawn, would perhaps like to know my 
present opinion of them— whether I still think them 
profitable books to loan to truth seekers. To this I 
reply, Certainly not; because the very immature views 
of God's truth therein presented fall far short of what 
we now see to be God's wonderful plan.. ..All now 
so clear was then blurred, mixed and indistinct. Neither 
had we seen the steps or planes, shown upon the Chart 
of the Ages, MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOL. I., which have 
assisted so many to distinguish between justification 
and sanctification, and to determine their present standing 
and relationship to God.... Even Food for Thinking 
Christians I no longer commend, because it is less 
systematic than later publications." Again, in speaking 
of these earlier works it says: "Things which are 
now clear as noonday were then cloudy and mixed." 

Thus, by your own words, it is apparent that the 
light of truth did not shine upon all the features of the 
Divine Plan until we were well on in the harvest day— 
until noonday— until the "Sun" had reached the zenith 
and poured its light-giving rays into the secret recesses 



of the deep things of God. And what was noonday to 
you was noonday to all, as soon as The Plan of The 
Ages had been published. 

To find, therefore, the time of publication of the 
Plan of the Ages will, it seems to me, be to find midday 
of this harvest season, and this can be easily done. 
On the fourth cover-page of every paper bound copy of 
The Plan of the Ages occur these words: "Special 
Issue of Zion's Watch Tower, representing numbers 
3, 4 and 5 of Volume VIII.," which numbers correspond 
to November 1st, 1886, December 1st, 1886 and 
January 1st, 1887. As the middle date of these three 
is December 1st, 1886, that is evidently the midday 
hour of this harvest day. 

In the "Helps" in the back of my Bible I find the 
following remarks under the heading "The Day and 
its Divisions:" "The hour varied in length with that 
of the daylight to be subdivided. To compute any 
given hour of a Jewish day in modern terms is thus a 
matter of some complication, as only one hour of the 
Jewish day,— that of noon— would always correspond 
with one hour of our day." Reckoning back, therefore, 
from this important hour, midday, to sunrise, (assuming 
the publication of MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOL. I., to 
have been midday in this 40 year harvest day) we find 
that the difference between October 1st, 1874, and 
December 1st, 1886, or, in other words, the first half 
of the harvest day (from sunrise to noon), is 12 years 
and 2 months. Accordingly, the last half of the day, 
or from midday to sunset, will be of the same length. 
12 years and 2 months from December 1st, 1886, 
brings us to February 1st, 1899, and exactly confirms 
what we had previously learned. If this were all the 
evidence to show that February 1 st, 1 899 marks the 
date of sealing of the last overcomer, it would be sufficient, 
but there is still more. 

page 92 

CONFIRMED BY THE HALF HOUR OF SILENCE. 



After mentioning, in Chap. 6, the various epochs 
which, under the symbols of seals, mark the events 
connected with the rise and fall of Papacy and with 
those of "the time of the end," Revelation 7:2,3, 
says: "And I saw another angel [messenger] ascending 
from the East [the messenger of the covenant— 
the Sun of Righteousness], having the seal of the living 
God [the seventh and last]" and he cried with a 
loud voice to the four angels to whom it was given to 
hurt the earth and the sea, saying, Hurt not the earth, 
neither the sea, nor the trees, till we have sealed the 
servants of our God in their foreheads." The balance 
of the chapter, verses 4-17, seems to me to be a parenthesis, 



thrown in to conceal, until God's due time, 

the meaning of the first verse of chapter 8. If I understand 

the subject correctly, this verse closes the 

subject of the seals, the balance of chapter 8 dealing 

with an entirely different subject. 

Correctly translated, the verse reads, "And when 
he had opened the seventh seal there was silence in 
heaven during half an hour." The word "silence" 
has a double significance. It not only conveys the impression 
of a time of deep study and thoughtfulness, 
but of a calm before a storm, and as here used seems to 
me to plainly mean both. Please note carefully that 
this time of silence takes place 

(1) While the saints are being sealed. 

(2) While the winds of the time of trouble are 
withheld, and see how perfectly it coincides with both 
thoughts. 

Again, Christ and his Church, since April 1st, 
1878 (the date when "He took to himself his great 
power and began his reign") really constitute the 
heaven, and as the prophecy, "He uttered his voice 
[i.e., broke the "silence"], the earth melted," is not 
yet fulfilled, I hold it to be unmistakable evidence that 
the time of silence and the work of sealing are one and 
the same thing; and that both began April 1st, 1878. 
This is the date when it was first possible to apply the 
Lord's command, "Come out of her, my people;" for 
it was not till then that Babylon was cast off; this is 
the date marked in the time parallels as the time when 
our Lord took to himself his great power and began his 
reign; it marks the rejection and commencement of 
the fall to everlasting destruction of what has constituted 
the heavens all down during the Gospel age; it 
indicates the beginning of the return of favor to fleshly 
Israel; it is the end of the 360-year periods or 
"times" of Revelations; it is the date when the 
first resurrection (of the Church, the body of Christ) 
began, and the time from which it is said, "Blessed 
are the dead who die in the Lord from now henceforth." 
It is, therefore, a focal point toward which the rays of 
prophecy converge. 

Moreover, since then the work of "sealing" the 
saints has progressed in an orderly, systematic and 
wonderfully thorough manner. During all this time 
the winds of the time of trouble have been held and 
the "silence in heaven" which commenced, as we have 
shown, on April 1st, 1878, still continues. The seventh 
seal, by way of contrast with the other seals, is called 
the "Seal of the living God." It lies wholly within 
God's day,— the seventh thousand-year day, the Millennium, 
—and the events which occur under it are 
specially under God's direction. The scale, therefore, 
by which the half hour of silence should be measured 
is not the "year for a day" scale by which God measures 
human events, but is the scale by which God 
measures his own work. In speaking of the events of 



this day of judgment, Peter says, "one day is with the 

Lord as a thousand years and a thousand years is as 

one day." (2 Peter 3:8.) Using this divinely provided 

scale it becomes a very easy matter to find the 

length of the half hour. One half hour is one forty-eighth 

of a literal day. One forty-eighth of a thousand 

years is 20 years and 10 months. 20 years and 10 

months from April 1st, 1878, brings us again to February 

1st, 1899, as marking the date when the last 

overcomer will be sealed, and the storm of the great 

time of trouble will begin to break. Perhaps it will 

be worth mentioning that by this scale one hour would 

be 41 years and 8 months, this corresponds with the 

period from the beginning of the seventh thousand 

years or Day of the Lord, to October 1st, 1914, and reminds 

one of Rev. 18:10,17,19, where it is thrice 

repeated that "in one hour" the judgment and desolation 

of Babylon takes place. 

CONFIRMED BY THE LENGTH OF THE NIGHT. 



In several places in MILLENNIAL DAWN reference 
is made to the fact that the French Revolution is a 
type of the great time of trouble or "night," into 
which we anticipate the world will soon be plunged; 
and it seems probable that if we can find the length of 
that period of unrest, we may be able to learn something 
of further advantage. After mentioning the 
gathering of the National Assembly, and their claim 
on June 17th, 1789, that they were the legitimate representatives 
of the French people, Anderson's General 
History, page 572 says:— 

"Thus was inaugurated that tremendous social 
and political convulsion known as the French Revolution, 
which in its progress not only overturned the government 
of France, but threw the whole of the civilized 
world into violent commotion, uprooting institutions 
that had withstood the assaults of ages. The king and 
his ministers, dismayed at the determination shown by 
the lower order and desiring to check their proceedings, 
attempted to exclude them from their hall and thus 
suspend their sittings. ...An insurrection of the populace 
of Paris ensued, and the Bastile, a noted prison, 
was stormed and captured by the mob, July 14th, 1789. 
The excited populace then proceeded to Versailles and 
demanded that the king and royal family should return 
to Paris, and Louis felt himself obliged to comply." 
(July 17th, 1789.) 

Concerning king Louis' memorable journey from 
Versailles to Paris, Abbott's "Life of Marie Antoinette," 
says:— 

"As on the morning of the 17th of July, the king 
entered his carriage, with a slender retinue and with 
no military protection, to expose himself to the dangers 



of his tumultuous capital, this whole body formed in 
procession, on foot, and followed him. A countless 
throng of artisans and peasants flocked through all the 
streets of Versailles, and poured in from the surrounding 
country, armed with scythes and bludgeons, and 

page 93 

joined the strange cavalcade. Every moment the multitude 
increased, and the road, both before and behind 
the king, was so clogged with the accumulating mass 
that seven hours passed before the king arrived at the 
gates of the city. During all this time he was exposed 
to every conceivable insult. As Louis was conducted 
to the Hotel de Ville a hundred thousand armed men 
lined the way, and he passed along under the arch of 
their sabres crossed over his head. The cup of degradation, 
he was compelled to drain to its dregs." 

As the first great result of the French Revolution 
was to humble royalty, to destroy reverence for 
"names" of men, (Rev. 11:13), we are safe in fixing 
upon the date of the humbling of the French monarch, 
July 17th, 1789, as the time when something more 
than claims had been made, or mob violence attempted, 
and the people had begun to know their power and to 
use it. We therefore look upon this date as the real 
beginning of the "tremendous social and political convulsion" 
of that period. 

Now looking ahead to the great time of trouble 
coming, we know that it will only come to its final end 
when Isaiah 2:2-4 is fulfilled— "And many people shall 
go and say, Come ye and let us go up to the mountain 
of the Lord, to the house of Jacob, and he will teach 
us of his ways and we will walk in his paths." With 
this in mind we look amid the troublous events which 
stirred France from end to end a century ago, for a 
personage who was not only a mighty factor in those 
events, but who, so far as he was able, so shaped them 
as to cause them all, eventually, to work together for 
his own aggrandizement. Needless to say we find him 
in the "Man of Destiny"— Napoleon Bonaparte, he 
who so narrowly missed becoming a universal monarch 
that he is described at length in that wonderful 
eleventh chapter of Daniel, in which they all find a place.— 
See MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOL. III., chapter 2. 

As all students of history know, Napoleon, during 
the latter part of the French time of trouble, caused 
the fickle populace to really play into his hands. He 
became successively the First Consul, then Consul for 
life, and finally Emperor. But even when he had 
been crowned Emperor of the French he had not yet 
attained the height of his power, and we must look for 
an event in his life which will correspond with the 
homage which, about October 1st, 1914, we expect will 
be paid to the rightful Lord of Earth. Such event did 
occur, and by those who feared and hated him was considered 



of such importance that it caused a coalition 
to be formed against him by the combined governments 
of Europe. From Arnault and Panckoucke's Life of 
Napoleon, Part I., page 206, 1 quote a description of 
this event:— 

"Napoleon no longer indulged the least hesitation 
in putting upon his head the iron crown of the kings 
of the Lombards. In reality, as Napoleon had established 
royalty in France, he could not think of suffering 
a republic to subsist in the north of Italy, and as, 
during his Consulship, he had prepared the French 
for an imperial regimen, he had also brought the Italian 
republic into such a state that it was impossible to preserve 
its independence. From its first existence this 
republic had been led by him, as it were, in leading 
strings, but from the moment he was declared Emperor 
of France a change in the Italian constitution was to 
be expected. In order to be more sure of the assent 
of his new subjects, he used the same means as he had 
adopted in 1802. He summoned the Italian consulta 
to meet him at Paris for the professed purpose of adding 
those modifications and changes that times and 
circumstances had rendered necessary. On the 17th 
of March, 1805, therefore, M. de Melzi, Vice President 
of the Italian republic, arrived at Paris at the head of 
a deputation from the Cisalpine Republic, to express 
their cordial acquiescence in a monarchial and hereditary 
government, and also their wishes that Napoleon, 
being (already) proclaimed king of Italy, would not suffer 
a year to elapse before he came to be crowned," etc. 

This, I believe, was the proudest day of Napoleon's 
life, when the representatives of that country which 
for two thousand years had— under one form of government 
or another— ruled the world, came to lay their 
homage at his feet and beseech him to be their lord. 

Anderson's General History, page 579, under the 
heading "King of Italy," says:— 

"Napoleon received the crown of France from the 
hands of the Pope; and subsequently, at Milan, caused 
himself to be crowned King of Italy, with the famous 
"iron crown" of the Lombards (1805). These assumptions 
of power led to another coalition against 
him, on the part of England, Austria, Russia, Sweden 
and Prussia." 

From this date, March 17th, 1805 (when his imperial 
power was first recognized by the Italian government), 
back to the beginning of the French Revolution, 
July 17th, 1789, was 15 years and 8 months, and if I 
am acting upon right premises this should be the length 
of time from October 1st, 1914, back to the beginning 
of the great time of trouble. 15 years and 8 months 
back from October 1st, 1914, brings us again to Feb. 
1st, 1899, and confirms all we have previously learned! 

Having found the length of the "night" to be 15 
years and 8 months, it may be of interest to note if we 
divide this into four equal watches,— as was the Jewish 



custom,— where the end of the cock-crowing or third 
watch, and the beginning of the morning or fourth 
watch will occur. 15 years and 8 months equals 188 
months; three quarters of 188 months would be 141 
months, or 1 1 years and 9 months. 1 1 years and 9 
months from February 1st, 1899, brings us to November 
1st, 1910. This synchronizes very closely with 
the teachings of the pyramid (Vol. III., p. 363). The 
difference of one month from October 1 st to November 
1st, suggests that possibly the "month" referred to by 
Brother Dickinson in the November 1st, '96, TOWER 
may have a literal as well as a symbolic fulfilment, and 
that some great catastrophe, the worst event of the 
year of October 1st, 1910 to October 1st, 1911, may 
occur about that time, and that as Christ has promised 
his followers that if worthy they would be permitted 
to escape the severest troubles of this coming day of 
wrath, he will take the last one to himself before that 
catastrophe has come. It seems reasonable, also, to 
suppose that it will take but a very short time after the 
last members of the body of Christ (the light of the 
world) have been taken from the earth, until the darkest 
hour of that dark night will have involved Great 
Babylon in inextricable confusion and dismay. 

In love and fellowship, Your brother in Christ, 
July 12, '97. CLAYTON J. WOODWORTH. 



R2279 : page 94 

JOHN THE BAPTIST AND HIS MURDERERS. 

-MAR. 20.-MATT. 14:1-12.- 

"Keep thy heart with all diligence; for out 
of it are the issues of life."— Prov. 4:23. 

THIS lesson relates more particularly to Herod 
and Herodias, than to John the baptizer. It will 
be remembered that John had faithfully reproved Israel's 
sins, calling the nation to repentance— in preparation 
to receive their Messiah and the long promised 
Kingdom of God. His work, while faithfully done so 
far as he was concerned, and while not devoid of fruits, 
was nevertheless a failure as respected the bringing of 
Israel into a proper condition of heart, that as Israelites 
indeed they might be prepared to receive Jesus as 
the Messiah. Had John succeeded, the mission of 
Jesus to Israel would have been successful; and then, 
instead of the nation's being rejected from divine favor 
and overthrown in a great time of trouble, it would 
have received additional divine blessings, taking the 
place now occupied by the Christian Church: but, as it 
was, the words of the prophet were fulfilled, "Tho Israel 
be as the sands of the sea, yet a remnant only shall 



be saved." The unready stumbled, were "broken off." 

In this respect we have seen that John, like Elijah, 
was a type or illustration of the entire Gospel Church 
in the flesh,— in its earthly career.* John himself, 
however, tho a loyal servant to the Lord and a martyr 
for the truth, was not a member of the Gospel Church. 
He belongs on the lower plane, with the overcomers of 
the Jewish age. Our Lord clearly declares this; "The 
law and the prophets were until John; since that time 
the Kingdom of Heaven is preached." (Luke 16:16.) 
Again he said, "There hath not risen a greater than 
John the Baptist; notwithstanding, he that is least in 
the Kingdom of Heaven [Church] is greater than he." 
(Matt. 11:11.) None could share in the "high calling," 
nor in any manner be recognized by the Father 
as members of the house of sons, who died prior to our 
Lord's death and resurrection,— prior to the giving of 
the holy spirit of adoption, whereby all the house of 
sons are "sealed unto the day of redemption."— John 1:12; 
Eph. 4:30. 

John's position in the future, therefore, will not 
be that of a member of the Bride, the Heavenly Kingdom 
class; but with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob and all 
the prophets, amongst whom he was one of the chief, 
he will be privileged to participate as a member of the 
earthly phase of the Kingdom, and be one of the 
"princes in all the earth." And as a servant of the 
Kingdom he will be greatly honored and blessed and 
used, in that position to which by the grace of God he 
was called. And we might here remark that the ancient 
worthies who will thus be the servants of the 
Kingdom class, are not thus differently honored from 
the Church because less faithful than the overcomers 
of the Gospel age: on the contrary, had they not been 
faithful they would not be honored at all. Only overcomers 
will have any part in the Kingdom work; and 
any part in that work will be honorable and desirable. 
God desired two classes and hence in his plan called 
two classes, both honorable and to honorable service; 
—the one on the earthly plane, the other on the spiritual. 
There was no obligation to "call" either class: 
it is an honor to be called and to be used of the Lord 
in any part of his service; and all thus used will be 
perfect, each on his own plane, and be perfectly satisfied 
with his estate: just as fish are better satisfied to be in 
the water, while birds are better satisfied to be in the air. 

John's candor in reproving Herod for living in 
adultery with his brother Phillip's wife, brought 
against him not only Herod's ill-will, but especially the 
ill-will of the woman. It would seem indeed that it 
was the woman, Herodias, that was the instigator of 
Herod's entire course toward John. We read, "Therefore 
Herodias had a quarrel against him and would 
have killed him; but she could not, for Herod feared 
John, knowing that he was a just man and an holy, 
and saved him; and when he heard him, he did many 



things, and heard him gladly."— Mark 6:19-25. 

Herodias was therefore on the lookout for some 
opportunity to overcome Herod's sympathy and fear, 
and to accomplish the death of John, who had now 
been imprisoned, at her instance, for over a year. Her 
opportunity came when, at a birthday banquet, Herod, 
surrounded by his "lords and high captains," and 
charmed by the dancing of Saloam (the daughter of 
Herodias), promised her whatever she might ask even 
to the half of his kingdom. The wickedness and intense 
malignity of the woman's heart against John, 
simply because of his reproof of her wrong course, is 
fully shown by the fact that at her instance the 
daughter chose the death of John in preference even to 
a half of Herod's kingdom. 

Incidentally, too, this narrative shows how great 
an influence a wrong-minded woman can exercise. 
Herod was under her influence to such an extent that 
he had put away his lawful wife to make room for this 
wicked woman: her daughter was under her influence 
so that she was willing to relinquish half a kingdom to 
fulfil her mother's wicked will. One lesson here set 
before us is that, while women naturally are more sentimental 
than men, and under favorable circumstances 
dominated by good sentiments, yet, if they become 
evil-minded and vicious, they are correspondingly disposed 
to go to even greater extremes of wickedness 



*MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOL. II., page 251. 

R2280 : page 94 

than their brothers. It is of absolute importance to 
men that they should not only be emptied of the evil 
spirit of selfishness and sin, but that they should be 
filled with the spirit of Christ, the holy spirit: all this 
is still more important as respects woman, with her 
more sentimental nature for either good or evil. 

R2280 : page 95 

What a suggestive lesson is here for mothers in 
respect to their power over their daughters either for 
good or for evil. And here we trespass upon our subject 
sufficiently to remark that woman's proper sphere 
of influence is the home— as saith the Scriptures. A 
true, pure, noble, sensible mother has an almost untellable 
influence for good or for evil with her husband 
and sons as well as with her daughters. What a great 
mistake has been made by some well-intentioned but 
not Scripturally guided mothers in leaving the home 
privileges, opportunities and duties put into their hands 
by Providence, to go out into the world to attempt its 
reformation. How frequently the homes of female 



suffragists and female reformers are neglected, the evil 
effects thereof falling upon husbands and children. 
Let every mother feel that in her own family and family 
connections, and in the opportunities opened to her 
in the Church, the Lord's family, she has abundant 
opportunity for the exercise of every talent and grace, 
and that in a manner fully in accordance with the divine 
Word and therefore in harmony with the wisdom 
which cometh from above. 

Herod was grieved, "sorry," for the unexpected 
turn matters took in connection with his unwise offer. 
We are not to infer from this any heart repentance, 
but merely that the matter was incongruous to his 
sentiments and wishes. But proud of his word as a 
king, proud also of the power, and desirous of appearing 
omnipotent as possible before his nobles, none of 
whom probably were of a kind to have any sympathy 
with John, because also of his oaths, Herod concluded 
to grant the request, and as a result John was beheaded, 
and the cruel, vindictive and wicked Herodias received 
the ghastly present of his head, while John's 
followers buried the remainder of his body and bore 
the news to Jesus, his friend. 

John's courage and fearlessness in reproving the 
King should not, we believe, be taken as an indication 
of proprieties, by the Lord's people. To our understanding 
John exceeded his mission when he undertook 
a personal correction of the king. He was right in 
speaking publicly and boldly against sin in its any and 
every form; and had Herod inquired of him respecting 
the subject, it would have been duty for John to have 
made the statement here recorded. And it is barely 
possible that Herod did inquire and that John was not 
a busybody in the king's business, but merely told the 
truth in answer to an inquiry. This however does not 
appear from the general narrative. We suggest, however, 
that the Lord's people would generally best proclaim 
the truth in a general way without making applications 
of it to persons in particular, rulers or others, 
unless so requested by them. It is, we believe, sufficient, 
if principles of righteousness are firmly held 
and publicly stated. 

However, it is altogether possible, indeed probable 
we think, that John's course which brought him 
into conflict with Herod was in some degree typical of 
the course of the Gospel Church in this present time; 
and of the course of events that may be expected. If 
it be a type, Herod would represent civil government, 
and the unlawful wife would represent the nominal 
church, which throughout the symbolic Scriptures is 
represented as a woman, Jezebel, etc. Should it prove 
to be a type by its fulfilment in antitype, the fulfilment 
will probably be on something like the following lines: 
(1) A partial reunion of Church and State. (This 
seems to be now in process of development.) (2) In 
such case it would become the duty of the true Church, 



the forerunners and announcers of the Messianic Kingdom, 
to reprove the civil powers as well as the nominal 
church systems, and to declare their union unlawful- 
contrary to the Word of God. (3) The effect of this 
would pretty surely be to awaken the animosity of 
both civil and religious powers; but it would draw out 
specially the animosity and venom of the latter. (4) 
The church nominal, in her false position would be 
anxious to stifle the reproofs and to destroy the reprovers, 
and the effect would be that the civil power would 
be induced to pass such legislation as would restrain 
the liberty of the faithful ones and hinder them from 
public utterances;— as John was hindered by imprisonment. 
(5) Jezebel's personal influence being insufficient 
may subsequently be augmented by the influence 
of her daughter (united Protestantism) who will be so 
fully in sympathy with her as to become her tool in the 
destruction of the most loyal servants of God. 

The Golden Text of this lesson is well worthy of 
being deeply engraven upon the hearts of all who seek 
to make their calling and election sure: "Keep thy 
heart with all diligence; for out of it are the issues of 
life." If the heart, the thoughts, be kept strictly under 
control in full harmony with the Lord and his 
Word, all the opposition of the world and the flesh and 
the devil will not be able to overcome us. Being filled 
with the Master's spirit and guided by him, we shall 
thus come off victors, conquerors and more than conquerors 
through him that loved us. 



page 95 

-QUARTERLY REVIEW.-MAR. 27. 



R2280 : page 95 

"THE DOGS EAT OF THE CRUMBS WHICH FALL FROM THE CHILDREN'S TABLE. 

-APRIL 3. -MATT. 15:21-31.- 

"Then came she and worshipped him, 
saying, Lord, help me."— Matt. 15:25. 

SIDON and Tyre lay between Galilee and the 
Mediterranean sea, and the border line of 
these two countries, where they touched the land of 
Israel, are in this lesson called the "coasts." Our 
Lord did not go into the countries of Tyre and Sidon, 
for those were Gentile countries, and he had already 
instructed his disciples not to go into the way of the 
Gentiles. His journey, mentioned in this lesson, was 
still in Israel, in Galilee, but over toward the border 



of Tyre and Sidon. The woman who is the central 
figure came from the Gentile side of the border: she 
no doubt had heard of Israel's hope in a coming Messiah, 
who would be of the house of David, and whose 
Kingdom it was predicted should be a universal Kingdom. 
And she had undoubtedly heard also of Jesus 
and his wonderful works, and of his claim that he was 
Israel's Messiah. Hearing of his close approach to her 
neighborhood, she came to him on behalf of her daughter 

R2280 : page 96 

who was possessed of a demon, obsessed.* In harmony 
with her knowledge she cried to Jesus for help, 
"Have mercy upon me, O Lord, thou Son of David: 
my daughter is grievously vexed of a devil." 

Our Lord's course in making no answer for a time 
was perhaps intended to test the woman's faith as well 
as to manifest it to others, then and since. Perhaps 
also his delay was in order to consider well the path of 
duty, the work which the Father had given him to do. 
What a lesson is here for us: if our Master went into 
the wilderness and into the mountain to pray and to 
meditate, and if here he paused to consider the Father's 
will, how much more need have we to do so;— we, 
whose judgments have so often proved to be unsound, 
and who know that to begin with we are sadly fallen 
and imperfect. Our dear Master's caution should be a 
reproof and a lesson to us; for how apt the majority 
are to speak and act without one moment's thought 
respecting the will of our Father in heaven. 

Our Lord was perhaps weighing the subject, fully 
recognizing the fact that his powers were to be specially 
used with Israel and Israel only, as he himself had 
testified. He seems to have been considering whether 
or not he might reasonably and properly reward the 
faith of the supplicant. While he delayed to answer, 
his disciples seemingly took up the woman's cause, 
whether from sympathy or from vexation because she 
was interrupting their opportunity for study and communion 
with the Lord, we cannot judge; but their suggestion 
evidently was that the Lord grant her request 
and "send her away" in peace. As tho still weighing 
the question and as tho desirous that the disciples 
should discern the logic of his course and the propriety 
of his decision, he answered the disciples, "I am not 
sent but unto the lost sheep of the house of Israel."— 
Verse 24. 

Quite probably the poor woman heard our Lord's 
disclaimer of any mission to the Gentiles; but so great 
was her love for her daughter, and so great her faith 
in the Lord's power, that she persisted, and falling before 
the Master, she worshipped him, saying, "Lord, 
help me." Her daughter's cause was her cause. Our 
Lord's response, that it would not be proper to take 
the food away from the children of God to give it to 



dogs, she understood fully. She recognized Israel as 
the children of the Kingdom that God had promised 
to their father Abraham and his seed; and she well 
knew that all Gentiles were reckoned as "dogs." But 
our Lord's language seemed nevertheless to give her 
some hope, for it would appear that he used a word 

R2281 : page 96 

for dogs which signifies not ferocious dogs but house-dogs 
—dogs which were friends and companions of the 
children. And so the poor woman, taking advantage 
of this thought, pressed her prayer for help, saying 
that the friendly dogs do get some of the children's 
bread, sometimes, cast to them from the table: and she 
desired that some crumb of favor might be granted to 
her. Our Lord was greatly touched by her faith 
which, while persistent, was not intrusive nor assertive; 
and as a result her prayer was granted. Her 
daughter was healed. 

Here, too, we have a valuable lesson respecting 
what course is pleasing to our Lord when we approach 
him; for our Lord approved the woman's course. Let 
us note that she was not brazen and assertive. She 
did not attempt to be wiser or more just than God, and 
to criticize his partiality toward the elect seed of Abraham. 
So far from demanding that her wishes be 
granted instanter she did not even express a wish. She 
merely told the Lord the nature of her trouble, and 
said, "Lord have mercy on me." "Lord help me." 
She left it entirely to the Lord's wisdom how the help 
and mercy should be bestowed. 

Alas! how many Christians of years of experience 
have less idea of how to approach the Lord acceptably 
than had this poor heathen woman. But it is not too 
late to learn better. Let us remember this example 
of what was pleasing and acceptable eighteen centuries 
ago; for we deal with the same Lord who changes not. 
Sometimes our Lord may be pleased to grant physical 
relief and at other times he may do as he did to Paul 
—give us the more grace to bear the physical ills, saying 
"My grace is sufficient for thee, my strength is 
made perfect in weakness." 

Turning his course inward again toward the Sea 
of Galilee, our Lord rested in the mountain and healed 
the multitudes, lame, blind, etc., all "afflicted of the 
devil." For we are to remember that all afflictions 
are either directly or indirectly of Satan: by his temptations 
he first induced our first parents to sin, and 
thus brought upon them the penalty of sin, death,— 
with all its train of attendant evil, pain, sickness, sorrow; 
difficulty, mental, physical and moral. And subsequently, 
all the way down, by additional temptations 
to sin, through the pride of life, the lust of the eye, 
etc., Satan has continued to ensnare and to injure the 
fallen race. And thus all sickness and blemish, of every 



kind, may be either directly or indirectly charged to 
him. Our Lord in healing the people was doing so 
much in offset to the work of Satan; but all that was 
done in the few years of his earthly ministry, was only 
a type, a figure, a foreshadowing of the great coming 
work of blessing the world with restitution— which 
will include not only physical, but mental and moral 
recuperation and release from Satan's power. "For 
this purpose Christ was manifested that he might destroy 
death and him that hath the power of death, 
that is, the devil. "-Heb. 2:14; Acts 3:19-21. 

It is claimed by some that miracles are impossibilities 
and the reason that they give is that they are 
contrary to the laws of nature. But this is shallow reasoning 
Every person of observation knows that mankind 
has the skill and ability to overcome the laws of 
nature to some extent, and that he frequently does so 
to his own comfort and advantage. For instance, gravity 
is one of the known laws of nature, yet, every time we 
walk upstairs and are lifted upward in an elevator, we 
are overcoming and going contrary to the laws of 
nature. According to this same law of nature water 
gravitates downward, yet by overcoming this law of 
nature with pumps, etc., mankind has one of his greatest 
conveniences in the waterworks systems of the civilized 
world. If then the laws of nature can be controlled 
to some extent by man for his own convenience, 
how much more able is God to control the operation 
of his own laws, so that all things shall work together 
for good to them that love him;— and for the carrying 
out of any and all of the divine purposes, in this age 
and in the ages to come. 



*See— What Say the Scriptures about Spiritism? 



page 97 
VOL. XIX. APRIL 1, 1898. No. 7. 



CONTENTS. 



Our New Prophetic Chart 98 

Views from the Watch Tower 99 

Poem: Oertake Us on Our Journey, 

Lord! 100 

The Memorial Supper 101 

Is There Hope for Judas? 101 

"By Grace are Ye Saved" 102 

Once in Grace, Always in Grace 107 

"If We Suffer with Him We Shall 

Also Reign with Him" 109 

"We Beheld His Glory in the Holy 

Mount Ill 

page 98 

SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
-ADDRESS TO- 
TOWER PUBLISHING CO., BIBLE HOUSE, 58 ARCH ST., 
ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 



SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, N.Y. DRAFT, MONEY ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS: 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age or accident, or other 
adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, if they 
send a Postal Card each December, stating their cases and requesting the paper. 



R2282 : page 98 

OUR NEW PROPHETIC CHART. 



WE STILL procure and supply ($1.50 including expressage) 
the handsome, 5 ft. long Chart of the Ages, similar to the one in 
the front of MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOL. I., for parlor and hall meetings. 
But now we have something entirely new which every 
WATCH TOWER reader will want for personal and family use. 

It is 34 inches long, on extra heavy coated paper, with metal 
mountings top and bottom and hangers. It gives the outlines 
of the ages and dispensations, and underneath the same, and to 



a scale, it shows the various lines of prophecy presented in 
MILLENNIAL DAWN volumes, also an illustration of the "days of 
creation" as set forth in the WATCH TOWER some years ago, and 
promised again in some future volume of the DAWN series. 

The chart is too complex to be described briefly. Suffice it 
to say, If you are deeply interested in present truth, as presented 
in the TOWER and DAWN, you will surely want one of these 
charts for your sitting room or study wall. We have made the 
price 25 cents each, including postage, which will bring it within 
the reach of almost all. But that the poorest may enjoy it 
and be helped by it, we will send it free to all such on our list 
who drop us a postal card stating the fact and requesting the 
chart free, during the month of April, 1898. 

For the suggestion of such a chart, no less than for the drawing 
of this one, we all are indebted to our dear Brother U. G. Lee, 
whose service was rendered free to the Lord and his people. 
Wherever possible, let several unite in one order, to one address, 
as thus the risk of damage will be decreased. 



R2281 : page 99 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 



THE chief concerns of the world are food, clothing, 
shelter, money and the preparation of munitions 
of war;— among the Christian (?) nations. Beat 
your plowshares into swords and your pruning hooks 
into spears: turn your factories from the manufacture 
of the implements of peace to the preparation of war 
materials is the order of the day. 

Great Britain vs. France and Russia, as well as 
Spain vs. the United States, are straining every nerve 
to be prepared for war, should it come;— the former 
over China and her trade, the latter over Cuba and her 
liberty. We have many reasons for hoping that a conflict 
will be averted in both cases. Should war come, 
however, in either case our sympathies would, we are 
glad to say, justly be with the English speaking nations. 
For altho England's policy in China has not 
been one of disinterested benevolence, there can be no 
question that it has been and is and will continue to be 
more liberal toward the Chinese than would be the 
yokes of other Christian (?) nations of Europe. 

An armed intervention by the United States to secure 
the liberty of Cuba from the despotism and cruelty 
of the most bitter and cruel nation in Christendom 
would be, as nearly as can be imagined, a war on lines 
of disinterested benevolence. We believe that it is 
neither the desire of the government nor of the people 
of the United States to annex Cuba, while its population 
in all respects is as dissimilar to our own as is that 
of Mexico: hence whatever may be done for Cuba must 



be accredited either to pride or to benevolence— as with 
the food supplies already sent and still being forwarded 
by government and people to relieve victims of 
barbarity. 

We incline to think that the President's policy 
will result in securing for Cuba, without war, a liberty 
similar to that enjoyed by Canada, and if so he will deserve 
the congratulations of all civilized peoples. However, 
should war come— either of the above suggested 
—it would have no special prophetic significance so far 
as we can see. It would mean loss of life, increase of 
debts: and by increased business prosperity for a few 
years it would really put off the great catastrophe which 
will overthrow all governments in anarchy. 

CORRECTIONS. 

Not long since we, in common with other journals, 
called attention to the inconsistency of the New York 
millionaire, Trustee of the First Presbyterian church, 
H.M. Taber, whose Will showed him to have long been 
an infidel. The son of the deceased has since corrected 
some misapprehensions which we gladly record. 
He declares that his father "cherished a peculiarly 
bitter abhorrence of religious hypocrisy," and points 
out that he never was a member of the church, and that 
he had severed his relationship of Trustee ten years 
before he died: his acceptance of that office originally 
was to gratify a dear member of his family who was a 
member of that Church. 



In Rules for Daily Life given in last issue (which, 
by the way, we learn have been helpful to the friends 
in various localities) we neglected a very important 
item. It is one which is generally recognized by 
earthly courts and judges, but, alas, too frequently forgotten 
in the family and in the Church. It is this: 
No one is to be esteemed guilty because guilt is charged; 
but only after it has been PROVEN. 

The charged person is not to be esteemed guilty 
until he or she has proved the charge untrue: he is to 
be esteemed and treated as absolutely guiltless until 
the accuser has taken the Scriptural steps outlined in 

R2281 :page 100 

Rule V., and has manifested or proved the guilt. If 
this course were followed strictly it would quickly put 
an end to slandering and back-biting. For if the Church 
slanderer found that his charges were not believed, he 
would abstain or else follow the Scriptural rule. 

Because the fact is not generally known, we remark 
that any injurious or derogatory report is a slander. 
Webster defines "Slanderer, One who injures 



another by maliciously reporting something to his prejudice; 
a defamer; a calumniator." No one under the 
control of the holy spirit will engage in such "devil's 
business;" and each should be careful not to encourage 
others in such "works of the flesh and of the devil." 

In referring to conscience as an unsafe guide (Rule 
XI), we merely meant that because of "the fall" all 
of our consciences need the constant guidance and control 
of the Lord's Word, or they will mislead us. We 
have no other guide than conscience or judgment; 
hence, the necessity of having it divinely directed. It 
is not enough to say, "My conscience does not reprove 
me." 

CHURCH REVENUES DECREASE. 

Commenting on the resignation of Dr. John Hall 
from the pastorate of one of the most prominent Presbyterian 
churches in the world— the resignation having 
been subsequently recalled— an Exchange says:— 

R2282 : page 100 

"Surprising as his resignation, since withdrawn, 
was to the public and the Presbyterian church, this 
reason will be even more surprising. From a surplus, 
large enough in successive years to build a $100,000 
manse, the church has run behind, and pews once rented 
at $3,000, are let with difficulty. Where 10 years 
ago the church was giving $44,000 yearly to home 
missions, it is now giving $12,000, and its contribution 
to foreign missions has sunk from $28,000 to $9,000. As 
is always the case, this reduction has affected all receipts. 
Any church which stops giving to missions 
before long will stop adequately supporting its own 
gospel services." 

The Editor proceeds to say that a similar falling 
off is noted in the receipts of all Presbyterian churches. 

We render acknowledgment to God that the voluntary 
contributions to the spread of present truth 
have been increasing yearly, during this same period, 
as shown by the reports of the Watch Tower Bible 
and Tract Society;— and that notwithstanding the 
friends of "harvest truth" are nearly all poor— "not 
many rich," mighty or great among them. But where 
the heart has been touched and the flame of love to 
God and man has been enkindled, there is a burning 
desire to be, to do and to give to the glory of him who 
called us "out of darkness into his marvelous light." 

"THE MODERN STEPHEN." 

This is the title of a sketch in the Ram's Horn 
for January 29th. It represents a faithful minister of 
the gospel under persecution. He is shown fallen in 
the street, a Bible on his arm: around him lie stones 



labeled Hate. Around him are pictured his assailants 
throwing more stones: a saloon keeper hurls a stone 
labeled Revenge; a society man with kid gloves hurls a 
stone labeled Persecution; a finely dressed man resembling 
a banker hurls a stone labeled Malice; an elegantly 
dressed woman (possibly his wife?) hurls a stone 
marked Scandal; while a College Professor with a large 
head (resembling that of a certain Xenia, Ohio, Professor) 
is throwing stones marked Ridicule. 

The cartoon is a good one, and very forcibly illustrates 
the changed methods of Satan and his employees 
for the accomplishment of the same ends as formerly. 
Thus are the prophets prohibited, "killed" and "beheaded" 
who do not shun to declare the truth, the 
whole counsel of God, today.— Compare Rev. 13:15,17; 
20:4; 6:11; Luke 21:17; 2 Tim. 3:12. 

R2282 : page 100 

O'ERTAKE US ON OUR JOURNEY, LORD! 

-(Luke 24:13-32.)- 

When to Emmaus the disciples walked, 
Downcast, their hopes to sorrow turned, 

A courtly stranger came and with them talked 
Whose hearts for consolation yearned. 

"Why walk ye thus, with sad, dejected mien, 
When brightly shines the King of Day? 

The woods are decked; for, as a radiant queen, 
Spring comes triumphant on her way." 

"O stranger, not by us the fields are seen; 

We study sorrow's pages o'er. 
The day is night, and crushed our hearts have been, 

Since Calv'ry's cross our Master bore. 

"Jesus of Nazareth his humble name, 

But rightful heir of David's throne. 
We trusted for redemption; but in shame 

We must our cause defeated own." 

"Defeated? Say not so who hope in God. 

Weep not! Jehovah's oath and seal 
Attest Messiah's righteous scepter-rod 

Shall Israel bless, all nations heal. 

"But ought he not have suffered all these things, 

And enter into glory, first 
To make conciliation? King of kings 

Indeed, but for our sakes accursed." 

Unlocking then the mysteries of the Word, 

The light the prophecies concealed, 
His eloquence their languished faith bestirred, 



And lo ! the Master was revealed. 



O kindly stranger! On our toilsome way 
O'ertake us, thou who went'st before! 

On thy deep footprints focus ev'ry ray 
Of light that "shineth more and more." 

Forsake us not, when faith and hope are weak, 
But walk with us the journey through; 

Full fill us with thy spirit, holy, meek, 
All bonds of earth and sin undo. 

Reveal thyself! With tender touch anoint 
Our dimmed eyes. Revive our faith 

With visions of the crown thou dost appoint 
To those who bear the cross till death— 

That, though at first we may discern thee not, 
We shall behold thee when we rest 

At twilight— all our griefs and cares forgot, 
Rejoiced in thee, and by thee blest. 

-R. B. HENNINGES. 



R2282:page 101 

THE MEMORIAL SUPPER. 



SOME friends of the truth in Georgia write that 

they have not celebrated the Memorial Supper 

since coming out of Babylon, and give as their 

reason: "We feel that our minds are consecrated, but 

our flesh is not, nor can be under surrounding circumstances. 

We are poor and have large families dependent 

and cannot deny them. Therefore we have abstained 

from this much desired blessing." 

If we understand the brethren aright, they are 
laboring under some misapprehension. If we should 
wait until our flesh is perfect, none of us could partake 
of the Memorial Supper, for the Church of this age is 
not to expect perfection of the flesh; our perfection, if 
we are faithful, will be as spirit beings in the First 
Resurrection. Now we have the treasure of the new 
nature, the new mind or will, in earthen vessels,— all 
of them more or less marred, blemished by sin. But 

R2283 :page 101 

here we have benefit under the New Covenant, by the 

terms of which God has agreed to accept our perfect 

wills (backed by our best endeavors) AS OUR ABSOLUTE 



PERFECTION. All such can say with the Apostle, 
"The righteousness of the Law is fulfilled in us"— we 
"walk not after the flesh, but after the spirit," and as 
close to it as possible. 

Consecration does not imply the neglect nor the forsaking 
of our families;— unless in God's providence his 
adversaries and ours should be permitted to kill us, or 
captivate and imprison us, and thus forcibly hinder our 
care, or separate us;— as was frequently the case during 
the dark ages. Otherwise God instructs us that 
reasonable care for our families is his will, and properly 
our duty. 

Full consecration to the Lord means a full surrender 
of our wills to God's will and of our bodies to our 
new wills. It means, consequently, the putting away 
of sin, to the best of our ability under the direction of 
the Lord's Word, and a cultivation daily and hourly of 
the holy spirit with its fruits and flowers of meekness, 
gentleness, purity, kindness,— Love. 

So then, dear Brethren, by faith realize that the 
Lamb of God was slain for our sins, and that the merit 
of his sacrifice covers and reckonedly cleanses us from 
sin in God's esteem: and so believing, and with hearts, 
wills, fully given up to the Lord, come to his table and 
partake of his emblems with mingled meekness and 
courage. 



We have various questions respecting the fourteenth 
of Nisan, all of which arise from a failure to recognize 
that the "Passover," as understood by the Jews, 
refers to the Feast of Passover, and has no reference to 
the killing of the lamb on the 14th,— which is the thing 
we celebrate. With the Jew, the 14th was merely a 
day of preparation for Passover, and the eating of the 
lamb, and especially its killing, was only a part of that 
preparation. The Law provided that the lamb should 
be killed on the 14th of Nisan at even— or literally, 
between evenings. It was therefore within the scope 
of that requirement, if the lamb were killed and eaten 
on the 14th at any time after 6 P.M. of the 13th. 

Let none of us forget to "put away all leaven"— 
sin— in preparation for the eating of the Passover. Let 
us cleanse ourselves from all filth of the flesh and of 
the spirit, perfecting holiness in the reverence of the 
Lord." (2 Cor. 7:1; 1 John 1:7.) Thus the remainder 
of life will be a feast of unleavened bread. 

Do not make the serious mistake that leaven symbolizes 
merely false doctrine (Matt. 16:6-12); remember 
that it is also defined by the Apostle to signify a 
wicked disposition. Not merely a wickedness which 
would steal and lie and murder (the grosser forms of 
wickedness), but a form of wickedness much more likely 
to assail those who have even nominally accepted 
Christ; viz., "malice," producing hatreds, envyings, 



strifes, back-bitings, evil surmisings, and other works 
of the flesh and the devil. Let the spirit of love come 
into our hearts and purge us of the old leaven of malice. 
-See 1 Cor. 5:6-8; Eph. 4:31; Col. 3:8; Tit. 3:3. 

Let a man examine himself and so let him eat of 
that bread and drink of that cup. Each should seek 
to make the most of the occasion in the interest of his 
own spiritual welfare. Let each apply afresh the 
cleansing blood, and renew his consecration to be faithful 
to the Master until death. Remember, too, the 
Master's words, "Watch and pray, lest ye enter into 
temptation." "Brethren, pray for us!" 



R2283 :page 101 

IS THERE HOPE FOR JUDAS? 



Wisconsin. 
DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-In reading the article 
on Venial and Mortal Sins in the TOWER for 
June 1, '96, 1 found a statement on page 122 which, 
if it is true, would seem to show that Judas' case is 
not a hopeless one. The statement is as follows: "On 
the contrary, those who have sinned wilfully and with 
full intent, and whose sin is mortal, do not feel penitent; 
but afterwards approve their sin and boast of it 
generally as greater light and liberty." This does not 
seem to be true in Judas' case. He repented of his 
sins, and that his repentance was sincere is shown by 
the fact that he restored to the Priests the money for 
which he had betrayed Jesus, and confessed to them 
that he had sinned, and in his despair went and hanged 
himself. -Matt. 27:3,4,5. 

In the article on Judas' case in the TOWER for 
April 15, 1896, one of the reasons given for believing 

R2283 : page 102 

that Judas' case is a hopeless one is our Lord's statement 
in Matt. 26:24. It seems to me that Jesus could 
not have meant that it would have been better for Judas 
never to have lived, as this could not be true. For 
even the short span of life he did enjoy was better than 
no existence at all. May the meaning not be that it 
would have been better for Judas if he were not born 
yet? This seems to be the meaning in the Diaglott 
translation of Matt. 26:24. It certainly appears that 
Judas did not expect that the Jews would be able to 
capture Jesus and condemn him to death. For if that 
was what he expected and desired, then he would not 
have repented of his sin. In John 17:12 Jesus calls 
Judas "the son of destruction." This would tend to 



prove that Judas' case is a hopeless one. But we find 

that Jesus applies just as strong names to the Scribes 

and Pharisees. He tells them they are of their father, 

the devil, calls them serpents and generation of vipers, 

and asks how they can escape the damnation of Gehenna. 

So it would seem that if Judas has died the 

second death, at least some of the Scribes and Pharisees 

must also have suffered it. Judas' case resembles 

somewhat that of the lady, described on page 41 in the 

booklet on Spiritism, who had permitted the evil spirits 

to get control of her will and lead her to wrong a 

dear friend, and then make her believe she had committed 

the unpardonable sin. She, too, would have 

killed herself as Judas did, if she had not been prevented. 

From what is stated in John 13:2,27, it 

would seem that Satan was the evil spirit who led 

Judas to betray his Savior. 

Hoping you will kindly help me to get a correct 
understanding of this question, I remain, 

Yours in the Redeemer, R. A. LINDBLAD. 

We give the brother's argument space because it 
is as good as we have ever seen on that side the Judas 
question. 

Some twenty years ago we were inclined to think 
that all must come to a full knowledge of all truth ere 
they could be liable to the Second Death; but we have 
come to the conclusion from the general tenor of 
Scripture that this is not the Lord's view and plan. 
On the contrary, deliberate and intelligent rejection of 
the first principles of the gospel seems to imply an unfitness 
for further favors on the ground that he that 
is unfaithful in that which is least, would be unfaithful 
also with more. Adam's knowledge of the divine 
plan was very slight, yet his disobedience brought full 
death penalty. The real grounds for sympathy with 
and hope for the masses is the Apostle's statement that 
Satan has blinded their minds,— misinterpreted the 
facts. All such will by and by "see out of obscurity" 
when Satan shall be bound— during the Millennium. 

We confess little hope for the Scribes and Pharisees 
who, when they could find no other fault, ascribed 
our Lord's good works to the devil. As for Judas' 
tears,— were they better than those of Esau (Heb. 12:17)? 
Did his repentance lead him to a renewed and 
reformed life, or to self destruction?— Heb. 6:6. 



R2283 : page 102 

"BY GRACE ARE YE SAVED. 



"For the grace of God that bringeth [leads to] salvation hath 
been manifested for all men— teaching us that renouncing ungodly 



desires we should live soberly, righteously and godly in this 
present age, waiting for the blessed hope, even the glorious 
manifestation of our great God and Savior Jesus 
Christ; who gave himself for us that he might redeem 
us from all iniquity and purify unto himself 
a peculiar people, devoted to good works." 

-Titus 2: 11-14. - 

"GRACE, 'tis a charming sound," sang the 
poet, nor did he exaggerate; for to all who 
have learned the true meaning of divine grace, that 
word, like the word "gospel," is a synonym for all the 
divine mercies which God's people may now or ever 
enjoy. But this word grace is little used to-day in 
common conversation on the every day affairs of 
life, and consequently remarkably few appreciate its 
richness, its wealth of significance, and consequently 
many of the statements of Scripture in which this word 
occurs are, to the majority of readers, deprived of their 
real beauty and force. 

The word grace signifies favor— particularly unmerited 
favor. Acts of grace are thus to be clearly 
distinguished from acts of justice and from obligations. 
If this proper signification were in the minds of people 
when reading the Scriptures where the word grace so 

R2284 : page 102 

frequently occurs, it would be to all true believers a 
great protection against numerous of Satan's wiles and 
false doctrines— the general aim of which is to misrepresent 
the divine dealings and to pervert and subvert 
the divine testimonies. Every testimony to the effect 
that God is extending his "grace" to humanity or to 
the Church is a testimony to their unworthiness to justly 
demand those favors or blessings. 

The spirit of the world in general is that of self-sufficiency 
and independence; following their own wisdom 
and lacking the instruction and wisdom from above, 
the worldly-wise regard themselves with complacency; 
they believe themselves to be quite sufficiently righteous 
to merit a good deal of divine blessing and reward: 
true, they admit also that they have imperfections, but 
these they expect to pay for to the full according to 
some law of divine retribution. Hence they are undisposed 
to look for or to accept pardon, forgiveness, 
justification through the great sacrifice for sins which 
God has provided. They see a law in nature according 
to which fire burns him who believes that it will 
burn and burns equally him who believes not that it 
will burn. And so they regard all of the laws governing 

R2284 : page 103 

humanity as merciless, graceless— strictly just. 



The Scripture presentation of the matter does not 
overlook the law of retribution— that sin of any kind, 
the transgression of any law, will surely bring its penalty, 
whoever may be the sinner and whatever may be 
the conditions. And the propositions respecting divine 
grace, rightly understood, are not in conflict with this 
universal law of retribution: the proposition of grace 
is not to prevent fire from burning, but to provide a 
healing balm; not to prevent the wages of sin from 
following transgression, but to succor the repentant 
who desire to reform, and to help him back to divine 
favor and full recovery, along the lines of strictest justice; 
—by a willing ransom-price. And since this succor 
is wholly unmerited on man's part and without 
just obligation on God's part, it is purely of divine 
favor— "grace." Indeed, if it were not for sin and its 
retributive punishments, there would be no room for 
grace: it is man's necessity for grace that constitutes 
the divine opportunity for its exercise. Grace, however, 
operates in harmony with the divine laws, and 
not in violation of them. 

Remembering that divine grace signifies God's unmerited 
mercy and favor, let us examine its operation 
in the light of Scripture:— 

(1) The first movement of divine grace toward 
mankind was the exercise of benevolence, love and 
compassion toward mankind in his fallen and sinful 
condition. There was nothing in man to merit this 
compassion and sympathy; quite to the contrary: we 
were aliens from God and enemies of his righteous rule 
through wicked works,— the depravity wrought in us 
through sin voluntarily committed by father Adam. 

(2) It was in harmony with this thought of grace 
on God's part, or, as we might term it, God's gracious 
plan, that he revealed something respecting his purpose 
of ransom and restitution to father Abraham;— 

thus preaching first, beforehand, to him the good tidings 
of a coming blessing or grace, saying, "In thy seed 
shall all the families of the earth be blest." Abraham, 
and others who believed God, rejoiced in mind under 
the influence of this gracious promise— altho even the 
beginning of its fulfilment was still nearly two thousand 
years off. 

(3) The third step of grace was in the great gift 

of divine love, our Lord Jesus Christ. It included the 
gracious arrangement made with the only begotten 
Son of God, on account of which he joyfully laid aside 
his heavenly glories and conditions and humbled himself 
in death as the ransom or substitute for the first 
Adam and thus incidentally a "ransom for all" the 
race of Adam. 

(4) It was a fourth step of grace when God, having 
determined to select a Church, a "little flock," to 

be heirs of God and joint-heirs of Jesus Christ their 
Lord, in the dispensing of the divine favors or grace, 
promised through Abraham, began the work of selecting 



this Church— receiving at Pentecost the first installment, 
from the house of servants into the house of 
sons and joint-heirs. (John 1:12,13.) Altho tests 
were applied to those received into the family of sons, 
and altho character qualifications were imposed upon 
them and will be imposed upon all who will be called 
and accepted to this high calling, nevertheless this also 
was a step of grace, because there were no obligations 
resting upon God to confer upon us such a "high 
calling," such "riches of his grace in Jesus Christ our 
Lord." 

(5) Throughout this Gospel age the same grace 

has been in operation doing a twofold work; (a) justifying 
repentant believers from the guilt of their moral 
obliquity, and giving them thus a standing before God 
in Christ's imputed righteousness;— thus making them 
eligible to the "high calling to divine sonship and to 
joint-heirship in God's Kingdom to come, and (b) then 
extending to them that "high calling," inviting them 
through the divine Word to become the "very elect." 
True, there are conditions imposed, and not all the 
many "called" will be among the few "chosen;" 
but nevertheless it is an inestimable privilege to be 
"called" and to have put within our grasp the opportunity 
and all the needful helps, whereby we may make 
our calling and election sure. 

(6) The grace of God will still further be manifested 
when the "elect" Church shall all have been sought, 
found, tried, disciplined, and "made meet to be partakers 
of the inheritance of the saints in light;" for the blessings 
which will be conferred upon this glorified Church 

will not only be such as were not merited, such therefore 
as were not of obligation upon God's part, but 
according to the divine testimony they will be additionally 
great, super-abounding in grace, "exceedingly 
abundantly more than we know how to ask or expect;" 
for "eye hath not seen, nor ear heard, neither hath 
entered into the heart of man, the things which God 
hath in reservation for those that love him."— 
1 Cor. 2:9. 

(7) Even then, God's grace will not have exhausted 
itself;— even after having thus honored and 

blessed and exalted the Church, the body of Christ, whose 
only merit consisted first in an honest confession of 
sin and an acceptance of the divine favor, and second, 
in their "reasonable service" in rendering their lives 
in obedience to him who bought them and in and 
through whom the divine graces were extended. 

Then divine grace will begin to be fully manifested 
—then all shall see it, all shall know it, and all who 
will may share it; for then will begin the glorious 

R2284 : page 104 

"times of restitution of all things, which God hath 
spoken by the mouth of all his holy prophets since the 



world began"— the Millennial age of a thousand years; 
the time when the knowledge of the Lord shall graciously 
be caused to fill the whole earth; the time when 
all the sin-blinded eyes shall be opened; the time when 
all the prisoners of the pit (death) shall come forth, 
that they may be instructed in righteousness. Then, 
according to the grace of the divine promise, he who 
redeemed the world shall judge the world in righteousness, 
a trial, an opportunity, that whosoever will, with a 
knowledge of sin and its penalty, and with a knowledge 
of righteousness and its rewards, with a knowledge 
of the goodness and grace of God shining in the face 
of Jesus Christ our Lord, may then stand trial and be 
judged as to whether they will receive God's grace and 
its provisions of eternal life, or whether they will reject 
these and die the second death. 

Here we behold the wonderful steps of grace. No 
one can intelligently believe in divine grace who holds 
the theory of evolution or any other theory of salvation 
than the Scriptural one, which recognizes man's 
original creation in the divine likeness, his fall into sin 
and death, his redemption therefrom by the death of 
our Redeemer, and his hope for recovery through divine 
grace extended now to the Church and to be extended 
by and by through the Church (under Christ its 
Head) to all the families of the earth. 

Coming now to consider present manifestations of 
divine grace toward the Church, we note that many 
professed followers of the Lord fail in a very large degree 
to appreciate this grace which it is their privilege 
to enjoy. This is attributable largely to false teaching 
and preaching. In very much that is preached in 
the name of the gospel of the grace of God, the element 
of grace is entirely omitted, and such preaching 
is proportionately vain— sometimes worse than vain— in 
that it is delusive and subversive. For instance, how 
common it is for people to hear and to believe that if 
they "do right" they will have divine rewards at the end 
of life's race; but if they "do wrong" they shall have divine 
punishment at the end of the race. Such views ignore 
grace entirely, for if we are to be punished in proportion 
to our shortcomings and rewarded for our obedient 
deeds, where would be the "grace?" where would be 
the mercy? where would be the necessity of a Savior, 
a sin-offering, an atonement and a reconciliation with 
God? and where would be the peace through our Lord 
and Savior Jesus Christ? None of these mercies 
and blessings can be rightly recognized except as the 
grace of God (his unmerited favor) is seen in them. 

The fact is that the divine standard of righteousness 
is much higher than men generally understand: 
with God righteousness is synonymous with perfection; 
and hence "all unrighteousness [all imperfection, however 
or whenever or wherever]— is [a proof of] sin." 
Thus all men are proved to be sinners,— because all are 
imperfect, un-right. And the divine law is that the 



sinner, the wrongdoer, the un-right, the imperfect, 
shall not live. "The wages of sin is death." Whoever 

R2285 : page 104 

understands this can see at once that man's only 
hope of eternal life lies not in his own perfection, but 
in divine mercy, grace. To plead that we are not 
wholly bad, corrupt, or even that we are not so bad as 
some others, is to admit our imperfection, and hence 
to prove the hopelessness of our case except as divine 
grace intervenes to help us. 

But, says some one, That is not a fair statement 
of the case. God made me as I am, imperfect; and 
justice requires that he shall not demand of me an impossible 
perfection, nor punish me for weaknesses and 
imperfections beyond my control. 

Such reasoning implies a misunderstanding of the 
case. It is a mistake to assume that God made us imperfect. 
All "his work is perfect." (Deut. 32:4; 
Psa. 18:30; Matt. 5:48.) He neither created idiots 
nor other physical and mental malformations of humanity, 
but, as the Scriptures declare, we were "born in 
sin and shapen in iniquity— in sin did my mother conceive 
me." Our blemishes come to us from our parents, 
not from God. The Scriptures not only point out to 
us father Adam's sinless perfection, saying that he was 
created in the image of God, but they plainly declare 
that it was by his disobedience that the divine sentence 
of death passed upon him and passed as an inheritance, 
a legacy of evil, to his offspring, saying, "By one man's 
disobedience sin entered into the world and death as a 
result of sin, and so death passed upon all men, for all 
are sinners [imperfect]." Truly also, "The fathers 
have eaten a sour grape [disobedience] and the children's 
teeth are set on edge.— Rom. 5:12,17-19; Jer. 31:29; 
Ezek. 18:2. 

The very basis of all our hopes, then, is this grace 
of God, operating toward us through Jesus Christ our 
Lord. God's grace does not subvert or set aside God's 
law, however, and he who would rightly appreciate 
and use the divine grace should recognize this fact. 
God's grace was not intended to frustrate the spirit of 
his own law: it was not intended to clear the guilty, 
the wilful transgressor. It acknowledges the divine 
law, attests its justice, and has fully met its requirements 
in the person and sacrifice of our Lord Jesus on 
behalf of Adam and all his race involved in his transgression 
and his penalty— death. Hence it was that 
"Christ died, the just for the unjust" in order "that 
God might be just and yet be the justifier of him that 
believeth in Jesus." And the only condition upon 
which God's grace is offered is our acknowledgment 

R2285 : page 105 



of our sin, weakness and imperfection, a sorrow for 
these and a repentance and reformation to the extent 
of our ability and an acceptance of Christ Jesus as the 
personification of divine grace. Upon no other condition 
can we step into this grace of God or walk in 
its way and inherit its rewards. 

And even after we have received Christ and God's 
grace in him, and are no longer recognized as strangers, 
aliens to God, but sons, as servants of righteousness 
and no longer servants of sin, being imperfect, we are 
not free from blemishes of word, thought and deed; 
yet, God's grace under the New Covenant continues 
with us to cover our blemishes until perfected in the 
resurrection. Under its provisions whatever is contrary 
to our wills, and purely the result of hereditary weakness, 
may be forgiven; and our obliquity and blameworthiness 
be gauged only by the measure of wilfulness 
or assent connected with the wrongdoing. Nevertheless, 
to some extent, chastisements or natural 
penalties for violations of law may be expected: but 
to those under grace these will come as helps by the 
way, causing them more and more to detest sin, as 
corrections in righteousness, as chastisements and 
disciplines for their blessing. And even these sure 
penalties may be to some extent ameliorated in accordance 
with the wisdom of our great High priest, who, 
having borne all our sins in his own body on the tree, 
is freely empowered to abate for us so much of the 
penalty of our misdeeds as grace may be able to cover 
as un-wilful transgressions. 

There is a disposition in our day, as there was a disposition 
in the days of the apostles, for those who have 
once accepted of divine forgiveness, the grace of God 
through Christ, to turn aside therefrom and to attempt 
to justify themselves by works. Even while first experiences 
were those of humble dependence upon divine 
mercy, subsequent experiences sometimes lead to the 
rejection of the grace that at first was so thankfully 
received. The Apostle wrote to some thus affected, 
saying, "Christ has become of none effect unto you, 
whosoever of you are justified by the law; ye are fallen 
from grace." (Gal. 5:4.) Judged from this same 
standard, how many Christians to-day have backslidden 
—fallen from grace— lost the trust in the merit 
of the precious blood and in divine favor extended to 
us through the great atonement sacrifice. Now, as 
then, the disposition is to trust to works of our own 
righteousness, which the inspired writers tell us and 
which our own consciences should prove to us are imperfect, 
"filthy rags" unfit and unable to cover us. 
Yes, we need a covering before we could in any manner 
or degree hope to be acceptable to God, and this covering 
of our imperfections with the imputed righteousness 
of Christ, is another statement of the grace of 
God extended to us. This tendency to depart from a 
recognition of God's grace in Christ as our only hope 



for eternal life, and to take instead a hope of being 
able to walk righteously and to do justly, and thus to 
merit eternal life, is what the Apostle very properly 
calls "another gospel"— a false gospel.— Gal. 1:6. 

This thought of the divine grace as the basis of 
all our mercies is interwoven with all the promises of 
God's Word. Thus the Apostle speaks of the gracious 
plan of God, and Christ as the exponent of that plan 
as "the grace of God and the gift by grace."— 
Rom. 5:15. 

Our approach to God in prayer is spoken of as an 
approach, not to the throne of justice and equity, but 
as an approach to "the throne of grace," where "we 
may obtain mercy and find grace to help in every time 
of need."~Heb. 4:16. 

Again we are exhorted that our hearts be established 
in grace; and again told that unto every one of 
us is given grace according to the measure of our faith; 
and again the Apostle declares of himself, "By the 
grace of God I am what I am." 

According to the testimony of our text this grace 
is general, "for all men," and must therefore ultimately 
in some manner or other be extended to all men,— the 
dead as well as the living. The translation of our 
Common Version is manifestly faulty here; all men, 
even in this most enlightened day of the world's history, 
have not yet beheld God's grace in any degree, 
nor has it as yet brought them salvation. But since it 
has been provided freely for all, so ultimately it shall be 
extended to all, that all may avail themselves of it. 

The teaching of this grace is not that we may continue 
in sin that grace may abound; for divine grace is 
intended to benefit only those who renounce sin and 
become servants of righteousness: and thus, as our 
text declares, God's grace teaches us that we should 
repudiate sin and live separate from every ungodly desire, 
in righteousness, soberness and godlikeness. 
Furthermore, as our text declares, this grace of God 
does not claim to have reached its completeness, and 
to have accomplished in us and for us the grand designs 
of the God of all grace. On the contrary, it teaches 
us to wait for the consummation of this grace until the 
glorious manifestation of the Son of God in the majesty 
and power of his Kingdom, to unite his Church with 
himself as his Bride and joint heir, the channel of mercies 
and blessings through which God's grace shall flow 
to all the groaning creation.— Rom. 8:18-22; 11:31. 

"RECEIVE NOT THE GRACE OF GOD IN VAIN." 



"We then as workers together with him, beseech you also 
that ye receive not the grace of God in vain."— 2 Cor. 6:1. 

This exhortation is addressed to such as have already 



recognized God's gracious character and the gift 

R2285 : page 106 

of his grace toward mankind,— the redemption which 
is in Christ Jesus. The Apostle has just been explaining 
this matter of how God's grace had provided a 
reconciliation; "that God was in Christ reconciling 
the world unto himself, not imputing their trespasses 
unto them [but unto him who died for them]." He 
declares himself an ambassador on behalf of God to 
declare this grace and exhorts his readers not only to 
accept of God's grace in the forgiveness of sins through 
Christ, but additionally that they also should become 
fully reconciled or completely in harmony with the 
Lord, as would be represented by full consecration to 
him and his service, after the example of the Apostle 
himself. 

We take it that this exhortation of our text is the 
equivalent of the same apostle's exhortation elsewhere, 
namely, "I beseech you, brethren, by the mercies of 
God [already brethren because already believers in 
Christ and partakers through him of divine grace], 
that ye present your bodies living sacrifices, holy, acceptable 
unto God, which is your reasonable service." 
-Rom. 12:1. 

The Apostle was here urging progress on the part 
of the believers, advancement from "justification by 
faith" to the next higher step in divine grace and 
privilege,— full consecration even unto death, in response 
to the "call" to joint-heirship with Christ in 
his Kingdom,— to suffer with him in the present time, 
and to reign with him by and by in glory. These two 
steps are contrasted by the same Apostle, who says of 
himself and others who had taken both steps, (1) "Being 
justified by faith we have peace with God through 
our Lord Jesus Christ." (2) "By whom also [additionally] 
we have access by faith into this [further] 
grace wherein we stand and rejoice in hope of [sharing] 
the glory of God."— Rom. 5:1,2. 

R2286 : page 106 

In our text the Apostle distinctly implies the possibility 
that some may receive the grace of God in vain 
—to no purpose. We see from the connection as we 
have examined it, that he refers to the grace of God 
in justification, the forgiveness of our sins, and not to 
the second step of grace, our acceptance to the new 
nature through the begetting of the spirit. This implies, 
therefore, that the only object of justification by 
faith in this present age, is to give us a footing, a standing 
of acceptableness with God, from which we may 
be able to advance and take the second step of self-sacrifice, 
and become joint-heirs with Christ in his 
Kingdom. Nevertheless, this first step and all the 



privileges and blessings connected with it would be 
"in vain," profitless to us, if we fail to take the second 
step, the particular feature of the divine plan which 
belongs to this Gospel age. 

We are not to add to the Word of God, and to say 
that to receive justification in vain (by not making use 
of it to progress to a complete consecration and newness 
of nature) would mean eternal torment, or even 
the second death: we are simply to understand it as it 
reads, that the intention of the grace of justification, 
the first step, being to qualify us for the second step, 
those who fail to take the second step will have no particular 
benefit accrue to them from the first step, which 
would thus have been taken in vain, profitlessly, without 
permanent results and advantages. 

We hold that the Scriptures in general teach that 
only those who take the "narrow way" will gain any 
prize offered during this Gospel age, which is specifically 
the age set apart for the development of the "royal 
priesthood," devoted to good works— to self-sacrifices 
in the service of the Lord and his cause. Indeed, there 
is only one prize and one hope of our calling during 
this age— the other prize and other hope and other call 
will be in the age to come. We cannot therefore expect 
that any who take the first step of faith in Christ, 
and who are therefore temporarily justified because of 
their faith, will have a reward for a faith which did 
not work by love. The faith that works by love speedily 
goes on to full consecration and self-sacrifice, and is a 
sure indication of the kind the Lord is seeking for his 
"little flock," the "royal priesthood," the "joint-heirs." 
The faith, therefore, which refuses to work 
by love, cannot be considered an acceptable faith in 
God's sight. Nor can we expect that this class will 
be counted worthy to share in the earthly phase of the 
Kingdom with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob and all the 
prophets. 

Why should they be rewarded? It was by God's 
grace that the knowledge of his grace reached them, 
while it passed by others. Will they be rewarded 
further because they have already been blessed with a 
knowledge of God's grace which they have rejected- 
received in vain? We think not. Instead of being 
more worthy to receive blessings of the Lord than the 
ignorant world who never tasted of his grace, they are, 
if anything, more blameworthy, because that after having 
tasted of the truth they did not love it sufficiently 
to serve it when they found that that service implied 
self-sacrifice. Quite different from this was the conduct 
of the ancient worthies. While not favored with 
the "high calling" to the divine nature and jointheirship 
with Christ, because this "call" was not yet due 
to be proclaimed, nevertheless, these ancient worthies 
manifested a faith and a trust in the Lord and his 
promises which worked, and by their works manifested a 
love for the Lord and a loyalty to him which did not 



hesitate to sacrifice reputation, wealth and life itself, 
in obedience to the principles of righteousness revealed 
to them. 

R2286 : page 107 

Those who receive the grace of God (justification, 
forgiveness) in vain, permit their justification to lapse, 
and to our understanding have thereafter no advantage 
above the remainder of the world, nor has the Lord 
more interest in them than he has in "all the families 
of the earth," for whom he has prepared the gracious 
blessings of the Millennium. When God's time shall 
come for extending to the world in general his mercies 
and blessings, we fail to see that previous knowledge 
and opportunity, misused, received in vain, will be of 
any benefit or advantage: whether or not it will be of 
disadvantage and bring greater "stripes" of punishment, 
will depend largely, we believe, upon the measure 
of light enjoyed with its corresponding responsibilities, 
and the measure of conscientiousness with 
which that light was lived up to. 

A much misunderstood text respecting grace is 
the one used as a caption for this article, namely, "By 
grace are ye saved, and that not of yourselves, it is the 
gift of God." (Eph. 2:8.) The erroneous thought given 
by many is that our faith is not our own faith, not of 
our own volition, but an impartation, a gift from God. 
Of course, in one sense every gift and blessing which 
we enjoy is indirectly if not directly from God; "Every 
good gift and every perfect gift is from above, and 
cometh down from the Father of lights." (Jas. 1:17.) 
But the proper understanding of the Apostle's words, 
we believe, is this: It is of God's grace and not of 
personal merit on our part that salvation is offered to 
us; and altho that salvation is offered to us as a reward 
of faith (including true faith's obedience), yet we 
cannot even boast respecting our faith as tho it merited 
the Lord's favor,— for our faith is something which 
is the indirect result of divine providence also; there are 
millions of others in the world who might exercise just 
as much faith as we if they had been favored of God 
with as much light, intelligence, knowledge, as a basis 
of faith: hence our faith is not to be credited as a meritorious 
condition but we are to be thankful to God for 
it, for the circumstances and conditions which have 
made it possible for us to exercise faith are of his grace. 



R2286 : page 107 

ONCE IN GRACE ALWAYS IN GRACE. 



QUITE a large number of people rest themselves 

very securely upon the fallacy that 

if they have once been made the objects of divine 

grace, it means perpetual grace to all eternity, and insures 

their salvation despite anything they may afterward 

do or leave undone. This view is an outgrowth 

of false views of election and predestination,* and is 

hurtful to many. Like most of errors, this view is 

supported by misapplications of Scripture. For instance, 

the following:— 

"Ye have not chosen me, but I have chosen you." 
-John 15:16. 

"My Father, which gave them me, is greater than 
all; and no man is able to pluck them out of my Father's 
hand."-John 10:29. 

"If God be for us, who can be against us?"— 
Rom. 8:31. 

"Who shall lay anything to the charge of God's 
elect? It is God that justifieth."— Rom. 8:33. 

"What shall separate us from the love of Christ? 
Shall tribulation, or distress, or persecution, or famine, 
or nakedness, or sword? Nay, in all these things we 
are more than conquerors through him that loved us." 
-Rom. 8:35,37. 

"I am persuaded, that neither death, nor life, 
nor angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things 
present, nor things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor 
any other creature, shall be able to separate us from 
the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus, our Lord." 
-Rom. 8:38,39. 

Those who become thoroughly infatuated with the 
theory that God's grace, having once reached them, 
must abide with them through all eternity, entirely 
lose sight of the numerous texts which declare that all 
who would be permanent and everlasting objects of divine 
grace and love must abide in Christ, and as the 
Apostle says, "Keep yourselves in the love of God." 
They must so run as to obtain the prize of the high 
calling. We must lay aside every weight and the sin 
which doth so easily beset us and run with patience 
the race set before us in the gospel, if we would win 
the grand consummation which will mean everlasting 
grace. It was grace that first contrived the way. It 
was grace which opened the door to this race-course 
and invited us to run for the prize. It is grace that 
holds before our eyes the inspiration of the prize. It 
is grace that provides strength and succor along the 
journey in every time of need. But the necessity still 
remains that we shall "abide," that we shall "run," 
that we shall not "faint," that we shall not be "overcharged" 
with the cares of this life and the deceitfulness 
of riches. 

Mark how the Apostle Peter declares the matter: 
after telling respecting the cultivation of the fruits of 
the spirit, he says, "If ye do these things, ye shall 
never fall, but so an entrance shall be ministered abundantly 



into the everlasting Kingdom of our Lord and 
Savior Jesus Christ."— 2 Pet. 1:11. 

Mark how the Apostle Paul speaks of some and 
says that if they shall fall away after having tasted of 
divine grace it will be impossible to renew them again 
unto repentance.— Heb. 6:5,6. 



♦MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOL. I., p.96. 
R2286 : page 108 

Mark how the Apostle John declares, "There is a 
sin unto death: I do not say that ye shall pray for it." 
(1 John 5:16.) The sin unto death in the present time 
could be committed only by those who have tasted of 
divine grace, which ultimately shall reach every man 
and test every man; because "the grace of God hath 
been manifested for all men"— "to be testified in due 
time." 

Mark our Lord's words on this subject. Speaking 
of those who had already received the grace of God 
and had already become members of his body, branches 
in the true Vine, he says, "I am the true vine and my 
Father is the husbandman; every branch in me that 
beareth not fruit he taketh away." (John 15:1,2.) 

R2287 : page 108 

"He that abideth in me and I in him, the same bringeth 

forth much fruit." (John 15:5.) "If any man 

abide not in me, he is cast forth as a branch and withered." 

(John 15:6.) "Ye are my friends if ye do 

whatsoever I command you."— John 15:14. 

Here, then, we have two separate lines of texts, 
and the question before us properly is, not which set of 
texts will we adopt, for we are not at liberty to choose 
portions of Scripture which we may prefer, or to reject 
portions because out of harmony with our theories: 
rather our theories must be modified, altered, amended, 
so as to be in fullest harmony with every testimony of 
the inspired Word. How, then, can these two sets of 
texts be harmonized? We answer, they can be very 
simply and very beautifully harmonized by giving to 
each its proper place and weight: they balance 
themselves. 

The statement that none could pluck us out of the 
heavenly Father's hand is equally precious and equally 
important with the one which declares that if we do 
not bear fruit, the heavenly husbandman will cut us 
off from membership in the Vine, not permit us to 
abide in the Vine; but as rejected ones we shall be deprived 
of all his grace, and hence wither. The point 
to be noticed is, that so long as our hearts are loyal to 
the Lord and his Word and his work, neither angels 



nor devils nor men nor any other creature or thing 
would be permitted to alienate us or separate us from 
him who loved us and bought us; but if, on the contrary, 
we do not earnestly desire to abide in the Vine, 
and to bear the fruit of the Vine, and to work the works 
of God, we are thus proving that our hearts are alienated 
from our Lord, and under such circumstances he 
would not only permit us to leave him, and his work, 
and his word, but, indeed, would force us to do so,— as 
expressed in the statement, "Every branch in me that 
beareth not fruit, he taketh away." 

From this standpoint all is clear and harmonious: 
it was by the action of our own wills, after we had been 
favored with a knowledge of the truth, that we consecrated 
and were "accepted in the Beloved;" and similarly 
by the actions of our own wills we can at any 
time withdraw from the Lord. He would not compel 
our loyalty; he seeketh not the worship of slaves, or 
any compulsory work or service. "He seeketh such 
to worship him as worship him in spirit and in truth." 
(John 4:23.) As by our own will or volition we placed 
our hands in the hand of the Lord for guidance, and 
submitted our wills to his will, to be dead to ourselves 
and alive to our God, so by the same will and volition 
we may withdraw ourselves and break our covenant 
and do despite to the spirit of grace, and bring upon ourselves 
all the loss which this would entail. But once having 
been accepted in the Beloved, nothing but our own 
wills could change this relationship: the ill will of others 
could not do it; and as for our heavenly Bridegroom, 
like the Father, he changes not— he is faithful. Nothing 
shall be able to separate us from the love of God 
in Christ Jesus so long as our wills are actively enlisted 
with the Lord and his cause. 

It is well, however, for us to note from another 
standpoint the operations of grace on behalf of those 
who have received it. For instance, suppose that our 
hearts are loyal to the Lord in the sense that we do 
not willingly and intentionally repudiate him, or his 
people, or his Word, or his work, but that nevertheless 
from some cause our hearts become overcharged 
with the cares of this life, or the ambitions of this life, 
or the strife for the riches of this life, and so our zeal 
and energy for the Lord and his cause, and our fruit-bearing, 
are largely hindered (not stopped, but lessened): 
will the Lord's grace let go of us in such an 
hour of temptation and trial and abandon us to the Evil 
One? Will he say to us lightly, You are now choosing 
the world; I now drop you entirely; go to your 
choice. Or will he have compassion upon us, and remembering 
our frame, that we are dust, go after us as 
lost or wandering sheep? 

The latter, we answer. Once in grace under divine 
protection and oversight, means always in grace 
until we shall have done despite to the spirit of favor, by 
sinning deliberately, repudiating either the Lord or his 



Word or its spirit. The Lord goes after his sheep frequently 
with the rod of chastisement, reproof, trial, 
difficulty, persecution, adversities, that he may correct 
them and bring them again to the narrow way; or as 
expressed in another place, the branch is pruned, 
many of the tendrils which were catching hold of all 
the various attractions of earthly life are pruned off, 
yet the branch remains a branch in the Vine: the very 
object of the pruning is to cause that branch to bear 
fruit more abundantly. "If ye be without chastisement," 
says the Apostle, "ye are not sons." Every 
son needs discipline to fit him and prepare him for the 

R2287 : page 109 

Father's service, that he may be pleasing, acceptable 
as a co-worker with God, not only in the present period 
but also in the world to come. 

These chastisements will be kept up for a reasonable 
time, often are kept up for years. With some 
they result in a complete correction in righteousness, 
bringing the wandering sheep back, so instructed by 
its experiences that it will never wander more. In 
other cases this discipline and chastisement are repeated 
over and over and become a life-long lesson, and the 
recipients will fail to get the great prize of the high-calling, 
which is offered only to the overcomers. 

A pen-picture of these, who having become the 
Lord's people by his grace, and who, still clinging to 
the Lord do not repudiate him, his Word and his people, 
yet are not overcomers of the world nor proper 
fruit-bearers, nor "fit for the Kingdom," is given us 
in Rev. 7:14,15: "These are they which came out of 
great tribulation and have washed their robes and made 
them white in the blood of the Lamb." Because the 
grace of God in Christ keeps hold of us so long as we 
do not repudiate him and his principles of righteousness, 
therefore that grace will bring us through if we 
thus abide in him and in his Word, even if it should 
not bring us through as conquerors and more than conquerors, 
but must bring us through "great tribulation;" 
—palm bearers, tho not crown wearers. 

In still other cases, however, the chastisements of 
the Lord merely sour and embitter the hearts which 
in such cases usually become the more proud, boastful, 
arrogant and resentful of the rod of correction. They 
become deaf to the Shepherd's voice, and run to the 
goats for sympathy and fellowship and counsel, and 
speedily lose the sheep nature. For such there seems 
to be no hope held out in the Lord's Word. We should 
do all that we can to help these,— "pulling them out 
of the fire"— but if we find it impossible to renew them 
again unto repentance we may surmise the reason to be 
that they have ceased to be "sheep," ceased to abide 
as branches in the Vine. 

The proper attitude of heart for all who have received 



divine grace, is to be anxious to bring forth 
much fruit and thus to be more and more like our dear 
Redeemer, daily growing in likeness to him, as well as 
in knowledge of him. "Herein is my Father glorified 
that ye bear much fruit," and such fruit as will remain. 



R2287 : page 109 

"IF WE SUFFER WITH HIM WE SHALL ALSO REIGN WITH HIM. 

APRIL 10. -MATT. 16:21-28. 

"He was bruised for our iniquities."— Isa. 53:5. 

THIS lesson brings us down to near the time of 
the crucifixion. The former part of our Lord's 
ministry was devoted apparently to the establishment 
of his disciples' faith, through cures and miracles and 
instructions. He had taught them that he was the 
King long promised, the Messiah; and had promised 
them that if faithful to him they should participate in 
the glories of the Kingdom; but up to this time he 
had not explained to them how sufferings and death 
must precede the glories. "From that time forth began 
Jesus to show to his disciples how he must... 
suffer,. ..be killed, and be raised again the third 
day." It was necessary that they should know of the 
sufferings, that were to be expected as well as the glories 
to follow; but it was not expedient that they should 
learn of the sufferings at first, nor until their faith and 
confidence should become established. Here is a valuable 
lesson to all who are seeking to walk in the Master's 
footsteps— especially to such as endeavor to teach 
others: namely, that the truth should be told as the 
hearers are able to hear it; "milk for babes," "meat 
for men." 

Noble, impulsive Peter had previously been commended 
for his good confession, that Jesus of Nazareth 
was the Christ, the long promised Messiah: perhaps 
the Master's approval on that occasion had something 
to do with Peter's forwardness on this occasion. With 
our poor, weak, fallen natures, it is a difficult matter 
always to keep well balanced and to say the right thing 
at the right time. On this occasion Peter made a serious 
mistake, for he attempted to turn teacher and got 
out of his place as pupil or disciple, when he attempted 
to reprove the Master and to instruct him, saying, 
"This shall not be unto thee." 

In his commendation of Peter's confession of him 
as the Christ, our Lord had intimated that it was not 
merely by his own wisdom that he had thus recognized 
and confessed, but that he had been under the guidance 
of the Father,— "Flesh and blood hath not revealed 



R2288 : page 109 

it unto thee, but my Father." So in this case, 
our Lord intimates that Peter evidently had come under 
the control of a different spirit or influence— the influence 
of Satan: and since Peter had become the mouthpiece 
of error, of Satan, our Lord addresses him as tho 
he himself were Satan, "Get thee behind me, Satan." 
Our Lord recognized that the temptation put to him at 
the beginning of his ministry, and which he had resisted 
in the wilderness, was now again being thrust at him 
by the same great enemy of God who was seeking to 
use Peter as a channel of temptation, to hinder him 
from progressing in the way to sacrifice which the 
Father's plan had marked out for him. 

R2288 :page 110 

What a lesson is here for every one of us to the effect 
that we may be either mouthpieces of God and righteousness 
or error and Satan;— helps or hindrances to 
the fellow-members of the body of Christ. How careful 
we should be that our words and conduct are in full 
accord with the divine plan as presented to us lesson 
by lesson through the great Teacher and his appointed, 
and since Pentecost, inspired, apostles. We remember 
in this connection the words of our Lord, "His 
servants ye are to whom ye render service." Many 
are professing to render service to the Lord and his 
cause, who in reality are serving the great Adversary 
of God and the truth. 

And how many there are to-day, who like Peter 
attempt to turn aside those who have consecrated 
themselves as living sacrifices: not that they wish to 
do evil, but that they have not the spirit of the truth 
themselves, but the spirit of the world, and hence 
speak from the worldly standpoint, which is in direct 
conflict with the divine plan as respects God's consecrated 
Church. Let each of us take heed first, that we 
be not thus tools of the Adversary in stumbling others, 
and second, that we be not stumbled by any of the 
Adversary's tools who may take such positions, no matter 
how kind and sympathetic their manner and intentions. 
If they seek to turn us aside from the narrow 
path which our Lord marked out, they are not our true 
friends but most seductive enemies. 

Our Lord lost no opportunity of enforcing the lesson 
which he had started and which Peter attempted to 
interrupt. He proceeded to show the disciples that 
not only he, their Master, must suffer, but that all 
who desired to be his disciples, and to sit with him in 
his throne and share the honors of his Kingdom, must 
likewise expect to suffer. Each must "deny himself, 
and take up his cross" and follow the Captain of their 
salvation. He enforces this by laying it down as a 
general principle, that the disposition to preserve the 



present life and its comforts at any cost is the disposition 
which will be deprived of eternal life; while the 
reverse disposition, that is willing to lay down the 
present life in the service of the Lord, his truth and 
his people, is the one to which God will be pleased to 
grant life eternal. The word that is here rendered 
"life," is the same that in the next verse is rendered 
"soul:" it is the Greek word psuche, and signifies being 
or existence. 

Our Lord put the proposition squarely before his 
disciples and inquired whether they thought it would be 
profitable to a man if he should gain the whole world 
in this present life, and then lose his being,— utterly 
perish. The implication is that it would be much 
more desirable for him to lose all things pertaining to 
this present life, yea, and the present life itself also, if 
thereby the eternal life of the future might be obtained. 
What could be considered a valuable exchange for the 
everlasting life of the future which God hath promised 
to them that love him? 

It should be noticed that our Lord says nothing 
here in favor of the common fallacies on this subject 
usually drawn from his words by mistaken inference: 
his words by the plainest inference contradict the very 
unreasonable and so-called "orthodox" views of this subject. 
Our Lord did not say, What shall it profit a man 
if he gain the whole world and be cast into an eternal torture 
—be roasted and boiled in liquid flame? Not a word 
of the kind. Such a statement, altho in harmony with 
the views often advocated by Christian people, would 
be wholly contrary to the divine plan and Word. Such 
"orthodox" teachings are, like Peter's expression, instigated 
by the great Adversary, Satan, as a libel and 
slander upon the divine character and plan. Our Lord's 
statement was most explicit; that is a question of life 
or no life; of being or no being; of existence or non-existence; 
of eternal life or destruction in the second 
death. Let those who will not hear the Lord's 
words believe Satan's falsehood if they prefer it: we 
may be sure that all who have the Lord's spirit and 
who are seeking to walk in his footsteps will hear his 
voice and be guided into the truth which now, as 
meat in due season, is provided for the household of 
faith. 

In the 27th verse our Lord handles very rudely 
another of Satan's deceptions. Satan, through many 
mouth-pieces in many church pulpits and at many funerals 
is declaring that every man is rewarded either 
with heaven or hell for all eternity at the instant of 
death. But here our Lord expressly declares that he 
will reward every man when he shall come in the 
glory of the Father— at the establishment of his Kingdom. 
This, taken in connection with the preceding verse, 
gave to the disciples and gives to us the correct 
thought; viz., that if we now are willing to lay down 
our lives for the truth, in the service of God and Christ 



(including the members of his body), and thus shall 
suffer the loss of earthly things which otherwise we 
might have gained or attempted to gain, we shall be 
rewarded by the Master with eternal life and a share 
in his glory— at his second coming. 

The 28th verse is separated from its connection by 
the starting of a new chapter and thus many are confused,* 
and fail to see that the record of the fulfilment 
of this promise immediately follows it. But this is a 
part of our next lesson. 



*For the division of the Scriptures into chapters and verses 
is a modern invention, and while intended for convenience 
is sometimes misleading, as in this case. In the Revised Version 
this difficulty has been corrected. 



R2288 :page 111 

"WE BEHELD HIS GLORY IN THE HOLY MOUNT." 

-APRIL 17.-MATT. 17:1-9.— 

"We beheld his glory, the glory as of the 
only begotten of the Father."— John 1:14. 

LITTLE did the disciples imagine that our Lord's 
statement that some of them should not taste 
of death until they had seen the Son of Man coming in 
his Kingdom, would be fulfilled within six days to 
Peter, James and John in the Mount of Transfiguration. 
Yet so it was, and evidently it produced a great 
and designed effect upon the witnesses, one of whom, 
writing respecting it, says (2 Pet. 1:16-18), "We have 
not followed cunningly devised fables, when we made 
known unto you the power and coming of our Lord 
Jesus Christ, but were eyewitnesses of his majesty. 
For he received from God, the Father, honor and glory, 
when there came such a voice to him from the excellent 
glory, This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well 
pleased. And this voice which came from heaven we 
heard, when we were with him in the holy mount." 

The transfiguration scene was not all that it appeared;— 
it was a "vision," as our Lord explained to 
the disciples when they were coming down from the 
mount. In this vision, as in all visions, the unreal 
appears real. Just so it was in the vision of John, on 
the Isle of Patmos, described in the book of Revelation. 
He saw, he heard, he talked, yet the things thus shown 
him in the vision were not realities— not beasts with 
many heads and many horns, and angels and vials and 
thrones, nor real dragons, etc., merely a vision. And 
a vision was in every sense of the word just as good, 



and really better suited to the purpose, than realities 
would have been. 

Moses and Elias were not present on the mountain, 
personally, but were merely represented to the disciples 
in the vision. We know this not only from our 
Lord's statement, that it was a "vision," but also from 
his statement that no man had ascended up to heaven. 
(John 3:13; Acts 2:34.) We know also that Moses 
and Elijah could not have been there, since they were 
not resurrected from the dead; because our Lord Jesus 
himself was the "First-fruits of them that slept"— 
"the first-born from the dead, that in all things he 
might have the preeminence." (1 Cor. 15:20; Col. 1:18.) 
Furthermore the Apostle to the Hebrews distinctly 
mentions Moses and the prophets (which would 
include Elijah) and their faithfulness in the past and 
their acceptance with God; but he points out that they 
had not yet received their reward, and that they would 
not receive it until after we (the Gospel Church) shall 
have received our reward as joint-heirs with Christ in 
his Kingdom. "These all, having obtained a good report 
through faith, received not the [blessings of the] 
promise; God having provided some better thing for 
us, that they without us should not be made perfect." 
-Heb. 11:39,40. 

Since, then, the appearance of Moses and Elias 
with our Lord was an appearance merely, we properly 
inquire, What was the significance or meaning of this 
vision? We reply, It was a tableau, illustrative of the 
glorious Kingdom of Christ, as our Lord had predicted, 
and as Peter understood it and expressed it. In this 
tableau, the three disciples formed no part. They were 
merely witnesses. Christ was the central figure; his 
features and garments, shining with miraculous lustre, 
represented in figure the glories which belong to the 

R2289 : page 1 1 1 

spirit nature, which our Lord received at his resurrection, 

"the express image of the Father's person." It 

is this same spirit glory that is represented in the visions 

of Revelation, where our Lord is represented 

with eyes as a flame of fire, and his feet bright as burning 

brass, etc. (Rev. 1:14,15; 2:18.) At his second 

advent our Lord will no longer be flesh because, as he 

testified, "flesh and blood cannot inherit the Kingdom 

of God." He is now, and every will be, a glorious spirit 

being of the highest order— the divine nature: and the 

transfiguration was intended to convey to the minds of 

his disciples a faint conception of the glory which 

excelleth. 

Moses represented the faithful overcomers who 
preceded our Lord, described by the Apostle (Heb. 11:39,40), 
who cannot be made perfect until the Kingdom 
shall have been established. Elijah represented the 
overcomers of the Gospel age.* The topic discussed 



in the vision was our Lord's crucifixion. (Luke 9:31.) 

The cross of Christ is thus pointed out as being the 

necessary thing in order that he might enter into his 

glory, as he himself expressed the matter after his resurrection, 

saying, "Ought not Christ to have suffered 

these things, and to enter into his glory?" (Luke 24:26.) 

There could have been no Kingdom glory without 

the redemptive work. But this vision portrays the 

Kingdom glories which will ultimately result from our 

Lord's death. 

Possibly, too, the vision was intended to represent 
the two classes who will be associated with the Lord 
in his Kingdom, first the Church— the body of Christ, 
his bride and joint-heir, who shall be like him and see 
and share his glory, as spirit beings. These in the 
present time are represented by Elijah. Second, the 
overcomers of the past, who shall be the earthly representatives 
of the Kingdom, as per our Lord's statement; 
—The world "shall see Abraham, Isaac and Jacob and 
all the prophets in the Kingdom;" because they will be 
restored, perfected human beings: but the world will 
not see the Lord and the Church, his glorified spouse, 
because they will all have been changed from flesh and 
blood (human nature) and will be spirit beings and of 
the divine nature, and hence as invisible to men as are 
God and the angels.-l Tim. 1:17; 6:16; Heb. 11:27. 

Of course, the disciples did not clearly comprehend 
the matter at the time, yet they realized a blessing and 
felt that it was "good to be there." Their meeting 
had started as a prayer-meeting: the three favorite disciples 
of the Lord accompanying him on this occasion, 
as on several other occasions— for instance, when he 
went in to awaken the daughter of Jairus from the 
sleep of death, and a little later than this in the Garden 
of Gethsemane, they were again his chosen and 
closest companions. We cannot suppose that the choice 
of these was an arbitrary one, but must suppose that 
there was something about these three men that made 
them specially companionable to the Lord. One thing 
about them that impresses every reader of the New 
Testament record is their faith in the Lord and their 
zeal for his cause. It was James and John who, in 
their zeal (but not according to knowledge), were 
about to call down fire from heaven upon the Samaritans, 
because they did not promptly recognize and 
cordially receive the Master. It was Peter who first 
promptly confessed Jesus as the Christ, the same Peter 



*See MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOL. II., Chap. 8. 

R2289 :page 112 

who drew his sword in the Master's defense, and declared 
that he would die with him. The Master himself 



was of a warm temperament, and naturally and 

properly was most drawn toward those who were similarly 

fervent. 

There is a lesson here for us, to the effect that, if 
we would be closest to the Master and most frequently 
privileged to have fellowship with him, we should 
similarly have and cultivate this earnest, zealous spirit. 
Cold, calculating people may have other good qualities, 
but there is no room for coldness or even luke-warmness 
on the part of those who have once tasted that the 
Lord is gracious. With such, the love enkindled 
should lead to a consuming zeal. It was thus with 
our Lord Jesus, and this was one of the reasons why 
he was beloved of the Father. Speaking for him, the 
prophet said, "The zeal of thine house hath consumed 
me." Let all who desire to be pleasing in the Lord's 
sight become so filled with the same spirit of zeal for 
righteousness and truth that it will consume them as 
sacrifices upon the Lord's altar. Thus they will be 
most pleasing and acceptable to him through Jesus our 
Lord. As a rule, only the warm and zealous ever get 
free from Babylon. The others coolly calculate and 
weigh matters so long that the spirit of the world, the 
flesh and the devil puts fresh blinds on them, even after 
they have gotten into the light and see considerable. 

Peter proposed making some booths on the mountaintop 
for the Lord and his guests. Luke adds, "Not 
knowing what he said." He was bewildered, confused, 
but in harmony with his natural temperament wished 
to say something. The voice from heaven, however, 
seemed to say, Be still! hearken rather to the words of 
my beloved Son. Not a few need to learn the lesson 
of quietness— to hear and learn, be taught of God, before 
they have much to say. Peter evidently learned, 
as we may judge from his after conduct, to be slower 
to speak and swifter to hear. (James 1:19.) This is an 
important lesson to all who would be servants of the 
Lord: we must learn that of ourselves we know nothing, 
and can do nothing aright. The proper learning 
of this lesson means a lesson in humility and in patience, 
a lesson respecting our own nothingness, and 
that "our sufficiency is of God." Those who reach 
this condition become apt students in the school of 
Christ— not forgetful hearers, but doers of the Word: 
and such only are prepared to teach the truth to others. 
Those who are too forward and ready to teach, before 
they have received instruction from the Lord, are very 
apt not to know what they say, as was Peter's case; 
and if such be true-hearted and worthy of being used 
of the Lord as his servants, they are very apt to receive 
numerous reproofs from time to time. 

The first lesson for such to learn is that "The 
fear [reverence] of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom." 
Thus, Peter's rash expression, "not knowing 
what he said," found a reproof in the voice from heaven 
which said, "Hear ye Him." And fear fell upon the 



disciples. 

Not only is the fear of the Lord valuable as a beginning 
of true wisdom, but it is valuable all our journey 
through. One tendency amongst those who have 
received the light of present truth, and who lose thereby 
the terrible and slavish fear inspired by misrepresentations 
of the divine character and plan, is to lose 
all fear. And according to the Scriptures this is a very 
dangerous condition, an ultra freedom that is apt to 
lead to license, under our present imperfect conditions. 

It is true that "perfect love casteth out fear," but 
it is also true that perfect love is a very scarce commodity 
on earth even amongst the saints. Hence the Apostle 
urges, "Let us fear, lest a promise being left us of 
entering into his rest, any of us should seem to come 
short of it." (Heb. 4:1.) The fear which we are to 
lose entirely is "the fear of man which bringeth a 
snare." He who loses the fear of God, and the fear 
of losing the great prize which God has held out before 
us, is in a very dangerous position: he is likely to 
become self-conscious and self-satisfied, and readily 
drops into the condition where he does not believe even 
in the just sentence against sinners, the second death, 
and where he is proportionately careless respecting the 
keeping of his own words and thoughts and deeds in 
strictest alignment with the principles laid down in the 
Word of the Lord. Having lost his fear of the Lord, 
he rapidly loses carefulness respecting the Word of the 
Lord, and inclines more and more to "lean to his own 
understanding," and becomes blinded to his own faults. 

Let us note carefully additional encouragements to 
fear held out in the Scriptures. Some of these are as 
follows:— "O fear the Lord, ye his saints." "Ye that 
fear the Lord, praise him." "Let them now that fear 
the Lord say, that his mercy endureth forever." "Like 
as a father pitieth his children, so the Lord pitieth 
them that fear him." "The mercy of the Lord is from 
everlasting to everlasting upon them that fear him." 
"He will fulfil the desire of them that fear him." 
"The Lord taketh pleasure in them that fear him." 
(Psa. 34:9; 22:23; 118:4; 103:13,17; 145:19; 147:11.) 
Our Lord says, "I will forewarn you whom ye shall 
fear." (Luke 12:5.) The Apostle Paul says, "Be not 
high-minded, but fear." "Let us also fear." (Rom. 11:20; 
Heb. 4:1.) The Apostle Peter says, "Honor 
men; fear God;" and "He that feareth him and worketh 
righteousness is accepted with him." (1 Pet. 2:17; 
Acts 10:35.) God says through the prophet that 
they who fear his name, are the ones who speak often 
together, and of whom a book of remembrance is made. 
And again he promises, "To you that fear my name 
shall the Sun of Righteousness arise with healing in 
his beams." (Mai. 3:16; 4:2.) Of our dear Redeemer 
himself it is recorded that Christ "was heard in that he 
feared."— Heb. 5:7. 

The lesson of these various scriptures is that, to 



lose fear of God, in the sense of losing fear of his displeasure 

or fearing to come short of the grand possibilities 

which he has so graciously put within our 

reach, would be a most serious loss, as it would probably 

cost us our eternal life; for those who have lost 

this fear are like steam-engines which have lost their 

governors, and are apt to run with too much liberty to 

self-destruction and unfitness for service. Hence, as 

the Apostle again says to the pilgrims who seek the 

heavenly country,— "If ye call on him as Father,... 

pass the time of your sojourning here in fear" (1 Pet. 1:17); 

not in levity, nor in worldly frivolities, nor in 

sensualities, nor in land and money grabbing, nor even 

carelessly and slothfully, but in earnest watchfulness 

of every word and act, to please the Lord and to copy 

his character and thus to make your calling and election 

sure to a place in his Kingdom, when it shall be established 

in power and great glory. 



page 113 
VOL. XIX. APRIL 15, 1898. No. 8. 



CONTENTS. 



Views from the Watch Tower 115 

The Zionist Movement 

Brother Cone's Pilgrimage Ended 116 

Poem: "All my Springs are in Thee" 116 

The Celebration of the Memorial 117 

Reports from Elsewhere 120 

Questions and Answers 122 

"Forgive and Ye shall be Forgiven" 123 

"Behold, thy King Cometh unto Thee!" 127 

page 114 

SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 56-60 ARCH STREET, ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, N.Y. DRAFT, MONEY ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS: 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age or accident, or other 
adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, if they 
send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting the 
paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list 



constantly. 



THE TOWER PUBLISHING COMPANY NO LONGER EXISTS. 



On the first day of April, this Journal, with all and sundry 
its outfit and belongings, together with the entire stock on hand 
of DAWNS, booklets, tracts, Bibles, etc., and the Bible House, 
were formally transferred to the WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT 
SOCIETY, which henceforth will do its own publishing, etc. Pray 
for the Society's continued usefulness; and to this end heavenly 
guidance of its efforts to dispense the harvest truth. 

THE TRUTH IN FOREIGN FIELDS. 



As we go to press, we are preparing shipments of books and 
tracts for England, Scotland, Germany and Switzerland, to the 
amount of 1972 books and 64,750 tracts, 300 of the new charts, 
envelopes, etc. 

We mention this for the encouragement of some of the dear 
friends, who, finding their own efforts to serve the truth stoutly 
resisted, may feel discouraged and inclined to give over the battle 
for the truth. The foreign field is more difficult to work than 
our home field, and yet we see evidence of steady progress there, 
as illustrated in the above good sized shipment, which is by no 
means the largest yet made. Besides this, remember that the 
French DAWNS and tracts were published in Switzerland, and 
are kept in stock there. 

"Pray ye— that He will send forth more laborers." The 
general revival of business throughout this country makes it 
possible for colporteurs of even moderate ability to meet their 
expenses, upon the liberal terms allowed by our Society. (We 
cannot, however, encourage those who have families wholly dependent 
upon their labor to engage in this service.) We accordingly 
suggest to the dear friends of the truth that each do 
with his might what his hands may find to do, while it is called 
day, "for the night cometh, wherein no man can work." 

We still favor making a specialty of DAWN, VOL. I., but the 
Spiritism and Hell pamphlets, and DAWN, VOL. IV., are meeting 
with such success that we can encourage colporteurs to take them 
over fields recently worked with VOL. I. The results are good. 
Write us, if you feel an inclination, and have the opportunity, 
for entering this branch of service to any extent. "He that 
reapeth receiveth wages [reward] and gathereth fruit unto life 
eternal." 



R2290 :page 115 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 



THE following, from the pen of the Editor of the 
Jewish World, may be regarded as a better than 
average review of the subject discussed, both as regards 
knowledge and candor. Very evidently "the time of 
Jacob's trouble" (Jer. 30:7-9) is not yet ended. Probably 
still greater persecutions will shortly overtake 
them;— to drive them to Palestine and thus to fulfil the 
Lord's predictions through the prophets. The spiritual 
Israelite must always feel a deep interest in the 
natural Israelite— whose favor ceased when ours began, 
and whose favor is to return when ours has accomplished 
its purpose in finding and developing the Bride, 
the Lamb's wife. 

THE ZIONIST MOVEMENT. 



"Few movements with deep political and social 
significance have come to the front with such well-ordered 
rapidity as has marked the progress of Zionism. 
The return to Palestine, and a Jewish State for Jewish 
people, have been the dream of the 'People of the 
Book' for hundreds of years; in fact, the vision was forever 
the patrimony of the Diaspora, and has haunted 
the house of Israel through the long intervening centuries. 
Isolated instances are scattered through the 
records of history, showing how small bodies of devoted 
men have from time to time gone to end their days 
in the Holy Land, and for some this is still the highest 
aim. Very early in the sixteenth century the Turkish 
Sultan, Mehmet, gave a huge tract of territory in Central 
Palestine to Don Joseph of Naxon for the purpose 
of establishing a Jewish Colony. But the time was not 
then ripe for a general exodus. 

"The present movement has been working slowly 
and silently for a long time, and is directly an outcome 
of the changed political condition of things on the Continent. 
Liberalism came into Europe with the peace 
that followed the disastrous wars of the beginning of 
the present century; it was hailed everywhere as the 
death blow to an already obsolete Feudalism; it produced 
later on a race of youthful martyrs whose blood 
stained the barricades in most of the capitals of Europe 
nearly half a century ago. Then, slowly but surely, 
the masses found that Liberalism had brought no millennium 
in its train, that the pressure of economic 
evils was as great as heretofore, that they had changed 
the nature rather than the weight of their burdens. 
As the years passed, and men's minds were filled with 
self-satisfaction, while they regarded scientific progress 
and the modern rush of events and life as an indication 
of prosperity; while the idea, that the nineteenth century 



knew everything, and that our forefathers lacked 
our gifts, gained in strength; it became necessary to 
provide a scapegoat upon whom a half-trained, uneducated 
populace might lay the burden of its own faults, 
and the blame for the difficulty of the struggle for life. 
Who so fit to be a scapegoat as the Jew— the survivor 
of a mighty past, the man who held aloof from the 
people among whom he lived, who worshipped his God 
in his own way, who did not intermarry, whose virtues 
were essentially domestic, and whose vices were, tho 
few, decidedly Eastern and remarkable?... 

"To-day the state of affairs on the Continent is a 
disgrace to the vaunted civilization of the century. 
Law and order are suspended whenever the Jew comes 
into question. These are no random statements. In 
Paris, the Dreyfus case and the pages of La Libre Parole 
prove the case; in Germany, the almost military discipline 
of the populace alone keeps the Judenhetze subdued: 
in Austria, men of infamous character openly 
lead the mob against the Jews; in Roumania, riots are 
planned in high quarters; while in Russia and Poland 
there exists such a condition of affairs as may fairly be 
termed indescribably revolting. So far as Eastern 
Europe is concerned, only in Turkey, the country of 
Abdul Hamid, for whom the worst phrase of the dictionary 
has been deemed too good, is the Jew permitted 
to live in peace.... 

"Dangerous diseases proverbially require desperate 
remedies, and only the present condition of the 
Jews can adequately explain the far-reaching step that 
is being advocated throughout Europe, and is filling 

R2290 :page 116 

the hearts of an outraged people with a joy they never 

knew before. Dr. Herzl, of Vienna, a man of extraordinary 

attainments, who has given very great study 

and care to the case, published a remarkable pamphlet 

a few years ago, advocating the establishment of a 

Jewish State, and pointing out the complete possibilities 

of the plan. Soon after the publication, Dr. Herzl 

came to England and unfolded his scheme to the Maccabaean 

Society, whose members listened to it with an 

interest in which enthusiasm had no part. English 

Jews are not inclined to go to Zion under any aegis 

other than that of Thomas Cook and Son. 

"They have no personal need, and only a scant 
knowledge of the need of their brethren. It was not 
until Dr. Herzl convened the Basel Congress in August 
of last year that the enthusiasm and needs of Continental 
Jews became apparent. Two hundred delegates 
from all parts of the world were present, and the plans 
were most carefully discussed. The idea of the present 
movement is to secure Palestine from Turkey just 
as England secured Cyprus from the same Power, and 
also to obtain the sanction of the European Powers; 



then to draft, as rapidly as may be, sections from the 

districts where most congestion is, and the struggle for 

life is made almost hopeless by the repressive economic 

laws that grind the Jews to poverty. Petitions, signed 

and presented, show that more than three million of 

Jews are prepared to go to the State when established, 

and that the vast majority of these are not destitute 

aliens, but able to hold out for awhile pending preparations 

for existence under new conditions. This would 

lead to an immediate relief in congested districts, and 

so soon as a Jewish State developed, diplomatic relations 

could be established all over the world that would 

afford adequate protection from mob violence and premeditated 

moral oppression to those left behind. Limits 

of space forbid any amplification of the outline of the 

plan laid down by Dr. Herzl.... 

"Societies are springing up in the laboring districts, 
and, significantly enough, all the good work 
down to now is by the poor, to whom the idea of a 
State more specially appeals. 

"Now comes a vital question: Is Palestine fit and 
able to accommodate the many hundreds of thousands 
who desire to return? Granting that the people go 
without undue haste, that the land is free for their 
work, and that the management is vigorous and single-minded, 
I answer, with modesty but with assurance, 
in the affirmative. The soil in Palestine is of more than 
common fertility, and we have the testimony of the 
Bible that it covers considerable mineral wealth; the climate 
is healthful and would probably be improved by 
occupation and cultivation of the land. 

"Colonies in Palestine have long been an accomplished 
fact. I have visited several, some in or by the 
plains of Sharon near Jaffa, others in Central Palestine 
by the Sea of Galilee, or more to the north, near the 
sources of the Jordan. Everywhere the same phenomena 
are to be observed. The land, long lain derelict, 
has smiled again at the first return of labor; the orange 
and the vine have come rapidly to perfection; fields of 
waving corn, lighted with vivid splashes of poppies, 
recall old England. As is the land, so are the people. 
A single generation has in many cases sufficed to change 
the stunted sons and daughters of the Ghetto into stalwart 
men and women: they are themselves as flowers 
removed from poisonous soil and stifling atmosphere 
to healthy land and pure fresh air. The change of 
physique has been accompanied by an equally welcome 
change of temperament. In place of the men and women 
whose condition called for a pity in which contempt 
often succeeded in finding a place, we find a race 
springing up in which something of the old national 
spirit has come to sudden rebirth— people who look 
out upon existence with a knowledge that they, too, 
have a natural right to share Nature's heritage without 
reproach. Seeing that this change has come to the 
few, why should it not come to the many? And if it 



come to the many, can a Jewish State be so very far 



away?" 



BROTHER CONE'S PILGRIMAGE ENDED. 



On the last of March, too late for notice in our 
last issue, our dear Brother S. S. Cone, well known to 
many of our readers as one of the "Pilgrims," died at 
Augusta, Ga., after a brief illness. He was about 
seventy-eight years old, and for the past two years had 
been giving all of his time to the service of the truth, 
under the auspices of the Watch Tower Bible and Tract 
Society, as a traveling minister or "Pilgrim." His 
last tour was through the Southern States. He was 
a very effective speaker, very zealous for the Lord and 
the Harvest truth, and will be greatly missed by us 
all. Our hope for him is that he was faithful until 
death, and that he is now among those of whom it is 
written, "Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord 
from henceforth: Yea, saith the Spirit, that they may 
rest from their labors; and their works do follow them" 
—beyond the vail.— Rev. 14:13. 



R2297 :page 116 

"ALL MY SPRINGS ARE IN THEE." 
-(PSA. 87:7.)- 

A brook goes brightly on its way, 
Its ripples on the pebbles ring 

Incessant, day by day; 
It has a living spring. 

A life moves buoyantly along, 

Tireless its walk; heart, glad and free, 

Breaks out to God in song— 
My springs are all in Thee. 

God sets his seal upon the heart, 
The holy unction from above, 

His new name to impart; 

Transcendent spring of love! 

He gives the running-over cup, 
Water of life, without alloy, 

Forever welling up; 

Perennial spring of joy! 

God's mercies, every morning new, 
Bid every anxious worry cease, 
Distilling like the dew 



To fill my spring of peace. 

A watered garden is the soul, 

Where grows the branch within the vine. 
Thou dost sustain the whole, 

O Spring of Life divine! --F. I. PARMENTER. 



R2291 :page 117 

THE CELEBRATION OF THE MEMORIAL. 



THE RECENT celebration of the Memorial 

Supper at Allegheny was amongst the most solemn 

and impressive that we have ever enjoyed. The 

attendance was good, perhaps the largest we have had 

since the abandonment of the general convention at 

this date, in 1892. About two hundred were present, 

and that notwithstanding the fact that none were invited 

to come on this occasion except believers in the 

ransom who professed full consecration to the Lord. 

Quite a number of brethren, too, were hindered from attendance, 

by reason of many of the works in this vicinity 

running extra time, and the inability of those desirous 

of attending to get substitutes for the time. Our 

meeting convened at 7.30, but we delayed the general 

service to accommodate some who were unable to arrive 

until nearly eight o'clock. Meantime the entire 

congregation took part in worshiping the Lord in 

psalms and hymns and spiritual songs, singing and making 

melody in our hearts also, to him who loved us 

and bought us with his own precious blood. We sang, 

"Ask ye what great thing I know, 

What delights and stirs me so? 

What the high reward I win? 

Whose the name I glory in? 
Jesus Christ, the Crucified."* 
Then we joined in prayer for the divine blessing 
upon our gathering and upon all of the Lord's people 
everywhere gathered for similar purpose, not forgetting 
also the solitary ones; entreating the divine blessing 
and wisdom, and grace to appreciate the realities 
symbolized by the "Supper" before us. Then our 
hearts and voices united in the grand old hymn,— 

"There is a fountain filled with blood, 
Drawn from Immanuel's veins; 

And sinners plunged beneath that flood 
Lose all their guilty stains. "+ 
Following this came,— 

"In the cross of Christ I glory, 

Tow'ring o'er the wrecks of time; 

All the light of sacred story 

Gathers 'round its head sublime. "++ 



This was followed by the old, familiar, solemn 
and heart-cheering hymn,— 

"Sweet the moments, rich in blessing, 

Which before the cross I spend; 
Life and health and peace possessing, 
From the sinners' dying Friend. "+++ 

At eight o'clock we took up our Lord's words in 
which he describes himself as the living bread, reading 
from John 6:48-58,- 

"I am the bread of life. Your fathers did eat 
manna in the wilderness and are dead. This is the 
bread which cometh down from heaven, that a man 
may eat thereof and not die. I am the living bread 
which came down from heaven: if any man eat [feed 
upon] this bread, he shall live forever: and the bread 
that I will give is my flesh, which I will give for the 
life of the world. Except ye eat the flesh of the Son 
of Man, and drink his blood, ye have no life in you. 
Whoso eateth my flesh, and drinketh my blood, 
hath eternal life; and I will raise him up at the last 
day. For my flesh is meat indeed, and my blood is 
drink indeed. He that eateth [continuously] my flesh 
and drinketh [continuously] my blood, dwelleth in 
me, and I in him. This is that bread which came down 
from heaven: not as your fathers did eat manna and 
are dead: he that eateth [continuously] of this bread 
shall live forever." 

Examining the subject we saw that the manna 
of the wilderness was at very most only a type to illustrate 
our Lord Jesus who is the true manna for our 
souls: feeding upon which we are to have eternal life. 
We sympathized with the Jews and realized how, in 
their fleshly condition, unenlightened by the holy spirit 
which was not yet given, it was impossible for them to 
comprehend the significance of the deep things of God 
contained in our Master's words. Indeed, we see that 
the majority of Christians but faintly comprehend 
their meaning to-day. We discussed the subject of 
how our Lord's flesh is the bread of life to those who 
eat it. We noted that "Bread is the staff of life" 
amongst all mankind, the main dependence for this 
present life, and hence the appropriateness of the figure 
of speech which likens our Lord and the graces and 
virtues which are in him to the bread which imparts 
sustenance to the new life. 

We noted the importance of our Lord's flesh and 
that it was uncontaminated, free from sin— "holy, 
harmless, separate from sinners." We noted that this 
is necessary because our father Adam, having been 
created in a similar condition of sinless flesh, had, by 
transgression of the divine law, become a sinner: his 
flesh came under divine sentence of death and became 
corrupt both morally and physically. We noted the 
necessity for the man Christ Jesus, whose sinless flesh 
could be accepted as the ransom price, the offset, the 
full equivalent, instead of Adam and his flesh which 



had become defiled through sin. We noted the Scriptural 
explanation that it was for this purpose that our 
Lord Jesus left the glories and honors of the higher 
nature and condition and "was made flesh,. ..that 
he by the grace of God should taste death for every 
man." We noted our Redeemer's own words: "My 
flesh I will give for the life of the world." (John 6:51.) 
We saw that thus the giving of our Lord's unblemished 
flesh as a corresponding price for father 



POEMS AND HYMNS OF DAWN, *No. 15. +No.290. ++No.l23. 
+++No.276. 

R2291 :page 118 

Adam's condemned flesh, constituted the purchase price 
by which not only father Adam was redeemed, but also 
all his race which was in his loins at the time of his 
transgression. We praised God for the undefiled flesh 
of our Redeemer and took note of the fact that, while 
it had been broken for all, it is required of each that 
he shall for himself accept of his own share in the great 
work of atonement accomplished by that broken body 
and shed blood. We noted that none can have eternal 
life except by partaking of this broken body. This 
meant to us an out and out contradiction of all the various 
claims to the effect that a knowledge of the historic 
Christ and of his sacrifice for sins is unnecessary 
to salvation: it meant to us what it says, that only by 
eating of the Lord's flesh and partaking of his blood 
can any ever obtain life eternal. 

We considered what is signified by the eating of 
the flesh: we saw that as the eating of natural bread 
includes the thought of its assimilation and absorption 
into the system through the blood, so our eating of the 
flesh of Christ signifies (1) our appreciation of the fact 
that he was sinless, and a suitable sacrifice on our behalf. 
(2) Our faith in the fact that he did offer himself 
a ransom for all. (3) Our conviction that this 
sacrifice was acceptable to the Heavenly Father, as 
evidenced by our Lord's resurrection from the dead, 
and also by the Father's acceptance of believers through 
him, and his impartation to them of the holy spirit of 
adoption, which began at Pentecost and has continued 
since. (4) It signifies our desire for the life eternal 
and also for the purity which was in Christ, and implies 
our separation from sin— the renouncement of our 
relationship to the first Adam, and our acceptance of 
the hoped-for life through the second Adam, based upon 
his sacrifice— his flesh given for the life of the world. 

We then turned to and considered 1 Cor. 11:23-26, 
and noted the fact that the Lord's Memorial Supper 
followed the Paschal Supper and was a separate 
institution and designed to take its place. Looking 



back to the deliverance of fleshly Israel from Egyptian 
bondage and the passing over or sparing of their first-born 
on the night before they left Egypt, we noted the 
antitypes of these things: that Egypt was a type of the 
world; its king, Pharaoh, a type of the prince of this 
world; its bondage a type of the bondage of sin; the 
deliverance from all these under the leadership of Moses, 
a type of the ultimate deliverance in the next age 
of all who love God and who desire to do sacrifice to 
him, under the leadership of the antitypical Moses 
(Christ), and that the final overthrow of Satan and his 
servants was prefigured in the destruction of Pharaoh 
and his hosts. 

In harmony with these thoughts and as a part of 
them, we saw that the passing over or deliverance of 
Israel's first-born from death, in the night before all 
the people went forth from the bondage, was a type of 
how God passes over, spares, gives life to, a certain 
class now (in the "night" before the full introduction 
of the Millennial age and his Kingdom for the deliverance 
of all who love and seek righteousness). The 
class that will be delivered, spared, passed over, during 
this night, while God's people are in the world and 
under the evil influence of the prince of this world, is 
merely and only the first-born— the Church— "the 
Church of the first-born [ones] whose names are written 
in heaven."— Heb. 12:23. 

But we noted that in the type, in order that the 
first-born ones might be passed over, it was necessary 
that a lamb without blemish should be killed, its blood 
sprinkled upon the door-posts of their houses, and its 
flesh eaten within with bitter herbs. We saw that this 
Passover lamb was a type of "the Lamb of God which 
taketh away the sin of the world," and that the antitypical 
first-born, the elect Church, must eat of the 
flesh of our Lamb, as the literal first-born of Israel ate 
of the flesh of the typical lamb. We saw that our 
hearts also must be sprinkled with the precious blood 
from all consciousness of evil, from all wrong association 
in sin, and that the "bitter herbs" signify the 
trials, oppositions, persecutions, difficulties and crosses 
of the human will, necessary to our feeding upon our 

R2292:page 118 

Lord's flesh which was given for the life of the world. 

We saw that in giving the symbols of the bread 
and the fruit of the vine to represent his own flesh and 
blood, our Lord wished us to recognize two things. 
(1) That he is the antitypical Lamb, and that the passing 
over or sparing of the Gospel Church and the deliverance 
of her from death to newness of life in Christ 
and to a share with him in the first resurrection, is the 
antitypical Passover. (2) That the unleavened bread 
and the fruit of the vine were to emblemize the body 
and blood of the true Lamb, and to take the place of 



the typical Paschal lamb. Not that the bread and the 
fruit of the vine are the antitypes of the lamb, but that 
they are the symbols, figures or representations of the 
an ti typical Lamb. We saw, consequently, that the 
partaking of the unleavened bread and the fruit of the 
vine are matters of small importance as compared with 
our partaking of and feeding by faith upon our Lord, 
which this symbolizes; and that many have partaken 
of the emblems who have never "tasted that the Lord 
is gracious:" while others may have tasted of the 
Lord's grace who may never have seen their privilege 
and had opportunity of partaking of the emblems of 
his broken body and shed blood. We rejoiced in our 
privilege to have both— the real feast in our hearts and 
the symbols which our Lord himself had provided and 
instructed us to use. 

R2292:page 119 

We considered the bread that it was unleavened, 
—leaven, in the type, signifying sin. We noted the 
Apostle's explanation that the bread not only represented 
our Lord's flesh upon which we feed by faith, 
but that, having fed upon it and received of his spirit, 
we, as his Church of the first-born, are reckoned as being 
members together in one loaf or cake of unleavened 
bread. Thus he exhorts us to remember that, as a 
little leaven leaveneth an entire batch of dough, so a 
little sin might accomplish a great fermentation in our 
midst. Hence he exhorts, "Purge out therefore the 
old leaven, that ye may be a new lump, as ye are unleavened. 
For even Christ our Passover is sacrificed 
for us: therefore let us keep the feast, not with old 
leaven [rank wickedness], neither with the [less rank 
but more insidious] leaven of malice and wickedness, 
but with the unleavened bread of sincerity and truth." 
-1 Cor. 5:6-8. 

Following up this same thought, and comparing 
advanced Christians (who have purged their hearts of 
sin and consecrated themselves fully to the Lord) to a 
baked loaf of unleavened bread, the Apostle declares 
that all such are (with Christ) members or parts of 
one loaf— all pledged to be broken, that they may be 
of life-giving power and influence to others. He says, 
"The bread [lit., loaf] which we break, is it not the 
communion of [our participation as] the body of Christ? 
For we being many are one loaf and one body: for we 
are all sharers in that one loaf. The cup of blessing 
for which we give thanks, is it not our participation 
in the blood of Christ?" (1 Cor. 10:16.) Thus we 
see the double figure. (1) Christ our Passover slain 
for us, on account of which we keep the feast, seeking 
to abstain from sin and feeding upon the merit of our 
Redeemer. (2) Our union with him and consecration 
to participation in the sufferings of this present time, 
that by and by we may participate also in the glory that 



shall follow. Thus we see that all who reach this stage 
of development in the body of Christ have pledged 
themselves to be broken with him for the good of 
others. 

All such are inspired with their Master's spirit— 
a spirit of love to the Father, and to those who have 
the Father's likeness, and to all. It is to these that 
the Apostle says, "Hereby perceive we the love, because 
he laid down his life for us: and we ought to lay 
down our lives for the brethren," (1 John 3:16.) This 
willingness and desire to be broken for the good of 
others is the result of our first feeding upon our Lord's 
broken body and receiving of his spirit, mind, disposition, 
love. And such have the promises. "If we suffer 
with him we shall also reign with him." "If we 
be dead with him we believe that we shall also live 
with him." 

Having thus considered the significance of the 
bread and having fed upon it in our hearts, and having 
pledged ourselves afresh to be broken with the Lord 
for the feeding and blessing of others, we followed the 
Scriptural example and gave thanks to God for the 
bread of eternal life. Following this was a period of 
silence, during which the bread was carried to the 
communicants. 

Next we considered the fruit of the vine, and saw 
that it symbolized death, and not only death, but the 
more or less of suffering associated therewith. We saw 
that the grapes must be crushed, trodden, sorely 
pressed, ere the fruit of the vine could be drawn. And 
as we considered the juice of the grape as a symbol for 
the blood of Christ, his consecrated life, and then as a 
symbol of the consecrated lives of all those who become 
joint-sacrificers with him, we saw that it was a most 
beautiful and fitting symbol. Our Lord likened himself 
to the vine and his followers to the branches, and 
declared that it was his desire that we should bring 
forth much fruit: and the grape juice which we used 
seemed a fitting symbol of the fruitage of the Vine, 
Christ, and the sufferings of all who would be faithful 
as members of his body and who would seek to walk 
in his footsteps, to spend themselves and be spent 
in glorifying God in their bodies and their spirits 
which are his. 

We remembered, also, the words of two of the disciples 
of old, who requested that they might sit with 
the Lord in his throne, and our Lord's response to the 
effect that they did not comprehend fully what their 
request implied of self-denial, saying, "Are ye able to 
drink of my cup [of ignominy and suffering] and be 
baptized with the baptism [death] that I am baptized 
with?" (Matt. 20:22.) We noted that, altho the 
apostles could not comprehend this subject fully, yet 
our Lord was evidently gratified with their promptness 
to make the consecration, declaring themselves willing 
to endure the cross to win the crown, and he in turn 



pledged them that, since this was the desire of their 

hearts, they should indeed be able to carry it out— 

since they had (and so long as they would continue to 

have) the will to suffer with Christ, they would have 

the opportunity; and with that opportunity and faithfulness 

to it they would have a share in his Kingdom; 

altho he could not designate for them the particular 

place, that being in the Father's hands. This gave 

us the encouraging thought that, however insignificant 

and weak we are, the Lord by his grace is both 

able and willing to carry us through;— that if we abide 

faithful to him and his spirit of sacrifice, he will bring 

us off conquerors, and more than conquerors. 

Then thanks were rendered to the Lord for the 
cup— for the sufferings of Christ on our behalf for our 

R2292 : page 120 

redemption, and for our privilege of being partakers 
of his cup— his sufferings, his ignominy: and that the 
reproaches of them that reproached him may be shared 
by us, and that we can rejoice in the divine promise 
that if all manner of evil be said against us falsely for 
his sake, and if we take it patiently, we may rejoice 
therein; knowing that it will work out for us a far 
more exceeding and eternal weight of glory. Then 
the cup was passed, remembering our Lord's words, 
"Drink ye all of it"— have fellowship in my sufferings. 
We concluded the service, using as a united prayer, 
and as a fresh pledge of consecration to the Lord, 
the following precious hymn:— 

"Savior, thy dying love thou gavestme; 

Nor would I aught withhold, dear Lord, from thee. 

In love my soul would bow, my heart fulfil its vow, 

Myself an offring now I bring to thee. 

"Give me a faithful heart, likeness to thee, 

That each departing day henceforth may see 

Thy work of love well done, thy praise on earth begun, 

Some vict'ry for truth won, some work for thee. 

"All that I am and have— thy gifts so free- 
All of my ransomed life, dear Lord, for thee! 
And when thy face I see, thy sweet 'Well done' shall be, 
Through all eternity, enough for me."* 

REPORTS FROM ELSEWHERE. 



We have excellent reports from similar gatherings 
of the Lord's people in various quarters which indicate 
(1) that the observance of the Memorial has been more 
general than ever before; and (2) that the numbers 
participating were larger than ever before; and (3) 
that the meaning of the Memorial is more clearly discerned 



than ever before. We rejoice in all these features; 
especially the last. We give a few sample reports. 
We wish that space would permit the publication 
of many more or all of them. But they breathe 
the same spirit as these samples. 

From reports already received we learn that the number 
who partook at Columbus was 21; at Youngstown, 
35; at Boston, 75; at Chicago, 69; at Buffalo, 21; at Cleveland 
20, at St. Petersburg, Fla., 20; and smaller numbers 
are reported from all over the world. Some of the 
congregations appoint one of their number as Scribe to 
report to us matters of interest, to keep up their supply 
of tracts, etc. This plan has some advantages, tho we 
would not like it to prevent us from hearing from each 
of the interested ones individually, at least once a year. 
You are all subjects of our loving watch-care, interest 
and prayers, as we trust that we and the general work 
represented at the TOWER office are of yours. We append 



*POEMS AND HYMNS OF DAWN, No. 259. 
page 120 
a few reports:— 

Maine. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-Just a note to tell you 
of our meeting last night. The weather was bad; it 
snowed all day and in the evening, and we feared 
some might not get out, but the five of us came together 
at the appointed time. The Lord was with us 
"and that to bless." I know all felt drawn closer to 
the Lord and to one another. These friends who celebrated 
the Memorial this year for the first time on its 
anniversary say that it means so much more to them 
than it ever has before. They are dear, good friends, 
and the Lord's own children. 

I have been doing very little lately, but hope the 
poor success will not last very long. Sister H. joins 
me in Christian love. 

Your Brother in Christ, VIRGIL C. HAVILAND. 



Texas. 
DEAR BROTHER IN CHRIST:-The Church at 
this place met at the appointed hour to commemorate 
our Lord's death on our behalf. Our meeting was 
one of interest, each one realizing the necessity of a 
closer walk with God. We felt the influence of the 
Lord's presence. Our hearts burned within us as we 
reviewed at what cost this privilege to us had been 
obtained. It was a season of refreshment to us all. 
Seventeen partook of the emblems. Our love for the 



Savior and all of like faith deepened; tears came to our 
eyes; we renewed our consecration to consequent obligations, 
and a more careful watch over our daily 
transactions, spiritual and temporal, lest the tempter 
gain advantage over us. Remember us in your prayers 
as we remember all in the Lord's work. The brethren 
join us in Christian love to you and all the brethren. 
Yours, a humble servant in the Lord's work, 
WILSON SUTCLIFFE. 



Florida. 
DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-The Church at this 
place celebrated the Lord's Supper at the home of Bro. 
Lee, about three miles out of the city. We had two 
meetings, one in the afternoon, led by myself, and the 
other this evening, led by Bro. Lee; we had a short 
address also, by Bro. Durant. There were about twenty 
in attendance, some of whom never had met on such 
an occasion before. We had a very blessed time, and 
I believe all experienced the presence of the Lord in 
our midst, and we parted resolved that the next year 
will find us more faithful than ever in his service. 
Hoping you at Allegheny had a blessed time I will 
close, with Christian love to you and all the dear ones 
there. Your Brother in the Lord, 

G. F. RICHARDSON. 



South Dakota. 
DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-Last evening a little 
company of eight of us met to commemorate our dear 
Master's great sacrifice for us. I think we realized 
more than ever before the cost of our salvation. Indeed, 
it is "so great salvation" that it is beyond our 
comprehension at present, and we can only begin to 
see the dim outlines of its greatness and to catch 
glimpses of its wonderful light and magnificence. The 
thought that Jesus had received the "one loaf" and 
that he had then offered to divide it with his disciples 
that they, too, might share in his glory gave us cause 
for heart searching. (1 Cor. 1 1:27-32.) We surely 
felt the spirit's presence with us, and that indeed it 

page 121 

was good for us to be there. Earnest prayer was offered 
that we might all come more and more into the 
"oneness" of heart and spirit for which our Master 
also prayed. (John 17:21,22,23.) I think we all went 
home feeling that altho the fulfilling of our covenant 
meant a great deal in every way, to us individually, 
yet with the Father's promised help we would come off 
more than conquerors through him that loved us.— 



Rom. 8:35,36,37. 
Your Brothers and Sisters in the Lord Jesus, 
THE COMPANY AT HURON, S.D. 



Massachusetts. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-The Church at Boston 
met on the evening of April 5th, to commemorate the 
Lord's death. About 75 were present, some coming 
a considerable distance, altho it was a stormy night. It 
was a season of blessed communion and spiritual refreshing 
to us all. As the years go by, the meaning 
of the occasion is more deeply felt and appreciated. The 
Sunday previous we had a baptism service, when twenty 
were immersed into Christ (in symbol). I notice that 
those who come into the truth now, seem to come in 
with more zeal and arrive more quickly at a knowledge 
of the deep things than formerly. The whole Church 
here is in close sympathy with you, dear brother, and 
with the general harvest work, and feels that the Lord 
is shepherding his flock. 

"He safely leads his Church along, 
His loving-kindness, O, how strong." 

With much Christian love from Sister T. and myself, 
W. J. THORN. 



R2293 : page 121 

Brother D. P. Jackson, M.D., in a letter recently 
received, after telling that four met at his house and 
partook of the Memorial, adds:— 

I wish to submit for your consideration some 
things which have lately come to the attention of our 
little communion in this place, namely:— 

One of the brethren here received an invitation to 

meet with the Church at M , on April 5th, to 

assist in the Lord's Supper. He declined because it 

would break up our own meeting at B , there 

being only the two families of us here. Brother A, of 

Y , in answer to an invitation, expects to go to 

M to assist the Church there in the Memorial 

Supper, and Bro. M. goes to N on a similar 

errand. 

The invitation to M was declined on the 

grounds above stated, but it also occurred to us, on 
further consideration, that perhaps it is not wise for 
the members of the Church to get into the habit of 
sending to the leaders and prominent members of other 
Churches for assistance in the Memorial services, for 
the following reasons:— 

(1) The Passover was a family observance. This 
would have some bearing on the question, as showing 
that the Lord's Supper was not to be made the occasion 



of any special public display. 

(2) We have no record that it was a custom of 

the Apostolic Church for one congregation to send to 
others for the services of an elder to officiate for them 
at the Communion service. 

(3) The Lord's Supper has been made, in all 
apostate churches, a center around which the clergy 
have built a great deal of the worst ecclesiasticism. It 
is the principal means which the Protestant clergy of 

to-day have in their possession for magnifying the importance 

of the clergy over the laity. Last winter the 

Presbytery of Louisville, Kentucky, excommunicated 

a minister for teaching that it was proper for lay members 

of the church to celebrate the Lord's Supper without 

the presence of a clergyman— an "ordained 

minister." 

(4) May not the practice of one Church sending 
to some other for a "leader," "elder" or prominent 
member to come and help them celebrate the Lord's 
Supper be the infinitesimal beginning of the same 
spirit of ecclesiasticism and sacerdotalism, which was 
the ruin of the early church? Would not the practice 
have a natural tendency to exalt the mind of the leader 
called away to assist a distant Church in this ceremony, 
and to awaken in the minds of the members the idea 
that it was necessary or at least useful and important 

to have "leaders" and "elders" present, officiating 
at the ceremony, and not only so, but that the leader's 
part was so important that their own home elder needed 
to be reinforced in the important duty by one from a 
distant Church? It is a natural weakness of human 
nature to consider a man who comes from a distance 
as a "greater" man than one of their familiar neighbors. 

(5) This practice of getting a clergyman from 
some neighboring church to come and "assist" the 
pastor in holding the "Communion" is very common 
among Presbyterian churches, and seems to be designed 
to exalt the importance of the presence of clergymen 

at the ceremony, and is it not a custom which, to say 
the least, will "be more honored in the breach than in 
the observance" by the Lord's humble followers of 
the harvest period? 

I am impressed that temptations to ecclesiasticism, 
and partisan bigotry and narrowness, are among the 
most subtle of our trials, the most crafty of the 
"wiles of the devil." These brethren who have given 
the invitations, and those who have accepted them, no 
doubt are acting with the best of motives and without the 
slightest thought of there being any danger in the 
practice, but on further reflection I am only confirmed 
in my first impression, and fear that there is danger in 
the practice, and that "as the serpent beguiled Eve in 
his craftiness, your minds should be corrupted from 
the simplicity and purity that is toward Christ," by 
this seemingly innocent and seemingly edifying practice, 
and I hope you will give it your thoughtful and prayerful 



consideration. 

I would like also to know whether the practice is 
becoming general. It seems to have occurred to nearly 
all the Churches in this section. It would be interesting 
to know whether this was the case in many 
other places or whether it was limited to this locality. 
If it has occurred in numerous Churches it would look 
like a concerted movement of the Enemy to plant the 
germ of the "mystery of iniquity" in the reformed 
churches, for if the custom should become general the 
more retiring and less gifted members would almost 
certainly get the impression that somehow these "leaders" 
had more to do with the Memorial than they had, 
and if time allowed, the difference between elders and 

R2293 : page 122 

members would widen until a clerical class would be 
differentiated. 
Yours truly, DAVID P. JACKSON. 



We presume that none of the friends above mentioned 
had the slightest thought of encouraging 
"clericism." The churches supplied we believe celebrated 
the Memorial this year for the first time; and 
we think it was well that some of larger experience 
should initiate them. Besides, the little groups mentioned 
were gathered to a considerable extent through 

the efforts of the brethren of Y , who as 

Evangelists drew their attention to the divine plan of 
the ages. It would, of course be quite appropriate for 
such to meet with those whom they had already interested 
along other lines, to introduce to them the Memorial 
Supper observance. 

However, we quite agree with Bro. Jackson respecting 
the necessity for guarding against the cloven 
hoof of clericy and everything which might tend to 
divide the Lord's people or abridge the liberties conferred 
upon us mutually by our dear Redeemer. The 
only ground for preference as to who shall serve the 
Lord's people on this or other occasions is qualification 
—mental, moral, physical or spiritual. We publish 
the letter because many of its points are well taken. 
The Passover was a family affair and the Memorial 
Supper superseding it is similarly a family matter;— 
but instead of pertaining to an earthly family it pertains 
to the Lord's family; "the household of faith." 



R2293 : page 122 

QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS. 



Question. In discussing "Feet Washing" in your 
issue of March 15, you made no reference to 1 Tim. 5:10. 
Please give us your thought on that scripture. 

Answer. It would appear that a "poor relief" 
had been started which afforded occasional relief to 
some, and permanent relief to others. The Apostle is 
here urging that these general charities should not discourage 
the care of their own afflicted and unfortunate 
ones by each family: that professing Christians who 
would not provide for their own relatives and families 
so far as possible, were denying the faith— denying 
their share in Christianity in most practical form (vss. 8 and 16). 
The Church help was specially for the 
real widows— those bereft, and particularly the aged. 

Accordingly no widow was to be enrolled as a regular, 
habitual beneficiary of the church's bounty under 
sixty years of age; and certain other qualifications were 
to be demanded also— Had she reared a family which 
took her attention? Or had she, without a family, 
shown herself willing, kind, hospitable in the entertainment 
of strangers? Or had she in any manner 
shown a desire to relieve affliction and generally to do 
good? Had she manifested an interest in the Lord's 
people and a helpfulness toward their comfort and entertainment, 
as for instance, by washing their feet? 

These, and not doctrinal questions, were the questions 
to consider when application was made to put 
some one on the rolls as a permanent pensioner; for, 
these recipients of bounty might not have come to the 
place of full consecration or saintship themselves, but 
might be the sisters or mothers of the consecrated. 
The tests, therefore, were along lines of good disposition, 
meekness, helpfulness, kindness. Anyone who 
could not answer some of the above questions affirmatively, 
should be esteemed unworthy of enrollment as 
a permanent or life pensioner. 

With this view before the mind, and remembering 
that the feet-washing mentioned was one of the necessities 
of that time and country, it will be seen that its 
performance would merely signify kindness, hospitality, 
good feeling and appreciation toward the Lord's 
people. 

Question. In Isa. 53:2,3, the statement is made 
of our Lord Jesus that, "He hath no form nor comeliness 
that we should desire him." Would it not, on 
the contrary, be reasonable to suppose that, as among 
the imperfect members of our race we see some very 
handsome persons, our Lord, who was perfect, was 
transcendently beautiful, both in form and feature? 

Answer. Yes. The Jews saw no comeliness in 
Jesus, such as they looked for and desired; because 
they expected to find in Messiah a mighty warrior to 
free them from the Roman yoke; whereas he came as a 
Nazarene and humbly companied and ate with publicans 



and sinners. 

Question. Since we are to be baptized in the likeness 
of Christ's death, should we not be immersed three 
times, face-forward, since he bowed his head thrice; 

R2294:page 122 

and since Jesus died before he was buried, is it not improper 
to speak of baptism as a burial? 

Answer. We do not understand Paul's words, 
"baptized into his death" and "buried with him by 
baptism into death," to refer to immersion in the likeness 
of the Lord's physical movements in his dying 
hours. That would be to be immersed in the likeness 
of his dying, whereas we are to be immersed in the 
likeness of his death. 

You say that he died before he was buried; but on 
the contrary, we believe it proper to say that he was 
buried before he died; that is to say, his will was buried 
or immersed into the will of God at the time of his 
consecration, and he was reckoned dead from that time 

R2294 : page 123 

onward, the expiration on the cross being the completion 

of that death. So he said, "I have a baptism to 

be baptized with; and how am I straitened till it be 

accomplished!" 

When we are baptized in water it is the symbol of 
the burial of our wills into the will of Christ; and when 
we are raised out of the water it is the symbol of our 
resurrection in his likeness. 

The claims of triune immersionists as to the apostolic 
methods, based upon early historians, are not reliable. 
The "early fathers" are not to be depended on 
in such matters, the Word of God being the only reliable 
standard. Many vagaries, including triune immersion, 
were introduced after accessions began to be made 
from the ranks of the non-consecrated, and were a part 
of the falling away which began in the second century 
and culminated in Papacy. 

Question. The statement of John 2:19 is perplexing 
to some of us: "Destroy this temple and in 
three days I will raise it up." John says "He spake 
of the temple of his body;" but other scriptures declare 
that the Father raised our Lord Jesus from death 
by his own power. Can you throw any light on the 
matter? 

Answer. The Scriptures repeatedly tell us that 
the Church is "the body of Christ." The Apostle Peter 
declares that each of the Lord's saints is a living 
stone prepared for and being placed in the glorious 
"temple" which God is building— whose chief cornerstone 
and cap stone is Christ Jesus our Lord. While 
this "temple" is a temple not yet existent in its spiritual 
condition, it already has an existence in the flesh 



—even now we are reckoned as the "members in particular 

of the body of Christ." In harmony with this 

we understand our Lord's words of John 2:19, "Destroy 

this temple, and in three days I will raise it up" 

—"he spake of the temple of his body"— the Church, 

of which he is the Head. 

The three days we understand to be the days of 
the larger week, one thousand years to each day. In 
this larger week the seventh day will be the seventh-thousand-year 
period— the Millennium or Sabbath of 
rest from sin and Satan. Recognizing time from this 
standpoint and applying to each thousand years the 
parallel day of the week, we find that, as over four 
thousand years had passed and the fifth thousand had 
begun when our Lord made this statement, it was 
therefore at a time corresponding to the fifth day of 
the lesser week, namely, Thursday, the first day of the 
three mentioned; Friday the second day, and Saturday 
(the seventh-day Sabbath) the third, in which the 
temple is to be "raised up." It is to be early in the 
morning of this third day— the Millennium— that the 
body of Christ, the temple of God, is to be brought together 
as a spiritual temple and filled with the glory 
of God, to the end that from it may flow the blessing 
of reconciliation to all the families of the earth. 

Another statement, similar to this and interpretable, 
we believe, in the same manner, was the Lord's 
answer to Herod— "I do cures to-day, and tomorrow, 
and the third day I shall be perfected." (Luke 13:32.) 
This last statement could not be interpreted in any 
other way than that above suggested. The cures and 
blessings of divine grace have prevailed during the fifth, 
the day in which our Lord and the apostles lived, and 
also during the sixth thousand-year day; and on the 
seventh, the grand Millennial Sabbath, Christ and his 
Church will be perfected and the cures correspondingly 
increased. 

Are not these three days the same that are mentioned 
by the Prophet Hosea (6:2)? Referring to Israel's 
judgments and their final repentance and reconciliation, 
he says, representing Israel, "Come, and let 
us return unto the Lord: for he hath torn, and he will 
heal us [see preceding verses]: he hath smitten, and 
he will bind us up. After two days will he revive us: 
in the third day he will raise us up, and we shall live 
in his sight." 



R2294 : page 123 

"FORGIVE AND YE SHALL BE FORGIVEN." 
-APRIL 24.-MATT. 18:21-35.- 
OUR Golden Text (Luke 6:37) is not to be understood 



as applicable to everybody: to so understand 

it would be to ignore the ransom and faith in 

the same, and other conditions of discipleship. It is 

applicable only to the class mentioned, "ye,"— believers, 

already justified and brought into harmony with 

God. The divine arrangement to forgive our sins 

presupposes a realization on our part of our own imperfections, 

and that we who desire to have our 

own sins cancelled will be magnanimous to others. And 

the Lord makes this a condition of our discipleship: 

we must not only start with justification, forgiveness 

of our sins, but we must continue by seeking to put 

away "all filthiness of the flesh and of the spirit," and 

to become more and more copies of God's dear Son. 

As we receive more and more knowledge of the divine 

character, and as we more and more seek to copy it, 

we should correspondingly become more and more generous, 

kind, loving, God-like. If we fail to develop 

this character, the knowledge received has not profited 

us; and instead of continuing justified before God, we 

will be reckoned as having lapsed again into sin— and 

R2294 : page 124 

greater sin, because of greater light— and will be treated 
of the Lord accordingly. 

Peter evidently recognized this principle in general: 
he saw that it was his duty to forgive the trespasses 
of his repentant brother. But he was doubtful how 
far this principle of forgiveness should go. Our Lord 
had instructed them in this matter early in his ministry: 
he had taught them to pray, "Forgive us our debts 
[sins, trespasses], as we forgive our debtors," and he 
had explained the meaning of this to them, saying, 
"If ye forgive not men their trespasses, neither will 
your Father forgive your trespasses."— Matt. 6:12,15. 

It is not necessary for us to suppose that one of 
Peter's brothers was a great annoyance to him, continually 
doing him wrong and continually needing to 
repent of it and to be forgiven. We may suppose that 
Peter was turning over in his mind the broad teachings 
he had received on general principles to ascertain of 
the Lord definitely how far this rule of forgiveness was 
to be applied in the ordinary affairs of life. He no 
doubt made what he thought a very liberal suggestion, 
that the proper limit of forgiveness would be seven 
times: but our Lord's answer must have given him 
still broader and deeper views on the subject— "I say 
not unto thee, Until seven times: but, Until seventy 
times seven." 

It is difficult for some to see how the principle of 
justice applies in the matter of forgiveness. They 
reason that God did not forgive the sins of the world, 
gratis, that he exacted a penalty, a full corresponding 
price— the death of our Lord Jesus Christ, as a "ransom 
for all;" and reasoning upon this, they say, If Justice 



in the Lord demanded a full payment of the penalty, 
why should not we, in copying God, likewise demand 
full reparation from those who seek our forgiveness in 
more trivial matters? Reasoning thus, they very generally 
overlook several facts; (1) The penalty was exacted, 
not of an imperfect fallen man, as is each of us, 
but of a perfect man, created in the image of God 
(father Adam), whose sin was wilful and deliberate. 

(2) That, so far as sinners were concerned, God's gift 
was a free gift. He did not exact the penalty of us. 

(3) If he had exacted the penalty of us, we could never 
have paid it. (4) If we were perfect men ourselves and 
dealing with others who were likewise perfect, a law 
of Justice and demands of Justice would be in order; 
but since we are transgressors ourselves and objects of 
divine grace, and since our fellow-creatures are in the 
same pitiable plight through the fall, there is no room 
for us to take our stand upon Justice. He who stands 
upon Justice will fall before the sword of Justice. 
Hence, our Lord declares, "With what judgment ye 
judge, ye shall be judged." If you realize your own 
weakness and imperfection and need of help from on 
high, and if you exercise a similar generosity in the 
smaller affairs of life with your fellows in tribulation, 
you will be the kind for whom God designed the full 
measure of his grace: so long as divine favor does not 
thus reach your heart and mellow it toward others, 
you are not of the class to whom the full measure of 
divine favor will be extended, but will be accounted 
unworthy of the full ultimate blotting out of your sins. 

We are to remember that our sins are not now 
blotted out, even when we are reckoned justified: our 
sins are merely "covered;" our Lord hides them from 
his sight, deals with us as though we had no sins, receiving 
us into his family and making covenants with 

R2295 : page 124 

us, as though we were perfect, righteous. Thus the 
Apostle quotes from the Prophet David, "Blessed is 
the man to whom the Lord will not impute sin; blessed 
are they whose iniquities are forgiven and whose sins 
are covered." (Rom. 4:7,8.) Mark the distinction 
between the iniquity and the sin. The word "iniquity" 
carries with it the sense of wickedness, lawlessness, 
while the word "sin" has merely the thought of 
transgression: and many of our transgressions are wholly 
without iniquitous intention. Believers who are 
seeking to escape from sin, that sin should have no 
more dominion over them, are forgiven the moral obliquity 
connected with the sin, which they now no 
longer sympathize with, but hate; and the sin itself, 
while not blotted out, is covered. So, therefore, should 
any return to sin, "as a sow to her wallowing in the 
mire," he removes the covering of sins, and falls back 
where he was before, "having forgotten that he was 



purged from his old sins."— 2 Pet. 2:22; 1:9. 

The time for the blotting out of sin is, thank God, 
near at hand. So far as the overcomers of this age, 
the Gospel Church, are concerned, the blotting out of 
every vestige of their sins, to be remembered no more, 
comes with the destruction of the flesh in death. In 
our flesh (in our imperfections, mental, moral and physical) 
is the record of sin; and this which God so graciously 
covers from his sight will entirely disappear 
in the grave. In the resurrection these overcomers 
will be granted new bodies, free from all the marks or 
blemishes of sin, perfect, likenesses of their Lord: not 
only free from sin reckonedly, but free from sin actually, 
and without a trace or mar thereof. Oh, how we 
long for the blotting out of sins! 

Later on, as the Millennial day shall advance, the 
work of blotting out the sins of humanity in general 
will begin: but the operation will be different with 
them than with us. Ours by an instantaneous resurrection, 
"in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye:" 
theirs will be a gradual blotting out— a work of restitution. 
The restoring of the original nature of man 
in its perfection will mean the blotting out of mankind's 

R2295 : page 125 

mental, moral and physical blemishes, and their gradual 
restoration to that perfect condition in which father 
Adam was before he sinned, which is declared to have 
been "the image of God," with which God was well 
pleased. 

These two thoughts— the present covering of our 
sins and the future blotting out of every trace of them, 
are called forcibly to our attention by the words of the 
Apostle Peter. Speaking on the day of Pentecost, he 
urges his hearers, "Repent ye, therefore, and be converted 
[receive now the covering of your sins through 
Christ by faith and have as a result the divine favor 
and instruction in righteousness], that your sins may 
be blotted out, when the times of refreshing shall come 
from the presence of the Lord; and he shall send Jesus 
Christ which before was preached unto you: whom the 
heavens must receive [retain] until the times of restitution 
of all things, which God hath spoken by the 
mouth of all the holy prophets since the world began." 
-Acts 3:19-21. 

To the apostles and to us, even "all those who 
should believe on him through their word," our Lord 
gave the illustration or parable of The Two Debtors. 
The parable is not of general application, but merely 
applicable to the Kingdom of Heaven class— the Church 
—called to run the race and, by the grace of God, to 
win the prize of joint-heirship with their Lord in his 
coming Millennial Kingdom. The generosity of the 
King in the parable, toward his servant who was so 
greatly in his debt, illustrates God's magnanimity, 



mercy, toward us through Christ. The debt, ten thousand 
talents, was an enormous one, representing in 
value about twenty millions of dollars: this debt fitly 
represents our great obligations to God as a race, and 
our utter inability to meet the obligations. Adam was 
already "sold under sin" and his entire family was involved 
in the slavery, when God graciously had mercy 
on us through Christ and provided for our liberty. 
The liberated servant, whose prayer for mercy was 
heard, represents the Christian believer who has been 
made free from sin. 

The parable proceeds to show a wrong course of 
action which, alas, we often see exemplified; for some 
of those who have received divine grace in abundant 
measure are very hard-hearted, uncharitable, unforgiving, 
vindictive, malicious and vengeful toward those 
who trespass against them, and whose trespasses are 
sometimes purely imaginary. We do not live in a day 
in which a creditor may wantonly inflict physical abuse 
upon his debtor, nor need we expect under present enlightenment 
that any Christian would feel like wreaking 
his vengeance upon his fellow servant by physical 
force: no, thank God, the day of the rack and fagot 
and crucifixion is gone. But we live in a day when, 
nevertheless, the same spirit can and does manifest itself, 
but in less flagrant, tho not less cruel and sinful 
forms. The modern method of attack upon an enemy 
is not with pincers to pull out his finger and toe nails, 
nor with red-hot irons to gouge out his eyes, nor with 
molten lead to fill his mouth and ears; but instead the 
weapon is slander, back-biting, evil-speaking, and according 
to its degree it may be the spirit of murder 
(as pointed out in "Helpful Rules for Our Daily Life" 
in our issue of March 15). Indeed, our Lord seems to 
have taken more notice of the evil-speaking that would 
come upon his people, than of the physical sufferings, 
for over and over again he points out, "They shall say 
all manner of evil against you falsely, for my sake." 
-Matt. 5:11. 

What shall we say of the Christianity of the 
brother or sister who, meeting a debtor, or one whom 
he esteems to be a debtor (justly or unjustly), thus 
abuses his fellow servant? But it is much more important 
that we should know how the Lord would regard 
such an one, and in the parable before us he has 
answered it fully. In the parable the King was wroth 
and called the forgiven but unforgiving servant to account, 
pronouncing him at once a "wicked servant." 
And applying the lesson of the parable, our Lord declares: 
"So likewise shall my Heavenly Father do also 
unto you, if ye from the hearts forgive not every one 
his brother their trespasses." 

Let it not be overlooked that our Lord here very 
particularly called attention to the difference between 
an outward and formal expression of forgiveness with 
smooth words, and the true forgiveness which is from 



the heart. The former, or outward forgiveness, is only 
lip-deep, and means that a wrangling of an evil, unforgiving 
spirit is within, and that it will only be a 
matter of time until the pent-up force of malice and 
hatred will break forth in words of slander. God reads 
the heart and, whatever the lip professions may be, he 
will not consider these unless the heart and life correspond 
with them. It is in vain, therefore, that anyone 
should say, I love my brother, and at the same time 
seek either by word or act to do him injury. All the 
evil-speaking, malice, hatred, envy, strife, proceeds 
from evil in the heart: hence, the necessity on the part 
of all who desire to be of the Lord's body, that they 
"purge out the old leaven of malice" that they may be 
members indeed of the unleavened loaf— the body of 
Christ. 

The fact that in the parable the evil servant was 
delivered to the "tormentors" is not to be understood 
to mean that the heavenly Father will deliver every 
unfaithful servant to the torments of devils to all eternity. 
The tormentors of olden times (and also of today 
in some Oriental countries) inflicted scourging or 

R2295 : page 126 

other torment upon accused persons for the purpose of 
extorting from them money or information or whatever 
they may be unwilling to give up. The analogy 
to this in God's dealings with his people might reasonably 
be expected along the lines of earthly disciplines, 
such as the Apostle referred to, saying of one, I have 
delivered him "unto Satan for the destruction of the 
flesh, that the spirit may be saved in the day of the 
Lord Jesus." (1 Cor. 5:5; 1 Tim. 1:20.) This might 
mean financial difficulties or losses, or physical ailments, 
disease or what not. Not infrequently, we believe, 
the Lord through these agencies teaches his servants 
important lessons respecting their own weaknesses, and 
introduces and develops in them patience with others 
and more of his own holy spirit— meekness, patience, 
gentleness, brotherly-kindness— Love. We do not 
mean to intimate by this that the trials and difficulties 
of life are always in the nature of chastisement and 
corrections in righteousness. We understand that 
sometimes they are tests instead of chastisements- 
tests to prove the degree of our loyalty to the Lord, 
and to develop in us larger degrees of faith and of the 
various graces of the spirit. 

We cannot properly leave this subject without 
calling attention to certain conditions which ought to 
precede forgiveness. For instance, in the parable the 
king does not exercise compassion until the debtor 
asks for it: so also God does not forgive our sins until 
we acknowledge our sins and ask his forgiveness. Likewise, 
in the parable, the second servant, who owed a 
hundred pence (about sixteen dollars), asked mercy of 



the one to whom he owed it, before that one was 
obliged to forgive: and in a further comment on the 
subject, mentioned by Luke (17:3,4), our Lord expressly 
states the propriety of expecting those who 
trespass against us to make some acknowledgment of 
their fault before expressing full forgiveness. He says, 
"If thy brother trespass against thee seven times in a 
day, and seven times in a day turn again to thee, saying, 
I repent! thou shalt forgive him." 

We are not to accept one portion of the divine direction 
and to ignore another portion: we are not to 
say that our Lord meant it, when he said, "forgive 
him," and that he did not mean it when he said, "Rebuke 

R2296 : page 126 

him; and if he repent, forgive him." With the 
majority of people, however, it would probably be 
quite unnecessary to urge the propriety of repentance; 
—unless they were the transgressors whose duty it is to 
repent. Most people are sufficiently disinclined to forgive, 
to wait until their forgiveness is asked. The 
trouble is that then the large majority apparently do 
not "forgive from the heart" but merely from the 
lips. Heart forgiveness leaves no sting, no animosity, 
no grudge. 

On the other side of the question, however, a caution 
is necessary. The Christian is to have the loving, 
generous disposition of heart, a copy of the Heavenly 
Father's disposition. In trivial affairs he is to have so 
much sympathy and love that he will take no notice, 
just as God for Christ's sake deals with us and does 
not impute sin to us, except as it represents knowledge 
and wilfulness. With such a rule operating amongst 
Christians, a determination not to recognize as an offence 
anything that is not purposely done, or intended 
as an offense, would be a great blessing to all, and the 
proper God-like course. The transgressions to which 
our Lord refers, are not trivial affairs of no consequence, 
are not evil surmisings and imaginings, are 
not rumors, are not fancied insults, but positive wrongs 
done us, which are susceptible of proofs, and on account 
of which it is our duty, kindly and lovingly and 
wisely to give some proper rebuke;— some intimation 
that we recognize the wrong and that it has grieved us 
and hurt us. Then comes in the divine rule respecting 
the one and only proper manner of rebuke, pointed 
out in Rule No. V., page 85, this journal. 

The disposition to forgive should be with us always, 
and should be manifested by us at all times. 
Our loving generosity and kindness and desire to think 
no evil or as little evil as possible, should be manifest 
by all the words and acts of life. This is God-like. 
God had a kind, benevolent, generous sentiment toward 
us, even while we were yet sinners. Nor did he 
wait for the sinners to ask forgiveness, but promptly 



manifested his desire for harmony and his readiness to 
forgive. The whole Gospel message is to this effect: 
"Be ye reconciled to God." Our hearts should be so 
full of this disposition toward forgiveness that our 
faces would not have a hard look, nor our words of reproof 
a bitter sting: they should manifest the loving 
forgiveness that we should have in our hearts at all 
times. 

Forgiveness, "in your hearts," is the condition 
which is always to obtain there: we should never harbor 
any other feeling than that of forgiveness and good 
will toward all, no matter how seriously they may have 
trespassed against us: and if this be the case, we will 
be longing and anxious to exercise the forgiveness outwardly 
and to express it to the repentant ones. Hence, 
we will not seek to compel the most elaborate statement 
on the part of the penitent; but, like the father 
of the prodigal, to see the repentant one coming in an 
attitude of humility will touch our hearts and prompt 
us to go out part way to meet him, and to forgive him, 
and to kiss him, and to put on the robe of fullest fellowship 
and brotherhood. 

"If ye forgive not men their trespasses, neither 
will your Father forgive your trespasses."— Matt. 6:15. 



R2296 : page 127 

"BEHOLD, THY KING COMETH UNTO THEE!" 

-MAY l.-MATT. 21:6-16.- 

"Hosanna to the Son of David: blessed is he that 
cometh in the name of the Lord!"— Matt. 21:9. 

THE SCENE of this lesson occurred about six 

days before our Lord's crucifixion. In many respects 

it differed from any other circumstance in his 

ministry. Previously, when the people had spoken of 

taking him by force to make of him their King, Jesus 

had withdrawn himself: to such an extent was this true 

that his friends and disciples marveled that anyone proclaiming 

himself the Messiah should seemingly avoid 

the very means of centering public attention upon himself 

and favoring the sentiment of making him the 

King. (John 7:4-6.) But on this occasion our Lord 

deliberately sent for the ass upon which he rode triumphantly 

as King to Jerusalem: and when the people 

shouted our Golden Text, "Hosanna to the Son of David: 

blessed is he that cometh in the name of Jehovah" 

and strewed their clothing in the way and put 

palm branches as marks of honor of the King, breaking 

all previous records, our Lord accepted these marks 

of honor. It was when the Pharisees, being greatly 

displeased, remonstrated, urging that he should rebuke 



the people and not permit them so to honor him, that 
our Lord explained, to the effect that a prophecy was 
being fulfilled, and that, since the Prophet had said, 
"Shout, O daughter of Jerusalem! Behold, thy King 
cometh unto thee," etc., therefore there must be a shout 
to fulfil the prophecy: so that, if the people had not 
shouted, the very stones must have cried out, in order 
to fulfil the Word of the Lord by the Prophet 
Zechariah.— 9:9. 

The fact that our Lord was thus fulfilling prophecy, 
explains the entire situation; and we at once catch the 
thought, elsewhere enforced in the Scriptures, that our 
Lord's previous ministry to Israel had not been as their 
King, but as John had introduced him— as their Bridegroom 
and as their Teacher. But now, at the close of 
his ministry and just as he was about to finish his course 
of sacrifice at Calvary, the time had come to offer to 
Israel, formally, the King and the Kingdom which God 
had long before promised to father Abraham and reiterated 
through the prophets. The hour was come. Would 
they now at this moment of trial and testing as a nation 
receive the Messiah, the long promised King, or 
would they be so blinded by false expectations, superinduced 
by wrong conditions of heart, as to be unable 
to know him and to appreciate him, when the crucial 
moment should come? God had foreseen that, notwithstanding 
the favors which he had bestowed upon Israel, 
including the sending to them of John the Baptist to 
prepare them, including also the work of our Lord and 
the apostles, and the "other seventy also," they would 
not be ready, would not receive their King, and would 
hence be rejected from being his peculiar people. God, 
acting upon his own foreknowledge, might have avoided 
sending our Lord in this formal way to make a formal 
tender of the Kingdom to the nominal seed of Abraham, 
knowing in advance that they would reject it; but 
had he done so, his course would not have been so plain 
and clear to the Jews, nor to us. God's judgment would 
have been just, but its justice would not have been apparent 
to his creatures, and the latter is a part of his 
good pleasure. 

Not only did our Lord accept the salutations of the 
people as the Messiah, but continuing the same thought 
of his dignity of power and authority, he rode to the 
Temple and with a scourge of small cords drove out 
the money changers and merchants, who were defiling 
the Temple and violating the divine rule respecting it. 
Whether it was because of our Lord's dignity of person 
and presence alone, or whether also because of the large 
multitude that was with him and shouting for him, the 
fact remains that no attempt was made to resist him, 
and the King had his way, cleansed the typical Temple, 
reproved the wrong doers and received the poor outcasts 
of society, the blind and the lame, and healed them in 
the Temple, while the shouting of Hosanna to the Son 
of David was continued, fulfilling the testimony of the 



Prophet, "Out of the mouth of babes and sucklings 
thou hast perfected praise." 

It was on this occasion that our Lord in his journey, 
when on the hilltop opposite Jerusalem, wept over 
it, saying, "O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou that killest 
the prophets, and stonest them which are sent unto 
thee; how often would I have gathered thy children together, 
even as a hen gathereth her brood under her 
wings, and ye would not! Behold, your house is left 
unto you desolate. For I say unto you, Ye shall not 
see me henceforth till ye shall say, Blessed is he that 
cometh in the name of the Lord"— the very shout the 
Pharisees objected to. -Luke 19:41; Matt. 23:37. 

This was the turning point in Israel's history, as 
the Prophet Zechariah has marked out.* It was here 
that the Lamb of God offered himself to Israel as a nation 
as their Paschal or Passover Lamb, and they did 
not receive him as a "house" or nation. In the type 
the lamb was to be taken into the house on the ninth 
day of the first month and to be killed on the fourteenth. 
Here our Lord appropriately offered himself 
to them as the Lamb on the ninth day of the month in 
fulfilment of the type, and on the fourteenth day he 
was crucified— the Lamb was slain. But since Israel 
did not receive the Lamb into their house, they lost the 
great blessing that the Lamb was to bring; their house 
was not passed over, their house was given up to destruction: 



*MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOL. II., Chap. 7. 

R2296 : page 128 

and from that day onward until A.D. 70 the 
work of destruction progressed, and from it they have 
never since recovered. Only now— since 1878— is their 
measure of chastisement coming to its full, so that we 
may fulfil the words of the Lord through the Prophet 
Isaiah, "Comfort ye, comfort ye my people, saith your 
God. Speak ye comfortably to Jerusalem, and cry unto 
her that her warfare— her appointed time— is accomplished, 

R2297 : page 128 

that her iniquity is pardoned: for she hath received 
of the Lord's hand a second part [of chastisement] 
for all her sins."— Isa. 40:1,2. 

Thank God, that the failure of the natural seed of 
Abraham to prove worthy of the great promise, did not 
frustrate divine grace: but that, using the little band of 
Israelites indeed as a nucleus, our Lord at once began 
the work of gathering "a holy nation, a royal priesthood," 
the true seed of Abraham which, with himself 
as its King, shall ultimately fulfil all the exceeding great 
and precious promises implied in the promise and oath 



to Abraham— that all the families of the earth should 
be blessed through this "Seed."-Gal. 3:16,29. 

But while the incident of this lesson is both interesting 
and instructive of itself, it assumes still greater 
importance when we remember that the fleshly Israelites 
were typical of the spiritual Israelites, and that 
those features in the close of that age correspond to a 
considerable degree to the closing features of this Gospel 
age. Here our Lord has come to the second house 
of Israel, and he finds it as he found the fleshly house, 
nominally pious, compassing sea and land to make a 
proselyte, yet, as described in his own words, neither 
cold nor hot, and ready to be spewed out of his mouth; 
—knowing not that they are "wretched and pitiable- 
even poor and blind and naked." (Rev. 3:16,17.) 
Poor in that they lack the true riches of divine grace, 
the gold of the divine nature and the precious hopes 
and promises associated therewith. Blind, in that they 
cannot see afar off, cannot see the length and breadth 
and height and depth of the divine plan revealed in 
God's Word, cannot see either the high-calling of the 
Church, with the blessed provisions of restitution for 
the world of mankind in general. Naked, in that their 
chief ones have already lost faith in the ransom, the 
only covering of our nakedness (which the filthy rags 
of our own righteousness will not cover), and in that 
the people are following the examples and precepts of 
their leaders in discarding the precious robe of Christ's 
righteousness— the only "wedding garment." Surely, 
this is a pitiable condition, and to many of themselves 
a miserable one. 

As the King he is now taking possession of his 
Kingdom— first, as with the Jews, offering himself to 
his professed people— but now, as then, finding only a 
remnant, in the nominal mass, truly anxious for his 
Kingdom, and prepared to receive it and him. He is 
now seeking for all the Israelites indeed in whom is no 
guile, and he will thoroughly winnow the "wheat," 
and when it shall be gathered into the garner, it shall 
be found exactly sufficient to complete the foreordained, 
predestinated number of the "elect" Church. 

As the nominal Jewish "house" was given up and left 
desolate, and the true Israelites were gathered out of it, 
so with the "house" of nominal spiritual Israel— Christendom. 
The Lord is calling out all who are his people, 
saying, "Come out of her, my people, that ye be not 
partakers of her sins, and that ye receive not of her 
plagues." As soon as this call and the various sittings 
of divine providence shall have found the worthy ones, 
who shall inherit the Kingdom with the King (as his 
Bride and Consort), then the plagues shall come upon 
the residue, the nominal system. The great time of 
trouble so long foretold in the Lord's Word (in which 
the whole world will be humbled before him, its proud 
heart broken, its pride and haughtiness brought low) 
will then break forth upon the world. 



We must remember, however, that the King takes 
his Kingdom not to destroy men's lives, but to save 
them; to bless them. And while the early part of his 
reign shall be the ruling of the nations as with a rod of 
iron, and the breaking of them in pieces as unsatisfactory 
potters' vessels, yet the intent of all this is that 
he and his Kingdom may thus be recognized of all, and 
the work of healing and restitution be caused to progress 
for a thousand years to earth's blessing. 

Meanwhile, however, the Temple class, the "little 
flock," must be purged, cleansed; the money changers, 
and those who make merchandise of the sacrifices, must 
be driven out, before the Temple, composed of living 
stones, with Christ as its top-stone and foundation, shall 
be ready to be filled with the glory of God and to become 
the place of prayer for all nations, the channel 
which all mankind may, during the Millennial age, find 
access to God. 

Fleshly Israel failed to receive the King because 
"They knew not the time of their visitation." And 
they were left in ignorance, because their hearts were 
not right— they were not worthy of the truth. Realizing 
that they and their experiences were types of Christendom 
to-day, let us take heed to our hearts that we may 
continue to be accounted worthy to be reckoned among 
the "brethren" to whom the Apostle declares, "Ye, 
brethren, are not in darkness, that that day should overtake 
you as a thief; ye are all children of the light and 
of the day." 

"The 'Gentile Times' are closing, for their kings have had their day; 
And with them sin and sorrow will forever pass away; 
For the tribe of Judah's Lion now comes to hold the sway: 
Our King is marching on. 

"I can see his coming judgments, as they circle all the earth, 
The signs and groanings promised to precede a second birth; 
I read his righteous sentence in the crumbling thrones of earth: 
Our King is marching on. 

"The seventh trump is sounding, and our King knows no defeat. 
He will surely sift the hearts of men before his judgment seat. 
O! be swift, my soul, to welcome him, be jubilant, my feet: 
Our King is marching on." -HYMNS OF DAWN. 



page 129 

VOL. XIX. MAY 1, 1898. No. 9. 



CONTENTS. 



Our New Prophetic Chart 130 

Views from the Watch Tower 131 

War, Horrible War, is upon Us 
An Answer to the Queen Regent 

of Spain, etc 132 

"Let Him that Thinketh he Standeth 

Take Heed" 133 

The Marriage Feast 136 

The Duty of Watchfulness 139 

The Day of Judgment 141 

Interesting Letters 143 

page 130 

SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
--ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 56-60 ARCH STREET, ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, N.Y. DRAFT, MONEY ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS: 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age or accident, or other 
adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, if they 
send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting the 
paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list 
constantly. 



OUR NEW PROPHETIC CHART. 



WE STILL procure and supply ($1.50 including expressage) 
the handsome, 5 ft. long Chart of the Ages, similar to the one in 
the front of MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOL. I., for parlor and hall meetings. 
But now we have something entirely new which every 
WATCH TOWER reader will want for personal and family use. 

It is 34 inches long, on extra heavy coated paper, with metal 
mountings top and bottom and hangers. It gives the outlines 
of the ages and dispensations, and underneath the same, and to 
a scale, it shows the various lines of prophecy presented in 
MILLENNIAL DAWN volumes, also an illustration of the "days of 
creation" as set forth in the WATCH TOWER some years ago, and 



promised again in some future volume of the DAWN series. 

The chart is too complex to be described briefly. Suffice it 
to say, If you are deeply interested in present truth, as presented 
in the TOWER and DAWN, you will surely want one of these 
charts for your sitting room or study wall. We have made the 
price 25 cents each, including postage, which will bring it within 
the reach of almost all. But that the poorest may enjoy it 
and be helped by it, we will send it free to all such on our list 
who drop us a postal card stating the fact and requesting the 
chart free, during the month of May, 1898. 

For the suggestion of such a chart, no less than for the drawing 
of this one, we all are indebted to our dear Brother U. G. 
Lee, whose service was rendered free to the Lord and his people. 
Wherever possible, let several unite in one order, to one address, 
as thus the risk of damage will be decreased. 



R2298 :page 131 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 



WAR, horrible war, is upon us. The match is 

ignited, the combustible passions are being 

enkindled, and who can tell how great a fire may result; 

—how destructive, how costly in blood and treasure? 

It is lamentable indeed that such horrors should 

be practically unavoidable; yes, really incidentals to 

our civilization. Except for a great advance in civilization, 

the present war would not be waged. 

League wars, where nations fought for each other 
because of treaty covenants (hoping for similar favors 
in return) have been known; religious wars for the aid 
of co-religionists have been known; race wars, where 
bonds of blood led one nation to fight for another, have 
been known; wars of jealousy and pride have been 
known; wars for freedom have been frequent; wars for 
conquest and plunder have been many: but never before, 
so far as we are informed, has there ever been a 
war like the present one— a benevolent war; a war for 
the oppressed; a war for the poor and starving; a war 
for a different race, of a different tongue and of a different 
religion; a war for a people who can never repay 
—neither in money, influence, trade nor otherwise. 
The masses of the people of these United States are far 
enough from being saints; far enough from having perfect 
love rule their every thought and word and deed; 
far enough from fully conquering inborn selfishness; 
but for them as a people, and for their British cousins, 
the gospel of the Lord Jesus Christ has done far more 
than for any other peoples in the world. If it has not 
given them love, it has given them the sheen or reflection 
of love— "the milk of human kindness," sympathy. 

Spain cries, Robbers! Thieves! Hypocrites! You 



want to steal my possessions and merely make a pretense 

of sympathy for my rebels! All Europe shouts 

the same, denouncing the war as perfidious, a disgrace 

to modern civilization— national piracy, national highway 

robbery. 

And no doubt these charges are honestly made; 
that is, they are believed to be true; they reflect the real 
judgment of Spain and of Europe. Controlled only by 
motives of pride and selfishness themselves, they cannot 
conceive of others being influenced by so much 
nobler motives. And in the United States quite a minority 
who have no conscientious scruples against war 
complain bitterly, because "It won't pay." Verily, if 
the parable of Dives and Lazarus were to be adapted to 
present times and affairs between nations, it would be 
incomplete, unless the dogs ate Lazarus, while Dives 
would refuse all succor because Lazarus could not pay 
him for it. 

If the suggestion of generous motives on the part 
of the United States should be even glimmeringly seen 
by Europeans, it would be repulsed; because it would 
be a reflection upon United Europe's conduct of a year 
ago in the matter of poor Armenia— united to them by 
ties of blood and religion, as against him whom they 
term "the unspeakable Turk." Nor will anyone acquainted 
with the spirit of the Americans doubt that, 
had they lived where Austria lives, or where Russia 
lives, much more than a cup of cold water would have 
been promptly extended to poor Armenia. 

We did not advocate the war. We cannot take 
part in it; for we are aliens. We belong to the Loyal 
Legion of the Great King, whose Kingdom is not of 
this age, and whose soldiers must not fight with carnal 
weapons. But we want to be able to appreciate the 
motives of our fellow-creatures when they are noble 
and good, as in this instance. We should sympathize 
with every effort for righteousness and the uplift of 
humanity, even tho we can render our service only to 

R2298 : page 132 

our Captain in the warfare which we esteem to be still 
more important than any other. 

Where the matter will end, none but the great 
King, the Captain of our salvation, knows. Peace may 
suddenly be ushered in by some suggestion of compromise, 
or the war with its frightful horrors may continue 
for months or even years— our expectation is that it 
will not be very prolonged. We do not consider it 
any part of the final struggle. The following clipping 
from the Pittsburg Gazette will be interesting:— 

"JUST A POSSIBILITY." 



"Not that they love Spain more, but the United 
States less, the sympathies of the European countries 
are generally with Spain in the present crisis, and there 
is little reason to doubt that if they could have secured 
the cooperation of Great Britain the evidence of such 
sympathy would have found stronger manifestation ere 
this than in the weak and well nigh meaningless joint 
note presented to this government a few weeks ago by 
their ministers at Washington. By reason of the blood 
relationship between the rulers of Austria and Spain 
the sympathy referred to has been less concealed in 
Austria than in other European countries. One Austrian, 
prominent in scholastic and political matters in 
that country, is quoted as saying that 'the sympathies 
of Europe for Spain don't express admiration for her 
colonial administration, but are rather the instinctive 
expressions of the presentment that the victory of 
America will be the beginning of the Americanizing of 
European institutions.' It is further complained that 
'already the republics of America have fallen under 
the influence of the United States.' In view of the 
issues involved in these and kindred arguments, surprise 
is manifested, not to say impatience and disgust, 
that Great Britain should seem disposed to take its 
place with the United States in what might develop 
into a world alignment of the forces of militarism and 
royalty on the one hand and of republican institutions 
on the other. It is not approval of Spain nor fear of 
territorial conquests by the United States that causes 
now the poorly concealed European sympathy for 
Spain, but fear of a greater working in the old world 
of the leaven of republics. Tho it may not be, and 
probably will not be, it is nevertheless possible that 
the impending hostilities may widen into a greater conflict 
than war between Spain and the United States." 

The opposition here noted seems to grow daily, 
rather than to diminish. Not only do the monarchies 
of Europe begrudge the Great Republic its successes 
and prosperity, but the Mexicans and peoples of the 
Central and South American republics are jealous. 
They fear that we may eventually develop a rapacity 
and land hunger similar to that of the great nations of 
Europe, and that then they would be swallowed up. 
Moreover, they were mostly settled by Spaniards and 
their cousins, the Portuguese; and tho they fought and 
won their independence as the United States did from 
Great Britain, yet they still feel the ties of blood and 
of language and of religion. Stranger things have 
happened, than that they should lend their aid to the 
Mother country, if they saw her being worsted. They 
know little of love or sympathy for the oppressed: they 
do know pride; and it is already leading to subscriptions 
of money for Spain. 

Moreover, the comments of the newspapers of 
Great Britain favorable to the United States, suggesting 
that the British could never stand idly by and see 



the United States crushed, and advocating an offensive 
and defensive treaty between the countries, laid great 
stress upon the ties of Anglo-Saxon blood between the 
nations. And this has stirred the pride of the Latin 
races, especially the French, and their journals now 
announce that France could never lie passive and see 
Spain crushed— for they are of the same blood and of 
the same religion. And the latest news is that the 
French fleet is being put into readiness for action. 
How comforting and heart assuring to be able to 
look by faith to our Lord and Master and to realize 
that he is at the helm; not only to supervise particularly 
the affairs and interests of his consecrated saints, 
but also in a more general way to guide the nations 
and their affairs so as to humble them all and dash 
them all in pieces as a potter's vessel in the great time 
of trouble by which his better Kingdom will be introduced. 
The more the billows near us roll, the more 
let us hold to our anchorage within the vail. 

"Faith has dropped her anchor, found her rest." 

AN ANSWER TO THE QUEEN REGENT OF SPAIN. 



Royalty is no longer above criticism even in Spain. 
The spirit of liberty there finds ability to reason and 
to note the selfishness of rulers. In proof we quote a 
comment on the queen's recent speech before the Cortes, 
urging the retention of Cuba as a part of her son's patrimony, 
at any cost. It is from the Madrid newspaper, 
El Nacional. 

"On reading the words of your majesty we cannot 
hide from our queen the fact that they fill us with profound 
sadness. Your majesty says nothing of the employment 
that has been given our 200,000 sons hurried 
away from productive work in order to fight for 
the fatherland, and the king, his majesty; and makes 
no mention of the 2,000,000 pesetas, earned by the 
sweat of our brow, which we contributed to preserve 
intact our honor. You say nothing about the matter 
in which gold and blood have changed places, nor how 
the gold and blood are to be regained. We can understand, 
madam, that in your august heart a large 
place is occupied by your son, our king, but for a similar 
reason, your majesty will understand that in our 
soul there predominates a deep anxiety for our 200,000 
sons, your subjects. Your majesty speaks to us only 
of what is yours. It constitutes an enthusiastic hymn 
to motherly love. Athwart this speech, madam, we 
see a mother bending over a cradle, but we seek in 
vain for a queen bending over a tomb, which appears 

R2299 : page 133 

to open to receive an ill-starred nation. Still, with 



that nobility of soul that has enabled us to bestow a 
name and character upon Spain, we receive your request 
and have no objection to protect the throne of 
yourself and the king, in remembrance of that other 
king, your consort, whose memory, as we have noted 
with much pain, was not mentioned yesterday from 
your august lips. But now let us speak of ourselves, 
because if we perish will not ruin overtake your son? 
If we be dishonored by ignominious defeat, will not 
your throne be soiled by the mud in which we are 
buried?" 

Would that we could see such loyalty to the true 
King and Kingdom by the Spaniards and all nations. 
No Christian heart can do otherwise than sympathize 
with these sorrowing people who prefer to bury all 
their sons and all their wealth, rather than mortify 
and bury their pride. 



R2299 : page 133 

"LET HIM THAT THINKETH HE STANDETH TAKE HEED. 



"All these things happened unto them for ensamples [types]: 
and they are written for our admonition, upon whom the ends of 
the world are come. Wherefore let him that thinketh 
he standeth take heed lest he fall."-- 1 Cor. 10:11,12. 

IN THE ten preceding verses, the Apostle has 
pointed out that, as Israel after the flesh was a 
type of spiritual Israel, so the various evidences of divine 
favor toward them were types of the greater favor 
of God bestowed upon his Church in the Gospel age- 
spiritual Israel. 

As the consecrated people of God are now baptized 
into Christ, the Mediator of the new Covenant, 
the appointed leader of the Lord's people,— their wills 
immersed into his will, their personal identity lost sight 
of in their identity as members of the body of Christ 
(beautifully illustrated in symbol in water baptism), 
so this was typified in the immersion of all the 
Israelites, when they passed through the Red Sea, 
with the waters rising on either side as a wall and with 
the waters of the cloud overhead: they were all thus 
baptized, buried, unto Moses, in the cloud and in the 
sea. They all recognized him as the leader upon whom 
depended their deliverance from Egypt and their finding 
of the promised land. 

So also our spiritual food, the bread which cometh 
down from heaven— Christ and his word of truth, the 
gospel of his salvation, were typified in Israel's case by 
the manna which fell for them daily, and was for a 
long time their only sustenance. As we require the 



spiritual food continually, as our daily bread, to give 
us strength for the journey of life toward the heavenly 
Kingdom, so fleshly Israel had need of the manna, 
provided for their strengthening in their way to the 
typical Kingdom. As the truth and the spirit of the 
truth must be sought daily by us, if we would enjoy 
its benefits, and as it is found in small particles, here 
a little and there a little, and as it requires searching 
for and pains-taking labor to gather our daily portion 
of grace and heavenly food and experience in spiritual 
things, by searching the Scriptures, etc., so this also 
was typified in natural Israel's experience. They could 
not gather a stock of manna for the future. It was 
their daily bread, daily sought. Nor did they find it 
in large pieces and without difficulty. On the contrary, 
those who would be fed must pains-takingly 
gather up its small pieces, and with diligence. Thus 
"they did all eat of the same spiritual food"— or rather, 
they did all eat of the food which had a spiritual 
significance. 

As the Lord's consecrated people now have the 
refreshment of his grace all along the journey of life, 
and whenever weary and thirsty may come to the Lord 
for refreshment, and whenever needing purification, 
may come to the washing of the water through the 
Word of him who died for us,— so this spiritual truth 
was typified to fleshly Israel. When in their journeyings 
they famished for water and cried unto Moses, 
and Moses cried unto the Lord for them, relief was 
granted through the smiting of the rock, which 
typified the smiting of Christ at the hands of the Law, 
as our atonement sacrifice, our redemption price. As 
the grace which flows to us through Christ comes as a 
result of his being smitten for us, his death on our behalf, 
so the waters flowed to Israel as a result of the 
smiting of the typical rock. It was dry before the 
smiting— the waters gushed forth after the smiting. 
And not only did they drink of the waters freely at 
that time, but the waters formed a brook which went 
with them for a long time in their subsequent journey 
through the wilderness. Thus they did all drink of 
the same spiritual drink— of the drink which had a 
spiritual significance, for they drank of the rock which 
was typical or had a spiritual significance, the waters 
of which went with them, and that rock was Christ in 
type, and that water represented the grace of God in 
Christ. 

Having thus established the identity of fleshly Israel's 
experiences with the experiences and favors of 
spiritual Israel, the Apostle is ready to enforce from 
these a lesson. He would have us note that not only 
God's favors were typical, but that Israel's conduct 
with respect to these favors was typical of the conduct 
of nominal spiritual Israel in respect to the realities, 
the antitypes. "With many of them God was not 
well pleased:" this implies that he will not be well 



pleased with many in the nominal spiritual Israel. 

R2299 : page 134 

Again, many of the typical people, "were overthrown 
in the wilderness:" so the proper inference is that many 
of nominal spiritual Israel will be overthrown in the 
wilderness and fail to reach the antitypical Canaan. 
For "these things were our figures, examples,— to the 
intent that we should not lust after evil things, as they 
also lusted." The thought seems to be that in their 
experiences God gave us a lesson, or illustration, of 
what results would come to us if we received his mercies 
and favors in an improper manner. They were 
object lessons in wrongdoing, and God's treatment of 
the wrongdoers was intended to instruct us in respect 
to what would happen to us if we, blessed with the 
antitypical favors, should misuse them, and desire or 
lust after the former things, the sinful things which 
we left when we quitted the world (typified by Egypt) 
to follow Christ (typified by Moses). 

The Apostle then itemizes some of the notable 
mistakes made by typical Israelites, and suggests that 
the temptations of spiritual Israel are along the same 
lines, only on a higher plane— that their experiences 
and temptations were typical of the temptations which 
we must expect to endure, and which he urges us to 
overcome. 

(1) Idolatry. He points out how Israel was exposed 
to idolatrous influences and yielded to them, 
leaving it for us to apply the lesson to ourselves, and 
to find what idols are most alluring to spiritual Israelites. 
Alas ! we find that idolatry is very common 
amongst the nominal spiritual Israelites. Idolatry is 
the inordinate or undue respect, homage, reverence, or 
devotion paid to any person, system or thing,— aside 
from the Lord. Judged by this standard, how many 
are idolaters! Some idolize money, wealth: they are 
so devoted to it, so enslaved to it, that they can scarcely 
think of anything else; they bend all their energies 
to its service, even at the cost of dwarfing their moral 
and intellectual powers, and at the cost of health, and 
sometimes even the loss of name and fame are risked 
by the devotees of this idol. This is one of the oldest 
as well as one of the most reverenced of all the idols 
of Christendom. 

Another idol is Self: reverence paid to this idol is 
known as selfishness. Its worship has a very ignoble 
and debasing effect upon its worshipers. It is worshiped 
under various forms and name— pride, selfish 
ambition, self-esteem, boastfulness, love of show, tyranny, 
unreasonable self-will, self-ease regardless of 
others, gratification of passions, gluttony, drunkenness. 
After all these things do the Gentiles seek; but true 
Israelites are supposed to have left or put off all these, 
when they left Egypt, the world, to become followers 



of God as dear children, no longer to worship at the 
shrine of self, but to worship God and to more and 
more seek and strive after the spirit of his holiness- 
Love. 

Another idol much worshipped is Denominationalism: 
this form of idolatry had become so popular in 
nominal spiritual Israel that anyone who does not worship 
at some of its many shrines is regarded as almost 
a heathen. One of the principal shrines is Roman 
Catholicism; another, Greek Catholicism; another, 
Methodism; another, Pan-Presbyterianism— indeed, 
there are so many of these shrines that we cannot take 
time to enumerate them. Suffice it to say that those 
which do not count their worshippers by millions, count 
them at least by thousands and hundreds of thousands. 

This is one of the most dangerous idolatries of all. 
Its influence upon many is most insidious, for it has 
a "form of godliness"— it closely resembles the true 
worship of deity but is delusive and ensnaring in the 
extreme. Whoever becomes a fervent devotee at these 
shrines is apt to bind himself hand and foot, and in doing 
so often thinks, mistakenly, that he does God 
service. The true Israelite should awake to the fact 
that there is but one proper object of devotion— to whom 
his consecrations should be made, and his every power 
of service rendered— God only. 

R2300 : page 134 

(2) He points out that with them the sin of fornication 
was prevalent and caused many of them to 
fail-24,000, as is recorded in Num. 25:1-9. As the 
food they ate typified something higher, as the water 
they drank typified something better, as the idolatry 
they practiced found its parallel in more subtle besetments 
to Spiritual Israel, so their fornication foreshadowed 
a fornication on a higher plane, and along more 
subtle lines. While deprecating this sin in the form 
in which Israel transgressed, we are glad to believe that 
it is far from being a common or general sin in Spiritual 
Israel to-day, even as the lower forms of idolatry, 
the worshiping of the golden calf, etc., are not common 
to-day, indeed, never practiced amongst those 
who profess to be of Spiritual Israel. The temptation 
before Spiritual Israel, which was illustrated by fornication 
in fleshly Israel, is of a more insidious kind, 
and we are frequently warned against it, in the book 
of Revelation. (See Rev. 2:21; 14:8; 17:2,4,5; 18:3; 
19:2.) The use of the word in these cases cited seems 
to imply as its higher meaning or symbolical significance 
any illicit fellowship with the world, on the part 
of those who have betrothed themselves to be God's 
consecrated people: in other words, fellowship in spirit 
with those who have not the spirit of the Lord, but 
the spirit of the world. To how large an extent is this 
improper course, this sinful fellowship, indulged in by 



the professed Church of Christ! Are not the worldly 

not only invited but almost pressed into foremost positions 

in the nominal Church, while those who are 

R2300 : page 135 

faithful to the Lord and who stand aloof from and rebuke 
worldly aims and methods, are disesteemed 
as being fanatical and peculiar people? How many 
will fall through this cause! 

(3) "Neither let us tempt Christ, as some of them 
also tempted [their leader Moses], and were destroyed 

of serpents." The reference here evidently is to Num. 21:4-9, 
which relates how the Israelites rebelled against 
God's leading at the hand of Moses, and relented that 
they had started in the wilderness journey for Canaan, 
and spoke against the manna— desiring the leeks, onions 
and fleshpots of Egypt, and in consequence were bitten 
by fiery serpents, so that many of them died. This 
would seem to represent a tendency or temptation to 
Spiritual Israelites to lose their appreciation for spiritual 
things, for the bread of divine truth, and a hungering 
instead after the pleasures, ambitions, etc., of the 
world; a rebellion against the providential leadings of 
the Lord, which are intended not only to bring them 
ultimately to Canaan, but meanwhile to discipline and 
fit them and prepare them to enjoy its blessings everlastingly. 
Such an evil condition, such a yielding to 
worldly appetites and desires on the part of any, will 
surely expose them to the bite of the great serpent of 
sin, whose poison will effectually destroy in them the 
spiritual life. Any who have already been bitten by 
such worldly ambitions and desires, are by this lesson 
taught to look away speedily from themselves to the 
Crucified One, if they would have life— if they would 
recover from the bite of the serpent. 

As they "look" at him who was made a sin offering 
for us, him who knew no sin of his own, and behold 
how he who was rich for our sakes became poor, 
and how he left honor and riches of glory to become 
our deliverer and to bring us to the heavenly Canaan, 
they will have such a lesson in humility, and submission 
to divine providence, and in waiting for the exaltation 
and glory which God hath in reservation for 
them that love him, that they will recover from the 
bite of the serpent. Nevertheless, many in Spiritual 
Israel have been thus bitten who never recover, because 
they keep looking upon the serpents and keep 
under the influence of the evil, instead of looking away 
to him who is the author and by and by will be the 
finisher of our faith. 

(4) "Neither murmur ye, as some of them also 
murmured and were destroyed of the destroyer." The 
reference here seems to be to the account given in 
Num. 16 of a conspiracy on the part of certain leaders 

of the people, two hundred fifty, "famous in the congregation, 



who resented the leadership of Moses and 

declared themselves equally competent, and better 

qualified, to do the work of leading Israel and ministering 

to them in holy things. The result of this conspiracy 

was (1) that the conspirators were destroyed 

(vss. 28-35), and (2) that many of the people of Israel, 

being in sympathy with the conspirators, were offended 

and blamed Moses for having caused the death 

of the conspirators; in consequence of which the Lord 

visited upon them the plague; they were "destroyed of 

the destroyer," and nearly 15,000 perished (vss. 41-49). 

The lesson of this example, written for our admonition, 

upon whom the ends of the age have come, 

seems to be (1) that we are to expect leadings of divine 

providence in connection with the journey of Spiritual 

Israel. We are not to regard the matter of the 

Christian progress of the past eighteen centuries as being 

merely of human leadership, nor to think, therefore, 

that human leaders could to-day take hold of 

Israel's affairs and right matters and bring in the Millennium, 

as the higher critics, social reformers and 

religious politicians of our day propose to do. The 

Lord, the antitype of Moses, is still at the helm, still 

guiding; nor will he permit the matter to be taken out 

of his hands. Altho Canaan has not been reached as 

yet, and altho the journey has been a long and tedious 

one, with numerous trials and besetments, nevertheless, 

it has been accomplishing what God designed in 

the way of valuable lessons and experiences which his 

people could not do without, and yet be prepared for 

the inheritance promised. We are to draw from this 

ensample, also, the lesson that the Lord is at the helm 

in respect to the very smallest affairs which affect his 

Zion, that "he setteth up and he pulleth down," and 

that whosoever attempts to place himself in position in 

the Church, is violating the divine arrangement, as it 

is written, "Now God hath set the various members of 

the body as it hath pleased him." Whosoever, therefore, 

shall conspire in any manner to overthrow the 

divine arrangement, will be summarily dealt with by 

the antitypical Moses. Moreover, all who sympathize 

with those whom the Lord shall overthrow will be in 

danger also of dying the second death, because of being 

murmurers against the Lord and lacking of sympathy 

with his arrangements or providences. 

Based upon these examples from the past, the 
Apostle urges us, the Gospel Church, each individual 
Israelite, to be on guard lest we should fall from the 
Lord's favor and fail to enter Canaan, after the manner 
of the examples herein set before us, and which 
the Lord provided for this very reason. It is the common 
thought, especially with those who are in most 
danger, that they cannot fall, that they are secure, 
just as some of the transgressors, herein mentioned, 
boasted that they were God's holy people, saying, "All 
the congregation are holy, every one of them, and the 



Lord is among them." (Num. 16:3). Boastfulness is 
not a sign of piety, but rather the reverse. Meekness 

R2300 : page 136 

and humility, a realization of our own littleness and 
of the Lord's greatness, is the most favorable condition 
for those who would keep faithfully on the pilgrim 
way and reach the Canaan of promise. Thus the Apostle 
stated it respecting himself, saying, "When I am 
weak, then I am strong." It is when we realize 
our own weakness that we realize also our dependence 
upon the Lord and are willing to be guided of him in 
his way. Hence, the Apostle in this lesson specially 
exhorts that those who feel that they are standing, 
who feel strong, who feel that they are in no danger, 
shall take special heed to the examples hereinbefore 
presented, lest they fall. 



R2300 : page 136 

THE MARRIAGE FEAST. 

--MAY 8.-MATT. 22:1-14.- 

"Come; for all things are now ready."— Luke 14:17. 

A CAREFUL scrutiny of this parable, as found 

in Matthew's record, shows it to be in full 

accord with the similar parable recorded in Luke (14:16-24), 

tho they differ somewhat in minor details. It 

is therefore wise to study the two records in unison. 

Both records show three distinct calls to the marriage 
supper, or rather three divisions or parts to the 
one call which gathers the guests. There can be no 
difference of opinion respecting what the parable signifies: 
the thought brought to our attention is the same 
which pervades the Scripture throughout, namely, that 
God is selecting from among mankind a peculiar people, 
a little flock, to be joint-heirs with Christ Jesus, 
their Lord, in his Kingdom and in all the gracious 
work of that Kingdom, and symbolized as a "chaste 
virgin" who enters into a covenant of betrothal to the 
King's Son, her Redeemer and Lord, in harmony with 
which ultimately the great marriage shall take place, 
and the virgin become "the Bride, the Lamb's wife." 

This thought was enunciated by John the Baptist 
who, in introducing our Lord, presented him as the 
Bridegroom, saying: "He that hath the Bride is the 
Bridegroom, but the friend of the Bridegroom, when 
he heareth the Bridegroom's voice, rejoiceth greatly; 
this my joy, therefore, is fulfilled." John heard the 
Bridegroom and rejoiced, tho he was not invited to become 
one of the Bride class. The Lord had specially 



called Israel as his peculiar people, and had made ready 
his arrangements by which the first invitation to be 

R2301 :page 136 

the Bride of Christ was extended to the people of that 
nation. This invitation was given at our Lord's first 
advent, during the three and a half years of his ministry. 
His message, sent throughout all the land of 
Israel, was, "The Kingdom of Heaven is at hand; repent 
and believe the good tidings." This is the invitation 
mentioned in the third verse of our lesson, which 
was not heeded by Israel as a people. Following this, 
as we saw in our last lesson, their "house," or nation, 
was left desolate, Messiah was slain, etc. 

But our Lord did not abandon the people of that 
nation, when he rejected the nation as a whole; and 
hence at his resurrection, in directing his apostles 
no longer to confine their efforts to Israel, but to 
preach the gospel to every creature, he added, "beginning 
at Jerusalem." And we know that for a number 
of years following the crucifixion, the gospel message 
went again to Israel, under the power and blessing of 
the holy spirit, operating upon the apostles. Speaking 
of this, the Apostle Paul said to some of the Jews, 
"It was necessary that the Gospel should be preached 
first to you."— Acts 13:46. 

This was the second call to the marriage, recorded 
in verse 4. It says, "Tell them which were bidden"— 
previously bidden, and who had during the three and 
a half years of our Lord's ministry refused to come. 
Moreover, now the servants were commissioned to tell 
them that "the oxen and fadings are killed, and all 
things ready." This comprehensive statement of 
readiness could not be made in the first invitation, before 
our Lord's death; for he himself, in his own sacrifice 
for sin, was the bullock that was killed, and it is 
the eating of his flesh, given for the life of the world, 
that is to bring eternal life to as many as receive him.* 

To the first call none seem to have responded, save 
the servants only who bore the message. To the second 
call some responded, tho only a remnant, as is shown 
by Luke's account (vss. 21,22). Moreover, the second 
call is shown to have been not to the righteous and 
prominent ones among the Jews, but to the morally and 
mentally poor, blind, and maimed— not to the Temple 
class of Israel, the leaders of religious thought, the 
Scribes and Pharisees, but to the poor, found in the 
streets and lanes of that city or kingdom. This second 
message found a considerable number of this apparently 
inferior and unsuitable class, and gathered them 
for the wedding, where they were made presentable 
under the provided "wedding garments." Respecting 
the gathering, under this call, notice the record found 
in Acts 2:41,47 and 4:4— three thousand were found 
willing in one day and five thousand subsequently. 



Nevertheless, as the Apostle Paul clearly shows, these 
Israelites who received the message of grace after the 
day of Pentecost, under this second call of the parable, 
were but a remnant as compared with the whole of Israel 



*See Tabernacle Shadows,— signification of the fatted bullock 
of the sin offering, page 34. 

R2301 :page 137 

—but a part as compared to the entire number predestinated 
to be the number of the elect Church, the 
Bride of Christ. 

In proof of his assertion that only a remnant of Israel 
was acceptable to God, Paul quotes Isaiah, the 
prophet, saying, "Isaiah also crieth concerning Israel, 
Tho the number of the children of Israel be as the sand 
of the sea, a remnant shall be saved." (Rom. 9:27.) 
Paul proceeds to show that "the fall of them was the 
riches of the world," and that in consequence of their 
not completing the elect number, not providing the full 
complement of guests to the great marriage feast, 
therefore the invitation was extended beyond them to 
the Gentiles. He points out that God spared not the 
natural branches of the olive tree, but broke off the 
unfit ones, and during this age has been grafting Gentiles 
into the places formerly reserved for Israelites according 
to the flesh, in connection with the root and 
fatness of the great divine promises to Abraham's 
Seed. -Rom. 11. 

It was after the remnant had been gathered out 
from the "streets and lanes," and after the great and 
influential of that nation had rejected the divine invitation 
to the marriage feast, and had imprisoned the 
King's messengers, the apostles, and had slain some of 
them (See Acts 8:1-4; 12:1-3, etc.), that God sent 
his judgments against that city or government, and 
utterly destroyed it, in a great time of trouble, referred 
to in verse 7 of this lesson. John the Baptist, speaking 
of that trouble, likened it in parable to "fire," 
whose work was to burn up the chaff of that nation. 
This was the baptism of fire which came upon them, 
in contradistinction to the baptism of the holy spirit, 
which came upon the Israelites indeed, who accepted 
the invitation to the marriage feast. (Matt. 3:11.) It 
was respecting this fire and wrath that John said to the 
scribes and Pharisees who came to his baptism, "O 
generation of vipers, who hath warned you to flee from 
the wrath to come?" (Matt. 3:7; Luke 3:7.) Concerning 
this same destruction of these rejectors of the 
divine favor, the Apostle Paul wrote, saying that they 
"killed the righteous, and their own prophets, and 
have persecuted us; and they please not God, and are 
contrary to all men: forbidding us to speak to the Gentiles 



that they might be saved;— to fill up their sins 

alway: for WRATH IS COME upon them to the uttermost." 

-1 Thess. 2:15,16. 

Thus the way was left open for the third division 
of the call to the marriage feast (the call of the Gentiles) 
by reason of an insufficient number of worthy 
ones being found amongst those which were originally 
bidden— the Jews, the natural seed of Abraham. This 
third call, mentioned in verse 9 of our lesson, and in 
Luke 14:23, is in both the accounts designated as a 
call in "the highways"— among the nations, the Gentiles, 
outside the city of the parable, which represents 
Israel. This call among the Gentiles has progressed 
for now more than eighteen centuries and, according 
to various lines of testimony in the Lord's Word, it has 
about accomplished the purpose intended, namely, the 
filling up of the elect, predetermined number which 
shall constitute the joint-heirs in the Kingdom, by becoming 
the Bride, the Lamb's wife. 

Both evangelists state that a sufficient number 
will be found; and Matthew declares that "both good 
and bad" were amongst those found willing to participate 
in the feast. His description reminds us of another 
of our Lord's parables, illustrative of the same point, 
namely, the parable of the net which, being cast into 
the sea, caught fish, both good and bad,— suitable and 
unsuitable. The separation of the fish, gathering some 
into baskets for use, and casting the remainder 
back into the sea, implies a choice, a discrimination on 
the Lord's part, as between the numbers who eventually 
would profess to be of his Kingdom class and seek 
to share the feast, and those whom the Lord will esteem 
worthy, according to certain conditions and tests of 
character. 

This part of the parable brings us down unquestionably 
to the close of the Gospel age; because the 
Gospel age is for the very purpose of calling those who 
shall participate in the marriage feast. If, therefore, 
it be true that we are in the end of this Gospel age, it 
implies that a sufficient number of worthy guests have 
been found, or, to reverse the proposition, If a sufficient 
number of worthy guests have now been found, 
it proves that we are in the close of this age. And 
just at this point the parable introduces another feature 
—for it was after the wedding had been furnished with 
a proper number of guests, that "the King came in" 
and began the inspection of the guests. This, we have 
elsewhere shown, marks the date April, 1878.* At 
that point of time therefore, we believe, on the strength 
of the testimony of the Scriptures, our Lord assumed 
the office of King, which he since holds, and will continue 
to exercise until he shall have overthrown present 
institutions, falsely called Christian institutions, dashing 
them "in pieces as a potter's vessel," in a great 
time of trouble symbolically spoken of as a time of 
"fire" and of overflowing "floods," and eventually 



reigning in righteousness for a thousand years, during 
which all the families of the earth shall be blessed. 

This date, at which the Bridegroom takes his kingly 
authority and power, marks a special feature of 
dealing in connection with his consecrated Church— 
the class gathered to the feast. The first part of the 
King's business, in the establishment of his Kingdom, 



*MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOL. III., page 197. 

R2301 :page 138 

is, as we have seen, the judgment of the nations, and 
the Apostle Peter assures us that "judgment must begin 
at the house of God." This judgment of the house 
of God, the consecrated Church, is shown in the parable 
by the statement that the King inspected or examined 
the guests. Among them he found worthy ones, 
evidently, and also unworthy ones which, in the parable, 
are represented by one man— a leader or representative 
of the class. 

The unworthiness of this guest is represented in his 
lack of a wedding garment, hence it is important for us 
to ascertain the significance of such a garment. Secular 
history shows that the custom of that time amongst the 
Jews was that when any notable person made a feast 
of this kind, he provided for the occasion an outer robe 
or covering, for each guest, so that however different 
the guests might be in respect to their circumstances, 
wealth or apparel, on this occasion, while at the feast, 
as guests of one host, they were on a common level; for 
the wedding garments were alike, probably of white 
linen embroidered. The significance is readily seen. 
The Lord's people, gathered from every nation and 
people and tongue, are dissimilar in their intellectual, 
moral, physical and financial conditions, but when they 
have accepted the Lord Jesus, the redemption in his 
blood provided and an invitation to the wedding, they 
are reckoned as "new creatures in Christ Jesus," and 
all on a common footing— the robe of Christ's righteousness 

R2302 : page 138 

making up for the deficiencies of each one, 

so that there is no difference as respects previous situation 

or condition, bond or free, male or female, they 

are all one in Christ Jesus.— Gal. 3:28. 

The class represented as without this wedding 
garment of Christ's righteousness is, therefore, very 
evidently a class which denies the necessity, value or 
merit of the great atoning sacrifice accomplished for us 
at Calvary,— denies totally any necessity for a covering 
for their sins— attempting to appear at the feast in 
the filthy rags of self-righteousness. 



The appropriateness of the illustration is still further 
heightened by the knowledge that it was the custom 
of that day, not only to provide these garments, 
but to insist that each guest who would enter to the 
feast should first have on the wedding garment. Just 
so it is one of the explicit terms or conditions of the 
call to the great feast that God has prepared, that all 
who will come to it must first accept by faith the 
redemption which is in Christ Jesus our Lord— otherwise 
they can gain no admission. It follows, therefore, 
logically, that the guest found without a wedding 
garment must have taken off the wedding garment after 
he had entered as one of the guests, since he would 
not have been admitted without it. We can readily 
see the application of this in the Church. While none 
could have access to the grace of God in Christ without 
first accepting by faith the merit of his sacrifice as 
the ransom price for their sins, yet after having entered 
the grace of God, we find so many who do despite 
not only to the King who made the marriage feast, 
but also to the King's Son who has just assumed the 
office of King, by rejecting the robe of his righteousness, 
while attempting to enjoy the benefits of his grace. 

Where may we look for this class? We answer, 
we may look for them in amongst the others, who still 
retain the wedding garment; and, as we should expect, 
it is especially since 1878 that the various no-ransom 
doctrines have come to the front,— "denying that the 
Lord bought them." And these theories, in derogation 
of the ransom, seem to have a special fascination 
for certain classes: (1) For a class which is anxious 
to appear more independent in thought, and to be 
known as critics and advanced thinkers. (2) They have 
fascination for a class whose consecration is lax, or 
partial only, and who like to take a broad view and to 
claim universal salvation, partly because they realize 
that they are not walking in the narrow way of 
self-sacrifice. 

At all events, such a class is to be expected at the 
present time, and such a class we find quite numerous; 
some of them openly scoffing at the thought that a ransom 
was necessary or was given, others tacitly acknowledging 
the ransom, but in heart and in life denying 
it: ignoring the logical consequences, and propriety 
of participation with the Lord in the sufferings 
of this present time. 

The parable shows that at this juncture the full 
number of the guests has been gathered, and are in the 
house of their host. We may imagine the provision 
for their entertainment, the reception room, its brilliant 
illumination, etc., and these correspond in our case, to 
the blessings enjoyed by the living members of the consecrated 
Church now. With us, too, the light has 
been turned on (since 1874); we are enjoying many of 
the blessings provided by our host, the Lord, and we 
have before us the menu describing to some extent 



"the things which God hath in reservation for them 
that love him." We can even occasionally see some 
of the preparations for the great feast progressing, and 
it is from such favorable conditions, into the ignorance, 
uncertainty and "outer darkness" of the world, that 
all who do not have on the wedding garment shall be 
thrust or forced. 

It was in 1878 that the importance of the wedding 
garment was particularly drawn to our attention, and 
since that time there has been continual evidence before 
us of the binding and going into outer darkness of such 
as have taken off the wedding garment. Of course, it 
is not a literal binding: it is accomplished by the presentation 

R2302 : page 139 

of the truth, in contradistinction to the error; 

the influence of the truth being the binding or restraining 

influence circumventing the error, on this subject. 

It is the duty of all who see the truth on the subject 

of the ransom to be thoroughly loyal to the King, and 

to thus assist in binding, restraining with the truth, 

any whom they find exercising influence to the contrary. 

It is our experience that all who lose respect 

for and trust in the merit of the precious blood of Christ 

as the redemption price of the world, go quickly into 

the outer darkness of the world in respect to the divine 

plan, etc. 

In the parable it is said that in the outer darkness 
there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth. This 
is generally understood to mean "eternal torment," 
"hell-fire," altho those who offer such an interpretation 
seem to entirely ignore the fact that outer darkness 
and inner fire would be opposites of thought: 
wherever there is fire, the darkness is absent; where 
darkness prevails, fire is absent. Moreover, they claim 
that people will be shut up in hell, whereas in the parable 
the place or condition is an outside place. None 
of the conditions favor the ordinary interpretation, tho 
all favor the interpretation which we are giving. The 
wailing and gnashing of teeth among those of the outer 
darkness of the world and of the nominal church has 
not yet commenced; but, as the parable states it, by 
and by, "there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth." 
And those who are now ejected from the light and 
from all participation in the joys and blessings of the 
present time will have their portion, their share in the 
great time of trouble coming upon the whole world, 
which is thus signified, "a time of trouble such as was 
not since there was a nation." None then living shall 
escape that trouble, except the little flock, the Kingdom 
class, the Bride class, to whom the Lord said, 
"Watch ye, that ye may be accounted worthy to escape 
all those things coming upon the world." 

Our Lord sums up the significance of this parable, 
as meaning that "Many are called but few are chosen." 



How true! Not all have been called to this marriage 

feast. Hundreds of millions never heard a word about 

it all through these eighteen centuries, and hundreds 

of millions are living to-day without the slightest 

knowledge of it, and none of these can in any sense of 

the word be reckoned among the "called." Nevertheless, 

many have been called— all of the Jewish nation 

who had ears to hear the message were called, because 

they, by divine arrangement, were a covenanted people, 

to whom the first call belonged; but only a few of 

them were chosen. And so, during the offer of the 

Gospel to the Gentiles, it has gone to a comparatively 

small proportion of the whole Gentile world; nevertheless, 

it has reached millions during these eighteen 

centuries. The calling has extended to hundreds 

of millions of Christendom to-day, and a considerable 

portion of these, we may reasonably suppose, have ears 

to hear; nevertheless, they very generally choose to ignore 

the call: the vast majority find other attractions 

and ambitions— worldly and church power, wealth, influence, 

pleasure, ease, etc. Comparatively few therefore, 

care to accept the invitation. And finally, of 

those who have accepted, the Lord makes choice and 

separates and rejects all who do not accept the invitation 

and all its privileges as a grace, a favor. The others 

constitute the little flock, addressed by our Lord, saying, 

"Fear not, little flock, it is your Father's good 

pleasure to give you the Kingdom." 

The inquiry naturally and properly arises: If the 
wedding was furnished with guests when the King 
came in— April, 1878— how can there be any room for 
others to come in now? We answer, that there would 
be no room for any to enter now, were it not for the 
inspection which is in progress, and the casting out of 
those who were not worthy. For each one of those 
cast out of the light and the privileges of the feast, 
there is an opening, an opportunity for another to take 
his place and to take the crown that was reserved for 
him.— See Rev. 3:11. 



R2302 : page 139 

THE DUTY OF WATCHFULNESS. 

-MAY 15. -MATT. 24:42-51.- 

"Watch therefore, for ye know not what 
hour your Lord doth come."— Matt. 24:42. 

THIS injunction followed our Lord's great prophecy 

of the events of the Gospel age, recorded 

in Matt. 24 and Luke 17 and 21. It is not an exhortation 

to watch the sky in hope of seeing our Lord's 

second coming, as some seem to understand it. On 



the contrary, our Lord had just explained that "in 
the days of" his second presence the world in general 
would be eating and drinking, planting and building, 
marrying and giving in marriage, and know not of his 
presence. He had told them that in the time of his 
presence his people would be gathered from the field, 
the mill and the bed, to the food of present truth 
which he would supply; and that if at that time anyone 
should say to them, Lo here! or Lo there! Lo, he 
is in the secret chambers, or in the desert, they should 
believe it not, nor seek to see him thus, because the 
signs or evidences of his presence would not be secret 
ones, but would be manifest to all, as is the light of 
the morning sun.* 



*See MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOL. II., Chap. 5, and VOL. IV. 
Chap. 12. 

R2303 : page 140 

It is proper, also, to call attention to the fact that 
nothing whatever in the text, nor in the context, has 
the slightest reference to watching for death; such a 
statement is only justified by the fact that very many 
are inclined to give this very unreasonable meaning to 
the Master's words. Death is not our Lord, but, on 
the contrary, the great enemy— the "last enemy that 
shall be destroyed."— 1 Cor. 15:26. 

We are to watch the signs of the times, so carefully 
delineated by our Lord in the prophecy which 
precedes this exhortation to watchfulness. The tendency 
of the world, the flesh and the devil is to absorb 
our time, thought, interest and affections in worldly 
affairs, eating, drinking, marrying, building, planting, 
business, pleasure, sectarianism, and cunningly devised 
fables. Our Lord presents to us, as an antidote to these 
prevailing influences, first of all the thought that he 
is coming a second time, to receive us unto himself, to 
associate us with him in his Kingdom, and to employ 
us then in the great work of blessing all the families 
of the earth: secondly, by the prophetic delineation of 
the conditions that would prevail in the interim of our 
waiting he sought to divert our thoughts from the 
worldly conditions, and to give us therein something 
which would help to hold and fix our thoughts and affections 
and interests on higher things, and thus help 
to hold our interest and to have us always ready. It 
is thoroughly absurd, however, to claim that the multitudinous 
signs of our Lord's prophecy are to be studiously 
ignored by the watchers. Such as give no 
heed to the "more sure word of prophecy" are not 
watching and will not know. 

Hence, we conclude that the meaning of this exhortation, 
"Watch therefore," is that the Lord's people 



should be keeping note of the fact of his coming, 
and of the various incidents of the interim; not knowing 
how rapidly they might culminate, might ever live 
in the attitude of expectancy, and of readiness for his 
presence. This would imply, not readiness in a literal 
ascension robe, but readiness in a figurative ascension 
robe, namely, such a condition of heart and life as 
would be in readiness to welcome the Lord, and his 
scrutiny of our hearts and conduct; and efforts to copy 
his character and to serve his cause every moment. 
The tendency of things of the earth is to lull us to 
sleep along the lines of self-control and spiritual activity 
in the Lord's service, and Watching signifies to 
keep awake, to be on the alert, to be energetic. Those 
who have tried it can attest, that nothing is more helpful 
to wakefulness and energy in the Lord's service 
than the thought of his coming, and the examination 
of the prophecies which were given us with the very 
object of having us know something about the time of 
his coming, so that we should not be in darkness with 
the world, nor be overtaken by the day of the Lord as 
by a thief, unawares, as it will overtake the whole 
world. 

This significance of the injunction to watchfulness 
is borne out by the subsequent exhortation in the form 
of a parable. Our Lord represents the world of mankind 
as a household, whose head or chief is the "Prince 
of this world," Satan, whose house is to be broken up 
in the great time of trouble with which this age shall 
end and the new age be introduced. If the world were 
aware of the time of the Lord's coming, and of the 
great dispensational changes then due, it would order 
its affairs differently, even tho its heart were not different 
from at present; hence it is that these things 
are spoken of in parables and "dark sayings," that 
worldly people may hear and not understand, and see 
and not believe at the present time, and so the day of 
the Lord will come upon them as a thief in the night, 
and as travail upon a woman with child, and they shall 
not escape it. But ye, brethren,— all the faithful in 
Christ Jesus, who wait for his Kingdom and watch 
thereunto and seek to be prepared for it— ye will not 
be left in darkness, that that day should overtake you 
as a thief . Watch! Not that you may be deceived 
and know no more about the matter than the world 
which does not watch, but watch so that when the 
time does come you may know of it— Compare 
1 Thess. 5:1-9. 

Luke says (12:41) that Peter inquired whether or 
not this necessity for watching was applicable to the 
apostles merely, or to all? Our Lord's answer is in 
the nature of a question, which implies that during 
this Gospel age it would be his method to make use of 
certain agents or agencies in the presentation of dispensational 
truth. He inquires, Who then, at that 
time— at the time of the second presence of the Lord 



—is the faithful and prudent servant whom his master 
has placed over his household to give them food in due 
season? Who will it be? Whoever will occupy that 
position, happy will it be for him, if the Master, on 
coming, shall find him thus employed— diligent in his 
service of the household, dispensing meat in due season 
to the household of faith. If that servant shall continue 
faithful during the trials of the day of the presence, 
he will be continued at his post of service, and 
used as a channel for the dissemination of all the riches 
of grace and truth which will continue to be due to the 
household of faith. But should he lose his faith in the 
Master's presence, become arrogant and tyrannical to 
his fellow-servants, and intemperate in his words and 
deeds, the Master will be present nevertheless [his loss 
of faith in the presence will not change the fact], and 
he will be cut off from the office of steward, and separated 
from the household of faith entirely, and will 

R2303 :page 141 

have his portion with the hypocrites,— altho he was 
not one of the hypocrites but an unfaithful servant. 

To have his portion with the hypocrites implies 
that he will share with them the great time of trouble 
which will follow the gathering together of the Lord's 
elect— the time of trouble such as was not since there 
was a nation, represented by the expression, "wailing 
and gnashing of teeth. "-Matt. 24:51; 13:42. 

This answer to Peter's question, while it gives a 
particular prophecy respecting the Lord's dealing in 
the end of this age, gives also a suggestive hint to all 
who might be special servants or fellow-servants, that 
the greater and more important their service, the 
greater will be their responsibility to the Master. 



R2303 : page 141 

THE DAY OF JUDGMENT. 

MAY 22.-MATT. 25:31-46. 

"He shall reward every man according 
to his works. "-Matt. 16:27. 

MOST of our Lord's parables or illustrations 
represent some phase of the Kingdom of 
Heaven— the Church— either in its present embryotic 
and preparatory condition, or in its future majesty. 
For instance, the parable of the wheat and the tares 
shows the sowing of the good seed, the gospel of the 
Kingdom, by our Lord, and the development of that 
seed in the Church; the sowing amongst it of the false 
doctrines by the adversary, and the development from 



it of the false professors in the Church; the harvest 
time at the end of the age, followed by the burning of 
the tares— the destruction of the counterfeits as such, 
and the gathering of the wheat into the garner,— 
which, our Lord explained, was an illustration of the 
glorification of the Church in Kingdom majesty: "Then 
shall the righteous shine forth as the sun in the Kingdom 
of their father." But in the parable before us we 
have no such illustration of the Kingdom— the Kingdom 
of Heaven is not likened to, nor illustrated by, 
the matters presented in this parable. Quite to the 
contrary of this, it is a lesson or description of the 
matters which will transpire after the Kingdom of 
Heaven has been developed in this age, and after it has 
been glorified at the end of this age. 

This is shown by verse 31, which distinctly states 
the time of its applicability: "When the Son of Man 
shall come in his glory." We are to remember, in 
this connection, that the first event of the second advent 
is not the manifestation of glory, but the thief-like 
gathering (unknown to the world) of the elect 
"little flock," the "chaste virgin," to the Bridegroom, 
and her exaltation to the position of "the Bride, the 
Lamb's wife, filled with the glory of God." The revelation 
of our Lord's glory is not another coming, but 
another step or development during the same coming 
or presence (parousia). "When he shall appear in 
glory, we also shall appear with him," explains the 
Apostle (Col. 3:4), and this view agrees with the 
Apostle's other statement that, as the wife is the glory 
of the husband, so the Church is the glory of Christ. 
Consequently, our Lord could not appear in his glory, 
according to his own arrangement as expressed through 
his own mouthpieces, until first he had associated the 
Bride with himself. 

Hence, the scene of this parable is not a judgment 
scene respecting the Church, because before this scene 
begins, those who shall be accounted worthy of a share 
in the Kingdom shall be with the Lord in the throne 
of his glory, according to the promise, "To him that 
overcometh will I grant to sit with me in my throne;" 
"To him that overcometh will I give power over the 
nations." The judgment scene here presented is the 
world's judgment, in which the Church shall share 
only as judges, as the Apostle explains, "Do ye not 
know that the saints shall judge the world?"— 
1 Cor. 6:2. 

In full harmony with this is the statement of verse 32, 

R2304 : page 141 

that it is the nations of earth then gathered to 
judgment before the throne of glory— the great white 
throne of justice and impartiality— that are here pictured 
to us. But the day of the world's judgment is 
not such a day as it has been generally represented. 



It will not be a twenty-four hour day, but a larger 
day, a thousand years, for "a day with the Lord is as 
a thousand years" (2 Pet. 3:8): it is the long-promised 
Millennial day, in which the overcomers of this age 
shall live and reign with Christ a thousand years, and 
as kings and priests unto God shall bless the world by 
a righteous judgment.— Rev. 5:9,10; 20:4. 

This brings us to the thought that this great judgment 
day, so far from being merely a day of general 
damnation, is really the great blessing, the great boon, 
secured for the world by the death of Christ. Originally, 
through Adam's transgression, the entire race 
was under sentence of death, justly; and there was no 
need for anything further of future judgment or sentence, 
for the original sentence, "Dying thou shalt 
die," in its execution had utterly destroyed mankind, 
without hope. But when divine mercy provided the 
great "ransom for all," another judgment was thus 
provided; that is to say, another trial for life. The 
first judgment or trial for life in Eden had resulted 
disastrously to Adam and all his race, but the penalties 
of that judgment being borne by our Redeemer in 

R2304 : page 142 

his own body on the tree, Adam and his posterity are 
to be granted another trial, another opportunity to see 
whether or not, with their added experience, they 
would choose righteousness, and thereby choose the 
accompanying gift of God— eternal life; or whether 
they would choose sin and the accompanying penalty 
of sin— death; which, in this case, would be the Second 
Death; the penalty of failure under the second opportunity 
or trial. 

God not only appointed the great redemption for 
sin, of which our Redeemer was the willing central 
figure, but he also appointed that the Redeemer should 
be the one through whom the blessings of the ransom 
—the second trial— should come to all: as it is written, 
"God hath appointed a day [the Millennial age, the 
seventh day, the seventh thousand-year period of 
earth's history] in which he [God] will judge the 
world in righteousness by that man whom he hath ordained 
[Jesus Christ]." And not only so, but having 
predestinated the adoption of a little flock to joint-heirship 
with Jesus in the Millennial Kingdom and 
its glory, its service and its judgment of the world, 
God has, during this Gospel age, preceding the day of 
judgment, granted a special, earlier trial to the Church. 

The trial of the Church during this Gospel age is 
along lines considerably different from those which 
will be applied to the trial of the world in the next 
age. For instance, mankind in general shall be tried 
or judged according to their works, during the Millennial 
age, as shown in this lesson, and in the Golden 
Text, and in Rev. 20: 12; but the Church of this age 



is not judged according to its works, which could not 
be perfect because of the infirmities of the flesh, "for 
we have this treasure [the new nature] in earthen vessels." 
We are judged according to our faith: "This 
is the victory that overcometh the world [during this 
age, while the world is under the Prince of this world, 
Satan, and in antagonism to righteousness and the 
righteous], even your faith." 

True, faith without works would be dead, and we 
are to show our faith by our works; but we are not to 
be judged by the imperfect works which are the utmost 
of our ability, but to be judged by our faith, 
which is reckoned unto us for righteousness— as full 
perfection: for, "The righteousness of the law [of 
God's demands] is [reckonedly] fulfilled in us who 
walk not after the flesh, but after the spirit."— 
Rom. 8:4. 

The great work of the Millennial age is briefly 
comprehended in the statement of verse 33, "He shall 
set his sheep on his right hand [position of favor] and 
the goats on his left." The wayward, wilful goat is 
chosen as a symbol to represent depraved humanity, 
while the docile sheep fitly represents those who are 
fully subjected to the Lord's will in every particular. 
Other scriptures show us that this division of mankind 
into two classes, the willing and obedient separated 
from the unwilling and disobedient, will be very gradually 
accomplished, with much patience, and with 
every opportunity for the sheep character to be developed 
by the whole world. For instance, speaking of 
that new dispensation and the patient and generous 
trial of mankind there to be granted by the Redeemer-Judge, 
the Prophet Isaiah shows that while all will be 
obliged to refrain from doing injury to others, for 
"nothing shall hurt or destroy in all my holy Kingdom," 
yet liberty to make progress, or not to make 
progress, under those favorable conditions will be left 
to each individual: and that those who refuse to make 
progress will die a hundred years old (the Second 
Death) because of having failed to benefit by the opportunities 
granted to them; altho then they will be 
but children— for they might live, by even outward 
conformity and progress, to the end of the day of 
judgment, till the close of the Millennium. ~ 
Isa. 65:17-20. 

The culminating scenes, marking the close of the 
Millennial age, are set forth in verses 34-46, tho in 
the reverse order to that given by the same Teacher 
in Rev. 20:7-10, and 11-15. The account in Revelation 
seems to indicate that the goat class will be dealt 
with first: a certain test, a deception by Satan, will 
manifest those who have the goatlike disposition of 
wilfulness still remaining in their hearts after they 
have enjoyed all the blessings of the "times of restitution." 
Those whose hearts are not completely won by 
the instruction and favorable opportunity for coming 



to a knowledge of God's goodness and wisdom and 
grace, will be destroyed with Satan, in the Second 
Death. Then will be ushered in the grand perfections 
of the eternal state, in which there shall be no more 
dying, no more crying, no more pain, because the former 
things— sin, and those who have unconsecrated 
dispositions disposed to sin, will be no more. 

The reward to the righteous will then be in order, 
and they will be introduced to the Father by the Son, 
blameless and irreprovable in love. These will have 
been perfected through the processes of the restitution. 
They will be perfect men, in the image of God as was 
Adam, but with their knowledge of God infinitely enlarged 
by the experiences through which they will 
have passed. This is the delivering up of the Kingdom 
to God, even the Father— the cessation of the 
Millennial Kingdom, mentioned by the Apostle Paul. 
(1 Cor. 15:24-28.) Mankind will no longer need a 
mediator, but will then be able to stand in their own 
righteousness, as Adam could stand in his own righteousness 
before he transgressed. 

R2304 : page 143 

The mediatorial Millennial Kingdom of Christ and 
the Church, having accomplished its purpose, and being 
withdrawn, the dominion of the renewed earth will 
be handed over to the rule of its redeemed and restored 
rulers— humanity. Thenceforth man shall again be 
king of the earth, subject to the Great King, Jehovah, 
in whose "everlasting Kingdom" Christ and the 
Church will thereafter be associated. We may reasonably 
suppose that even perfect men will require some 
form of government, and that it will be a representative 
government, since every member of that human 
family will be perfect, and therefore equally a king 
with each other member. Such a government would 
be nothing more nor less than a republic, in which 
each individual is a sovereign, and one of their number 
is chosen as their servant or President. 

This transfer of the earth's control to the renewed 
race is briefly represented in our Lord's words, "Come, 
ye blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared 
for you from the foundation of the world." It should 
be distinctly noted that this is a totally different kingdom 
from the one promised to the saints of this Gospel 
age, which is a joint-heirship with Christ in his Kingdom 
during the Millennial age, terminating, so far as 
the earth is concerned, at the close of the Millennium. 
The spiritual class and Kingdom was foreordained 
"from [BEFORE] the foundation of the world:" the 
earthly kingdom is here described as "prepared for 
you [restored and worthy humanity] from the foundation 
of the world." The earthly kingdom relates 
to the earth; and the foundation or preparation of the 
earth, which is its basis. 



The character of the judgment is intimated, rather 
than described, in the words addressed to the approved 
and to the condemned. The reward is for good works, 
indicative of sympathy, love, compassion; the punishment 
is for the neglect of good works, thus intimating 
the absence of good motives, tender, loving sentiments. 
Thus it appears, that those who will ultimately be accounted 
worthy of the Second Death will not be murderers, 
thieves, and liars, in the present-day acceptance 
of those terms, but those who lack evidences of 
the possession of the holy spirit whose fruits are meekness, 
patience, long-suffering, brotherly-kindness— 
Love. 

Our Lord's words summed up mean approval to 
those only who have at heart the disposition of love; 
and that such only will be adjudged worthy of eternal 
life. All who shall not attain to that graciousness of 
character, God-like-ness, will be rejected as unworthy 
of eternal life, and will die the Second Death. All who 
have not the spirit of love are "accursed," under that 
law of the New Covenant. Satan and all who (after 
the full opportunities of the Millennial age) still have 
to any degree his disposition or spirit of selfishness, 
lovelessness, will be accounted worthy of the Second 
Death, called, in verse 46, "everlasting punishment," 
in verse 41, "everlasting fire," and in Rev. 20:10,14,15, 
"the lake of fire;"— and there explained to be "the 
Second Death;"— "everlasting destruction from the 
presence of the Lord, and from the glory of his power." 
The wages or punishment of sin being death, the hopelessness 

R2305 : page 143 

of any rescue or further redemption from 
death, makes that death an everlasting punishment. 
For a further explanation of verse 46 and of other 
similar texts, see What Say the Scriptures about Hell? 
—ten cents, 50 cents per dozen,— this office. 



THE LORD'S SUPPER.-MAY 29.-MATT. 26:17-30. 



For this lesson, please see article in our issue of 
March 1, "The Memorial Supper." 



R2305 : page 143 

INTERESTING LETTERS. 



"THE MILLENNIAL DAWN CHRISTIANS." 



"In the city of Birmingham [Ala.] there are several 
persons now working who call themselves 'Non-Sectarian 
Christians.' They have espoused the doctrines as 
promulgated in MILLENNIAL DAWN. I desire now 
not to speak specially of their doctrines, which seem 
to me to be mostly theories, but of their methods of 
spending time. 

"They have worked this city from house to house, 
selling MILLENNIAL DAWN and circulating other brief 
literature. They talk their religion every chance, and 
preach on Sunday. They call themselves 'Colporteurs.' 
They have put over two thousand copies of their books 
in this city. Their books are in cheap binding. Most 
all of our literature [Christian Denomination] is too 
expensive. These books are being read. How I wish 
2,000 copies of some of our books could be placed here! 

"These young men live very economically. Four 
of them rent a room, use their own cheap cots, and 
cook their own victuals. They told me their meals 
averaged three and five-sevenths cents each. 

"Now, why cannot we disseminate our literature 
and the Bible doctrine, as we understand it, in this 
way? The fact is, I fear, we have stagnated on methods, 
and God is gradually hinting to us that, if we do 
not get to moving forward, he will give us a back seat. 

"It will not help the cause for you to become 
anxious as to my joining the Mormons or Age to Come 
Folks. The best method of propagating the gospel of 
Jesus Christ in its ancient purity, simplicity and power 
is what I am seeking, it makes no difference who is 
using it. This subject must be agitated." 

— O.P.S. in The Gospel Messenger. 

R2305 : page 144 

[There are three ways in which devotion and self-sacrifice 
may be induced, (1) by vainglory; (2) by superstition; 
(3) by a knowledge of the Truth in a consecrated 
heart. The first has plenty of illustrations in 
business and politics; the second plenty in heathenism 
and Roman Catholicism; the last is the energizing 
power in the Colporteur brethren, whose devotion is 
noted. Error is surrounded by the glitter and tinsel 
of public approval; it is backed by wealth and immense 
influence, yet it must provide its ministers with titles 
and honors and every comfort to secure their service. 
Those who receive the Truth into good and honest 
hearts cannot restrain themselves. They must tell the 
good tidings to others. Compare the message now 
going forth and the one which went forth at the First 
Advent, and then compare the effects of both, and you 
have the secret— EDITOR. 1 



Iowa. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-Words cannot express 
the joy I feel after perusing the wonderful truths of 
MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOLS. L, II., and III. Oh! how 
I love the Word of God— the Bible— and its Author 
more and more, ever since the Lord through one of 
his messengers directed my attention to one of those 
little tracts which I found in the library case of the 
Railroad Y.M.C.A., when I went to look for some 
good book to read. That little tract, The Wages of 
Sin, led me to look at others that were there, until I 
had read them all; and I was so pleased to see they 
were just as the Scriptures teach. What a flood of 
light came in upon some heretofore dark and difficult 
passages of Scripture! In fact, after I had gotten 
through reading MILLENNIAL DAWN, which I sent for 
at the earliest opportunity, the Bible had indeed become 
a new book to me, and God's plan so different 
from what I had always believed; and the beauty of it 
all is, I had not the slightest doubt from the beginning 
but that it is really and truly our heavenly Father's 
plan. 

Sixteen months ago I was converted from Roman 
Catholicism to Protestantism, at a series of meetings 
held here. Before that I was very much pronounced 
against Protestantism, as I of course believed that the 
Catholic Church was the true Church, and the others 
only rotten branches of the same. In my young days 
I was an altar boy and was very devout, and indeed, 
my parents thought I would choose to be a priest, but 
after going through the Catholic school, I drifted into 
the printing office and became a compositor, and nearly 
ever since have followed that vocation. 

Altho I had read a great deal, especially Romish 
papers and books, I never was aware that that church 
was such a blood-thirsty tyrant, and that she was the 
author and instigator of so many fiendish outrages. 
In fact, I did not know that she ever persecuted. Catholics 
are generally ignorant of this fact. They seem 
to think that all the persecution was on the other side. 
They are cautioned about reading "profane" history, 
as they call it; i.e., all history that is not authorized 
by their church. Up to the time when I was consecrated 
I never read the Bible, but had only a glimmering 
knowledge of some of its sayings and parables. I 
believed firmly that Peter was the first Pope and that 
he lived in Rome, and that the Church was founded 
upon him and not upon the truth he uttered, "Thou 
art the Christ, the Son of the living God." 

I am anxious to spread the glad tidings everywhere, 
as I am now nearly every day telling them to some 
one. Some think I am backsliding, while others believe 
the good news. I would like to know what arrangements 
can be made as to the sale of these valuable 
books. Of course, I never sold books, but I am greatly 



impressed that they would sell, especially to the 
right parties. I am anxious to put them as rapidly as 
possible into the hands of the brethren, along with the 
WATCH TOWER. I would like to engage in the work. 
Hoping to hear from you at your earliest opportunity, 

Yours in Christ, JAMES S. O'ROURKE. 

[This brother has since received DAWN, VOL. IV., 
and entered the Colporteur work; and the Lord is 
still blessing him and blessing his efforts to the good 
of others.-EDITOR.] 

page 144 

Washington. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-The light that has 
come to me through the DAWNS and WATCH TOWER 
is such that I feel it is both a duty and a pleasure to 
write to you. The four volumes of DAWN have been 
read again during the last eight months, and a larger 
portion of God's Word has thus been studied with a 
degree of understanding and enjoyment that was never 
before possible to me. 

My prayer now is that I may be shown the work 
that the Lord has for me to do and that strength and 
courage may be given me to do it. I dare not presume 
to be a teacher, having so much yet to learn, but I try 
to let no opportunity pass of calling attention to the 
DAWNS, TOWERS, etc., and have given away some 
copies, and hope to be able to do more in this line. 

I am peculiarly hindered from meeting with the 
few who have "come out" for the purpose of serving 
God in the liberty and in the light of present truth. 
I hope that the hindrance may be overcome, and that 
I may enjoy the fellowship of those who are striving 
to serve God in spirit and in truth. May their number 
increase, both here and elsewhere. With the fervent 
wish that God will prosper you in the work you 
are doing, I close, leaving unsaid many things that I 
would like to say, for fear of taking time that might 
be more usefully spent. 

Yours in the Lord's work, C. H. FULLER. 

R2305 : page 144 

Minnesota. 
MY DEAR BROTHER:-You remember my speaking 
of an old German here whom I found just before 
starting for Allegheny, who was so loyal to the Bible 
and to Jesus? Well, I called on him the other day. 
I do not know that I ever found a happier man. He 
had found a "new Bible" and a "new God," and he 
said, "Why didn't I know this before?" He had read 
the DAWNS once and almost a second time; says he has 
been trying to serve Christ for 72 years through much 
trial, even the threatening of death at the hands of his 
own brother for leaving the church, and now he says 



he has learned more about the Bible the last few weeks 
than during all the rest of his life. Such is the testimony 
for the truth in honest humble, loyal hearts 
everywhere. Praise the Father for his Truth! 
Your brother in Christ, W. E. VANAMBURGH. 



page 145 
VOL. XIX. MAY 15, 1898. No. 10. 



CONTENTS. 



Views from the Watch Tower 147 

Ex-President Harrison's Words, etc 148 

The Truth in Foreign Fields 149 

Reform among Roman Catholics, etc 150 

Poem: Grow in Love as well as in 

Knowledge 153 

The Christian's Warfare 153 

None but Fighters Wanted in the 

Lord's Army 156 

A Fight of Faith 158 

Jesus before Pilate— "Consider Him" 159 

page 146 

SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 56-60 ARCH STREET, ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, N.Y. DRAFT, MONEY ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS: 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age or accident, or other 
adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, if they 
send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting the 
paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list 
constantly. 

THE GERMAN WATCH TOWER. 



Many of the friends of the truth are possibly not aware 
that we have an edition of the WATCH TOWER in the German 
language. It is a bi-monthly, and its columns are filled with 
selections from the English TOWER translated by the Brothers 
Koetitz and Sister Giesecke. Order sample copies free for your 



German friends, supplying postage if they reside in foreign lands. 

POEMS AND HYMNS OF DAWN. 

We have just gotten out another edition of our hymn book, 
and have filled all the accumulated back orders. All of our 
readers who have not this book should have it. It is almost 
indispensable where meetings are held and spiritual songs 
without doctrinal objections are desired. Even those who are 
alone, and those who do not sing, will surely be profited by 
reading over these grand hymns and poems. They are of wide 
selection,— many of them "good old ones." Price to TOWER 
subscribers, 50 cents each, postage prepaid; or $5.00 per doz. by 
express at purchasers' charges.— Cloth binding, 494 pages. 



R2305 : page 147 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 



RETRIBUTION seems to be a law more easily 
discerned in national than in individual 
affairs. "Some men's sins are open beforehand, going 
before to judgment; and some men they follow after" 
(1 Tim. 5:24); but, since nations will have no 
resurrection as nations, it is but justice that the reaping 
as well as the sowing should always come in "this 
present evil world [age]." 

When God foretold to Abraham Israel's bondage and 
oppression in Egypt, he added, "And also that nation 
whom they shall serve, I will judge." (Gen. 15:14.) And 
only from this standpoint of retribution can we properly 

R2306 : page 147 

understand "the plagues of Egypt." And in this 
we seem to have an illustration of a general law whose 
operation can only be clearly discerned through the 
glass of history which takes in the sweep of centuries 
—the Law of Retribution. 

A noteworthy illustration just before our eyes is 
Spain— the derelict nation. Once a queen amongst the 
nations with more possessions than they all, she to-day 
is the pauper nation of Europe, whose promises to pay 
her debts are not one-half as good as those of despised 
Turkey; while her poor, illiterate peasants and artisans 
are rioting for bread. She discovered "the new world" 
and planted her colonies upon it and held the title to 
more than one-half of it— from Washington and Oregon 
to Florida, in the United States, to Mexico, Central 
America and nearly all of South America; yet piece by 
piece she has lost it all except a few islands, and these 
will probably be lost to her within a few days. 



What was Spain's crime? Her crime was practically 
the same as that of every other nation that has 
fallen;— the same that is briefly charged by inspiration 
against Sodom: "Pride, fullness of bread and abundance 
of idleness— neither did she strengthen the hand 
of the poor and needy." (Ezek. 16:49.) Spain's prosperity 
developed pride— instead of gratitude to God, 
and realization of increased responsibility as a Steward. 
Pride begat arrogance, injustice, misrule and tyranny, 
and led to the despoiling of all who came under her 
power, for the accumulation of riches in the hands of 
her favored ones at home. This led her foreign subjects 
to hate her and to rebel against her unjust rapacity 
by which their lives and substance were drained. 
Her pride and avarice spent her wealth and the blood 
of her young men in seeking to perpetuate the oppressions 
by which she sucked to herself the wealth of 
her victims. Thus by war after war she has lost victim 
after victim, as well as her accumulated wealth, 
until to-day without national purse or national credit 
she retains nothing but her national pride— which cannot 
die because it is an integral element of the spirit 
of the Evil One. 

Yet Spain is one of Papacy's oldest, most loyal and 
devoted daughters. Has she not been such for centuries? 
While la belle France can boast of her loyalty 
as manifested in the massacre of the Huguenots, can 
not Spain boast that she persecuted Protestant heretics 
more zealously than any other nation, not even excepting 
France and Austria? Can she not claim that the 
"Holy Inquisition" was of her own invention? Yes; 
and is it not a part of a just retribution that, as France 
suffered a century ago in expiation of her national sins, 
so Spain should now suffer for hers? and Austria for 
hers? 

Not only Christians who refused to worship the 
Man of Sin suffered at the hands of Spain, but the natural 
Israelites also. Spain was their bitterest foe who 
first persecuted them and expelled them. The histories 
of Holland, the Netherlands, Mexico and Peru all 

R2306 : page 148 

tell the tale that the spirit which centuries of Papal inculcation 

developed was an evil spirit, a devilish spirit; 

the very reverse of the spirit of Christ. And the fact 

that two-thirds of Spain's population are unable to read 

or write (according to their own published statements 

—which their pride would not lead them to overstate) 

is also properly chargeable to the blinding influences 

of Antichrist. 

Draper some forty years ago, dealing with Spain's 
crimes in Mexico, Peru and Central America, wrote 
in his— 

"INTELLECTUAL DEVELOPMENT OF EUROPE." 



"It was one unspeakable outrage, one unutterable 
ruin, without discrimination of age or sex. Those who 
died not under the lash in a tropical sun died in the 
darkness of the mine. From sequestered sand banks, 
where the red flamingo fishes in the gray of the morning; 
from fever-stricken mangrove thickets and the 
gloom of impenetrable forests; from hiding places in 
the clefts of rocks and the solitude of invisible caves; 
from the eternal snows of the Andes, where there was 
no witness but the all-seeing sun, there went up to God 
a cry of human despair. By millions upon millions, 
whole races and nations were remorselessly cut off. 
"The bishop of Chiapa [Roman Catholic] affirms 
that more than 15,000,000 were exterminated in his 
time. From Mexico and Peru a civilization that might 
have instructed Europe was crushed out. Is it for 
nothing that Spain has been made a hideous skeleton 
among living nations, a warning spectacle to the world? 
Had not her punishment overtaken her, men would 
have surely said, 'There is no retribution; there is no 
God.' It has been her evil destiny to ruin two civilizations, 
oriental and occidental, and to be ruined thereby 
herself. With circumstances of dreadful barbarity 
she expelled the Moors, who had become children of 
her soil by as long a residence as the Normans have 
had in England, from William the Conqueror to our 
time. In America she destroyed races more civilized 
than herself. Expulsion and emigration have deprived 
her of her best blood, her great cities have sunk into 
insignificance and towns that once had more than a 
million of inhabitants can now only show a few scanty 
thousands." 
The Poet Byron, long ago, wrote: ~ 
"Ye who would more of Spain and Spaniards know, 

Go read whate'er is writ in bloodiest strife, 
Whate'er keen vengeance urged on foreign foe 

Can act, is acting there against man's life. 
From flashing scimetar to secret knife, 

War moldeth there each weapon to his need, 
So he may guard the sister and the wife, 

So he may make each cursed oppressor bleed, 

So may such foes deserve the most remorseless deed!" 
The inspired words: "God resisteth the proud but 
showeth his favor to the humble," and "Pride goeth 
before destruction and a haughty spirit before a fall," 
are evidently as true of nations, as of individuals, tho 
specially applied to Christians. And while the Lord's 
people cannot take vengeance, nor join in the strife, 
nor even permit vengeful thoughts to find lodgment 
in their hearts; while they must on the contrary feel 
pity for the poor, ignorant, proud, sin-ruled and blinded 
people, and must long for the time to come when 
they as well as other peoples shall be blessed with a 



knowledge of the truth, and with all the gracious helps 
which the Millennial Kingdom will bring; nevertheless, 
it is our duty to take note of the various manifestations 
of divine vengeance,— the recompenses of 
Justice; and to sympathize with these and thus learn 
to apply our hearts unto wisdom;— the wisdom which 
cometh from above, which is first pure, then peaceable, 
easy to be entreated and full of mercy and good works. 

EX-PRESIDENT HARRISON'S WORDS. 



Referring to the present unsought and undesired 
war he recently said:— 

"We do not say that we have God's commission 
to deliver the oppressed the world around. To the 
distant Armenians we could send only the succor of a 
faith that overcomes death and the alleviations which 
the nurse and the commissary can give. But the oppressed 
Cubans and their starving women and children 
are knocking at our doors: their cries penetrate our 
slumbers. They are closely within what we have defined 
to be the sphere of American influence. We have 
said: 'Look to us, not to Europe,' and we cannot shrink 
from the responsibility and the dangers of this old and 
settled American policy. 

"We have, as a nation, towards Cuba, the same 
high commission which every brave-hearted man has 
to strike down the ruffian who in his presence beats a 
woman or child and will not desist. For what, if not 
for this, does God make a man or a nation strong?" 

While the people of the United States have favored 
war from a purely humanitarian standpoint, and not 
from a desire for combat nor for the acquisition of territory, 
yet we can see clearly that the success of the 
right, in which we rejoice, will have its dangers, which 
will be proportionate with the quickness and the brilliancy 
of the victories. 

Pride has a controlling influence in the hearts of 
the world in general— except the "saints," and even 
in these it is not wholly eradicated. True, the pride 
which grows under the greater light of a higher civilization 
and religious freedom is less rank than the 
Spanish article and more amenable to reason; yet success 
in the present war will develop this evil plant wonderfully: 
so that people who resisted the present war 
to the last notch and then yielded only for the sake of 
justice and humanity will, if the navy meets with great 
success, feel much more than before like brushing with 
other navies "to demonstrate American superiority." 
So there is no knowing to what the intoxication of 
success may lead. 

R2306 : page 149 



One result seems clear now— that Cuba will not 
be given her independence, as was the wish of the majority 
of the people at the outbreak of the war. By 
the time the war is ended and order restored in Cuba, 
Sugar Trust and Tobacco Trust and various wealthy 
citizens and officials will have purchased large holdings 
of property in Cuba; and some sort of a United States 
protectorate or control will be deemed essential. Indeed, 
it is doubtful if the poor people who constitute 
the vast majority of its population are capable of establishing 
a safe and stable government there. 

The duty of God's people, if they speak at all on 
the subject of the war, is found in the Apostle's words: 
"Let your moderation be known unto all men." God's 
people must not only cultivate the spirit of love, peace 
and good will toward all men, but their words should 
be along the same lines— not stirring up strife and anger 
and malice. We all must be "peace-makers" if 
we would be blessed as sons of God. 

R2307 : page 149 

"EAT HER FLESH AND BURN HER WITH FIRE." 

-REV. 17:16.- 

Roman Catholic sympathy is strongly with Spain; 
because she is the most intensely papal kingdom of 
earth. Their argument is that Spain owns Cuba and 
has a right, therefore, to drain its wealth to her treasury 
and to murder all of its population, if they defend 
themselves and resist her tax -pillaging. They blind 
themselves to the fact that Cuba belongs to the people 
of Cuba, and that no nation can claim the slightest 
right of justice to govern a colony or to take any revenues 
therefrom except as a reasonable, just recompense 
is made in the way of protection of their personal 
liberties by good government. While Great Britain's 
rule is by no means perfect, it at least recognizes and 
makes an attempt to follow these lines of justice: and 
as a result her colonies regard her as a mother and 
protector, rather than as whipped slaves regard a merciless 
master. 

But there is another side to this question. One 
century ago France passed through her terrible revolution, 
one result of which was the confiscation of the 
immense wealth of the Roman Catholic Church, accumulated 
during centuries. Later, Italy passed through 
a similar but lesser revolution and similarly degraded 
papal power and influence and confiscated much of 
Papacy's property. Now it looks as though the time 
were at hand for Spain to do the same— and later perhaps 
Austria. 

Telegraphic reports say that the newspaper organ 
of the Vatican already mistrusts the Spaniards and advises 
those having such matters in charge to "take 



measures with all speed, whereby the title to that property 
and the usufruct of it would be secured,— by its 
timely transfer to trustworthy private individuals." 
The reason assigned is that further reverses in the war 
will lead to the closing of the convents and monasteries 
and their confiscation and the sale of the Church's estates 
for uses of the government. 

Roman Catholics have been blind and unreasoning 
for a long time; but they are waking up. They 
begin to see that the prayer of the pope and the clergy 
for their success means a curse, and that heavenly 
blessings pronounced upon their naval vessels presage 
disastrous defeat. The ignorant two-thirds of that 
nation which can neither read nor write can reason so 
simple a problem as this,— that the so-called infallible 
"Lord God the Pope" has little wisdom and little power 
in respect to earthly affairs: and correspondingly they 
will lose confidence in his ability to unlock Purgatory 
and Heaven to Catholics and to lock up Protestant 
"heretics" in Hell. 

"God moves in a mysterious way, his wonders to 
perform;" and we shall not be surprised to see a revolution 
in Spain which will roll back from that people 
and from other peoples several centuries' growth of 
superstition. The whole world is witness that all of 
earth's governments are "beastly"— none of them 
more than base counterfeits of the Kingdom of God, 
yet their prosperity is proportionate to their recognition 
of the liberty wherewith Christ makes free— proportionate 
to the liberty of God's Word— proportionate 
to the numbers of the "salt of the earth," God's holy 
ones, the elect Church, and their freedom. 

We sympathize with the thousands of poor people 
in Italy and Spain who are rioting for bread, occasioning 
a greater number of deaths and wounds than the 
Spanish-American war thus far; we sympathize with 
the poor of France not quite so badly off; we sympathize 
with the politically troubled masses of Austro-Hungary 
in the trouble threatening them. But we 
fully believe that these lessons and experiences are 
needful to mankind. It is a blessed thing to have a God 
who is too wise to err, too just to be unkind. It is a 
blessing to know through his Word of the rich provisions 
of his grace for his elect Church, and for all the 
families of the earth through her. And it is a blessed 
thing to have faith in God not only as respects our own 
personal affairs, but also as respects the affairs of nations. 
And it is profitable for us to trace his providences 
so far as we may be able— trusting him where 
we cannot trace him. 

THE TRUTH IN FOREIGN FIELDS. 



As we write, we bid Goodbye to a dear brother 



who starts for his native land, Hungary, to tell the 
good tidings to his countrymen. A professor for years 
in the schools of his native land, he is well educated in 

R2307 : page 150 

Latin and German as well as Hungarian, and we trust 
that he may be used of the Lord to find and to seal 
some of the elect. 

He was a Roman Catholic, but his studies soon 
led him out of that into Agnosticism, and he became 
an ardent advocate of Darwinism and thought that the 
sum of knowledge. But the deeper he drank of the 
Pierian spring the more he saw that science so-called 
is chiefly conjecture, hypothesis, guess-work; until he 
concluded with the Brahmins and Theosophists that the 
sum of learning and of thought is so unsatisfactory 
that the most happifying condition would be that 
finally conscious existence would cease. 

Next he became interested in a kind of Social uplift 
for his people, and started an agricultural colony in 
Canada. It was while so engaged that he obtained 
through one of the colonists MILLENNIAL DAWN in 
German. He read at first skeptically, noting his objections 
on the margins of the pages. But soon he 
found a consistency and order in the divine plan which 
withstood the attacks of logic in a manner that nothing 
else ever did. He read the volumes a second time, 
and was obliged to erase his criticisms one after another 
as he became more and more enlightened by the truth. 
After reading some portions for a fourth and fifth time 
he is so full of the truth and its spirit that he is 
ready to lay down his life if need be in its service. 

Because he foresaw its approaching trouble, he 
left Hungary that he might seek peace and personal 
safety. Now all the more convinced from the "more 
sure word of prophecy" that the trouble impends, he 
courageously returns to do what he can for God's people 
there— to seal them in their foreheads with present 
truth before the great time of trouble breaks. Let us 
all join our petitions that the divine blessing may go 
with him and attend and use his efforts. 

While we write, a shipment of DAWNS and tracts 
of nearly six hundred pounds goes to China, to a 
brother, a missionary there, who has recently become 
interested in the harvest message and who believes that 
he sees opportunities for some of the elect to be sealed 
in that far off land. While all this is encouraging, it 
has also a sad feature: for each one who now comes 
fully into the light of present truth implies that some 
other one once sealed and accepted of the Lord has 
failed to keep his covenant and is being rejected, and 
his crown apportioned and his place in the race for the 
Kingdom given to another. Let us each remember 
the Master's words, "Take heed, let no man take thy 
crown."-See Rev. 3:11; MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOL. 



III., pages 225 and 363. 
REFORM MOVEMENT AMONGST ROMAN CATHOLICS. 



Although Roman Catholicism never parades its 
difficulties, but seeks to quietly but forcibly crush 
and extinguish any movement among its priests 
or people toward liberty, nevertheless sufficient leaks 
out to prove that such movements are general;— in 
Poland, in France, in Italy and amongst recently arrived 
foreigners in these United States. 

We called attention some time ago to the movement 
amongst the Polish Catholics of Buffalo, N. Y., and 
Cleveland, O., and recently we learn of similar movements 
in Chicago, 111., and near McKeesport, Pa. In the 
latter place the leader sought counsel of the Baptists, 
Methodists and other Protestant sects, and was much 
surprised to find that there is really so little difference 
between the beliefs, etc., of these and the Roman Catholic 
theories, doctrines and methods. He exclaimed— All 
Catholics! But when Brother Williams met him 
and explained to him the plan of the ages it seemed 
to appeal to him directly, and we are informed that he 
has already begun teaching the truth to his fellow dissenters 
(about forty in number) in the Slavic language. 
Near Chicago our very earnest Brother Oleszynski, 
himself a Polander converted from Romanism, is also 
doing a good work; he has interested and continues to 
weekly instruct a class of about fifteen, a number of 
whom were recently baptized in symbol of full consecration 
to the Lord, even unto death. 

A Protestant missionary laboring in Poland has 
recently been reached by "present truth" through 
Sister Giesecke, who, as the representative of our Society, 
is doing a good work in Germany. He bids fair to be 
a chosen instrument of God for handing the "meat in 
due season" to some in Poland. 

Brother Adolph Weber is doing an efficient work 
amongst the French in Switzerland and France. His 
heart is in the work and the Lord is blessing him, and 
through him blessings are reaching others. He reports 
increasing interest in and demand for French tracts 
and DAWN, VOL. I., which he translated and our Society 
published there under his supervision. Let us, 
when at the throne of grace, remember not only the 
Home Missions (in which all of us have the privilege 
of sharing), but let us remember also these laborers in 
foreign fields. 

Is it not very evident that so far from its being a 
favor or compliment to the Lord that we should believe 
and receive and confess him and his Word, it is a compliment 
or favor on his part that we have the opportunity? 
"Blessed are your eyes for they see and your 
ears for they hear; for verily I say unto you many 



prophets and righteous persons [of the past] have desired 
to see and understand these things [present truth] 
and have not seen and heard them." Whoever thinks 
himself safe in slacking his race for the great prize, 
because in comparing himself with other formal and 

R2308 :page 151 

nominal Christians he feels himself their equal or their 
superior, should remember also that the self-satisfied 
feeling of the Pharisees, the professed holiness people 
of the Jewish "harvest," was rebuked by our Lord, 
when he said, "Think not to say within yourselves, We 
have Abraham to our father [and hence could not miss 
inheriting the Kingdom of Heaven promised to the 
children of Abraham]; for I say unto you that God is 
able out of these stones to raise up children unto 
Abraham." 

So now, the fact that we have been favored with 
the knowledge of the truth does not insure that we 
will be heirs of the Kingdom. God no doubt knows of 
thousands of honest-hearted people, now steeped in gross 
ignorance and superstition, who would promptly respond 
with their whole hearts if the veil of ignorance 
were lifted so that the light of present truth could 
shine into their hearts. We firmly believe, not only 
that the crowns are limited in number, but that (as 
shown in DAWN, VOL. III.) we are living in the time 
when they are all apportioned, and hence that it is only 
as some "draw back" from the fulfilment of their covenant 
of self sacrifice that the opportunity of "striving" 
and "running" for a crown can be offered. 
Hence the force of our Lord's words, "Hold that fast 
which thou hast, that no man take thy crown." Only 
our own conduct can forfeit our title to a crown after 
it has once been reckonedly set apart for us. 

Let us each therefore beware lest he lose his own 
title to a crown: let each guard against the slightest 
diminution of the Lord's spirit in his own heart and 
life— the spirit of love. Loss of this spirit means (1) 
a loss of love toward God which will manifest itself in 
decrease of zeal and energy in his service and in a loss 
of fellowship with him in the study of his Word and 
in prayer. On the contrary these should continually 
increase with our growing knowledge. (2) It means 
a loss of interest in the Brethren of Christ— the "members 
of his body;"— less desire for their company and 
their fellowship, and an inclination to weigh and estimate 
their worth according to earthly scales of wealth 
and education and social qualities, rather than according 
to the divine balances— which judge them by their 
honesty of purpose and loyalty to God and his Word, 
and their efforts to bring every word and act of life into 
strict conformity thereto. (3) Faith in the Lord's 
providence will dim, and the inclination will more and 
more be to think and speak and act according to human 



judgment regardless of the Word. 

Whoever may upon examination find any of these 
symptoms of spiritual disease should lose no time in 
taking the medicine made and provided by the Great 
Physician. 

As an indication of a revolt against Rome in France 
we quote as follows from The Christian World:— 

"The movement for reform in French Catholicism, 
which has already been noticed in these columns, 
continues to develop remarkable features. The first 
number of Le Chretien Francais, the organ of the party, 
contains a confession of faith by a priest, M. Philippot, 
in response to a demand from his bishop, before whom 
he had been accused of heresy. M. Philippot, it may 
be said, has since left the Church. In his confession, 
after recounting his ardent faith in what we might 
term the great evangelical verities, M. Philippot 
continues:— 

'"The Roman Church is not the universal Church; 
it is only the most important part of it. The apostles 
and first missionaries established churches that were 
independent of each other, united solely by love and 
the faith of Jesus Christ. The Papacy is a human institution, 
and to-day as then, all the churches are equal 
before the gospel. To refuse the name of Christians 
to 250 millions of human beings who believe in Jesus 
Christ is a blasphemy. Salvation is found in all the 
churches if the life is placed in harmony with the 
teachings of Christ; and damnation in all of them if 
the life is contrary to Christ.' 

"In the Paris L'Eclair an article appeared some 
time ago describing the attitude of the new party 
amongst the priests:— 

'"According to them the old Roman dogma is 
rotten. It lives only by intrigue and compromise. A 
return is necessary, say these Neo-Catholics, to the first 
age, to the Apostolic teaching. Christ did not institute 
any visible Church. The apostles did not found 
a Church, but churches independent of each other. 
Sacerdotal pride has usurped the place of Christ. True 
Christianity can only triumph by the vanquishment of 
sacerdotalism.' 

"M. Bourrier, an ex-cure of Marseilles, who has 
just entered the French Reformed Church, at a conference 
of Protestant pastors, in which he was asked 
whether he came to them 'willingly, gladly, and without 
arriere-pensee,' made the following candid and noble 
reply, which touched all hearts:— 

'"I am thankful for the cordial welcome which 
the French Reformed Church has extended to me and 
for the hospitality it promises. But I am and always 
shall be an exile. Like all exiles, my gaze will be 
ceaselessly turned towards the fatherland, and my 
dearest desire will be for the day when I shall be able 
to return to the Catholic Church; for the day when it 
will be sufficiently evangelized to recognize in me a 



son worthy of her, and to respect the liberty of my 
conscience.' 

"It is pleasant to find that the French Protestants 
recognize perfectly the sincerity and straightforwardness 

R2308 : page 152 

of this attitude. They do not desire to make 
proselytes, but rather to see the real truth of the gospel 
spreading amongst their Catholic neighbors. In an 
address to French Catholics, M. Philippot asks them 
whether they understand that 'Your priests, those 
who have charge of your souls and who form the minds 
of your children, are condemned by Papal absolution to 
choose between two alternatives— either to preach a lie 
or to ruin their career.' 

"It is evident that French Catholicism is at the 
beginning of a movement of most portentous import, 
not only to France, but to the whole Catholic world." 

LEOPARD-LIKE SPOTTED.-REV. 13:2. 



Papacy is the most crafty and guileful institution 
on earth. Chameleon-like it adapts itself to its surroundings. 
In Mexico and South America it flourishes 
at the expense of the ignorance and superstitions 
of the poor benighted ones who purchase indulgences 
for past sins before starting on a fresh debauch, and 
whose profitable ignorance they make no attempt to 
remove. In the United States they build and maintain 
colleges and parochial schools and pose as the sincere 
friends of education to gain a standing and attract 
wealth and public funds. They offer no explanation 
of the fact that almost all the ignorant and degraded of 
our population are from countries and families where 
Romish superstition has ruled for centuries and where 
practically no effort is made to remove it. 

A notable illustration of the spottedness of Papacy 
is found in the fact that while the Bishops and priests 
in Spain are violent agitators against the United States 
as a Protestant nation— promising prayers for and blessings 
upon the Spanish soldiers and ships that would 
destroy the Protestants, yet when a priest in New 
York State voiced the same sentiment, he was promptly 
relieved of his congregation. Yet he merely said 
that American Catholics could not fight against Spain; 
—because with all its pride and cruelty and ignorance 
and superstition, it is most solidly Roman Catholic. 
Rome knows that she must hold her freer American 
"children" with a light and chiefly American tether. 

Again, Archbishop Keane recently consented to 
serve as one of the Vice-Presidents of a Salvation Army 
meeting, to welcome "General Booth" to the city 
of St. Louis. In his letter of acceptance he wished 



the army "godspeed." 

It is needless to say that this was done merely for 
effect— to deceive the Protestants;— it does not deceive 
the Roman Catholics who well know the Jesuit law 
that, "The end justifies the means." And they would 
consider commendable any deception of word or act 
that would serve the ends of the Roman Church. 
Contrast this with the treatment the "Salvation Army" 
or any other Protestants would receive in any city of 
Spanish America, where no form of Protestantism is 
tolerated, and where it is no uncommon thing for a 
Protestant to be chased and stoned for not uncovering 
his head and falling on his knees and in the dusty 
streets in veneration of the "host" when it is carried 
through the streets by the papal clergy. 

Romanists are in no danger of being deceived by 
Archbishop Keane's course, because they are thoroughly 
informed by their Catechism, that all Protestants 
are "heretics." We quote from the Deharbe's Catechism 
of The Catholic Publication Society, New York, 
as follows (page 145):— 

"Everyone is obliged, under pain of eternal damnation, 
to become a member of the Catholic Church, 
to believe her doctrine, to use her means of grace, and 
to submit to her authority." "Whoever is separated 
from the Catholic Church, however commendable in 
his own opinion his life may be, he shall for this very 
reason, that he is at the same time separated from the 
Unity of Christ, not see life, but the wrath of God abideth 
on him." "Hence, the Catholic Church is justly 
called the only saving Church. To despise her is the 
same as to despise Christ; viz., his doctrine, his means 
of grace, his powers; to separate from her is the same 
as to separate from Christ, and to forfeit eternal 
salvation." 

A slight provision is made for "heretics" who are 
such from ignorance. These it saves from eternal torments 
and merely puts into Purgatory where, however, 
these will suffer long, because not benefitting 
by the "indulgences," "Masses," "Prayers," "holy 
water," "Extreme Unction," etc., as all Catholics are 
benefitted, however wicked. 

ROMANISM STEADILY PROGRESSING IN GREAT BRITAIN. 



Last summer a petition signed by 40,000 English 
and Welsh Episcopaleans was presented to Lord Salisbury, 
complaining that the Premier's appointments of 

R2309 : page 152 

bishops in the Church of England favored men of Romish 
tendency— ritualists. The petition was in pamphlet 
form and set forth that out of thirty-three nominations 



thirty have been ritualists. 

Now it is proposed to elevate the Roman Cardinal 
Vaughan to a seat in the House of Lords— as a Lord 
Bishop. 

All this is, of course, none of our business, but it 
shows the tendency of our day, and is preparing the 
way for the rolling together of the heaven— Protestant 
and Roman Catholic— in the near future.— Matt. 24:29; 
Rev. 6:14; Isa. 34:4; DAWN, VOL. IV., Chap. 12. 

R2297 : page 153 

GROW IN LOVE, AS WELL AS IN KNOWLEDGE. 

"Knowledge puffeth up, but Love edifieth."— 1 Cor. 8:1. 

How blest this day the prophets were foretelling, 

When truth should speak and knowledge be increased; 
The signs are all about, our faith compelling, 
That days of waiting for the Lord have ceased. 
The saints are in their foreheads sealed, 
The hidden mystery revealed. 
Knowing what other ages did not see, 
How full of humble love our hearts should be! 

The mystery and knowledge understanding, 

We still need love— "the bond of perfectness." 
Tho tongues of men or angels now commanding, 
They teach and speak not with effectiveness 
Unless pure love to God dictates 
And all the being permeates. 
Without this love, God says, all words shall pass 
Like tinkling cymbals or like sounding brass. 

While, by God's will, in knowledge we keep growing, 

Keep in the love of God which death defies; 
Knowledge puffs up except the love be glowing,— 
In humbleness of mind love edifies. 
Love is long-suffering and kind, 
Love seeketh not her own to find. 
The mind through all God's Word this truth descries: 
Mere knowledge puffeth up; Love edifies. 
-F. I. PARMENTER. 



R2309 : page 153 

THE CHRISTIAN'S WARFARE. 



"Fight the good fight of faith; lay 
hold on eternal life."— 1 Tim. 6:12. 

WHILE the followers of Christ are to be peacemakers, 



and are instructed accordingly to 
"follow peace with all men," nevertheless, they are 
the greatest warriors the world has ever known, on 
the principle that "he that ruleth his own spirit is 
greater than he that taketh a city." But, there are 
good fights and bad fights. A good fight is one which 
is in the interest of that which is good, that which is 
true, noble, pure, godly— a battle for righteousness; 
every other contest is a bad fight, for an unworthy 
cause. 

But who are these fighters, referred to in our text, 
whom the Apostle Paul calls upon to fight a good 
fight? Does he call upon all men? or upon sinners? 
or upon merely nominal Christians? We answer, No; 
he addressed only the brigade of the "King's Own"— 
the body of Christ, the consecrated Church. The Apostle 
addresses these as the mouthpiece of our Captain of 
salvation, Christ Jesus, and it would be wholly out of 
order for a general or captain to issue orders to those 
who had not joined his army, and did not recognize 
his authority. Hence it is evident that the world in 
general is not addressed, and that nominal Christians 
who have never made a covenant with the Lord are 
not addressed. "The Lord knoweth them that are 
his." It is to these that the instructions come respecting 
the fight that is now on— that has been in progress 
since the Captain of our salvation began the war nearly 
nineteen centuries ago. 

For whom do we fight— for God— for Christ? No, 
we answer. We fight for ourselves. A great mistake 
is made on this point by many who seem to imagine 
that fighting the good fight of faith is doing something 
for God, and deserves his thanks and reward. The Almighty 
God does not need that we should fight for him. 
He is omnipotent, abundantly able to take care of himself 
and his cause; he needs not our puny efforts. 
The claim that we are fighting for God would be as inconsistent 
as for the Cubans to say that they are fighting 
for the United States. It is the United States that 
is fighting for the relief of the Cubans. So it is God 
who is fighting for us, and assisting and encouraging 
us to fight the good fight of faith, on our own behalf. 
It is well that this feature of the case should be clearly 
discerned. 

Against whom do we fight? We answer, our 
battle is not against our fellow creatures nor with carnal 
weapons; indeed, we can have large sympathy for 
even our most relentless foes, who, to the extent that 
modern civilization will permit, are ready and willing 
to despitefully use and persecute us, and to say all 
manner of evil against us falsely. We can readily see 
that they are blinded in considerable measure, either 
by their own prejudice and passion, or by the great 
Adversary's delusive false doctrines, superstitions, etc.; 
hence our warfare is not directed against these, and as 
we have opportunity we are to seek to do them good, 



"in meekness instructing those that oppose themselves." 
(2 Tim. 2:25.) Hence also, when dealing 
with these, so far from battling with them and resisting 
evil with evil, our Captain has commanded that we 
return good for evil, gentleness for rudeness, kindness 
for discourtesy; and that we seek to do good to those 
who speak evil of us and persecute us, that thus the 
eyes of their understanding may be opened, and that 
they may discern that there is such a thing as the 
spirit of love, generosity, kindness, whereas they suppose 
all to be actuated by the same malevolent spirit of 
selfishness, which controls themselves. 

Our fight is to be against Sin— the great taskmaster, 
which captured our race in the person of 
father Adam, and has held it as slaves from then till 
now— paying regularly for six thousand years the terrible 
penalty of death, with all its concomitants of 

R2309 : page 154 

sickness, pain, sorrow and trouble. Yes, this is our 
enemy. 

Indirectly, Satan is our enemy, because he it was 
through whose influence father Adam first became 
the slave of Sin; and Satan has still pursued the 
same course, and is even now endeavoring to bring us 
back again under the dominion of Sin, and to hold us 
there. We are not to forget, however, that our battle 
is not directly with Satan, nor are we to bring against 
him "a railing accusation" (Jude 9); rather, we are to 
say, with Michael, "the Lord rebuke thee;" and we 
are to await the Lord's time and the Lord's way for 
rebuking Satan. Nevertheless, we are to resist Satan; 
that is we are to resist his influence and deceptions and 
endeavors to mislead us into error and into sin. 

The Lord instructs us that "We wrestle not with 
flesh and blood, but with principalities and powers, 
and with spiritual wickedness in exalted positions." 
(Eph. 6:12.) Satan, as the great master or general 
of Sin, has largely to do with all the various influences 
with which we must battle. It is his cunning, his 
"wiles," that supervise the battle against us, and 
since he is a spirit being, and therefore much more 
intelligent than ourselves, the contest would be a very 
unequal one, if we were without an equally powerful 
spirit leader. But we are not thus left helpless to battle 
against superior wisdom and cunning. Our chief 
Captain, the Lord Jesus, has conquered sin, and has 
been glorified, and he is on our part, so that with 
the Apostle, we can confidently say, "Greater is 
he that is on our part than all they that be against us" 
—Satan and his cohorts of evil spirits, and his deluded 
earthly agents and servants. 

The Apostle seems to sum up the agencies through 
which our great captor Sin seeks to hold us his slaves, 
or if we have gotten free to regain his influence over 



us, as three— the world, the flesh, the devil. We have 

seen the powerful influence of the devil, as the great 

chief general of Sin. We next notice in what sense 

the world is our opponent, and in what sense we are to 

battle against it. We have just seen that we do not 

battle with carnal weapons, nor do we in any sense 

of the word battle or contest with our fellow-creatures, 

seeing that they are blinded by the adversary, and 

really little, if any, accountable for their course; our 

battle is not to be with these. It is with "the spirit 

of the world," its influence, that we are to do battle: 

it is to be fought against and resisted— the world's disposition, 

the mind of the world, the motives which 

actuate the world, the ambitions of the world, the pride 

of life and the deceitfulness of riches— these things, 

these wrong views of matters as seen from the worldly 

standpoint, we are to resist, to fight against;— and it 

is a daily battle. 

Finally, our battle is with the flesh— our own 
flesh. Ever since sin captured our race, in the 
person of father Adam, its slavery has been conducive 
to mental, moral and physical degradation. Its only 
tendency is towards evil, and that continually, and 
only as we get rid of the blinding influences, and perverted 
tastes and desires, ambitions and hopes and loves 
which sin cultivates— only in that proportion do we get 
to see matters in their true light, and to have even a 
faint glimpse of our own degraded condition. But our 
great Captain, who is also "the chief priest of our profession," 
redeemed us from this slavery to sin, with 
his own precious blood. He had compassion upon us, 
and when we realized our deplorable condition, and 
accepted his aid he sets us free from the yoke of Sin's 
slavery. 

But we still have the motions of sin in our bodies, 
—the tendencies toward sin, which have become almost 
second nature to us, through the long period of nearly 
six thousand years of slavery. So that while we are 
now free, and with the mind are serving the law of 
Christ, and are accepted into his army as soldiers of 
the cross, to battle for righteousness and truth and 
goodness and purity, we nevertheless find our new 
selves harassed by the old perverted tastes and inclinations 
of our own flesh, toward the service of the old 
taskmaster. Not the least of our fightings, therefore, 
as new creatures in Christ Jesus, is against these perverted 
tendencies of our flesh, and the battle with these 
is a daily battle. With the Apostle Paul, one of the 
great soldiers in our war, we should be able to say, "I 
keep my body [my flesh and its desires] under [in 
subjection to my new will, my new self] lest after having 
preached to others I myself should be a castaway." 
-1 Cor. 9:27. 

From the time that we enlist under the banner 
of our Captain, that is, from the time that we make a 
full consecration to him, to fight the good fight, and 



to lay down our lives in his service— from that moment 
on he, under the terms of the New Covenant, reckons 
our flesh as dead: because our minds are renewed— 
alive toward God with a newness of life, and hence those 

R2310 :page 154 

motions of sin which we are seeking to bring into absolute 
subjection to the will of God in Christ, are not recognized 
by the Lord as the will or motions of the new 
creature, enlisted in his service, but merely recognized 
as a part of the general enemy, Sin, pursuing after 
and battling with us, which we are pledged to resist 
and to war against, and which he promises grace and 
help to overcome. 

It is these enemies in our own flesh which cause 
us the greatest difficulties. It is these that Satan appeals 
to: these he seeks to encourage in their warfare 
against the new spirit of our minds; it is through 

R2310 :page 155 

these that the spirit of the world gains closest approach 
to us, and seeks to capture us, and lead us back as 
slaves of Sin. So to speak, the "new creature in 
Christ is beset, surrounded on every hand with enemies, 
seeking our disaster and reenslavement. We must 
battle— battle for ourselves, battle for our own liberty, 
battle for victory over our own weaknesses, battle 
against the spirit of the world, battle against delusions 
and snares of the adversary, by which he would seek 
to make the evil things appear good, and right to appear 
undesirable. No wonder, then, that the Christian 
soldier is urged to be continually watchful; no wonder 
that he is urged to "put on the whole armor of God;" 
no wonder that he is cautioned in respect to his various 
and wily foes, and especially against those of his own 
flesh. 

Thanks be to God for the great Captain of our salvation. 
Thanks be to God for the great armory of his 
Word, from which we obtain the helmet of salvation, 
the intellectual knowledge to protect us from the delusions 
of our own perverted sense and ignorance, and 
from the wiles of the adversary. Thanks be to God 
also for the breastplate of righteousness, the merit of 
Christ and his great sacrifice, compensating for our 
imperfections, and covering our vitals, and securing 
thereby our life— eternal life. Thanks be to God also 
for the shield of faith, of trust, of confidence in him 
who has bought us, in realization that he who has begun 
the good work in us is able and willing also to 
complete it; for the realization that since God so loved 
us while we were yet the slaves of Sin, and redeemed 
us from his bondage with the precious blood of Christ, 
much more does he now love us and much more is he 
prepared to aid us now that we have, by his grace, become 



free from sin, and become the servant of righteousness. 
Thanks be to God also for the sandals, the 
preparation to endure hardness patiently, which the 
truth gives, protecting us for the walks of life from the 
sharp animosities of the world in our pilgrim journey. 
Thanks be to God also for the sword of the spirit, the 
Word of his truth, as a defense by which we can resist 
the adversary, and come off conquerors through him 
who loved us and bought us. 

BENEFACTORS ALSO-FIGHTING FOR OTHERS. 



We have seen that our fighting is on our own behalf, 
and on behalf of each other. We are fighting to 
the death in self-defense, to maintain our own liberty, 
and that of each other. As the Apostle says, "Ye 
have not yet resisted unto blood [death], fighting 
against Sin"— we ought also to lay down our lives 
for the brethren." And we might add that, while the 
King does not need our fighting on his behalf, nevertheless 
we sometimes have great pleasure and profit in 
defending the honor of his name and the majesty of 
his righteous government from the assaults of those 
who wickedly or blindly misrepresent the same. But 
there is another feature of our warfare aside from all 
these. To observe this feature with clearness and distinctness, 
we must take an elevated position and note 
the entire trend of the conflict now in progress for over 
eighteen centuries, and the great object which the 
King himself has declared shall be the result of this 
battle. It is this:— 

Not only we, but the whole world were "sold under 
Sin" by father Adam— the whole world, as well as 
we, are slaves of Sin. Not only so, but our great Redeemer 
who bought us with his precious blood gave it 
as the propitiation price also "for the sins of the whole 
world." Thus he bought the right, not only to release 
us (his Church, his army) but the right also to release 
from the power of Sin, the great taskmaster, all the 
slaves of Sin. And altho he has not been prosecuting 
the work of releasing all the slaves at the present time, 
but has been confining his work to the releasing of a 
few, a little flock, who are now of his army, nevertheless 
he informs us that this present election of the little 
flock is merely with the intention of using these as 
his associates and joint-heirs in his Kingdom which he 
will establish at the time he is ready to take his great 
power and reign, for the utter overthrow of Sin, and 
the complete release of all from its bondage. 

The Apostle Paul, one of the lieutenants under 
our great Captain, speaks of this coming deliverance 
of the world, saying, "The whole creation groaneth 
and travaileth in pain together until now [under the 
relentless slavery of Sin, and its yoke of death], waiting 



for the manifestation of the sons of God. Because 
the creature itself also [the world of mankind, or as 
many of them as will accept the liberty] shall be delivered 
from the bondage of corruption [the bondage 
of death, with all its incidentals of pain, sorrow and 
trouble] into the glorious liberty of the children of God 
[the perfection of life, and all the glorious privileges 
which belong to the perfect sons of God on every plane 
—the divine, the angelic, and the human]."— 
Rom. 8:19,21,22. 

We see then, that the poor world, groaning in its 
slavery, has been waiting for this grand event of which 
the Apostle spoke, saying, "Yet a little while, and he 
that shall come will come, and will not tarry." The 
interim between the redemption and the deliverance is 
only a little while, from the standpoint of divine reckoning, 
in which a thousand years are as one day; but 
as yesterday, as a watch in the night. From this standpoint, 
the nearly nineteen centuries for the selection 
of the King's Own are but "a little while"— less than 
two days "with the Lord,"— and soon will be past. 

R2310 :page 156 

Then, glorified with their Master and Captain, they 
will be liberators with him of the world of mankind, 
from the yoke of sin and the prison of death. (This 
period of two days (2000 years) seems to be hinted also 
in the type of Rebecca's call to be the bride of the typical 
Isaac, where only two days are mentioned.— Gen. 24.) 

What a glorious prospect, what a benevolent ambition 
is thus set before us in the Gospel, in respect to 
the future work of all who are now called to be the 
sons of God, joint-heirs with Jesus Christ, and good 
soldiers in his cause,— the cause of righteousness and 
truth. O, how anxious we are that we shall be 
"overcomers," that we may inherit these blessed privileges 
—secure this great boon of association with our 
Redeemer in his work of blessing all the families of 
the earth. 

It was respecting this great work of delivering the 
world from the slavery of Sin, from the weaknesses 
and imperfections of the fallen nature, and from the 
prisonhouse of the tomb, that our Master referred, 
when quoting the prophecy relative to himself, which 
says, "The spirit of the Lord God is upon me, because 
he hath anointed me to preach the Gospel to the poor 
[meek, he hath sent me] to heal the broken-hearted, 
to preach deliverance to the captives [of Sin], and recovering 
of sight to the blind [whose minds the God 
of this world hath blinded], and the opening of the 
prison to them that are bound." (Isa. 61:1; Luke 4:18.) 
The little work that was done by our Lord at his 
first advent, in the way of healing the naturally blind 
and sick and lame, and setting at liberty a few from 
the prison of death, was merely a foretaste of the 



greater and grander work which is to be accomplished 
by him and his glorified soldiers of the cross, at his 
second advent. 

If the physical and temporary releases from sickness 
and death at our Lord's first advent were grand 
blessings, how much more grand and how much more 
blessed will be the "greater works than these," which 
we, as his glorified Church, in association with him, 
shall be privileged to perform during the Millennial 
age. How much greater is the work of opening the 
eyes of the understanding than of opening the physical 
eyes; how much greater the work of healing the lameness 
of character than of healing the lameness physical; 
how much grander the giving of an ear to hear 
the truth and to understand and to appreciate it, than 
the opening of the natural ear, to natural sounds; how 
much greater the work of loosing the tongue of the 
world, to speak forth the praises of him who has delivered 
them, than of merely loosing the tongue of the 
dumb to speak of natural things; how much more stupendous 
the work of giving eternal life to as many of 
the world of mankind as will accept it under the terms 
of the New Covenant than was the work of giving for 
a few years the lives of Lazarus and the son of the 
widow of Nain, and the daughter of Jairus. O, we 
praise the Lord for this glorious prospect of being associated 
with him in these "greater works" of the future, 
and we see it all comprehended in his statement 
that "the hour is coming in the which all that are in 
the graves shall hear the voice of the Son of Man and 
shall come forth." All the deaf ears of understanding 
shall be unstopped; they shall hear, in the sense that 
the knowledge of the Lord shall fill the whole earth. 
And the Master's assurance is, further, that they who 
hear properly, obediently, shall live— not "live at this 
poor dying rate," of the present time, but live in the 
grandly superlative sense of life— in perfection of being, 
with the power of life eternal, lifted completely out of 
sin and out of death, back to the fulness and perfection 
of life which God gave originally, and which was 
lost in Eden. 

NONE BUT FIGHTERS WANTED IN THE LORD'S ARMY. 



In the armies of the earth the chances are that 
many of the soldiers will never see a battle, that the 
majority of them will never lose a drop of blood; but 

R2311 :page 156 

in our army all this is reversed. All men know at the 
time of enlistment that they are sure to see service, 
and that not only in one battle, but in many battles; 
and that, altho there may be times of special fightings 



without and within, there never will be a time when 
there will be such a cessation of hostilities as that we 
may consider our enemies utterly routed, and ourselves 
at liberty to retire for repose. Furthermore, we are 
distinctly informed at the time of enlistment that there 
is no discharge in this warfare. We may desert, however, 
and indeed are at liberty to do so, since none are 
held in bondage in this army. 

All who desire to go back to the service of sin, 
have full opportunity at any time and in any place. 
Our Captain wants those, and those only, who serve 
the truth with the spirit of truth; with a desire for the 
service; with a love for it; all others are in the wrong 
ranks. The end of our service, we were informed at 
the time of enlistment, would be the end of the war; 
and further we were informed that the end of the war, 
so far as we were concerned, would mean faithfulness 
until death. "Be thou faithful unto death, and I will 
give thee a crown of life." Only by death can we 
finish our course, and only by faithfulness to the last 
can we be acceptable as amongst the conquerors— the 
overcomers. 

There are many other battles than ours in progress; 
and many different army corps fighting on every 
hand; but ours is different from them all. We may be 
interested in some of these battles more than in others. 

R2311 :page 157 

Some of them may appeal to us much more closely 
than others, as being along lines considerably in harmony 
with the "good fight" which we are waging, 
and to that extent we may heartily sympathize with 
them; but we can do no more than this: because our 
covenant, our engagement, our battle, is the most important 
of all, and to it we have covenanted our every 
moment and our every talent. For instance, we may 
sympathize with those who are fighting against alcohol, 
and in favor of temperance; we may sympathize 
with others who are fighting for a general social uplift 
for the civilized world; we may sympathize with those 
who are laying down their lives for a social uplift in 
heathen lands, as missionaries; we may sympathize 
with those who are risking their lives in the cause of 
liberty from oppression, as in the war in Cuba. 

But while our sympathies must always be on the 
side of everything which is making toward righteousness, 
goodness, truth, purity— everything either closely 
or remotely related to our cause of righteousness, 
we cannot turn aside to render aid to these other warfares. 
Ours is the most important, ours is the battle 
which the Lord God Almighty has planned, and which 
the Lord Jesus, as his Captain General, is carrying 
forward and will soon bring to glorious success; 
and which will secure better results, better conditions, 
than the various battlers for temperance and order 



and liberty have ever dreamed of. 

But we are to beware of certain deceptions which 
our great Adversary brings forward, by which he 
would seduce us and get us into the wrong army: appearing 
as an angel of light, as a servant of righteousness, 
as a fighter in the Lord's cause. He has organized 
numerous false army corps, into which he endeavors 
to attract all who learn something of the liberty of 
Christ and desire to become soldiers of the cross. In 
order to make the matter more seductive and deceptive, 
the Adversary carefully guards against any intimation of 
his relationship with these. Indeed, he puts forward 
as leaders and under-officers in these various armies as 
many of the soldiers of the cross as he can get into a 
thoroughly deluded condition, in order that these armies 
may be the more attractive to those who are seeking 
the Lord's service. These armies are not as select as 
the Lord's army, and they offer very many inducements 
to soldiers, and attract very many who are really 
servants of the adversary; because they promise 
great rewards and little or no fighting, and a generally 
pleasant social camp life. These conditions of enlistment 
seem so much more favorable than those which 
the Lord holds out, and on the whole these army corps 
are so large, so fine and so attractive, that many soldiers 
of the cross make the mistake of enlisting under 
wrong banners. 

The banner of the King's Own is emblazoned with 
a cross and a crown, and on the reverse side the names 
of the King and the Captain, and the law of this army, 
briefly comprehended in one word, "Love." The 
other deceptive corps, which are not the King's Own, 
but which contain many who deludedly think that they 
are in the King's battalion, have various banners, 
with various names; and their soldiers are generally 
enlisted under false conceptions of the object of the 
warfare, as well as respecting the results of it. They 
are advised that by joining this army they will get to 
heaven and escape a hell of eternal torment. And the 
results of the warfare are represented in one of two 
lights— either that the whole number who will get to 
heaven will be very small, and the whole number who 
will go to eternal torment immensely large; or that few 
of the intelligent will get to heaven, and the majority 
of the intelligent go to eternal torment, while many of 
the ignorant and savages will go to heaven, and few 
of them to eternal torment. 

Under these untrue representations these armies 
are immense in numbers, containing many who have 
comparatively little interest in righteousness or in the 
King's cause, but great interest in endeavoring to escape 
the awful reward which is represented as attaching 
to a neglect to enlist in these armies. And, be it 
noted, that these various armies are greatly in accord 
with each other: while maintaining a certain amount 
of rivalry, they nevertheless maintain a large degree of 



fellowship; because their hopes and aims are practically 
one. But for similar reasons they are greatly out of 
harmony with the King's Own. Its hopes, its aims, 
its methods, its banner, and everything pertaining to 
it, differ so radically from theirs that they cannot fellowship 
the soldiers of our army, and in order to keep 
the best of their soldiers from deserting and going to 
it, they are prone to say all manner of evil against the 
Lord's army, falsely; to misrepresent its hopes, aims, 
ambitions and efforts, even calling it the devil's army. 
It is not difficult to recognize these large numerous 
armies, organized under the supervision of the 
great Adversary. Their names are prominent upon 
their banners in every direction; and their soldiers are 
taught that the chief battling is to battle for their 
respective armies and their claims and names. The 
banner over one of these is Presbyterianism, over another 
Methodism, over another Roman Catholicism, 
over another Lutheranism, etc., etc. The Lord's army 
is a "little flock," while these armies boast their millions. 
The Lord's statement respecting his army is that 
"not many great, not many wise, not many learned, 
hath he chosen, but the poor of this world, rich in faith, 
to be heirs of the Kingdom." These other armies all 
boast to the contrary, of how much wealth they have 

R2311 :page 158 

accumulated; of how wise they are; of how learned; 
of how rich their people; of how influential in the 
world's affairs. There is so wide a difference along 
all these lines, that it is remarkable that any who desire 
to find the "King's Own" should be deceived. 
Yet, the King himself acknowledges, that some of those 
who are truly his, and who desire to be found in his 
army are in these counterfeit armies, which he calls 
"Babylon." He therefore calls to them, saying, "Come 
out of her, my people, that ye be not partakers of her 
sins, and that ye receive not of her plagues." 

Nor is it sufficient that we should have the right 
spirit of loyalty to righteousness, and opposition to 
sin, in ourselves and everywhere: it is proper that our 
warfare against sin should be carried on in a systematic 
and intelligent manner. To this end it behooves every 
soldier of the cross to remember that he is not the 
director of the fight, not the commander, but is to fight 
strictly according to the directions of the Captain. 
Many, getting the idea that they are simply to fight 
against Sin, battle wildly and at random, and accomplish 
little. The Apostle spoke against this sort of 
thing, when he said, "So fight I; not as one that beateth 
the air." Beating the air, either with our fists or with 
our tongues, our words, is of very little avail. Our 
energies are to be directed of the Lord along the lines 
which he has marked out, and not along the lines of 
our own unwisdom and choice. It is one of the Apostle's 



admonitions to us that we should be "swift to 

hear, slow to speak, slow to wrath." We should hear 

the Lord's direction as to the place to put in our best efforts 

for the fight, and according to his direction this 

can best be done, not in fighting others, not in stirring 

up strife, not in words of anger and passion, but in 

fighting such a disposition in ourselves, in conquering 

our natural tendencies, in mortifying the flesh, with its 

affections and its desires, and its combativeness, and 

in cultivating in our own hearts the "meek and quiet 

spirit which in the sight of God is of great value."— 

1 Pet. 3:4. 

We are to fight the good fight in the putting away 
and utterly routing from our own hearts and dispositions 
"all anger, malice, hatred, envy, strife, bitterness 
—all works of the flesh and of the devil— "perfecting 
holiness in the reverence of the Lord;" and to 
help all our fellow-soldiers to do the same. And we 
are to lift high the royal banner of our Lord, bearing 
his name and his law, and not a banner of our own, 
or of some other men's device. And we are to help to 
lift up this standard of the Lord in the sight of all those 
who are sincerely desiring to be his, and who through 
mistake have gotten into the wrong army corps. We 
are to be valiant in seeking to release them from the 
delusions of the great enemy, who is thus seeking to 
reensnare them and to deprive them of the liberty 
wherewith Christ made them free; and to bring them 
under a yoke of sectarian bondage, as being next best, 
for his purposes, to the yoke of sin and gross superstition. 

R2312:page 158 

Thus doing we are not beating the air; we are 

not merely hammering pulpit tops nor shouting ourselves 

hoarse on street corners to no avail; but, like 

the Apostle, we are seeking to be crafty, that we may 

thus bring the truth to the attention of those whom 

our crafty enemy, Satan, seeks to ensnare. Our craftiness 

will be with a view to their liberty, while his 

craftiness is with a view to their enslavement. It is 

along this line that our Master has counseled his soldiers, 

"Be ye wise as serpents, harmless as doves." 

A FIGHT OF FAITH. 



Our text calls this good fight a fight of faith, and 
very properly; it is a fight of faith in every respect. 

(1) It is a fight under an unseen leader, and 
against an unseen foe: only by the eye of faith do we 
recognize the Captain of our salvation, and only by his 
Word do we recognize the wily leader who opposes us. 

(2) Sin is recognized by our moral sense; likewise 
righteousness. By faith we accept the Word of 



God, and under the instructions of that Word we learn 
that certain courses of thought and word and deed are 
right in his sight, according to his standard, and that 
other courses of thought, word and action are therefore 
wrong; henceforth we accept these conclusions by 
faith in the Word,— the revelation which God has 
given us. 

(3) We fight for a liberty and a glory of the verity 
of which we have no knowledge, except as we accept 
it by faith. 

(4) God hath promised exceeding great and 
precious things to them that love him— that so love 
him as to lay down their lives in his service. We see 
the crown of life and we see the Lord of glory, and 
with the eye of faith, and not otherwise. 

(5) The things that are seen with the natural 

eye, are seeking to influence us to the contrary of our 
course, seeking to influence us not to lay down our lives, 
not to cultivate the spirit of meekness, gentleness, patience, 
love; but on the contrary, to cultivate the spirit 
of selfishness, ambition, pride and greed, the spirit of 
the world. Only, therefore, as we are able to have the 
faith which God inspires shall we be able to fight the 
good fight. 

In this view of matters we see how important an 
item faith is. If we have it not, we can never come 
off conquerors. And faith means some knowledge upon 
which faith may rest, some promises out of which 
faith may be constructed. These we have in the great 
and wonderful divine revelation. It follows, therefore, 

R2312:page 159 

that it is not enough for us to enlist in the Lord's 
army; but it is needful that we should go to his armory 
—the Word— and there painstakingly put on the whole 
armor which he has provided. And whoever does not 
follow this course is not following the course directed 
of the Captain, and will be sure to fail in the battle. We 
are not, however, to think of the armor as being all 
that is necessary. True, the doctrinal truths respecting 
the various features of the divine plan and the divine 
will concerning us are necessary, are absolutely 
essential to our victory: but the putting on of the 
armor is not all, and does not secure victory. It is 
necessary that with the armor on we should fight, 
along the lines which we have just examined, even 
unto death. Let us, therefore, not make either the 
mistake of attempting to fight without the armor, nor 
the equally serious mistake of putting on the armor 
and neglecting to fight. 

Our Captain in encouraging us to have faith in 
him, and in his promises of succor, assuring us that he 
will not leave us nor forsake us; that he will be with 
us in six troubles, and in the seventh he will not forsake 
us; and that he is abundantly able and willing 



to make all things work together for good to them that 
love God— the called ones according to his purpose. 
He declares, "This is the victory that overcometh the 
world, even your faith." Beloved, let us make sure 
of these things:— 

(1) That we have enlisted— that we have fully 
consecrated ourselves to obey the Captain of our 
salvation. 

(2) That we are seeking to obey his instructions, 
and to put on the armor which he has supplied. 

(3) That we are fighting— resisting unto blood, 
striving against sin in all its various forms. 

(4) That we are so loyal to the Lord and to all 

that are his, wherever they may be, that we are willing 
and ready "to lay down our lives for the brethren"— 
to assist them, to encourage them, to help them, in little 
acts of service as well as in larger matters. 

(5) That we remember that there can be no victory 
except as we keep the faith— our trust in the Lord as our 
Redeemer, in his care over us, and in his willingness to 
help us, and in his ability to help. Thus, and thus 
only, shall we come off conquerors and more than 
conquerors through him who loved us and who bought 
us with his own precious blood; to whom, with God our 
Father, be praise and thanksgiving everlasting. 

"Thanks be to God who giveth us the victory 
through Jesus Christ our Lord!"— 1 Cor. 15:57. 



R2312:page 159 

JESUS BEFORE PILATE-"CONSIDER HIM." 

-JUNE 5.-MATT. 27:11-26.- 

"Jesus came into the world to save sinners."— 1 Tim. 1:15. 

AFTER the Lord's arrest in the Garden of Gethsemane, 

he was brought before the high 

priests, Annas and Caiaphas, for examination, and it 

was probably at this same house of the high priest that 

the Jewish Sanhedrin met, and the trial before it took 

place, as described in Matt. 26:59-66. It was probably 

about one o'clock in the morning that our Lord 

was brought in as a prisoner, and the examination and 

trial are supposed to have lasted until about half past 

five in the morning; a little later, probably between six 

and eight o'clock of that same day, he was brought 

before Pilate, the representative of the Roman Government. 

The chief priests and leading Jews of the Sanhedrin 

had been anxious for some time to apprehend 

our Lord, and he had walked in Galilee and no longer 

walked in Jewry (the Province of Judea) because the 

Jews sought to kill him. True, they had reasoned 

among themselves— "not upon a feast day, because of 



the people;" but our Lord had eluded them, and returned 
only at the time of the Feast of the Passover, 
knowing that it was at this time that his "hour was 
come, that he should depart out of the world," and 
that it must be at the time of the Passover, to fulfil 
the types and prophecies of the law. Finally, exasperated 
by the Lord's triumphal entry into Jerusalem on 
the ass, and his driving the money-changers out of the 
Temple, they had seized upon the proposition of Judas 
for his betrayal at night, his capture when the multitudes 
were at home, his trial at an untimely season at 
night, his condemnation by the Jewish Court, and, 
rushing the matter through, the securing of Pilate's 
endorsement of the death sentence, which was 
essential. 

In the trial before the Sanhedrin, which was the 
chief or Supreme Court of the Jews, and was composed 
of seventy of their prominent men, it was necessary 
that a form, at least, of justice should be followed; 
hence witnesses were sought, to prove something against 
our Lord which would show him worthy of death. But 
finding no such witnesses, they ultimately secured two 
who were willing to bear false witness, who falsified 
by slightly perverting our Lord's statements— the wish 
to bear witness against him and to secure the favor of 
the chief priests probably helping them to distorted 
views of our Lord's words. 

It was because the Sanhedrin had no power to put 
to death without the consent of the Roman governor 
that they brought Jesus before Pilate, and they brought 
him bound, as indicating that they had already determined 
that he was a vicious character and had found 
him duly guilty, and that the endorsement of their 
verdict and order of execution were the only proper 
steps for Pilate to take. 

In the trial before the Sanhedrin no charges of 
treason or sedition were made, because such would 
have been out of order: the Jews holding their right to 

R2312:page 160 

freedom from the Roman yoke, treason to Rome would 
have been loyalty to Judaism; besides, this was the very 
thing for which they had been waiting for centuries— a 
deliverer, and a great one; hence, the charge before the 
Sanhedrin was blasphemy. But before Pilate the 
charge of blasphemy would have had no weight, himself 
being probably an unbeliever in Jehovah and the 
Jewish religion and customs. Hence, the charge before 
Pilate was treason to Caesar; the high priests and Sanhedrin 
hypocritically taking the position that they 
were loyal defenders of the Roman power. But Pilate 
evidently saw through their subterfuge. His experience 
with human nature taught him at a glance not 
only that the prisoner before him was a remarkable 
man, but also that he was not of the kind to make a 



dangerous enemy to the empire. 

Pilate's question to our Lord was evidently one of 
curiosity full of irony, "Art thou the King of the Jews?" 
If he expected any wild or blatant assertion of power 
and dominion, might and greatness, or any appeal to 
his compassion or pity or fear, he was disappointed. 
The Master merely answered in the brief and simple 

R2313 :page 160 

words, "Thou sayest." He made no response to the 

various charges and calumnies which the Jewish elders 

and priests heaped upon him— "not one word." He 

knew that his hour was come; he knew that the cup of 

bitterness and ignominy which he was draining to the 

dregs was permitted of the Father; his will was entirely 

submitted to the Father's will; he had no desire to 

clear himself, nor to avoid or resist the death sentence 

sought. Pilate was amazed that anyone should be so 

indifferent to the preservation of his own life; but altho 

astonished that our Lord made no effort to resist his 

enemies and preserve his life, Pilate clearly saw that 

the charges were base fabrications, unworthy of consideration; 

and hence he informed the accusers that, as 

it was the season when he usually set at liberty a prisoner, 

they could reckon Jesus as having been justly 

accused, justly sentenced, and then set at liberty. But 

the accusers were enraged at the thought of their plans 

miscarrying, and fearful that even yet their prey might 

escape them, and cried out and incited the people 

against such a decree. 

The Roman governor, like others of his day and 
since, was susceptible to fear, and especially if inspired 
by dreams; and a message from his wife, cautioning 
him to do nothing against Jesus and telling of her 
troubled dreams on his account, determined Pilate that 
he would set Jesus at liberty. Accordingly, he gave 
his decision that the one who should be released to them 
would be either Jesus or a very noted robber, named 
Barabbas. By naming Barabbas as the alternative 
choice to Jesus he evidently thought that, because 
Barabbas was so undesirable a person to have at liberty, 
the Jews would finally conclude that of the two 
they would prefer to have Jesus at liberty rather than 
Barabbas. But Pilate was mistaken: the hatred inspired 
by religious fanaticism is the deepest, wickedest 
and most conscienceless of all, and Barabbas was 
promptly accepted,— which left Pilate committed on 
that point, and left Jesus under the implied sentence. 

The governor was still further perplexed. In attempting 
to get out of a dilemma he had unwittingly 
gotten himself into a worse fix, and he inquired what 
would be their will, then, respecting Jesus. Their 
blood-curdling cry, "Crucify him" astonished Pilate, 
and he answered, "[No!] for what evil hath he done?" 
But seeing that the case hung in the balance, the bloodthirsty 



accusers cried with greater vehemence, "Crucify 

him, crucify him," creating a tumult, and thus endeavoring 

to impress upon Pilate the danger of a general 

insurrection, unless their demands were complied 

with. 

Poor Pilate! He stood as a representative and 
mouthpiece for the Roman empire, and was required 
to preserve order at any cost. He yielded to the demands, 
but indicated his own separateness from the 
sentence by his words, and by the symbolic act of 
washing his hands with water, in their presence, saying, 
"I am innocent of the blood of this just person; 
look to yourselves [that you are likewise free from 
blood-guiltiness]." Thus laying the responsibility upon 
them, he evidently still had hope of their change of 
mind. It was probably with this same thought in 
mind, or probably because the law required that everyone 
worthy of crucifixion should first be scourged, that 
our dear Redeemer was scourged before being delivered 
to be crucified. 

Promptly the defiant cry, "His blood be upon us 
and upon our children," rang out through the courts 
of Pilate's tribunal, and reverberated in the courts of 
heaven, and was recorded as a prophecy of divine judgment 
against them. Alas! poor Jews; with what judgment 
you judged, you have been judged. And altho 
the true followers of the Nazarene have never injured 
you, his nominal friends have often brought vengeance 
upon you at the hands of Pilate's successors. You 
cried, "We have no king but Caesar," and were taken 
at your word by the Almighty. Oh, poor Jew, there 
is no way to escape your self-pronounced curse of his 
blood, except by accepting his blood, freely offered to 
you as to all mankind as the blood of sacrifice, the 
blood of atonement which sanctifieth (maketh holy to 
God) all to whom it is applied by faith. It is the 
"blood [seal] of the New Covenant." 

The narrative of our dear Redeemer's shame, endured 
so patiently on our behalf, is most touching, 
and perhaps the relation of it and the reading of it have 
brought more hearts to repentance than almost anything 
else. Nor does it lose its power with those who 
have already accepted our Lord and the redemption 
which his blood effected: it mellows our hearts every 
time we consider him who endured such great contradiction 
of sinners against himself, when we remember 
that it was unmerited by him, and that it was a part 
of his sacrifice on our behalf. The Apostle points 
one of his most forcible lessons with this subject, urging 
that all of the Lord's followers should consider the 
meekness, patience and sufferings of Christ, endured 
most unjustly, lest we should be weary or faint in our 
minds, when enduring comparatively light afflictions, 
while seeking to walk in his footsteps. (Heb. 12:3.) 
Again, the Apostle refers to this, in connection with 
the other sufferings of Christ, saying that he who was 



rich for our sakes became poor, that we through his 
poverty might be made rich; that he suffered, the just 
for the unjust, that he might bring us to God; and that 
as he laid down his life on our behalf, a willing sacrifice, 
"we ought also to lay down our lives for the 
brethren." 



page 161 
VOL. XIX. JUNE 1, 1898. No. 11. 



CONTENTS. 



Provoking One Another 163 

Poem: The Truth Shall Conquer 167 

Must We Abandon Hope of a 

Golden Age? 167 

The Jewish Faith in the Millennium 168 

A Look at the Crucified One 170 

"A Spirit Hath not Flesh and 

Bones" 174 

page 162 

SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
--ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 56-60 ARCH STREET, ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, N.Y. DRAFT, MONEY ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS: 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age or accident, or other 
adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, if they 
send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting the 
paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list 
constantly. 



R2314:page 163 

PROVOKING ONE ANOTHER. 



"Let us consider one another, to provoke unto love and to good 
works: not forsaking the assembling of ourselves together, as the 
manner of some is: but exhorting one another; and so much 
the more as ye see the day drawing on."— Heb. 10:24,25. 

THE WORD "provoke" signifies to arouse or 

incite, or stimulate to activity. It is generally 

used in an evil sense, but is applicable, as in our text, 

to describe an incitement to good works, good thoughts, 

etc. The tendency of fallen human nature is toward 

things that are mean, selfish, grovelling, and the natural 

bent is to incite or provoke or encourage similarly 



mean and unworthy thoughts, actions and words in 

others, and it has become a proverb, that "Evil communications 

corrupt good manners." Everyone of 

experience knows this general tendency of evil to beget 

evil, and to corrupt and to pollute whatever is nobler 

and purer than itself; hence we have the Scriptural 

pronouncement, "Blessed is the man that walketh not 

in the counsel of the ungodly, nor standeth in the way 

of sinners, nor sitteth in the seat of the scornful." 

Those who neglect this counsel need not be surprised 

if they are continually falling into temptation, and if 

the influence upon their own lives results in a measure 

at least of ungodliness and sin, and disfellowship from 

those things which are noble and true and pure. 

But the "new creature in Christ Jesus" is one in 
whom the transforming influences of the Lord's spirit 
have already begun— one who has a new heart, a new 
will, a new disposition. With such, "old things have 
passed away, and all things have become new:" they 
have been begotten again; i.e., re-begotten— to new 
hopes, new wishes, new ideas of propriety. Instead of 
the earthly wisdom and way with its "bitter envying 
and strife," which "descendeth not from above, but is 
earthly, sensual, devilish," they have now the wisdom 
that is from above, and a heart (a disposition) to appreciate 
and pursue its counsels, which are, first purity, 
then peaceableness, gentleness, meekness, mercy, 
good fruits, without partiality, and without hypocrisy. 
And the disposition of this class, in proportion to their 
attainment of this heavenly wisdom and new nature, 
will be to "provoke" or incite or encourage one another, 
and all with whom they come in contact, to similar 
goodness of thought and word and act, in harmony 
with the heavenly wisdom which is guiding their own 
course. 

This is laid down in the Scriptures as an unvarying 
rule: "A bitter fountain cannot send forth sweet 
water, and a good fountain cannot send forth brackish 
water." A thistle-bush cannot bear grapes, and a 
grape-vine cannot bear thistles. It is the Master himself 
who says, "By their fruits ye shall know them." 
If, therefore, we desire to prove ourselves, and to judge 
respecting our progress in mortifying (putting to 
death) the old nature, and our growth in the new 
nature, we will judge ourselves by this standard; answering 
to ourselves the question,— Is my own spirit 
(disposition) one which delights in sin in its various 
forms (not necessarily in its grosser forms of murder, 
theft, etc., but in its more refined forms, falsity, envy, 
strife, vainglory, slander, evil-speaking, evil surmises, 
etc.), or is my delight increasingly in righteousness, 

R2314:page 164 

truth, goodness, gentleness, meekness, patience, love? 
If the former, we are yet, either wholly or partially, 



in the gall of bitterness and in the bondage of iniquity, 
and have need to go at once to the Great Physician, 
and to submit ourselves to his radical treatment 
—the cutting off of sin, the mortifying of such fleshly 
desires, etc. If the latter be our condition of heart, 
we have cause for rejoicing, yet no cause for pride or 
boastfulness; for we can say no more than that we have 
merely done our duty, having merely learned, and 
that imperfectly, the lessons set before us by our great 
Teacher. 

The Apostle is addressing the Church, the consecrated, 
the new creatures in Christ Jesus. This is 
shown in the text, for he classes himself with these, 
using the word "us;" it is also shown by the context. 
He calls the attention of the consecrated to the influence 
which goes out from each to each, and the consequent 
importance that the influence shall always be 
stimulating, or provocative of that which is good. No 
doubt the Apostle found in his day, as we find now, 
that many who are consecrated at heart fail to see 
clearly how this consecration should associate itself 
with and mark itself upon our every act and word. 
Perhaps he saw then, as we see now, that the holy 
influence of truth, gathered at a meeting of the Lord's 
people, through their communion of heart, with each 
other and with the Lord, is not infrequently spoiled, 
dissipated entirely, by inconsiderate or unkind remarks 
of some of the company, upon dismissal. 

Who, of experience, does not know how great a 
matter a little fire may kindle; how much evil may be 
started by the fire of the tongue; how many unkind 
thoughts, evil suspicions, surmises, how much envy, 
malice, hatred and strife, may be started by a mere 
insinuation? Since the Lord declares, "Out of the 
abundance of the heart the mouth speaketh," it follows 
that the hearts and lips from which emanate these 
evil influences, are not controlled by the wisdom which 
cometh from above, tho they be in some measure consecrated 
to the Lord. 

It is a great mistake, also, to suppose that because 
the evil thing is said in a kind and gentle manner, 
therefore it is a good thing, and evidence of a 
pure heart, that is full of love; quite to the contrary, 
we know that the great Adversary himself is continually 
presenting himself in garments of light, that he 
may exercise the greater influence for evil upon those 
who have made a covenant with the Lord. So, likewise, 
those who implant evil thoughts, surmises, etc., 
in a smooth and polished manner, and perhaps with a 
tear, are the most dangerous foes of peace and fellowship, 
and often accomplish the greater harm; because 
they succeed in planting roots of bitterness and 
thoughts of evil in hearts which would utterly resent 
the same evil thoughts and evil surmisings, if presented 
in a coarse, offensive and obtrusive manner. 

We are not to be reckless of each other's interests. 



In our contact with each other, whether a personal 
contact or a contact by mail or a contact through the 
columns of this Journal, we are to "consider one another." 
We are to consider what would be helps, and 
what would be hindrances, what would be encouragements, 
and what would be stumbling-blocks; and we 
are to do all in our power to assist one another to run 
with patience the race for the heavenly prize. If we 
are truly consecrated to the Lord, we can do nothing 
"against the truth but [every effort must be] for the 
truth." (2 Cor. 13:8.) What a burning and shining 
light every Christian would be, if his every act were 
considered and shaped for the benefit of those with 
whom he comes in contact! What a blessing it would 
be in the home! What a blessing it would be in the 
Church! This brotherly consideration is what the 
Apostle is urging upon us: "Consider one another, to 
provoke [incite, encourage] to love and to good works." 
Avoid every word and every act, so far as possible, 
that might incite to hatred, envy, strife, bitterness 
(and bad works, corresponding to these feelings), all 
of which are "of the flesh and of the devil." 

The Apostle links this advice with the exhortation 
to forget not the assembling of ourselves together, 
as the Lord's people. None of us are so strong in 
the new nature that we can disregard the fellowship 
of kindred minds. But even if we did feel sufficiently 
strong for ourselves, the spirit of love in us should so 
control that we would delight to meet with "the brethren" 
for their sakes, if we ourselves received no benefit 
therefrom. But we are more or less like coals of 
fire, which, if separated, will tend to cool rapidly, but 
which, if brought together, will tend to increase in 
fervency the entire mass. Our Lord has encouraged 
his people to seek each other's fellowship for companionship 
in the study of his Word, and in prayer, pronouncing 
special blessings upon the meeting of his 
people together, even if so few as only two or three. 

It is true that sometimes isolated ones, who have 
no fellowship in the present truth (except through the 
WATCH TOWER) are often amongst the most staunch 
and devoted and self-sacrificing of the Lord's people; 
but we should not from this infer that the blessing 
comes from their isolation, but rather, since their separation 
is unavoidable on their part, we may reasonably 
suppose that our Lord makes up to them, in his 
own presence and blessing, that which they lack of 
fellowship with other members of the body. But if 
one had opportunity for assembling with others for 
worship of the Lord and the study of his Word, and 

R2314:page 165 

neglected to avail himself of his privilege, we need not 
expect that for his benefit the Lord would work special 
miracles of grace. The Lord's miracles may be expected 



only in times of emergency, to make up for 
natural deficiency. 

Besides, we are to remember that through the 
WATCH TOWER and the mail the Lord has established 
a channel of communication amongst his people so that 
none need be without such fellowship and spiritual intercourse. 
And we call attention to the fact that the 
terms of our Journal are so liberal that the very poorest 
of the Lord's people may avail themselves of this 
privilege of communion. If they refuse or neglect 
to use this grace which the Lord has put within their 
reach, at a cost of one postal card per year, it is their 
own fault; they are disregarding the Lord's instruction, 
through the Apostle, and are neglecting the means 
open before them for having fellowship with others of 
like precious faith. If such find themselves growing 
cold, as a result of neglect of the Lord's arrangements 
and providences, they have themselves to blame. We 
do not know how to make the WATCH TOWER terms 
more reasonable than they are. We exhort all to recognize 
it, not as a personal gift, but as a part of the 
Lord's provision for his people, to which they are welcome 
as to all the features of his grace. Freely we 
have received, freely we will give the message of his 
love and mercy. 

The Apostle intimates that, as "the Day" draws 
near, there will be the more need for the observance 
of this instruction respecting the fellowship and communion 
of the Lord's people with each other. And 
experience proves this: the great Millennial Day which 
has already begun, chronologically, has brought with 
it new activities in mind and body, a greater pressure 
of business and rush to keep abreast of the times, and 
a correspondingly greater danger to the Lord's people 
of being choked with the cares of this life, or with the 
deceitfulness of riches, or of seeking riches. We need 
a counteracting influence, to off-set this increasing influence 
of the world and its affairs upon us; and this 
counteracting influence is to be sought and to be found 
by the Lord's people among themselves,— communing 
one with the other and with the Lord, and exhorting 
and encouraging one another to steadfastness along 
the lines of instruction laid down in his Word. 

And not only so, but we find that the beginning 
of this great Millennial Day is a "day of trouble." 
We find that the latter part of this day of trouble is to 
be upon the world, and that the Lord promised his 
Church that, if faithful, they shall be "accounted 
worthy to escape all those things coming upon the 
world." But we have found also that the forepart of 
this day of trouble, which is the day of preparation 
for the world's trouble, will be a special time of peculiar 
trouble and trial, testing and sifting, upon the 
Church; for— The judgments of this day "must begin 
with the house of God." We see this sifting and 
shaking in progress all about us in the nominal Church, 



and still more intensely among those who occupy a 
still higher position and enlightenment through the 
knowledge of the present truth. "The great day of 
his wrath [judgment, testing, sifting, first of the 
Church and afterward the nations] is come, and who 
shall be able to stand?" We hear the Apostle's exhortation, 
as he looked down prophetically to our day, 
saying, "Wherefore, take unto you the whole 
armor of God, that ye may be able to withstand in the 
evil day, and having done all, to stand. For we wrestle 
not against flesh and blood, but against principalities, 
against powers, against the rulers of the darkness of this 
world, against spiritual wickedness in exalted positions. 
-Eph. 6:13,14. 

It is "as we see the day drawing on" that we are 
to be the more diligent in assembling ourselves with 
those of like precious faith; the more earnest in exhorting 
and provoking to love and to good works, and thus 
to assist one another in putting on "the whole armor 
of God"— the graces of character, meekness, patience, 
gentleness, brotherly kindness, faith, truth, hope- 
that with these as the divine panoply or armor, protecting 
us from the assaults of the Adversary in this 
day, we may be able to stand. The clear intimation 
is that, unless we have on this armor, we will be unable 
to stand. And this armor includes more than mere 
head-knowledge, represented by the helmet; it includes, 
be it noted, the entire breastplate of righteousness, 
purity of heart, and it includes the shield of faith, and 
the sword of the spirit, and the sandals of 
consecration. 

In the succeeding verse the Apostle mentions the 
possibility of wilful sin among the Lord's people, and 
what it would imply— the second death (the sorer punishment 
than the first death, in that it would be without 
hope)— "everlasting destruction from the presence 
of the Lord and the glory of his power." 

While wilful sin has always been the same, it 
would not be unreasonable to infer from the Apostle's 
words that the temptations and dangers of "this evil 
day" in which we live will specially tend to trial along 
this line. Let it be clearly noticed that the Apostle 
is not speaking of sins of ignorance nor of accidental 
missteps by being overtaken in a fault, whose sin is 
not unto death, but from which the transgressors may 
be restored in a spirit of meekness. He is referring 
directly to full, complete sin— the sin upon which the 
full penalty is justly and properly to be recompensed. 

At first thought, many may be inclined to say, 

R2314:page 166 

Well, I am in no danger of that sin, for I am sure that 

I would not commit sin wilfully, intentionally, designedly. 

But let us notice, dear friends, that there 

is a way in which sin may come upon us without being 



at the time a wilful sin, but which later might become 
wilful sin: for instance, any transgression committed, 
either in total ignorance or with only a partial acquiescence 
of our wills, might become a full, wilful, deliberate 
sin afterward, if we afterward came to a clear 
knowledge of the truth respecting the subject, and 
failed to repent of it to the Lord, and to undo so far 
as was in our power the wrong toward our fellow-creatures. 
To consent to a sin clearly and fully understood, 
simply because at the time of its committal we 
were in ignorance, and to refuse to make amends for 
it, and thus to endorse the sin intelligently, would appear 
to make of it a will-full sin. 

With this view of the matter, the children of God 
cannot afford to sanction in their own minds even the 
slightest injustice or untruth towards each other, or 
towards any. The essence of this thought is found in 
our Lord's command: "If thou comest to the altar [if 
we have anything to offer to the Lord, either of service 
or of worship or of thanks], and there rememberest 
that thy brother hath aught against thee [that some 
one has been wronged by you, either in word or thought 
or act] leave there thy gift before the altar [do not 
think that it will be acceptable to God while in your 
heart or outwardly you are practicing injustice toward 
others]; first go and be reconciled to thy brother [make 
amends to him, apologies, explanations in full, of 
whatever wrong you have done him] and then come 
and offer thy gift [assured that in such an attitude of 
heart the Lord Almighty will be pleased to accept 
your gift]." 

In describing these who sin wilfully, the Apostle 
uses very strong, figurative language, declaring that, 
inasmuch as they are in heart-sympathy with sin, and 
not in opposition to it, they are the opponents of the 
Son of God, who was so out of sympathy with sin 
in its every form that he laid down his life to redeem 
us from its power and curse. The Apostle declares 
that such wilful sinners may be esteemed as the enemies 
of Christ, who really trample him and his goodness 
and love under their feet, figuratively, disdaining 
his mercy and favor as well as his instruction in righteousness. 
He says that, inasmuch as they were once 
sanctified, as a result of their faith in the precious blood 
and its cleansing from sin, their turning now into harmony 
with sin would imply that they now disesteem 
the precious blood of Christ which sealed the New 
Covenant, counting it a non-sacred thing— common— 
and do despite to the spirit of divine favor which had 
held out to them freedom from the yoke of sin, and 
ultimately release from its penalty, death; and the attainment, 
as the Lord's people, of the crown of life 
eternal. 

While holding up before the Church the dangers 
of sin, and the danger of falling away from steadfastness 
for Christ and to the principles of his righteousness, 



the Apostle encourages us to continue our fight 
against sin and its influence in ourselves and in others, 
"perfecting holiness in the reverence of the Lord." 
Accordingly he calls our minds back to our first 
love and first zeal— "the former days, in which, after 
ye were illuminated, ye endured a great fight of affliction; 
partly whilst ye were made a gazingstock both by 
reproaches and affliction, and partly whilst ye became 
companions of them that were so used." He would 
thus encourage the Lord's people to continue the good 
fight— to continue to wage warfare against the world, 
the flesh and the devil, and the spirit of these, especially 
each within himself, in the battlefield of his own 
soul. And he urges that faith in the Lord and the rewards 
which he shall grant by and by, when he 
shall be glorified in his saints, is very necessary 
to our endurance of hardness as good soldiers in the 
fight against evil, both within and without, saying, 
"Cast not away, therefore, your confidence, which 
hath great recompense of reward"— "forsake not the 
assembling of yourselves together, as the manner of 
some is, but exhort one another; and so much the more 
as ye see the day approaching." 

And this reminds us of the words of the Lord, 
through the prophet Malachi (3:15-17): In the time 
when the proud are happy, and they that work wickedness 
are established in power and influence, and they 
that tempt God seem to be blessed— "then they that 
feared the Lord spake often one to another [sympathizing 
with and encouraging one another, so much 
the more] : and the Lord hearkened and heard it; and 
a book of remembrance was written before him of 
them that feared the Lord, and that thought upon his 
name; and they shall be mine, saith the Lord of hosts, 
in that day when I make up my jewels; and I will 
spare them, as a man spareth his own son that serveth 
him." But while all should seek to provoke to love 
and to good works and to happy looks, we well know 
that the majority do the reverse. Hence, we suggest 
that the Lord's peculiar people may be so controlled by 
his Word and its spirit that they will be incited to 
good works, good deeds and good looks by the most 
unfavorable conditions. Consider Stephen, confronted 
by those who afterward took his life: not only had he 
courage to preach to them, but his heart was so provoked 
to love and good works that his face shone with 
an angelic beauty. (Acts 6:15.) And the same grace 
abounding enabled him to pray for his murderers. 
(Acts 7:60.) Nothing could provoke such a spirit- filled 
saint to evil. Let us follow the example of such close 
followers of our Lord's footsteps. 

R2314:page 167 

THE TRUTH SHALL CONQUER. 



"An arrowy shaft of lightning flame, 
Forth from unlettered lips it came; 
Winds bore it, and the songs of birds; 
It clove its way in burning words, 
And, on a holy mission sent, 
Through languages and lands it went. 

"Some heard it, but they did not heed, 
Some welcomed and performed its deed, 
Some fought it and were stricken dumb; 
They knew not what a power had come, 
And, struggling to eclipse the light, 
Were crushed by its resistless might. 

"It barbed the hero's scorn of wrong, 
The poet shaped it in his song; 
It nerved the speaker on the stage, 
With it the author warmed the page; 
And hoary error shrank away, 
Dazzled and blinded by its ray. 

"O, spark from heaven, touched by thy light 
The farthest hills with day are bright; 
New forms of love and beauty rise, 
New splendors tint the arching skies, 
The ancient wrongs that vex us cease— 
We hail the thousand years of peace." 
—Selected. 



R2313 :page 167 

MUST WE ABANDON HOPE OF A GOLDEN AGE? 



MISS Frances E. Willard, deceased, highly esteemed 

for her works in the cause of temperance 

and morality, is accredited with an epigrammatic 

statement which is generally supposed to contain 

an essence of wisdom amounting almost to inspiration, 

as follows:— 

"ONLY THE GOLDEN RULE CAN BRING THE GOLDEN AGE. 

Were we sure that Miss Willard was inspired, or, 
were we sure that in this sentence she had gathered 
up the spirit and essence of divine revelation on this 
subject, we would in either case lose all the hope we 
now entertain for the glorious future. 

It is over eighteen centuries since our Master promulgated 
the Golden Rule; and his disciples and followers 
for all these centuries have preached it. His 
words have been translated into every language under 
heaven, and yet, at this moment, how extremely few 



there are of the world's population of fifteen hundred 
millions who practice this rule! Nay, how few there are 
even of our Master's professed followers who make any 
pretense at governing their actions, their words and their 
thoughts by this Golden Rule! Let the answer come 
from every quarter,— from the nations of Christendom, 
from the business men and manufacturers, from the 
mechanics and laborers, from the home circles, where 
selfishness mars everything, and, finally, from the 
Churches professedly advocating the Golden Rule. 
How much we see of slander, anger, malice, hatred, 
selfishness, meanness; how little we see of any effort to 
control these in the lives of professed Christians; and 
how little reason we have, therefore, to suppose that the 
rule is observed in their hearts. 

And yet, if Miss Willard were a true prophetess, or if 
she voiced the testimony of the Bible prophets, the only 
hope of a Golden Age lies in man's acceptance of 
this Golden Rule which has met with such slight acceptance 
for more than eighteen centuries. Must we 
abandon hope of a glorious Golden Age? Can there be 
no Millennium until all mankind, or a majority at least, 
shall have voluntarily accepted the Golden Rule, and 
brought their hearts and lives into conformity therewith? 
If so, the Millennial dawn will never come. 
Reason and logic can reach no other conclusion than 
this. Must we give up hope? 

No, we will not give up hope, for we have "a more 
sure word of prophecy," to which "we do well to take 
heed, as unto a light which shineth in a dark place, until 
the day dawn." (2 Pet. 1:19.) We are still in the 
dark place; sin and selfishness still abound; the Golden 
Rule does not control; we see no evidence of a general 
acceptance of it: but the more sure word of prophecy 
foretold this very condition, foretold that the present 
would be a dark time, and foretold that a glorious dawn 
would come. We do well indeed to take heed to the 
prophetic testimony respecting what great light will 
usher in the Golden Age. 

So far from telling us that the Golden Age will 
come by the adoption of the Golden Rule among the 
inhabitants of the earth, the more sure word of prophecy 
tells us to the contrary, that the Golden Rule will 
come more and more into disrepute; and that the rule 
of selfishness and sin will abound; and that the result 
thereof will be a total wreck of present institutions, in 
a time of trouble such as was not since there was a nation 
(Dan. 12:1): a time of anarchy, brought on by the 
neglect of the Golden Rule; a time in which "every 
man's hand shall be against his neighbor; and there 
shall be no peace to him that goeth out nor to him that 
cometh in."— Zech. 8:10. 

This same sure word of prophecy leaves us not to 
grope on in doubt and fear, but assures us that beyond 

R2314:page 167 



the coming trouble Immanuel shall reign— that he will 
set up his Kingdom upon the ruins of the present selfish 
institutions and systems which will then be ground 

R2314:page 168 

to powder and become "as the chaff of the summer 

threshing-floors." (Dan. 2:35.) It informs us that Immanuel 

will establish his Kingdom by means of this 

time of trouble, and indeed that the trouble itself will 

be his judgment against sin and selfishness, against the 

neglect of the Golden Rule which he laid down, and 

that he will break in pieces and consume all these present 

institutions, and establish in the earth a kingdom 

of righteousness, whose law will be the law of Love— 

the Golden Rule. 

In harmony with this is the testimony of the more 
sure word of prophecy that, "When the judgments of 
the Lord are abroad in the earth [producing the great 
time of trouble], the inhabitants of the world will learn 
righteousness." (Isa. 26:9.) They will learn the inexpediency 
of sin and selfishness, and that thereafter under 
divine direction, under the rule of the Heavenly 
Kingdom (Christ and his Church, in spiritual power 
and glory), no other laws or rules than the Golden Rule 
shall be permitted; and under its glorious administration, 
the prophetic testimony is, "the whole earth shall 
be filled with the knowledge of the glory of God, as the 
waters cover the great deep;"— so that it shall no longer 
be necessary to say one to the other, "Know thou the 
Lord!" because all shall know him, from the least to 
the greatest. -Jer. 31:34; Heb. 8:11. 

This is the glorious day, foretold by Moses and by 
the Apostle Peter, when the great Prophet, Priest and 
King,— the Christ,— shall rule the world in righteousness, 
and execute justice in the earth; when he shall 
lift up also the poor and the needy, and him that hath 
no helper, and lay justice to the line and righteousness 
to the plummet, and bless all the families of the earth 
with the knowledge of the Lord and with opportunity, 
if they will, to come into harmony with him and to obtain 
the gift of God, eternal life, through Jesus Christ, 
our Lord: while all who reject the grace of God and the 
New Covenant shall be destroyed from among the people, 
in the second death.— Acts 3:22,23. 

Let all those who desire the truth, and who desire 
to have its sanctifying influence upon their hearts and 
lives, give the less heed to earthly prophets and wise 
men and women, however good they may be, and give 
the more earnest heed to the "more sure word of prophecy; 
whereunto they do well that they take heed, as 
unto a light that shineth in a dark place, until the day 
dawn." 

Neither logically nor Scripturally is there ground 
for hope of the Golden Age except in the institution of 



the Kingdom of Christ, for which he taught us to pray, 
"Thy Kingdom come, thy will be done on earth as it 
is done in heaven." Not only is this Kingdom the 
world's hope, but it is also the Christian's hope: he 
hopes to become a joint-heir with his Redeemer in that 
Kingdom. And, "he that hath this hope in him, purifieth 
himself, even as he is pure."— 1 John 3:3. 

Let us therefore change the statement, and tell to 
the whole world the "gospel of the Kingdom," the 
truth, that- 
ONLY THE REIGN OF CHRIST CAN BRING THE GOLDEN AGE. 



R2314:page 168 

THE JEWISH FAITH IN THE MILLENNIUM. 

BY RABBI GOTTHEIL, OF NEW YORK CITY. 

"THE belief that Jesus would return to earth in 

the near future formed, according to Schleiermacher, 

the basis of the theory of final redemption 

with the early Christians; and Dorner considers it the 

first dogma laid down by the rising Church. 

"Misgivings and consequent doubts sprang up only 
with the widening breach between Jewish and Gentile 
converts. As long as Christianity was viewed 
merely as a reformed Judaism, as the fulfilment of the 
Scriptures; as long as the Jewish nation retained in the 
eyes of the followers of Jesus its prerogatives and high 
vocation among the nations of the earth, no reluctance 
was felt to identify the great hope with the national 
restoration of Israel. It appeared but natural that the 
place where the Messiah suffered defeat should also 
witness his final triumph. Such a consummation would 
silence all doubts as to his authority forever. Israel 
had rejected him. Israel should be the first to receive 
him, repent and lead the rest of mankind to the foot 
of the cross, and thereby the Scripture should be 
fulfilled. 

"But time wore on without bringing the looked-for 
reappearance of the Messiah. Christianity meanwhile 
left its native soil more and more behind, carrying 
the cross beyond the seas and into distant lands; 
while at home disaster after disaster devastated the 
land and drove its inhabitants in scattered fragments 
among the Gentiles for shelter. The preachers of the 
new faith chafed under what they considered an unnecessary 
burden— nay, a positive hindrance to the 
success of their missionary labors. Unfortunate people 
are always unwelcome; the defeated are undesirable 
companions of those who mean to conquer the 
world. In the case of the Jews, there was superadded the 
scorn bred by the thought that their downfall was the 
vengeance of the gods whom they denied and despised. 



To be thrown together with this wandering tribe was 
very undesirable to the Christians— nay, appeared as 

R2314:page 169 

a stumbling-block in their way. Can it not be removed? 
Can the stigma not be got rid of? A new 
interpretation of the passages in the Bible predicting 
the restoration of Palestine as the beginning of the 
new and better order of things on earth was sought 
and, of course, found. 

"Divorce!' became the shibboleth of many leading 
spirits. 'No Judaism!' grew into a cry like 'No 
Popery!' in later England, and for the most part carried 
the day. In others, however, the first dogma of 
the Church held its own and gained new strength as 
the Christian writings were being gathered together, 
and the New Testament appeared as 'sacred Scripture' 
by the side of the Jewish canon. The words are all 
too clear and definite to be easily interpreted away. 
Endless controversies ensued, which are not finished 
to-day. Everybody knows what part the 'second advent' 
played in the history of the Church. There were 
times when large numbers of Christians actually prepared 
for the wonderful event, and if a recent statement 
made on good authority may be trusted one-half 
of the English clergy are firm believers in the primitive 
dogma, and are laboring to prepare the world for 
the impending manifestation of Christ. 

"It is a great pity that the 'No Judaism!' cry was 
ever mingled with the disputes of the new faith. Had 
it never been heard, why, the truth must have become 
apparent that the breach between the old and the new 
covenants was not nearly as wide as it seemed to be: 
that mother and daughter were not fatally separated, 
and might pursue their own ways as friends and not 
as foes. The dearest hope the Israelite nourished in 
his bosom during all his wanderings— what was it but 
the coming of the Messiah, the Goel (Redeemer), 
the Savior of his people; the one who would rebuild 

R2315 :page 169 

'the fallen Tabernacle of David' and restore his throne 
to greater than its pristine glory! That was the same 
throne on which the Christian expected Jesus to sit, 
surrounded by the heads of the twelve tribes of Israel 
and the resuscitated saints and martyrs, who should 
there receive their final reward. Jew and Christian 
hoped that Jerusalem would rise from her ruins, change 
her sackcloth and ashes for robes of honor, and, instead 
of being despised, become the desire of all 
nations. 

"The question who that chosen vessel of God 
would be, whether the one who in his own person 
shared the fate of Jerusalem, or one who had not yet 



been seen on earth— could that be of greater weight 
than the common belief that he would unfailingly appear? 
A scion of the house of David he would be, an 
Israelite after the flesh, a ruler of his own people. If 
he should reveal himself as the man of sorrow who 
was nailed to the cross, the Jews would be the first to 
do him homage. Here was a clear and firm point of 
contact, strong enough to keep the two faiths together 
until 'the day of his coming.' But the new faith had 
grown into churches— churches of various tongues and 
divers nationalities, split up into sects, warring with 
each other about subtle points of dogma and ceremonies 
and persecuting one another with ruthless hatred. 

"Amid these ever-growing conflicts Christianity 
was lost. I mean Christianity as it came from the 
lips of its Jewish teacher. His living words had congealed 
into creeds and systems, which, passing through 
the hands of writers of greatly divergent minds shaped 
these words— could it be otherwise?— into likeness 
with themselves. Powerful organizations arose which 
so far overshadowed their common origin that the Jew 
was mentioned only for condemnation, as the hater of 
the cross and the enemy of the Gospel, a tool of the 
devil to obstruct the kingdom of Christ. Yet half of 
his contention was widely conceded; viz., that the work 
of the Messiah was not complete; that it had been only 
preparatory for the final redemption of the world. 

"But this availed nothing, and the chasm was dug 
out deeper and deeper, which kept the two faiths apart 
—at what cost to the very purposes which were nearest 
the heart of Jesus we leave unsaid here. Instead 
of it let us refresh our hearts at the thought that after 
all the idea of a Millennium has not been lost to us— 
nay, that its kernel of truth is better understood now 
than ever before. For what it has failed to do in olden 
time, and must fail to do as long as it remains 
covered with dogmatic shells, it has begun to achieve 
in its liberated state. There is abroad now a new 
spirit of fraternity and community of sacred interests 
among the various religions; a desire for cooperation 
in those things good and true and helpful which are 
the very beginning of the Kingdom of God on earth. 
If the Christian thinks he must do that service in the 
name of his Redeemer, that need not hinder his neighbor 
of a different belief from grasping his hand and 
becoming his fellow laborer. If the Jew is seen to do 
Millennial work, why should the Christian keep aloof? 
God has made all nations not only of One flesh, but 
also of One heart and of One mind; planted in each 
the same hope, the same pity; tries them all by the 
same sorrows, and gathers them all at last to the same 
earth. As in all things, so Heaven can only help us 
to peace and good will if we are earnest and zealous 
in seeking and pursuing them. 

"What is the Millennial outlook at present? For 
the Jew; disheartening to almost despair, sadder even 



at the end than it was at the beginning of the century. 
The paeans with which he hailed 'the era of enlightenment' 
have died away from his lips. He stands aghast 
at the cruel rebukes he receives everywhere. The 

R2315 :page 170 

age of persecution has returned for his brethren in 

many lands. For what sin or misdeed? I will speak 

frankly; he who is branded as an unbeliever had only 

too much faith in the professions of his Christian surroundings. 

He flung himself into the currents of 

life, as they opened for him, with the ardor of youth; 

but when he reaches the desired shore in larger numbers 

than pleased his competitors he is pushed back 

and all the hateful vocabulary of scorn, abuse and calumny 

emptied on him with new vehemence. It is impossible 

for the non-Jew to realize the bitterness of 

soul which this disenchantment awakens in the Jew. 

Once he could bear it all in patience, because he felt 

the hand of God in it and thought it his portion during 

the dispersion; he walked his thorny path, as one 

of his poets sang:— 

"His eye to earth, his heart to heaven. 

"Now, his manhood rises against the injustice he 
suffers; the free man in him writhes under the indignities 
heaped upon him, and he has unlearned to seek 
and find compensation in the synagogues or in the 
Talmud. 

"But for all that the Jew stands at his post and 
defends his old flag. He will not recede a hairbreath 
from the ground so far gained. Firm in his oldtime 
tried and fireproof faith in the coming of the Millennial 
Messiah, he labors on; where that is made impossible 
by the iron hand of his oppressor, he practices 
the art no one has learned better than he— 'to stand 
and wait.' Whether that coming of the Messiah will 
be the first or the second, no matter, if only the will 
of God be done on earth as it is in heaven. 

"It is not the will of man to direct his steps, 
says Scripture; nor in that of mankind either. Civilization, 
and it alone, is sought— and behold, Millennial 
fulfilment comes with it unsought and inevitably. 
The spirit cannot be restrained nor put behind prison 
doors; it moves where it listeth. Freedom of speech, 
e.g., our undisputed possession, cannot coexist with 
church tyranny. The open court of an untrammelled 
press is the best safeguard of public justice. As it is 
shown in France, frenzied by artificially fanned passions 
to blindness, the combined power of civil and 
military authorities cannot wholly silence the voices, 
growing louder every day, which demand justice, justice 
at all hazards. 

"Electricity quickens thought as well as muscle; 
the telephone sharpens the mental as well as the bodily 
ear. Growing ease and comfort in our homes, in 



travel, in the sickroom, make us more sensitive for the 
sufferings of those who are deprived of them, and also 
for the aches of the soul and the stings of conscience. 
Organized handicraft and manual labor have increased 
the sum of manhood among us a million times. Despite 
their many drawbacks the unions are a splendid 
school for self-discipline and self-government. They 
have taken the sons of toil out of their isolation, taught 
them the value of social order and of subordination to 
established laws. States within the states support each 
other as the pillars do in the steel framework of our 
modern towers of Babel. It was the confusion of 
tongues that marred the plan of the first one. Our 
workingmen understand each other; there is no speech 
nor language where their voice is not heard intelligently. 
The bugbear of a war between capital and 
labor is fading more and more into air, for it would be 
just as wise as a war would be between the wheel of 
an engine and the steam that drives it. Our societies 
for the prevention of cruelty to animals, can they fail 
to make cruelties to man more and more hateful? 

"With the doors of our public schools open to all 
comers, with our colleges and universities freeing 
themselves ever more from dogmatic fetters and sectarian 
narrowness; with free libraries, increasing every 
year by the thousands, reaching the most outlying 
districts and offering their treasures to the cottager in 
village or hamlet; with our Chautauquas and other active 
societies for the diffusion of knowledge; with our 
charities becoming wiser and more truly charitable as 
the spirit of humanity spreads, and with Toinby halls 
and settlements and sisterhoods and brotherhoods for 
personal service finding ever greater favor; with pulpits 
on all sides in which the religion of truth is taught 
as well as the truths of the religion for which they 
stand— thus splendidly equipped we may surely approach 
the gateways of the centuries with the calm 
composure born of the confidence that humanity has 
now advanced too far to be forced backward to any 
great distance or checked for any length of time. 

"Our faces are firmly set toward the rising sun, 
and wherever light and love and right prevail God is 
present and is worshipped by all his servants in divers 
forms, yet One in spirit and aspiration. What if our 
songs are 'Songs before Sunrise,' and many deep shadows 
of uncovered wrong and unredeemed oppression 
cover still the earth— the watchman on the hill cries, 
'The morning cometh' and 'The counsel of the Lord 
standeth forever.'" 



R2315 :page 170 

A LOOK AT THE CRUCIFIED ONE. 



--JUNE 12.-MATT. 27:35-50.- 

"Christ died for our sins, according 
to the Scriptures."— 1 Cor. 15:3. 

ALTHO the Scripture narrative of our Lord's 
crucifixion is told in a most simple and artless 
manner, and without apparent attempt at embellishment 
to give it tragic effect, nevertheless in its simplicity 
it is one of the most touching narratives of history. 
As no novel could present a more eventful life, 
so likewise none ends more tragically than did this 
great real drama set upon the stage by the Almighty, 
as an exhibition both to angels and to men of his Justice 
and Love combined. How strikingly depravity of 
fallen human nature was illustrated in those who witnessed 
our Lord's many wonderful works, and then his 

R2316 :page 170 

unresisting sacrifice for our sins, coldly— without appreciation. 

Nothing could illustrate this better than 

the account of the division of our Lord's garments and 

the lot cast to see who would get the seamless robe, 

R2316 :page 171 

which so beautifully represented his own personal perfection, 

and which had probably been a gift from one of 

the noble women mentioned as being amongst his 

friends. (Luke 8:3.) The climax was reached 

when, after finally dividing the spoils, his executioners 

unpityingly viewed his sufferings and death— "Sitting 

down they watched him there." 

Moreover we are compelled to concede that while 
the influence of the Gospel of Christ has had a large 
influence upon the world of mankind, producing a 
civilization which certainly is to be appreciated as a 
great advance over more rude and barbarous conditions of 
the past, nevertheless, we can readily discern that under 
the veneer of worldly politeness and civilization 
there is yet a great deal of the depraved disposition in 
the natural heart. For are there not many to-day who, 
after coming to a knowledge of the facts of his case— 
a greater and clearer knowledge, too, than that 
enjoyed by the Roman soldiers— after learning of 
the wonderful works and of the sufferings of 
Christ, and that these were on our behalf, instead 
of falling at his feet and exclaiming, "My Lord and 
my Redeemer," on the contrary do just as the Roman 
soldiers did— "sitting down, they watch him there?" 
Their hearts are not moved with pity, or at least not 
to a sufficiency of sympathy to control their wills and 
conduct, and they continue to be "the enemies of 
the cross of Christ;"— for as he declared, "Whoever 
is not for me is against me." 



It was probably with irony that Pilate wrote out 
the inscription that was placed above our Lord's head 
on the cross, "This is Jesus, the King of the Jews." 
He knew that the rulers of the Jews had delivered 
Jesus to death because they were envious of his influence 
as a teacher; and since the charge that they 
brought against him was "He maketh himself a 
king," claiming, "We have no king but Caesar," and 
since by this hypocritical course they had forced Pilate 
to crucify him, on the claim that it was necessary to 
the protection of the throne of Caesar, therefore Pilate 
now retaliated and used their weapon against themselves. 
But little did he think, of course, that 
this was the true title of the wonderful man Christ 
Jesus, whom they caused to be put to death. Another 
evangelist tells us that the leading Jews objected 
strongly, but that Pilate refused to alter the inscription. 

It was a part of the ignominy which our dear Redeemer 
bore and a part of the "cup" which he desired 
that, if possible, he might be spared drinking, that he 
was crucified between two thieves, and as an evildoer. 
The Apostle says that we should consider this from the 
standpoint of enduring contradiction or opposition of 
sinners against himself, and suggests that it will make 
us stronger (not in fighting with carnal words or weapons, 
but) in enduring similar though lighter opposition 
and afflictions and misrepresentations. 

"He suffered much for me, more than I now can know, 

Of bitterest agony he drained the cup of woe. 

He bore, he bore it all for me. What have I borne for thee?" 

It is proper in this connection to remember that it 
was not the pain which our Lord endured, not the 
agony, which constituted our ransom-price;— it was 
his death. Had he died in a less violent and ignominious 
manner our ransom-price would have been equally 
well paid; but the trials, sufferings and contradictions 
which our Lord endured, while no part of our 
ransom-price, were expedient, in the Father's judgment, 
as being a part of his testing. The patient endurance 
of these proved his loyalty to the Father and 
to righteousness to the fullest degree: and thus proved 
his worthiness of the high exaltation which the Father 
had prepared as his reward. It was in view, not only 
of his humiliation to man-nature and his death for our 
sins, but in view also of the cup of shame and ignominy 
which he drained, that it is written, "Wherefore 
God also hath highly exalted him, and given him a 
name which is above every name, that at the name of 
Jesus every knee should bow, of things in heaven and 
things in earth, and things under the earth."— 
Phil. 2:9,10. 

How strangely the average mind, in its fallen estate, 
unguided by the sound principles of judgment 
and the Lord's word, can be swayed from one extreme 
to the other. This is illustrated by the fact that many 
of those who wagged their heads and reviled the Lord 



upon the cross, and taunted him with his declaration 

that he was the Son of God, and with his statement 

respecting the temple of his body, had evidently been 

amongst those who heard him during the three and a 

half years of his ministry. Some of them probably 

had seen his "many wonderful works," and were 

among those of whom it is written, they "marvelled at 

the gracious words which proceeded out of his mouth;" 

and who said, "When Messiah cometh can he do greater 

works than this man doeth?" Yet when they saw the 

tide turned against him, and especially when the influential 

of their religious teachers opposed him, they 

seem to have been easily swayed. We feel ashamed 

for the weakness of our fallen race as here shown. Yet 

the same thing is exemplified to-day: however pure 

and however luminous may be the presentations of the 

divine truth, if the chief priests and scribes and Pharisees 

of Christendom denounce it, they sway the multitude: 

however pure and true and honorable the lives 

of the Lord's servants, Satan can still suborn false witnesses, 

and secure honorable (?) servants to slander 

and reproach them. But this is what we are to expect. 

Did not our Master say, "It is enough for the disciple 

R2316 :page 172 

that he be as his Master, and the servant as his Lord: 
if they have called the Master of the house Beelzebub, 
how much more shall they call them of his household?" 
Did he not assure us also, "When they shall say all 
manner of evil against you falsely for my sake, rejoice 
and be exceeding glad for great is your reward in 
heaven"? Thus is fulfilled in us the declaration of 
the prophets also, "The reproaches of them that reproached 
thee are fallen upon me." 

The reproaches of the scribes and Pharisees were 
evidently the most cutting of all. When deriding 
Jesus' kingly office, and power, and faith in the heavenly 
Father, and his claimed relationship to him, they 
bantered him to manifest that power and to come down 
from the cross. O, how little they knew that it was 
necessary for the Son of Man to suffer these things 
to enter into his glory. How little they understood 
the divine plan, that Messiah could have no power to 
deliver Israel and the world from the hand of Satan 
and death, except he first of all should lay down his 
life as our ransom price. How thankful we may feel 
that our dear Redeemer was not controlled by passion 
and revenge, but by the Father's will and word, so 
that he endured the abuses of his tormenters in meekness 
and bowed his will to the will and plan of the 
Heavenly Father. 

And similarly how the living members of the body 
of Christ are misunderstood; not only by the worldly, 
but especially by the prominent Pharisees of to-day. 
Verily, "as he is so are we in this world." As the 



world did not understand the Master's sufferings and 
trials, and could not see the necessity for his sacrifice, 
but rather considered these as marks of divine disfavor, 
as it is written, "We did esteem him smitten and afflicted 
of God," so with the Church;— the fact that God's 
consecrated people have his favor in spiritual and not 
in temporal blessings, is misunderstood by the world. 
They see not that the blessing of the spiritual nature 
and the spiritual favors which we seek are to be obtained 
by sacrifice of the earthly favor. But all who 
are of this sacrificing class, and running the race for 
the prize of the high calling may, with the Apostle, 
rejoice in the sufferings of the present time, and count 
its crosses but as loss and dross that they may win 
Christ and be found in him— members of the body of 
the glorified Christ. 

It was not surprising that the two criminals on 
either hand of our Redeemer should join with the 
others in reviling Christ. The only little word of sympathy, 
however, that he received on this occasion, so far 
as the record goes, came later from one of these thieves. 
Our readers are referred to our issue of June 1, 1896, 
in respect to our Lord's promise to the penitent thief. 

Our Lord's crucifixion took place at the sixth 
hour, nine o'clock in the morning— appropriately as 
represented in the type, for this was the hour of the 
morning daily sacrifice, and his death occurred six 
hours later, at three o'clock in the afternoon which, 
according to the Jewish reckoning, was the ninth hour. 
This also was appropriately represented in the type, 
for the daily evening sacrifice was offered at this hour. 
It was fitting also that nature should veil her glories 
before such a scene, and that there should be darkness. 
We are not, however, to suppose that it was a dense 
darkness, but simply darkness, as stated. Nevertheless, 
it must have been supernaturally dark for, as 
it was the full of the moon, a solar eclipse could have 
lasted but a few minutes at most. 

It was now that our Lord uttered those agonizing 
words, "My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken 
me!" He had borne, with wonderful fortitude, 
the contradictions of sinners against himself, and 
Peter's denial, and the fact that all of his disciples fled 
from him, and that his last hours were spent amid the 
jeers of his enemies; but when the moment came that 
the Father's fellowship of spirit was withdrawn from 
him, that was more than he could bear, and it is 
claimed that he died of a literally broken heart, and 
that this was evidenced by the fact that both blood and 
water proceeded from the spear-wound inflicted shortly 
after his death. 

It may be questioned by some whether or not this 
was a failure of our Lord's faith merely, and not an 
actual withdrawal of the Father's favor and communion. 

R2317 :page 172 



We hold, however, that the philosophy of the 
subject proves that it was the latter, and that this was 
a necessary part of our Lord's suffering as the sin-bearer. 
The penalty of Adam's transgression was not 
only death, but additionally separation or alienation 
from him of divine favor and communion: consequently, 
when our Lord Jesus took Adam's place and suffered 
in his room and stead, the just for the unjust, 
that he might redeem us to God by his precious blood, 
—it was not only necessary that he should die on our 
behalf, but it was also necessary that he should experience 
the full cutting off and separation from the 
Father, which was a part of the penalty of Adam's 
transgression. He was not alienated or separated from 
the Father as a sinner throughout the three and a half 
years in which he was laying down his life; neither did 
he suffer the full penalty during those three and a half 
years; but the moment of crisis came at the cross, and 
for at least a brief period he must be deprived of the 
Father's fellowship, and must thus die— as a sinner, 
for our sins; in order that "as by a man came death, 
by a man also should come the resurrection of the 
dead." 
When we consider our dear Master's experience, 

R2317 :page 173 

we do well not to judge much from the last words of 
the dying, respecting their own spiritual state. False 
theories may beget false hopes in some, and lead them 
to believe that they are "sweeping through the gates 
of the New Jerusalem," when really they are sweeping 
through the gates into the great prisonhouse of death. 
The most extravagant dying expressions were not 
made, so far as the record goes, by the Lord or his inspired 
Apostles. Nevertheless they had a good hope, 
a firm hope, a Scriptural hope, a hope which gave 
them strength for the battle of life and to its very 
close to be faithful to the Lord and to the Word of his 
testimony: on the contrary, many of those who die 
with extravagant expressions of hope on their lips were 
less faithful to the Lord, less faithful to his Word, and 
less fully consecrated to his service. Let our faith, 
confidence and rejoicing be as was that of the Master 
and the Apostles, not so much in the experience and 
feelings of the moment as in God's Word and its testimony, 
—the "more sure word of prophecy, to which 
we do well to take heed, as unto a light which shineth 
in a dark place." 

Matthew does not record the words of our Lord 
when "he cried again with a loud voice," but we have 
them from Luke and from John. He said, "It is 
finished! Father into thy hands I commend my 
spirit." 

Many false teachers tell us that nothing was finished, 



and declare that no sacrifice for sins was needed, 

and that none was given; but the testimony of the 

Scriptures is explicit on this subject that without a sacrifice, 

"without the shedding of blood, there is 

no remission of sins." Our Lord's sacrifice dated 

from the time that he reached manhood's estate, thirty 

years, when he came promptly to John at Jordan, and 

was baptized— thus outwardly symbolizing his full consecration 

of himself unto death, in doing the Father's 

will. The sacrifice there begun was faithfully continued 

down to his last moment. When he had endured 

to the very last all the ignominy, all the shame, and 

was finally cut off from communion with the Father— 

this was the last, and so our Lord indicated by the 

words, "It is finished." His work was finished; the 

redemption price was finished; the sufferings were over; 

he had finished the work which the Father had given 

him to do, so far as its shameful and ignominious features 

were concerned. Another part of his work remained 

and is yet unfinished, namely, the work of blessing 

all the families of the earth, bestowing upon them 

the gracious favor and opportunities of eternal life secured 

to them justly by his sacrifice for sins. 

He gave up the ghost, that is the spirit. What 
spirit? He did not yield up his spirit body; for at this 
time he had no spirit body. Thirty-four years before 
he had laid aside spirit conditions and nature, to become 
partaker of a human nature, through his mother 
Mary— the spirit of life which belonged to him there having 
been transferred to human conditions. He enjoyed 
and exercised this spirit of life or life-power, as the 
animating, vivifying principle of his human body, for 
thirty-three and a half years; now he was surrendering 
it up in death— dissolution. The crucified flesh was 
to be his no longer, for, as the Apostle declares, he 
took upon him the form of a servant, for the suffering 
of death, and not for the keeping of that form of a servant 
to all eternity. The promise of the Father was that he 
should be glorified with himself, and even with a still 
higher glory than he had with the Father before the 
world was,— and that was a spiritual glory, and not a 
human glory. He left spiritual conditions when he 
"was made flesh and dwelt amongst us;" but he trusted 
in the Father that when he had finished the work 
given him to do he should be again received up into 
glory— the spirit condition. Thus he said to the disciples, 
"What and if the Son of Man should ascend up 
where he was before?" 

His commitment of his spirit to the Father's care 
implied therefore that he knew thoroughly just what 
death is— a cessation of being— yet had confidence in 
the Father that he would not be permitted to remain 
forever in death, but would be granted again, in resurrection, 
the spirit of life which he now laid down in 
harmony with the Father's will. He knew and had 
foretold to his disciples that he would be raised from 



the dead on the third day. He recognized that his 

spirit of life, his vitality, his being, came from the 

Father, originally, and was subject to the Father's 

power and care: and knowing that the Father had 

promised to give him being again, he here merely expresses 

his confidence in this promise. And his confidence 

was abundantly fulfilled, in that God raised 

him from the dead, highly exalted in nature, not only 

above human nature but far above angels and principalities 

and powers," to the very highest plane of the 

spirit nature, namely, to the divine nature. 

And, remarkable as it may seem, this is the very 
same invitation that is extended to the Church of this 
Gospel age, that they may have fellowship with their 
Master's sufferings, and eventually have fellowship also 
with him in glory, and as "partakers of the divine nature" 
and its glory, honor and immortality, far above 
the honor and nature of angels, tho that be grand, and 
a little higher than perfect mankind. (2 Pet. 1:4; 
Rom. 2:7; Psa. 8:5.) In view of all this we may well 
exhort one another to "lay aside every weight, and to 
run with patience the race set before us in the gospel, 
looking unto Jesus, the author of our faith, until he 
shall become the finisher of it." 



R2317 :page 174 

"A SPIRIT HATH NOT FLESH AND BONES." 

--JUNE 19.-MATT. 28:8-20.- 

"I am he that liveth, and was dead; and 
behold I am alive for evermore."— Rev. 1:18. 

WOMAN had the honor of being first to be 
made acquainted with the fact of our Lord's 
resurrection, and to receive his first message thereafter. 
Perhaps this was in part because the feminine 
mind seems naturally to grasp such subjects more 
quickly than the masculine mind, by what is sometimes 
termed intuitive faith, in contradistinction to 
what might be termed analytical faith. Or this may 
have been as a special recognition of woman's tender 
sympathy, which sought the earliest opportunity to 
bring balms and spices and to otherwise show sympathy 
and love for the deceased. At all events the 
women, who were earliest at the sepulchre, had a rich 
reward for their service, and for the love which prompted 
it. 

They were fearful and surprised when they received 
the angel's message that Jesus was risen; yet 
they grasped the fact by "intuitive faith." As they 
eagerly ran to carry the joyful news to the brethren, 
Jesus met them in the way, revealing himself in such 



a body as they could recognize. They worshiped at 
his feet, and held him fast, as tho fearful that he would 
leave them; but the Master consoled them, and sent 
them on their journey as bearers of his message to his 
disciples. 

His words, "Touch me not, for I am not yet 
ascended to my Father... and to your Father, to 
my God and to your God" (John 20:17), were doubtless 
uttered at this time, and need examination; because 
they have been sadly misconstrued. Professor Young's 
Lexicon shows that the word here rendered touch has 
the significance of "hold on." Mary evidently had already 
touched the Lord, for, as Matthew declares, they 
were holding the Lord by the feet. They evidently 
were fearful that the power which had raised our Lord 
would transport him elsewhere. Probably, too, from 
the time the angels told them that he was risen, they 
had been discussing the matter and remembered that 
he had so told them and had said that he would "ascend 
up where he was before." So now, when they 
saw him and really embraced his feet they feared to 
let go, lest they should see him no more. From this 
standpoint of view our Lord's words plainly meant: 
Do not hold me as tho fearful that you will never see 
me more; my time to ascend to your Father and God 
and mine has not yet come. Go carry the news to the 
brethren. And remember that my God is your God, 
my Father in heaven is your Father in heaven. 

In view of the fact that our Lord thus sent women as 
his special messengers, we may well consider it as an indication 

R2318 :page 174 

to us that while the Lord and the Apostles never 

commissioned women to take the chief and public place 

in the preaching of the Gospel, yet they have a good 

place in this great service of the truth, a not less noble, 

tho less public mission in connection with the promulgation 

of the gospel. It is safe for us to suppose that 

the natural tenderness and love supplemented by the 

holy spirit of love, fits and qualifies her for many important 

tho less obtrusive and aggressive services for the 

Lord and his people. And happy are the brethren, 

and happy the sisters in the Church of Christ, where 

their mutual helpfulness in the service is recognized, 

and where each cooperates with the other, and 

seeks to follow as nearly as possible the divine order 

and custom in the use of their respective talents. See 

"Man and woman in the divine order," in our issue 

of July, '93. 

The narrative of the sealing of the sepulchre and 
the setting of the watch, lest the disciples should steal 
away the Lord's body, seems to show conclusively that 
the religious leaders of the Jews were thoroughly blinded, 
and that our Lord's character, works and teachings, 
had no influence whatever upon them;— that they had 



not the slightest suspicion of who he was, nor of the 
fulfilment of his prediction that he would arise from 
the dead. Their only thought was that a fraud might 
be perpetrated by his disciples. But their evil suspicions 
were overruled by the Lord for good, and became a 
testimony of the truth, and an assistance to faith on 
the part of believers. 

It was not necessary to our Lord's resurrection 
that the stone before the sepulchre should be moved, 
and the body from within also be removed; because the 
body which he has now is no more his former body of 
flesh than that body of flesh was his former spirit body, 
which he had before he became a man: nor were the 
atoms of matter composing this earthly body transformed 
into spiritual atoms to compose his spiritual 
body, any more than our natural bodies will be our 
spiritual bodies, if we have part in the first resurrection, 
or their elements be required from which to construct 
our spiritual bodies. The Apostle Paul makes 
this very clear by his statement, "there is an animal 
body and there is a spiritual body." 

These two kinds of bodies are dissimilar. A fleshly, 
an earthly or animal body is composed of flesh, 
blood and bones; but, as our Master declared, "a spirit 
hath not flesh and bones," etc. As our Lord could not 
use his heavenly or spirit body, when he came to be 
man's substitute and ransom price, and as he was therefore 
obliged to lay aside the glory of that higher nature 
and humble himself and take "the form of a servant, 
for the suffering of death," so, when he had finished 
the suffering and death, finished the work that the 

R2318 :page 175 

Father had given him to do, and was to be received up 

again into the glory which he had with the Father before 

the world was, the human body would no longer 

be suitable. He must have again a spirit body. "That 

which is born of the flesh is flesh, and that which is 

born of the spirit is spirit." The form of a servant 

would not be suitable for him whom the Father delighted 

to honor and to highly exalt even above his 

former glorious station— "far above angels and principalities 

and powers and every name that is named." 

He therefore must be given a glorious body, "the express 

image of the Father's person;"— and such his 

resurrection body was. 

It is difficult for some, because of long-established 
habits of incorrect thought on this subject, to realize 
what the Apostle Paul means when he says, "Tho we 
have known Christ after the flesh, yet now henceforth 
know we him [so] no more;" or what the Apostle Peter 
means when he says, "He was put to death in the 
flesh, but quickened in spirit." Just what this means 
may be seen with greatest clearness, perhaps, from the 
words of the Apostle Paul, in describing the resurrection 



of the overcoming Church, the first [chief] resurrection," 
in which all the members of the body of 
Christ are to share, with their Head and Lord. Since 
we are to know "the power of his resurrection" as 
members of his body (Phil. 3:10), it follows that any 
description that we can obtain of what our resurrection 
will be, must of necessity be a description also of his 
resurrection, since we are to share his resurrection— 
the first resurrection. 

Concerning this first resurrection, the Apostle 
teaches that not the body that is sown will be 
raised, but another body, according to divine arrangement. 
And contrasting these two bodies, the 
one which we now have, and the one which we shall 
have, he declares that the body which dies is sown in 
corruption, the body which shall be is raised in incorruption; 
the body which dies, dies in weakness, the 
body which shall be raised will be raised in power; the 
body which dies, dies in dishonor, the body which is 
raised will be raised in glory. The body which dies is 
a natural body, an animal body, an earthly body; the 
body of the resurrection will be a spiritual body, a heavenly 
body, not flesh and blood— not a human body. 

The point of connection between our Lord's earthly 
body and his spiritual body is confused in the minds 
of many by reason of a certain fact which is not generally 
taken into consideration, namely, that our Lord, 
after his resurrection, had a work to do with his disciples 
to establish their faith in his resurrection, and 
to prepare and equip them for the work before them, 
of proclaiming the gospel to every creature. Because 
they were still natural men, and had not yet fully 
received the baptism of the holy spirit which came 
upon them at Pentecost, after Jesus was glorified, 
therefore they were not prepared to understand or appreciate 
spiritual things; as the Apostle Paul declares, 
"The natural man receiveth not the things of the spirit 
of God, neither can he know them, for they are 
spiritually discerned." But it was necessary that the 
disciples should believe in the Lord Jesus Christ, before 
he ascended to the Father, in order that they might be 
in the proper attitude of heart to be made the recipients 
of the holy spirit at Pentecost, for it was not to 
come upon unbelievers, but upon believers. 

In choosing how he would reveal himself to his 
disciples and make known his resurrection from the 
dead, our Lord surely chose the best method; and yet 
his method was different from that which he afterward 
adopted in dealing with the Apostle Paul. To Paul 
he showed his real body, the brightness of which affected 
his eyesight, making him blind, and felling him 
to the earth; shining, as he declared, with greater 
brightness than the sun at noonday. Had our Lord 
appeared thus to the women when they went to the 
sepulchre, or to the disciples, as he met them subsequently, 
the effect would have been much less favorable 



than by the method which he did pursue; they 
were already astounded enough, at the wonderful 
things which had transpired in the preceding few days. 
He therefore adopted the method which had been in 
vogue previously, the method used by angels sent on 
special missions to men, and by our Lord himself on 
some of these missions, before his nature was changed 
—before he "was made flesh"— while he was still a 
spirit being. For instance, he appeared as a man to 
Abraham, and talked with him and ate with him; but 
that appearance to Abraham was not a change of nature, 
but merely a vailing of the heavenly nature in a 
body of human flesh. Thus vailed, he could talk with 
Abraham and Sarah and do so without alarming them. 
Just so it was after his resurrection; altho he was no 
longer a man, but had become a partaker of the divine 
nature, and the express image of his Father's person, 
yet he appeared as a man— and in different forms at 
different times; once as the gardener, to Mary; again 
as a stranger, to the two who went to Emmaus; and 
again, in the upper room, he appeared in a body like 
to his former self, bearing marks of the nails and of 
the spear. This was to convince Thomas, who declared 
that otherwise he would not believe in the resurrection; 
nevertheless with the desired evidence the 
Lord gave a gentle reproof to the effect that others, 
who could believe without demanding that physical 
test, were the more blessed. 

Even as it was, with all these precautions and evidences 
to the "natural man," we are informed that 

R2318 :page 176 

tho they worshiped him, "some doubted." If he had 
appeared to them as he appeared to Saul of Tarsus 
later, can we doubt that they would have been perplexed 
more than enlightened? They would have 
been unable to recognize that it was the Lord who had 
previously been a spirit being, and who became a human 
being for our redemption, who had now been revived 
from death, no longer a man but a spirit being: 
that now he possessed all the powers of a spirit being, 
to appear in any form found desirable— as a burning 
bush or as a man, as a fisherman, or as a gardener, 
or as a wayfarer, or as his former self. As the Apostles 
had time to gradually take in the situation, they 
understood that it was he, their Lord, yet that he was 
now changed, and totally unlike his former self, and 
without human limitations. They were not prepared 
to understand the meaning of the teaching that we 
must all be "changed," in the twinkling of an eye, 
during the last trumpet, in order that we may "be like 
him, and see him as he is"— not as he was, nor as we 
are. 

Our Lord's message, "All power is given unto me 
in heaven and in earth," is in sharp contrast with his 



previous utterances, prior to his resurrection, while he 
was finishing the work of sacrifice which the Father 
had given him to do. Then he had said repeatedly, 
"Of my own self I can do nothing; as I hear I speak." 
What was the change? Why now speak of himself so 
differently— as possessing a power which he previously 
disclaimed? It was because he had been "changed." 
—He was no longer the man Christ Jesus, to suffer 
death; but having suffered it he was now risen, glorified, 
"Lord of all." His own trial and testing for 
worthiness to be heir of all was past. His resurrection 
as a spirit being was the evidence that he was accepted 
as "worthy to receive glory and honor, dominion and 

R2319 :page 176 

might, forever and ever." And not only so, but by 
his death he had purchased humanity and all the 
hopes, privileges, rights and interests originally belonging 
to humanity, as well as those conferred upon it 
through the divine oath of promise to father Abraham, 
to Isaac and Jacob, and David. These words, then, 
were a modest announcement of the great victory won 
for himself, and for Adam and his race. 

Such an announcement of his own victory and of 
the purchase of mankind, and of his present power, 
therefore, to uplift mankind out of sin and out of death, 
was a proper prelude or preface to the commission 
which he then and there gave to the Apostles, saying, 
"Go ye, therefore, and teach all nations." 

His own teaching and that of the apostles had 
previously been confined to the Jewish nation, in harmony 
with God's covenant with that people, through 
Moses; but now, having sealed the New Covenant with 
his blood, having consummated this New Covenant, 
ratifying it at Calvary, he was authorizing that it 
be put into operation. Now was the proper time, 
therefore, to declare it to be both broader and deeper 
than the Law Covenant instituted by Moses, (1) in 
that it is not confined to Israel after the flesh, but is 
for all nations, (2) in that it is efficacious to the perfecting 
of all those who come unto the Father through 
its mediator, and according to its terms, and not merely 
a temporary assistance. 

The teachings which were to be presented to the 
nations are specified by our Lord as being— "whatsoever 
I have commanded you." This, then, proves 
that the kernel of the Gospel is not the Jewish Law, 
nor certain scientific theories and abstruse problems; 
but the simple teachings which our Lord delivered to 
the apostles. What were these? 

(1) He taught that all men were sinners. 

(2) That he came into the world to "give his life 

a ransom"— a corresponding price for the sins of the 
whole world. 

(3) That no man could come unto the Father, 



but by him. 

(4) That all who would come by him must, in addition 
to the exercise of faith in him, also take up his 

cross and follow him. 

(5) That all believers are one with him, as the 
branches of a grapevine are parts of the vine. 

(6) That every branch to abide in him must bring 
forth fruit, else it will be taken away. 

(7) That those who trust in him are to hope for 
and to expect his second coming— "I will come again, 
and receive you unto myself." 

(8) That the ultimate end of our hope for all 
promised blessings is in and through a resurrection of 
the dead. 

(9) That Love is the law of the New Covenant— 
"Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, 
mind, soul and strength; and, thou shalt love thy 
neighbor as thyself." 

We are fully authorized, therefore, to teach and 
to believe that these are the points of faith and practice 
which are necessary to both Jews and Gentiles who 
shall be favored with the call of this Gospel age; and 
that nothing else is necessary or pertinent to the "doctrine 
of our Lord Jesus Christ" or "the faith once delivered 
to the saints." Whoever makes tests greater 
or lesser than these is in error. 

Our Lord's statement that he would be with his 
people always even unto the end of the age, no more 
signifies that he did not leave the world, than it signifies 
that his hearers would continue to live until the 
end of the age. His words here are not to be understood 
as contradictory of his words elsewhere; but they 
should be understood in harmony with other statements, 
to the effect that, while he would be absent 
from his people during this age, having "ascended up 
on high, there to appear in the presence of God for 
us," nevertheless, his power and spirit and care and 
love would be with his people throughout the age; to 
guard their interests, to overrule in their affairs, and 
to cause that all things should work together for good 
to them that love him;— until in the end of the age, 
according to his promise, he would appear a second 
time, not as a sin-offering, but unto salvation— to receive 
his Church unto himself in glory, and to bless 
the sin-sick and blinded world with the true light 
which, it is promised, shall enlighten every man.— 
John 1:9. 



page 177 
VOL. XIX. JUNE 15, 1898. No. 12. 



CONTENTS. 



Mean Christians and Noble 

Unbelievers 179 

The Need of the Good Physician 

Not Realized 179 

The Law of Heredity Involved 181 

"The Testimony of the Lord is Sure, 

Making Wise the Simple" 182 

"See that Ye Love One Another" 183 

Poem: "The Light of the Word" 184 

"The Waning of Evangelicalism" 184 

Solomon's Kingdom Divided 187 

Elijah, the Prophet 190 

page 178 

SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
--ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 56-60 ARCH STREET, ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, N.Y. DRAFT, MONEY ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS: 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age or accident, or other 
adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, if they 
send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting the 
paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list 
constantly. 



R2319 :page 179 

MEAN CHRISTIANS AND NOBLE UNBELIEVERS. 



SURELY none will dispute the statement that 
there are noble characters amongst unbelievers 
as well as amongst Christians; neither will anyone of 
experience dispute that there are mean people amongst 
Christians as well as amongst worldly. But how shall 
we account for this? Should we not reasonably expect 
that the noble principles of true Christianity would 
attract all of the best minds of the world, and rather 
repel the meaner dispositions? Should we not expect 
that the doctrines of Christ, the spirit of his teachings, 
namely, meekness, gentleness, brotherly kindness, love, 
would attract all who have sympathy with these qualities, 
hence all of the nobleminded of the world? And 
should we not likewise expect that since the Scriptures 



and the spirit of the Lord condemn all anger, malice, 
hatred, envy, strife, backbitings, evil speakings, impurities, 
etc., that all those who have sympathy with 
such works of the flesh and of the devil would be repelled 
by the Gospel of Christ? 

Whatever the tendency of our mental philosophy 
on the subject, the facts of the case prove to us that 
proportionately a larger number of the world's noble-minded 
children reject the Lord and his Gospel, and 
that a larger proportion of the world's ignoble children 
accept the Gospel of Christ. The still more interesting 
and perplexing question therefore is, how shall we 
account for this very peculiar condition which seems 
contrary to all and every expectation. 

We account for it along the lines of our Lord's 
statement, that he came not to call the righteous but 
sinners to repentance. True, there is none righteous, 
no, not one; all have sinned and come short of the 
glory of God; the fall of father Adam involved every 
member of his posterity; hence all are sinners and all 
need the grace of God in Christ for the forgiveness of 
their sins: but those who find themselves morally and 
intellectually less fallen than some of their neighbors 
are inclined to a self righteous feeling, even tho they 
would disclaim perfection. They are therefore the less 
inclined to acknowledge themselves to be nothing, unworthy 
of divine favor, and to bow themselves in the 
dust at the foot of the cross, and to receive, as an unmerited 
gift of God, the boon of eternal life through 
Jesus Christ our Lord. 

THE NEED OF THE GOOD PHYSICIAN NOT REALIZED. 



They feel that some of the more degraded of the race 
do need divine pity and forgiveness, and they feel glad 
that God has compassion for these, and will help them; 
but somehow they feel that they do not need the imputed 
robes of Christ's righteousness to cover them; 
they feel as tho they are so respectable that if God accepts 
anyone to a future life he will surely not exclude them. 
They look about them and compare themselves with 
Christians, and often with a large degree of complacency 
assure themselves that their ideas of right and 
wrong and of moral responsibility, and of benevolence 
etc., are higher, nobler, better than those of professed 
Christians: and say to themselves, God is just, and 
while I am not perfect I am a great deal better than the 
majority of Christians, and I am sure, therefore, that 
God in justice will take as much care of me as he will of 
others who I see are inferior to me in some of the good 
qualities of heart and mind. Like the Pharisee of old, 
they thank God that they are not as other men and 

R2319 :page 180 



neglect "the only name given under heaven or among 
men whereby we must be saved." 

The class we are describing is a numerous class, 
more numerous than many persons would suppose until 
they reflect on the subject. And it includes many far 
from hypocritical who have never understood the gospel. 
Several of the presidents of the United States, 
have been men of this class,— reverent toward religion, 
moral in their course of life, just in their dealings— 
for instance, Lincoln and Grant; and we merely mention 
these as ensamples of a class. Besides, many properly 
of this class are either Church attendants or Church 
members. They appreciate the fact that directly or 
indirectly the moral uplift of civilization is associated 
with Christianity and are pleased to take their stand on 
the moral and popular side, tho they have never accepted 
at the hands of divine grace the forgiveness of sins 
through faith in the precious blood of Christ. 

We see their difficulty: it is that they do not recognize 
that the Lord is dealing upon principles of 
strict justice and law. Divine law and justice declare 
that all imperfection is contrary to God, that God's 
work was perfect originally in Adam, and that he 

R2320 : page 180 

never can accept to harmony with himself anything that 
is imperfect. They fail to see that under this law, 
whoever is guilty in that which is least, is nevertheless 
guilty; and comes under the same death penalty with 
him who is guilty of many and more serious offences. 
Since, then, all men are imperfect— none absolutely 
righteous— the one sentence of death grasps every member 
of the human family. And there is no door of escape 
from death, no door of entrance into life except the one 
which God has provided— Christ Jesus, the righteous, 
who became man's Redeemer by the sacrifice of himself. 
He who fails to go through the door never attains 
to life, however much he may strive against sin, 
and however closely he may approach to the door. Only 
passage through the door can mean an entrance into 
eternal life. "He that hath not the Son shall not see 
life, but the wrath of God [the sentence of death] abideth 
upon him."— John 3:36. 

The same philosophy of the subject shows to us 
why it is that a proportionately larger number of the 
world's ignoble than of its noble children come to 
Christ. Only those who feel that they are sinners, 
who feel that they need relief from sin, appreciate 
the offer of forgiveness. Only the sick, who realize 
that they are sick, feel their need of the Great 
Physician. Many indeed seek the Lord's grace because 
they realize to some extent their own fallen, degraded 
condition, and that they are meaner people than 
others;— only this seems to awaken them to a realization 



of their position; only this leads them to cry out, 
"Have mercy upon me, thou Son of David." And this 
attitude of the realization of personal unworthiness of 
the divine favor is necessary to all who would accept 
the grace of God on the only conditions upon which it 
is offered. 

Having thus found the philosophical basis of our 
subject, we proceed to inquire concerning the result. 
What is the legitimate result of acceptance of Christ? 
We answer, the inevitable result of a proper acceptance 
of Christ, under the terms of the New Covenant must 
be moral uplifting; because the condition upon which 
Christ receives anyone is, that he desires not only to be 
forgiven the sins that are past, but he desires also to 
forsake sin for the future. The lower he may be in the 
scale of morality the more radical will the change 
eventually be, but the less proportionately will he realize 
at the beginning of his conversion all the steps of 
purification, of word and thought and act, which lie 
before him in the Christian pathway. He will at first 
think merely of the reform of the grosser manifestations 
of sin, but step by step and lesson by lesson he 
will be instructed by the great Teacher, and brought 
onward in knowledge and in appreciation, and in 
character upbuilding, if he continue in the school 
of Christ. 

The requirement of the great Teacher, through the 
Apostle, is that those who come unto him, in full consecration, 
after being accepted on the ground of faith, 
must at once begin to "put away all filthiness of the 
flesh and of the spirit, perfecting holiness in the reverence 
of the Lord." Whoever will not make the attempt 
to do this will not be continued in the school of 
Christ, because he has not his spirit, and not having 
his spirit he is "none of his." "Whosoever practices sin 
[knowingly, willingly] is of the devil." (1 John 3:8.) 
Nevertheless it may require years of schooling and discipline 
under the Great Teacher before some of those 
who were deeply sunken in the mire of sin and selfishness, 
and many consequent meannesses of disposition, 
become even moderately or passably good, noble characters. 
Character is more like the oak than like the 
mushroom; it requires time for its development. Yet, 
as the oak might be quickly killed with an axe, so 
even a strong character might be quickly undermined, 
prostrated, overthrown by sin. In other words, upward 
development is slow, but downward tendencies 
may take effect rapidly, if permitted. Consequently 
many Christians can see that while the religion of 
Christ has done much to help them and their friends 
out of the miry clay of sin, and to put them on the 
Rock, Christ Jesus, and has cleansed them from many 
of the defilements of the flesh, and many of its meannesses 
of disposition, yet perhaps after ten, twenty or 
forty years of such discipline and perseverance, they 
may with surprise behold some unbeliever whom they 



R2320 :page 181 

must acknowledge to be their equal in moral probity, 
uprightness or generosity. 

THE LAW OF HEREDITY INVOLVED. 



The question arises, How is this? We answer 
that as moral deflection affects the children to the third 
and fourth generation, so moral attainments may affect 
the children to several generations. Hence parents 
who have been upright and Godfearing, who have 
endeavored to cultivate in themselves the graces of the 
spirit, not only benefit themselves, and approach more 
nearly than at first to the grand standard of perfection, 
but their children will be born with better natural qualifications 
as well as under conditions more favorable to 
righteousness and nobility of soul. For the heart attainments 
of the parents are reflected in the physical 
conditions of their children. 

And this, by the way, proves conclusively that 
many professedly pious parents are less noble at heart 
than we could have hoped; for if, during the period of 
conception and gestation, parental thoughts, feelings, 
sentiments have been cultivated along the lines of nobility, 
purity, holiness, reverence, benevolence, justice 
and love, their children would show it; and results 
would be blessed both to the children and the parents. 
The natural qualities of the child were willed to it before 
its birth, chiefly by the mother, and the mother's 
ideals were considerably those of the father if they 
were well mated. Christian parents should awake to 
their responsibilities in the exercise of their procreative 
powers entrusted to them by the Almighty. It is a 
disgrace to our civilization that so many in civilized 
lands are low-born, even amongst those who recognize 
the laws of heredity and who carefully guard the breeding 
of their cattle and sheep and dogs and horses: it 
must be that the influence of the parental mind upon 
posterity is not recognized. Let these thoughts not 
only guard parents in respect to future offspring, but 
also make them very patient and painstaking with 
present children when attempting to train out of them 
blemishes of character which they helped to implant. 
The first duty of a parent to his child is to give him 
the most favorable start in life within his power. 

The children of Christian parents, favorably bred, 
if they also become Christians and begin a warfare in 
their own hearts against moral uncleanness and sin, 
and against all the mean and selfish propensities of the 
fallen nature, may, by the grace of God, attain to a 
moral position higher than that attained by their parents, 
—through putting into practice the instructions 



of the great Teacher. But here comes in another side 
of the question: God does not accept the children of 
believers on account of parental faith beyond the period 
of their minority. So soon as years of accountability 
have been reached, a personal covenant with the Lord 
is required, if they would be his in any special sense; 
otherwise they are reckoned as being of the world and 
under its condemnation, and not under the justification 
which extends only to believers and their minor children. 
(1 Cor. 7:14.) God makes the entrance into his 
family and school an individual matter. 

And here we find the secret of how it comes that 
some of the noblest men of the world are not the Lord's 
people. They are the children of some whose feet 
have been lifted out of the miry clay of sin; they have 
inherited through their parents a share in the uplifting 
which the teaching of Christ brought into the 
world, amongst those who follow his teaching. Thus 
we see that Infidelity has nothing to boast of in its 
noblest sons, for what they have that is noble and great 
came generally through the belief, the faith, of their 
ancestors. On the contrary, the tendency of unbelief 
is toward sin and its degradation. It may not come in 
one generation, or it may. The son of noble Christian 
parents who has inherited a more noble mind than 
the masses, may maintain that mind to some extent 
through life, and if he take pride in his morality he 
may, at least on the surface, keep up a good appearance, 
and may transmit some of it to his posterity. 
But eventually selfishness will undermine and destroy 
nobility, and we may as surely expect a degradation in 
the posterity of such who do not receive Christ, as we 
may expect an advancement on the part of all who do 
accept Christ. 

ILLUSTRATED IN THE PRIMITIVE CHURCH. 



The general operation of this law can only be appreciated 
as we look out over a grand scope of territory 
and over centuries of time. As we look back to the 
days of our Lord and the Apostles, we find that the 
Gospel laid hold upon the very class that we have here 
described, the publicans and sinners, the lower classes, 
while it was rejected by the worldlywise, the hypocritical 
and the pharisaical, who were morally and intellectually 
the superior class, and on this very account 
rejected Christ;— not feeling their need of a Savior. 
Looking intently at the Gospel Church, with its lowly 
beginning, in the poorest class, we find that whoever 
entered the school of Christ and was taught of him 
was uplifted by obedience to that Teacher. This 
higher teaching of the Master, to the effect that we 
should love not only one another, but should sympathetically 
love even those who hate us, who malign us 



and who persecute us, saying all manner of evil against 
us falsely, for his sake; and that divine blessing rests 
upon the meek, the patient, the humble, the peacemakers; 
and that the sum of all graces is love; became 
the standard among his followers. We find the 

R2320 :page 182 

very same teaching coming from the humble fishermen 
and publicans who accepted him, and whom he sent 
forth as the Apostles of his grace. 

R2321 : page 182 

For instance, we find the Apostle Peter saying, 
"Add to your faith patience, experience, brotherly 
kindness, love." We find the Apostle John saying, 
"He that loveth not his brother, whom he hath seen, 
how can he love God, whom he hath not seen?" We find 
the Apostle James saying that all who are taught of the 
Lord should "show out of a good conversation [life] his 
works with meekness of wisdom, but if ye have bitter 
envying and strife in your hearts, glory not. .Submit 
yourselves to God. Resist the devil and he will 
flee from you. Draw nigh to God, and he will draw 
nigh to you. Humble yourselves in the sight of the 
Lord, and he shall lift you up. Speak not evil one of 
another, brethren." "Hearken, my beloved brethren, 
hath not God chosen the poor of this world, rich in 
faith, and heirs of the Kingdom which he hath promised 
to them that love him?" 

We hear the Apostle Paul, who once was of the 
nobler, the Pharisee class, giving utterance to the same 
truth, and in all humility acknowledging that "there 
is none righteous, no, not one," and explaining that 
only as we accept Christ have we the forgiveness of 
sins or reconciliation with the Father; and explaining 
further that having put on Christ we should be new 
creatures in him; that old things should be past and 
gone, forever, and that we should walk thenceforth in 
newness of life, not according to the will of the flesh 
but according to the purpose of the Lord. Hear him 
exhorting those who have taken the name of Christ, 
assuring them that they must also take his spirit or 
disposition, and have the same mind [disposition] 
which was also in Christ Jesus our Lord, a mind in 
opposition to sin and meanness and selfishness, a mind 
in harmony with truth and goodness and purity and 
benevolence, love. 

And he explains this, saying: "Love worketh 
no ill to his neighbor; love is the fulfilling of the law. 
Let us therefore cast off the works of darkness, and let 
us put on the armor of light; let us walk honestly. 
Put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ, and make no provisions 
for the flesh to fulfil the lusts thereof. Recompense 
no man evil for evil. Provide things honest 



in the sight of all men. If it be possible, as much as 
lieth in you, live peaceably with all men. Avenge not 
yourselves, but rather give place unto wrath, for it is 
written, Vengeance is mine, I will repay, saith the Lord. 
Therefore, if thine enemy hunger, feed him, if he thirst, 
give him drink." 

He explained in particular the love which is the essence 
of the spirit of God, the spirit of Christ, which 
all followers of the Lord must have if they would be 
and continue to be his, saying: "Love suffereth long 
and is kind; love envieth not; love vaunteth not itself, 
is not puffed up, doth not behave itself unseemly, seeketh 
not her own, is not easily provoked, thinketh no 
evil; rejoiceth not in iniquity, but rejoiceth in the 
truth. Love beareth all things, believeth all things, 
hopeth all things, endureth all things. Love never 
faileth." 

"THE TESTIMONY OF THE LORD IS SURE, MAKING 
WISE THE SIMPLE."--PSA. 19:7-14. 



It would be impossible for any class of people, 
however mentally and morally degraded they might 
be, to receive such instructions into good and honest 
hearts, without being uplifted by them, made more 
noble, more Christlike, more Godlike. It does not 
surprise us, therefore, to find that in the first century 
even, the Lord's people became noted for their high 
principles and morality, insomuch that the masses of 
the people "took knowledge of them that they had 
been with Jesus and learned of him." Then we see 
how the adversary corrupted the truth from the simplicity 
in which it was presented by the Lord and the 
Apostles. We see forms and ceremonies, genuflections 
and masses, bondage to creeds and theories of 
men, taking the place of the pure gospel of Christ, and 
we note the result, that in proportion as the teachings 
of Christ were ignored, in the same proportion superstition 
came in, and the spirit of Christ was lacking. 

Nevertheless, with all the corruption which came into 
the world with the second century, there was a sufficiency 
of the true spirit intermixed with the error to 
work a vast reformation in the savages of Europe, and 
to bring them into a condition of civilization higher 
than that of the rest of the world. And when in the 
divine providence the Reformation movement was inaugurated 
it lifted the same class of people immeasurably 
higher in moral tone. It restored much of the 
primitive purity of Christianity and of the spirit of 
Christ; and in proportion as the Word of God has been 
free amongst the people, and in proportion as they 
have received it gladly and have permitted its ennobling 
sentiments to germinate in their hearts and bring 
forth its fruitage, in this proportion we have seen the 



peoples which came under the direct influence of the 
Reformation lifted still higher than the remainder of 
the world. 

THE WASHED SOW STILL CRAVES THE MIRE. 



In all of this we observe the principle at first set forth; 
namely, that it is the spirit of Christ, the spirit of 
truth, the spirit of righteousness from the Word of the 
Lord, which is the civilizing, enlightening and ennobling 
influence which has wrought the marvelous 

R2321 : page 183 

changes of this Christian era and especially of this last 
century. Papacy and sectarianism hindered but could 
not thwart its influence. It still continues to take hold 
of the lower classes of society, and lifts them up; and 
the tendency is still observable, that when they are 
lifted up they are the less likely to be appreciative of 
the divine goodness. Thus it is that not many great, 
not many learned, not many wise according to the 
course of this world, hath God chosen; but the poor of 
this world, rich in faith, to be heirs of the Kingdom. 

The broader and clearer our view of the situation, 
the more will we be able to sympathize with those of 
our brethren in Christ who by nature are mean, ignoble, 
selfish, lacking in benevolence of thought and 
word and conduct. When we realize that God has accepted 
them,— not because of their good and noble 
character, but because they admit its deficiencies and 
because they desire to become reformed, transformed, 
by the renewing of their minds— then all who have the 
Lord's mind or spirit will likewise receive them. In 
proportion as we have the mind of Christ, the holy 
mind, we will view them from the divine standpoint of 
sympathy for their weaknesses and ignoble qualities; 
and instead of condemning them and spurning them 
and cutting their acquaintance, because they do not 
come up to the noblest standards, we will desire all 
the more to help them up and seek kindly to point out 
to them the matters which they do not clearly see. 
We will be patient with them as we see them striving 
to overcome. We will realize that they contend against 
a mental disease that they have to some extent inherited, 
and which can only be gradually eradicated. 

From this standpoint we will learn to view them 
and to think of them not according to their flesh, not 
according to their natural tendencies and dispositions, 
but according to the spirit, according to the intentions 
of their minds, according to their covenant with the 
Lord. Thus, as the Apostle declares, we know each 
other no longer after the flesh, but after the spirit. 
Each one who has accepted God's grace under the New 



Covenant, and become a partaker of the spirit of holiness, 
and is striving against sin in all its forms,— in 
thought and word and conduct,— all such are striving 
for the grand perfection of character of which our dear 
Redeemer is the only perfect illustration. All such 
confess themselves imperfect copies of God's dear Son 
and seek to grow in his likeness. All such are seeking 
to put away all the works of the flesh and the devil,— 
not only the grosser evils (murder, theft, etc.), but 
also the more common elements of an ignoble, perverted 
nature, anger, malice, hatred, strife, etc. And all 
these are seeking to put on more and more the complete 
armor of God, and to resist sin; and to cultivate 
in themselves the same mind which was also in Christ 
Jesus,— meekness, patience, long-suffering, brotherly 
kindness, love. 

"SEE THAT YE LOVE ONE ANOTHER." 



Let us (Christians), then, take a broader view of 
matters, and especially of all who have named the 
name of Christ, and who give any evidence of seeking 
to walk in his footsteps. Let our love for them cover 
not only the little, trifling blemishes and differences 
from ourselves, but let our love cover also a multitude 
of imperfections in their flesh, so long as we see that 
their hearts are loyal to the Lord, and that they are 
seeking to walk not after the flesh but after the spirit: 
so long as they profess to be seeking to get rid of the 
meanness and selfishness and littleness of the fallen 
nature and to cultivate in themselves the nobility of 
character which belongs to perfect manhood, the image 
of the divine nature. 

And let each one who has taken the name of 
Christ be on the lookout to apprehend and eradicate 
every trace of the meanness, selfishness, rudeness, dishonesty, 
which as members of the fallen race still cling 
to us and are become so much a part of us that we are 
often disposed to call them natural traits. Let us remember 
that, even if our Lord and our brethren in 
Christ overlook these blemishes (rightly distinguishing 
between the "new creature in Christ" and these 
contrary elements of his old nature reckoned dead), yet 
the world cannot so distinguish and will charge to the 
cause of Christ all the faults and imperfections they 
see in his professed followers. Thus that holy name 
is profaned among the Gentiles, daily, by many. 

Let us remember, too, that ill-nature cannot be 
transformed to good-nature in a day; the transformation 
of mind and speech and conduct requires patience 
and perseverance; but it can be accomplished by those 
who have made the New Covenant and who are obedient 

R2322:page 183 



to the commands of the Great Teacher. "See 
that ye refuse not [obedience to] him that speaketh 
from heaven." Whoever neglects his teachings, neglects 
the great salvation offered during this Gospel age 
at very least; for none will be amongst the elect except 
those who in their hearts at least are noble, true and 
good,— conformed to the image of God's dear Son.— 
Rom. 8:29. 

If all could fully realize the influence of our minds 
over our own bodies, as well as their less direct influence 
over the minds and bodies of others, a great 
Thought-Reform Movement would speedily begin in the 
world; and especially amongst God's consecrated people. 
Surely, such should cooperate with the inspired 
prayer— "Create in me a clean heart [will], O God; 
and renew a right spirit [disposition].... Then will 
I teach transgressors thy ways, and sinners shall be 
converted unto Thee."— Psa. 51:10,13. 

R2334 : page 184 

"THE LIGHT OF THE WORD." 



"The light of the Word shines brighter and brighter, 
As wider and wider God opens my eyes; 

My trials and burdens seem lighter and lighter, 
And fairer and fairer the heavenly prize. 

"The wealth of this world seems poorer and poorer, 
And farther and farther it fades from my sight; 

The prize of my calling seems surer and surer, 
As straighter and straighter I walk in the light. 

"My waiting on Jesus is dearer and dearer, 
As longer and longer I lie on his breast; 

Without him I'm nothing seems clearer and clearer, 
And more and more sweetly in Jesus I rest. 

"My joy in my Savior is growing and growing, 
As stronger and stronger I trust in his Word; 

My peace like a river is flowing and flowing, 
As harder and harder I lean on the Lord. 

"My praise and thanksgiving are swelling and swelling 
As broader and broader the promises prove; 

The wonderful story I'm telling and telling, 

And more and more sweetly I rest in his love." 



R2322 : page 184 

"THE WANING OF EVANGELICALISM. 



'"WHAT remains but the teaching of catastrophe? 
'The ax will be laid to the root of 
the tree.' In such a manner Richard Heath closes a 
striking article, bound to create discussion, in The 
Contemporary Review (May). It is an indictment of 
the Evangelical movement started by Law, carried on 
by Wesley and Whitefield, later by Finney, later still 
by Moody, Spurgeon, and 'General' Booth, for its 
neglect of a great opportunity, its failure to interpret 
God's message in history, its disloyalty to the masses, 
and its blindness to the great truth of the unity and 
solidarity of humanity. As a result of all this, it is a 
waning movement— rapidly waning. It has failed to 
hear the voices of the prophets— of Maurice and Carlyle 
and Ruskin and Tolstoi. 'What remains but the 
teaching of catastrophe?' 

"Mr. Heath's article is divided into four parts, the 
first of which describes the rise and spread of Evangelicalism, 
the second arrays facts showing its decline, 
the third aims to dispel the idea that this decline is due 
to agnostic or skeptic views, and the fourth is an attempt 
to portray the real causes of decline. By Evangelicalism 
he means the movement that is really one 
in doctrine with the Methodist revival movement of 
the Wesleys, being based upon the fall of man, the 
sacrifice of Christ not only on behalf of man but in 
place of man, grace the sole originating cause of man's 
salvation, justification the sole instrumental cause, the 
need of a new birth, and of the constant and sustaining 
action of the holy spirit. These doctrines were 
already imbedded in the formularies of the Church of 
England and Nonconformist creeds when the Evangelical 
movement began. But the revivalists took 
them seriously and lived up to them. The movement 
has spread to vast proportions. Revivalism has been 
its most characteristic feature, but not its chief source 
of influence. Two hundred thousand sermons every 
Sunday— more than ten million a year— can be attributed 
to it. Thousands of missionaries have been sent 
out by it, great non-denominational and non-ecclesiastical 
societies have been formed by it, a vast number 
of churches and chapels have been built by it. It awoke 
English religion out of its torpor, has produced generations 
of remarkable pulpit orators, and attained such 
power that it may be called the English religion of the 
nineteenth century, and became a leading if not the 
leading fact in the history of English-speaking lands 
for two centuries. 

Now the movement is waning. In the Church of 
England, the Evangelical clergyman may say with the 
lonely worshiper of Jehovah: 
"I watch, and am become 
Like a sparrow alone on the housetop.' 



"According to the Bishop of Liverpool, 'the Evangelical 
clergy are to day but a small minority of the 
Church of England.' The great Evangelical institutions 
are burdened with growing deficits. The Evangelical 
denominations are declining in membership, or 
at least not keeping pace with the population. The 
Baptists (in England) just about keep pace with the 
population. The Wesleyans increased but 5 per cent, 
from 1888 to 1896, while the population increased 7-1/2 
per cent. In Birmingham and Liverpool, while the 
church accommodations have been greatly enlarged 
since 1861, the attendance upon the services has actually 
decreased. In this country a similar waning of 
power is seen in the fact that the Congregational 
and Presbyterian bodies returned, in 1896, 3,000 
churches which did not report a member added in the 
previous year by profession of faith. In Europe we 
find the same state of things, but much aggravated. 
The Huguenot, a monthly organ of the Reformed 
churches of France, declared in 1893 that the French 
Protestant churches are declining at the rate of one 
church (6,000 members) a year, and at this rate there 
will be no more Protestants in France at the end of the 
next century. In Berlin, it is said, only 10 per cent, 
of the population attend church and in Hamburg only 
12-1/2 per cent. If these figures and facts are not convincing, 
Mr. Heath refers us to 'the voice of the people,' 

R2322 : page 185 

as heard in the letters from the working classes 

sent in 1897 to The Methodist Times, of London, in response 

to an invitation to them to tell the reasons for 

their non-attendance at church. 

"Very briefly Mr. Heath dismisses the surmise 
that general agnosticism is to blame for this alienation 
of the people from the Evangelical churches. 'All who 
really know the people,' he asserts, 'know that they 
are quite as truly religious as they ever were, and 
those who have mingled freely with them must feel 
that it is not Christianity as taught in the New Testament, 
but as practically exemplified by the nineteenth-century 
Christianity, that they repudiate.' 

"What, then, is the reason for the waning of 
Evangelicalism? Says Mr. Heath: 

"Evangelicalism, coming into existence under an 
extremely individualistic and competitive order of 
things, has seen nothing in the Gospel but a plan of 
individual salvation. It has had but little idea of the 
common salvation, of the unity of mankind in Christ, 
and of the mutual responsibility of all men. It has 
hardly seemed to understand that a divine Helper was 
in the world, opening men's eyes to what is evil, gradually 
giving them higher notions of what is right, and 
a better judgment as to the real good and the real evil; 
and, failing to comprehend this, Evangelicalism has 



never understood the age in which it has run its course.' 

"The attitude of the early Evangelical leaders, 
Wesley, Whitefield, Howell, Harris, Fletcher, and 
others, in condemnation of the French Revolution and 
the American Revolution, are cited in illustration of 
the above statement. Hannah More published with 
'the approbation of the whole Evangelical party' her 
'Village Politics; or, Will Chip,' ridiculing the notion 
of equality and fraternity. The power and energy of 
Evangelicalism have been centered upon the upper 
middle class, whose sole idea of life was to struggle 
upward, let the rest of mankind sink as they might. 
Its dependence on this class has made Evangelicalism 
'shut its eyes more closely than ever to the great social 
revolution which, commencing in the last century, is 
still going on.' Mr. Heath continues his indictment: 

'"Evangelicalism has denied God in history, has 
refused to recognize his providential government of 
the world, or if it has not formally taken up this infidel 
position, it has treated the question with a true English 
contempt for consistency. God was in the Reformation, 
but not in the Revolution. He came to judge 
Christendom in the sixteenth century, but not in the 
eighteenth. It is this indifference to truth, when truth 
interferes with prejudice and interest, that has done so 
much harm to Evangelicalism. 

"For this blindness to the great social sunrise 
which has lit up the whole century, and is gradually 
leading to the emancipation of the laboring classes in 
Europe and America, has lost Evangelicalism the opportunity 
it has desired— to be the herald to them and 
all the world of the great salvation. And still more 
this blindness has strengthened in it that hardness of 
heart and contempt of God's Word and commandment 
which characterizes the whole of Christendom, and 
which is one of the reasons why its official representatives 
have not only lost their hold on the masses, but 
have driven into antagonism so many of the more conscientious 
and finer souls in Europe and America. 

"This hardness of heart has not only appeared in 
the methods at times adopted by Evangelical revivalists, 
but more especially in the astonishing lack of 
Christian brotherhood displayed in all sections of Evangelicalism, 
even to the point of permitting those who 
have worked for the Gospel as their agents and representatives 
to sink into being recipients of parish relief 
or to die in the hospital or workhouse. And in that 
class which has afforded Evangelicalism such support, 
and whose families have been its peculiar domain, how 
many hundreds of merchants, traders, and farmers, of 
whom it has made much in their prosperity, has it allowed, 
when ruin overtook them, to die broken-hearted 
or in bitterness of spirit? 

'"Contempt of God's Word and commandment is 
a serious charge, but can it be said to be too severe a 
description of a movement which has systematically 



and persistently ignored the main teaching of the Gospels? 

If in Christ, as Evangelicalism has always 

taught, 'dwelt the fulness of the Godhead bodily,' if 

he was in fact the divine Wisdom teaching men the 

R2323 : page 185 

true way of life, how can Evangelicalism be acquitted 
of contempt of God's Word when, in place of obeying 
his commandments, it has led its followers to regard 
the Sermon on the Mount as an impossible ideal which 
no sensible man could really think of taking as a rule 
of life?— causing men, therefore, to regard God's 
Word as something Quixotic and Utopian.' 

"Because of this 'hardness of heart' Evangelicalism 
has failed to understand contemporary history, 
failed to see that revelation is continuous, failed to recognize 
the great truth of the unity and solidarity of 
humanity. 

"The old Evangelicalism is waning; but this waning 
may precurse a new waxing: 

'"As among the decay of a past summer we often 
see, ere winter is over, new shoots springing up which 
will be the glory of the coming year, so it is with present-day 
Evangelicalism— its spiritual life is already 
taking new forms. Efforts to do away with sectarianism 
and to repair the broken unity of the church, efforts 
to find expression in the church for the mind and 
soul of the coming generation, efforts to live the life 

R2323 : page 186 

which Christ himself enjoined on his disciples, efforts 
to share in the sufferings of the miserable, sunk in the 
sordid life of the slums, and to lift them out of it- 
such efforts, and many similar ones, may indicate the 
coming of a new Evangelicalism.'" 

—The Literary Digest. 



We publish the foregoing for the sake of the truth 
it contains, and as a basis for criticism. Mr. Heath's 
views, briefly stated, are,— 

(1) That the religion of personal salvation (by which 
is meant escape or "salvation" of a few from a hell of 
eternal torment to which the vast majority hasten and 
are "lost") has had its day and is on the decline. In 
this he is undoubtedly correct even to a far greater extent 
than his statistics show; for large proportions of 
those who are members of various "Evangelical churches," 
and of those who still flock to hear Moody, Jones 
and others, are in part or in whole persuaded that the 
theory of eternal torment is at least questionable, and 
hence the Evangelical salvation from it questionable 
also. 



(2) That there is an astonishing lack of Christian 
brotherhood— lack of interest in the temporal welfare 
of the world or even in the temporal welfare of the 
"saved" brotherhood. The recent tendencies toward 
social uplift are credited not to Evangelical salvation 
theories, but rather to their decline. He credits these 
evidences of "good will to men" to the broader and 
more benevolent views of modern Christianity, which 
is now taking shape in efforts toward the social-uplift. 

Is there not considerable truth in this charge? Is 
it not true that the teaching that the vast majority of 
mankind is hastening to a hell of eternal torture, and 
that those who do not become saints richly deserve 
this fate, has a tendency to harden the heart and to 
dull all the finer sentiments? Surely those considered 
worthy of eternal woe could not be considered worthy 
of much consideration or mercy in the misfortunes of 
the present life. 

And in proportion as the real spirit of love is lacking 
and fervor for denominational progress in "saving 
souls" takes its place, everything not of utility to the 
one object is likely to be neglected. Hence, those able 
to render aid are esteemed for their usefulness rather 
than loved; and when they cease to be useful they are 
in danger of neglect. 

(3) In Mr. Heath's judgment, from the roots of 
dying Evangelicalism is sprouting a new and better 
Christianity which recognizes "the fatherhood of God 

and the brotherhood of man" and whose gospel is civilization, 
social-uplift, good citizenship, on the basis of 
the Golden Rule, "Whatsoever ye would that men 
should do to you, do ye even so to them." 

While bound to admit the fact here claimed, respecting 
the trend of Christianity, we cannot endorse 
the conclusions. We dissent. 

The tendency of human thought seems to be to 
go from one extreme to another; hence the need of a 
divine revelation to guide our judgments,— especially 
on religious subjects. "To the law and to the testimony, 
—if they speak not according to this rule, it is 
because there is no light in them." (Isa. 8:20.) The 
Scriptures make the entire subject plain and harmonious 
and satisfy our longings as nothing else can do. 
They do indeed show us a personal salvation, but not 
from eternal torture. They show us that "the wages 
of sin is death [not torment] but the gift of God is 
eternal life through Jesus Christ our Lord." They 
set before "believers" a great prize to be sought during 
this age, and to be won by a "little flock." They 
also set before us a mark or standard of life endeavor 
necessary to be attained by all who would gain that 
prize. That mark is the spirit or disposition of self-sacrificing 
love, which rejoices not in iniquity but rejoices 
in the truth— in doing "good unto all men as we 
have opportunity, especially to the household of faith." 
This is the personal salvation of the Scriptures, misinterpreted 



by so called "Evangelicalism." 

Nor are the Scriptures silent respecting the much 
needed social uplift. God has not been unmindful of 
the poor world's necessities. In the next age— the 
Millennial age— he will uplift the world to a degree 
that eye hath not seen, nor ear heard, neither hath 
entered into the heart of man— but which he has revealed 
to his faithful in his Word. 

God's Word is full of promises respecting the glorious 
epoch, the golden age, when "the earth shall be 
full of the knowledge of the Lord" (Isa. 11:9; Hab. 2:14); 
when "every man shall sit under his vine and 
under his fig tree; and none shall make them afraid" 
(Micah 4:4); when "they shall not build, and another 
inhabit," but when home ownership shall be general 
(Isa. 65:21-23); when every high one shall be humbled, 
and every lowly one shall be lifted up (Luke 1:52; 
Matt. 23:12) when "the Lord shall pour out his spirit 
upon all flesh." (Joel 2:28.) The Apostle Peter speaks 
of that epoch as "times of refreshing" and "times of restitution, 
and declares that every holy prophet since 
the world began prophesied of that time, and that it 
would begin at the second advent of our Lord Jesus 
Christ. -Acts 3:19-21. 

Thus the Bible-taught Christian finds in the faith 
once delivered to the saints all the aliments for spiritual 
nutrition. He has before his mind the straitness 
of the narrow way and the necessity for heart religion 
and full personal conversion and consecration to God 
without hardness and bigotry and uncharitableness 

R2323 : page 187 

toward others. Indeed, his sympathies for men become 
more and more deep, as he realizes that all are 
fallen from the image of God and are by heredity 
weak, and that Satan, the god of this world, is persistently 
deceiving them. 

Furthermore, the hope for the world in the next 
age— its mental, moral and physical uplift— is indissolubly 
united to his hopes and personal salvation; because 
the very hope set before him in the gospel is 
that, by personal victory and salvation and the attainment 
of the mark of the prize of his high calling, he 
shall become a sharer in the great work of uplifting 
humanity during the Millennium— helping whosoever 
then will to return through Christ and the New Covenant 
to fullest divine favor, including life everlasting. 

Such cannot agree to the common fatherhood of 
God and the common brotherhood of men; for they 
well know that only those who have the Father's spirit 
are "sons of God." (Rom. 8:14.) They know to the 
contrary the meaning of our Lord Jesus' words to some 
evil doers of his day, "Ye are of your father the devil, 
and his works ye do."— John 8:44. 

But while distinctly identifying the two fathers' 



families— the children of God and the children of the 
devil, and pointing out the mistake of confounding the 
two, we, nevertheless, are able from the divine Word 
and standpoint to see that many of Satan's followers 
and children are deceived, and we look forward with 
joy and expectancy to the time when Immanuel shall 
take his great power and bind Satan that his deception 
of mankind should cease, and that all may be brought 
to a knowledge of good as well as of evil, of truth as 
well as of falsehood,— a knowledge of the Lord, whom 
to intelligently accept is life eternal. 



R2323 : page 187 

SOLOMON'S KINGDOM DIVIDED. 

-JULY 3.-1 KINGS 12:16-25.- 

"A soft answer turneth away wrath, but 
grievous words stir up anger."— Prov. 15:1. 

SOLOMON'S wonderful reign was not an unmixed 

blessing: in it we see much of divine 

providence and guidance, such as Solomon had requested 

at the beginning of his reign, but in it also we 

see many marks of human imperfection and unwisdom. 

In so far as Solomon respected God, and sought to exercise 

his kingly office in harmony with the principles 

of the divine law, his reign was a success; but in so far 

as he followed his own judgment and sought to be cosmopolitan 

and to fashion his kingdom after worldly 

ideals, it was comparatively a failure from the divine 

standpoint, altho this made it the more renowned from 

the worldly standpoint. 

Solomon was a man of broad ideas, and like other 
men of similar good mold in this respect, he was the 
more susceptible to the temptation to think the Lord's 
ways and methods narrow; and to seek to be more 

R2324 : page 187 

broad and liberal than the Almighty. His error along 
this line is particularly shown in his recognition of 
foreign religions, which, according to God's law, 
had no right to be recognized in any sense or degree, 
in Israel. 

Women have always exercised a potent influence 
in the affairs of the world, and Solomon's deflection, 
and the consequent deflection of his kingdom, were due 
in large measure to his foreign wives and their natural 
attachment to the false religions of their fathers. Mismarriage 
was one of the first of Solomon's steps in the 
wrong course: it was taken, no doubt, with a view to 
a closer relationship with surrounding nations and 



royal families. It was a worldly-wise step, but an unwise 
one from the standpoint of the Lord, who desired 
Israel to be his elect, holy, and peculiar people, separate 
and distinct from all the families of the earth.— 
Amos 3:2. 

Yes, from a worldly standpoint Solomon's reign 
was a marvel of success. At the time of his death he 
dominated and collected tribute from a territory nearly 
seven times the size of Palestine; his capital city had 
become enormously wealthy, so that the war shields 
of some of his soldiers were made of gold, while the 
record is that— "the king made silver in Jerusalem 
to be as stones for abundance." (1 Kings 10:27.) 
While he lived, his wisdom and fame and the glitter of 
his success held the entire nation loyally to him, notwithstanding 
the fact that his methods, by which these 
brilliant results were achieved, were in a considerable 
measure oppressive to the people. This was especially 
the case with those of his people who resided at a distance 
from the capital city, and who did not so particularly 
share in the wealth there accumulated, but more 
particularly shared the general burdens of taxation and 
conscription of service, by which the wealth was amassed. 
Consequently, at Solomon's death, when the glitter 
faded, his kingdom, established not upon the loving 
loyalty of the people, but upon his own magnetic 
power and wisdom, was ready to disintegrate. 

As we have already pointed out* the original organization 
of Israel was practically that of a republic, 
in which the heads of the tribes exercised a sovereignty 
similar to Congress or Parliament. When the 
people desired a king like unto the nations around 
them, and God let them have their way, they nevertheless 



*MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOL. I., Chap. 3. 

R2324 : page 188 

still clung to some extent to their original tribal 
custom. Hence it was, that upon the death of 
Solomon there was a meeting of these heads of tribes 
at Shechem; and Rehoboam, already recognized by the 
heads of his own tribe, Judah, presented himself at the 
meeting, expecting, as a matter of course, that he 
would be accepted as king by these representatives of 
all the other tribes. To his surprise, he was requested 
to state himself respecting the policy he would pursue 
if accepted as king; and it was clearly intimated to him 
that the rigor of his father's reign, which accumulated 
wealth in the capital city at the expense of the remainder 
of the nation, would not be tolerated from him. 

King Rehoboam took three days to consider the 
matter with his counsellors. He first consulted the 
elders— probably the chief men of the tribe of Judah, 



who already had acknowledged him, and who probably 
had accompanied him to this council. Their counsel 
was wise, in that it advocated at least an outward deference 
to the just claims of the people; but, recognizing 
the fact that the young king was full of ambition 
to be as great as or greater than his father and to have 
no diminution of the revenues of the kingdom, they 
probably meant him to understand that their advice 
was that he should merely promise reforms, until he 
should have the endorsement of all the tribes and be 
fully established in the kingdom, when he might do as 
he pleased. 

But Rehoboam also consulted the young men— 
his wealthy companions and friends, with whom he had 
grown up. Their advice was that to make promises 
of reforms would imply a weakness on the part of the 
king, and make the discontented people more self-assertive 
and more rebellious than ever; and that now 
was the proper time to state himself strongly, to put 
down his foot with authority, and to dare the people 
to cross his will. Probably proud of heart, and vain-glorious, 
this last foolish advice was most in accord 
with the king's sentiments. And it was followed. He 
gave in substance the message of the young men: "My 
little finger shall be thicker than my father's loins; 
and now, whereas my father did lade you with a heavy 
yoke, I will add to your yoke: my father hath chastised 
you with whips, but I will chastise you with 
scorpions" (1 Kings 12:10-14.) The reference to 
whips and scorpions should be understood: it was the 
custom then, and is still the custom to a considerable 
extent in the far East, for the kings to draft the people 
to do service in the building of public works, kings' 
palaces, etc.; and these drafted men were treated for 
the time as the veriest slaves, being under taskmasters, 
who kept them up to the notch of diligence with 
whips. The scorpions referred to were scorpion whips, 
which differed from other whips in that they had a 
stinger at the end of the lashes, consisting of a sharp-pointed 
piece of lead. 

No wonder that king Rehoboam is noted as the 
foolish king; his unwise, boastful, vainglorious language, 
which no doubt was the abundant overflow of a 
heart in similar condition, which meant all that it 
boastfully said, caused him the loss of more than two-thirds 
of his dominion and subjects. The chiefs of 
the ten tribes promptly declared that Judah and Benjamin 
might have Rehoboam for their king, but that 
he was not acceptable to the remainder of the tribes. 
They accordingly chose one of their number, Jeroboam, 
who had once been one of Solomon's conscripts, and 
because of his natural ability as a manager of men had 
been made an overseer of a department of the government. 
It was he whom the Prophet Ahijah had already 
anointed to be king over the ten tribes, prophesying 
that he should yet occupy that position.— See 



1 Kings 11:29-38. 

Some one has said, "Solomon had a thousand 
wives but only one son, and he was a fool." His folly 
consisted in seeking advice from a wrong quarter. Had 
he recognized, as did his grandfather David and his 
father Solomon, that the throne of Israel was "the 
throne of the Kingdom of the Lord," his course should 
have been to seek counsel of the Lord, as did his father 
and his grandfather. But the fact is that Rehoboam's 
folly was really a part of his father's folly, for his 
mother was Naamah, an Ammonitess and idolater, for 
whom Solomon built, adjoining the Mount of Olives, 
and opposite the Temple of God, a temple to Moloch 
(a heathen divinity), the site of which is still pointed 
out to the traveller and known as "The Mount of Offence." 
Did not Rehoboam come by his folly honestly? 
Could we expect more of the son of a heathen mother, and 
of a father who, while worshiping the true God himself, 
was so lacking in firmness and principle in the 
conduct of the religious interests of his home? 

Rehoboam's unwise decision in his affairs is but 
an illustration of the many unwise decisions by mankind 
in general in respect to various questions of life, 
far reaching in their results. All cannot lose a kingdom, 
in the same sense, but each may win or lose another 
kingdom, in the sense signified by the poet, 
when he said: 

"My mind to me a kingdom is." 

Questions come before every intelligent person, at 
the threshold of maturer life, the decision of which, 
one way or the other, will have a bearing on all the remainder 
of the present life, and perhaps also a strong 
influence upon the interests of the life to come, provided 
for through the atonement. Happy and wise 
will be the choice, if the counsels of the Lord are 
sought and followed— less happy will be the conclusion 

R2324 : page 189 

if the wisdom of the world is sought and followed— 
disastrous will be the conclusion if the wisdom of the 
unwise and inexperienced be followed. 

We have the Lord's word for it that the division 
of Israel into two parts or nations— the ten tribes, 
known by the original national name, Israel, and the 
two tribes thereafter known as Judah— was of his foreknowledge 
and arrangement. In some way the Lord 
saw that such a division would work favorably for the 
development of his purposes. We may, perhaps, surmise 
how it would be. The entire nation, while still 
loyal to Jehovah, had become permeated with what 
would to-day be termed "liberal views on religion"— 
views which tolerated, if they did not countenance, idolatry; 
and which gradually were undermining its interests 
in the special hope which God had set before that 
nation, that it, as the seed of Abraham, should be a 



peculiar people, separate from all the other nations and 
ready at the coming of Messiah to become his associates 
(his Bride) in the work of blessing and enlightening 
the world, and establishing them in the ways of 
righteousness and in the knowledge of the true God. 

It was because this hope had grown faint, that the 
ten tribes were so ready to break the bonds of relationship 
which connected them with the tribe of Judah; 
from which tribe the prophets of the Lord had declared 
that Messiah, their great King, should ultimately 
come. The loss of this faith meant the loss of cohesive 
power in that nation, and it does not surprise us 
that when the ten tribes had organized a separate government, 
had cut themselves loose from the royal tribe 
and family, and from the Temple and the opportunities 
of approach to the Lord through it— it does not surprise 
us that under these conditions, and the preparation 
of "liberal views on religion" which led to these 
conditions, the ten tribes speedily drifted into idolatry, 
and became more and more like the nations round 
about them. 

So also it is with the Gospel Church: in proportion 
as the second coming of Messiah and the promises 
of a share in his Kingdom are kept in mind, and the 

R2325 : page 189 

contrast between the Church and the world is sharply 
drawn, so long will practical and vital Christianity 
prosper.— "He that hath this hope in him purifieth 
himself even as He is pure." 

As the example of a drunken father sometimes 
proves a most salutary lesson to his son, and as the 
gross corruption of Papacy led to and developed the 
Reformation movement, so the division of the Kingdom 
of Israel and the rapid progress of the ten tribes 
toward irreligion and idolatry had the effect, by contrast 
and suggestion, of awakening the people of Judah to 
a greater and more intelligent appreciation of the Kingdom 
hopes and divine blessings of which their kingdom 
was the representative. And the further the ten tribes 
went into idolatry the more the two tribes seem to 
have been quickened in religious fervor in upholding 
the sublime truths of which they were the representatives. 
This thought is the more forcibly impressed 
upon us when we remember that the ultimate decline 
of Judah— the two tribes— into idolatry, prior to their 
captivity, was after the ten tribes had gone into captivity 
a considerable time. 

Chagrined at the failure of his policy, and full of 
haughty determination that he would prove to them 
the weight of his little finger, Rehoboam hastened to 
his capital, and summoned his army, a hundred and 
eighty thousand chosen warriors: but the Lord sent a 
special message to him and the people of Judah that 
they should engage in no such war against their brethren 



and that the matter was of his ordering. 

Disappointments are more likely to lead to humility 
than are successes, and so it was in this case. Rehoboam's 
first folly having become apparent to him, he 
was more humbleminded, and the more ready to hear 
and to obey the divine command. Thus blessings 
sometimes come to us through lessons of our own imperfection 
and lack of wisdom: if our disappointments 
and extremities lead us to look for counsel in the proper 
direction, to which we should have looked at first. 

To the true Israelites the blighting of their popularity 
and national greatness in the sight of the world, 
and the consequent lessons of humility, were evidently 
beneficial. And thus with us who belong to spiritual 
Israel, the holy nation, the peculiar people, splits and 
divisions of the nominal mass will work for good to the 
Israelites indeed; but splits in the nominal mass, and 
the resulting benefits, do not justify splits or differences 
amongst those who are loyal and faithful to the 
Lord. As the Apostle says, there should be "no 
schism in the body"— of Christ. The true members 
of the body of Christ are held together by their common 
hopes, builded upon the exceeding great and precious 
promises of the Lord's word, and held together 
by the bonds of love. And those who have not these 
bonds of love are not true Israelites— "if any man have 
not the spirit of Christ [the bond of love] he is none 
of his." "They went out from us because they were 
not all of us." 

"A SOFT ANSWER TURNETH AWAY WRATH." 

Our Golden Text is excellent advice. 

(1) It is good policy for anyone— Christian or 
worldling— to learn to give soft answers, even under 
anger-provoking conditions. Business people study 
this as a matter of policy: it means custom, sales, profits, 
wealth, and to ignore this rule in business is to be 
considered foolish. 

R2325 : page 190 

(2) But that which is merely an outward form, 
policy, and often hypocritical in worldly people, is to 
abound much more in the child of God, begotten of a 
new mind. In him it is not to be put on for policy's 
sake, but to be the outgrowth or fruitage of the holy 
spirit or disposition which rules him as a "new creature 
in Christ Jesus." 

Any other answer than "a soft answer" is incompatible 
with the holy spirit of Love— with its meekness, 
gentleness, patience and brotherly kindness. If the 
truth must needs be spoken and if under the circumstances 
the truth be severe, hard, nevertheless and indeed 
all the more the hard thing needs to be stated as 
softly as possible. This evidently is the thought of the 



Apostle when he recommends "speaking the truth 
in love." 

This advice is nowhere more needed than in most 
of home circles. Each unkind, ungenerous, hard word 
or deed, is a testimony in opposition to our professions 
to be the Lord's people and to be begotten of his 
spirit. "Put away all these, anger, malice, hatred, 
strife," etc. 



R2325 : page 190 

ELIJAH, THE PROPHET. 

--JULY 10.— 1 KINGS 17:1-16.- 

"And the barrel of meal wasted not, and neither did the cruse of 
oil fail, according to the word of the Lord."— 1 KINGS 17:16. 

OUR preceding lesson in this series dealt with 
the division of Solomon's Kingdom, after his 
death. Our present lesson has to do with the ten 
tribes division and Elijah's mission as a prophet to 
them. The elders of the ten tribes which refused to 
recognize King Rehoboam chose Jeroboam, who had 
been at one time an influential officer in matters relating 
to their province during Solomon's reign: the same 
who had been anointed before Solomon's death by a 
prophet of the Lord, with the information that he 
should be the king of the ten tribes. Following this 
announcement he was obliged to flee for his life, as he 
would have been considered an enemy of the kingdom. 
Upon Solomon's death, however, he had returned, 
finding favor with the elders of the ten tribes. 

We saw, in the previous lesson, that the course of King 
Solomon had tended to break down the boundaries and 
barriers between true and false religion, between the 
worship of God and the idolatry of surrounding nations, 
Solomon having to some extent at least countenanced 
the worship of heathen gods by some of his 
wives, and the representatives of heathen nations at 
his court. This, which would be considered by many, 
a proper, liberal course, was out of harmony with the 
Lord's instructions on the subject, and did great injury 
to Israel— leading those whose religious instincts 
were on the lower levels to regard all nations as more 
or less right, and on a religious parity. 

Jeroboam, fearing that the people by going to Jerusalem 
to worship the Lord at the Temple, as previously, 
would become alienated from him as their king, 
and become attached again to Rehoboam and the line 
of David, took advantage of the fact that the people 
had become indifferent to the true religion, the worship 
of the Lord, and for the sake of establishing his 
kingdom and perpetuating the separation from Judah, 



he established idolatry, casting two golden calves, and 

saying to the people, "These be thy gods, O Israel, 

that brought thee up out of the land of Egypt." These 

two golden calves were set up in different parts of the 

land, one at Bethel and one at Dan, so that some could 

go to worship one, and some the other, a part of his 

pretext being that the former custom of worship at Jerusalem 

was too difficult for the people. Moreover, still 

further to separate the peoples, he instituted feasts and 

sacrifices at different dates from those appointed of 

the Lord through Moses, and still practiced in Judah. 

It has been suggested by some that these calves 

were originally set up as representatives of Jehovah; 

but we think not. A calf was chosen as the 

symbol for God, probably because the people while in 

Egypt were accustomed to the worship of the sacred 

bull Apis, of Egyptian mythology, and quite probably 

the Israelites had joined in that worship to some extent 

during their bondage. Their tendency toward 

bullock or calf worship is illustrated also by the fact 

that this was the form of idolatry to which they naturally 

took when Moses was absent from them for forty 

days in Mount Horeb, receiving the Law. The King 

himself had just returned from exile in Egypt to take 

the throne: he had therefore been several years under 

the influence of Egypt's idolatry. 

During the twenty-two years of Jeroboam's reign 
Israel made great progress away from the Lord and into 
idolatry; and to the more thoroughly accomplish this 
end the king built altars to these bullocks and instituted 
a new order of priesthood that, so far as possible, 
he might cause the people to entirely forget the true 
God, and his Levitical priesthood as well as his Temple 
at Jerusalem. Jeroboam seems to have appointed himself 
the chief priest of the new religious institution, 
for he offered the incense at the altar. 

Following the death of Jeroboam there was a period 
of repeated insurrections against king after 
king who took the throne of Israel, until Ahab, of 
whom it is written, "Ahab, the son of Omri, did evil 

R2325 :page 191 

in the sight of the Lord, above all that were before 
him." Ahab's wife, Jezebel, was seemingly still more 
wicked than himself, and really instigated most of his 
evil deeds. It is a well recognized fact that a good 
wife can be a great help to her husband: the history of 
Jezebel shows that a wife's influence for evil may be 
even more potent. It was during the reign of Ahab 
that as the Lord's servant and prophet Elijah delivered 
the messages and did the works recorded in this and 
several succeeding lessons. 

The work of establishing a new religion, which 
Jeroboam began, was ably carried on by his successors: 
and Ahab, influenced by Jezebel, his wife, seems to 



have out-done his predecessors not only to establish 
the new religion, but to exterminate the religion of 
Jehovah. He and his wife openly established the worship 
of Baal and slew the prophets of Jehovah,— the 
first religious persecution on record. Not only the 
out-spoken prophet of the Lord who delivered the message, 
but all the true Israelites who had respect to Jehovah, 
were obliged to hide from Jezebel's wrathful 
zeal for the worship of Baal. 

R2326 :page 191 

Under divine direction, Elijah appeared in the 
presence of King Ahab and delivered a message, saying, 
"As the Lord God of Israel liveth [whom you 
seem to think is dead] before whom I stand, there shall 
not be dew nor rain these years, but according to my 
word." At first, probably, the matter was considered 
a foolish boast, but when the dew and rain ceased and 
scarcity and famine resulted, the full purport of the 
judgment began to be understood, and the King sent 
hither and thither, everywhere, to find Elijah; presumably 
to induce him, either by entreaty or by cruelty, 
to lift from the land what he probably considered to be 
an evil spell or curse. But God had directed Elijah 
where to hide, in a place where he could himself be 
supplied with water, and where he could be fed by 
ravens. 

Elijah's prediction of a famine was not merely a 
prophecy; rather, it was the declaration of a divine 
judgment upon Israel. The object of the famine was 
to bring the Israelites to their senses— to show them 
that they were leaving the true God to trust in idols. 
The force and appropriateness of this particular kind 
of a judgment may be recognized, when we remember 
that the claim made for Baal was that he was specially 
the god of the forces of nature: his worship was presumed 
to bring increase in the home and in the field. 
The drouth and consequent famine would be a contradiction, 
therefore, of these claims made in the name 
of Baal, and would shatter faith in him, and prepare 
Israel to recognize and worship again the true God, 
Jehovah. 

Meantime, Elijah, following the directions of the 
Lord, lived for about two years at the brook Cherith, 
drinking of its waters, and fed there by the ravens. 
Various efforts have been made to discount the miracle 
implied in the statement that the ravens brought Elijah 
bread and flesh morning and evening. Some have 
claimed that the word translated "ravens" might, with 
a little different accent, be translated "Arabian," or 
signify the inhabitants of a village called Orbo. But, 
in addition to the fact that God is abundantly able to 
work such miracles as are necessary to his plans, we 
know that the raven of the East is in many respects a 
peculiar bird, which exhibits not only extraordinary 



intelligence but sometimes also sympathy. For instance, 
Bishop Stanley, in his "History of Birds," relates 
that a gentleman who had been driving ran over 
and bruised the leg of his Newfoundland dog, and 
says: "While we were examining the injury, Ralph, 
the raven, looked on also. The minute the dog was 
tied up under the manger of my horse, the raven not 
only visited him, but brought him bones, and attended 
him with particular marks of kindness." 

A missionary in India says, respecting ravens in 
general, and these which fed Elijah in particular— 
"While I do not claim to know where the ravens got 
the bread and meat, a residence of thirty years in the 
East helps me to guess where they got it. My own 
little children have often come crying into the house, 
their hands scratched and bleeding from the claws of 
kites and crows [the raven is of the crow family] that 
had snatched from them the food they were eating. 
Our nurse was one day preparing a fowl to be grilled, 
for my sick wife, and standing in the doorway, plate 
in hand, she called the cook to come for the fowl. 
When the man came, the nurse discovered that her 
plate was empty; a kite or crow had carried away the 
fowl without her knowledge. Meat sellers are obliged 
to be on the alert to prevent crows and kites from 
robbing them. I do not profess to know anything 
about it, but it is my firm conviction that those ravens 
[which fed Elijah] stole the food from the bazaars of 
Jerusalem or Jericho." 

In any case, the lesson to us is one of the divine 
care and providence over those who are devoted to 
God's service. He who sustained Elijah can equally 
sustain us. The important question with each of us 
should be, Am I the Lord's servant, in the place and 
doing the work which he has directed? If so, our 
bread and our water shall be sure, and no good thing 
will he withhold from those who walk uprightly.— Isa. 33:16; 
Psa. 84:11. 

"Nor is it a singular case— 

The wonder is often renewed, 
And many can say to his praise 

He sends them by ravens their food. 

R2326 : page 192 

"Thus worldlings, tho ravens indeed, 

Tho greedy and selfish their mind, 
If God has a servant to feed, 

Against their own wills can be kind. 

"Thus Satan, that raven unclean, 

Who croaks in the ears of the saints, 
Compelled by a power unseen, 

Administers oft to their wants. 

"God teaches them how to find food, 



From all the temptations they feel, 
This raven who thirsts for my blood 
Has helped me to many a meal." 
—John Newton. 

Next Elijah was directed to a widow of Zarephath, 
across the border, in the Kingdom of Zidon. Our Lord 
refers to this, and incidentally confirms this entire 
piece of history respecting Elijah, the three and a half 
years of famine, and his visit to Sarepta.— Luke 4:26. 

Considering that the drouth and famine extended 
also into Zidon, it would seem to have been a bold request 
of the prophet, to ask the widow woman for 
water to drink, and bread to eat. Her willingness to 
share with him was remarkable under the circumstances. 
It suggests to us a fact that with all our increase 
of civilization and wealth, the people of to-day are far 
less hospitable and less generous. A writer familiar 
with the customs of the East, says that there the gift 
of water to the thirsty is regarded as a sacred duty, 
saying: "Never yet, during many years' residence in 
Syria, and many a long day's travel, have I been refused 
a draught of water by a single individual of any 
sect or race. The Bedouin in the desert has shared 
with me the last drop in his waterskin." The Lord's 
people have great need to cultivate a large generosity, 
not only of thought, but of deed; and the blessing 
which came to the widow of Sarepta as a result of her 
generosity to Elijah, should serve to impress this lesson 
upon our hearts. 

Furthermore, altho the woman was a Gentile, she 
had respect to Jehovah, and in some manner evidently 
recognized the Prophet as one of his servants. This, 
no doubt, had to do with her willingness to share her 
last morsel of food. Indeed, the intimation of our 
Lord is that this poor Gentile widow was more worthy 
of divine care than many of the widows of Israel. She 
explained to Elijah that her barrel, or rather stone jar, 
of meal was about exhausted; and that she was preparing 
for herself and her son what she presumed 
would be her last meal before they would die of famine. 
The Prophet's demand that he should have a 
small cake from it first was not because of greed or 
selfishness on his part, but as one feature of the lesson 
of faith which the Lord wished to inculcate. If 
the woman had the faith necessary to obey, then she 
would be esteemed worthy of the Lord's assistance 
through the Prophet; if she did not exercise the faith, 
another widow might have been found who would. 
Thus it is with us,— at various steps in the journey of 
life the Lord brings us to the place where he tests our 
faith. If we exercise the faith we will get the blessing; 
if we do not, we will lose it. "Without faith it 
is impossible to please God." Nevertheless the woman 
was not asked to exercise this faith without being first 
given a definite promise from the Lord; and so with 



us— we are not to be blindly credulous respecting the 
words and promises of men, and to consider this to be 
faith in the Lord; but when we recognize the word of 
the Lord, we are to trust it implicitly, and to act 
accordingly. 

Not always, or even often, does God deal with his 
people after this manner of miraculous provision for 
their sustenance. Nevertheless, we are to recognize 
him as the author of all our blessings— "Every good 
gift and every perfect gift is from above, and cometh 
down from the Father of Lights." His promised provision 
is not for weeks and months and years in advance, 
but "daily bread"— bread for each day— "thy 
bread and thy water shall be sure." Nor are we to 
expect or ask for the luxuries of life, but to remember 
that our "Father knoweth what things we have need 
of"— what things would be for our highest welfare 
and best interests. 

The meal, the bread, of that time might fitly be 
considered as a symbol of the bread of truth, of which 
we are privileged to eat, and of which our supply is 
continued from day to day. The olive oil, used by 
the ancients much as we use butter, is frequently used 
in the Scriptures as representing divine grace and the 
holy spirit; and so we, as the Lord's people, are not 
only supplied with the bread of truth, but also with 
the spirit of truth, which helps to make it nourishing 
and profitable to us. Another prophet speaks of the 
experience of the world during the dark ages, saying, 
"There shall be a famine in the land,— not a famine 
of bread nor a thirst for water, but of hearing the 
words of the Lord."— Amos 8:11. 

We have elsewhere shown that this famine of 
Elijah's day and the period of its duration, as well as 
the Prophet and his experiences with Jezebel, etc., 
were typical of God's dealings with the Church, and 
her experiences during this Gospel age.* 

Note here also the beautiful poem by Mrs. Charles, 
found in POEMS AND HYMNS OF DAWN, page 127. It 
suggests a very profitable thought respecting the Lord's 
blessing upon the widow of Sarepta, and shows how 
an application of its lesson may be made by all who 
are the Lord's people. 

"Is thy cruse of comfort failing? 
Rise and share it with another." 



*See MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOL. II., Chap. 8. 



page 193 
VOL. XIX. JULY 1, 1898. No. 13. 



CONTENTS. 



Views from the Watch Tower 195 

Mercy Rejoiceth Against Judgment 197 

The Royal Law 199 

This Law in Practical Operation 201 

The Royal Law During the 

Millennium 202 

Poem: I'll Do My Very Best 202 

Interesting Queries 203 

Christian Duty if Drafted, etc. 

"Jehovah, He is the God" 204 

A Discouraged Reformer 206 

Elijah's Lesson Symbolically Considered 207 

page 194 

SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
--ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 56-60 ARCH STREET, ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, N.Y. DRAFT, MONEY ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS: 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age or accident, or other 
adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, if they 
send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting the 
paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list 
constantly. 



R2327 : page 195 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 



AS THE war with Spain progresses, it becomes 

more and more evident that "The Great 

Republic" is very thoroughly hated by her sisters in 

the family of Christian Nations so called. Their hatred 

and ill-will are scarcely restrained from pronounced 

utterance by the fact that she is their best customer 

who for financial reasons must not be too grossly insulted. 

Great Britain alone manifests sympathy: and 



even she is frank enough to intimate that her love is 
selfish, because she fears a European coalition against 
her and desires a wealthy and influential partner. 
Even the other republics of the world— France, Mexico 
and all those of Central and South America are 
jealous of their big sister. 

The appeal to race prejudice and race pride has 
much to do with this condition of things and is most 
unwise. But we must remember that "the natural 
man" moves almost exclusively along grooves of pride 
and selfishness; he knows nothing of Love as a motive 
principle. And it is the same on both sides of the question: 
if one boasts of race superiority and valor, so 
does the other. And the more these selfish channels 
of thought are opened, the deeper the hatreds engendered 
and the more dangerous the possible results. 

Another factor never to be overlooked is Romanism. 
The revenues of the Roman Catholic Church in 
the Philippine Islands are estimated at $50,000,000 per 
annum (silver). It is the real government, the silent 
but potent partner of the Spanish Governor General 
and army. Other religious teachings are not tolerated, 
and the natives so far as possible are kept in ignorance. 
Altho the Spanish government decreed that the 
Spanish language should be taught in the Romanist 
schools supported by government bounty, the order 
has been generally evaded. Papacy knows well that 
general intelligence is a foe to its institutions. 

Of course, when the time comes for Spain to sue 
for peace, she will probably be instigated by the pope 
to relinquish Cuba and close the war on condition that 
the United States abandon all claim on the Philippines. 
It is doubtless to threaten a prolongation of the war 
there, and thus to make the United States the more 
willing to relinquish the islands, that the Cadiz squadron 
has sailed eastward. Moreover, it is realized that 
the soldiers carried by this fleet will be needed to put 
down the Philippine rebels. The latter are the more 
intelligent of the natives who are rebelling as much 
against the tyranny of Romanism as against the oppression 
and cruelty of Spain. It is our opinion 
that the Lord wills to break the power of Papacy there, 
and hence that he will not permit Spanish misrule to 
be continued. 

To what extent the present war may be a waking 
up of all the world to an era of war which will impoverish 
all nations, and sicken all their peoples and prepare 
the way for the universal anarchy with which 
this age shall end, we know not; but such an outcome 
will not surprise us. If so, it will seem like the time 
mentioned in Joel 3:9-14. See the conclusion of the 
S.S. Lesson on Elijah, page 192. 

Of one thing we may be sure: the affairs of this 
world while nominally left to the "gentiles" until the 
end of "Gentile Times,"* the end of their lease of 
power, are nevertheless subject to a divine surveillance, 



to the intent that naught shall be permitted that our 
God is not abundantly able to overrule for good. Divine 
providence has already been manifested on behalf 
of America and doubtless will continue to supervise 



*See MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOL. I., Chap. 13, and VOL. II.. 
Chap. 4. 

R2327 : page 196 

her course. Who that is God-fearing and possessed 
of a knowledge of history can doubt that this land was 
kept hidden until due time; that it was purposely made 
an asylum for liberty-loving people and for the oppressed 
of all nations? Who can doubt that its unparalleled 
history thus far has been a lesson to the whole 
world— "Liberty enlightening the world?" Who can 
doubt that thus the Almighty has been gradually forcing 
open the fetters of Church and State, of superstition 
and ignorance, and emancipating the peoples of 
Europe? 

It was the influence of liberty and its blessings in 
America that led to the French Revolution— the French 
people being too ignorant, and too much under the influence 
of Romanism, to be able to appreciate and use 
the boon of liberty wisely. The same object lesson 
(America) has had a great influence upon Great Britain 
and Germany and upon the peoples of other countries 
in proportion to their intelligence and freedom 
from papal bondage. 

As the reforms of Europe have been granted inch 
by inch by its monarchical aristocracy, under the glare 
of Liberty's torch (America), it is but natural that they 
very generally feel a hostility; "because the darkness 
hateth the light," as ever. There are exceptions to 
every rule, but generally speaking America is loved 
and appreciated only by the middle classes of Europe, 
and these chiefly in Protestant countries. 

Nor should it surprise us if God has still some 
further work for America to do in pulling down the 
strongholds of error and waking up the mighty men 
and men of war. To some extent the torch of liberty 
may be a torch of war and destruction. This may 
sound strange to those who mistakenly have supposed 
that God is to be credited with all the peace and 
arbitration movements and Satan to be credited with 
all the moves toward war and violence. 

It is necessary to our appreciation of transpiring 
events that we remember that God's dealings and commands 
are individual and not national since he abandoned 
fleshly Israel and removed the diadem— "until 
he come whose right it is." Meantime the nations 
are restrained in peace or let loose to vent their selfish 
passions in war as best harmonizes with the next step 



in the divine program. How aptly the poet expressed 
this, saying— 

"See the mystic Weaver sitting 
High in heaven— His loom below. 
Up and down the treadles go. 
Takes, for web, the world's dark ages, 
Takes, for woof, the kings and sages. 
Takes the nobles and their pages, 
Takes all stations and all stages. 
Thrones are bobbins in his shuttle. 
Armies make them scud and scuttle- 
Web into the woof must flow: 
Up and down the nations go ! 
At the Weaver's will they go ! 

"Calmly see the mystic Weaver 
Throw His shuttle to and fro; 
'Mid the noise and wild confusion, 
Well the Weaver seems to know 
What each motion, and commotion, 
What each fusion, and confusion, 
In the grand result will show! 

"Glorious wonder! What a weaving! 
To the dull, beyond believing." 

The present work is the selection of the Church, 
the royal priesthood, and incidentally the awakening 
and disciplining of the nations to prepare them for the 
Millennial reign of blessing and peace. Let us not 
forget, however, that God's people are all to be peaceable 
and to the extent of their opportunities 
peacemakers. 



A brother has recently called our attention to 
Isaiah 5:26-30; inquiring whether or not we see anything 
to indicate that this refers to the United States. 
After examining the passage it seems to us not a forced 
or unreasonable application. The prophecy seems to 
apply to the present time— the end of this age— and its 
fitness to this nation is worthy of consideration also: 
it will probably not require long to demonstrate 
this. The following is a preferred translation. 

"And he will lift up an ensign to the nations from 
afar, and will call for one of them from the end of the 
earth; and, behold, with speed, swiftly, it cometh. 

"There is none weary nor stumbling among its 
men; it slumbereth not, it sleepeth not; not loosened 
is the girdle of its loins, not broken is the latchet of 
its shoes; whose arrows are sharpened, and all whose 
bows are bent; its horses' hoofs are hard like flint, and 
its wheels like the whirlwind. 

"It hath a roar like the lioness, it roareth like the 



young lions; yea, it growleth, and layeth hold of the 
prey, and carrieth it safely off, with none to deliver. 

"And it will rage against them on that day like 
the raging of the sea: and if one look unto the earth, 
behold there is darkness, oppression, and the light is 
darkened in the heavens thereof."— Compare Leeser's 
Translation. 

When we remember the significance of sea and 
earth and heavens as symbols, it seems to add force to 
the above suggestion. The sea in symbol is anarchy: 
and while the United States is perhaps less anarchic 
than the old world, yet the freedom possessed here is 
in the estimation of many of the potentates of Europe 
"like the raging of the sea [anarchy]." The earth in 
symbol signifies society, the social structure. And surely, 
whoever looks at the social condition of Europe 

R2327 : page 197 

with open eyes sees little but superstition's darkness 
and oppression. Nor can we see grounds for hope for 
better conditions under the present order of things. The 
heavens are the nominal churches or religious powers, 
and by false teachings surely these have much to do 
with the trouble present and impending. 



R2328 : page 197 

MERCY REJOICETH AGAINST JUDGMENT. 



"He shall have judgment without mercy who hath shown 
no mercy. Mercy rejoiceth against judgment."— Jas. 2:13. 

THE word judgment here stands for sentence— 
the sentence of sin, death. It therefore represents 
justice, because in man's trial it was Justice which 
inflicted the sentence of death. Mercy is the fruit or 
result of love, and therefore represents love. Hence 
the case, Mercy against Judgment is equivalent to Love 
against Justice. The thought would be that divine 
Love has secured a triumph over divine Justice. 

At first thought there would seem to be an inconsistency 
in this view: for how could love triumph over 
justice, since the Scriptures, as well as reason, assure 
us that justice must be the very foundation of all divine 
government; and that to ignore it would mean the 
destruction of government and order,— anarchy, disorder. 
It is when we inquire of the Lord's Word, 
how his Love gains a victory over justice, that we gain 
an insight into the beautiful harmony and coordination 
of these divine attributes— Love and Justice. The 
Scriptures assure us that "God is Love," and that 



"Justice is the foundation of his throne," or government. 
(1 John 4:16; Psa. 89:14.) Since God himself 
is Love, he can do nothing that can be derogatory 
or opposed to love; and since his government is founded 
upon strictest justice he can do nothing that would 
not be in harmony therewith. His own character and 
law are the bulwarks on either side of the subject, each 
as high and as strong as the other. 

How then, can love and mercy gain a conquest and 
rejoice over justice and the sentence? The Apostle 
answers the question, assuring us that our justification 
from the sentence is by divine grace, "through the 
redemption that is in Christ: whom God sent forth to 
be a propitiation [satisfaction of justice] through faith 
in his blood... that he might be just, and [yet be] 
the Justifier of him which believeth in Jesus.— 
Rom. 3:24-26. 

Here then, is the triumph of love and mercy, not 
through a failure of justice, not through conquering 
it, but through a satisfaction of justice, its appeasement 
by the payment of a ransom price, a corresponding 
price— a man's life for a man's life: the man Christ 
Jesus for the man Adam and those who were involved 
in his disobedience and its sentence or curse. From 
this standpoint alone would it be possible for love and 
mercy to triumph over divine justice and its sentence; a 
triumph in which the justice of God can equally rejoice. 

The original trial of father Adam in the Garden 
of Eden was along the lines of strictest justice, and 
his sentence was without mercy: it was inflicted without 
the slightest deviation. Subsequently, when God 
introduced the Covenant of Law at Mount Sinai, 
with the nation of Israel, it also was along the lines 
of justice: it was an offer of eternal life to any Israelite 
who could and would live up to the divine law;— it 
was justice, without mercy. It had indeed an admixture 
of leniency as represented by the annual Atonement 
Day with its benefits extending to that nation 
for the ensuing year, but the sacrifices which were offered 
according to the Law, the Apostle assures us, 
"could never take away sin." It could cover the sin 
temporarily for the year, and furnish a new opportunity 
for a fresh start, but it could never cancel the 
sins past, nor atone for sins future; hence it was still 
a reign of Law, a reign of death, at the hands of Justice. 
Love did not and could not intervene to spare the sinner; 
the most it could do was to point forward, in 
promise and in type, to the coming Deliverer, who 
would satisfy the claims of justice, and set at liberty 
the prisoners of sin and death. God was Love before 
he sent his Son, just as truly as he is Love since he 
sent his Son; but God's Love was not manifested previously, 
as it was in that great act of love. "Herein 
was manifested the love of God, in that he gave his only 
begotten Son." The giving of his son to be our redemption 
price was in connection with the making of 



a New Covenant, a new agreement, a new compact, 
between God and those of his creatures fallen into sin 
who might desire to return to his favor. 

The New Covenant was an arrangement by which 
God's love might exercise mercy toward the sinner. 
The language of the New Covenant is apparently an 
abandonment of strict justice in the Lord's dealing with 
the sinner, and the adoption of a course of treatment 
which deviates to some extent from strict justice, 
and shows mercy to those who desire mercy, and desire 
to come back into harmony with God, and desire 
to attain again the perfection lost through sin. 
The language of the New Covenant is, "I will be 
merciful to their unrighteousness, and their sins and 
their iniquities will I remember no more."— Heb. 8:12. 

The Apostle assures us that this New Covenant 
could only go into force, could only become operative 

R2328 : page 198 

toward us, by virtue of the atoning sacrifice which 

the Father designed, and which the Lord Jesus joyfully 

and obediently fulfilled. He assures us, and so 

also does our Lord Jesus, that the death of Christ sealed 

or ratified or made binding and complete this New Covenant 

between God and man, of which Jesus is the 

Mediator. Thus our Lord himself, when speaking of 

his death, symbolized by the cup, said, "This is the 

blood of the New Covenant shed for many for [in order 

to] the remission of sins." Sins could not be remitted 

except as justice would first be met, and the 

one who met the claims of justice on behalf of the sinner 

would be the one who would have the right to 

remit the sinner's guilt, and thus to be the Mediator 

between Justice and the sinner. 

The Apostle Paul gives us the same view of the 
matter; saying, that "the blood [death, sacrifice] 
cleanseth us" and for this cause he is the Mediator of 
the New Covenant: that by means of death for the redemption 
of the transgressions that were under the first 
covenant, they which are called might receive the 
promise of eternal inheritance. (Heb. 9:14,15.) We 
see, then, that since Calvary, since the sealing of the 
New Covenant with the blood of the Mediator, since 
that New Covenant was thus ratified or made effective, 
the triumph of love and mercy over justice, and the 
sentence of death originally inflicted, has been a fact. 
And since the offence and the sentence were of one 
man, and rested upon the many through him, even 
upon all his posterity, so likewise the New Covenant 
is by the one man, Christ Jesus, and is applicable to 
not only the first offence committed in Eden, but applicable 
to all the "many offences" since committed 
because of weakness and depravity, introduced by the 
one transgression.— Rom. 5:12,15-21. 

But while the New Covenant is thus for Adam and 



all his posterity, nevertheless there are conditions attached 
to this Covenant, which limit its action. 

(1) Faith in it— and acceptance of its provisions 

or demands: and this implies a knowledge of the covenant 
conditions, for no man can either accept or reject 
that of which he has no knowledge, as the Apostle 
says, "How shall they believe on him of whom they 
have not heard?" 

(2) Obedience, as the result of faith, is required 
to the extent of ability— obedience to the law of the 
New Covenant. 

Hence, although the New Covenant is for the 
entire race, it is not as yet available to any but a small 
minority. Few have the knowledge of God and of his 
arrangement in Christ under this covenant, which 
would permit of faith in it. And of those who have 
received some knowledge of the great fact, and who 
have with more or less clearness exercised a faith in 
the atonement, comparatively few have taken the second 
step of obedience. Those who have taken the first step of 
faith are, on this account, reckoned as justified— to the 
intent that they may take the second step of full obedience 
to the requirements of the covenant. Those who 
have taken the second step have not lost the first step 
of justification, but have added thereto the step of 
sanctification,— consecration,— devotion. And only to 
the latter class belongs the full benefit of this covenant. 

These two steps, (1) Faith, and (2) Obedience, 
were illustrated in typical Israel, and in the institution 
of their typical covenants, at the hand of their 
typical mediator, and with the blood of their typical 
sacrifice for sins. The Lord made known to Israel 
his covenant, and they assented thereto, and said, 
"All these things will we do," accepting Moses also 
as their mediator. This was the first step, corresponding 
with us to the step of faith and justification through 
faith. Then Moses took the blood of the sacrifice of 
atonement,— the blood of their covenant, and sprinkled 
it upon the book; i.e., upon the tables of the law, as 
representing God and his Word, the law or basis of his 
covenant with them, which they were to observe and 
obey. Moreover, he sprinkled also all the people with 
that blood, saying, "This is the covenant which God 
hath enjoined upon you." This was not a meaningless 
performance. The moment the drop of blood 
touched the Israelite, it meant that the covenant was 
in operation, in full force and power, on him and toward 
him; that God was bound to him by the covenant, 
and he was bound to God by the covenant. So 
likewise in the antitype, after we have heard, known, 
and have exercised faith, then the Lord requires that 
if we are in harmony with him, and desire to enter into 
this new covenant, we shall take our position with those 
who receive the blood of sprinkling, that speaketh better 
things for us than any typical blood, and that by receiving 
this blood of sprinkling we shall not only be 



justified from our past sins, but thereby also we shall 
recognize ourselves as henceforth bounden, obligated, 
covenanted to the Lord, as his people.— 1 Pet. 1:2. 

Moreover, as Israel was bound by that covenant to 
the law of God, as promulgated by their mediator, 
Moses, so we spiritual Israelites, who have fully entered 
the New Covenant relationship, and who have had the 
seal of the New Covenant, the blood of Christ, put 

R2329 : page 198 

upon us, are thereby bound to all the terms and conditions 
of that new covenant,— to its obligations as well 
as to its blessings: and these obligations are expressed 
in the law of the New Covenant, promulgated by the 
mediator of the new covenant, namely the royal law 
of Love. 

There are many false apprehensions respecting 
the New Covenant: one is to the effect that the law of 

R2329 : page 199 

the old covenant is also the law of the New Covenant. 
But not so: as the New Covenant is higher than the 
Law Covenant, and as its mediator is higher than the 
mediator of the Law Covenant, so the law itself is higher 
still and grander still than the law of the Mosaic 
covenant. Altho the latter was holy and just and 
good (Rom. 7:12), the law of the New Covenant is 
sublime. The Apostle declares that the law of 
the New Covenant is in full harmony with the law of 
the old covenant, that it is really the same law, only 
that our Mediator has magnified it, and made it still 
more honorable, adorable. The law of the covenant 
which Moses mediated reads, "Thou shalt not" do 
thus and so; the law of the New Covenant is briefly 
comprehended in one word, Love; "Thou shalt love." 

O, how much difference there is between these two 
laws, notwithstanding all their many points of harmony. 
"Thou shalt not kill," "Thou shalt not steal," 
might be understood by some, perhaps, to leave room 
for a willingness or desire to steal, or a willingness or 
desire to murder, if the evil acts themselves were abstained 
from. But the one command, "Thou shalt 
love," not only leaves no room for stealing and murder, 
but leaves no room for any thought that would be 
akin to these evil deeds. More than this, it is not 
merely a law of negatives, commanding us to abstain 
from doing and from even thinking evil; but it goes 
much further in positively requiring of us to think 
good and do good— to fulfil "the royal law" "Thou 
shalt love the Lord thy God," and "Thou shalt love 
thy neighbor." 

Many who think that they have entered into the 
New Covenant relationship with the Lord are evidently 
mistaken. They have perhaps believed in Jesus, and 



in his sacrifice for sins, and have desired his blessing 
and liberty from the curse of death; but they have not 
recognized nor accepted the corresponding obligations 
on their part. They have not stood up before the Lord 
to swear allegiance to him and to the law of his covenant, 
and to be sealed with the blood which seals 
that covenant. They are deluding themselves in 
thinking they are under the terms of the New Covenant, 
when they are not— not having taken the necessary 
second step to make them beneficiaries under its 
arrangement. They have heard of "the royal law of 
love," they know of it as the Golden Rule of the New 
Covenant, yet they have never, by consecration, put 
themselves under that law. They have never recognized 
it as being the law over them, by which they 
are to be controlled, and by which eventually they are 
to be judged. It is a work of kindness to such to point 
out to them clearly and distinctly that they are deceiving 
their own selves, and that those who do not accept 
of and come under the royal law of the New Covenant 
have neither part nor lot in the blessings which flow 
from that covenant. 

It is time that all who profess faith and loyalty 
to the Lord and to the New Covenant should recognize 
themselves as Covenanters— those who have made a 
compact, a covenant, with the Lord through Christ 
Jesus, and who are bound by the law of that covenant. 
And if they have done this intelligently, it is high 
time that they should be measuring every act and word 
and thought of life by the Golden Rule of this Covenant, 
which our Lord Jesus expresses most succinctly, 
saying, "As ye would that men should do to you, do 
ye also to them likewise."— Luke 6:31. 

THE ROYAL LAW. 



Our Lord and the Apostles, in all their teaching 
and writing, inculcated this royal law of the New 
Covenant. It was along this line that our Lord said 
to the disciples, "Judge not [harshly, unmercifully, 
ungenerously,] that ye be not [so] judged; for with 
whatever measure of cold justice and mercilessness you 
measure others, the same shall be meted out to you. 
The Apostle James, in our text, repeats the same 
thought, saying, "He shall have judgment [just sentence] 
without mercy who hath showed no mercy." 
That is to say, if we have come under the blessed provisions 
of the New Covenant, it means not only that 
we have accepted of God's mercy through Christ in 
the forgiveness of our sins, but also that a condition 
upon which we receive divine mercy was that we ourselves 
would be governed by the same rule of love and 
mercy towards our fellow-creatures. If, therefore, we 
fail to follow the Golden Rule, we mark ourselves as 



rejectors of the covenant of grace, and as those who 
despise divine favor, and who trample upon and make 
light of the great sacrifice by which this favor of the 
New Covenant was made available to us. 

Such a course, persisted in intelligently and intentionally, 
would seem to result in the Second death; 
for, as the Apostle declares, if we show no mercy to 
others, if we attempt to mete out justice without mercy, 
the result to ourselves will be that we will be treated 
without mercy,— on lines of strictest justice. This 
would mean that we would be without any benefit in 
the New Covenant, and without any covering or protection 
in the Mediator, and would fall directly into 
the hands of Justice, without a covering for our blemishes. 
This is the condition of affairs which the Apostle 
Paul points out to us, in connection with which he 
says, "It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of 
the living God." It is a fearful thing for imperfect 
beings like ourselves to fall into the hands of strict 
justice and its judgment, and to obtain no mercy. 

This would mean nothing short of the Second 

R2329 : page 200 

Death, for as the Apostle illustrates, the one who despised 
the typical covenant and the law given by its 
mediator died without mercy: much more, might we 
suppose, that he who has accepted the terms of the 
New Covenant, and who has intelligently heard from 
its Mediator the law which must govern all who would 
be blessed by that covenant (the law of love), and who 
willingly and intentionally despises and rejects the 
claims of that law, is worthy of death. And this death, 
as the Apostle intimates, would be a greater, a sorer, 
punishment than the one inflicted for the violation of 
the typical covenant— it would be sorer or more disastrous, 
in that it would be the Second Death, the end 
of all hope; because those thus condemned had enjoyed 
the opportunities and privileges of the New Covenant, 
and had despised and rejected them. 

Nor should such radical treatment of transgressors 
against the conditions of the New Covenant surprise 
us: the same conditions will, we believe, obtain in the 
next age, in the Millennium. The world of mankind, 
when brought to a knowledge of divine grace, will be 
invited to fully subject themselves to all the terms and 
conditions of the law of love. Those who endeavor to 
make progress in this direction will have the blessing 
and the assistance of the great Mediator, while those 
who reject the principles of this law of love to God and 
love to man— "The law of the spirit of life in Christ 
Jesus," will be rejecting this law, be rejecting the life 
which is attached thereto. And such rejectors of the 
law of the New Covenant are to be esteemed as rejectors 
of all the grace "which first contrived the way to 
save rebellious man." Such rejectors will be despisers 



of God, who was the Author of this plan of salvation. 
They will be rejectors of the blood of Christ, which 
sealed the New Covenant. And figuratively speaking, 
they may be said to trample upon that grace of God 
and of our Lord Jesus Christ. Very properly, eternal 
life is not intended for such. It would not be a real 
blessing for such, and they in turn would be an injury 
and a curse to all those who shall come into full accord 
with the Lord and with the spirit of his law of love. 

Let us, then, who have heard of the grace of God 
in Christ, and who have accepted of that grace by entering 
into the obligations of the New Covenant— let us 
remember daily, hourly, to let this law of love rule in 
our hearts, and in all our conduct. Let us remember 
that it not only means supreme love to God, which 
places the will and Word of the Lord paramount not 
only to our own wills, but also to the wills of others, 
and thus makes us loyal in the highest sense of the 
word, and in every affair of life, to the King of kings 
and Lord of lords. Let us remember, secondly, that 
the law of love is to operate toward our fellow men, 
and to lead us to "do good unto all men as we have 
opportunity— especially to the household of faith." 
Let us remember that love not only would not kill the 
neighbor, nor steal from the neighbor, but that it 
would hinder us from speaking evil of the neighbor, 
from stabbing him with slander, and from stealing 
from him a good name, which is more to him than his 
purse. Let us remember that love would not only 
utterly repudiate and contradict and hinder such conduct, 
but that on the reverse, it would lead us to be 
kind, gentle, patient, forgiving, merciful, not only to 
them that love us, and who are gentle and kind to us, 
but also as our Master explained, to the unkind, to 
the unthankful, to enemies who injure us, and who say 
all manner of evil against us falsely. "Love suffereth 
long and is kind." 

Love and its consequence, mercy, take hold upon 
the heart, the sentiments, the affections of life, and 
should ultimately permeate every channel of life. Thus 
love, mercifulness, would extend not only to the household 
of faith and our own family households, and to 
our neighbors, but also to the dumb animals. The 
man who has accepted love (mercy) as the ruling and 
controlling principle of life, the law of the New Covenant, 
which is to control in every act and word and 
thought, will be loving (merciful) toward his horse, toward 
his dog, his chickens,— toward everything with 

R2330 : page 200 

which he has to do. And if love (mercy) would restrain 
him from whipping his horse unmercifully, and if it 
would lead him to provide amply for the sustenance 
and comfort of the dumb creatures under his care, will 
not the same spirit of love extend also along to higher 



lines of the family, and lead him to be thoughtful of 

the comfort and welfare of all the human beings under 

his care, in matters both spiritual and temporal? And 

if it would stay his hand from smiting his beast an unnecessary 

blow, would it not much more stay his or 

her tongue from smiting the hearts and feelings of 

humanity with whom he or she may come in contact, 

with needlessly sharp, cutting words, irony, sarcasm, 

etc.— or still worse, with the poisoned blade of slander 

and suspicion and evil suggestion and surmise? 

And all of this which applies to the beast, to the 
home circle and family, applies with equal or still more 
force to the family of God, the Church; hence the 
Apostle urges that evil speaking, bitterness, anger, 
wrath, malice, hatreds, strifes, envyings, which are 
all parts of the old nature, the nature of the world and 
of the devil, be put away. These are to be supplanted 
by the new spirit of Christ, in harmony with the law 
of the New Covenant,— Love— with its gentleness, 
meekness, patience, long-suffering, brotherly-kindness. 
"If these things be in you and abound they shall make 
you that you shall neither be barren nor unfruitful in 
the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ. But he that 

R2330 : page 201 

lacketh these things is blind, and cannot see afar off, 
and hath forgotten that he was purged from his old sins. 
Wherefore, the rather, brethren, give diligence [to the 
cultivation of these graces] to make your calling and 
election sure; for if ye do these things ye shall never 
fall: for so an entrance shall be ministered unto you 
abundantly into the everlasting Kingdom of our Lord 
and Savior Jesus Christ."— 2 Pet. 1:8-1 1. 

He who finds his heart not in harmony with this 
law of the New Covenant, love— mercy, kindness, 
gentleness, goodness— lacks the evidence of proof that 
he is in any sense of the word accepted as a son of 
God, and a joint heir with Christ. If he have not this 
spirit of love, he will find it impossible to go far in the 
footsteps of the Master, for the sacrifice of Christ was 
not vain-glorious, not for outward show, not for honor 
of men, but prompted by love— toward God and men. 
So likewise with us, if we have not love in our hearts 
for the brethren, and the love of gentleness and benevolence 
toward all men, and even toward the brute creation, 
we have not the spirit which will carry us through 
in making the sacrifices necessary under present conditions. 
It will only be a question of time with such 
when the power of pride or vain-glory, holding them 
in the way of sacrifice, will snap asunder, and selfishness 
take full control. He who would be faithful even 
unto death, walking in the footsteps of the Master, 
must receive of the Master's spirit of love, before he 
can thus follow him. As the Apostle declares, "He 
that saith, I love God, and hateth his brother, is a 



liar. He that loveth not his brother, whom he hath 
seen, how can he love God, whom he hath not seen?" 
Hence, the Scriptures place the love of the brethren as 
one of the evidences of our having been begotten of 
the spirit, and of our being in touch with the Master. 

THIS LAW IN PRACTICAL OPERATION. 



And love of the brethren does not mean merely 
love for a faction, or clique, or for some of the brethren 
who have natural qualities which we admire. It 
means love for all who have accepted the New Covenant 
and are seeking to walk by the Golden Rule of love. 
It means that if some have peculiarities of natural development 
and disposition, which are discordant to our 
ideas and sentiments, nevertheless, we will love and 
cherish them, and cheerfully serve them, because they 
are trusting in the Lord, and have been accepted of 
him, and have adopted the law of the New Covenant, 
the royal law of liberty and life, as their standard. 
We thenceforth know them not after the flesh, with 
its peculiarities and knots and twists: but after the new 
nature, as "new creatures." It means also that each 
of us in proportion as we discover our own natural 
crooks and twists, which are contrary to the law of love, 
will seek to get rid of these imperfections of the flesh as 
rapidly as possible, and to make them as little obtrusive 
and offensive to others as possible. 

From this standpoint love will not be forever noting 
the defects of the various members of the body of Christ, 
nor holding them up to ridicule and scorn of others; 
but each will be, so far as possible, fully as anxious to 
cover the defects of others as to cover his own defects; 
and to sympathize with others in their conflicts with 
their besetments, as he sympathizes with himself, and 
desires that the Lord shall sympathize with him, in his 
own conflict with his own imperfections. "If any man 
have not the spirit of Christ [the disposition of Christ, 
love] he is none of his."— Rom. 8:9. 

The object of the present call of the Church, in 
advance of the call of the world, to share in the benefits 
and privileges of this New Covenant, is to select 
in advance, not those that are perfect, not those who 
are the copies of God's dear Son, but those who desire 
and will seek to become copies of God's dear Son, 
"conformed to the image of his Son." That image is 
love itself, for as God is love, so Christ's character is 
love, the express image of the Father. This is the 
mold into which we are to be fashioned. But God 
will not impress us into this mold; he will not force 
upon us these lines of character: rather, the only influences 
which he exerts to this end are the "exceeding 
great and precious promises; that by these we 
might become partakers of the divine nature" and impress 



upon ourselves the divine character of love, and 
thus escape the corruption that is in the world through 
selfishness; or rather, we are to keep ourselves in the 
love of God while he causes the pressure of all things 
to deeply engrave it upon us.— Jude 21. 

The matter is left open to us; we can either avail 
ourselves of these promises and permit them to mold 
and fashion us according to the copy, little by little, 
daily and hourly, in thought, in word and in deed, or 
we can resist their proper influence, and we can hold 
the truth in unrighteousness. Those who take the 
latter course are purchasing for themselves thereby bitter 
disappointment; for such are not of the kind to 
whom the Lord will say, "Well done, good and faithful 
servant, thou hast been faithful over a few things, 
I will make thee ruler over many things." The degree 
of our devotion to the Lord, therefore, will be indicated 
in the degree of our love for him and his; and 
the degree of our love and devotion will be manifested 
by our activity in conquering self and its selfishness, 
in all its ramifications throughout the affairs of life, 
and bringing all our thoughts and talents, great or 
small, into active service, prompted by love to God and 
to his people. And such will appreciate the sentiments 
of the Apostle, when he said, "We [who have 

R2330 : page 202 

received of the begetting of the holy spirit of our 
Master, the spirit of love, and who have grown to some 
extent in the knowledge of him— we] ought also to lay 
down our lives for the brethren." 

THE ROYAL LAW DURING THE MILLENNIUM. 



These same principles will be applicable to some 
extent during the Millennial age: note some of the 
differences between then and now, in the operation of 
this New Covenant. 

First, the Mediator shall then draw or call all men 
to a knowledge of the grace of God bestowed upon 
them in the provisions of this New Covenant; whereas 
now all are not called, but only "Whomsoever the 
Lord your God shall call," for no man cometh unto 
the Son now, except the Father who sent the Son 
draw him. (Jno. 6:44.) Not many great, or wise, or 
learned, or rich are called. 

Second, the acceptance of the New Covenant then 
will be less a matter of faith and more a matter of 
knowledge, than now; because the Lord shall take 
away the vail of ignorance which now is spread over 
all the earth, and the blinded eyes shall see out of the 
obscurity. -Isa. 25:7; 29:18. 

Third, nevertheless it will be equally necessary 



that each one who would then avail himself of the 
blessed provisions of the New Covenant shall for himself 
enter into a positive covenant with the Mediator, 
that he will obey the law of the New Covenant, Love. 
Love is the voice or command of the great Teacher, 
who shall then stand up with authority, and cause 
that all the world of mankind shall hear this message. 
"It shall come to pass that whosoever will not hear 
[obey] that prophet shall be cut off from among his 
people." All who will not conform themselves to the 
law of love, the law of the Millennial Kingdom, shall 
be cut off in the Second Death. 

Fourth, but even in the Millennial age God will 
not compel mankind to be conformed to this law. He 
will compel them to bow to and acknowledge the rule 
of love, as it is written, "Every knee shall bow, and 
every tongue shall confess;" because, when the Kingdom 
is established, and righteousness is laid to the 
line, and justice to the plummet, every violation of the 
law of that Kingdom, the Golden Rule, will meet with 
swift punishment; to the intent that evil doers shall be 
afraid, and that the righteous shall flourish. But God 
will still not impress the law of love upon the hearts of 
any; he leaves that for each to do for himself, just as 
at the present time. Each then, as now, must "put 
away" from his heart selfishness and all of the concomitant 
evils resulting from sin. Each then, as now, 
must "cleanse himself from all filthiness of the flesh 
and spirit, perfecting holiness in the reverence of the 
Lord" (2 Cor. 7:1); because God seeketh not such as 
are merely forced into obedience,— he "seeketh such 
to worship him as worship him in spirit and in truth" 

R2331 : page 202 

—such as love the law of God with all their heart, and 
who are at warfare with selfishness and sin, especially 
in themselves. 

Hence we see that at the close of the Millennial 
age, after the full opportunity has been granted to the 
world to have two-fold experience— now, with sin and 
selfishness, and their misrule, and the evil results; and 
then, with righteousness and love, and their blessed 
rule of peace and joy— when all shall have had fullest 
opportunity to develop in their hearts the spirit of 
love, then will come a test, a trial, in the close of the 
Millennial age, which will prove and demonstrate those 
whose love and fidelity to the Lord are of the heart, 
versus those whose obedience has been because of expediency. 
This trial, we may suppose, will not be a 
trial to see whether or not they will commit some open 
and flagrant wrong, but rather like the trial of father 
Adam in his perfection, a trial along the lines of obedience 
and disobedience, and whether love has been 
permitted to rule and take full possession of the heart, 
with resultant faithfulness to God and every principle 



of righteousness which would trust the Lord and follow 
strictly in his way. 

The result will be that all of the world who then 
shall not have the spirit of love properly developed, 
will be cut off in the Second Death, as unfit for eternal 
life, or to go beyond the Millennium into the grand 
conditions;— respecting which God has promised us 
that there shall be no more dying, no more sighing, 
no more crying, no more pain, there; because all the 
former things shall have passed away— all the things 
of sin, and all who have sympathy or love for sin. 

The victory in this race is not because of willing, 
nor for perfect running, yet it is only to him that willeth 
and that so runneth— through Christ. Thus Mercy 
rejoiceth against Justice, yet he that shows no mercy 
and who thus shows himself lacking in love shall receive 
no mercy. He that dwelleth in love dwelleth in 
God, and for such are all the riches of divine mercy 
and grace. 



I'LL DO MY VERY BEST. 



I may perform no deed of great renown, 
No glorious acts to millions manifest; 

Yet in my little labors up and down 
I'll do my best. 

I may not paint a perfect masterpiece, 

Nor carve a statue by the world confessed 

A miracle of art; yet will not cease 
To do my best. 

My name is not upon the rolls of fame, 

'Tis on the page of common life impressed; 

But I'll keep marking, marking just the same, 
And do my very best. 

And if I see some fellow traveller rise 
Far, far above me, still with quiet breast 

I keep on climbing, climbing toward the skies, 
And do my very best. 

Mine may not be the beautiful and grand, 
But I must try to be so careful, lest 

It fail to be what's put into my hand— 

My very best. — H. Guy Carleton. 



R2331 : page 203 

INTERESTING QUERIES. 



WERE LINCOLN AND GRANT CHRISTIANS? 



Question. In the WATCH TOWER of June 15, p. 180, 
the intimation seems to be that Abraham Lincoln 
and Ulysses S. Grant were not Christians, but noble 
specimens of the natural man; and that their opportunities 
in the future may be much more favorable 
than those of some who, professing Christ in church 
membership, deny him openly and continually in their 
daily life; but, nevertheless, that such moral people 
are in no sense counted by the Lord as members of 
his elect Church. Have I understood you correctly? 

Answer. You have stated the matter very correctly. 
The Church is composed only of believers in 
the redemptive work of Christ Jesus, who, because of 
their faith, are reckoned as justified from all sin. 

Moreover, the believer must subsequently consecrate 
himself to the Lord a "living sacrifice," ere he 
is reckoned as a member of the body of Christ, which 
is the Church. And this implies not only belief with 
the heart, but also confession with the mouth, and in 
the general course of life a manifestation of having (in 
will at least) died to sin and self and become alive as 
a new creature to the Lord and his righteousness. 

We are well aware that the foregoing is very contrary 
to the general views of this subject, but the 
Scripturalness of our position cannot be successfully 
controverted. The popular, but very erroneous, idea 
of the name Christian was recently illustrated by the 
answer of a gentleman to the question whether or not 
he or any of his family were Christians. His answer 
was,— Well, I presume we are Christians, for we are 
not Jews, nor heathen. 

The trouble with Protestants in general is that 
they assume that the Scriptures teach that all who are 
not of the Church are damned to eternal woe, and they 
reason correctly that Lincoln and Grant were too good 
to be everlastingly tormented, and so, without the 
slightest warrant of Scripture and in opposition to it, 
they crowd into heaven, as members of the glorified 
Church, "all the ring-streaked and speckled" of Christendom, 
excluding only the absolutely black. 

And when we call their attention to the Scriptures 
which declare that the blessings of the Church's high 
calling are promised only to the sanctified in Christ 
Jesus, who strive to walk in the Master's footsteps of 
self sacrifice; and to the fact declared by the Apostle, 
that "without holiness no man shall see the Lord,— 
then they abandon the Scriptures, declaring that they 
prefer their own judgments. However, if the Scriptures 
be rejected at all they should be rejected in toto. 



But in that case to be consistent they would have to 
abandon all hope in a divine plan of salvation, for there 
is no other revelation of it: and such is the general 
trend. 

We most heartily agree that Lincoln and Grant 
were far too noble to be justly sentenced to everlasting 
torments: and we will go a step further, and assert 
that no man is or ever was bad enough to justly merit 
eternal torment. The Bible commends itself as vastly 
superior to the views and teachings of the heathen and 
of Christian sects, in that it does not teach so unjust 
and unreasonable a theory.* 

Much more consistent is the teaching of Roman 
Catholicism than that of Protestants on this subject. 
It puts all except the "saints" into Purgatory for purification 
and development. 

But the essence of consistency is found in the 
teachings of the Bible: that (1) the present age is 
merely "for the perfecting of the saints, for the work of 
service" in the age to follow this— the Millennium. 
(Eph. 4:12.) (2) That under that future ministry 
of the saints, for which they are now being perfected, 
"all the families of the earth shall be blessed," which 
will include the awakening of "them that sleep in the 
dust of the earth" (Dan. 12:2); for in that glorious 
day of blessing and restitution "all that are in the 
graves shall hear the voice of the Son of Man and come 
forth."-John 5:28; Acts 3:19-23. 

When the sleeping world comes forth from the 
grave it will be found that while all men inherit blemished 
characters, nevertheless, each has according to 
his knowledge and opportunities either builded and 
strengthened character or undermined and degraded 
the measure of character received from his parents. 
Among these will be noble characters, such as Lincoln, 
Grant, Plato, Socrates, Confucius and many others 
less notable. These will be recognized according to 
their true worth at a time when "every secret thing 
shall be revealed" whether it be good or bad. And 
amongst those who shall then come forth we are told 
there will be some exposed to "shame and lasting contempt.' 
(Dan. 2:2.) Oh, how much meanness and 
perfidy and hypocrisy and selfishness will then be exposed: 
and what shame will be connected with this 
exposure— and what contempt in their own eyes as 
well as in the eyes of each other. Yet all this will be 
a part of their "blessing," which, to those rightly 
exercised thereby, will work out reform and gradually 
lead, step by step, up to full restitution of all the glorious 
likeness of God bestowed upon father Adam and 
lost by disobedience. The shame and contempt will 



*See What Say the Scriptures About Hell? Postpaid 10c. 
Watch Tower office. 



R2331 : page 204 

continue so long as the shameful and contemptible conditions 

continue, and no longer. And all who refuse 

to go up on the highway of holiness then opened up to 

R2332 : page 204 

them "shall be destroyed from among the people"— 
"the Second Death."— Compare Isa. 35:8; 62:10; 
Acts 3:23; DAWN I., Chap. 11. 

WAS THE TEMPLE CLEANSED TWICE? 



Question. From the various accounts would it not 
appear that the Temple was cleansed twice? I see 
that DAWN and WATCH TOWER always refer to the 
matter as tho there had been but one cleansing.— See 
Mark 11:15; John 2:13-17; Matt. 21:12,13. 

Answer. Many take the view suggested— that 
there were two cleansings; but we do not share it. It 
will be noticed that Matthew, Mark and John each 
mention the matter only once; and each mention once 
our Lord's riding upon the ass in fulfilment of 
Zechariah's prophecy (9:9-12); but only one of them connects 
these two events— Matthew. Moreover, since all 
agree that the riding on the ass was in fulfilment, of 
Zechariah's prophecy, and that there our Lord assumed 
for the first time his title as King, it is but reasonable 
to suppose that the use of force in cleansing the temple 
followed and did not precede that assertion of regal 
authority. For the same reasons we accept that same 
day as the one on which our Lord wept over Jerusalem 
and said "Your house is left unto you desolate!" 
Note the Prophet's expression— "Even to-day do I declare 
I will render [the second half of thy] double unto 
thee;"— the day of the riding on the ass as King. 

The disconnection so noticeable in the gospels 
may be accounted for (1) By remembering that the 
Apostles were "unlearned men," not regularly educated 
historians, men who recorded the wonderful words 
and works of their wonderful Teacher, but apparently 
saw little necessity for order or sequence. (2) By 
assuming that in this matter our Lord designed the 
confusion of the record, that only the faith-full and 
zealous might, under the leading of the holy spirit be 
led to "rightly divide the Word of truth" and to get 
from it "meat in due season." 

CHRISTIAN DUTY IF DRAFTED. 



Question. There are possibilities of a still greater 
war and of a draft which might include some of us who 
understand our Lord's commands to forbid our engagement 
in carnal warfare. What then, would be our 
duty? 

Answer. "We know that all things shall work together 
for good to those who love God— to the called 
ones according to his purpose." If, therefore, we 
were drafted, and if the government refused to accept 
our conscientious scruples against warfare (as they 
have heretofore done with "Friends," called Quakers), 
we should request to be assigned to the hospital service 
or to the Commissary department or to some other non-combatant 
place of usefulness; and such requests would 
no doubt be granted. If not, and we ever got into 
battle, we might help to terrify the enemy, but need 
not shoot anybody. Meantime what an opportunity 
we might thus have for preaching "Jesus and the resurrection;" 
—for being "living epistles known and read 
by all" the camp;— examples of good soldiers of the 
Lord Jesus Christ, drilled and thoroughly equipped 
with the armor of God, loyal and courageous in the 
Christian warfare, against the world, the flesh, and 
the devil. 



R2332 : page 204 

"JEHOVAH, HE IS THE GOD." 

-JULY 17.-1 KINGS 18:30-40.- 

"And when all the people saw it they fell on their faces, 
and they said: Jehovah, he is the God."— 1 Kings 18:39. 

THE three and a half years of drouth no doubt had 
an humbling effect upon King Ahab, as well as 
upon the people of Israel. No doubt they began to 
wonder where the matter would end; and to recognize 
it as more than an accident— as a judgment. The 
question would be whether it was a judgment from 
Baal or a judgment from Jehovah; for the people, as 
a result of their extended acquaintance with idolatry 
had a comparatively weak faith respecting the unseen 
Jehovah, who permitted no image or likeness of himself 
to be made or to be worshiped. The Lord's time 
had come for awakening Israel, and starting a reformation 
movement amongst them, and Elijah, who had 
been sought by the King throughout the surrounding 
nations, was instructed to present himself before Ahab, 
with a promise that rain should follow; and was permitted 
to be the Lord's agent in drawing the attention 
of the people to the true God, who alone has power 
over the elements. 
Altho Ahab realized that the famine was a judgment 



of the Lord, nevertheless, after the custom of 

the natural man, he ignored personal responsibility, 

and affected to charge the evils to Elijah, saying to 

him, "Are thou he that troublest Israel?" It is always 

so with the faithful mouthpieces of the Lord. 

Since they cannot prophesy smooth things, but must 

present the truth in reproof of unrighteousness, therefore 

the world and the nominal Israelite hate them. 

R2332 : page 205 

They do not seem to realize that the difficulty lies in 
themselves, and their sins, and their separation from 
the Lord. But Elijah, humble yet unabashed, did not 
hesitate to tell the king the truth of the matter, assuring 
him that the trouble in Israel came from his own 
wrong course. 

The drouth had so humbled Ahab that he did not 
resent the Prophet's arraignment of his sin: perhaps 
also he hoped that through the prophet's favor the 
embargo of the drouth and famine might be lifted. 
At all events he very promptly complied with Elijah's 
request that the people of Israel be assembled at Mount 
Carmel, together with the priests of Baal. Accordingly 
there was a great concourse to the flat, table-top of 
Mount Carmel, where Elijah awaited them, the king 
also coming with them; but Queen Jezebel sullenly 
remained at the palace in the capital city of Samaria. 

Elijah, full of zeal for the Lord, and full of indignation 
against the idolatry, and probably counseled 
respecting his course by the Lord, had a plan prepared 
by which to demonstrate to Israel which was the true 
God and which the false one. In the presence of the 
people he made a proposition to the priests of Baal for 
a contest to prove the question. This proposition was 
so reasonable, and the interest and expectation of 
Israel so great, that the priests of Baal dare not refuse. 
They, four hundred and fifty in number, were to build 
an altar and to make a sacrifice thereon to their god, 
Baal, while Elijah would build an altar and offer 
a sacrifice thereon to Jehovah, and whichever god 
would answer by fire would thus be attested as the true 
God. If Baal were powerful enough to answer the 
prayers of his priests and to accept the offering of the 
altar, then the people might understand that it was 
because Baal was offended with them that they had 
experienced the drouth and the famine. But if Jehovah 
had the power, and would answer with fire, it 
would be proof to the people that the drouth and the 
famine were from him, and signs of his indignation 
because they had worshiped Baal. 

The proposition could not be rejected: the priests 
of Baal prepared their altar and their sacrifice, and had 
the advantage of the noon-day heat of a tropical sun, 
sufficient almost of itself to ignite the fat of the sacrifice. 
They desired and prayed that the test might be granted; 



they cut themselves with stones until the blood 
gushed out, claiming that it must be because some of 
them, as priests of Baal, had trespassed against him, 
that their prayers were not heard. They kept 
this up for hours, until near sunset— Elijah meantime, 
in the hearing of the people, pouring upon them 
the sharpest sarcasm— the sarcasm of truth, not of 
falsehood. He suggested that they pray louder, as 
peradventure their god might be a little deaf; he 
urged them to keep it up, peradventure Baal might be 
on a journey, or attending to other business, or asleep. 
Thus he was giving to Israel in general the most telling 
lesson possible, considering their lethargy on religious 
subjects. He was preparing them for the final 
demonstration which he was about to give, that Jehovah 
is the true God, the only God who had power to 
answer both by fire and by water. 

Mark how thorough the Prophet's faith in God, 
and how thoroughly he demonstrated that there could 
be no room for deception in connection with his offering. 
Twelve stone crocks of water were poured upon 
the sacrifice and the wood, and filled the trench around 
about it; the sun was losing its power, and the offering 
was thoroughly drenched, and all things were thus 
ready for a thorough test of Jehovah's power to send 
down fire. 

Elijah stated the matter to the people: "How 
long halt ye between two opinions? If Jehovah be God, 
follow him; but if Baal be God, then follow him." The 
test was to show which was the true God, and which 
was the false god, and incidentally which the true 
and which the false prophets. Then Elijah prayed a 
beautiful and proper prayer. He did not say, "O 
Lord, cause Israel all to know how great, I Elijah, am, 
as a prophet of the Lord," but "Hear me, O Lord, 
hear me, that this people may know that thou art Jehovah 
God, and that thou hast turned their heart back 
again [—recalling them again by their experiences and 
these signs to be thy people]." 

The answer by fire was prompt, and the effect upon 
the people great. They promptly acknowledged Jehovah, 
and slew the priests of Baal. Then, while Ahab 
and the people rejoiced in Elijah's promises that the 

R2333 : page 205 

long hoped for rain would come, and went to their 
homes to rejoice and feast, the prophet remained upon 
the mountain to pray for that which God had definitely 
promised. Once he prayed, and sent his servant a 
distance to look for indications, but no answer. Again 
he prayed, and sent his servant again, but no evidence 
of response. After having been used of the Lord so 
mightily, in the matter of the sacrifice, Elijah might 
have gotten to feel too much of his own importance, 
if his prayer for rain had been too promptly responded 



to. Opportunity was given for fear and doubt, that 
the Lord would fail to keep his engagement, respecting 
the rain. But knowing the sureness of the Lord's 
word, Elijah did not doubt; he prayed again and again, 
and sent his servant each time to see what evidences 
there were of the Lord's answers to the prayers, until 
finally, when he had prayed for the seventh time, and 
inquired for a sign, the young man returned, saying 
that he saw a small cloud about the size of a man's 
hand. Then Elijah ceased his prayer, and realized 

R2333 : page 206 

that the beginning of the fulfilment had come. 

There is a lesson in this also for the Lord's people 
of to-day, that, as our Lord said, "We ought to pray 
and not to faint," not to grow weary in looking for, 
asking for and expecting the spiritual blessings which 
the Lord has promised us. Many of the prayers which 
fail of fulfilment, fail because the petitioners ask amiss; 
for things which God has not promised. Others fail, 
because of lack of faith. The prayer of faith is that 
which is offered, "nothing doubting," and whose hope 
is based upon a definite promise of the Lord. For instance, 
to us as new creatures, the Lord has declared, 
"Your heavenly Father is more willing to give the 
holy spirit to them that ask him, than are earthly 
parents to give good gifts [of an earthly kind] to their 
children." He that seeketh the spirit of holiness, the 
showers of divine grace, findeth them. To him that 
knocketh, the stores of divine favor shall be opened. 



R2333 : page 206 

A DISCOURAGED REFORMER. 

--JULY 24.-1 KINGS 19:1-16.— 

"Rest in the Lord, and wait patiently for him."— Psa. 37:7. 

SUDDEN was the reformation which apparently 

in one day overthrew the religion of Baal, 

and destroyed his priests, and revived the religion of 

Jehovah, and brought his prophet Elijah most prominently 

before Israel. But the influence of the slavery 

to superstition could not be easily eradicated. Reformation 

was not accomplished, but merely commenced by 

the test which the Lord had given at the hands of 

Elijah, in accepting the sacrifice with fire, and subsequently 

sending the promised rain. The people were 

lacking in those qualities of liberty and nobility of 

mind which are essential to a quick and thorough reformation. 

They lacked the courage of their convictions, 

and consequently were easily brought under the 



influence of that wicked woman, Jezebel, whose evil 
spirit and self-will were courageous enough to combat 
anything, everything. 

Ahab, and all Israel, seemed to be thoroughly 
humbled and converted, but Jezebel, fearing not God 
and regarding not man, was furious when she learned 
that the priests of the religion which she had championed 
had been put to death. Ignoring the king and 
the people of Israel entirely, she constituted herself 
the executive, and sent word to Elijah that he might 
expect to die also, as the priests of Baal had died, 
within twenty-four hours. It is altogether probable 
that this was merely a threat, intended to drive Elijah 
out of the kingdom; so that she might the better overthrow 
the reform movement which he had so recently 
begun. Had she not become fearful that the killing 
of Elijah might have brought some disastrous result, 
either through an insurrection of the people or through 
a divine judgment, no doubt she would have ordered 
his assassination, instead of notifying him of what she 
would do twenty-four hours later. 

The notification had what we presume was the 
designed effect: Elijah, thoroughly frightened and 
discouraged, fled panic-stricken before a woman; whereas 
but a few days before he had courageously faced 
the king, and reproved him. Ah, who will say that a 
woman has no power in the world! And her power for 
evil is commensurate with her power for good. No 
one can read the history of the world without seeing 
that woman has played an important part in all the 
important acts of the world's great drama. Her influences 
have been potent, both for good and evil, truth 
and error, God and Satan. Let not the sisters despise 
their opportunities, but let them seek to use them ever 
and always on the side of the good, the true, the pure, 
the noble, the holy, and in harmony with the Lord's 
Word. 

Elijah fled to the kingdom of Judah. Utterly discouraged, 
he went alone into the wilderness, and prayed 
that he might die. How severe his disappointment 
was we may judge. There had been three and a 
half years of preparation for this reform movement, 
and it had been inaugurated under such favorable conditions, 
and at first with pronounced results; and now 
to have the entire matter fail was certainly very 
discouraging. 

But the Lord did not even chide the Prophet for 
his timidity, etc. "He knoweth our frame, he remembereth 
that we are dust;" he makes allowance for 
our unintentional imperfections. God realized, better 
than did the Prophet, the physical exhaustion which 
he had experienced in connection with the great work 
which he had done within the past few days. So now, 
instead of chiding him, he was permitted to take rest 
in sleep and was provided miraculously with nourishment, 
and then sleep again; and, his vitality replenished, 



he arose refreshed, and ate again, before commencing 

a long journey and a long fast, of forty 

days. 

The lesson here to us is God's care over those 
who are fully consecrated to him, and who seek to do 
his will. He cares for our bodily necessities as well as 
for our spiritual wants. "Your Father knoweth what 
things ye have need of." Another lesson is found in 
the character of the food which the Lord supplied to 
Elijah. It would have been just as easy for Omnipotence 

R2333 : page 207 

to have provided dainties and luxuries for 
the prophet, but instead the provision was very simple 
—bread and water. The bread is called a "cake," 
for the customary food of that country then was, and 
still is, bread made about a quarter inch thick, and 
somewhat in the form of a pancake, baked on heated 
pebbles. Our Lord's promise to us, as his faithful 
people, is that our bread and water shall be sure; we 
are not to ask for more than this; whatever is received 
more should be accepted with thanksgiving and to the 
Lord's glory. Elijah's food also was a symbol of the 
Church's spiritual food: water is a symbol of truth- 
water of life; the unleavened bread is a symbol of 
Christ, whom we appropriate to our needs, for our 
refreshment through all the journey of life. 

Having journeyed to Mount Horeb (that is, Mount 
Sinai) the Prophet seems to have been without any 
special aim or purpose before his mind, for he simply 
dwelt in a cave there. The Lord brings this fact that 
he had no definite purpose or aim in life, to the prophet's 
attention by the inquiry, "What doest thou here, 
Elijah?" 

Elijah told the Lord how discouraged he felt, and 
why,— that he had in his zeal for the Lord attempted 
to do all that he could, but that apparently everything 
was wrecked, and the people of Israel had lost their 
courage and their faith in the Lord, and that apparently 
nothing further could be done to help them. 
And the Lord proposed to give Elijah a little lesson on 
various methods of work— so he sent him out upon 
the mountain, and there exhibited his power to him in 
various forms: (1) "A great and strong wind rent the 
mountains and brake in pieces the rock before the 
Lord." Here was an illustration of power such as 
Elijah had probably never before seen— wind with a 
velocity to rend the rocks; yet notwithstanding all this 
power, this was not God; it was merely the power of 
God. (2) He showed him an earthquake— the power 
of God to lift and to shake the mountains; yet neither 
was this the Lord; but an exhibition of his power. 
(3) A wonderful display of celestial fire, lightning, was 
next presented; but this was merely another grand 
manifestation of omnipotence. (4) Finally, in a great 



stillness, he heard a small voice speaking to him. Ah, 
here he recognized God. It had an influence upon 
him that all the manifestations of power did not 
have. He wrapped his face in his mantle, and fled 
back to the cave. 

We are not informed what the voice said to Elijah, 
but we see that he learned the lesson designed, namely, 
that God has a way of appealing to the heart of 
man more powerfully than by the wonderful gymnastics 
and phenomena of nature. Perhaps the small voice 
told Elijah that he should have had greater faith in 
God, and should have remained at his post, notwithstanding 
the threat of Jezebel, and that the Lord could 
have delivered him from her power. However, the 
Lord spoke to him again, intimating that he was doing 

R2334 : page 207 

nothing, and not in a place to do anything— 

"What doest thou here?" Elijah made the same response 

as before, about his discouragement, but by 

this time he had learned lessons of the Lord's providential 

dealing, and was prepared for the mission given 

him. The commission indicated that there was to be 

a general change in the affairs of Israel— a new king 

instead of Ahab, and another prophet instead of Elijah. 

Hazael, who was anointed to be the new king over 

Syria was to be the divine agent in bringing the divine 

judgment upon Israel and its king, Ahab, thus compelling 

reform, and preparing for better conditions 

future. 

The Lord's inquiry of Elijah may be variously 
emphasized, and may be applied fitly to each one of the 
Lord's consecrated people. It may be profitable to us 
if each one will ask himself the question, What doest 
thou here? What are we doing for the Lord and for 
his cause? What are we trying to do? Are we fleeing 
from the threats of the Lord's enemies? Are we 
discouraged in his service? Having begun in the 
spirit, are we hoping, contrary to his Word, to find 
earthly blessings and victories? Has the courage 
which enabled us for a time to fight the good fight deserted 
us? After being courageous for the Lord and 
his truth and his people are we in danger of being put 
to flight by a woman or a man, or any other creature? 
Is the Lord's arm shortened that it cannot help us and 
deliver us? Shall we receive of his marks of kindness 
and provision for our necessities of spiritual food, yet 
doubt his care and ability to supervise our temporal 
interests, and our endeavors to render service to his 
cause. Let us gather a blessing of instruction from the 
experience of Elijah, as delineated in this lesson, lest 
we be weary and faint in our minds. Greater is he 
that is on our part than all they that be against us. 
He will not suffer us to be tempted above that we are 
able, but will with the temptation provide also a way 



of escape. His grace is sufficient for us. Nevertheless, 
for these things he will be inquired of by us, 
and he demands that we shall exercise faith in him 
corresponding to his mercies and manifold favors 
to us, for "without faith it is impossible to please 
God."-Heb. 11:6. 

ELIJAH'S LESSON SYMBOLICALLY CONSIDERED. 



Recognizing that Elijah was a typical character 
representative of Christ in the flesh (the complete 
Church, head and body), should lead us to scan every 

R2334 : page 208 

feature of his experience, to note, if possible, the correspondence 

to it in the experience of the Church. 

We have already pointed out that the discouragement 

of the Reformer and his flight represent the discouragement 

of many of God's people now, in view of the 

rising power of Papacy and the tendency of so-called 

Protestants to sympathy with Papal methods, and the 

general abandonment of faith in the "ransom for all" 

paid at Calvary. 

It seems, therefore, not unreasonable to suppose 
that the lesson given to Elijah, just examined, represents 
a lesson which God has for his people now— to 
keep us at work undiscouraged or to revive the fainting. 
The lesson we see is this. 

Protestants obtained from Papacy the false idea 
that the whole world must be converted during this 
age. Experience and statistics prove that this is an 
impossible task;— that the population increases at a 
ten-fold more rapid ratio than even nominal conversions 
to Protestantism. Dismay and discouragement 
are followed by perplexity. But now as "meat in due 
season" the Lord gives his people an inkling respecting 
his plan for man's salvation and it restores confidence 
and zeal on the part of his people. He shows 
them that his power will first be manifested and that 
afterward he will speak to the people by the still 
small voice of the spirit of the truth which shall be 
surely heard. 

The four exhibitions of the Lord, given to Elijah, 
represent, we believe, four manifestations, in which 
the Lord is about to reveal himself to mankind;— the 
first three of which will prepare men for the final one in 
which will come the desired blessing, to all the families 
of the earth. These are: 

(1) The mighty winds rending the very rocks. 
Blowing winds seem to be used in Scripture as a symbol 
for wars. And Revelation (7:1-3) teaches us 
that the wars, whose dark clouds have threatened the 
civilized world so ominously for the past thirty years, 



have been miraculously hindered to give opportunity 
for "sealing" the Lord's consecrated people in their 
foreheads (intellectually) with the present truth. We 
are therefore to expect that when these winds of war 
shall be let loose, it will mean a cataclysm of warfare 
which shall divide kingdoms (mountains)— prefigured 
by the mighty wind shown to Elijah, which rent the 
rock. But God's Kingdom will not follow the epoch 
of war: the world will not thus be made ready for the 
reign of Immanuel. No, a further lesson will be needed 
and will be given. It is represented in 

(2) An earthquake. Throughout the Scriptures 

an earthquake seems always to represent revolution, 
and it is not unreasonable to expect that an era of general 
warfare would so arouse the lower classes of Europe 
and so discontent them with their lot (and especially 
with the conditions which would follow such a war) 
that revolution would be the next thing in order. If 
so, the earthquake made known to God's people is the 
one referred to in Revelation 16: 18. But severe tho 
those revolutionary experiences will be to the world 
they are not sufficient to prepare men to hear the voice 
of God. It will require 

(3) The fire from heaven;— an epoch of divine 

judgments and chastisements upon a maddened but unconverted 

world wild in anarchy, as other Scriptures 

show us. The results of their wars and revolutions 

and anarchy— the failure of their schemes and the 

lessons of divine judgments will however, have an exhausting 

and humbling effect and prepare mankind 

for God's revelation of himself in 

(4) The still small voice. Yes, he who spoke to 

the winds and waves of the sea of Galilee will, in due 
time, "Speak peace to the peoples." He will speak 
with authority, commanding the observance of his long 
neglected law of Love. "And it shall come to pass 
that whosoever will not hear that Prophet shall be cut 
off from among his people."— Acts 3:23. 

Mark the harmony of Psalm 46 with these thoughts 
drawn from Elijah's lesson. After portraying in symbol 
the dashing of the kingdoms of this world, the 
shaking of society by revolution and the figurative 
melting of society under the fire of God's judgments, 
and after every hope of man in his own power is gone, 
the still small voice is heard, commanding,— "Be still 
and know that I am God! I will be exalted among the 
people, I will be exalted in the earth." 

The difficulty with mankind is, in great part, their 
ignorance of God. And they fail to know him, partly 
at least because of their high opinion of their own 
wisdom and ability to get along without God. They 
will soon learn to the contrary and will then be willing 
to hearken to divine wisdom, and say, "Come, let 
us go up to the mountain [kingdom] of the Lord's 
house. He shall teach us of his ways and we will 
walk in his paths."— Isa. 2:3; Micah 4:2. 



"All the paths of the Lord are mercy and truth." 
-Psa. 25:10. 

The lesson to the Lord's people from these symbols 
is, that God has the power by which eventually 
he will "subdue all things unto himself," and bring 
order out of present confusion. We are to "wait patiently 
for him," and labor on diligently and fervently 
to the extent of our opportunities and abilities and to 
"hope to the end for the grace that shall be brought 
unto us at the revelation of our Lord and Savior, Jesus 
Christ" for "in due season we shall reap if we faint 
not."-Gal. 6:9. 



page 209 
VOL. XIX. JULY 15, 1898. No. 14. 



CONTENTS. 



Special Items 210 

"Purify Your Hearts, Ye Double 

Minded 211 

How the New Mind Should Rule 214 

Poem: What Became of a Lie 216 

Interesting Queries 216 

Christadelphian Proof-Texts 216 

Immortal Vs. Incorruptible 218 

The General or First Resurrection? 219 

The Sin of Covetousness 219 

Elijah's Successor, Elisha 221 

Interesting Letters 223 

page 210 

SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
--ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 56-60 ARCH STREET, ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, N.Y. DRAFT, MONEY ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS: 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age or accident, or other 
adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, if they 
send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting the 
paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list 
constantly. 

OUR NEW TRACT-NO. 41. 



This tract comprises the article "Must We Abandon Hope 
of a Golden Age?" (recently published in this Magazine) and 
three pages of Scripture texts, from "all the holy prophets since 
the world began," and from the New Testament, showing that 
there will be "Times of Restitution." It is very suitable for 
general distribution. 

R2335 : page 210 

"THE DAY OF VENGEANCE" --IN GERMAN. 

We have quite a few calls for the fourth volume of MILLENNIAL 
DAWN series in the German language. It was not our intention 
to publish this volume in any language except the English. 
We would say, however, to the friends who are anxious 
to have it in German that, if interest enough is developed to 
guarantee the purchase of sufficient books to amount to the 
cost of the typesetting (say $500) we will, on the strength of 
such subscriptions, proceed to get out a German edition of VOL. 
IV. One dear brother and sister in Germany are so certain that 
it is just the thing the Germans there need, that they have, in 
spite of our protests, proceeded to translate the volume; and 
they are now quite well on with the work. No money need be 
sent at present, but those interested may inform us at once what 
amount of money they wish to invest in this manner, at the 
same prices as the English editions. Postal cards will serve the 
purpose. 



R2335 : page 211 
"PURIFY YOUR HEARTS, YE DOUBLE MINDED." 



"A double-minded man is unstable in all his ways."— Jas. 1:8. 

BY NATURE all mankind have the depraved 
mind or will, whose chief characteristic is 
selfishness. And it is the desire to gratify this depraved 
will, including all selfish desires, that leads into sin in 
its every form. But those who have tasted of divine 
grace, and have come unto the Father through the 
Son and the merits of his sacrifice, and whose eyes 
have been opened to discern the difference between 
righteousness and unrighteousness, and the natural 
result of both under the operation of the divine law, 
and who have consecrated themselves to the Lord, are 
said to have a new mind, a new will,— sometimes called 
a clean heart and a right spirit. The natural, fallen 
disposition or will or mind is Scripturally termed "the 
mind of the flesh," while the renewed mind, disposition 
or will is termed "the mind of the spirit," because 
it is the result of the influence or spirit of the truth. 



Nevertheless, this new mind or will, based upon 
more proper views of right and wrong, is evolved 
through the very same brain as the other; and these 
brains by which we do our thinking and reasoning and 
willing are very closely and sympathetically allied to 
our depraved physical conditions, so that it is more 
natural, more easy, for us under present conditions to 
exercise the will or mind of the flesh than to exercise 
the will or mind of the spirit. Nor can this connection 
between our depraved physical conditions and our 
wills be completely broken up: so long as we are in 
the flesh it will be impossible for us to completely 
deaden its influence upon our minds and wills: consequently 
the will of the flesh and the works of the flesh 
would be the most easy and the most natural to us— 
the thoughts, words and deeds of the fallen disposition 
coming without seeking and without effort. 

On the contrary, as the new mind or will was begotten 
or implanted in us by an outside influence, foreign 
to ourselves and our depravity, it, like all invaders, 
for a long time at least must hold its control, if at 
all, as would an invading foreigner— by force. The 
force or power by which the spirit of truth, the spirit 
of righteousness, the spirit of our God, gained a foothold 
in our hearts, was through the enlightenment of our 
minds and the quickening or revivifying of certain 
organs of the mind which had for many generations 
lain dormant and consequently become dwarfed and 
weak, and of other organs which for many generations 
had become distorted and perverted through misuse, 
under the domination of error, superstition, etc. 

The spirit of truth, the spirit of the Lord, entered 
our minds as a great general might land upon a foreign 
shore, and recruit his army from amongst those whom 
he desires to conquer,— by lifting up and encouraging 
and enlightening the rightly disposed, and drilling 
these and arming them in his service, for the overthrow 
of a bad government, and the establishment of a righteous 
government. Such a new government, seeking 
the best interests of every citizen, and willing to have 
the cooperation of each, would nevertheless find it extremely 
difficult to control the lower elements of society, 
except by putting all of its affairs fully in charge 
and under the control of the rightly disposed: and so, 
too, in our minds, we find that there are certain lower 
organs or propensities which have maintained their 
strength and vigor, while some of the higher organs 
of our nature have lost their vitality and power to rule, 
and become dwarfed under the control of sin and ignorance. 
The spirit of truth, the spirit of the Lord, 
having gained entrance to our minds, has enlightened 

R2335 : page 212 

and quickened and is constantly drilling these better 
elements of our natural dispositions, and seeks to restore 



to them the control originally theirs, over the 
baser or lower propensities of our nature. 

Nothing else need be expected than warfare between 
the new mind seeking under the Lord's direction 
to regain the control, and the depraved mind 
which obtained the control under the reign of sin and 
death. The Apostle mentions this warfare, saying:— 
"The flesh lusteth against the spirit, and the spirit 
against the flesh; and these are contrary the one to the 
other; so that ye cannot do the things that ye would." 
(Gal. 5:17.) The inspired Apostle here puts the matter 
very strongly, and yet experience proves to all 
Christians that he puts it very truthfully, "Ye cannot 
do the things that ye would." 

So far, then, from being discouraged that our new 
minds cannot conquer an absolute peace, and come into 
such perfect conditions that a wrong thought could 
never rise up to assert itself and to tempt us, we 
should, on the contrary, while prompt to crush the 
slightest uprising of the mind of the flesh, nevertheless 
realize that our condition is the very one which 
the Lord designs as best for us. We should realize 
that our faithfulness to righteousness is attested, not 
by the fact that we have no trials or besetments from 
the evil mind of the flesh, but that by the grace of God 
we have a holy will, a holy desire to promptly resist 
and by the Lord's grace to overcome every evil 
suggestion. 

There are a few people in the world, we believe, 
who claim to have become so dead naturally and so 
alive spiritually that they have no "motions of sin in 
the flesh;"— so that no evil thought or desire ever so 
much as suggests itself to them. In our judgment 
these people are deceiving themselves; not only because 
their alleged experience is different from the experiences 
of other Christian people, faithfully battling 
against every motion of the flesh to the end of life's 
journey, but more particularly because their alleged 
experiences are contrary to the Word of Truth which 
in many places assures us (concerning the new creature 
with the new mind, seeking to overcome the mind 
of the flesh, and to bring every thought and word and 
act into subjection to the will of God in Christ), saying, 
"Ye cannot do [perfectly] the things that ye 
would." 

This implies not only that the Lord's people, the 
new creatures in Christ, will be liable to besetment on 
the part of the mind of the flesh, but it implies also, 
that the mind of the flesh (in spite of our best efforts 
to down it, to mortify it), while not succeeding in accomplishing 
its evil purposes, will nevertheless hinder 
us in divers ways from accomplishing all the good and 
great and noble things to which the new mind will 
prompt us. He who thinks that he is accomplishing 
great things, he who succeeds in accomplishing all 
that he would, all the things that he wills to accomplish, 



may be sure that he is not willing on a high 
enough plane; just as he who fancies that he has no 
besetments of the flesh is merely deceiving himself, 
and is so asleep as respects his new mind that he does 
not recognize sharply the distinctions between the new 
mind and the old mind, nor discriminate closely between 
truth and error, righteousness and sin. 

THE DOUBLE MINDED. 



A double-minded man or woman is one who has 
received the new mind and recognizes the difference 
between the mind of the flesh and the mind of the 
spirit, but who, instead of giving over the control of 
his life to either one, thinks erroneously that he can 
succeed better by dividing matters. The double mind 
is the compromising disposition. The old nature, as 
soon as it recognizes the presence of the new, is inclined 
to dissimulate, and to propose compromise and 
peace, fearing its own extermination. The new mind 
urges right, truth, the spirit, disposition, of God; and 
that these should have free course, and that every 
thought daring to assert itself in opposition to these 
recognized principles of righteousness should be summarily 
dealt with and put to death as a rebel. The 
mind of the flesh trembles at such thorough-going law 
and discipline, and raises various objections: 

(1) It would cause an awful rupture and a lifelong 
war between the new mind and the tendency, 

mind or will of the fallen flesh. It would mean self-denial; 
it would mean the risk of breaking of tender 

R2336 : page 212 

ties, and the rupture of long cherished hopes and 
ambitions. 

(2) It objects that such a course would be fanatical; 
that such is not the course of the world in general, 
nor even the course of the most respectable among 
those who are classed as Christians; and that to follow 
the course proposed would, therefore, mean, as gauged 
by worldly wisdom and customs, to become a fool for 
Christ's sake, and to be considered such by all the 
worldly-wise. 

(3) It urges its own claims and rights: it admits 
that at one time it usurped full control improperly, 
but declares that it is reformed now. Its proposal, 
therefore, is that there should be a lasting peace as 
between the old mind and the new, that the new mind 
shall have the full right to control in all matters pertaining 
to religious worship, Sabbath observance and 

outward deportment, and that the old mind (reformed) 
shall continue to have full charge of business and secular 



R2336 : page 213 

affairs; and that in matters of conscience, respecting 
dress, amusements, etc., there shall be a compromise 
between the two minds, which, it suggests, would 
really be the happy medium and more desirable and in 
better taste than the extremes of either. 

This is the condition represented by the Apostle, 
when he says, a double-minded man is inconsistent in 
all his ways. And alas, how many Christians are in 
this very condition of inconsistency: they profess on 
the one hand to be renewed in mind, and are actually 
so to some extent; yet on the other hand, in many of 
the affairs of life they are walking not after the spirit's 
direction but after the will of the flesh. They more 
or less feel this inconsistency, and their lives are not 
satisfactory to themselves, and far from satisfactory 
from the divine standpoint. Nor does the world appreciate 
them; for frequently it calls them hypocrites, 
pointing to their inconsistencies as proof. Their course 
is thoroughly disapproved by the Lord's Word which 
declares that none such shall constitute the Kingdom 
class, which shall be composed only of "overcomers," 
in whom the mind of the spirit has the control, the 
mastery, bringing even the thoughts of the heart into 
subjection to the will of God in Christ. 

The double-minded man, the man who has two 
wills in control, and who is obliged to compromise 
matters continually, by "splitting the difference" between 
the two minds, will be apt to find the old mind 
more and more securing control in his heart;— until 
finally his mind or will becomes as fleshly as it was before 
grace and truth reached him— full of selfishness. 
The only trace of the "new mind" remaining in such 
will be an outward semblance of respect for righteousness, 
truth and honesty, a "form of godliness" which, 
as a mere veneer, will serve to keep up outward appearances 
and respectability, while inwardly the heart, 
the will, is completely reprobate. Such have reached 
the condition of the scribes and Pharisees of old— they 
have become mere hypocrites, "whited sepulchres, full 
of all manner of corruption." 

What then is the right attitude of mind, what is the 
proper course to take? We answer that the proper 
course is to have only one mind, one will— the will of 
God— to permit the new mind, the new spirit, the new 
disposition, to have full control. As the Apostle says, 
"Let the mind of Christ dwell in you richly and 
abound," and it will bring forth good fruit, that will 
be a blessing to yourself and to others, and pleasing 
to the Lord: and such will be neither barren nor unfruitful 
in the knowledge of the Lord. We are to 
place ourselves in every particular under the control 
of the new mind, and as the Apostle again declares, 
"Make no provision for the flesh, to fulfil its desires." 
(Rom. 13:14.) The mind of the flesh, the desires of 



the flesh, are to be considered as mortal enemies,— to 
be fought against and exterminated so far as possible, 
and with them there is to be no compromise, no terms, 
no covenant, no agreement. "Mortify [kill, deaden] 
therefore your members [your mental members, your 
depraved tendencies] which are upon the earth."— 
Col. 3:5. 

This same thought of the necessity of having only 
the one will, the one set of principles before our minds, 
if we would be successful in making our calling and 
election sure, was enunciated by our Lord, when he 
said, "If thine eye be single, thy whole body shall be 
full of light." That is to say, if our eyes be focused 
in harmony together as one, the object before us will 
be seen in its true, proper light and shape, but if we 
were cross-eyed, our eyes glancing in different directions, 
every object looked at with both eyes would 
seem distorted. So with the eyes of understanding: 
if we attempt to look at matters from the heavenly 
standpoint, and at the same time from the earthly 
standpoint, the result will be unsatisfactory— confusion, 
uncertainty, incorrectness of judgment. 

As we have found that the old nature, if permitted 
to have a voice at all, would eventually capture the 
citadel of the heart, so we find also that if the new nature 
be granted full sway to overcome the will of the 
flesh, to bring every thought and word and deed into 
subjection to the will of God, this also means a gradual 
development, a growth in grace and in the knowledge 
and the will of God. It means that the entire 
heart is thus seized in the name of the Lord, and reckoned 
as his, and reckoned a pure heart on this account; 
but it means also a progressive battle with and a progressive 
victory over the weaknesses, the frailties of 
our mortal bodies; and it means additionally the establishment, 
in every quarter of our beings, of fortified 
defences against the besetments of the world, the flesh 
and the devil. Thus the developed Christian, whose 
eye is single to the pleasement of God, and whose mind, 
purpose or will is single to the service of the one Master, 
shall, by the grace of God, day by day, month by 
month, year by year, find the ability, more and more, 
to hinder his flesh from rendering service to Sin. And 
not only so, but his flesh, once the willing servant of 
sin until mortified, rendered dead to Sin, shall more 
and more be quickened, energized, by the new mind, 
to its service, and thus more and more become a servant 
of righteousness and of truth: so that it not only 
will be passively the Lord's, in the sense of not being 
an opponent of truth and right and purity, but so that 
it will be the Lord's in a positive sense, aggressively 
and actively engaged in opposition to sin and error, 
and in the service of truth and righteousness.— 
Rom. 8:11. 

R2336 : page 214 



HOW THE NEW MIND SHOULD RULE. 



Many gibes and taunts are thrown at the present 
House of Congress, whose Speaker and representative 
is the Hon. Thomas B. Reed, who is styled "the Czar 
and autocrat of the House." Nevertheless, and without 
attempting any discussion of the merits or demerits 
of the arrangement criticized, from their political and 
human standpoint, we see there a most fit illustration 
for our subject under consideration. 

The human brain is scientifically, phrenologically, 
subdivided into various organs, representative of various 
propensities or dispositions: these may be illustrated 
by the various representatives of the various States, 
assembled in the House of Congress. Each different 
organ has its own particular thought or interest, yet 
the will is not the expression of any one organ merely, 
but the voice of the majority. When a motion or 
bill is offered in Congress, it may be of special interest 
to only a few of the members, and the State interests 
which they represent. In such event, if personal or 
sectional selfishness ruled amongst the members, the 
matter in question could not be passed, because the 
majority would not be sufficiently interested to favor 
it; and hence, to accomplish its end it would be necessary 
to appeal to the selfishness of the various other 
members, by agreeing to favor certain interests of 
theirs in return for their cooperation. Thus, Congress, 
if each member and each state stood entirely separate, 
and without any combination, would be comparatively 
powerless, unless a degree of patriotism should be 
shown larger than we would have any reason to expect. 
Hence the tendency has always been to party division 
and party cooperation; the party in the majority having 
the control of the situation, and being held responsible 
accordingly for the results. So with our 
minds: if each organ stood wholly separate from the 
others, it could move only on lines of selfishness, unless 
it were perfect, which we know it is not. Hence 
in the human mind, as in Congress, party lines have 
been established, and for very much the same purpose. 
In the mind of the Christian the party lines are, the 
old mind and the new mind, the old self and the new 
self, the old creature and the new creature, the old 
will and the new will, the mind of righteousness, and 
the mind of sin, the mind of love and the mind of selfishness. 
All these various names describe the same 
two minds. 

In Congress it was found that as its number of 
representatives increased there was an increased tendency 
on the part of minorities to baffle or hinder the 
accomplishment of anything by the majority: the minority 
party would discuss the subject for hours, days 



and weeks, if permitted to do so, rather than let the 
matter go to a vote, in hope that in the end the will of 
the majority should be frustrated. But Speaker Reed, 
cooperating with the leaders of his party, concluded 
that it was not the intention of the law to hinder legislation, 
and that consequently the dominant party 
should have opportunity to proceed to enact the laws 
which it, as the majority of the body, deemed to be 
the proper laws. Consequently rules were laid down 
giving the Speaker, as the representative of the majority, 
certain privileges and powers, by which the opposition 
would be limited in its discussion of the various 
subjects, and the will of the majority more speedily 
and more thoroughly enacted. 

Now this is exactly the condition of things in the 
human heart, where the teachings of the Lord have 
been accepted, and where the propensities or organs 

R2337 : page 214 

of the mind have come to a strict party division;— the 
one the party of truth and righteousness and love, in 
harmony with the Lord, and the other the party of sin 
and selfishness, with contrary sentiments. If conversion 
has taken place it means that the higher organs 
of the mind, sufficient in number or in influence, have 
gained the control of the mind; that these preponderate 
in number or in influence; that they constitute the 
majority, and the evil propensities the minority. Any 
heart in which the evil propensities are in the majority 
and in control is an unconverted heart. 

And what was found in Congress respecting the 
disposition of minorities to baffle the will of the ruling 
majority is found also in our minds, namely, the disposition 
of our natural mind not only to be heard, 
but to foil and baffle and render void the will of the 
new mind, in respect to the control of the affairs of 
life. What the Scriptures propose to us, therefore, is 
illustrated again in Congress: the Scriptures propose 
that the new mind, having obtained the control, shall 
elect a Speaker, a head,— and that that head or Speaker 
for our every talent, directing all our interests and all 
our efforts, shall be Christ Jesus our Lord. They propose 
that we shall place full authority and power in 
the hands of the Lord, so that his word and will shall 
be our will, our law. And how safe it is for us to admit 
such a Czar, such an autocrat, to control us, 
since we have learned to know him as the very embodiment 
of justice, wisdom, and love. Safely we can 
trust our affairs in his hands. 

There are other analogies which might be drawn: 
for instance, the power of the Speaker of the House 
rests solely in the fact that it is the power of the majority. 
If the majority which placed him in power 
and gave him the authority which he exercises should 
become a minority, his power would immediately terminate; 



and the opposition party might give its representative 
equal power in an opposite direction. So 

R2337 : page 215 

with our hearts; only as our hearts voted to have the 
Lord in control, did he take charge; and if our wills, 
the preponderance of our propensities, our judgments, 
cease to be on the side of the Lord, he no longer retains 
his power in our hearts and lives, and the evil 
majority appoint a successor, in line with the selfish 
propensities, favoring everything selfish. 

In Congress, when any matter is brought up, 
each representative has an opportunity for expressing 
himself, either directly or indirectly, either on the floor 
personally, or through representatives in committee. 
And so with our wills: when a matter is presented by 
one organ of the mind, the other organs have a chance 
to respond, and to seek to influence the majority, and 
to overthrow the rule of righteousness. For instance, 
a suggestion is made to the mind by the organ of Combativeness, 
to the effect that there is a good, proper 
cause why the whole being should be angry, and undertake 
vengeful retaliation; and under the influence 
of the eloquence of Combativeness, various other of 
the lower organs would most surely be aroused; namely, 
Pride, Self-esteem, Destructiveness, Selfishness, 
etc., and in addition perhaps some of the higher organs 
might be temporarily swayed by the old sympathies, 
prejudice, antipathy, etc., to favor the angry, malicious 
and resentful course. Conscientiousness might 
excitedly declare that it was a righteous cause of indignation; 
Caution might join, and claim that if the 
thing were not now opposed violently, worse results 
would follow; even Spirituality and Veneration might 
be swayed into favoring the angry course, with suggestions 
that it was in the service of God, and a duty 
towards God, and toward righteousness, to be angry 
and to crush the opponent with retaliation and vengeance. 
Thus, for a moment the entire mind might 
be swayed toward the side of evil, yet without previous 
wilfulness or sin— because of the hereditary tendencies 
of the mind. 

But here the gavel of the Speaker is heard, Memory 
calls attention, and points out that the will of the 
majority has already been expressed to the contrary of 
such a course; and calls attention to the rules already 
adopted;— namely, to put away all anger, malice, hatred 
and strife, as being in general works of the flesh 
and of the devil. Memory calls attention to the fact 
that the majority adopted as the rule of action the 
words of the Speaker, Christ, "Love your enemies, do 
good to them that hate you, and speak evil of you." 
Commit your way unto the Lord, remembering that 
he has said, "Vengeance is mine, I will recompense." 
Where the will of the majority of organs is loyal to 



its own previous decision, the effect of Memory's calling 

attention to that law will be instantaneous: at once 

Conscientiousness, Veneration, Spirituality, Caution, 

and all the higher organs realize that they were about 

to make a mistake; and immediately they change front, 

fully supporting the law of the Speaker, Christ. Selfishness, 

Combativeness, Pride, etc., may attempt to 

argue the point, but immediately they are called to 

order and reminded that by vote of the majority they 

are strictly under the law of Christ, and all further 

discussion of the subject is forbidden. 

Similarly, illustrations might be drawn as representing 
other passions, tastes or desires of the flesh, 
which temporarily might seem to gain some control; 
but from the moment that Memory calls attention to 
the proposal as being in conflict with the law of the 
Master, there should be an instantaneous surrender. 
Such a course would prove that the will had all along 
been thoroughly loyal to the Lord, and that he reigns 
there. It proves the reign of Christ in that heart far 
better than if no suggestion to the contrary course had 
come up. And who cannot see that a life thus ordered, 
and under strictest control of the will of our Head, 
Christ Jesus, is not only the only proper life (the only 
one in which the new mind is properly exercised), but 
in addition to this the only mind which is a "sound 
mind." People who are continually carried from their 
moorings by their emotions show that their minds are 
unsound; such are continually proving to those around 
them that they have poor judgment. They are frequently 
angry, troubled, vexed, hurt; or continually 
falling into one wrong act or another, as they confess 
afterward. Indeed, the majority of the things at 
which they take offence, become angry, etc., prove to 
have been mistakes, nothing having been done or intended 
to anger, hurt, or injure them. And we know, 
not only from the Scriptures, but also from our own 
observation, that the world of mankind in general is 
thus of unsound mind; and, as the Apostle explains, 
the only ones in all the world who have even the spirit 
or disposition of a sound mind are the new creatures 
in Christ Jesus, who have the new mind, the new will, 
in control. These, as we have seen, would be liable 
to be carried away also, by evil passions, evil surmisings, 
etc., but those who have put themselves fully 
and completely under the control of Christ and his law 
of the New Covenant are kept from the extremes to 
which otherwise they would be as subject as others. 

The Apostle's exhortation to the double minded, 
is in place, and should be heeded promptly by all who 
realize that they have a double mind or will which can 
never please the Lord nor bring joy and blessing either 
now or hereafter: "Purify your hearts, ye double 
minded;"— purge your consciences by hearty obedience 
to the truth, by the washing of water through 
the Word. 



"Grant, Lord, a heart, submissive, meek, 
My great Redeemer's throne, 

Where only Christ is heard to speak, 
Where Jesus reigns alone; 

"A heart in every thought renewed, 

And full of love divine, 
Perfect and right, and pure and good, 

A copy, Lord, of thine." 

R2342 : page 216 

WHAT BECAME OF A LIE. 



"First somebody told it, 
Then the room wouldn't hold it, 
So the busy tongues rolled it 
Till they got it outside. 
When the crowd came across it 
They onward did toss it, 
Till it grew long and wide. 
From a very small lie, Sir, 
It grew deep and high, Sir, 
Till it reached the sky, Sir, 
And frightened the moon; 
For she hid her face, Sir, 
At the dreadful disgrace, Sir, 
That happened at noon. 

"This lie brought forth others, 
Dark sisters and brothers, 
And fathers and mothers 

A terrible crew. 
And while headlong they hurried, 
The people they flurried, 
And troubled and worried 

As lies always do. 
And so evil boded, 
This monstrous lie goaded, 
Till at last it exploded 

In smoke and in shame. 
While from mud and from mire 
The pieces flew higher, 
And hit the sad liar, 
And killed his good name." 

—Mrs. M. A. Kidder in Jewish Gazette. 



R2337 : page 216 

INTERESTING QUERIES. 



Question. The fact that our Lord received worship 
is claimed by some to be an evidence that while 
on earth he was God the Father disguised in a body of 
flesh and not really a man. Was he really worshiped, 
or is the translation faulty? 

Answer. Yes, we believe our Lord Jesus while 
on earth was really worshiped, and properly so. While 
he was not the God, Jehovah, he was a God. The 
word "God" signifies a "mighty one," and our Lord 
was indeed a mighty one. So it is stated in the 
first two verses of the gospel of John. It was proper for 
our Lord to receive worship in view of his having been 
the only begotten of the Father, and his agent in the 
creation of all things, including man. 

Besides, he had come to earth under the divine 
arrangement and accepted the condition of Messiahship, 
presenting himself to God as fallen man's sin-offering; 
besides, at his baptism he was anointed of the 
holy spirit as the Messiah, and authorized to carry out 
the great divine plan and to receive homage from both 
angels and men. This alone would have rendered 
worship proper even aside from his pre-human greatness 
as "the only begotten of the Father." 

CHRIST ADELPHIAN PROOF-TEXTS. 



Question. Some "Christadelphians" offer the following 
texts in proof that death ends all for a large 
majority of the human family— that the majority will 
never be awakened from the sleep of death.— Psa. 88:4,5; 
49:14. Isa. 26:14; 43:16,17; Obad. 16. 

Please let me have your explanation of the meaning 
of these texts. 

R2338 : page 216 

Answer. These texts should be interpreted in 
harmony with the holy spirit's interpretations given 
us in the words of our Lord and the apostles recorded 
in the New Testament. These declare that the hour 
is coming in which all that are in the grave shall hear 
the voice of the Son of Man and come forth, some unto 
the resurrection of life and some unto a resurrection 
by judgments. (John 5:29.) And we are assured by 
the Apostle that it is the will of God that "All should 
come to a knowledge of the truth that they may be 
saved;" and that to this end "Christ died for the ungodly," 
"gave himself a ransom for all, to be testified 
[to all] in due time." (1 Tim. 2:6.) Indeed, the 
Apostle assures us that the Kingdom class (the Church) 
now being selected is appointed to "judge the world" 
(1 Cor. 6:2); and that "God hath appointed a day" 



(an epoch or age) in the which this judgment or trial 
shall take place (Acts 17:3 1); and the picture of this 
in the symbols of Revelation shows the dead, small and 
great, standing before the great white throne of justice, 
mercy and love, and being tried (during the thousand 
years of Christ's reign), according to the law 
written in the Book and according to their works. 
(Rev. 20:1 1-13.) In interpreting any of the Old 
Testament Scriptures we need all the light and help 
which God has deemed proper to throw upon them 
through the New Testament revelations. If we did 
not observe and use this New Testament key furnished 
us by the holy spirit, all of the prophecies and types 
of the Old Testament would be meaningless or worse 
to us. Looking at the passages you cite, from this the 
proper standpoint, we find as follows:— 

Psa. 88:4,5. The writer is not declaring his own 
opinion, but is merely saying how he is regarded by 
others, "I am counted with them that go down into 
the pit: I am [counted] as a man having no strength 
—a cast away among the dead; [counted] like the slain 
that lie in the grave, whom thou rememberest no more: 
and like them that are cut off by thy hand." 

The Lord reveals the fact, in the Old Testament 
as well as in the New, that there will be some who 
will be utterly cut off from life in the second death. 
But none will be in this class whose hearts are in the 
attitude of the Psalmist. The only ones who will be 
of this class will be such as have spurned the grace of 
God, after it has been made known to them. (Heb. 6:4-6.) 
The Psalmist is saying that he is disesteemed 
and disowned, as one who is the subject of divine displeasure, 

R2338 : page 217 

counted unworthy of any future life, remanded 
to the second death. 

Psa. 49:14. "Like sheep they are laid in the 
grave; death shall feed on them; and the upright shall 
have dominion over them in the morning." The 
prophet David is here speaking of a certain class who 
vainly think to build up fortunes and to make their 
names endure, without realizing what is the true 
wealth of character which should be sought. But, there 
is nothing in this to indicate that death will end all 
for these. Quite to the contrary, the statement that 
"The upright shall have dominion over them in the 
morning," proves that death does not end all for these; 
but that in the morning of the Millennial Day, when 
Christ and the Church shall be granted the Kingdom 
under the whole heavens, then these shall be awakened 
and come under his dominion. This will be God's 
method of bringing them under the blessings of the 
seed of Abraham which he has promised shall come 
"to all the families of the earth." 

Isa. 26:14. The first nine verses of this chapter 



are a prophetic description of the Millennial day,— 

when the land of Judah has been reclaimed (verse 1) 

and when the nations of earth are walking in the light 

(teaching) of the glorified Church— the New Jerusalem. 

(Compare verse 2 and Rev. 21:24-26 and Isa. 60:11,18-22.) 

Verse 5 describes the humbling of the 

proud and the fall of mystic Babylon. Verse 9 shows 

how some (the body of Christ) have desired and 

prayed "thy Kingdom come" throughout the "night" 

of the Gospel age while waiting for the Millennial 

dawning; and how the judgments of the "day of 

trouble" which introduces the Millennial reign are 

necessary to teach the world righteousness. Verses 10 and 1 1 

show, however, that even those terrible lessons 

will be insufficient for some who, even in the land 

of uprightness (the Millennial or "new earth" state), 

will be unjust still, and refuse to recognize the mighty 

"hand" of God. Yet they shall see, and eventually 

all enemies of the Lord shall be destroyed. 

Verses 12-15 represent the faithful taking a glance 
backward, and acknowledging that the deliverance has 
been wholly God's work. "O Lord our God, other 
lords [rulers, powers] have had dominion over us [Sin, 
the great task -master, and his representatives in civil, 
ecclesiastical and financial despotism, including trusts, 
combines and every evil system which oppresses men 
at the present time;— some of which are now highly 
esteemed among the oppressed]; but of Thee only 
would we make mention [now as our ruler]— of thy 
name. They are dead, they will not live again; they 
are departed, they will not arise again: because thou 
hast visited and destroyed them and made every memorial 
of them to perish."— See Leeser's Translation. 

Ah, yes! every power of evil and oppression shall 
be destroyed forever, never to rise again, when the 
kingdom is the Lord's and he is the Governor amongst 
the nations. 

Isa. 43:16,17. "Thus saith the Lord,. ..who 
maketh a way in the sea and a path in the mighty 
waters; which bringeth forth the chariot and the horse, 
the army and the power; they shall lie down together, 
they shall not rise: they are extinct, they are quenched 
as tow." Nothing in this statement bears upon the 
case of any individual in the world: it is a statement 
respecting horses, chariots and armies. The Lord will 
bring low, even to destruction, all the implements of 
war; as is written, "He maketh wars to cease, unto 
the ends of the earth." When once the armies of 
strife have been overthrown, they shall never rise again; 
but the individuals who compose those armies are 
members of the Adamic race, whose redemption was 
secured by the great sacrifice for sin; and in due time 
each and all who have not yet come to a knowledge of 
the truth, must be brought to that knowledge, and 
have the opportunity of believing, obeying, and obtaining 
everlasting life through Christ. 



Obad. 16. "For as they have drunk upon my 
holy mountain so shall all the nations drink continually, 
yea, they shall drink, and they shall swallow 
down, and they shall be as tho they had not been." 

The Lord through the prophet describes (verse 15) 
the events of "the day of the Lord," the approaching 
time of trouble, in which all the nations (improperly 
translated heathen) shall come into judgment, and be 
caused to drink of the cup of the Lord's anger. (Jer. 25:28,29.) 
When the nations fall during the coming 
time of trouble it will mean their utter destruction, as 
was illustrated in Nebuchadnezzar's image of these 
nations (Dan. 2:35,44,45). The same destruction of 
the nations is pictured in Daniel's dream respecting 
the same Kingdoms (Dan. 7:11-14,27). But altho 
the nations shall never rise up again, and altho only 
God's Kingdom will thereafter be recognized, yet the 
people who composed the various nations, "all the 
families of the earth," shall come forth from the grave 
to be blessed by God's kings and priests— "the holy 
nation, the peculiar people, the Seed of Abraham." 

Question. Please refer me to any of your writings 
explanatory of Zech. 13:6. 

Answer. We have nothing treating Zech. 13:6. 
From the connection of verse one with the preceding chapter, 
it would seem to imply that in this day of 
trouble already commenced, there will be a general 
change of front on the part of religious teachers who 
will be so greatly ashamed of the false gospel which 
they have proclaimed, that they will desire to disavow 
their previous occupation. In this view the wounds 
would seem to indicate severe usage received by them 
from their former flocks. The hand is a symbol of 
power, and the wounding of the hand would seem to 

R2338 : page 218 

imply injury or destruction of the power or influence 
once exercised by these "shepherds." The wounds 
here mentioned seem to have no reference to the 
wounding of the hands of our Lord at the crucifixion: 
there is no connection apparent. 

Verse seven seems to begin a totally different subject, 
no longer treating of the false shepherds and reprobate 
prophets, but of the true servants of God and 
the fact that God would permit trial and tribulations 
to come against such for their proving and development, 
nevertheless covering the little ones, the weak 
ones, with his hand— power. 

Question. Is not the denomination known as 
"Disciples" on a proper basis of freedom? Is there 
any cause for considering it a section or ward in "that 
Great City, Babylon," from which the call is, "Come 
out of her, my people? " —Rev. 18:1-5. 

Answer. The denomination known as "Disciples" 
professedly stands just where we stand and 



where the early Church stood, as respects its declaration 

that the Bible is the only standard for faith and 

practice. However, all will agree that very few churches 

of this denomination practice what they all theoretically 

profess. While they have no written creed, 

they very generally have an unwritten creed which is 

most positive and arbitrary in many respects and particulars. 

Were this not the case, every one of their 

gatherings would be very glad to welcome any servant 

of the truth who would attempt to prove his teachings 

by the Word of God only: and in such event, the 

"Disciple Denomination" would very speedily be 

thoroughly impregnated with what we denominate 

"present truth"— the "harvest" message. 

If you have been so fortunate as to find one of the 
few congregations of "Disciples" where the spirit as 

R2339 : page 218 

well as the theory of liberty prevails, you have been 
extremely favored and are to be congratulated. And 
if your articles to the Standard are received when full 
liberty has been exercised in their preparation, this 
will be another subject for congratulation. Perhaps 
the test for yourself, the congregation and the 
management of the paper, is still future. Perhaps, as 
you come to get clearer views respecting present truth, 
and as you do not shun to declare the whole counsel of 
God (wisely, but boldly), you may find that the attitude 
toward you may change. Let us hope that they 
may prove to be true "Bereans" and will search the 
Scriptures daily, to see whether these things be so: 
and that finding them they will lay hold of them with 
alacrity and zeal. If so, it will mean a great revival 
in the Church, a great blessing. But if the truth does 
not prove a savor of life unto life to the Church, it is 
very apt to prove the reverse— a savor of death unto 
death, and will mean violent opposition to you and to 
all others who in any manner or degree call in question 
the cherished dogmas of "Disciples." 

We advise that you put the matter to the test earnestly, 
courageously, calmly; casting all your care upon 
the Lord. Let him mark out your way by his 
providence; on your part merely making sure that you 
are faithful to him— faithful to the truth as he sends 
it to you. We caution you, however, not to put your 
light under a bushel, and not to refuse further light 
for fear of consequences. "The fear of man bringeth 
a snare." Remember, that our Lord put his Word 
and himself on a parity, saying, "He that is ashamed 
of me and my Word, of him will I also be ashamed." 

We shall expect to hear from you before very 
long, either that you have been greatly used and 
blessed to the good of the church you are connected 
with, helping them out of the darkness into the light 
of present truth, or that they have rejected your testimony 



and that you have stepped out of the system 

in order to preserve to yourself "the liberty wherewith 

Christ makes free." 

IMMORTAL VS. INCORRUPTIBLE. 



Question. The terms immortal, immortality, and 
incorruption, incorruptible are used in the Scriptures in 
a manner rather confusing to the average reader. 
Please state the distinction between them. 

Answer. The translators have helped to confuse 
this subject by rendering the same Greek word whiles 
one way and whiles another: and while there are two 
Greek words used and with different thoughts, yet our 
English words Immortal, and Immortality, really represent 
the thoughts of both Greek words,— Aphthartos 
and Athanasia. 

Coming down to the fine shades of meaning,— 
Athanasia signifies, deathless, death-proof, that which 
cannot die. Aphthartos signifies, that which cannot 
corrupt. 

(1) The following texts are the only ones in 
which Athanasia occurs:— 

"This mortal must put on immortality," i.e., deathlessness. 
-1 Cor. 15:53. 

"This mortal shall have put on immortality," i.e., 
deathlessness.— 1 Cor. 15:54. 

"Who [God] only hath immortality," i.e., deathlessness. 
-1 Tim. 6:16. 

(2) The following texts show all the Scripture 
uses of Aphthartos and its derivative Aphtharsia:— 

"Now unto the King eternal, immortal [aphthartos] 
—incorruptible]."— 1 Tim. 1:17. 

"A corruptible crown, but we an incorruptible 
[aphthartos]" one.— 1 Cor. 9:25. 

"The dead shall be raised incorruptible [aphthartos]." 
-1 Cor. 15:52. 

"To an inheritance incorruptible [aphtharsia]."— 
1 Pet. 1:4. 

"Not of corruptible seed, but of incorruptible [aphthartos]. 
-1 Pet. 1:23. 

"Seek for glory, honor and immortality [aphtharsia— 
incorruption]."— Rom. 2:7. 

"Who brought life and immortality [aphtharsia— 
incorruption] to light."— 2 Tim. 1:10. 

"It is sown in corruption, raised in incorruption 
[aphtharsia]."- 1 Cor. 15:42. 

"Neither doth corruption inherit incorruption 
[aphtharsia]."- 1 Cor. 15:50. 

"For this incorruptible must put on incorruption 
[aphtharsia]."— 1 Cor. 15:53. 

"When this corruptible shall have put on incorruption 
[aphtharsia]."- 1 Cor. 15:54. 

Applying this information, we find that altho the 



two words represent in many respects the same thought, 
yet by antithesis the Apostle brings out their shaded 
differences in 1 Cor. 15:53,54, by using one word with 
reference to those saints who should be "asleep" or 

R2338 : page 219 

under the power of corruption and would put on a condition 
of incorruption by resurrection; while those saints 
who would remain until the "change" would pass from 
mortal to immortal (deathless) conditions. But both 
will be exactly alike, when the one group is resurrected 
and the other group is "changed" in the moment 
of death without an interim of sleep or corruption. 

IS IT THE GENERAL OR THE FIRST RESURRECTION? 



Question. Does the resurrection described in 
1 Cor. 15:42-53, include the whole world, or only the 
overcoming Church? 

Answer. It does not at all refer to the world, but 
exclusively to the first resurrection— the Church's. 
This is evident from the reading of the common version. 
All having a share in it get "immortality," 
"incorruption," "glory," "power," and "a spiritual 
body." See verses 42-44,53,54. None are to get 
such blessings but the overcomers, the "blessed and 
holy that have part in the first [chief] resurrection on 
whom the second death hath no power," the class 
which will live and reign with Christ a thousand 
years.— Rev. 20:4,6. 

Furthermore, the Greek text guards against the 
supposition that the resurrection described could be 
other than that of the Church by using emphasis 
which expressed in English would make verse 42 read, 
"Thus also is the resurrection of the dead." 

Question. Will deceased infants, begotten of justified 
parents in this age, have spiritual (angelic) being 
in the resurrection life? If not, what will differentiate 
them from other deceased infants? This question 
is suggested by the reading of the June 15th 
TOWER, page 181. 

Answer. "That which is begotten of the flesh is 
flesh." Children under the conditions you mention 
are not begotten of the spirit, and hence will not be 
spirit beings. Their perfection will be of the human 
nature, accomplished (as with the remainder of the 
world) through the processes of restitution, during the 
"times of restitution"— the Millennial age. There 
will be no difference between these and the remainder 
of the world (children of unbelieving parents) during 
the Millennial age, except whatever may come to them 
in the natural way, in that they may be better born, 
less depraved in their natural organism. The justification 



feature mentioned by the Apostle (1 Cor. 7:14) 

and by us in the TOWER of June 15, page 181, applies 

merely to the present age, and to children before they 

reach years of discretion and personal responsibility. 

It merely signifies that the children of believing parents 

are subjects of divine providence, as well as their 

parents, during the present life, until they reach years 

of discretion; and that such will be under divine providence 

and leading, to the intent that they may be 

the better prepared for becoming obedient children of 

God on their own account at maturity. All mankind 

will ultimately come to favorable conditions, physical, 

mental and moral. This will mean no less favorable 

conditions for the children of believers in the next age, 

but more favorable conditions for others. 



R2339 : page 219 

THE SIN OF COVETOUSNESS. 

--JULY 31.-1 Kings 21:4-16.- 

"Thou shalt not covet thy neighbor's house."— Ex. 20:17. 

JEZEBEL is marked by the incidents of this lesson, 

if we had no other record of her evil way, 

as being a most diabolical woman. The tenderness 

which belongs to her sex had entirely given place to 

the feeling of envy, pride and ambition, incident to 

her great exaltation to power as the wife of King Ahab. 

She was ready to instigate perjury, and the foulest of 

murder, to gratify her whims, or to please those who 

truckled to her vanity. And the terrible degradation 

to which the people of Israel and their elders, who 

were presumably of average or more than average intelligence, 

had descended, is shown by their willingness 

to obey their wicked queen, in utter disregard of their 

own consciences and of justice. It is doubtful whether 

our disgust should be greater with the queen, who instigated 

the evil, or with the elders, who so supinely 

became her tools to accomplish it. This shows, however, 

that where a people lose sight of the grand teachings 

of the law of the Lord, and come under the influence 

of the devil, through other religions, there is no 

knowing where the corruption of morals will end— all 

sense of justice and right seems to become obliterated 

in proportion as people are separated from the Lord 

and from the word of his testimony. 

The fact that infidels of to-day are not always immoral 
is no contradiction of this thought, for altho they 
may reject the Lord in their hearts, they cannot reject 

R2340 : page 219 



nor get away from the influences of his law of justice 
which has come to be recognized throughout the entire 
civilized world, and made the basis of all civil law. 
Besides, they are continually in touch with Christian 
influences, and some of them (for instance, Robert 
Ingersoll) received from Christian parents a good 
moral basis of character, which would not exhaust in 
one generation, even tho the faith were lost from it. 

The beginning of this crime perpetrated by Jezebel 
and the elders of Israel— the murder of Naboth— 
was Ahab's sin of covetousness. He coveted Naboth's 
vineyard, and wished to purchase it, and, as the sequel 
shows, altho he did not perpetrate the crime of 
murder himself, he was quite satisfied with the crime 
and its results, and hastened to appropriate the murdered 
man's vineyard at the earliest opportunity. 
There is a great lesson here for Christian people to-day. 
While the crime of murder is recognized and 

R2340 : page 220 

thoroughly reprobated, the crime of covetousness is 
now not only general and common, but almost approved 
as proper. It seems to be generally practised, 
and almost without a suspicion as to its being wrong, 
sinful, condemned of the Lord, and fruitful of many 
evil works of the flesh and of the devil. 

We do not mean to charge as covetousness a desire 
to prosper as well as one's neighbor: desires are 
covetous when we wish to possess and enjoy that which 
we see in the possession of our neighbor: it implies a 
willingness to take from him a part or all of his prosperity, 
and to appropriate the same to ourselves. This 
spirit of covetousness may be readily discerned among 
business men and manufacturers; less readily discerned, 
but nevertheless present, in the ranks of labor, and in 
the social circle. It is unnecessary to point out how 
business people envy one another success, and seek to 
attract from one another the trade which brings the 
success. And in the ranks of labor, especially where 
competition is open, it is not infrequently the case 
that the workman will disparage the work or character 
of a fellow-workman, in order to have favor with the 
overseer or employer, or in hope of personal advancement. 
These are illustrations of covetousness in 
operation. 

In society it works very stealthily, very quietly, 
fearing that it should react upon the covetous one unfavorably; 
hence, in society, the effort to undermine 
the character of another and thereby to advance one's 
self in the good graces of others, is kept under cover, 
and ably assisted by its yoke-fellow, hypocrisy. When 
covetousness sees another occupying a preferred place, 
it stealthily conceals the dagger with which it would 
smite the Naboth that thwarts its ambitions. It 
sometimes assumes a mask of love, and strikes the dagger 



of scandal under professions of love and esteem, 
or of pity and sympathy. At other times it has the 
hypocritical mask of duty, religion, fidelity to God, 
etc., while it seeks to stab Naboth in his vitals, and 
to gain possession of the vineyard coveted,— or whatever 
it may be. 

Nor is the Church of God free from those who 
have this spirit of covetousness. It inspires many 
petty jealousies and envyings and strifes as to which 
should be greater, for honorable positions, etc. And 
how many large and small scandals have been the results 
of covetousness, and a desire to break down the 
influence of one, for the purpose of establishing the 
influence of another, or of himself or herself? 

Ahab's covetousness was of the most approved 
kind, in that it sought to act through others, and 
stoned Naboth to death by proxy, rather than directly 
by his own act. That Ahab fully endorsed the conduct 
of Jezebel is shown by his ready acceptance of the 
fruits of her villainy; and this fact, in connection with 
the fact that the Lord sent the reproof as much to 
Ahab as to Jezebel, leaves room for the inference that 
he had intentionally worked upon the feelings of Jezebel, 
with a view to getting her (more courageous for 
wickedness than himself) to devise and carry out plans 
for the satisfaction of his covetousness. So some to-day 
seem to feel free to covet the possessions of others 
—social, religious, financial or otherwise— and to take 
possession of these, if possible, but they strive to have 
the dirtiest part of the work done by others, or at least 
not directly by themselves. But such unquestionably 
are sharers in every crime to which their covetousness 
by any road may lead others. 

Let all who have named the name of Christ be 
especially on guard respecting this deceptive covert 
sin; and the best ounce of protection that we can take 
against it (far better than any pound of cure after 
it has entered in) is to have our hearts permeated with 
the spirit of love, of which we are told, "Love worketh 
no ill to his neighbor." And more than this, 
"Love envieth not, seeketh not her own [interests 
merely, but is concerned for the interests of others] 
is kind, helpful, generous, good." 

As an illustration of how hypocrisy usually accompanies 
covetousness, seeking to cover up the real 
motives and intentions not only from fellow-creatures, 
but from one's own conscience, and from the Lord, 
note in this lesson how Jezebel accomplished her purpose 
through the appointment of a feast, and the giving 
of Naboth, the victim, a seat of honor in connection 
therewith. Alas, that it must be said that religion 
has often been injured by being made the tool of 
hypocrisy and covetousness. And similar principles 
are still at work in the world, and the same great prime 
mover and instigator of evil is still master of ceremonies, 
and as willing as ever to help forward every wicked 



cause and to prosper the evil work and way of the 
covetous. "We are not ignorant of his devices." 
"My soul, be on thy guard, 

Ten thousand foes arise; 
The hosts of sin are pressing hard 

To draw thee from the prize." 
But while the Lord did not interfere to protect 
Naboth, nor to prevent the machinations of the Evil 
One and his servants, he nevertheless took note of the 
evil, and did not permit it to pass unpunished. Accordingly, 
when Ahab went in to take possession of 
the vineyard, and to rejoice his heart that his covetous 
desires had reached accomplishment, the Lord sent 
Elijah to meet him in the vineyard. Ahab recognized 
the prophet at once, and evidently smitten by his conscience, 
exclaimed: "Hast thou found me, O mine 
enemy?" And Elijah answered, "I have found thee, 
because thou hast sold thyself to work evil in the sight 

R2340 : page 221 

of the Lord." Then follows the prophecy of violent 
deaths to his children, and that the dogs should eat 
Jezebel; all literally fulfilled later. 

However, Ahab was learning to have great confidence 
in the word of Elijah, and in the power of Jehovah; 
and when he heard this prophecy, "he rent his 
clothes, and put sackcloth upon his flesh, and fasted, 
and lay in sackcloth and went softly." On account 
of this degree of repentance the Lord sent word through 
Elijah that the calamities prophesied would not be in 
Ahab's day, but in the days of his sons. The fact 
that sinners may for a time go unpunished, the Apostle 
Peter shows us, is a mark of God's patience and 
forbearance, and not an indication that he will not reward 
both the welldoer and the evildoer. 

Some one has said, "Covetousness is like drinking 
the salt waters of the sea, which only increase the 
thirst; or like piling wood on the fire, which only makes 
it burn the fiercer; or like climbing higher, which only 
enlarges the horizon of the desires." The only covetousness 
encouraged by the spirit of righteousness and 
the Word of the Lord is that mentioned by the Apostle, 
"Covet earnestly the best gifts"— the gifts of divine 
grace, which neither rob others, nor make God 
the poorer. 



R2340 : page 221 

ELIJAH'S SUCCESSOR, ELISHA. 

-AUG. 7.-2 KINGS 2:6-15.- 
"How much more shall your Heavenly Father give 



the holy spirit to them that ask it!"— Luke 11:13. 

IT WOULD appear that the lesson which the Lord 
taught Elijah by the wind, the earthquake, the 
lightning, and the still, small voice, was appreciated 
and acted upon. Elijah had expected the Reformation 
word to go forward like a terrific windstorm or 
like the earthquake, or like the fiery lightning, and 
when it did not take such form, he fled, discouraged, 
from the scene of his efforts, and wished to die. Now, 
he was to understand that the reformation was to work 
more secretly, more quietly, in the hearts of the people, 
before it would give great outward manifestations. 
The Lord's inquiry of him, "What doest thou here, 
Elijah?" evidently gave him to see that he had discontinued 
the Lord's work, and for the time was out 
of the service; but, under the Lord's direction, he returned, 
and began again his work in Israel, following 
more closely the lines indicated by his lesson, seeking 
to have the people hear "the still, small voice," the 

R2341 : page 221 

Lord's message to their consciences. Nor can we doubt 
that he was greatly encouraged to reengage in this 
work, by the Lord's assurance that altho his people 
were not courageous, not bold in defence of the truth, 
and in opposition to evil, but rather lacking in firmness 
and courage, nevertheless there were yet seven 
thousand persons in Israel who had not been so weak-kneed 
as to bow to Baal. 

After attending to his commission, to anoint Hazael 
and Jehu, and Elisha, the prophet seems to have given 
his special attention to the founding of "schools of the 
prophets" in various parts of the land of Israel. These 
would appear to have been prophetic schools, gatherings 
of religious men, faithful to Jehovah, who desired 
to learn his will and word and law more particularly. 
And these in turn, we may suppose, exercised in their 
various communities a wholesome influence for righteousness, 
and the worship of the true God. Thus the 
"still, small voice" was operating. The gain in influence 
and respect for the true worship, as opposed 
to idolatry, is manifest from the fact that Jezebel, altho 
still as bitterly opposed as ever, seemingly made 
no effort to interfere with Elijah, or with the schools 
of the prophets; whereas, before, she had caused the 
death of a similar class. Public opinion, altho not 
very pronounced at that time, nevertheless had to be 
respected, and that in proportion as the truth set the 
people free from the superstitions of error. 

There are many profitable lessons for us of the 
present day, along these same lines. The great antitypical 
Jezebel, "the mother of harlots," alarmed the 
reformers of the sixteenth century by her threats, and 
caused them to flee and to desert many of the prominent 



principles of the Reformation, for fear of the consequences; 
yet in the Lord's due time the antitypical 
Elijah— the Church— was refreshed in spirit, and 
learned the lesson that God's revolutions were not to 
be expected along the lines of wholesale conversions 
from sin to righteousness, from ignorance to knowledge, 
from error to truth; but that the truth was to be 
inculcated gradually, and was to do its work among 
the people, as the "still, small voice" of righteousness, 
of conscience, of God. It is along these lines that the 
truth has been progressing for the last three centuries. 

Moreover, in connection with the present "harvest 
truth," many of us have been at first inclined to expect 
powerful reactions, social upheavals, lightning-like 
transitions "out of darkness into his marvelous 
light," as it is now shining. And the failure of such 
expectations is inclined to send us away into the wilderness, 
discouraged, as was the case with our prototype, 
Elijah. We, like him, are to learn lessons, that 
the inculcation of truth, according to the Lord's plan, 
is to be a gradual work, and we, like him, are to perseveringly 
engage in its gradual spread. Now, as then, 
"those who fear the Lord speak often together"— 

R2341 : page 222 

come together as schools for the study of prophecy,— 
for the study of the "good, acceptable and perfect will 
of God." Now, as then, these schools or gatherings 
of persons sufficiently interested to desire to know the 
will of the Lord, are on the increase. 

The time came for the end of Elijah's work, and 
for Elisha to take his place and do the Lord's work 
along slightly different lines. Elijah and Elisha were 
men of totally different types; Elisha was an influential 
and comparatively wealthy farmer, as is indicated 
by the large number of oxen working under his supervision, 
and presumably upon his own farm— twelve 
yokes of oxen. We may presume him to have been a 
man of considerably more personal refinement than 
Elijah, and that he dressed differently accordingly. 
Elijah was known as the man with the leathern girdle 
about his loins, and a mantle, which sometimes he 
wore, and sometimes he removed,— generally living in 
wilderness places; and, we may presume that he had 
rather a rustic and wild appearance. 

Elijah's method of announcement to Elisha that 
he was invited to become an associate in the work, and 
his intimation that he might be the successor in the 
office of servant of the Lord, as prophet, was indicated 
by throwing his mantle over Elisha's shoulder, Elijah 
removing the mantle again, and continuing on his 
journey. Elisha understood the matter, and quite 
evidently was whole-hearted, inasmuch as we see no 
evidence of halting between two opinions. He decided 
at once that he would accept the opportunity; telling 



Elijah that he would be with him directly, as soon 
as he had bidden farewell to his parents. Then, by 
way of manifesting to the Lord and to the people his 
appreciation of this call to the service of a prophet, he 
made a feast to the people, and shortly after joined 
Elijah. 

As Elijah represents the Church of this Gospel 
age, so we understand that Elisha represents the successors 
of the Church of this age, the class which will 
take up the work of the Lord as successors to the Elijah 
class, after the latter has been joined to the Lord 
in the invisible heavenly Kingdom— "changed," translated, 
become spirit beings, according to the power of 
the first resurrection. In harmony with this view, we 
find that Elisha was not called until about the close of 
Elijah's service— "when the Lord would take up Elijah 
into heaven." 

Our lesson shows that, while Elijah had called 
Elisha according to divine direction, and while Elisha 
had started to keep Elijah company, yet the latter 
seemed bent on separating himself from Elisha, requesting 
him frequently to tarry at the different schools 
of the prophets which they visited, namely, at Gilgal, 
at Bethel and at Jericho. But no argument persuaded 
Elisha to desert Elijah; he seemed to understand that 
the degree of his blessing would depend upon the closeness 
of his company with Elijah, and this evidently 
was the truth, and the attempts to have him stop at 
the various places on the journey were with a view to 
testing his earnestness and fidelity. Had he stopped 
he would not have received the great blessing which 
he eventually got. 

Applying this as a type at the present time, we 
see that the time for the taking up of the Elijah class, 
"the overcomers," "the little flock," of this Gospel 
age, has arrived. An Elisha class mingles with the 
overcomers, yet is a separate class; and various trials, 
disappointments and sittings are encountered, the design 
of which is to have these, if they will, turn back, 
separate themselves from the Elijah company, and 
those who are sifted out by the way will neither be of 
the one class nor the other, according to our understanding 
of this type and also of the general Scriptures. 

Elisha's special desire, above all things, was to 
have a large measure of the spirit of the Lord, the 
same spirit which had operated through Elijah, and 
this was his prayer: "I pray that a double portion of 
thy spirit may be upon me." Elijah's answer to this 
request implies that the faithfulness of the Elisha class 
will have to do with the measure of the Elijah spirit 
which will descend to it. So we understand it will be 
with all who become the successors of the Gospel 
Church as representatives of the Lord and his cause in 
the end of this age. The larger the degree of their 
sympathy and fellowship with the overcoming Church, 
the larger will be the blessing which will come to them 



consequently and the larger will be their future privileges 
in connection with the work of the Lord. 

A chariot of the Lord, with horses as of fire, parted 
Elijah from Elisha. It is easier to understand the 
type than to fully comprehend what its antitype will 
be. The chariot of fire undoubtedly typified the chariot 
of glory— the change from human to spirit conditions, 
which will separate the little flock from humanity, and 
by which the Lord will receive them unto himself. But 
it may also signify more than this, for fire and brightness 
are not only used as symbols of glory, but also as 
symbols for the trials and difficulties by which the 
Lord's people are prepared for glory: thus, the Apostle 
speaks of "the fiery trials which shall try you." 
The chariot of fire may therefore signify also, that the 
last members of the Gospel Church will be separated 
from the world under very trying circumstances, fiery 
trials; but that these, nevertheless, will be merely the 
agencies, the chariots by which the Lord will receive 
them to himself. 

Furthermore, the record is that Elijah was taken 
up in a whirlwind; and applying this to the last members 

R2341 : page 223 

of the Church, would seem to indicate trouble 
also, because whirlwinds are used symbolically in the 
Scriptures to represent trouble. We will, therefore, 
not be surprised if the last members of the Church, 
the body of Christ to be taken to the Lord, should be 
taken in the midst of fiery trials and a whirlwind of 
trouble. This seems to be indicated by another type 
of the same class, given us in the Scriptures— John the 
Baptist, who was imprisoned and finally beheaded.* 

Having seen Elijah to the last, Elisha understood 
that his request was to be granted, and that a double 
portion of the spirit of the Lord, which was with Elijah, 
should be upon him. He took up the fallen mantle 
of Elijah as his own, and coming to the river Jordan, 
smote it with the mantle, as Elijah had done, saying, 
"Where is the Lord God of Elijah?" That is to say, 
Is not the Lord God of Elijah with me? If so, then 
the same power of God exercised through Elijah will 
be exercised through me. And his faith was rewarded, 
for Jordan was divided, as for Elijah. Thenceforth 
he was the chief teacher in the schools which Elijah 
had established, and was so recognized. 

We do not understand that Elijah was taken to 
heaven, in the same sense that the Gospel Church will 
be taken to heaven. Elijah was taken up into heaven 
physically, while the Church is to be "changed," because 



*See MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOL. II., Chap. 8. 



R2342 : page 223 

"flesh and blood cannot inherit the Kingdom of 
God." But Elijah was flesh and blood, human; Elijah 
had no change of nature; he lived before the time 
of the call to the divine nature; which began with the 
Gospel age. He therefore did not go to heaven, in 
the sense that the Church will go to heaven. He was 
not greater than John the Baptist, of whom our Lord 
said, "There hath not arisen a greater prophet than 
John the Baptist, and yet I say unto you that the least 
one in the kingdom of heaven is greater than he." 
The Kingdom of Heaven class was not started until 
our dear Redeemer's first advent, when he gave himself 
a ransom for all, and began the selection of the 
little flock, the Kingdom class. And it was his own 
testimony through John, centuries after Elijah's day, 
that "No man hath ascended up to heaven save he 
which came down from heaven, even the Son of 
Man." (Jno. 3:13.) Elijah, therefore, according 
to the Scriptures, could have no higher position 
than that of the other prophets of his time, 
including John the Baptist, all honorably mentioned 
by the Apostle (Heb. 1 1:38-40): "of whom the world 
was not worthy: they wandered in deserts, and in 
mountains, and in dens and caves of the earth,... 
and these all having obtained a good report through 
faith, received not the promise [the things promised]: 
God having provided some better thing for us [the 
Gospel Church], that they without us should not be 
made perfect." Elijah, as one of these prophets, will 
be honored and blessed after the antitypical Elijah (the 
Gospel Church) has been glorified. 

Nor does the fact that Elijah appeared on the 
Mount of Transfiguration have any bearing upon the 
case, or in any manner or degree prove that he did not 
die; for, as we have already shown, the scene on the 
Mount of Transfiguration was a vision (see Lesson in 
TOWER, April 1). If there were anything to prove 
that Elijah had not yet tasted death in the full sense 
of the word, it would still not prove that he had been 
changed to spiritual conditions, but merely that he had 
been carried physically away from the earth, and miraculously 
preserved elsewhere for a season or time: but 
inasmuch as we see nothing to be accomplished by 
this, it is our understanding that, while he was taken 
up from Elisha in the chariot of fire, he no doubt was 
buried somewhere by the Lord, just as Moses was buried 
secretly. 

The story of Elijah, and especially of the record 
of the end of his career can only be understood properly 
when recognized as being typical of the matters 
connected with the Gospel Church, and the close of 
its career. Let each one who hopes to be of the glorified 
body of Christ seek to be faithful to the Lord, 
after the example of Elijah, and according to the instructions 



of his Word, and the leading of his spirit, 

to-day; that we may be among those who shall be accounted 

worthy to be changed, in a moment, in the 

twinkling of an eye, in death. Faithful is he who has 

called us, who also will do for us all that he has so 

graciously promised, ultimately transforming us to the 

perfection of his own divine nature.— 2 Pet. 1:4. 



page 223 

INTERESTING LETTERS. 



Texas. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I found a good 
interest at the last two points where I preached. 
To our joy the prejudice of many people is cooling 
greatly, while the bigots and self-willed are enraged 
wonderfully. 

At some places near here, where ten years ago I 
could not have gotten a hearing, they now invite me to 
meet them and preach for them. But those whose 
"craft" is in danger are not enjoying this. Our 
prayer is, Speed on the good work and let God's name 
be glorified. 

Yours in the work, S. WILLIAMS. 

Georgia. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-Your discourse in the 
TOWER, "Remember the Sabbath Day," presents a 
grand and wonderful view of the Christian Sabbath 
which my mind had never conceived. I truly join you 
in the earnest wish that all Christians could see it so: 
that our God is too gracious to us who are his to limit 
our Sabbath of rest to a single day of the week, but on 
the contrary extends it through all the days of all the 
weeks of all the years of our Christian life, during 
which we may rest in full assurance of the ransom 
paid for us by our great Redeemer, free from any passionate 
anxiety concerning our final deliverance, of 
which no man needs try to assure us, because God 
has been pleased to seal us with his own holy disposition 
—the earnest of our inheritance. It is marvelous 
light to me, giving me, if possible, a more exalted 
opinion of our infinitely gracious Heavenly Father. 

Arrangements for my future colporteur work are 

page 224 

quite satisfactory. The Lord continues to bless me in 
interesting some, and my course in the community 
produces great commotion, and a few have gone about 
to "trim their lamps." There is much here to be done. 



I find the leading "Reverends" among the most offended. 
But public ridicule and increase of opposition 
seem only to brighten the splendor of the prize 
which is spiritually discerned. 

Very truly, Yours in the service of our present 
Lord, J. A. BROWNE. 

Denmark. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-It is some time now 
since I last wrote to you about matters here in Denmark. 
We have had much sickness all around among 
our little company this winter; so much that we have 
had to stop our meetings for several weeks. Now 
Springtime is here, and with it comes new energy and 
a better feeling, and we are now a good deal better in 
health. 

We are holding MILLENNIAL DAWN Meetings in 
a small hall every Tuesday evening, and these meetings 
are well attended. The people are glad to hear 
these good tidings we are proclaiming; the interest is 
constantly increasing among God's people here; many 
are reading the DAWNS and have accepted their teaching 
into good and honest hearts, and the fruit will 
surely come, in the Lord's own time, to his praise. 
I believe there are many of his true sheep here, many 
who realize the voice of the Shepherd; as Jesus says, 
"I know mine, and am known of mine." Yet, it is 
only a "little flock" that will be chosen and elected, 
out of these many millions of church people. 

The WATCH TOWER is received here regularly, 
and is ever warmly welcome. I know of nothing to 
compare with it, as a herald of the glad tidings to 
God's people. With much Christian love to you all 
and kind greetings, wishing you God's blessings, and 
upon the harvest work, 

Your brother and fellow-servant of Christ, 
I. S. WINTER. 

R2342 : page 224 

Pennsylvania. 
DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I have not written for 
a long time, but you have not been absent from my 
mind, and I now take this opportunity of thanking you 
for the benefit and pleasure received from perusing 
your last labor of love, DAWN, VOL. IV. I have read 
it carefully twice, and I received more pleasure and 
strength from the second perusal than the first. While 
I had already a very fair outline of the general features 
of the great time of trouble from the study of the TOWERS 
and DAWNS and God's Word in connection with 
them, and from observing the signs of the times through 
their light, yet I had no conception how much the 
leading thinkers of the world corroborated the prophetic 
evidences. It almost seems as if they were all 
ripe for the truth and must, perforce, accept it as soon 



as brought to their attention. But sober reflection, in 
memory of my poor success in interesting the most 
likely cases within my knowledge in the truth, endorses 
God's Word— that Satan is exerting a blinding influence 
on all but those whom God is calling. In this 
volume you have given us a systematic, logical, Scriptural 
and exhaustive presentation of this important 
subject; you have called up in evidence the opinion 
and conclusions and warnings of leaders of thought 
from every strata of society, and every creed and party 
and field of public life: and I hope that we shall all be 
blessed and edified and encouraged by the results of 
your labor and God's guidance: thereby realizing that 
we have not read God's Word amiss, not followed cunningly 
devised fables, but may in consequence be sure 
that our redemption draweth nigh. 

By what some might think an odd coincidence, 
during the last few weeks, a large number of pamphlets 
have come to my hand, the work of writers apparently 
disinterested and earnest for the well being of 
others, which completely harmonize with the teachings 
of Scripture on these times: but who have no 
knowledge of either DAWN or God's Word in connection 
with current events, and yet who can see the present 
trend of events with startling clearness, but each 
imagines that his remedy is the one thing needful. 

We have still some trouble occasionally here: 
chiefly from Mr. C. (I can no longer call him brother). 
For nearly two years at every possible opportunity he 
has forced us to listen to "holiness" theories and tried 
to compel us to accept a hash of present truth and 
Methodism until we were obliged to send him a written 
request to absent himself from our meetings and seek 
more congenial society, and this has been a rather unpleasant 
step. This he has declined to do on the 
ground that he is the father of the Church here and 
intends to look after us. He has often told us that 
none of our number were even justified, to say nothing 
of being consecrated, and has sometimes included himself 
in the same category. So far as I am capable of 
judging he held and taught the truth clearly some four 
years ago, but he has seemed to be getting gradually 
into denser darkness for half that time, and he seems 
to attend our meetings for the purpose of annoyance. 

Jude intimates, in his epistle, that the falling away 
during the Gospel age will be on three lines:— typified 
by Cain, Balaam and Korah. Does this mean (1) approaching 
God under the cover of a different sacrifice 
to the one he had appointed, (2) covetousness, and 
(3) envy? 

Your brother in Christ, SMITH WALKER. 

[It is for the Church (each little company meeting 
for communion, fellowship and the study of holy 
things) to decide the character of the meetings and the 
leaders of the same according to their best judgment 
of the Lord's will as expressed in his Word. Any attempted 



deviation from this Scriptural rule should be 
kindly but firmly resented. And, furthermore, only 
those who profess both justification and full consecration 
should be recognized as having a voice on such 
matters. Such as have not the Spirit of the Lord 
surely could not know the mind of the Lord. 

I think that you correctly interpret Jude's teaching. 
And who cannot see that these three points are 
the causes of stumbling in nearly every instance— and 
especially among those who have talents and who 
aspire to be used in the Lord's service. Let us beware 
of these seductions of the Adversary, (1) a rejection 
of the ransom, (2) covetousness of wealth or honor or 
fame, (3) envy, malice, hatred, strife as against others 
more liberally endowed with talents or more favorably 
situated for service.— EDITOR. 1 



page 225 
VOL. XIX. AUGUST 1, 1898. No. 15. 



CONTENTS. 



Special Items 226 

"Ye Serve the Lord Christ" 227 

Poem: Some Better Thing 230 

Interesting Questions Answered 230 

Elisha Doing Restitution Work 231 

General Naaman Healed— Mercies 

Appreciated 233 

General Naaman's Gratitude 236 

The Covetous Servant 238 

"Are They Not All Ministering 

Spirits?" 238 

page 226 

SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 56-60 ARCH STREET, ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, N.Y. DRAFT, MONEY ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS: 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age or accident, or other 
adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, if they 
send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting the 
paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list 
constantly. 



R2343 : page 227 

"YE SERVE THE LORD CHRIST." 



"Whatsoever ye do, do it heartily, as to the Lord, and not unto 

men; knowing that of the Lord ye shall receive the reward 

of the inheritance: for ye serve the Lord Christ."— Col. 3:23,24. 

SERVANTS are specially addressed by the 
Apostle. He points out to them not only 
here but elsewhere that all service should be good 
service, and that whether the person served were one 
of the Lord's people or an enemy of the truth, the 



work should not be slighted. The principle of the 
thing is pointed out, namely, that we are servants of 
the Lord and therefore his representatives. So then, 
if we find that we are in the place in which Providence 
has placed us, we are to serve in that place or position 
faithfully, perseveringly, interestedly, as tho we were 
laboring for the Lord, and not for men: whereas if we 
considered ourselves as merely laboring for men, we 
might labor hard and faithfully for the good, and 
slightingly for the unkind and froward. But a point 
to be remembered is that we are all servants: none are 
called to be masters under the gospel call; one is our 
master, even Christ, and we all are brethren and fellow 
servants. 

The effect of such advice is good: first, upon the 
world, and secondly, upon ourselves. Worldly people 
are keen to appreciate good service, altho they may 
not always acknowledge it or properly reward it: and 
the Apostle's instructions here, if diligently followed, 
would soon have the effect of making Christians the 
most desirable servants in any and every field of usefulness, 
because their work would be more faithfully 
and more carefully performed, and hence more satisfactory 
in its results. The effect of this would be that 
Christian intelligence and skill would be appreciated 
and sought; and under the operation of the general 
rule, being appreciated, they would be advanced to 
positions of more and more responsibility, where their 
carefulness might be the more valuable to their employers. 
Thus, the name of Christ would come to be 
respected amongst the most intelligent people, and the 
inquiry would naturally be, What is there about these 
Christians, or about their teaching and doctrines, that 
makes them more capable and efficient as servants? 

The answer would be, This is the spirit and result 
of their law of Love: they are not only forbidden to do 
injury to anyone, even their enemies, but they are enjoined 
to be faithful to everyone, and to do good even 
to their enemies. They are instructed to labor daily, 
not merely for the praise and approval of their earthly 
masters, but especially for the praise and approval of 
their heavenly Master. And then, if the inquiry came, 
Why should they do so? the answer would be, These 
Christians are not expecting earthly rewards but heavenly 
rewards: they are content to be "pilgrims and 
strangers" in this present time, and servants, if Providence 
so orders for them, and to learn lessons in 
patience, submission and love, anticipating that the 
time is coming when they shall be highly exalted, 
—when their present efforts to please their Master, by 
faithfulness in humble positions, shall be exchanged 
for a most glorious service,— when they shall be united 
with their Master in the great work of ruling and 
instructing the world of mankind, during the Millennial 
age. 

And if the intelligent employer continued questioning, 



and asked, What has such a hope of the future 
to do with their faithfulness in the little affairs of 
the present life? his question would bring the answer, 
Their King, Master and Teacher has instructed them 
that all the little affairs of the present life have a bearing 

R2343 : page 228 

upon the development of character, and that they 

must develop characters of obedience, meekness, patience, 

love, else they will be unsuited to the future 

service in glory, to which they are called. Their Master 

has instructed them that in his view of matters he 

that is faithful in little things is the one who will be 

faithful in great things, and that only as they show 

their faithfulness and subordination to him, and their 

willingness to do his will in the present life, 

can they hope to be accounted worthy of the 

high position and great rewards which he has 

in reservation for those that love him. The employer 

would be informed further that all the tests and trials 

of patience and faith, in obedience to the Word of the 

Lord, are understood by Christians to be tests of their 

love for and loyalty to their Master and King, because 

he has so instructed. Who can doubt that the influence 

of such living epistles would be great for good in 

the world? 

And what is true as respects those who are engaged 
in serving masters literally is true also of the 
entire household of faith, whatever may be their stations 
in life,— master or servant, mistress or maid, 
manager or subordinate; because all of the Lord's people 
are his servants. True, we are termed his brethren 
also, but there is nothing inconsistent with the 
thought of our being his brethren and still being his 
servants; nor would there be anything inconsistent 
with the thought that while all of the Lord's people 
are brethren some of them might, in a particular sense, 
be servants of brethren; and both of these thoughts 
are prominently set before us in the Scriptures. Each 
one is to share in the others' love. "Love as brethren;" 
and each one is to share in serving, and to esteem 
it a special privilege to "serve one another." 

Nothing could be much more contrary to the spirit 
of the world, than this. The spirit of the world is to 
make other people your servants, and as for you, 
avoid serving anybody as much as possible. The spirit 
of Christ, on the contrary, is a spirit of service, and 
not a spirit of mastery, browbeating, domineering, 
force, compulsion: it leads those who possess it to seek 
opportunities for service— to "do good unto all men as 
we have opportunity, especially to the household of 
faith;" and to the contrary it leads those under its influence 
to be very generous and to ask or require only 
reasonable service from others. 

The foundation principles of the Christian religion 



are laid upon these lines, which are the reverse of the 
world's lines of thought and conduct; namely, that the 
greatest one in the Church is the one who is the greatest 
servant, the one who renders most assistance to others. 
The greatest servant in the Church was the great 
Head of the Church himself, who gave even his life on 
our behalf. And those of his followers who desire to 
be great in the estimation of the Lord and so esteemed 
of their fellows, are enjoined that they should follow 
closely in the Master's footsteps, and with humility of 
heart be ready and seek to lay down their lives for the 
brethren. (1 John 3:16.) Nor does this mean simply 
formal service; it means an actual service. Our Lord's 
sacrifice, we see, was not merely a form or a show of 
interest and of love: it was the giving of his life as the 
purchase price for ours. So with us; we are not merely 
to love one another and to serve one another, in 
word, in profession, in title (as for instance, the word 
"minister" signifies servant); but we are to serve one 
another as we are to love one another, "in deed and 
in truth. "--1 John 3:18. 

Looking about us for opportunity of service we 
find our Lord's instruction through the Apostle, that 
we should seek to do good to all men according to our 
ability and opportunity, but especially to the household 
of faith. As we look first to the household of 
faith to see what service we can render, we find in 
this household some who are naturally more attractive 
to us than others, some whom we would find it a pleasure 
to serve; while others, because of more perverse 
natural conditions, we find less congenial, even repellant; 
and these we feel less disposed to serve. But this 
is because of a wrong view of the subject. We are to 
remember that all consecrated believers are new creatures 
in Christ Jesus and accepted of the Lord as members 
of his body, fellow-members with ourselves. From 
this standpoint only can we realize to the full the significance 
of the Apostle's words in our text, "Ye do 
serve the Lord Christ." The Master informs us that 
the slightest service done to the least of his brethren 
is accepted as done to himself. With this view of matters 
clearly in mind, we see our duty of service in a new 
light. We see that the brother or sister of high spiritual 
development and possessing more of the Lord's 
likeness and grace, whose company we find so congenial, 
and whom we would delight to serve, often needs 
our service far less than others who are of the same 
Body, acknowledged by the same Head, who have 
much more natural depravity, unconquered, to contend 
with. These need our special sympathy and love 
and care and helpfulness; for the proper conception of 
service is a desire to render some benefit: and there 
is the more opportunity to benefit or help those who 
most need assistance. 

Of our Lord it is written that he "pleased not himself," 
in his serving. He did not come into the world 



on a mission of self-gratification and pleasure; but to 
render service. He himself said, "The Son of Man 
came not to be served, but to serve, and to give his 
life a ransom for many." We are to have his spirit, 

R2343 : page 229 

and the thought with us is not to be our own pleasure 
or convenience, but on the contrary the necessities of 
those whom the Lord would have us serve,— namely, 
those of his household most in need of our aid. We 
may have less pleasure, according to the flesh, in serving 
such than we would have in serving others, but it 
is not fleshly pleasure that we are seeking; and we can 

R2344 : page 229 

have as much or more spiritual pleasure serving those 
who are the most needy members of the body of Christ, 
because we realize that this is the will of our Master. 
It is to him that we really render the service, and our 
highest spiritual pleasure must be in doing those things 
which are pleasing in his sight. And it is because our 
Master has so ordered, that the household of faith is 
to be served in preference to any other class; consequently 
we are to ignore the opinions of the worldly 
and of the nominal church and not to seek out the 
most degraded people of the world, and spend our energies 
upon them, but we are to seek the most needy 
members of the body of Christ, that we may be most 
helpful to them. The Lord will attend to the poor 
heathen world in due time, and the time is now nigh 
at hand. The first work is, as we have seen from the 
Scriptures, the preparation of the body of Christ; and 
it is to this end that we are to "edify one another, 
building up one another in the most holy faith." 

Another thought respecting service is that the true 
service of the Lord and his truth may be a small, humble 
and comparatively insignificant service, or a larger 
and more prominent service. And of course, if two 
opportunities for service offer, which were otherwise 
alike, we should choose and use the larger and the 
more important of the two opportunities. But we are 
to guard ourselves against seeking for large opportunities 
for service, and overlooking or intentionally passing 
by smaller opportunities. We believe this is a common 
error amongst those who seek to serve the Lord 
Christ. They desire to do some great thing for him; 
they would be overjoyed with the privilege of addressing 
thousands of intelligent and interested hearers. 
They fain would sway nations to the Lord's standard. 
Some would be willing to use smaller opportunities, 
and to address a hundred or fifty or even less, yet perhaps 
would think it not worth while to use the little 
opportunities of everyday life in speaking to one or 
two or three, or a dozen or a score, in a day, or of 



handing a tract, or of loaning a book, or of circulating 
tracts in the railway train, or upon the street corner. 
These services they would esteem too insignificant to 
render to the Master; they feel that they must do some 
great thing. 

This is a serious mistake, and any who find such 
a disposition in their hearts should at once analyze 
their sentiments carefully, to ascertain whether or not 
they have the desire to serve the Lord, or whether 
theirs is a desire for self-glorification,— a desire to be 
identified with something great, prominent and distinguished. 
The Lord's rule is, not to put a new servant 
into a very important place. The captains in the 
Lord's army are expected to rise from the ranks. He 
tells us the process of his judgment respecting fitness 
for prominent service, when he says, "He that is faithful 
in that which is least will be faithful also in that 
which is greater." "He that humbleth himself shall 
be exalted; he that exalteth himself shall be abased." 
And the more we look at the principles here set forth, 
the more we see of their wisdom and correctness. The 
person who is earnest and zealous to serve the Lord, 
so willing and so anxious for the opportunity that he 
will do what his hand finds to do with his might, that 
is a true servant; that servant shows his love for the 
Master,— shows that his is not a love of self and of 
self-advancement. Such servants, the Lord sees, can 
be trusted with a more important service, and consequently, 
when a more important service is to be attended 
to, usually the Lord selects one who has been 
faithful in a few things, to give charge over larger 
things. And who would dispute the wisdom of the 
Lord's method? He who has not humility enough to 
do the smallest service for the Lord, for the truth, and 
for the fellow-members of the body of Christ, has not 
humility enough to be entrusted with any larger service; 
for larger service might prove a great injury to 
himself, since it would tend to cultivate a quality 
which is latent in every member of the fallen race, and 
one which would thoroughly incapacitate him for further 
service, namely, pride,— self-conceit and its concomitant 
evils. 

In thus requiring that all who would be followers 
of him shall be servants, not merely in name, but in 
deed and in truth and in spirit, our Lord lays down a 
rule which tends to keep out of his real flock the selfish 
and ambitious wolves. Yet the danger remains 
that, if the Lord's flock as a whole in any place loses 
the real conception of their call, that it is a call to 
service, the self-seeking disposition is apt to spread as 
a contagion from one to another of the entire company, 
until, instead of being servants one of the other, they 
may become a group of self-seekers; each seeking his 
own welfare and honor and position, and each neglecting 
the fact that the chief business of life is to render 
service to others. And each one who gets into this 



attitude of self-seeking himself is thereby to a large 
degree blinded to the proper principles that should 
govern. And a group of Christians in such a condition 
might, and very probably would, select as their 
principal one or leader a person of self-seeking disposition, 
a lord over God's heritage, instead of a servant 
of the flock. 

R2344 : page 230 

Seeing that this is the Lord's arrangement, that 
we are to grow in this grace by noticing and using our 
opportunities as servants, we exhort all who may read 
these lines to be more faithful, henceforth, in seeking 
for opportunities of service to the Church which is the 
body of Christ; and that thus carefully seeking they 
take heed that they do not pass by some of the small 
opportunities. Let us remember that our great Master 
set us an example in this direction, preaching some 
of his most wonderful sermons to extremely small 
audiences. For instance; his discourse on the Water 
of Life, to the woman of Samaria; his discourse on 
Heavenly versus Earthly things, to Nicodemus; his discourse 
to Nathaniel, and his discourse to the two who 
were going to Emmaus, after his resurrection. If we 
take care of the little opportunities for service, in a 
humble way, and are faithful in these, and render this 
service heartily as unto the Lord, we will by and by 
be granted larger and still larger opportunities. To 
him that hath used his opportunities shall be granted 
more, and from him who hath not used his opportunities, 
that which he has had will be taken from him. 
"Whatsoever ye do, do it heartily as to the Lord, and 
not unto men, knowing that of the Lord ye shall receive 
the reward. For ye serve the Lord Christ." 



R2344 : page 230 

SOME BETTER THING. 



Tho wintry wind the yellow leaf displaceth, 

For spring's sweet harbingers it maketh room;— 

Ere long the tender bud the forest graceth, 

New verdure waketh from old Nature's tomb. 

The snowy blossom from the orchard fadeth, 
'Tis then the earnest of fair fruit we find; 

Tho morning mist the landscape overshadeth, 
The sunlit mountain-peaks are just behind. 

Lo, in the crimson West the glory dieth, 

And from his throne Day's monarch hath withdrawn! 



Herein the promise of the sunrise lieth— 
Already we are waiting for the dawn. 

O heart bereaved, some better thing remaineth, 
Tho God should seem thy treasures to remove; 

Some better thing his gracious hand retaineth, 
He will not fail the children of his love. 

Some better thing! Thy life-joy all departed- 
Its glory trailing sadly in the dust; 

O cleave to him,— the Savior tender-hearted; 

Thou canst not understand, but thou canst trust. 

Perchance he leads to depths of self-abasement, 
And storms awake, and billows round thee roll; 

Give thanks! Contrition is the open casement 

Through which the Dove of Peace shall reach thy soul. 

O patient heart, thy best, thy brightest bringing, 

With full consent upon his altar lay! 
Some fair new blessing even now is winging, 

All unobserved, its sure but noiseless way. 

Thy purpose crossed, each sunny prospect clouded, 
Still to his changeless promise learn to cling; 

Altho his ways may be in darkness shrouded, 
Jehovah hath reserved some better thing. 
-LUCY A. BENNETT. 



R2344 : page 230 

INTERESTING QUESTIONS ANSWERED. 



Question. Had Adam a knowledge of death by 
observation of it in the lower creation? 

Answer. There is nothing to show that he had. 
But whether he had or had not witnessed death, he 
probably understood to some extent what God meant 
when he used the words, "Dying, thou shalt die." 
He was not deceived. Tho Adam's experience was 
limited, he undoubtedly understood what it meant to 
have life, and had some idea of what it would mean to 
lose his life and to be resolved into the elements from 
which he had been created. 

Question. In Gen. 1:28 and similar passages the 
word "replenish" seems to indicate that the earth had 
been peopled before Adam's creation. Is there anything 
in the claim of a pre-Adamic race? or that some 
of the more barbarous nations are not Adam's 
offspring? 

Answer. You would find it of advantage when 
such questions come up to consult Young's Concordance 



and show the advocate of any erroneous view the 
definitions there given, and also other passages in 
which the word in question occurs. If "replenish" 
be the meaning here, it should fit the other instances 
in which the word is used; but it does not. The 
proper rendering of the word is fill.— See margin. 

The Scriptures are positive in the declaration that 
Adam was the first human being. In 1 Cor. 15:45,47, 
he is called the first man. In Acts 17:26, it is 
stated that God "made of one blood all nations of men 
for to dwell on all the face of the earth;" in other 
words, all the peoples of the earth are descended from 
Adam, no matter how different in color, stature, intelligence, 
etc., they may now be. 

Furthermore, the entire testimony of the Bible 
must needs be set aside to give color to such a theory: 
for the Scriptures record that present races had their 
start in father Noah and that only his descendants survived 
the flood. And in the New Testament our Lord 
and several of the Apostles corroborate this record— 
of Noah and the flood. The negro race is supposed 
to be descended from Ham, whose special degradation 
is mentioned in Gen. 9:22,25. 

Question. Please briefly give us your views on 
Rom. 2:14,15. 

Answer. These verses assure us that some heathen 
people do some good things in harmony with the 

R2345 : page 230 

divine law, and that to that extent their conduct meets 
with the divine approval. But the Apostle clearly 

R2345 : page 231 

shows that neither the Jews nor the heathen do all 
things in harmony with the divine law, nor can they, 
because of inherited imperfections. Hence, neither 
the Jews nor the heathen would be justified under the 
Law. God, however, has provided through Christ 
a justification, under the terms of the New Covenant, 
which excuses and forgives whatever is not wilful sin, 
on the part of both Jews and heathen, who receive 
Christ, and through his merit. Thus it is that God 
will justify the heathen through faith— not all the 
heathen, but all the heathen who will exercise the 
faith when the knowledge of Christ shall reach them, 
in God's due time. 

Question. I was surprised to note your advice to 
any who might be drafted into the army. Would not 
your advice seem like compromising to avoid trouble? 

Answer. It is proper to avoid trouble in a proper 
manner. It is proper to compromise when no principle 
is involved, as in the case mentioned. Notice that 
there is no command in the Scriptures against military 
service. Obedience to a draft would remind us of our 



Lord's words, "If any man compel thee to go a mile, 
go with him twain." The government may compel 
marching or drilling, but cannot compel you to kill 
the foe. You need not be a good marksman. 

Question. You suggested in a recent WATCH 
TOWER that, if drafted and in the army, we need not 
shoot to kill. Would such a course be right? Would 
it not be fraudulent? 

Answer. No; it would be quite right to shoot, 
not to kill. You forget, perhaps, our provisos, which 
were that we explain our conscientious scruples against 
war, and seek to be excused; if not excused, that we 
seek non-combatant positions, as nurses, etc.; but if 
compelled to go a mile or many miles as a soldier, we 
still need not kill anybody. 

Question. Will we know each other in the 
Kingdom? 

Answer. When the Apostle says (1 Cor. 13:12), 
"Now we see through a glass darkly [i.e., as through 
an obscured glass], but then face to face; now I know 
in part, but then shall I know, even as I also am 
known," he undoubtedly included in the future 
knowledge the recognition of friends, even as he realized 
himself already known of God. If we are to be 
partakers of "the divine nature" and inheritors of all 
things, we must expect to be acquainted with the beings 
who form a considerable part of our heritage for 
a thousand years as well as with our associates in that 
inheritance. 

Question. Were not the Psalms inspired specially 
for song service; and is it not therefore improper to use 
other hymns? 

Answer. David's thought in writing the Psalms 
may have been merely their use in song; but the Lord's 
object was to give prophecy to assist his people of a 
later period. See what Peter says on this subject. 
(1 Pet. 1:10-12.) Other prophecies of the Old Testament 
are written in poetical form, particularly Isaiah 
and Job. Our Lord quoted from both, as did also his 
apostles, and showed that in some of the Psalms David 
typified the Lord. 

While some of the Psalms seem to us very suitable 
for singing, others we regard as less appropriate than 
hymns of praise of modern date. When the apostles 
said that we should sing "psalms and hymns and spiritual 
songs" (Eph. 5: 19), he recognized a distinction 
between the three kinds of songs and commended all. 
We believe it is safe to follow his instructions, remembering 
the instruction, "Be not wise above what is 
written." However, on this subject we believe each 
one should follow his own conscience. Doubtless the 
Lord accepts the offering of song, whatever its form, 
so long as it comes from the heart,— just as with prose 
prayers; for hymns and psalms should be regarded as 
union or concert prayers. 



R2345 : page 231 

ELISHA DOING RESTITUTION WORK. 

--AUG. 14.-2 KINGS 4:25-37.- 

"Cast thy burden upon the Lord, and 
he shall sustain thee."— Psa. 55:22. 

ELISHA did receive a double portion of Elijah's 

spirit, or power. Not only did Jordan part 

before him, in obedience to his faith and at the stroke 

of the mantle, but other important works followed. 

Coming to a school of the prophets, they found that 

in preparing the dinner of vegetables something had 

gotten into the stew which they recognized to be poisonous, 

and the dinner was spoiled; but Elisha miraculously 

antidoted the poison, and made the dinner 

wholesome. Again, the people of Jericho complained 

that the fountain of water which supplied them was 

brackish, and he healed the waters so that the fountain 

became known as the fountain of Elisha, and the 

place is so known to-day. 

These may be considered as typical of the restitution 
works which the Elisha class will introduce to the 
world. What do people who are religiously disposed, 
and who seek to understand the Word of the Lord, 
need, as the first feature of restitution blessings? Will 
it not be that something shall be put into their mess 
of pottage, that will destroy its poisonous errors, and 
make it health-giving, nutritious? Surely the peoples 
of civilized lands have God's Word in their hands, and 
its contents are good and nourishing and health-giving; 
but some of the theological cooks have unintentionally 
added doctrines of the Evil One so that it is 
made to the people a poisonous dinner, injurious, as 
represented in the various creeds of Christendom. And 
what does the world in general need more than that 
the springs of the water of life (which have become 
corrupted and brackish, through false theories and 
misinterpretations of the divine Word and plan) should 
be corrected, healed, made sweet and pure and refreshing? 
And such restitution work will be accomplished, 

R2345 : page 232 

we understand, by the successors of the Gospel Church 
in a much larger measure than the Church itself is 
able to accomplish it now— the Church's work being 
specifically the making of herself ready.— Rev. 19:7. 

Further, we have the record of how the poor 
widow and her sons were helped by the prophet Elisha, 
to whom she appealed in her distress. A debt 
was upon her, and, according to the terms of the Law, 



her sons would be bound to serve the creditor until 

the indebtedness had been discharged, or until the 

Jubilee year should be ushered in; and as she was a 

widow she needed her sons' assistance at home. The 

prophet saw her distress, sympathized with her, and 

assisted: the assistance being rendered in a manner 

which helped to develop her faith in the Lord. The 

only merchantable thing she had in her house was a 

pot of oil; and the prophet directed her to send among 

her neighbors and borrow all the empty vessels that 

she could obtain, and to pour all full of oil, which then 

she could sell, and from the proceeds pay the debt and 

have something left; and so she did, according to directions. 

Does not this act of relieving the poor illustrate 

restitution powers and work also? Are we not 

told that in that time the Lord will "lift up the poor 

and the needy, and him that hath no helper?" There 

is in this a lesson of the Lord's sympathy with us in 

our earthly difficulties; a lesson of his willingness to 

assist us to pay our honest debts; and a lesson of the 

propriety of paying honest debts. And there is another 

lesson respecting how God is pleased to bless the use 

of the things which we have, rather than to send us 

other things, or to miraculously put the money into 

our pockets. There is also a lesson for faith, because 

it was in proportion to her faith that the woman gathered 

a large or small number of vessels, and therefore 

got a larger or a smaller evidence of divine bounty 

and mercy. Let us, when dealing with the Lord, remember 

that all the gold and silver are his, and the 

"cattle on a thousand hills," and let our works be in 

harmony with our faith. 

We come now to the particular feature of this lesson, 
the Shunammite woman and her son: and this also 
contains a suggestion of the great restitution blessing 
of awakening the dead. This Shunammite has the record 
of the Scriptures that she was "a great woman." 
Apparently she and her husband were comfortably 
situated in life; perhaps indeed the greatness referred 
in part to wealth, but evidently she was a more than 
ordinary woman in other respects, as is indicated by 
the narrative. She may have been superior to her 
husband in intelligence, as the narrative seems to indicate. 
She had the kind of greatness, too, which 
recognizes goodness, and reverences the Lord, and those 
who are his. Seeing the prophet pass her place occasionally, 
probably on his way to the schools of the 
prophets, she hospitably urged him to take dinner with 
her, and so, apparently, every time he passed that way 
he stopped to partake of her hospitality. And the 
more this great woman saw of the Lord's prophet the 
more she realized that it was a favor to have him under 
the roof, so she said to her husband, "Behold now, 
I perceive that this is an holy man of God, which passeth 
by us continually. Let us make a little chamber, 
I pray thee, on the wall, and let us set for him there 



a bed, and a table, and a stool and a candlestick: and 
it shall be when he cometh to us that he shall turn in 
thither." Altho apparently the husband was less religiously 

R2346 : page 232 

inclined than his wife, and perhaps less 
"great" in some other respects, yet this courteous request, 
expressed in so wifely and proper a manner, 
appealed to him, and was acted upon, and we may say 
that part of the woman's greatness is manifested in 
this her dealing with her own husband. How many 
women there are who, if they felt themselves the 
greater of the two, would altogether forget the propriety 
of consulting with the husband, the divinely 
appointed head of the family, and requesting cooperation 
in religious work and benevolence, rather than 
demanding it. Modesty and humility are true signs 
of greatness, both in men and women. 

Hotels and lodging houses and restaurants were 
not arrangements of those days, and consequently hospitality 
was more practised than to-day. In some respects 
we have lost considerably by the change of customs, 
for the spirit of hospitality seems to be considerably 
less than in olden times. We believe that so far 
as possible every Christian family would do well, if 
their means would justify, to have such a spare room 
for the entertainment of the Lord's servants who may 
come their way. We believe that a blessing, spiritual 
if not temporal, comes to all who seek to cultivate this 
spirit of loving generosity, benevolence, kindness, in the 
entertainment of the Lord's servants,— and in general 
the household of faith, as they may have opportunity. 

A similar spirit of benevolence and thoughtfulness 
for others was in the Prophet, who requested his servant 
to notice whether or not the kind entertainer was 
lacking of anything which would minister to her comfort, 
which he could supply. The answer was that 
she was childless; and seizing the opportunity the 
Prophet informed her that she should have a son. 
There is a lesson here for each of us, to the effect that 
if we are the recipients of favor from others— either 
from the Lord or his people— if we have the same spirit 
we will seek to do something in return. Those who accept 
of the favors of others, and lack the desire and fail 
to seek the opportunity to do as much or more in return, 
are certainly lacking the Lord's spirit in this particular. 

R2346 : page 233 

Years passed; the child grew to boyhood, and 
while in the harvest field was taken ill with something 
like sunstroke, and died. The mother, with exhibitions 
of great faith, laid the dead child in the prophet's 
room, upon his bed, and immediately started with her 
servant in all haste to find the Prophet. When the 



Prophet by the mouth of his servant asked, "Is it 

well?" she had faith enough to answer, "It is well;" 

and reaching the prophet's presence she reminded him 

of the fact that she had not requested the son, that he 

had been a gift, and intimated that if now the lad were 

taken away, instead of being a gift or benefaction to 

her the matter would be only a sorrow; yet she did not 

say that the boy was dead, apparently having full confidence 

in the power of God, through the Prophet, to 

awaken him, even from the sleep of death. The 

Prophet, full of faith also, sent his staff to be laid upon 

the child, at the hands of the servant; but the mother 

had not so much faith in the staff as in the Prophet, 

and would be satisfied with nothing else than a visit 

from him. When Elisha arrived he found the child 

dead, but neither did this stagger his faith: he shut 

the door, and prayed to the Father in secret, but not 

only did he pray, but he used restorative means, which 

finally resulted in the awakening of the child from the 

sleep of death, when he delivered him to his mother, 

whose faith had thus its reward. 

There are several lessons here for us. Considering 
Elisha as a type, and his works as typical of the 
works of restitution in the beginning of the Millennial 
age, we note what the New Testament Scriptures 
clearly affirm, that vitality will be restored to humanity 
so that "All that are in the graves shall hear the 
voice of the Son of man, and shall come forth." And 
the earthly agents in the Kingdom will no doubt be 
participators to a considerable extent in restitution 
work along this line, as well as along other lines. Thus 
Elisha in his companionship with Elijah seems to represent 
the "tribulation saints," and subsequently the 
work and workers of the entire Millennial age. 

But we may draw lessons of profit for the present 
time from the Shunammite woman's faith and the 
Prophet's faith and works. Apparently the Prophet 
was perplexed by this case. The staff in the hands of 
his servant had been without avail; his own efforts for 
a considerable time were without avail. Here was 
room for doubt as to whether or not the Lord's power 
had forsaken him. He walked the little room repeatedly, 
and again and again laid his face upon the child's 
face, and his hands upon the child's hands, presumably 
the meanwhile praying the divine blessing. But 
finally faith triumphed. This case reminds us of the 
one in which the disciples failed to cast out the devil 
from the boy, while the Lord and Peter, James and 
John were in the Mount of Transfiguration. Our 
Lord's remark was, "This kind goeth not out but by 
prayer and fasting." So, apparently the Lord is 
pleased to exercise his power either slowly or quickly, 
according to circumstances and conditions. 

We are not to consider this as a resurrection of 
the dead, in the proper Scriptural sense of the word 
resurrection. It was merely a temporary awakening 



from the sleep of death, as in the case of Lazarus and 
the son of the widow of Nain and the daughter of 
Jairus. These parties all, later, relapsed into death. 
Nor could their subsequent death be properly termed 
the second death, unless, after their awakening, they 
by wilful sin came under its condemnation. And to 
whatever extent we are less than perfect and possessed 
of life in its completeness, to that extent each is already 
in death, whether he have a greater or a smaller 
spark of vitality remaining. As heretofore seen, in 
discussing the subject of resurrection, that word signifies 
a raising up— all the way up to all from which 
we fell in Adam, namely, to the perfection of life. — 
See our issue for April 1, '93. 



R2346 : page 233 

GENERAL NAAMAN HEALED-MERCIES APPRECIATED. 

-AUG. 21.-2 KINGS 5:1-14.- 

"Heal me, O Lord, and I shall be healed; 
save me, and I shall be saved."— Jer. 17:14. 

ELISHA'S fame was evidently very general 

throughout Israel, and this lesson tells us 

of its spread to Syria, the adjoining kingdom, through 

one of its captives— a maidservant in the household of 

one of Syria's principal generals. For some reason 

the Lord seems to have had more interest in Syria than 

in the other nations of the world outside of Israel and 

Judah. The reason of this probably lies in the fact 

that King David conquered Syria, and incorporated it 

as a part of the twelve-tribe kingdom, and it so continued 

during the period of Solomon's reign. It was 

thus considerably permeated with Israelitish influence. 

At the time of the revolt of the ten tribes and the division 

of Israel into two kingdoms, the kingdom of 

Syria seems to have regained its independence: nevertheless, 

because of its intimate relationship with the 

people of Israel we found (in our lesson of July 24), 

that Elijah the prophet was sent to anoint Hazael to 

be king over Syria, as indicating a special oversight of 

that people on the Lord's part, more than of other 

Gentile nations. No doubt because of this intimacy 

with Israel, Syria is frequently referred to also in the 

R2346 : page 234 

prophets, and her captivity to Babylon was foretold. 

At all events, affairs so shaped themselves as to 
bring to the chief general of Syria a better knowledge 
of the true God, Jehovah, and that through the instrumentality 
of the little bondmaid. Naaman, with all 



his prowess in war, and his favor with the king, and 
the honor done him by the people, had a very serious 
ailment— leprosy. A man of wealth and position, he 
would have given almost anything to be free from the 
loathsome disease. The little maid, so far from feeling 
envious, revengeful and wickedly toward her captors, 
was evidently exercised by a very benevolent, 
kindly disposition; and perhaps indeed she had been 
well cared for by her captors, and was appreciative. 
Seeing the general's trouble she called the matter to 
the attention of her mistress, assuring her that there 
was a prophet in Israel who could heal him. 

She probably knew nothing about the name of the 
prophet, nor about his resident city, but her account 
was sufficiently explicit to awaken the interest of her 
master, the leper, who started out on his journey to 
the land of Israel, to see the prophet. Naturally, he 
sought to bring as much influence to bear as possible, 
and hence took letters from the king of Syria to the 
king of Israel, as well as valuable presents of money, 
fine apparel, etc. This would be expected of a wealthy 
man, dealing with a wealthy man, a king. And the 
thought in mind of the general, as well as in that of 
the Syrian king, evidently was that any prophet so 
notable as the one indicated, and able to cure any kind 
of a disease, and who had already performed wonderful 
cures, would be found at the royal court, specially 
favored of the king, and made a high officer in some 
sense in the kingdom. 

Hence it was that so remarkable a letter was written, 
which for the time confounded the king of Israel. 
It read: "I have herewith sent Naaman, my servant, 
to thee, that thou mayest recover him of his leprosy." 

R2347 : page 234 

Leprosy was recognized as being an incurable disease; 
therefore the king of Israel at once surmised that the 
king of Syria wished to pick a quarrel with him, and 
to have an excuse for another invasion, to carry off 
more spoil and more captives. The rending or tearing 
of the outer garment was, in olden times, a sign of 
sore distress, perplexity of mind; but it was much less 
of an operation than it would be with modern clothes. 
The action of the king was evidently soon noised 
abroad, and came to the ears of Elisha, who at once 
sent word that the king need have no perplexity, but 
should send the leper to him; intimating that he would 
be healed. All of this experience doubtless seemed 
very strange to Naaman, as he found that the king 
knew nothing about such a person at first, and finally 
had sent him to a lowly house. He was still more surprised 
and disappointed when the prophet did not even 
think it worth while to come out and salute him, or do 
obeisance, or make particular inquiry or say any words 
of enchantment, etc., but sent him a commonplace 



message, that he needed to go and wash several times. 
He was indignant; he knew that the waters of the river 
Jordan were muddy, far less likely to wash away any 
defilement than the waters of his own city, Damascus, 
which were beautiful, clear mountain streams. Naaman 
was wroth: had he come a long journey, and with 
imposing outfit of chariots and servants, to be treated 
like a dog? Was he not a great man with his master, the 
king of Syria, and was not the latter an influential 
king in those parts? "So he turned and went away 
in a rage." 

Leprosy in the Scriptures, because it is incurable, 
and because it eats as a canker, is used as a symbol of 
sin, which cannot be eradicated from the blood and the 
system, except by divine power. Sometimes great 
sinners, and wealthy sinners, recognize themselves as 
sinners, and desire to be cleansed; and some of these 
are inclined to think that there should be some special 
manner of dealing with their cases, different from the 
general one: for they are willing to give of their influence 
or of their means. They forget that our God is not 
poor; all the gold and silver are his, and the cattle 
upon a thousand hills. It is, therefore, difficult for 
wealthy people to humble themselves, and to come to 
the Lord in the only attitude of humble obedience, 
that will gain the desired end; hence it is that the 
Lord said, "How hardly shall they that have riches 
enter into the Kingdom of Heaven"— with what difficulty 
will they get in,— how few of them will get in. 
And this applies not only to great riches of money, 
but also to riches of reputation and to wealth of learning. 
Hence we see that it is much easier for poor 
people, and unlearned people, and people without great 
reputations to come to the Lord and to accept the great 
gift of his grace, upon his conditions. In coming to 
the Lord there is no difference between the king and 
the beggar; both need his bounty, his grace, and it is 
offered to both upon precisely the same terms. 

WISE COUNSEL HEEDED. 



Naaman had evidently some sensible companions, 
servants, or possibly under officers, who "came near," 
approached him in a moderate and wise manner, and 
offered him some good advice, saying in substance, 
We know how disappointed you feel; we know that if 
this prophet had demanded of you some great thing, 
you would have been pleased to perform it, and not 
only so but would have been pleased to have rewarded 
him handsomely, and now because he has ignored your 
wealth and your presents, and has bidden you do 
something which seems quite common-place, it is well 
calculated to make you resentful; but consider the 



R2347 : page 235 

other side: it is an easy thing to perform, and we advise 
that you do so forthwith. 

How excellent a thing is good counsel; it is needed, 
not only by the foolish, but needed also by the 
wise, as in this case. Naaman was undoubtedly a 
wiser and abler man than his servants, yet in the present 
case he was so closely interested that his judgment 
did not act as well as theirs; and they were wise servants, 
and were surely the more appreciated by Naaman 
for not simply joining with him and agreeing with his 
every word and every thought. They might have assented 
to his proposition, and said, Yes! you are insulted; 
we are all insulted! Resent the insult, ask the 
king of Syria to permit you to bring up an army against 
them, and teach them a lesson of your greatness, etc. 
But instead, they wisely counselled their general to 
perform the simple thing which had been directed, 
and all the more willingly than if it had been a very 
difficult matter. 

So there are everywhere people who are ready to 
counsel evil, and they are generally more numerous 
than those who are ready to counsel good— in favor of 
peace, harmony, obedience, righteousness. Yet this 
should always be the attitude of the Lord's people: 
they are always to be peacemakers— on honorable 
grounds, of course; but nevertheless always striving or 
making for peace. How often it is that those who are 
inquiring the way to the Lord, especially if they are 
wealthy, are misdirected, by the very ones who have 
opportunity to help them to take proper views of the 
matter— to humble themselves to learn the lesson of 
complete submission to the Lord and his methods of 
getting rid of sin. 

TRUE GREATNESS MANIFESTED. 



The true greatness of Naaman is also here incidentally 
brought forward. Had he been a man of inferior 
mind, he would have been so haughty and dignified 
that his servants could not even have offered 
him a suggestion; or, receiving it of them, he would 
have resented it, as being from an inferior source; considering 
that his servants were not qualified to offer 
him any suggestions. But being a wise man, "a great 
man," as our lesson expresses it, he was not unapproachable, 
nor inclined to disrespect sound, reasonable 
advice, even tho it came from an unexpected and 
humble quarter. All of the Lord's people should realize 
that the little child or a person least learned either 
in religion or science may be able to offer a suggestion 
which would be valuable to the most profound thinker. 
It therefore is not only the Scriptural course but the 



reasonable, wise course, that all of the Lord's people 
should be so humble minded as to be approachable, 
and able to hear, weigh, and act upon sensible advice, 
even from those below them in the social scale. 

Naaman dipped himself in the water of the Jordan, 
as directed, once— no sign of improvement; twice- 
still no sign; three, four, five, six times— still no sign. 
The prophet had said seven times; but he might reasonably 
have expected that the leprosy would begin to 
go away with the first dip; but no, he was to exercise 
faith. It required faith to go to the muddy river of 
Jordan to bathe at all; it required faith to continue the 
bathing until he had fulfilled the full number of times, 
according to the promise. With the seventh dip came 
the blessing, and he was clean. His flesh came again, 
soft, smooth, clean, not scurfy and dead, as in leprosy. 

Thus it is also in reference to sin,— moral leprosy. 
Every man realizes that he is imperfect, that sin has 
a hold upon his mental, physical and moral powers; 
and many are the methods advocated for getting free, 
getting rid of sin. The natural man suggests that he 
can get rid of sin for himself, without any advice from 
any quarter; he can wash and be clean by moral reforms 
which he will some day begin in earnest; he can 
cleanse his own flesh and spirit; he needs no prophet 
to teach him where or how; he has as much knowledge 
on the subject as anybody. He has no great high 
Priest and wants nobody to redeem him as his substitute. 
Besides, to fulfil the conditions required for the 
forgiveness of sin would be taking a very open and 
courageous step, and he shrinks from making such an 
outward demonstration, and considers that it would do 
no special good anyway: that if the Lord would save 
him he can save him just as well at one time and place 
as another. Others make the mistake of being unwilling 
to do anything for their own recovery out of 
sin; they will not go to Jordan and wash; because they 
lack faith. Not a profession of faith, but the exercise 
of an active, living faith brings the blessing. 

But the sinner who has come to feel the load of 
his sin, its grievousness, is prepared to do a good deal 
if he can only get rid of it. When he comes to this 
place of being ready to obey the Lord's voice, it not 
infrequently is the result of good counsel on the part 
of his friends— Christian friends. He is finally prepared 
to take the humiliating step of acknowledging 
that nothing that he can do for himself will relieve his 
own trouble; of acknowledging that there is only the 
one power that is able either to prescribe the remedy 
or to supply it; and that is the Lord. But when finally 
the sinner plunges into the antitypical Jordan, "the 
fountain filled with blood, drawn from Immanuel's 
veins," and when he dips therein seven times (that is, 
perfectly,— seven being a symbol of perfection) then 
he has indeed a cleansing. He is justified by faith, 
justified from all which the law would not justify; he 



is made every whit whole, reckonedly, and has then a 
standing with God. We can imagine the rejoicing of 

R2347 : page 236 

Naaman and of his companions, and we know the still 
greater rejoicing of the one who, coming to the Lord, 
has had the moral leprosy of sin all washed away. 
"Being justified by faith, we have peace with God, 
through our Lord Jesus Christ." 

Our Lord refers to this miracle (Luke 4:27) saying: 
"Many lepers were in Israel in the time of Elisha, 
the prophet, but none of them were cleansed, 
save Naaman, a Syrian." Our Lord points out that 
there was a difference in the condition of heart as between 
some of these lepers of Israel and this particular 

R2348 : page 236 

Syrian leper, just as there was a difference in that 
particular widow of Zarephath with whom the prophet 
Elijah dwelt during the famine, and whose cruse of oil 
and crock of meal on this account did not exhaust. 
There was faith found in the widow. There was faith 
also found in Naaman. The "many lepers" of Israel 
had heard of this prophet, no doubt, as well as had 
the little bondmaid. But Naaman had faith in God 
to come seeking Elisha, and with large presents, while 
the lepers of Israel had not thought it worth while to 
seek Elisha, for help, altho in the same country. This 
illustrates to us the general lesson of the Scriptures, 
that "without faith it is impossible to please God." 
God tells us of his benevolence and willingness to forgive 
sins, yet only those who have faith in him, and 
who come to have their sins forgiven, only such get 
the blessing. 

How comforting is the Scriptural assurance 
that the notable, general lack of faith is owing very 
largely to the influence of Satan, "the prince of this 
world," who shortly shall be bound for the thousand 
years of Christ's reign. "The god of this world hath 
blinded the minds of them which believe not." Thank 
God that soon all these "blind eyes shall be opened." 
-Isa. 35:5. 

GENERAL NAAMAN'S GRATITUDE. 



Another matter which shows Naaman in an excellent 
light, and which assures us that God appreciates 
character, and made no mistake in sending word to 
Naaman respecting his prophet, etc., is found in the 
fact that, after he had been healed in Jordan, he did 
not thanklessly go on to his home, saying, Now that 
king and his prophet, who were so independent that 



they would not come down and make more ado over 
me, and perhaps come to Jordan with me, to see 
whether or not it took effect, have missed getting 
the present which I brought from Syria for them, and 
I am the gainer by just that much. No; with a true 
nobility of soul he desired to make some acknowledgment 
of the goodness which had been bestowed upon 
him. He probably knew something about the true 
God, and probably with his heart and with his lips 
acknowledged him, and rendered thanks for his recovery 
from the leprosy, so soon as he was healed: but 
this was not enough. As God had seen fit to use an 
agent in bringing the blessing to him, he rightly 
judged that it was as little as he could do to recognize 
the same agent that God had recognized— God's own 
accredited agent in his healing. So he returned to 
Elisha with the remarkable words, "Behold, now I 
know that there is no God in all the earth but in Israel; 
now therefore, I pray thee, take a blessing [a 
present] of thy servant." Here true dignity of character 
is shown. He was not seeking to see how cheaply 
he could get the favor of heaven; he did not say 
within himself, If Elisha had bargained with me for 
a large sum before I went down to Jordan, and got the 
blessing, then indeed I would have given him much to 
obtain this great benefit, but now I will put him off 
with some trifling gift, and no doubt, as a poor man, 
he will think a great deal of it. 

On the contrary, he had brought a gift representing, 
it is claimed, over seventy-seven thousand dollars, 
besides much "goodly apparel," and he evidently was 
desirous that the prophet should receive all of this as 
a token of his appreciation of the great benefit conferred. 
Our Lord's reference to Naaman and his cure, 
and how the Lord's favor reached him, even tho he 
was a Gentile, reminds us of the fact that when our 
Lord healed ten lepers by the wayside, only one of 
them returned to give God the glory for his healing. 
Naaman, the Syrian, was more noble, evidently, than 
the other nine, if not more noble also than the tenth, 
who, so far as we know, offered no present— tho perhaps 
this was because he had nothing to offer. 

This illustrates to us the difference in conduct 
amongst those who receive the blessing of the forgiveness 
of sins— cleansing from moral leprosy. Some receive 
it as a matter of course; some are thankful, but 
especially glad that they got it so cheaply— that salvation 
is free. It is only the occasional one ("not many 
learned, not many wise," not many altogether), who 
receives the divine blessing, forgiveness, who returns 
to give God the glory and to offer him a thank-offering. 
Not very many present either money or influence 
or their lives at his feet, in recognition of the 
boon of their forgiveness. 

Addressing these who have been washed from 
their sins in the precious blood, who have received 



forgiveness of sins through faith in that blood, and 
who consequently are reckoned of the Lord as justified 
freely from all things, the Apostle says to them, 
"I beseech you, brethren, by the mercies of God 
[manifest toward you in the forgiveness of your sins], 
that ye present your bodies living sacrifices, holy and 
acceptable, to God, which is your reasonable service." 

R2348 : page 237 

Naaman had the spirit, the disposition, the mind, 
which under the favorable conditions of the Gospel 
age would have made of him a saint— a member of the 
elect "little flock," the Church. If he appreciated so 
largely, so heartily, his physical cleansing, who can 
question that he would have appreciated much more a 
moral cleansing, and the full reconciliation to God, 
and the privilege of coming into the family of God as 
a son and as a joint-heir with Christ? His conduct 
shows to us that he would have been ready to lay 
down his life, and all his wealth, all his possessions 
and his honor with the King of Syria. And this, we 
see, would be but a "reasonable service" for him as it 
is for us, and for all who have been made recipients of 
this great blessing of forgiveness of sins— cleansing. 

But if the noble, proper spirit was manifested by 
Naaman, in desiring to render something in return for 
the mercies received, there was not less of the noble 
spirit in Elisha, in refusing to receive those gifts. To 
have received the presents would have meant the selling 
of the divine power which operated through him; 
and Elisha well knew that God's gifts are not for sale. 
Fortunate would it be for many who deal with the 
spiritual things of the Lord, in the cure of the leprosy 
of sin, if they could take as exalted a view of matters as 
did Elisha. We fear that too often the Lord's servants 
are ready to accept earthly rewards for their part 
in the healing of sin-sickness— costly apparel, gold 
and silver. 

And then comes out still another lesson of nobility 
of character. Naaman requested that he might 
have as much soil from the land of Israel as two pack 
mules could carry, intimating that his desire for this 
earth was that he might place it in some suitable location 
in his own country, that he might kneel upon the 
sacred soil, which God had blessed, and might offer 
prayer to the true God, who had healed him, besides 
whom there is no God. And the keenness of his conscience 
is shown by his further remark that he knew 
that his king, as a worshipper of a false God, would 
expect him to go with him, as his servant, as usual, 
that he might lean upon his arm, when bowing himself 
before the false god; and he inquired whether or 
not Jehovah would pardon him for thus joining with 
and assisting his king in the worship which now he no 
longer would take part in from the heart. Elisha indicated 



to him that he would be forgiven for joining 

thus unwillingly in the bowing before the idol, as a 

servant with his master, the king. 

We cannot doubt that Elisha sought direction of 
the Lord in this matter, and that he had the Lord's 
mind in respect to it. But why even this much sanction 
to a false god should be permitted may be a question. 
We suggest, as an explanation, that God was 
not then dealing with any Gentile nation, but with 
Judah and Israel only; "You only have I known [recognized] 
of all the families of the earth." (Amos 3:2.) 
The other nations were without any of God's 
promises, or, as expressed by the Apostle Paul, "without 
God and having no hope." The redemption sacrifice 
for the sins of the whole world had not yet been 
offered, would not be offered for several centuries; 
consequently, altho Naaman was of so honest a heart 
that the Lord delighted to send him to the Prophet, 
and to heal him of his leprosy, and altho the Lord appreciated 
his nobility of character, yet the time had not 
come for making any offer of reconciliation to the Gentiles. 
The only offer thus far made was to the seed of 
Abraham, according to the flesh. 

Consequently, altho Naaman recognized Jehovah, 
Jehovah had not yet recognized him,— could not do 
so, under the covenant then in force, the Law Covenant, 
—and had not prepared to recognize him or any 
other such noble Gentile characters, until the New 
Covenant would go into force, later. Hence, it mattered 
not, except to Naaman himself, how he worshiped. 
His worship would not be accepted. He had no mediator! 
It was entirely proper, therefore, that while 
Naaman, having recognized Jehovah for himself, 
should worship Jehovah and respect him alone, as the 
true God, yet nevertheless, as the servant of the king 
of Syria, he might join in any worship that might 
please his master, Jehovah not having accepted or 
even "called" him, to become his servant. We cannot 
doubt that, when the Millennial age shall have 
fully dawned, and when those who are in the graves 
shall come forth, and the turn of Naaman shall come, 
it will find in him one whose condition of heart and 
mind toward the Lord will make him very ready for 
the good tidings of great joy unto all people through 
the New Covenant, sealed by the precious blood of our 
Lord Jesus at Calvary. We cannot doubt that so noble 
a character will make rapid progress under the favorable 
conditions of the Millennial age back to the original 
perfection, the image and likeness of God, lost 
by the whole race through father Adam. 

The conscientiousness of Naaman, the Gentile, 
who had never before heard much of Jehovah, is strikingly 

R2349 : page 237 

in contrast with the deficiency of this quality in 



many who have enjoyed many privileges in Christian 
lands, and much advantage every way. We wonder 
much, for instance, when some of the Lord's people 
are translated out of darkness into his marvelous light, 
when their minds are relieved of the cloud of superstition 
and vail of ignorance which long have hindered 
them from seeing God's true character,— we wonder 
why these do not take an equally decided course and 
inquire of the Lord through his oracle, the Word of 

R2349 : page 238 

the testimony, whether or not it is longer permitted of 
them to bow themselves down before creeds of men, 
which misrepresent the divine character and plan: 
whether or not it is permitted of them to continue 
worshiping after the old manner, which they have 
found to be an erroneous manner: whether or not it is 
proper for them to lend their influence and presence 
at meetings whose tendencies and influences are chiefly 
against the truth, tho outwardly they are "religious" 
and have "a form of godliness." Such inquiries now, 
at the oracle of God, get the response, "Come out of 
her, my people, that ye be not partakers of her sins, 
and that ye receive not of her plagues." 

THE COVETOUS SERVANT. 



There is still another feature of this narrative 
which contains a valuable lesson. Elisha had a servant 
named Gehazi, who had been with the prophet for 
a considerable time, and had witnessed many of his 
wonderful works; the same servant, probably, who 
carried his staff and laid it upon the Shunammite woman's 
son, and who very well knew that the Lord's 
power had operated through the Prophet for the recovery 
of the child to life. But all of this contact with 
divine power and goodness and mercy, and all of the 
illustrations of the Prophet's nobility of character and 
generosity— all of this counted for practically nothing, 
to Gehazi. He saw the rich presents that had been 
brought by Naaman, and allowed covetousness to enter 
into his heart, instead of allowing the spirit of righteousness 
and generosity to prevent it. He said to himself, 
What a pity to see this wealth thus rejected by 
the Prophet. I will contrive a plan by which I may 
get some of it for myself; then I can have olive groves 
and vineyards, and be a very wealthy man, and some 
of these costly garments will make me the envy of all 
my neighbors. So he ran after the departing chariot, 
to accomplish his purpose. 

As a matter of fact, covetousness, with almost 
everyone, leads to various other sins— generally to lying, 
sometimes to murder. Nearly every crime is more 



or less traceable to covetousness. In this case Gehazi 
did not hesitate to lie, and not only so, but to misrepresent 
his master, and thus indirectly to misrepresent 
God. His falsehood was, "My master hath sent me, 
saying, Behold even now there be come to me from 
Mount Ephraim two young men of the sons of the 
prophets: give them, I pray thee, a talent of silver 
[$1944] and two changes of garments." Nothing 
doubting, the generous Naaman urged him to take 
two talents of silver, and bound them in two bags, 
with the changes of garments, and laid them upon two 
of his servants, and they bare them before him, and 
when he came to a secret place Gehazi took them from 
their hands and hid them in the house. 

But Elisha called him and said, "Went not my 
heart with thee when the man turned again from the 
chariot to meet thee? Is it a time [a suitable occasion] 
for the receiving of money, garments, olive yards, 
vineyards, sheep, oxen, menservants and maidservants?" 
—intimating that all of these things had been 
the moving covetous cause before the mind of Gehazi: 
and no doubt at that period such an amount of money, 
nearly $4000, would have purchased a great deal and 
have made Gehazi a wealthy man. But the penalty 
of his misconduct was severe, for the leprosy of Naaman 
was given him. 

The lesson here would seem to be that while some 
who have been ignorant of the gospel of grace of God 
are mightily and properly actuated by it (like Naaman), 
others who are in daily contact with divine 
grace, fail to have the right attitude of heart to appreciate 
it, and know of it chiefly as so much merchandise 
(like Gehazi). This covetousness becomes to some, 
even if they had already been cleansed, a renewal of 
the leprosy or sin. The same influence which operates 
favorably upon one heart, operates unfavorably upon 
another. This reminds us of the Apostle's statement, 
which is applicable throughout this Gospel age, that 
the gospel of Christ is either a savor of life unto life, 
or of death unto death. It will either have the effect 
of bringing us near to the Lord, in appreciation and 
imitation of his goodness and love, or it will have the 
reverse effect of repelling us from the Lord, and bringing 
us under a spirit of evil and selfishness. Let all 
who have come in contact with the grace of God take 
heed, lest they receive the grace of God in vain; lest 
instead of being benefited by it they are hardened by 
it, and finally should be esteemed wilful sinners on 
their own account. 



R2349 : page 238 
"ARE THEY NOT ALL MINISTERING SPIRITS?" 



--AUG. 28.-2 KINGS 6:8-18.- 

"The angel of the Lord encampeth round about them 
that fear him, and delivereth them."— Psa. 34:7. 

THE SPECIAL feature of this Scripture lesson is 
that there are invisible powers on every hand 
for the protection and assistance of the Lord's people, 
while doing his work. As we have already shown, there 
are "wicked spirits," invisible to humanity, whose 
fiendish delight is to deceive, mislead and ensnare 
mankind.* But in this lesson we have the other side 
of the question presented to our attention. It is an 
encouragement to know that, tho beset by evil spirits, 
the Lord's people are surrounded by other invisible 
agents no less powerful, whose interest in their welfare 
is of the highest order, and who are near to guard us 
in proportion as our hearts are pure, and loyal to the 
Lord and his Word. 

Tho we do not understand the process, we accept 
the fact, that God has both spoken and written and 
operated miraculously through holy men of old. We 
have had illustrations of this in the preceding lessons 
respecting Elijah and Elisha. But how these communications 



*See What Say the Scriptures About Spiritualism?— 10c. per copy. 

R2349 : page 239 

were made to the prophets we are not informed. 
Quite possibly they were made through the 
invisible spirit beings who serve the Lord and his people. 
Concerning these invisible spirit beings, angels, 
the Apostle says, "Are they not all ministering [serving] 
spirits, sent forth to minister unto those who 
shall be heirs of salvation?" It may be that they 
ministered to Elijah and Elisha the information which 
they possessed, and which therefore constituted them 
prophets. For instance, in this lesson, we are informed 
that Elisha sent word in advance to the king of Israel 
respecting the movements and intentions of the king 
of Syria, and that his fame as a seer had extended to 
Syria: so that the counsellors of Syria's king explained 
the matter to him, saying, "Elisha, the prophet that 
is in Israel, telleth the king of Israel the words that 
thou speakest secretly in thy bedchamber." 

Is it unreasonable to suppose that it was these invisible 
ministering spirits which were the divine instrumentality 
in making known to Elisha the things 
proper to be told to the king of Israel for his protection? 
We think it not unlikely; we think it probable. 
In one of our previous lessons we saw that, when 
the Shunammite woman came to Elisha to inquire 
about her son, Elisha said, "The Lord hath hid it from 



me, and hath not told me." (2 Kings 4:27.) From 
this it is evident that it was not by any power that the 
prophet himself possessed that he had any special 
knowledge, but by revelations from the Lord. And 
this agrees with the testimony of the Apostle Peter, 
who says, "Holy men of old spake as they were moved 
by the holy spirit." (2 Pet. 1:21.) Our suggestion 
is that the holy spirit of God communicated information 
to the prophets through the holy angels, the invisible 
spirit beings who encamp round about them 
that fear God. But for God to use this instrumentality 
in communication would make it no less his power, 
just as he may use the lightning or the storm to do 
his work, and it be none the less his work; just as we 
may speak by telephone or telegraph or cable, and it 
be as really our word and deed as tho done without 
those agencies of communication. 

The folly of humanity attempting to cope with 
the spiritual powers is well illustrated in this lesson by 
the conduct of the king of Syria in sending an armed 
company to capture Elisha. He might well have 
reasoned that if the prophet had information of his 
most secret plans respecting the king of Israel, he 
would none the less have information respecting the 
proposed capture of himself. But the king of Syria 
and some of his people were to be taught a lesson respecting 
the power of the God of Israel, and of any 
man whom the God of Israel might choose to use as 
his channel or mouthpiece. Here, the foolishness of 
man was made to show forth the wisdom and power 
of God. 

Elisha's servant (not Gehazi, we may feel assured, but 
another more worthy), seeing the armed host surrounding 
the city, was in terror, but the Prophet, who likewise 
saw the armed host, also discerned another host, 
more powerful, more numerous; and he entreated the 
Lord on behalf of his servant that he might have an 

R2350 : page 239 

opening of the eyes, to see that all the mountains round 
about them were filled with spirit beings— "horses and 
chariots of fire," or like fire, as all spirit beings are 
described in Scripture. (See Ezek. 1:13,14; Dan. 7:9; 
Rev. 4:3-5.) The Lord answered the prayer: and 
then the young man saw what Elisha had already told 
him, that "they that be with us are more than they 
that be with them." 

It is important that every Christian should have 
the eyes of his understanding opened, that he may see 
by faith that which was shown to Elisha and his servant 
literally. During this Gospel age the Lord does 
not open our natural eyes to see the wonderful provisions 
he has made for us, and his power for our protection; 
but instead he gives us a still better knowledge 
of the subject through his Word of grace and 



truth, so that we are enabled to walk by faith and not 

by sight; to see the armies of the Lord encamped around 

about us and to recognize their protection of us, without 

any miracle being performed upon our natural 

sight. None of us are sufficiently strong to pass through 

the fight of Christian warfare without just such assistances 

as these which the Lord has provided, and 

which faith beholds, accepts, lays hold of, rests upon 

and is strengthened by. 

Shall we call this faith in invisible spiritual powers 
and agencies of God the true spiritualism of the Scriptures 
—in contradistinction to the evil spiritualism 
which is of Satan and his fellows, the fallen angels, 
the "wicked spirits in exalted positions?" We believe 
that this is so, and spiritualists admit that there 
are both good and evil spirits. They are sure that 
there are evil spirits, because they know how these 
have ensnared them in evil, enticed them into sin. 
They know that they are what the Scriptures term 
"lying spirits," because they have been lied to by the 
spirits which communicated with them; but they insist 
that there are good spirits, and they think that sometimes 
they have had communications with these. But 
this proposition we dispute: we hold that all the rapping, 
wonder doing and other manifestations of so-called 
spiritists are from the Evil One, and his consorts 
entirely. 

A very small amount of common sense should 
convince anyone that the holy angels must have something 
better, higher, nobler, to do than are the various 

R2350 : page 240 

practices of these so-called spirits who speak 

through mediums and by obsession. Indeed, we hold 

that the good spirits, the holy angels, make no communications 

with man now: that these communications 

belonged to a previous time, when they were appropriate 

and necessary as the channels of divine communication. 

We do not need their ministry through 

mediums to-day, and are especially forbidden to seek 

communication or knowledge through such channels: 

this for the same reason that we do not need the testimony 

of the inspired seers and prophets to-day; because 

God has made an abundant provision for us 

through the prophetic utterances of the past, to the 

intent that we of this Gospel age should walk not by 

sight nor by communication with the angels, but by 

faith. We may realize no less clearly, but even more 

clearly, than did the ancients that he who is on our 

part is more than all they that be against us; we may 

discern by the eye of faith that the "angel of the Lord 

encampeth round about them that fear him, and delivereth 

them;" we may realize that all the powers of 

heaven— "more than twelve legions of angels"— altho 

invisible to us, are nevertheless present, and fully subservient 



to every will of our glorious Lord; and that 
thus surrounded and protected we are living "under 
the shadow of the Almighty" and, as it were, in the 
hollow of his hand. 

In this connection we are reminded of our Lord's 
words respecting his faithful disciples, his "little 
ones." He assures us that the very humblest of those 
who are his have high connections with the heavenly 
throne, saying, "Their angels do always behold the 
face of my Father in heaven." (Matt. 18:10.) That is 
to say, as the angels are all "ministering spirits sent 
forth to minister for those who shall be heirs of salvation" 
(the Gospel Church), there are some of them 
who have a charge, a watch, a care over each member 
of the body of Christ. Perhaps one guardian angel to 
each saint, perhaps more than one; but we have the 
Lord's assurance that his provision is "sufficient." 
One thought that our Lord's words give to us is, that 
these holy angels, charged with ministering to and 
caring for the elect, are in no danger of being detained 
so that they must wait for a long time on more important 
business before having access to the Father: 
on the contrary, they always have access to him, they 
can always see his face; and through the Redeemer, 
and by these agencies, God is ever ready to respond to 
our cries and to cause all things to work together for 
good to them that love him. 

Turning to the host of Syria, the prophet prayed 
to the Lord that they might be smitten with blindness, 
our Common Version says; but from the original text 
the thought would appear to be not the loss of sight, 
but a bewilderment or hallucination, somewhat similar 
to that produced by hypnotism; when a person sees or 
imagines that he sees things differently from what they 
actually are. Exercising this power upon the host, 
Elisha guided them to the city of Samaria, saying, 
"This is not the way, neither is this the city; follow 
me, I will bring you to the man whom ye seek." And 
this was true, for Dothan was not Elisha's city, his 
home was in Samaria, and thither he took them; and 
he did indeed bring them to the man they sought, 
namely, himself; but not after the manner that they 
had expected. The narrative proceeds to say that 
when he had led them into the city of Samaria (under 
the influence of some power like hypnotism), he then 
said, "Lord, open the eyes of these men, that they 
may see," and then they understood where they were. 
They were completely in the hands of their enemies; 
surrounded by the king of Israel and his soldiers. 

The king of Israel inquired whether or not he 
should smite them with the sword? Such an inquiry 
seems to indicate a considerable change of the kingly 
attitude toward the Lord and his representative: the 
reformation work was taking effect; Israel's kings were 
learning gradually that the will of the Lord was to be 
considered, and that to neglect his counsel would be 



unwise indeed. Elisha, in his reply, shows a large 
and benevolent heart, in full accord with the highest 
teachings of the New Testament. He showed the 
king that these men should not be put to death; but 
that instead a better way would be to return good for 
the intended evil. Accordingly, the king made a great 
feast and entertained his enemies and sent them home. 
We cannot doubt that they marveled at their peculiar 
experiences, and the happy outcome of what seemed 
for the moment so great a disaster. We may suppose, 
too, that they had a higher degree of respect for the 
Lord and his prophets and the king upon the throne 
of Israel, than they ever before had. 

There is a lesson in this for us also: the best victories 
are the bloodless ones; the ones in which the 
spirit of righteousness and mercy and benevolence 
gains the victory over the spirit of rivalry, ambition 
and selfishness. This, under the New Covenant, among 
the soldiers of the cross is known as fighting the good 
fight and overcoming evil with good. It may not succeed 
in fullest measure in the present time, but nevertheless 
it will develop in ourselves the peaceable fruits 
of righteousness, and prepare us for a share in the 
strong government of the future, which with one hand 
will restrain the wicked and all the powers of evil, 
while with the other hand it blesses, washes, refreshes 
and anoints with the oil of gladness and blessing all 
the willing and obedient of the entire groaning 
creation. 



page 241 
VOL. XIX. AUGUST 15, 1898. No. 16. 



CONTENTS. 



Items: Council Bluffs Convention, etc 242 

"Be Content with Such Things as 

YeHave" 243 

Few are Appreciative, etc 246 

"Have Faith in God"— "Lord, 

Increase Our Faith" 247 

"Faith's Foundation Strong" 247 

"Elisha Died, and They Buried Him" 248 

"Woe unto Them that are at Ease 

in Zion" 250 

The Prophecy of Amos 251 

Interesting Letters 255 

page 242 



SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
--ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 56-60 ARCH STREET, ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, N.Y. DRAFT, MONEY ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS: 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age or accident, or other 
adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, if they 
send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting the 
paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list 
constantly. 



COUNCIL BLUFFS CONVENTION. -OCT. 1-5. 



SINCE the Omaha Exposition secures very low rail-road 
rates, the friends in that vicinity urge the holding of a 
Convention at which the Editor of ZION'S WATCH TOWER shall 
meet with them and as many as can conveniently attend, for a 
Bible Study, along the lines of the Divine Plan of the Ages; 
and to get personally acquainted. This kind invitation has been 
cordially accepted by the Editor who promises (D.V.) to attend. 

The Convention is called for October 1 to 5, altho it is expected 
that the first day's meetings will be informal (social 
merely), time being necessary for getting visitors properly settled. 
Likewise no meetings are announced for the last day, 
the 5th, it being left open for social meetings and conferences 
and leave-takings. The general meetings will therefore commence 
Sunday, Oct. 2nd, at 9 A.M., with a Testimony Meeting, 
to be followed at 10.30 by a discourse by the Editor of ZION'S 
WATCH TOWER. Subsequent meetings will then be announced. 

The meeting place is TEMPLE HALL, No. 400 BROADWAY, 
COUNCIL BLUFFS, IOWA. Excursion tickets should probably be 
purchased to Omaha, Neb., which is just across the river from 
COUNCIL BLUFFS, IOWA, where the meetings are to be held. Brother 
Adams kindly volunteers arrangements for visiting Brethren 
and Sisters at moderate rates,— that clean and comfortable accommodation 
(three meals and lodging) can be had at one dollar 
per day: it will be well, however, for all visitors to provide 
for expenses of at least $1.50 per day to cover car-fare, etc. We 
mention this because we well know that the majority of those 
interested in "present truth" are poor in this world's goods, 
and must count the cost even of spiritual refreshments. There 
will be no other expenses and no collections: all else is provided 
for by the loving friends who have called the Convention. 

Write a postal card to the WATCH TOWER office on Sept. 20th, 
if you expect to attend the Convention, stating the fact; and if 
others will go with you, say how many, so that your lodging 
may be arranged for in advance through Brother Adams. 



OLD THEOLOGY TRACTS. 



We have sent out great quantities of tracts lately and have 
depleted our stock so that several numbers are temporarily out; 
viz., Nos. 2, 21, 38, 40 and 41. We will have a good supply in 
about a month. Order other numbers freely as you can use them. 

"TABERNACLE SHADOWS OF BETTER SACRIFICES." 



Our supply of this booklet is exhausted: and as the plates 
are worn it will require to be reset. We must ask you to wait 
patiently for these until November. 



R235 1 : page 243 
"BE CONTENT WITH SUCH THINGS AS YE HAVE." 



"Be content with such things as ye have; for he hath said, I 
will never leave thee nor forsake thee. So that we may boldly 
say, The Lord is my helper, and I will not fear 
whatman shall do unto me.— Heb. 13:5,6. 

BAD ADVICE, very bad advice, says Mr. 
Worldlywiseman; it is because this advice has 
not been followed that we of America have made such 
progress within the past century. It is because the 
workmen of the United States are ambitious, energetic, 
and not content with such things as they have, but 
constantly trying to make two blades of grass grow, 
where one grew before, and to put ten dollars in the 
bank to one that was there before, that our nation has 
stepped rapidly to the front, and become noted for the 
genius, thrift and progressiveness of its people. 

We will not dispute Mr. Worldlywiseman's statement, 
except to say that all of the remarkable progress 
of the present century is not due alone to discontent: 
much of it is due to freedom, which has come 
chiefly as the result of greater enlightenment,— an enlightenment 
which has come largely as a result of 
having the Bible in the living languages of the people 
and in their possession. Another element contributing 
to the marvelous developments of this century is 
one of which few take note; namely, that since 1799 
we have been in the period known in the Scripture, as 
"the day of his preparation:" the period in which the 
Lord has been lifting the vail, and letting in upon the 
world, through natural channels, a stream of inventive 



genius designed to bring forward to perfection, through 

chemistry and mechanics and art, the devices and contrivances 

which will ere long most marvelously, under 

the guiding control of Immanuel, during the Millennium, 

make of this earth a Paradise. Nevertheless, 

we are willing to concede that ambition and discontent 

are present, and that they are helping in their way to 

bring forward the various devices which shall ultimately 

prove so great a blessing to mankind; but on the 

other hand, we contend that just in proportion as discontent 

is spread, in that proportion unhappiness is 

present, and an anarchistic spirit begotten. 

We see more clearly than those looking in other 
directions, that discontent is permeating the entire 
fabric of society and making it restless, and rapidly 
leading to the great catastrophe of trouble and anarchy 
which the Scriptures point out will be the end of 
this present age, "a time of trouble such as was not 
since there was a nation." We notice also that discontent 
and selfish ambition are at work in the home, 
in the mill, in the factory and in the Church; and that 
wherever these touch and grind, somebody is bruised 
or crushed, or at least made sore and sensitive. Wherever 
they abound, they blight peace, joy and a holy 
spirit. They are in antagonism to the spirit of Christ 
—meekness, patience, gentleness, brotherly kindness, 
love. They tend toward the spirit of the Adversary, 
—anger, malice, envy, hatred, strife, bitterness. What 
wonder, then, that the statistics show that despite the 
great increase of medical skill, especially in the treatment 
of nervous and mental ailments, and despite also 
the more favorable conditions of birth and living, 
mental and nervous diseases are greatly on the increase, 
and asylums are being enlarged and new ones 
built. Nor are these conditions confined to this country; 
reports from Europe are to the same effect- 
even worse as respects insanity and suicide. 

It would be useless to point the world to the fact 
that happiness, the desirable quality, is on the decrease 
as wealth and business are on the increase— that the 
grandfathers of the present generation, altho less favorably 
situated every way, enjoyed life better because 
more contented than their grandchildren of to-day: 

R235 1 : page 244 

the world would be unwilling to go back to the conditions 
which were happifying in the past, and have a 
craving for still more of luxury for the future, and 
will have it or at least strive to get it, whatever the 
cost. Indeed, knowing this, and knowing also of the 
divine provision for the future, and how present discontent 
is shortly to teach mankind a great lesson 
through the wreck of the present social structure, 
built upon selfishness, covetousness, ambition, and 
discontent, we think it wisest to let the world alone, 



to let it take its course and reap the reward of that 
course, and ultimately learn the lesson which Providence 
will teach. We therefore say little to the world 
on the subject of discontent, except as their cases may 
come close to us and properly under our criticism and 
advice. Even then our advice would not be that the 
world should attempt the impossible thing of being 
content while under a spirit of selfishness and discontent; 
rather we will advise such to seek and find the 
Lord and his spirit of love and peace and gentleness 
and goodness, and finding it, prove that "Godliness 
with contentment is great gain,"— "having the promise 
of the life which now is and also of that which is 
to come."— 1 Tim. 6:6; 4:8. 

THE THINGS WHICH WE HAVE-WITH WHICH WE 
ARE CONTENT. 

Nor should it be overlooked that this is the standpoint 
of all Scriptural address— the inspired injunctions 
and admonitions are not to the world, but to 
those who have become the Lord's covenanted people. 
The poor world, and especially the poor world who are 
without God, and who have no hope, have surely very 
little cause for contentment;— they have neither the 
luxuries desired for this life, nor the exceeding great 
and precious promises for the future life. Indeed, 
under the false teaching inculcated by the great adversary 
of God and truth and man, many not only 
have a comfortless treadmill existence in the present 
time, but are led to look forward to awful tortures in 
the future— a hell of unending suffering, or a purgatorial 
period of suffering, to last for hundreds or thousands 
of years. Poor world! What wonder if it is 
downcast, discontented, morbid, anarchistic. 

But with the Christian— the true Christian, begotten 
of the truth (by the Word of truth, not by the 
word of error), how different are all these things! 
He sees what the world does not see, namely, the reason 
why God has permitted the reign of sin and death 
in the world for the past six thousand years. He 
sees more, namely that God, who has been just to inflict 
the penalty of sin— death, and its concomitants 
of disease and pain and trouble,— is also loving and 
gracious, and has prepared a redemption from the 
sentence and an ultimate deliverance from the blight 
of sin and death. He rejoices to know that this ransom 
price has already been paid and that its payment 
was formally acknowledged by Jehovah at Pentecost. 
He is instructed by the Word of grace that as a result 
of this redemption the whole world which was first 
tried and sentenced in Father Adam is to be tried again 
individually; and that the provision for this fresh trial 
was made in the "ransom for all" given at Calvary. 
He learns also that the divine time for this trial of the 
whole world, under the offer of eternal life through 



Christ, and the conditions of the New Covenant, is yet 
future— during the Millennial age— according as it is 
written, "God hath appointed a day in the which he 
will judge [grant trial to] the world, by that man 
whom he hath ordained— Jesus Christ."— Acts 17:31. 
Having learned this much, he rejoices in the hope 
of eternal life, and longs for release from the present 
conditions of weakness and the fall, and for a full delivery 
into the liberty (freedom from sin) of the sons 
of God. While thus rejoicing in his new-found hope, 
and looking forward expectantly for its realization, at 
the second coming of the Redeemer, to inaugurate the 
times of restitution of all things (Acts 3:19-23), he 
receives a further message to the effect that since he 
appreciates the divine goodness already made known 
to him, he is privileged to know of and to share in a 
still further blessing. The steps of grace are explained 
to him as follows, by the divine Word: 

(1) The step of faith and acceptance of the great 
redemptive sacrifice which you have already taken is 
reckoned to you for and as justification in God's sight; 
and now being thus reckoned as justified, you are to 
be treated as not only freed from the sentence of death 
in Adam, but also as tho freed from your imperfections, 
inherited through the fall, which are reckoned 

as being "covered." 

(2) All this is in order that you may take the 

second step, which is now due; namely, you may present 
your body to the Lord by full consecration, and 
without reservation: to be or to do or to suffer, to have 
or not to have, to enjoy or not to enjoy further, the 
things of this present lifetime; and to spend yourself 
and be spent, with all that you have and all that you 
are, in the Lord's service, in the service of the truth, 
and in the service of all those who are in harmony 
with the truth. 

(3) It is pointed out to you that in many respects 
this is the pathway which the great Redeemer trod, 
and that by walking in this difficult "narrow way" 
you will be following in his footsteps and along the 
same path of sacrifice which he trod. 

(4) Furthermore, the assurance is given that, if 
you follow in this pathway faithfully, to the end of 

R235 1 : page 245 

life's journey, all of your unwilling and unintentional 
blemishes will continue to be covered by the merit of 

R2352 : page 245 

your Redeemer's sacrifice: so that, at the end of the 
journey, all these who are now "called" and who thus 
gladly obey the "call," will be granted also the privilege 
of sharing with the Redeemer in the honors and 
glories of his Millennial Kingdom: and of being instruments 



of God, with the Redeemer, for conferring 

upon the world of mankind all the gracious benefits 

and blessings purchased by the Redeemer's death, finished 

at Calvary;— sharing in the judging of the world, 

in the ruling of the world, and, as members of the 

royal priesthood, in the blessing and helping of the 

world back, by restitution paths,— to all that was lost 

in Adam and his transgression. 

Whoever has heard this glorious message, in the 
true sense of hearing it— with the hearing of faith and 
acceptance— has received indeed what is called by some 
a "Second Blessing." If the forgiveness of his sins 
and reconciliation to the Lord, through the blood of 
the cross, the Christian's first experience in grace, 
was a great blessing that could scarcely be comprehended 
or measured, still more is this second blessing 
a cause for fulness of joy, in that it has brought to us 
begetting of the holy spirit, whereby we know that 
we are the sons of God, "and if children, then heirs, 
heirs of God, and joint-heirs with Jesus Christ, our 
Lord, if so be that we suffer with him, that we may be 
also glorified together." It is enough to know that, 
"Now we are the sons of God, and [that] it doth not 
yet appear what [the full completeness of the glory 
and blessing that shall come to us at his second advent] 
shall be, for we know that when he shall appear, we 
shall be like him."— 1 John 3:2. 

It is this class that the Apostle addresses in the 
words of our text. We that have such blessings would 
surely be unappreciative, unthankful, if we are not 
content with such blessed things as we have. We have 
such things as should make us happy under the most 
adverse circumstances, so far as the present life is concerned. 
We, by the grace of God, have found the 
pearl of great price, and are not only content with the 
terms upon which it is offered to us, but most gladly, 
willingly, joyfully, we count all else but loss and dross 
that we may retain our ownership in it,— win Christ, 
and be found in him,— members of the body of the 
great Prophet, Priest and King, who shortly, as the 
antitype of Moses, shall stand forth as the deliverer of 
all who love righteousness, from the bondage of Sin 
and Satan.— Acts 3:22,23. 

All who have intelligently taken the position of 
followers of Christ, knew from their start in the narrow 
way to expect trials and difficulties and adversities, 
and have said to the Master:— 

"Not for ease or worldly pleasure, 

Nor for fame my prayer shall be; 
Gladly will I toil and suffer, 

Only let me walk with thee, close to thee." 

We should view every affair and incident of this 
present life that is not painful as a cause for thankfulness 
to the Lord; because it is that much less than our 
covenant might legitimately require; for our Master 
distinctly informed us that the way was rugged, saying, 



"Whosoever will live godly in this present time 

shall suffer persecution." And furthermore, our Lord's 

own example of suffering and enduring patiently the 

mockings, slanders, evil speaking, and general contradiction 

of sinners against himself, and the examples 

of the Apostles, who followed closely in his footsteps 

in the same path, all indicate that, all things considered, 

we of the present time who "have not yet resisted 

unto blood [death], striving against sin" and the 

machinations of sinners and the wiles of the Adversary, 

have much to be thankful for, that our lines have 

fallen unto us in comparatively pleasant places. We 

have every reason for thankfulness, no reason for 

murmuring. 

And not only are we to be appreciative of the 
smooth places along the "narrow way," in which the 
Lord gives rest to our weary feet, but we are to be 
thankful also for all the trials and tribulations. If by 
faith we have laid hold, first, upon justification; and 
secondly, upon the high calling, and its exceeding 
great and precious promises, we must thirdly lay hold 
also by faith on the assurances of the Lord's Word that 
all things are working together for good to those who 
have made this covenant with him, and who are seeking 
to perform it;— to those who love God, and who 
were called according to his purpose, to this high calling. 
Viewed from the proper standpoint, all the trials 
and difficulties which come to us will be seen to be 
mercies and blessings, designed to shape us in conformity 
with the lines of character manifested in our 
Lord and Head, and to polish us and to make us fit 
for the inheritance of the saints in light. While, therefore, 
we are not to rush into temptation, nor to bring 
upon ourselves persecution by injudicious conduct, 
yet when these things come to us as rewards for fidelity 
to principles of truth and righteousness, exercised 
in the spirit of meekness, gentleness, patience and 
love, we are to rejoice in them, as so many ministries 
of evil toward us, which under divine guidance are 
fitting and preparing us to further reflect the Lord's 
likeness, and to further be his representatives and 
ministers of righteousness, now and hereafter. And 
to shrink back from and to avoid the trials and difficulties 
and persecutions incident to faithfulness to the 
Lord and to his service, would be, in a measure at 
least, to draw back from our consecration, which is to 

R2352 : page 246 

suffer with him, that we may also reign with him— to 
be dead with him, that we may also live with him. 

FEW ARE APPRECIATIVE-FEW VALUE THE THINGS 
THAT THEY HAVE. 

But evidently only the smaller number of those 



who have named the name of Christ, and who have 
made consecration of life and time and influence and 
all things to him, have ever appreciated these matters 
in their true light; and hence, not only are the so-called 
Christian nations the most discontented peoples 
of the world, but professed Christians are often among 
the most discontented and unhappy of individuals. 
Nay more, even some of those who have made the 
full consecration to the Lord, and some who have come 
to a considerable knowledge of present truth and respecting 
the wonderful time in which we are living, 
and the high calling and its object, and the glories to 
follow the sufferings of this present time,— many of 
these also, we fear, are among the discontented of the 
world,— unhappy, restless, not enjoying the rest which 
God provides for his people, not having "the peace of 
God which passeth all understanding" to rule in their 
hearts and keep all the other affairs of life in subjection 
and in order. 

Brethren, these things ought not so to be. See to 
it that they do not so continue. Remember that according 
to our covenant we sacrificed all of our earthly 
interests and rights, that we might become sharers 
with our Master in the divine nature and all the heavenly 
promises. Remember that the only things of an 
earthly kind promised us by the Lord are that we shall 
have the things needful. If we learn aright the lessons 
of necessity, we will find that the things needful 
for our sustenance might mean a bill of fare of very 
limited variety and of very inexpensive food; and it 
might mean a wardrobe of great simplicity and of very 
little cost; and it might mean a home of very humble 
appearance and very small and very scantily furnished. 
Whatever we have more than necessity is that much 
more than the Lord has promised to us in this present 
time; and is a cause for thankfulness of lip, and gratitude 
of heart. 

With these things rightly viewed, where is the 
occasion or the desire to murmur or complain about 
such things as we have? Where would be the desire 
to wish for, hope for, or ask for more than the Lord 
has promised to give us, and more than his unerring 
wisdom has seen would be best for us? If these lessons 
from the Lord's Word are received into the good 
soil of honest hearts, they will speedily bring forth, 
under the sunshine of the divine favor and the droppings 
of divine grace, a hundredfold more of joy and 
peace and trust and contentment and happiness and 
love, in the lives of all who put them into exercise: 
and the influence upon our families, neighbors and 
associates will be a good influence, for their happiness 
as well as our own. 

Instead of complaining about the weather, that it 
is too hot or too cold, too wet or too dry, too bright or 
too dark, or that it is too foggy or cloudy or murky, 
or something, let us be content with such weather as 



we have. We did not make it and we cannot change 
it. And since our wise and loving heavenly Father 
sees best to permit it so now, we see it best to have it 
so now. In his own good time his favor shall reach 
not only the world of mankind, to lift up and bless 
and heal it, but will reach also the home of mankind, 
the earth, to bring it into the Paradisaic condition 
which he has promised it shall have in the "times of 
restitution of all things." 

If your health is not the best, do not go mourning 
and complaining all your days; be thankful- 
thankful that it is not worse, remembering that as a 
member of the fallen race the full penalty of sin against 
you is pain and suffering unto death. Whatever therefore 
you have, that is moderate or endurable or in some 
measure enjoyable, be very thankful, very grateful, 
and make the most of it. 

Our text, then, is not only a good medicine 
to bring us spiritual health and joy in the Lord, 
but also very profitable to our physical health; for 
it is unquestionably a fact that the majority of 
people aggravate their physical complaints and diseases 

R2353 : page 246 

by their fretfulness and unhappiness of mind. 
If you are one of the Lord's children, remember the 
words of our Redeemer, Master and Forerunner in the 
narrow way, to the effect that the Gentiles (those who 
know not God, who are not his covenant people) seek 
continually after what they shall eat, what they shall 
drink, and wherewithal they shall be clothed, and 
that we should not be like unto them, because our 
Heavenly Father knoweth what things we have need 
of, before we ask him; and he has already promised, 
that we shall have what is best for us. 

If your position in life is a lowly one, and requires 
continual labor to secure the things needful, do not 
complain, but, on the contrary, render thanks— thanks 
for the health and strength to perform the needed labor; 
thanks for the realization that the present brief 
life is only the schooling time, and that the lessons of 
the present, rightly learned, will bring riches of grace 
and glory which the world could neither give nor take 
away. Think then, on the other hand, of the fact 
that your condition is in some respects more favorable 
than that of some others who seem to be more prosperous 
or better situated: how many who have had 
wealth and leisure have found in them a curse! How 

R2353 : page 247 

many who have not been cursed by wealth have found 
that the deceitfulness of riches and the pride they are 
apt to induce are hindrances instead of helps in the 
"narrow way;" how many have found the meaning of 



the Lord's words, "How hardly shall they that have 
riches enter into the Kingdom of God." 

Remember also the words of the Apostle, that not 
many rich, not many great, not many learned, are 
amongst God's chosen; that chiefly the poor of this 
world, rich in faith, shall be heirs of the Kingdom. 
Realizing that riches of faith, riches of trust, riches of 
contentment, and riches of godliness, with the fruits 
of the spirit which accompany these constitute the true 
riches, give thanks to the Lord that in his wisdom and 
grace he has so favorably situated you. 

"HAVE FAITH IN GOD"-"LORD, INCREASE OUR 
FAITH." 

The same principle holds good with reference to 
all of our affairs, no matter what. The lesson of faith, 
to those who have become the Lord's consecrated people, 
is not merely faith in doctrines and theories, nor, 
indeed, chiefly this faith. The chief feature of faith 
is confidence in God; that what he has promised he is 
able and willing to fulfil. This faith grasps not only 
the things to come, but also the things present; this 
faith rejoices not only in the glory that shall be revealed, 
but rejoices also in the sufferings and trials and 
difficulties and all the rich experiences which an all-wise 
Father sees best to permit. Let us therefore, as 
the Apostle exhorts, rejoice evermore, "in everything 
giving thanks."— 1 Thess. 5:18; Eph. 5:20. 

The best illustrations of this true faith, this continuous 
confidence in God, is found, as we should expect, 
in our dear Redeemer's experiences and their 
narrative. Realizing that he was in the world for the 
purpose of serving the divine plan, he realized also 
continually the supervision of divine wisdom in respect 
to all his affairs: consequently he not only went 
to the Father frequently in prayer, and went to the 
Word of the Lord for guidance, but every experience 
through which he passed, and all the opposition with 
which he met, he recognized as being under the divine 
supervision. He knew that he was fully consecrated 
to the Father, and seeking not his own will but the 
will of him that sent him; he knew consequently that 
the Father's providential care was superintending all 
the affairs of his life. 

This is forcibly illustrated in his answer to Pilate; 
when the latter said to him, "Knowest thou not that 
I have power either to deliver thee or to put thee to 
death?" Jesus answered, "Thou couldest have no power, 
except it were given thee of my Father." Again 
he said, with respect to the cup of suffering and ignominy, 
"The cup which my Father hath given me, 
shall I not drink it?" Indeed, it was sufficient for him 
in any and every matter to realize that the Father was 
controlling: this thought gave him courage to do, to 
suffer and to bear. 



And similar confidence in divine Providence is 
necessary to all who would come off conquerors through 
him who loved us and died for us. If we can feel sure 
that we have fully surrendered ourselves to God according 
to his call, we may also feel sure that all 
things are working for our good: we may realize in 
every emergency of life that the Father has prepared 
the cup, and will sustain and bless us while we drink 
it: our Lord Jesus, the Father's representative, oversees 
our trials and ignominy and suffering; he permits 
the cup to be prepared for us by blinded servants of 
Satan. This knowledge should not only enable us to 
take joyfully the spoiling of our goods (anything that 
we deemed precious, trade, influence, good name, 
etc.), but should enable us also to entreat with kindness 
and gentleness, and with a spirit of forgiveness 
those who prepare and administer the cup of our sufferings. 
But none can have this confidence of faith— 
none should have it— except one certain, particular 
class; and it is not a large class as compared to the 
world, but a "little flock"— those who have believed 
in the precious blood unto justification, and who have, 
as members of the body of Christ, consecrated themselves 
unreservedly to walk in their Redeemer's footsteps, 
to suffer with him, and to be finally glorified together 
with him. 

"WHAT IS FAITH'S FOUNDATION STRONG?" 



In our text, after the Apostle has urged us to be 
"content with such things as ye have," he adds the 
reason or ground upon which this advice is given, saying 
"For he hath said, I will never leave thee nor forsake 
thee." Yes; this is the true ground of contentment, 
the realization of the Lord's care, and that the 
Lord's wisdom and grace are being exercised towards 
us,— and that such things as he grants are the things 
which are best for us, and which we would choose for 
ourselves, if we had sufficient wisdom and insight into 
all the circumstances of the case. 

The Apostle adds, "So then we may boldly say, 
The Lord is my helper, I will not fear what man shall 
do unto me." The whole world has wondered at the 
intelligent courage of the humble ones of the Lord's 
people. The secret of their courage and of their 
strength is in their confidence that the Lord is their 
helper, that he, with wisdom and love which are infinite, 
is both able and willing to make all things work 
together for their good. 

Possibly some may be inclined to wonder why so 
much attention has been given in these columns of late 

R2353 : page 248 



to themes similar to the one here discussed, and kindred 
topics calculated to develop more and more the 
spirit of love and the various fruits of that spirit, and 
to counteract the spirit of selfishness, and the evil fruits 
of that spirit. We answer, it is because we believe 
these lessons to be specially opportune at the present 
time. The Lord, by his grace, has removed many 
blinding errors from our minds, and given us clearer 
insight of his glorious plans, and revealed to us his 
glorious character in connection with his plan; and 
there has perhaps been more or less danger, that in 
such a study of theology the real object of all this 
knowledge, the object of the Gospel, may be lost sight 
of. It is not God's object to merely find an intellectual 
people, nor to instruct a people with reference to 
his plans, but to sanctify a people with the truth, and 
thus to make them "meet [fit] for the inheritance of 
the saints in light." We are of the opinion that the 
testings which the Lord designs for his people are not 
merely doctrinal tests, and consequently we expect, 
more and more, that the harvest sittings and separations 
amongst those who come to a knowledge of the 
truth, will be considerably along the lines of character, 
and of the fruits of the spirit. 

The Lord's final decision is not, If you be ignorant 
of certain things you are none of mine; nor, If you 
have certain knowledge you are mine; but, "If any 
man have not the spirit [disposition, mind] of Christ, 
he is none of his." And if we are right in this, dear 
readers, it is of paramount importance that we, as 
soldiers of the cross, put on not only the intellectual 
covering, the helmet of salvation, but also the heart 
covering, love of righteousness and truth and goodness 
and purity, with the shield of faith. The breastplate 
of righteousness will be found to be one of the 
most important pieces of armor in the battle which is 
upon us, and respecting which we are told that thousands 
shall fall at our side.-Psa. 91:7; Matt. 24:24; 
2 Thess. 2:1 1. 

Not only so, but we believe that the lesson foregoing 
is of great importance, because the time is short; 
and those of the Lord's people who do not soon start 
to cultivate a spirit of contentment and thankfulness 
will not only not be fit for the Kingdom, but will as 
sharers of the world's spirit of discontent be in sore 
distress with the world very shortly, in the great time 
of trouble. Contentment and the faith which it implies, 
are necessary to godliness: and whoever is attempting 
godliness without striving for cultivation of 
contentment will surely make a failure of it. Godliness 
and the fruits of the spirit, meekness, patience, 
gentleness, longsuffering, brotherly-kindness, love, 
will not grow in the garden of the soul, where the 
weeds of discontent are permitted to sap the strength 
and vitiate the air with their noxious presence and 
influence. 



The sentiment of one of our precious hymns is 
quite to the point, and we desire, for ourselves and for 
all of the Lord's people, that condition of faith and 
consecration and contentment which will permit us to 
sing from the heart, with the spirit and with the understanding 

R2354 : page 248 

also, the words:— 

"Content with beholding his face, 

My all to his pleasure resigned, 
No changes of season or place 

Can make any change in my mind. 

"While blest with the sense of his love 

A palace a toy would appear, 
And prisons would palaces prove, 

If Jesus still dwelt with me there." 

Who can tell that the Lord may not ultimately 
put some such tests to us, as these mentioned by the 
poet which were applied to himself and to others of 
the faithful in the past? Let us remember that we 
will not be faithful in large things unless we have 
learned to be faithful in little things. Let each, therefore, 
begin, and faithfully continue, a transformation 
of his life along these lines of godliness with contentment 
in the most trifling affairs of life. He will thus 
not only be making himself and others the happier in 
the present time, but he will be preparing himself for 
greater trials and tests that the Lord may be pleased 
to impose later, to prove to what extent we are overcomers 
of the world and of its spirit. 

"This is the victory that overcometh the world, 
even your faith;" because faith lies at the foundation 
of all loyalty to God and his cause. Faith in the divine 
supervision of all our affairs not only gives peace 
and content, but it saps the root of all selfish ambitions 
and vain gloryings and boastings; because of our 
faith in the Lord's Word, that "He that humbleth 
himself shall be exalted and he that exalteth himself 
shall be abased." Faith in the Lord's supervision 
prefers the Lord's arrangement to any other as respects 
the sufferings of this present time and the glory that 
is to follow; and hence it doth not puff up but builds 
up in the character-likeness of our Redeemer. 



R2354 : page 248 

"ELISHA DIED, AND THEY BURIED HIM. 
-SEPT. 4.-2 KINGS 13:14-25.- 



"Precious in the sight of the Lord is 
the death of his saints."— Psa. 116:15. 

MANY YEARS rolled by, and Elisha, the 

prophet, about eighty years of age, fell 

"sick of his sickness wherewith he died." Meantime 

there had been various experiences in Israel, and so 

far as the kings were concerned a better condition of 

matters had been reached, through the process of the 

reformation begun by Elijah. King Jehu had destroyed 

the worshipers of Baal, and his images and groves, 

and had in some measure sought to restore the worship 

of Jehovah, and the Kingdom had been established 

in the hands of his offspring, one of whom, Joash, otherwise 

called Jehoash, was now king of Israel. 

Elisha's remarkable history as a prophet and representative 
of God in Israel continued during a period 
of nearly sixty-five years, it is presumed. He shared 
the difficulties and vicissitudes of Israel: sometimes 
much divine favor and blessing and deliverance; at 
other times trials and difficulties and famines, the punishments 

R2354 : page 249 

of neglect of God, departure from his worship, 
etc. One of these passed over was the siege of 
the city of Samaria, the capital of Israel, by the hosts 
of the Syrians. Elisha shared with the others the terrible 
ordeal of famine which the long siege developed. 
This was in the days of Jehu's son, Jehoram, and no 
doubt was on account of deflections from the Lord. 
In the remarkable delivery of Israel from that famine, 
by the overthrow of their enemies without a spear or 
an arrow, the Lord manifested his power as he had 
previously declared it through the prophet Elisha. 
These various lessons were in harmony with what the 
Lord had already covenanted with Israel as a nation; 
namely, that if they would live in harmony with him 
and his law he would bless them in every way, and 
that if they did not so live he would send plagues and 
disasters upon them.— See Deut. 28:45; Amos 3:6. 

But now, at the time of Elisha's death, Jehoash 
was king and was evidently very humble and had come 
to realize that Israel's trouble lay in neglecting Jehovah; 
and hearing of the Prophet's illness he seemed to 
feel himself about to be bereft of his only helper and 
guide in the way of the Lord; and our lesson introduces 
him as weeping over Elisha. It is suggested by some 
that his peculiar remark, "The chariots of Israel and 
the horsemen thereof," may have been intended to 
signify that he regarded Elisha as a host in himself, 
as the chief defence and protection of the nation of 
Israel. At all events, he was in a proper attitude of 
mind so far as we may judge, sincerely desirous of 
choosing and walking in the proper course, and sorrowful 
that he now would no longer have heavenly 



counsel; perhaps remorseful, too, that he had not sooner 
appreciated the privileges which he did enjoy and 
had now come to realize. 

Having gotten into a right attitude of mind, the 
Lord was pleased to release him and the kings of Israel 
from their subjection to the King of Syria. Accordingly, 
Elisha, under the secret counsel of the Lord, 
told the king to open the window to the eastward, and 
to shoot out an arrow, meantime placing his own weak 
hands over the hands of the king, he explained to 
him that this signified an arrow of divine power on behalf 
of Israel and against Syria. He further instructed 
him to take the remaining arrows from his quiver, 
and strike with them upon the floor: the king did so; 
but whether he had comparatively little faith in the 
Prophet's promise, or whether he was lacking in 
patriotism, and therefore lacking of appreciation of 
the Prophet's assurance of victory for Israel, whatever 
the cause, he seems to have struck the arrows in rather 
a feeble way, and three times only, not even asking 
how many times he should strike. 

Elisha reproved him for this, and showed him that 
as a consequence he should have only three victories 
over the Syrians through this blessing. The Prophet 
evidently reasoned, and perhaps invisibly guided to 
such a view of the matter, that if Jehoash had been 
full of zeal and faith for the work of delivering Israel 
from its enemies, and of bringing to Israel all the blessings 
permitted by the Lord, he would have been more 
energetic to smite the floor, which to him was to represent 
Syria. 

There is a lesson for us here, to the effect that 
what we do should be done with our might: if Jehovah 
be God, serve him; if Baal be God, serve him. But let 
the service be whole-hearted; for a double-minded man 
is unstable in all his ways; and such are not to expect 
much of the Lord: "Let not such think that they shall 
receive anything of the Lord." We have a spiritual 
conflict against a wily foe; and we are to be so much 
in earnest for the deliverance of ourselves and of all 
the Lord's people from his control, that we will smite 
him energetically, fighting the good fight of faith; and 
we should keep on smiting until our enemy is vanquished: 
we are not to be faint-hearted, nor indifferent, 
nor to slack our hands. Our part in the privilege 
of smiting down error will depend largely upon our 
humility, our zeal and our faith. And our works show 
what is the degree and character of our faith. 

God evidently wished that the influence of these 
two reformers, Elijah and Elisha, should be deep and 
permanent in Israel: accordingly, the various miracles 
which they wrought were calculated to impress the 
matter upon the minds of the people. Even after 
Elisha's death, God gave another sign by which he 
would remind Israel of his power and his word, by reminding 
them of Elisha and his words; so that when, 



nearly a year after Elisha's death and burial, the Moabites 
invaded the land, and were burying one of their 
number, as soon as the corpse touched the bones of 
Elisha, vitality returned. The history of those times 
is limited, but it is quite possible that the faintheartedness 
of Jehoash became all the more manifest when 
he felt himself alone, after Elisha's death, and that he 
and Israel did not serve the Lord with a whole heart, 
and that consequently these Moabites were permitted 
to come upon them, as a further chastisement. And 
possibly it was to draw the minds of the people back 
again to Elisha and to his teaching, and thus to revive 
their confidence in the Lord, that this miracle occurred 
in connection with his bones. The record, nevertheless, 
is that Jehoash succeeded in defeating the Syrians 
three times, as the prophet Elisha had promised, 
and thus he delivered Israel out of the hands of the 
Syrians, from whose dominion his father Jehoahaz had 
never succeeded in getting free. 
The Golden Text gives a cheering thought, which 

R2354 : page 250 

applies not only to all the holy ones of the past, but 
in an especial manner to the fully consecrated ones 
("saints") of this Gospel age. If it were not for such 
assurances from the Lord's Word, our increased knowledge 
of Jehovah (of his greatness), and our increased 
knowledge of ourselves (of our own littleness), might 
lead us to infer that we are altogether too small for 

R2355 : page 250 

his notice and attention. But when we realize that 
our Heavenly Father careth for us, so that not a hair 
of our heads might be injured without his notice, nor 
even without his permission; and when we know that 
our lives are precious to him, that he is not indifferent 
to our welfare, temporal or spiritual, it puts a new 
value upon life itself, and upon all that we have and are. 

Altho God does not hinder his saints from going 
down into the great prisonhouse of death, altho he 
does not shield them from the experiences of the world, 
yet he does do something for them even in this respect; 
he informs them of the redemption which is in Christ 
Jesus, and of the glorious time of refreshment and 
blessing of the future, when all that are in the graves 
shall hear the voice of the Son of Man, and come forth. 
Not only so, but he promises to the saints of this Gospel 
age that if they are faithful unto death he will 
give them the crown, the prize of life, in joint-heirship 
with their Lord Jesus Christ. What a kind, beneficent 
God we have! How different from all the 
heathen conceptions of God: how different from all the 
conceptions of the natural man. Our God is our Father; 
he remembereth that we are dust; he has compassion 



upon us. "The Father himself loveth you," 

said our dear Redeemer. Precious in the sight of the 

Lord is the death of his holy ones. He will not suffer 

his holy ones to remain under the dominion of death. 

In his own good time the prison shall be broken up 

and all the prisoners of the pit shall go forth. Hallelujah! 

What a Savior! He is able to save unto the 

uttermost all that come unto the Father by him. 



R2355 : page 250 

"WOE UNTO THEM THAT ARE AT EASE IN ZION." 

--SEPT. 11. -AMOS 6:1-8.- 

"They also have erred through wine, and through 
strong drink are out of the way."— Isa. 28:7. 

THE THOUGHT of those who arranged the 

International Sunday School Lessons evidently 

was to make of this one a temperance lesson. Undoubtedly 

there was need for the inculcation of temperance, 

moderation, self-denial, self-restraint, in the days of 

Amos, as there is to-day, and as there will be so long 

as mankind is under the influence of depraved appetites, 

and weak through heredity, and exposed to temptations 

through association with others likewise depraved; 

—especially while the great adversary, Satan, 

is still at liberty, unbound, permitted to ensnare the depraved 

by putting darkness for light, and evil for good. 

We remember that temperance, self-control, is one of 

the fruits of the spirit of Christ, and as such it should 

be sought and cultivated by all who desire to be copies 

of God's dear Son. But it is a too frequent mistake 

to think of temperance merely as respects intoxicating 

liquors: the Christian may reasonably be supposed to 

have gotten such a victory over self, to have gained 

such self-control, that he will no longer be in danger 

as respects drunkenness, but he finds, nevertheless, a 

great necessity for the exercise of self-control, temperance, 

in respect to all the affairs of life— in matters 

which previously gave him no concern, respecting 

which he saw no necessity for self-control. 

Temperance, self-control, in the Christian, is applicable 
to all the affairs of life; he is to be temperate 
in his language, not given to exaggeration or misrepresentation, 
better or worse than the facts; his yea is 
to be yea, and his nay, nay. He is to speak forth 
"words of soberness," and even if it be necessary to 
speak in correction or reproof, he is to be temperate, 
making sure that he speaks the truth in love, and not 
in severity or bitterness. His speech is to be with 
grace— seasoned with the saltness, the preservative 
quality, of his consecration to Christ,— for is he not a 



part of the "salt of the earth?" 

The Christian's temperance is to extend to his 
business. He is to be moderate in his aims and ambitions, 
in his money-getting and money-saving. He 
is to remember that under the Lord's call the riches 
which he seeks for are heavenly and not earthly, and 
that the Master says, "How hardly shall they that 
have riches enter into the Kingdom." Christian moderation, 
then, will seek first the Kingdom of heaven, 
esteeming that its attainment would be great riches, 
and cheaply bought, even at the cost of earthly welfare, 
riches and comforts. 

The Christian should be temperate in his food— 
his eating, as well as his drinking. As he has consecrated 
himself and all that he has to the Lord, is it 
not, therefore, a part of his bounden duty to obtain 
from life the largest possible yield to the Lord's glory? 
Must he not, therefore, consider what and how much 
he shall eat, to the intent that he may render to the 
Lord his largest, his best, service? This will mean 
self-denial, self-control, for the appetite of food, as 
well as the appetite of drink, is considerably depraved 
in all. True, gluttony will not rob one of his senses, 
and make him crazy, as will spiritous liquors, yet overeating 

R2355 : page 251 

does frequently, to a considerable extent, sap 
the energies of the mind, or by over-stimulation weakens 
them. Thus many are weak and sickly through 
self-gratification in the matter of food as well as drink. 
Temperance, self-control, is the command of the Lord 
to all such;— not that it will benefit the Lord, but that 
thus we may build up proper characters,— loyal to that 
which is right, good, reasonable, proper. 

The Christian should be temperate in his joys. He 
should not set his chief affections upon the earth, or 
earthly things— pleasure, wealth, influence, popularity, 
etc. He is to remember that very much of the 
present order of things is wholly contrary to righteousness, 
and he is to seek to use even approved things of 
this world temperately, utterly rejecting those things 
which are contrary to righteousness, truth, goodness, 
purity: he is to find his pleasure in another quarter- 
in serving righteousness— in the service of the Lord, 
in the Word of the Lord, in the promises of the Lord, 
in the spirit of the Lord. 

The Christian is to be temperate in his sorrows. 
He "sorrows not as others who have no hope," but he 
believes that Jesus died for the sins of the whole world, 
that he rose again in order to justification of those who 
believe and obey him, and that either now or in the 
age to come all mankind shall have a full opportunity 
to know of divine grace, and to accept and share therein, 
under the terms of the New Covenant. Thus may 
the Christian, living up to his privileges under divine 



grace, be temperate in his sorrows:— 

"He'll bear unmoved the world's dread frown, 

Nor heed its scornful smile; 
Him seas of trouble cannot drown, 
Nor Satan's arts beguile." 

This quality of temperance, once attained, will 
manifest itself also in kindness, and in patience. The 
Christian who has developed in self-control is the one 
who will be the most patient with the unwilling, unintentional 
faults and frailties of others: he will be ready 
to restore the repentant ones, remembering himself 
also, lest he should be tempted. The Apostle has reference 
to this temperance in all things, when he says, 
"Let your moderation be known unto all men." The 
cultivation of this moderation from the right standpoint 
of desire to be pleasing to the Lord, and in full 
harmony with him, leads to kindness, sympathy: for, 
finding how many are his own weaknesses, besetments, 
difficulties and desires, such an one can have a larger 
measure of sympathy with the entire "groaning creation." 
As a result, this temperance will work kindness 
of speech and of look and of act, inspired by the 
kindness of heart. 

There is need for this temperance, moderation, 
self-control, and its accompanying spirit of kindness 
and gentleness everywhere; in the shop, in the store, 
in the schoolroom, in traveling, in visiting, at home 
with the various members of the family,— and above 
all, in the Church, the household of faith, the family 
of God. It will help us in cultivating this Christian 
temperance in all things to remember that we are the 
representatives of God and of our Lord Jesus Christ 
in the world. We are his ambassadors, and as such 
our lives of temperance and godliness, or of intemperance 
and ungodliness, are living epistles, known and 
read of all men with whom we come in contact. It is 
a part of our bounden duty, day by day, to see to it 
that not only the thoughts of our hearts, but also the 
words of our lips and all the acts of life are acceptable 
in the Lord's sight, and showing forth the praises of 
him who called us out of darkness into his marvelous 
light. 

THE PROPHECY OF AMOS. 



Through Amos, the Lord foretold a speedy coming 
doomsday, a time of trouble and retribution, upon 
Judah, Israel and the adjoining nations. These adjoining 
nations, Moab, Syria, Philistia, etc., had been 
subjugated to Israel, and incorporated in the Kingdom 
of Israel, under David and Solomon, but subsequently 
had separated themselves, and latterly had been recaptured 
and temporarily were again under the dominion 
of Israel. Probably it was because of their 



close identity with Israel, territorially and through intercourse, 

that they are made the subjects of this 

prophecy. (See chapters 1-4.) The principal burden 

R2356 : page 251 

of the prophecy, however, is against Israel, the ten 
tribes, and Judah, the two tribes, the Lord's covenanted 
people, the seed of Abraham. 

The home of Amos was in Judah, where he was a 
herdsman, but under the Lord's direction he went into 
the territory occupied by the ten tribes, to deliver to 
them the Lord's message. Amongst other things, the 
Lord pointed out that the families of Israel (the twelve 
tribes) constituted his peculiar people, that he had 
brought out of Egypt, and of whom he had been specially 
careful to order their ways most favorably. He 
even declares of them, "You only have I known of all 
the families of the earth: therefore will I punish you 
for all your iniquities. Can two walk together except 
they be agreed?" (Amos 3:1-3.) The Lord had 
made himself known to no other nation, had recognized 
no other nation, had made a covenant with no 
other nation, had given his laws to no other nation; 
and hence this nation, Israel (in its two parts), had a 
special responsibility. Nevertheless, instead of God's 
favor making them loyal of heart to him, they had 
continually resisted his favor, and were not even faithful 
as eye-servants. The reason of this was that they 

R2356 : page 252 

were of a different spirit: they would not walk in harmony 
with the Lord while their hearts were really in 
harmony with sin and wickedness. 

The Lord, in foretelling the troubles he would 
bring upon Israel, because of misused privileges and 
opportunities, and rebelliousness of heart, wished them 
to discern distinctly that these judgments of the then 
near future, like their previous judgments, were not 
matters of accident, not matters of chance, but of divine 
providence. Consequently, the message of Amos is 
likened to a trumpet of alarm, announcing the dire 
catastrophies that shortly would come. And the announcement 
is thus made in advance, not with a view 
to the bringing of repentance, but with a view to the 
proper appreciation of the judgments when they would 
come— that the people might know that the things 
coming were judgments and not accidents. Accordingly, 
it is written,— 

"Shall a trumpet be blown in a city, and the people 
not be afraid? Shall there be evil [calamities, 
disasters] in a city, and the Lord hath not done it? 
Surely, the Lord God will do nothing, but he revealeth 
his secret unto his servants the prophets." (Amos 3:6,7.) 
The Lord reveals his intentions thus that 



his people may know and profit by the chastisements, 
and experiences, and recognize them as of the 
Lord's hand. 

We are not prepared to say that all the calamities, 
famines, pestilences, etc., which from time to time afflict 
mankind, are of divine providence— judgments 
sent of the Lord. On the contrary, we believe that 
generally, so far as the world of mankind in general is 
concerned, they merely take their chances as respects 
famine, storms, pestilence, etc.; yet there are marked 
instances in which the Lord has evidently interposed 
to bring calamities upon certain nations of the world, 
as chastisements, as judgments for their correction in 
righteousness: for instance, the United States Civil 
War which resulted in the freeing of millions of slaves 
and the general awakening of fifty millions of people. 
Unquestionably God has made use of wars and human 
selfishness to awaken various nations at various times, 
and to let in the light of civilization. The present 
war with Spain may be of this character. The 
Spanish soldiers returning from Cuba will be wiser 
if not better men. All this does not prove that war 
is right, any more than it proves that pestilence and 
famine are desirable; but these things show us how 
God is able and willing to use even the wrath of man, 
and the selfishness of man, in the present time, and to 
overrule the effects indirectly for good, in harmony 
with his plan. 

But there are many calamities and troubles not 
only national but individual, in which we have no reason 
to believe there is any divine providence whatever. 
There are epidemics of disease which very evidently 
are caused merely by lack of cleanliness, neglect of 
sanitary rules; and many calamities, such as earthquakes, 
cyclones, floods, etc., which give every evidence 
of being purely accidental, that is to say, without divine 
or human intervention or responsibility. We do not 
consider these beyond divine control, nor beyond divine 
foreknowledge: we do consider that in general 
they are the natural operations of the divine laws and 
regulations, which, as respects the earth at the present 
time, are not under special regulation for man's comfort 
and welfare: man's comfort and welfare being ignored, 
for the time being, because of sin and the curse 
or penalty of sin which rests upon man and upon the 
earth, his home. For, altho the ransom price has been 
paid for now eighteen hundred years and more, the 
results of the ransom, in the complete lifting of the 
"curse," have not yet been brought in, but are waiting 
for the Lord's due time— the Millennial age. 

With fleshly Israel, the natural seed of Abraham, 
the Lord's dealing was different: his covenant with 
them was to the effect that nothing should happen to 
them by chance— in no sense or degree were they to 
be subject to the mutations of life, the accidents of 
nature, etc. This was God's special covenant with 



this one particular nation— it was a part of the Law 

Covenant as recorded in Lev. 26. Under that covenant, 

the seed of Abraham was to be God's peculiar 

people, devoted to his service, and he was to be peculiarly 

their God, careful of their interests. So long as 

that nation would be faithful to the Lord, no calamity 

could befall them personally or nationally; they would 

be spared from wars and disasters, spared from famines 

and pestilences; they would prosper in proportion as 

they would be faithful to their covenant. But if unfaithful 

to their covenant, then they would not only 

be liable to the same accidents of nature with the remainder 

of the world under the "curse," but might 

know that God would assuredly bring upon them, as 

special judgments or chastisements, calamities of every 

kind, physical and mental, individual and national. 

This is distinctly stated to be the Lord's rule of dealing 

with them; and it was to this covenant that they 

gave their assent at Sinai. Consequently, their failure 

to keep their covenant made it to them a curse, a 

greater burden and disadvantage than rested upon the 

other nations of the world, with whom God had made 

no covenant, and to whom he had extended no promises, 

but who were "without God, and having no hope 

in the world." 

With this thought in mind it will be seen to have 
stronger force, that the Lord calls his people's attention 
to the fact that whatever calamities, disasters, 

R2356 : page 253 

troubles (evils, pestilences, etc.), they suffered were 
and would continue to be a sure proof to them that 
God was again chastising them for violation of their 
covenant with him. It is in harmony with this that 
he says to them,— 

"I have given you cleanness of teeth in your 
cities, and want of bread in all your places: yet have ye 
not returned unto me, saith the Lord. And also I 
have withholden the rain from you. ..and I caused 
it to rain upon one city, and caused it not to rain upon 
another city: one piece was rained upon, and the piece 
whereon it rained not withered.... Yet have ye not 
returned unto me, saith the Lord. I have smitten you 
with blasting and mildew: when your garden and your 
vineyards and your fig-trees and your olive trees increased, 
the palmer worm devoured them: yet have ye 
not returned unto me, saith the Lord. I have sent 
amongst you the pestilence, after the manner of Egypt: 
your young men have I slain with the sword [in war], 
and have taken away your horses. ..yet have ye 
not returned unto me, saith the Lord. ..Thus saith 
the Lord unto the house of Israel,. ..Seek the Lord 
and ye shall live, lest he break out like fire in the 
house of Joseph, and devour it, and there be none to 
quench it in Bethel [the city of idol worship]." 



Having noted the character of the Lord's dealings 
with Israel under their covenant, that all calamities 
were of his providence and for chastisements; and having 
noticed that in the case of the nations in general, 
the Gentiles, the world, the calamities which come are 
not generally chastisements or judgments, but only 
occasionally so, we turn with interest to the new nation, 
the holy nation, the peculiar people, spiritual 
Israel, the royal priesthood,— now being gathered out 
of all nations, peoples, languages and tongues,— and 
we inquire, How is with these? Are all the calamities 
of life that may befall these of the spiritual house, to 
be reckoned as accidents, or are they all to be reckoned 
as judgments of the Lord because of sin? 

We answer, Neither. As this is a "peculiar people," 
and being selected by the Lord for a peculiar 
purpose, it need not surprise us to find that he has a 
peculiar manner of dealing with them. He permits 
them in a general way to be subject to all the conditions 
that are upon the world, but guarantees to them 
that all of these calamities and difficulties which will 
befall them, as a part of the world, shall be overruled 
of divine providence so as to bring them some blessing, 
instead of injury. Hence, as the Apostle says, 
"We know that all things shall work together for good 
to them that love God— to the called ones according to 
his purpose." (Rom. 8:28.) These have the satisfaction 
of knowing that any of the causalities of life 
which may befall them as a part of the human family, 

R2357 : page 253 

or even those which shall befall them as the ones 
against whom Satan and his blinded followers have a 
peculiar grudge and hatred, shall either be overruled 
and made to work a blessing, or else be warded off. 
For we are assured that,— He will not suffer us to be 
tempted above that we are able to bear, but will with 
the temptation (too hard to be borne) provide a way 
of escape. 

Thus we see that divine providence deals differently 
with spiritual Israel than with natural Israel, 
and still differently with the world. What a consolation 
to know that God is for us, not only to the extent 
of providing a Savior and redemption through his 
blood, but also to the extent of providing through that 
Savior "a present help in every time of trouble," and 
an ultimate salvation in the Kingdom to those who are 
faithful, loyal to him, obedient to his Word, under the 
New Covenant. 



The lesson, and its connection, points out that 
certain ones in Israel were in a very ease-loving and 
self satisfied condition, that many of them abounded 



in wealth, and drank the wine of earthly pleasure and 
extravagance inordinately, in bowlfuls. They neither 
were solicitous for the Lord's praise and worship, on 
their own part, nor on the part of others: nor were 
they solicitous for the poor— they were intemperately 
selfish, and hence the judgments were coming upon 
them, the evil days of their captivity and overthrow 
as a nation. That their sin of intemperance did not 
consist solely of literal drunkenness, nor perhaps specially 
of this, but rather that it consisted of a drunkenness 
of greed, by which many of the influential 
amongst them were disposed to swallow up the poor 
and the needy, is evident from the words of the Lord's 
reproof:— 

"Forasmuch, therefore, as your treading is upon 
the poor, and ye take from him burdens of wheat; ye 
have builded your houses of hewn stone, but ye shall 
not dwell in them; ye have planted pleasant vineyards, 
but ye shall not drink wine of them. For I know your 
manifold transgressions, and your mighty sins. They 
afflict the just, they take a bribe, they turn aside the 
poor in the gate from their rights, and make it prudent 
for those who see the wrong to keep silence." 

"Hear this, O ye that swallow up the needy, even 
to make the poor of the land to fail, saying, When 
will the newmoon be gone, that we may sell corn, and 
the Sabbath, that we may set forth wheat, making the 
ephah [measure] small, and the shekel [price] great, 
and falsify the balancer by deceit? That we might 
buy the poor for silver, and the needy for a pair of 
shoes; yea, and sell [them] the refuse of the wheat? 

"The Lord hath sworn by the excellency of Jacob, 
Surely I will never forget any of their works. Shall 
not the land tremble for this, and everyone mourn that 
dwelleth therein? "-Amos 5:11-13; 8:4-8. 

R2357 : page 254 

While this prophecy evidently applied specifically 
to natural Israel, and its captivity, nevertheless, some 
of the statements respecting that evil day that came 
upon Israel remind us of similar statements applied by 
the prophets and apostles and by our Lord to antitypical 
Israel— Christendom;— and hence, while noting 
the Lord's dealing with the natural Israelites, and 
their day of doom or punishment, it properly brings 
to our thoughts the judgments pronounced upon Christendom, 
"Babylon the Great," which are to come in 
the end of this age. And as we compare the conditions, 
now and then, the thought that the words of 
Amos have to some extent a double application is 
strengthened. 

We find to-day a similar condition of things to 
that which the prophet describes. Many are at ease 
in nominal Zion: many are boasting of their prosperity, 
and symbolically are resting upon beds of ivory, taking 



their ease, and trusting that the Church is being 
carried forward to the conquest of the world along a 
new pathway which the Master and the apostles knew 
not of, a pathway of roses without thorns, a pathway 
that is not narrow nor difficult, nor steep, but that is 
broad, pleasurable, easy. The wealthy are very generally 
members of nominal Zion, or at least liberal 
supporters of her arrangements, services, etc., and she 
in turn is appreciative, and boasts of her wealth, just 
as she is pictured prophetically by the Lord, in his 
description of the Laodicean period of the Church. 
Nominal Zion to-day is saying, "I am rich and increased 
in goods, and have need of nothing," and 
knows not that she is poor and miserable and blind and 
naked; and hence she neglects to purchase the true 
gold and the only wedding garment. The announcement 
to-day to nominal spiritual Zion, of calamities 
coming upon her in the "day of vengeance" just at 
hand, is as unacceptable and disbelieved as was the 
message of Amos to those who were prospering and at 
ease in nominal fleshly Zion, as recorded in our lesson. 
How unacceptable to the priests of Israel was the message 
of Amos, is indicated by the record, which says: 

"Then Amaziah, the priest of Bethel, sent to Jeroboam, 
King of Israel, saying, Amos hath conspired 
against thee, in the midst of the house of Israel: the 
land is not able to bear all his words [he is disturbing 
the peace of those who are at ease in Zion].. ..Also 
Amaziah said unto Amos, O thou seer, flee away into 
the land of Judah, and there eat bread and prophecy 
there; but prophecy not any more at Bethel, for it is 
the king's sanctuary, and the king's court."— 
Amos 7:10-13. 

But as Amos was faithful in declaring the message 
of the Lord, and was not deterred into silence from 
prudential reasons, so those who to-day are spoken to 
by the Lord through his Word and are instructed respecting 
the things that are shortly to come to pass 
upon nominal spiritual Israel, are not to hold their 
peace from prudential reasons— for the fear of man 
bringeth a snare. They are to speak the truth in love, 
and to seek to pull as many as possible out of the fire 
of tribulation, and to bring as many as possible into 
the little flock of faithful ones, whom the Lord exhorted, 
saying, "Watch ye, therefore, that ye may be 
accounted worthy to escape all these things coming upon 
the world, and to stand before the Son of Man." 

In this prophecy of Amos, the Lord points out 
that the wrath he was about to permit to come upon 
Israel as chastisements, would, nevertheless, work out 
for them a blessing, and that in his due time he would 
bring them back again into harmony with himself, and 
that under more favorable conditions than in the past. 
We are not only to believe the calamitous portion of 
this prophecy, which we already see has been executed 
upon Israel in fullest measure, but we are also to 



believe the features of it which are favorable to Israel 
—the future blessings. For instance, we see how literally 
has been fulfilled the prediction:— 

"Behold the eyes of the Lord God are upon the 
sinful kingdom, and I will destroy it from off the face 
of the earth [as a nation, a kingdom]; save that I will 
not utterly destroy the house of Jacob, saith the Lord 
[the people of the nation were to be preserved as a 
separate people from others]; for lo, I will give the 
command, and I will shake about amongst all nations 
the house of Israel, as one shaketh things in a sieve, 
while not the least piece falleth down upon the earth." 
Amos 9:8,9. 

The Lord thus shows his continued supervision of 
Israel, according to the covenant made with them. 
And how accurately this has been fulfilled: the Israelites 
as a people have been scattered throughout the 
whole earth, yet they have not lost their identity; as a 
nation they were utterly destroyed, yet unlike every 
other nation, they have preserved their national identity, 
and have not been mixed and blended with the 
world in general. 

And if this feature of the prophecy has been accurately 
fulfilled to-day before our eyes, we certainly 
have every reason to believe that the remainder of the 
prophecy will be just as accurately fulfilled— that portion 
which applies to the restitution times, after the 
true spiritual Israel has been selected, when natural 
Israel shall be brought back into covenant relationship 
with God, and become the earthly agent of the spiritual 
Kingdom for blessing, instructing and restoring 
the families of the earth, under the terms of the New 
Covenant. This is clearly set forth in the closing 
words of the prophecy:— 

"In that day will I raise up the standard of David 
which is fallen, and close up the breaches thereof, and 
I will raise up his ruins, and I will build it as in the 
days of old, that they may possess the remnant of 
Edom and of all the heathen which are called by my 
name, saith the Lord that doeth this.. ..And I will 
bring again the captivity of my people of Israel, and 
they shall build the waste cities, and inhabit them, 
and they shall plant vineyards, and drink the wine 
thereof; they shall also make gardens, and eat the fruit 
of them, and I will plant them in their land, and they 
shall no more be pulled up out of their land, which I 
have given them, saith the Lord God." 

We recall the quotation of this prophecy in the 
New Testament, by the Apostle James, and find it in 
full accord also with the words of the Apostle Paul, 
to the effect that after spiritual Israel has been developed 
as the true seed of Abraham, through Christ, 

R2358 : page 254 

then divine favor shall return to natural Israel, and 



she shall obtain mercy, according to the terms of the 
divine covenant, at the hands of spiritual Israel then 
glorified.-See Rom. 11:1-25-32; Acts 15:16,17. 



R2358 : page 255 

"OUT OF DARKNESS INTO HIS MARVELOUS LIGHT." 
-INTERESTING LETTERS. - 

MR. C. T. RUSSELL, Illinois. 

DEAR SIR:— It is now about two years since I first 
became acquainted with your work— MILLENNIAL 
DAWN. The assimilation of the truth has been a very 
slow and laborious work in my case. The so-called 
orthodox doctrines of to-day had been so thoroughly 
instilled into my mind as to have become almost a part 
of my being. The force of the logic of chapter I, 
VOL. I., took a firm hold upon my mind from the start 
however, and led me to see the folly of church work 
as usually carried on. Gradually I was able to accept 
the truth regarding hell as presented in your little 
pamphlet "What Say the Scriptures about Hell?" 

Now I have just finished reading VOL. I. for about 
the 6th time, and the truth has come to me in a very 
convincing manner, so clear, so simple, and yet so 
wonderful and sublime, that I have many times stopped 
to praise God for his wonderful plan, while I have been 
led to love and adore him as never before. The truth 
seems so clear now that I wonder how I stumbled over 
it so long. There is now a question in my mind as to 
just what my duty is regarding some money and notes 
in my possession which have been pledged to the China 
Inland Mission. The pledge was solemnly made before 
God before a house and lot which I used to own 
was sold, that if the Lord would send me a buyer the 
entire amount should be given to the support of a missionary 
in China. I now see the truth of God's plan 
in a different light and the sending of the remainder 
of the money to that field seems almost useless, and I 
have often wished of late that I could use the money 
here at home to spread the truth and help the poor, 
but my pledge still stands, and I do not know what to 
do regarding it. 

I write to ask your advice and pray that God may 
give you wisdom in answering, as I desire to make no 
mistake. On a separate sheet I enclose an order for 
DAWNS and tracts with a renewal of my subscription 
to the ZION'S WATCH TOWER, also for one of the hymn 
books. May the Lord richly bless you and yours and 
may the truth shine out brighter and brighter from 
the gloom of the early dawn, is my prayer. 

Yours truly, CALVIN DODGE. 

[IN REPLY:-God be praised, dear Brother, that 



under the guidance of his Providence you have been 
led out of darkness and uncertainty into his marvelous 
light. Godspeed! Be faithful to the light and let it 
so shine, that men may see your good works and glorify 
our Father in heaven. 

Your responsibility to the Inland China Mission 
depends upon circumstances. 

(1) Did you pledge the proceeds of your property 
unqualifiedly to the Missionary Society? If so, to it 
every penny should go. 

(2) But if you pledged to the Lord, that as his 
steward you would use that money in his service in 
supporting a missionary in China, the case would be 
totally different: you may properly consider the Lord's 
guidance into present truth to be his instruction to 

you as his steward of "a more excellent way" of serving 
his cause. 

(3) If the latter is your case, and if after pledging 
the money to the Lord, you gave the "China Inland 
Mission" more or less directly to understand that 

it would be the channel you would use as God's steward, 
you should judge, as best you are able, whether 
or not or to what extent the Society undertook any 
obligations as a result of your declarations to it. Then 
judge to what extent the amount you have already 
contributed has reasonably met those obligations. 

(4) To sum up: So far as your consecration to 

God is concerned, it touches every penny of the pledged 
sum, but leaves you free at all times to act according 
to the highest intelligence given you of the Lord. So 
far as men are concerned your donation would generally 
be understood to depend upon your faith in the 
Society and your sympathy with its work; and your 
loss of either of these would be understood to imply 
the discontinuance of your cooperation. As a rule, 
Societies do not reckon definitely upon any contributor: 
on the contrary, their rule is to reckon on a certain 
average of discontinuances.— EDITOR.] 
California. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-The TOWER of July 
15th gave us great pleasure in the reading, and was 
helpful in "building up." We know that a clearer 
understanding of the conflict between the mind of the 
flesh and the mind of the spirit cannot but be helpful. 
How beautifully the Rotherham Translation puts Col. 3:15: 
"Let the peace of Christ be acting as umpire in 
your hearts." We were quite interested also in the 
question in regard to the Christadelphian Views. 

About two weeks ago we were studying the question 
of Death, and among other things we came across 
the statement in Psa. 49:19, "They shall never see 
light." Never is a long time and seemed to conflict 
with ransom and restitution. We looked that "never" 
up in Strong's Concordance with this result:— 

Never— "ad," as far as or until; "naytsakh," 
goal or the bright object at a distance traveled towards; 



"lo," not. 

Does not that word "never," instead of teaching 
everlasting death, teach "resurrection" and "the desire 
of all nations?" The more we study the wording 
of the Bible, through present-day helps, the more perfect 
our faith becomes in that wonderful Word of God. 

Sister Bell joins me in Christian love and greeting. 
Yours in Christ, CHARLES C. BELL. 

page 255 

Missouri. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I often desire to write 
to you concerning the Church at this place, but am 
just as often hindered. We are all feeling very much 
encouraged spiritually at present. In the first place, 
ZION'S WATCH TOWER during this year has cheered 
and strengthened us in a wonderful degree. Divine 
principles have never been so clearly portrayed, or else 
we are in better condition to understand them. You 
have demonstrated the holy spirit of love until we comprehend 
more deeply what it is to "Bear all things" 
for righteousness' sake. We thank the giver of all 
good for the abundant blessing we have had through 
your kind instrumentality. 

We have recently enjoyed a visit from our dear 
Brother Rogers, and we believe the fruit of his labor 
here will be quite marked as time rolls on. I do not 
know whether you have had a report of his meetings 
here or not. I attended two meetings at the home of 
Bro. Kuntz. Only a few were present, as the day was 
inclement, but as always "The Old, Old Story" was 
refreshing. In the evening Bro. Rogers and others 

page 256 

attended a "Mission," conducted by a Brother Dann. I 
was not present, but understand that Bro. Rogers gave 
them a rousing sermon on the ransom and restitution 
which was gladly received. 

There are twelve in our class fully in the truth. 
Bros. Kuntz, Hutchinson and Bardelmier symbolized 
their baptism unto death last week. Sr. Grace McGee 
will do the same this week. How I wish Bro. McPhail 
could visit us now, he would be very helpful. Mother 
joins me in Christian love to you. We are praying 
for you constantly. In Christ, AMELIA POWER. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I canvassed Helena, 
Millersville, Burgoon and Bettville last week, every 
house in each place, and left a tract at each home. 
At Toledo last Sunday we had two good discourses 
from Bro. Draper, and two good audiences. [Sixteen 
immersed] Enclosed please find order and M. Order. 
Expect, D.V., to try for a while to sell DAWNS as a 
specialty. I purpose to be faithful in that which is 
least, and to do what I can for the Kingdom and glory 



of our Heavenly Father, who is infinite in Love. 

Yours in the service of the truth, JAMES A. WEST. 
Canada. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-Ever since the meetings, 
where we had the long-desired privilege of seeing 
you in person, and hearing your voice, I have 
wanted to write to you and tell you of the blessing and 
help received through that privilege. Indeed, I could 
not begin to express what those meetings were to me, 
of the misty places which now are as plain as noonday, 
of the realness of our Savior's presence, and of our 
"high calling," of the comfort, strength and encouragement 
received, to persevere in the "narrow way." 
I am very thankful to God that what I had so longed 
for was made possible. But those four days of your 
stay with us passed all too quickly, and it seemed that 
we had to say good-bye to you almost directly after 
meeting you. 

When I am at home, and that is nearly always, I 
have not one person with whom I can talk about the 
truths that are more precious to me than I can express. 
Being confident that I can pass the test of loving 
the "brethren," you will understand that this is a 
great privation. But I have my beloved books, the 
DAWNS; and the TOWER will be more welcome and 
more carefully studied than ever, if that is possible. 

Your Sister in the faith, S. A. YENNEY. 

R2358 : page 256 

MR. CHARLES T. RUSSELL, Colorado. 

DEAR BROTHER:-I must take the liberty of sending 
you a message of gratitude in reference to your 
article in July 15th TOWER on the double-minded man. 
It was particularly enjoyed by me for the reason that 
for a long time the questions reviewed have been 
thought over, and to a great extent in the very light 
in which you have so clearly presented them. 

From several previous articles in the TOWER I 
had gained the impression that you were writing not 
only in the light of the blessed Savior's presence, but 
also with a clear understanding of the principles of 
Phrenological science. This has now been confirmed, 
for which I praise the Lord. 

Phrenology (as taught by its true representatives) 
is certainly the correct theory of mental phenomena, 
and those who are ignorant of its principles must of 
necessity be in the dark as to a proper understanding 
of human nature. 

For some years I have contended that there was 
too much truth— too much light— in the phrenological 
science for its general acceptance in the past and present 
time. This is proven, to my mind, by the fierce 
antagonism the subject has received at the hands of 
college professors, physicians and especially the clergy, 
as well as others, whereas if they had given the 



matter honest investigation they could have verified 
its correctness time and again, every day of their lives. 

Babylon's religionists refuse it because if admitted 
it would utterly condemn the eternal torment idea, and 
render that vicious theory unbearable, even to themselves. 
It would teach them the fact that many of our 
poor, fallen race have retrograded so far from perfection 
and the proper balance of faculties as to be entirely 
incapable of appreciating and accepting a "system 
of theology," and therefore to be doomed to eternal 
torture. Presume, however, they would manage to 
get this class of unfortunates through on their peculiar 
"infant and idiot" plan of salvation. 

It seems to me that in the Millennium perfection 
will be attained gradually along the lines of phrenological 
principles— fully developed, of course, and under 
the direction of the earthly representatives of the 
Kingdom. In conclusion, I want again to express my 
thanks to our glorious Father and blessed Master for 
setting the truth so clearly before the remaining members 
of the Church. Your Brother and servant in the 
precious faith, G. M. HUNTSINGER. 

page 256 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-The Day of Vengeance 
(DAWN, VOL. IV.) in German would be more of a good 
thing to have, than I had dared to hope for, and would, 
I think, do a great deal of good. Glad of the opportunity, 
I herewith subscribe for a sufficient number of 
books to amount to five dollars and stand ready to 
double this number, should it be found necessary to 
reach the required sum to guarantee the cost of typesetting. 
Your Brother in Christ, J. G. KUEHN. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I subscribe to the IV. 
VOL. of DAWN in German to the amount of $5 and 
hope that I can do better if it should become necessary. 
The meetings with Bro. Draper in Toledo have been 
a rich feast. Several of the brethren have come back 
again and accepted the ransom; two of them were baptized 
by Bro. Draper. Remember these brethren as well 
as myself before the throne in your prayers. 

Yours in the Redeemer, S. KUESTHARDT. 

R2358 : page 256 

Missouri. 
DEAR BROTHER RUSSELLr-Rejoice with me, for 
my soul so long in darkness is illuminated with the 
glorious beams of the "MILLENNIAL DAWN." I have 
been in the world 61 years. I have lived in Babylon 
since 1854. I have been a Baptist minister since 1867. 
During all these years I never saw the "King in his 
beauty," until now. Through the kindness of Elder 
Job Chalfant I have been reading the first three volumes 
of your valuable book, MILLENNIAL DAWN, and 



the WATCH TOWER. Never before has the gospel of 
our blessed Redeemer been so precious to me. The 
Bible seems like a new book— I see the glorious plan 
of redemption as I never have before. I cannot preach 
any more as I formerly did. The voice of the Master 
has reached my ears, "Babylon is fallen! Come out of 
her my people." I have obeyed the command, and 
may God help me from this on to speak the blessed 
present truth. Please send me the WATCH TOWER 
and the four volumes of MILLENNIAL DAWN. 
Your brother in the present truth, D. SIMONS. 



page 257 

VOL. XIX. SEPTEMBER 1 & 15, 1898. No. 17 & 18. 



CONTENTS. 



Council Bluffs Convention Notice, etc 258 

The Parousia of our Lord Jesus and 
His Subsequent Apokalupsis and 

Epiphania at His Second Advent 259 

For What are We Watching? 260 

Proofs of His Presence 265 

"Behold the Bridegroom!" 269 

Presence Gradually Revealed 271 

"Cometh not with Observation" 273 

"Knew not the Time of Their 

Visitation" 275 

Israel's Overthrow and its Cause 278 

page 258 

SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
--ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 56-60 ARCH STREET, ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, N.Y. DRAFT, MONEY ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS: 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age or accident, or other 
adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, if they 
send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting the 
paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list 
constantly. 



THIS ISSUE AS A FREE SAMPLE. 



Our subscribers are invited to send us, plainly written on 
postal cards, the full addresses of their friends and acquaintances 
interested in our Lord's second coming but not aware of 
his parousia. To all such we will be pleased to send a copy of 
this issue free, during September. 

COUNCIL BLUFFS CONVENTION. -OCT. 1-5. 



We had not thought of this as a general convention except 
for the friends of Iowa, Nebraska and nearby states, but we 
learn that others will probably attend. We assure all of a hearty 
welcome. Remember the date, October 1st to 5th, and be sure 
to send a card to the WATCH TOWER office not later than Sept. 
20th, stating the number in your party. See last TOWER. 

'PILGRIMS' IN THE FAR WEST AND SOUTH. 



Brother Draper's proposed route lies to the North West. 
He is going by rail. Brother Ransom's route is South West, 
through Indian Territory, Oklahoma and Texas. He is traveling 
via wagonette, Sister Ransom with him. So far as possible all 
points where there are five or more WATCH TOWER subscribers 
will be visited. Others of the preaching brethren "Pilgrims" 
are in central and Eastern states, and one will (D.V.) make a 
Southern tour during the Winter. If these children of the great 
King come to you, give them a hearty welcome, remembering 
the Master's word, "He that receiveth you receiveth me,... 
and him that sent me." 

Remember that none of these "Pilgrims" either take up 
collections or ask for money: all their expenses are provided 
for, out of your special fund, from this office. Neither do these 
"Pilgrims" come to "devour widow's houses" by a prolonged 
stay. They will remain only two or three days, and will be 
disappointed if there are not arrangements for at least two 
meetings each day of their stay. Have all arrangements made 
for the exact day mentioned on the notification postal cards 
sent in advance of them, as they must be punctual, and their 
routes are all arranged weeks in advance. Do your part in 
gathering in the "hearing ears." This service and the Colporteur 
service are both being greatly blessed of the Lord. 



R2359 : page 259 

THE PAROUSIA OF OUR LORD JESUS 

AND HIS 

SUBSEQUENT APOKALUPSIS AND EPIPHANIA 

--AT HIS SECOND ADVENT.- 

"Watch, therefore; for ye know not the day* your Lord doth 
come." "What I say unto you, I say unto all [believers], 
Watch! "-Matt. 24:42; Mark 13:37. 

WHATEVER the character of the watching, and 
whatever the thing to be looked for, there can 
be no question that the exhortation to watch for an 
event whose precise time is not stated implies that the 
watching ones will know when the event does take 



place. Watch, because ye know not, in order that at 
the proper time ye may know, is the thought; and the 
intimation clearly is, that those who do not watch will 
not know: that the events which are to be known in 
due time to the Watchers will be recognized by them, 
and not recognized by others, at the time of 
accomplishment. 

This, the only logical interpretation of our Lord's 
exhortation, is fully corroborated by several of the 
apostles. The Apostle Paul urges us, saying: "Yourselves 
know perfectly that the day of the Lord so cometh 
as a thief in the night, and when they [the world, 
unbelievers] shall say, Peace and safety, then sudden 
destruction cometh upon them as travail upon a woman 
with child; and they shall not escape. But ye, brethren, 
are not in darkness, that that day should overtake 
you as a thief" (1 Thes. 5:3,4); because, being children 
of the light, ye brethren will be watching and be 
enlightened and taught of the Lord. The Apostle 
Peter suggests the means by which the Lord will teach 
us and informs us respecting our location upon the 
path of the just which shineth more and more unto the 
perfect day. He shows that it will not be by miraculous 
revelations, nor by dreams, but through the Word 
of testimony, the Bible. He says, "We have a more 
sure word of prophecy, to which ye do well that ye 
take heed, as unto a light which shineth in a dark 
place, until the Day dawn and the Day-star arise in 
your hearts."— 2 Pet. 1:19. 

The united testimony of these Scriptures teaches 
us that, altho it was not proper nor possible for the 
Lord's people to know anything definite in advance, 
respecting the exact time of the second presence of the 
Lord Jesus and the establishment of his Kingdom, yet 
when the due time would come the faithful ones, the 
watchers, would be informed,— would not be left in 
darkness with the world. It is in vain to urge, as 
contradicting this, our Lord's statement, "Of that day 
and hour knoweth no man, no not the angels in heaven, 
neither the Son, but my Father only." Those who 
use this Scripture to prove to themselves and to others 
that no man will ever know anything respecting the 
time of the second advent find it to prove too much, 
and thus spoil their own argument; for if it means that 
no man will ever know, it must similarly mean that no 
angel will ever know, and that the Son himself will 
never know. This evidently would be an absurd construction 
to place upon the passage. The Son did not 
know at the time he uttered this statement, the angels 
did not know then, and no man knew then: but the 
Son certainly must know of the time of his own second 
advent, and at least a little while before it takes place; 
the angels also must know a little while before it takes 
place, and the true children of God, the "watchers," 
as we have seen above, are to watch in order that they 
also may know at the proper season, and not be in 



darkness, in ignorance, with the world; and that their 
watching shall be rewarded is guaranteed:— "None of 



*Thus read the oldest Greek MSS. 

R2359 : page 260 

the wicked shall understand; but the wise [in heavenly 
wisdom] shall understand."— Dan. 12:10. 

FOR WHAT ARE WE WATCHING? 



This is an important question. Many of God's 
people have been offended, "stumbled," as respects the 
doctrine of the second coming of our dear Redeemer, 
by reason of peculiar, extravagant, unreasonable, illogical 
and unscriptural views on the subject, presented 
by some, who professedly love the Lord's appearing, 
known as Second Adventists. But this is all wrong; 
we are not to reject one of the grandest and most prominent 
doctrines of the Scriptures, simply because some 
fellow-Christians have erred egregiously respecting the 
matter, and brought a certain amount of worldlywise 
contempt upon everything connected with this subject. 
On the contrary, this doctrine, as a glorious gem, should 
be given the first place among the precious jewels of 
divine truth, where it can cast its halo and splendor 
and brilliancy over all connected and related promises 
and blessings. It should not be left in the imperfect 
setting which hides its glory and beauty, but should 
be recovered, remounted, set in its true place, to the 
glory of God and to the blessing of all who are sincerely 
and truly his people. 

We need offer no apology for the interest which 
we feel in this grand subject, which is the center upon 
which all the testimony of divine grace, through all 
the holy prophets, is focused. Rather do they need 
to apologize who, knowing that the second coming of 
the Lord and the resurrection of the dead hold the 
most important places in the Scriptures, next to the 
doctrine of the atonement for sin, have nevertheless 
neglected this while they have quarreled, skirmished, 
fought and bled over trifling things of no real importance, 
doctrinaily or otherwise. 

Our watching is to be for the second coming of 
him who redeemed us, who said, "If I go away, I will 
come again and receive you unto myself." The watching 
is to be specially with the thought that our Lord 
Jesus comes at his second advent in the majesty and 
glory of the Father, King of kings and Lord of lords. 
The watching not only includes the thought of the second 
presence of our Lord, as King, but it has attached 



to it the wonderful results which are promised to flow 

from the coming of the King; for the coming of the 

King means the coming of the Kingdom for which he 

taught us to pray, "Thy Kingdom come, thy will be 

done on earth as it is done in heaven." And the coming 

of our Master, the King, and the establishment of 

this glorious Kingdom means the fulfilment of the long-waited-for 

promise made to the seed of Abraham: the 

promise which Israel after the flesh was not found 

worthy to inherit; the promise for which God has been 

selecting the members of the Bride of Christ during 

this Gospel age, to be with the Lord Jesus and his 

joint-heir in carrying out its beneficent provisions; 

the promise which is sure, but which has never yet 

had, in any sense of the word, a fulfilment; the promise 

which reads, "In thy seed shall all the families of 

the earth be blessed." 

Watching implies hoping, and it also implies waiting. 
We are waiting for what the Apostle terms "that 
blessed hope, the glorious appearing of our Lord and 
Savior Jesus Christ," who shall transform his Church 
to his own spiritual image and likeness, in order that 
we ("changed") may be like him, see him as he is, 
and share his glory, and be associated with him in his 
great work of bringing in the Millennial blessings to 
the world of mankind. Nevertheless, this waiting time 
and hoping time is a time of more or less tribulation, not 
only on the world, which lies still under the yoke of 
sin and under the blinding influences of Satan, but also 
to the waiting, hoping and watching Church, of 
whom the Apostle says, "We ourselves groan within 
ourselves, waiting for the adoption, to wit, the deliverance 
[from death] of our body"— the body of Christ, 
of which we are members in particular.— Rom. 8:23. 

HOW ARE WE TO WATCH? 



Our watching consists not in looking up into the 
sky— "stargazing;" for those who study the Lord's 
Word to any purpose soon learn that "the day of the 
Lord so cometh as [like] a thief in the night," and 
that its dawning cannot be discerned with the natural 
eye. If the Lord's people would discern anything by 
watching the sky with their natural eyes, could not 
the world discern the same thing? If the second advent 
of our Lord were to be an open, outward manifestation, 
would not the world know of it just as soon 
as the saints, the watchers? In such event it could 
not be true that the day of the Lord should come as a 
thief, as a snare, unawares, upon the world, while the 
Church would have foreknowledge thereof— not be left 
in darkness. 

We are to watch the signs of the times, in the light 
of the Lord's Word, our lamp: as the Apostle declares, 



"We have a more sure Word of prophecy,... as a light 

shining in a dark place,— until the Day dawn." The 

Gospel age has been a night-time, and the Lord's people 

have been waiting for the dawn of the Millennial 

morning, with the promise ringing in their ears, "God 

will help her [the Church] early in the morning." 

(Psa. 46:5.) The word of the Lord, through the prophets, 

has been the lamplight all through this Gospel 

age, upon the Church's pathway, as the Lord expressed 

it through the Prophet David, "Thy word is a 

lamp to my feet, a lantern to my footsteps." The 

R2359 : page 261 

lamp of the truth of revelation has guided all the faithful, 
watchful pilgrims in their journey toward the Celestial 
City— the Heavenly Kingdom. O, what a comfort 
it has been, and how dreary would have been our 
pilgrimage without it! 

"Looking back, we praise the way 
God has led us, day by day!" 

Those who have taken heed to the landmarks, 
pointed out by the Lord through Daniel and Isaiah and 
Jeremiah, and all the holy prophets, realize that we 
have come already a much longer journey than was expected 
by the Church when first she started out; but 
we realize also from these landmarks that we have approached 
very closely to the end of the journey, very 
near to the time when the great blessing, for which 
God's people have so long waited and prayed, is at 
hand. For instance, the Watchers have noted the 
Lord's testimony through the Prophet Daniel that "the 
time of the end" would be a period of time (more than 
a century), and that in this "time of the end" there 
would be a great increase of travel, running to and fro 
throughout the earth, and a great increase of general 
intelligence, increased knowledge, as it is written, "In 
the time of the end many shall run to and fro, and 
knowledge shall be increased."— Dan. 12:4. 

Watching carefully respecting our whereabouts, 
hopeful and solicitous respecting the gracious things 
which God has promised, none of the Watchers are indifferent 
to these fulfilments of prophecy, which are to 
be seen on every hand to-day. All men discern these 
things, but not all alike: the faithful, the Watchers, 
discern them not only as facts, but also as fulfilments 
of prophecy; as proofs that we are already in the period 
termed "the time of the end." Further investigations 
and applications of the prophetic measurements prove 
to the watchers that we have been in "the time of the 
end" since 1799, and that it is also termed "the day 
of his [Jehovah's] preparation." Looking about them, 
they see the preparation that Jehovah God is making 
for the Kingdom of his dear Son. They see the lifting 
of the curtain of ignorance, and the letting in of 
the light, and that thus God is using mankind at the 



present time to make ready in a natural way the mechanical 
and other arrangements and conveniences which 
ultimately shall be so great blessings to the world, 
when the Sun of Righteousness shall arise with healing 
in his beams, and the Millennial Day shall be ushered 
in, with all its multiplied blessings and mercies 
and opportunities;— "the times of restitution of all 
things, spoken by the mouth of all the holy prophets 
since the world began."— Acts 3:21. 

Watching intently, earnestly, interestedly, because 
they know of the good things God hath in reservation 
(1 Cor. 2:10-13), the Watchers note that Daniel's 
prophecy further points out that, as the increase of 
travel brings the increase of knowledge, so the increase 
of knowledge will bring an increase of discontent to the 
world of mankind in general; and the result will be as 
prophetically stated, that "there shall be a time of 
trouble such as never was since there was a nation." The 
Watchers, seeking to note whether these things have 
yet a fulfilment or not, look about them and behold 
on every hand discontent, unhappiness; far more than 
when the world enjoyed far fewer of the mercies and 
blessings of heaven. These latter day gifts of Providence 
(preparations for the Millennial age), instead of 
provoking thankfulness, gratitude and love to God and 
generosity to man, produce in unregenerate hearts ambition, 
greater avarice, selfishness, envy, hatred, strife, 
and other works of the flesh and of the devil. Yes; 
the Watchers can clearly discern the great approaching 
climax of human trouble in which the Scriptures 
distinctly declare that all the present human institutions 
shall go down in anarchy, in confusion, in chaos. 
But the Watchers do not lose sight of God and his 
providence. They see that, while the approaching 
social and ecclesiastical catastrophe will be the natural 
result of the operation of selfishness under highly favored 
conditions, nevertheless they remember that God 
is at the helm, and that he is able to cause the wrath 
of man to praise him, and the remainder of man's wrath 
(which would not praise him) he will restrain. 

The Watchers look not merely at the outward 
signs, as seen in the world. They scrutinize carefully 
and repeatedly their "chart," the Bible's prophetic 
outline of the world's history, furnished by the King 
himself. It is because they see the time of trouble 
outlined in the prophetic chart that they know that it 
is sure to come, and are able in advance of others to 
"discern the signs of the times," and not to be in darkness 
respecting the "things to come." It was in respect 
to this that the Lord promised the watchers that the 
holy spirit should guide them into all truth, as each 
feature becomes due, and would show them things to 
come— future things— in advance of the world's knowledge, 
and in advance of the facts themselves. (John 16:13.) 
But the same chart which shows the downfall 
of all earthly institutions, political, social and ecclesiastical, 



shows also that their fall is so timed in the 
great plan of Jehovah that it shall be the very hour in 
which he will establish in the hands of the elect Church 
(who then shall be a royal priesthood glorified— priests 
upon their thrones— the religious as well as the civil 
rulers of the world), whose exaltation shall be to the 
glory of God and to the blessing of every creature. 
The Watchers remember well that the King gave 
them an outline of the history of the Gospel age at the 
very time that he told them to watch, intimating to 

R2359 : page 262 

them that they were to watch for the things which he 
therein noted. The Watchers are those who are in 
harmony with the King and who have respect to his 
promises, and they, therefore, do not neglect the words 
which he spoke. And as they note this very prophecy 
in connection with which he tells them to watch, they 
see in it clearly that the day of the Lord will be ushered 
in at the close of this Gospel age, secretly, quietly, 
unobtrusively, "as a thief in the night,"— unaware 
to the world, and known only to the Watchers. 

PAROUSIA VS. EPIPHANIA, APOKALUPSIS. 



Because not heedless, careless, indifferent servants 
of the King, but faithful and earnest, the Watchers 
have scrutinized every little particular which fell from 
the lips of him who spake as never man spake; and all 
the messages which he has sent them through his faithful 
apostles and prophets. And discriminating carefully, 
they discern that there are three words of distinctly 
different signification used in the respect to the Lord's 
second advent; namely, parousia and epiphania and 
apokalupsis. Parousia is used in respect to the earliest 
stage of the second advent, while apokalupsis relates to 
the same advent later;— not that apokalupsis and epiphania 
relate to another or a third advent, but merely 
to a later feature of the second advent. These Greek 
words, it is true, are somewhat obscured or hidden in 
the Common Version of the Bible, and probably for a 
purpose. The Lord's purpose evidently was to keep 
the world and the wicked in ignorance of his gracious 
plan until his due time; nor did he wish the particulars 
to be understood by the Watchers until nearly the 
time of the fulfilment. But now we are "in the time 
of the end," in "the day of his preparation," in the 
time in which it was foretold that then "the wise [not 
the worldlywise but the humble Watchers who are wise 
enough to take heed to the Word of the Lord] shall 
understand." (Dan. 12:10.) And hence, since many 
of the Watchers are not Greek scholars, God has made 
gracious provision through valuable helps (such as 



Young's Analytical Concordance and the Emphatic Diaglott), 

so that the very humblest of his people may 

have a clear and discriminating understanding of the 

meaning of certain features of his Word which hitherto 

have been kept hidden under imperfect translations: 

and these matters God himself has been bringing to 

the attention of his people, through MILLENNIAL 

DAWN, ZION'S WATCH TOWER and the OLD THEOLOGY 

TRACTS. The Watchers all over the world are being 

reached by these "Helping Hands for Bible students," 

which the Lord himself is extending to them. 

By these helps, the Watchers are rapidly coming 
to see that the word "parousia," translated in our 
Common Version "coming," does not mean what our 
English word signifies; namely, to be on the way, approaching; 
but that on the contrary it signifies presence, 
as of one who has already arrived. The Watchers note 
also that the Scriptures predicate certain things respecting 
the Lord and respecting his parousia (his presence), 
which clearly intimate that he will be present and doing 
his work, his great work (of setting up his Kingdom 
and smiting the nations with the sword of his mouth) 
wholly unknown to the world,— "as a thief in the night." 
The Watchers also notice that the Scriptures clearly 
indicate that after the Lord has done certain things 
during his presence (parousia) and unknown to the 
world, he will later make a manifestation of his presence; 
—a manifestation which will be discerned by all mankind: 
and the outward manifestation is designated his 
"epiphania" which signifies "shining forth" or "bright 
shining." 

The Watchers get the two thoughts respecting the 
Lord's second coming: that first, altho really present a 
spirit being, like the angels who, we are told, encamp 
round about them that fear God and deliver them, and 
who are "all ministering spirits, sent forth to minister 
to those who shall be heirs of salvation," and whose 
ministry is an invisible one (Psa. 34:7; Heb. 1 : 14), — 
so also our Lord, now a glorious spirit being, of the 
divine nature, will not be manifest to the natural eye 
during his presence— his parousia. Hence the necessity 
that the Lord's faithful ones shall "watch," because 
they, no more than the world, can discern a spirit being 
with their natural eyes. The Watchers in due 
time are to discern the presence (parousia) of their Lord 
by the eye of faith. The sleepless eye of faith will in 
due time take note of the "sign of the Son of Man,"— 
the indications of the presence of the King. 

During the period of the parousia (presence) preceding 
the epiphania (shining forth) a certain work 
will be accomplished, unknown to the world, unknown 
to the nominal Church, known only to the Watchers. 
Ah, how important to us the words of our Master, exhorting 
us to be Watchers! And, by the way, this 
watching includes a watching of our own hearts as well 
as of the Lord's Word and the outward signs— to insure 



our worthiness to be continued in the light, and 
under the instructions of the great Teacher. "If any 
man have not the spirit of Christ he is none of his;" 
and if any man lose the spirit of Christ he ceases to be 
his; and hence we all need to "watch" that we may, 
as the Scriptures direct, "Keep our garments unspotted 
from the world;" and "Keep ourselves in the love of 
God, while looking for the grace [aid] of our Lord 
Jesus Christ, which is able to keep us from falling and 
to present us faultless in the presence of his glory with 
exceeding joy." For whoever has the spirit of Christ 
may be a Watcher, and as a Watcher may know of the 

R2359 : page 263 

gracious things connected with the great "salvation 
which shall be brought unto us at the revelation of our 
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ," but whoever ceases to 
have the spirit of Christ must of necessity cease also 
to be a Watcher and shall be in ignorance of the things 
of the day of the Lord like the world, of which he then 
probably would be a part. 

As the light by which the eye of faith may discern 
the parousia, we have the "more sure word of prophecy 
to which we do well to take heed." It has shone 
upon the pathway of the Watchers all along through 
this night, but now its various prophetic rays have focussed 
and clearly indicate that we are already living 
"in the days of the Son of Man," while, as he expressly 
foretold, the world in general goes on as usual, in 
utter ignorance of his presence, and of his harvest work, 
and of the beginning of the Day of the Lord; it continues 
as usual— eating and drinking, marrying and 
giving in marriage, planting and building. It is a mistake 
to suppose that our Lord, in giving this information 
respecting the events of the time of his presence, 
meant us to understand that it would be wicked for the 
world to eat, drink, plant, build and marry; these are 
not improper things and any such interpretation is 
strained and faulty and results from an utter misconception 
of the subject. Our Lord wished merely to 
show that the world would be in ignorance of his presence 
"in the days of the Son of Man," and in utter ignorance 
of the great time of trouble or "Day of Vengeance" 
which his inauguration of his Kingdom will 
signify to the kingdoms of this world, which are to 
be dashed to pieces as potters' vessels. The ignorance 
of the impending trouble here will be similar to that 
of the people who lived in the days of Noah. "As it 
was in the days of Noah, so also shall it be in the days 
of the Son of Man. "-Luke 17:26. 

As "the days of Noah" were not days before Noah's 
time, neither are "the days of the Son of Man" 
days before the Son of Man's presence. The days of 
the Son of Man are the days of his parousia, or presence, 
—invisible and unknown to the world, known only 



to the Watchers and seen by them only with the eye 
of faith. "As in the days that were before the flood 
they were eating, drinking, marrying, ...and knew 
not,. ..so shall also the [parousia] presence of the 
Son of Man be:"— the world will simply go on about 
its usual affairs, and know not of the Lord's presence. 
-Matt. 24:38. 

But why should our Lord be thus present? What 
will be his work during the period of presence preceding 
his epiphania or manifestation to the world? 

His work is clearly outlined in various of his parables 
which were given that the Watchers might know 
—might not be in darkness. The parable of the wheat 
and the tares shows this period of the parousia (presence) 
preceding the epiphania (manifestation), and 
represents it as the "harvest" time of this age. The 
Son of Man sowed the good seed, and his servants followed, 
doing work in the field down through the age; 
finally the end of the age comes when the full crop of 
wheat is ripe, and then the harvest is reaped. The 
parable shows the separation of the two classes of the 
nominal church during the "harvest." For be it noted 
that the wheat-field is not the entire world, but 
merely the professedly Christian part of the world- 
Christendom: much of the field is not yet sown. And 
the parable relates only to the wheat-field, and particularly 
to the wheat. The tares (spurious Christians) 
are dealt with only incidentally. The tares choke the 
wheat, yet nevertheless the Master will obtain a sufficiently 
large crop, for— "All his purposes shall be 
accomplished." 

The separation of the tares from the wheat, and 
the gathering of the wheat into the garner of heavenly 
conditions precedes the work of cleansing the wheat-field 
of its symbolic tares by symbolic "fire;" and this 
entire harvest work is to take place during the parousia 
(presence) of our Lord, before his epiphania (manifestation). 
He is the Chief-Reaper, and all the under-reapers 
will work under his direction and eye; and 
every kernel of true symbolic "wheat" will be gathered 
into the glorious symbolic "garner" by resurrection 
and "change." 

The truth will be the separating medium, and not 
until the separation is complete and the "wheat" all 
garnered into the glory of the heavenly nature, will 
the "fire," the great time of trouble mentioned by the 
Prophet and by our Lord, burn and consume, symbolically, 
all the "tares:" so that thereafter none will make 
false professions of being Christians while really of the 
world and possessed of its spirit. 

The parables of the Pounds and of the Talents 
cover this same period of time. In both of these the 
Lord represents himself as a great householder and 
heir to a throne, who has gone into a far country to be 
invested with kingly powers and to return to use those 
powers. Departing, he left with his servants various 



riches of grace and privilege, "to every man according 
to his several ability," saying to them, "Occupy till I 
come." The return of the nobleman of the parables 
unquestionably represents the second coming of our 
Lord and Master. Now note the work first due to take 
place upon his return as King, as shown by these parables. 
He does not first deal with the rebellious world, 
—those who would not have him to rule over them; 
but, first calls "his own servants," and reckons with 
them— rejecting some from further service because of 
unfaithfulness, and accepting others to a participation 

R2359 : page 264 

in the joys of the Kingdom which he at once 
establishes. 

This reckoning with the servants signifies a reckoning 
with the Church first, after his return; and corresponds 
to the separating of the wheat and tares, in 
the other parable. It is comparatively easy for anyone 
to realize that this part of the Lord's work at his 
second advent is the work which precedes the epiphania 
or manifestation to the world. It is during this period 
that the Watchers are to be aware of the presence (parousia) 
of the Lord, and of his scrutiny or judgment of 
them, which will then be in progress. Only the faithful 
will know, however,— only they will be "accounted 
worthy to stand before the Son of Man" in that judgment 
—all found unworthy shall "stumble." "The 
wicked [and slothful servants] shall not stand in the 
assembling of the righteous." (See Psa. 1:5.) It is 
of this period of his presence, and this feature of his 
work, that the world is to be in total ignorance, and 
"not know," until, having finished reckoning with his 
servants, and having glorified the faithful, the judgment 
of the world shall begin with "a time of trouble 
such as was not since there was a nation." That trouble 
is symbolically pictured as a fire, and we are told 
by the Apostle that our Lord shall be revealed (apokalupto 
—uncovered, disclosed, made manifest) in flaming 
fire (judgments), taking vengeance. 

All who are Watchers, all who have taken heed 
to "the more sure word of prophecy," including the 
Master's description of the events of "the days of the 
Son of Man," can readily discern that the world would 
not go on in its usual routine— eating, drinking, planting, 
building, marrying, etc.— if they knew of the 
Lord's presence, and the progress of the "harvest" of 
the Gospel age. If they knew of the Lord's presence 
and that the reckoning with the servants had commenced, 
and that the next thing in order would be 
judgments upon themselves, they would change their 
usual order of affairs considerably: they would be in 
great trepidation; because only those who are in sympathy 
with the Lord and the righteous government 
which he is about to establish, when he shall lay judgment 



to the line and justice to the plummet— only these 
can in any degree be ready to welcome him: all others 
have the spirit of fear, and are under the blinding influences 
and misrepresentations of Satan. "The god 
of this world hath blinded the minds of them that believe 
not, lest the glorious light [of the gospel of 
Christ] should shine unto them." Because of ignorance, 
therefore, the world would be in great fear, if 
they knew the fact of the beginning of the day of the 
Lord, which is to be to them the "day of vengeance."* 
Very evidently, therefore, this reckoning with the 
Church and the reward of the faithful will precede our 
Lord's epiphania or apokalupsis. To use one of his own 
figures, we might say that his day or time of presence 
—"the day of the Lord"— will come as a thief in the 
night; and in this time he will gather his virgin Church 
discriminatingly, and take her as his Bride to himself, 
—changing her from earthly nature and conditions to 
spiritual or heavenly conditions, to be like him, see him 
as he is, and share his glory. And since the saints 
have always been "the salt of the earth," we may readily 
discern that the taking away of the salt of the earth 
would leave mankind in a very deplorable condition, 
in which corruption would spread rapidly: and this is 
exactly what the Scriptures indicate. 

We are not, however, to understand that the Lord 
will take the Church away to heaven, and then come 
back again, and make his epiphania or apokalupsis, for 
that would be a third advent, which is nowhere even 
hinted in Scripture. The "change" of the Church 
from earthly conditions and nature to heavenly, spirit 
conditions and nature will first be in order, and then 
they twain, the Bridegroom, Christ, and the Church, 
his bride, thus made one in nature and in heavenly or 
spirit power, will commence the work of putting down 
all rule and authority contrary to the divine rule,— 
bringing all things into subjection to the heavenly 
Kingdom, the Millennial Kingdom. Our Lord and his 
Church will not be absent from the earth during the 
period of the world's tribulation; but on the contrary 
will continue present, but invisible, bringing upon the 
world the tribulation, foretold in the Scriptures, which 
will result in the humbling of the hearts of mankind, 
that they may say eventually, "Come, let us go 
up to the mountain [Kingdom] of the house of the 
Lord, that he may teach us of his ways, that we may 
walk in his paths." 

This fact is abundantly proved by the Lord's statement 
of what shall be the reward to the overcomers, a 
part of which is, "He that overcometh, and keepeth 
my words to the end, to him will I give power over 
the nations: and he shall rule them with a rod of iron; 
as the vessels of a potter shall they be broken in pieces: 
even as I have received of my Father." (Rev. 2:26,27.) 
Again, the same matter is mentioned by the Prophet 
David, saying, "This honor have all his saints,— to execute 



the judgments written." It is manifest, therefore, 
that the Church, altho absent from the world during 
the period of the tribulations in the sense of being 
"changed" from human to divine nature, will be 
present in it with Christ, as associate executors of the 
divine justice, breaking to pieces the present order of 
affairs, and ready to heal the hearts of the world as 
soon as they shall be broken in their pride, and prepared 
for the "Balm of Gilead." 



*MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOL. IV., "The Day of Vengeance.' 
R2359 : page 265 

THE TIME OF THE PAROUSIA. 



It will doubtless surprise many to learn that there 
is much Scripture proof that we are already in the time 
of the presence (parousia) of the Son of Man,— that we 
are already living "in the days of the Son of Man." 
At first some will be inclined to say, "Where is the 
promise of his [parousia] presence, while all things continue 
as they were from the beginning?" Peter foretold 
that some would thus question and be surprised at 
this information, that we are living in the days of the 
Son of Man, while there is as yet no outward manifestation 
of his presence, but the affairs of the world continue 
in their ordinary channels. (2 Pet. 3:4.) The 
answer to the question is, as we have just pointed out, 
our Lord's own declaration that in his days of presence 
the world would be eating, drinking, planting and 
building, and know not. That is the promise of his 
presence, while all things continue as they were. Could 
it be more explicit? A totally different question, however, 



WHAT ARE THE PROOFS OF HIS PRESENCE? 



This is a reasonable inquiry. We would not be 
justified in believing that the Lord is present upon any 
slight evidence, even tho we know in advance that he 
is a spirit being, whose presence would be invisible 
without a miracle;— and even tho we know in advance, 
from the parables, that he will be present, but invisible, 
in the harvest time of this age, in the time of reckoning 
with his servants, preparatory to their glorification. 
We have a right to expect clear, reasonable 
ground for faith, before accepting any matter which 
implies so much. We are not, however, to ask or to 
expect evidences to natural sight: if we are of the 



Watchers, who have "the eyes of their understanding 
opened" to see wonderful things in the divine Word, 
then these eyes of our understanding must also be the 
eyes of our faith. Hence, the true Watchers are to 
expect reasonable, satisfactory evidence for faith, and 
not ocular demonstrations of an invisible parousia. 
As the Apostle explains, "We walk by faith, not by 
sight." 

To our understanding there are strong proofs that 
our Lord's parousia began in the Autumn of 1874. We 
have seen nothing with our natural eyes; only with the 
eyes of the understanding, only in the light of "the 
more sure word of prophecy," do we know this, which 
we sincerely believe and affirm, and which is important 
news to all who claim to be Watchers. The fact that 
any Watcher should have remained in ignorance of 
this important event for now twenty-four years would 
seem of itself to be an indication that he had not been 
properly awake to the use of his privileges and opportunities 
—that he had not been sufficiently watchful of 
the sure word of prophecy to which he was instructed 
to take heed; and that therefore he had been left at least 
partially ignorant of the important things transpiring 
throughout the world during these years. To this extent 
many of the Lord's people have been with the 
world and similarly ignorant: and yet we may reasonably 
assume that the Lord did not expect all of his 
watching servants to discern the matter at the same 
instant of time. True; those who saw early have had 
special blessing for the longer time; but, as we saw 
above, the preparation for the knowledge of the time 
lies largely in the right attitude of heart— in its humility 
and possession of the various graces of the spirit of 
Christ. 

Lest we should get a misapprehension respecting 
this matter of the discerning the Lord's parousia, we 
do well to take heed of the parable of the ten virgins, 
which evidently was given to throw special light upon 
this point. That parable shows a false announcement 
of the arrival of the Bridegroom in 1844, which brought 
to the subject considerable reproach, but which nevertheless 
was of great advantage, as stirring up the "virgin" 
class (the pure, the consecrated) to fresh trimming 
of the lamp of truth— investigating the sure word 
of prophecy. The parable shows, also, that the "virgins" 
in general fell asleep, yet, nevertheless, in due 
time all would be reawakened by the prophetic knocking, 
and the knocking of the signs of the times, which 
indicate the Bridegroom's presence. And the parable 
shows that the result will depend upon how much oil 
(holy spirit) the "virgins" may have in their vessels 
(in their own hearts), as well as in their lamps (the 
Scriptures). Applying this parable, then, we may reasonably 
suppose that some of the Lord's true people 
have temporarily fallen asleep on this subject of his 
second coming, and that the sleeping ones will include 



some who have his spirit in their hearts, and who will 

be fully ready to welcome the Master when they shall 

awake, and whose lamps will be duly trimmed and 

burning and ready to enable them to discern the signs 

of his parousia, when once their attention is brought 

to the subject. In harmony with this we find that 

many who get awake on this subject now come into the 

clear light of present truth much more rapidly than 

did some in the past: doubtless partly because present 

truth can now be presented to them more concretely 

than ever before through the printed page. It is in the 

interest of this true "virgin" class that we now write: 

we have no desire to awaken the worldly; this knocking 

of the prophecies announcing the Parousia is not 

for them— besides, the worldly are so soundly asleep 

that it will require the terrific crashing of present institutions 

and the earthquake shakings of social revolution 

to thoroughly awaken them to a realization of 

R2359 : page 266 

the presence of the great Judge— Immanuel. The true 
Watchers on the contrary, if they slumber at all, sleep 
lightly, being on the qui vive of expectancy and hope 
for the long-waited-for Bridegroom. We would merely 
whisper in the ears of this class the one word, "Parousia!" 
assured that all true Watchers (and the Lord 
alone knoweth them that are his) will be aroused by 
that word, and trim their lamps on the subject. 

Is the question asked,— What portions of the sure 
word of prophecy indicate that the presence of our Lord 
began in the Autumn of 1874? We answer that there 
are several lines of prophecy which interlace and corroborate 
each other in this testimony; but, as might be 
expected, since the entire matter was to be hidden from 
the world, and "none of the wicked," but only the 
"wise" are to understand (Dan. 12:10), and these wise 
only to understand when the due time would come,— 
for these reasons, it must be evident to all that these 
prophecies, while clear and forcible and positive, are 
nevertheless somewhat under cover. We cannot here 
attempt to give a complete and comprehensive statement 
of these prophecies; that has already been done 
in four volumes aggregating eighteen hundred pages.* 
Here we can only give a very brief resume, leaving it 
for the true Watchers to seek that they may find; to 
knock if they would have the door of divine revelation 
opened to them; to use the keys which God has provided, 
if they are interested in penetrating into "the 
deep things" of the divine Word, now due to be understood; 
to eat of the meat of present truth, "things new 
and old," if they hunger and thirst after righteousness 
and true knowledge. 

"IN THE DAYS OF THESE KINGS." 



(1) We have a number of general prophecies, indicating 
that we are living in about the time of the 
Master's second presence. We have already referred 
to Daniel's testimony respecting "the time of the end," 
in which many will run to and fro, and knowledge will be 
increased, and the wise understand, and which the time 
of trouble follows. Then we have the inspired dream of 
Nebuchadnezzar, and its inspired interpretation by 
Daniel, showing the earthly governments which would 
bear rule over the earth;— during the interim between 
the overthrow of the typical Kingdom of God, whose 
last king sitting upon the throne of David was Zedekiah, 
and the installation of the true King, Emanuel, 
in his Millennial Kingdom glory. These different 
governments of earth are here pictured as a great 
image; Nebuchadnezzar's government, the first universal 
empire of earth, being represented by the head 
of gold; the Medo-Persian Empire, which, according 
to history, was the second universal empire, is here 
shown as the breast and arms of silver; the Grecian 
empire, which overthrew the Persian, and became the 
third universal empire, is represented by the belly and 
thighs of brass; the Roman empire, which succeeded the 
Grecian, and constituted itself the fourth universal 
empire of earth, was represented in the image by the 
legs of iron— strong exceedingly; and the later development 
of the same Roman empire with the intermixture 
of papal influence is represented in the image 
by the feet, which were partly iron (civil government), 
and partly of clay (ecclesiastical government— Papacy). 
These were to constitute the sum total of Gentile 
dominion; and "in the days of these kings" (represented 
by the ten toes of the image), Jehovah God himself 
would establish his Kingdom— the very Kingdom 
for which we pray, "Thy Kingdom come!" 

We are all witnesses that the heavenly Kingdom 
has not yet come,— that we are still under the dominion 
of "the prince of this world"— the prince of darkness. 
All the efforts to prove to us that the greedy 
and bloody governments of Christendom, so-called, are 
the Kingdom for which we prayed, and were taught 
to pray, could not prevail: we could never recognize 
these as Immanuel's Kingdom: they are only the kingdoms 
established by Antichrist, and recognized by Antichrist, 
and named by Antichrist "Christendom." The 
true Kingdom waits for establishment at the hands of 
him whose right it is; and he has promised that, when 
he sits upon his throne, all his faithful ones, the "little 
flock" of the Gospel age, shall sit in that throne with 
him, and be associates in the work and in the honor of 
blessing the world. 

The Church is not neglected in the picture of 
earthly dominion given to Nebuchadnezzar, and interpreted 
by the Prophet Daniel. She is shown therein 



as a stone taken out of the mountain without hands 
(by divine power). This stone represents God's 
Kingdom (Christ and the Church), and the inspired 
dream and explanation show that the disaster which 
shall come to the kingdoms of this world, represented 
in the image and in the toes of its feet, would come 
through the impact or smiting of the image by the 
stone. Daniel says: "A stone was cut out, which, 
without being in hands, smote the image upon his 
feet.... Then was the iron, the clay, the brass, the 
silver and the gold broken to pieces together, and became 
like the chaff of the summer threshing floor, and 
the wind carried them away that no place was found 
for them: and the stone that smote the image became 
a great mountain [kingdom], and filled the whole 
earth." 

The explanation is that— "The great God hath 
made known to the king [and indirectly more particularly 
to the Watchers] what shall come to pass hereafter." 



*MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOLS. I. -IV. 

R2359 : page 267 

"In the days of these kings shall the God of 

heaven set up a kingdom which shall never be destroyed, 

and the kingdom shall not be left to other 

people; [it shall have no successors, for the others will 

all be destroyed] it shall break in pieces and consume 

all these kingdoms, and it shall stand forever." Here 

is a prophecy which gives a full delineation of the empires 

of earth, to which God granted dominion during 

the interim between the removal of the typical crown 

from his typical kingdom, and the institution of the 

crown of righteousness and glory upon the true King 

in the inauguration of the Kingdom of Heaven. 

Even the surface evidences are that human empire 
has nearly run its course, and that heavenly empire is 
needed to deliver the world from its own selfishness. 
But the sure word of prophecy, if carefully scrutinized 
by the Watcher, reveals still more. It shows that the 
next universal empire will be the Kingdom of God's 
dear Son, and further the interesting fact that the 
total lease of power to the Gentiles, is in the Scriptures 
known as "the times of the Gentiles;" and that 
these "times" are seven times, and that each of the 
seven times is a period of three hundred and sixty 
years, and that consequently the complete period of 
the seven times is 2520 years. Hence the Watchers 
may reckon that Gentile rule will terminate and Immanuel's 
rule be fully set up in 2520 years from the 
time the Lord removed the diadem from Zedekiah, 
saying: "Oh thou profane and wicked prince,... 
take off the diadem, remove the crown; I will overturn, 



overturn, overturn it, until he comes whose right 
it is, and I will give it unto him." The period of 
overturning of the Lord's typical Kingdom and the 
removal of the crown must correspond to the period of 
the lease of empire to the Gentiles and be 2520 years. 
And measuring this period, we find that 2520 years 
will expire with the close of the year 1914, A.D. and 
consequently that by that time Gentile rule will be no 
more while God's Kingdom will then hold sway. 

But the scrutinizing Watcher will readily perceive 
that it is one thing to know the time when earthly 
dominion shall cease, and give place to the completed 
Kingdom of God, while it would be a totally different 
matter to know when the "stone" Kingdom would begin 
to smite the image upon its feet, preparatory to 
its destruction. This period of smiting of the image, 
which precedes its destruction, must also precede the 
full establishment of God's Kingdom to fill the whole 
earth. This smiting period is the period of the parousia; 
the period in which Christ is present, gathering 
his "jewels," his "elect," and in which he will smite 
the nations with the rod of iron and with the two-edged 
sword of his mouth, dashing them in pieces as a potter's 
vessel, and preparing mankind for the royal 
majesty of the heavens. Let the Watchers note critically 
the Prophet Daniel's explanation that it will be 
"in the days of these kings" (the kingdoms represented 
in the feet and toes of the image— the divisions of 
Papal Rome) that the God of heaven will set up his 
kingdom. God began the selection of his Kingdom 
class in the days of Civil Rome— represented by the 
legs of iron: he has continued the selection ever since, 
and the setting up or bringing of his Church (Kingdom) 
into power comes toward the close of Gentile 
power, but before it ends; for it is to be "in the days 
of these kings" and not after their days. Now note 
the similarity of the expressions "in the days of the 
Son of Man" and "in the days of these kings," and 
give both the same significance and remember that, 
as we have proven, they will be the same days— days 
before the lease of Gentile power expires, in which 
the Son of Man will be present to "set up" his Kingdom, 
which shall a little later destroy all these Gentile 
kingdoms. 

TYPICAL ISRAEL'S EXPERIENCES WERE PROPHETIC. 



(2) Take another line of prophecy, concealed, and 
yet very simple and easy of appreciation when once 
the mind grasps it. The Scriptures show us that the 
fleshly house of Israel and all of its institutions and 
affairs were typical foreshadowings of the spiritual 
house of Israel, and its higher institutions, better sacrifices, 
etc. It need not, therefore, surprise us to find 



that the length of the Jewish age— the length of the 
divine favor to fleshly Israel,— was typical also, and 
that it gives us the exact measurement of the Gospel 
age,— God's dealings with and favor toward spiritual 
Israel. 

Jacob's name was changed to Israel, which signifies 
"A Prince with God," and his descendants were 
therefore termed Israelites— the people of the Prince 
with God. But the antitype of Jacob is Christ, the 
true Prince with God, not after the flesh, but after the 
spirit; and his house is spiritual Israel. Jacob's 
twelve sons first inherited his name and blessing, and 
through them it descended to all the fleshly house of 
Israel: Christ's twelve Apostles inherited his name 
and blessing, and through them it has descended to all 
the spiritual house of Israel. As the typical house 
had a high priest, Aaron, so the antitypical house has 
a greater high priest, Christ Jesus our Lord, the high 
priest of our profession. As the fleshly house had a 
priesthood under Aaron, so the spiritual house has "a 
royal priesthood" under Christ, to whom the promise 
is made that they shall be kings and priests unto God, 
who shall reign on the earth, after their present time 
of sacrificing is ended. So we might proceed with 
everything that fleshly Israel had and find its duplicate 

R2359 : page 268 

on a higher plane, in spiritual Israel, but we will 
not go into details here: suffice it to notice further 
that the Jewish age or period of fleshly Israel's favor 
ended with a "harvest" period of forty years. This 
began with our Lord's baptism, lasted three and a 
half years, as a national test, and when that nation 
was rejected at the time of our Lord's crucifixion, the 
harvest work proper began— a separation of the wheat 
from the chaff— a time of gathering out of that rejected 
nation such as were "Israelites indeed," previous to 
the great time of trouble which came upon the nation 
and which utterly destroyed their national polity A.D. 
70. All of this is likened to a "harvest" season, and 
its first garnering of the wheat and subsequent burning 
of the chaff. And our Lord gives instructions to 
us (Matt. 13) that this Gospel age of spiritual Israel's 
favor will likewise end with a harvesting time, gathering 
the wheat together and ultimately destroying the 
tares. In the harvesting of the fleshly house our Lord, 
in the flesh, was the Chief-Reaper, and his Apostles 
were co-laborers: in the harvesting of the spiritual house 
our Lord, a spirit being, is to be present as the Chief-Reaper, 
and members of the spiritual house are to be 
also reapers. 

Now note the time correspondencies. The Jewish 
age, from the death of Jacob to the death of Christ, 
was 1845 years long— to the beginning of our Lord's 
ministry 1841-1/2 years long, and to the time of the utter 



destruction of their nation, in A.D. 70, 1881-1/2 years 

long. Notice how the Gospel age corresponds to this. 

The Gospel age did not begin with our Lord's birth: it 

began after our Lord's death and resurrection, when 

he commissioned his disciples to "preach the Gospel to 

every creature." (Our Lord's previous work during 

the three and a half years of his ministry was the offering 

of the Kingdom to the fleshly house, to test 

them, and to prove that they were unready to receive 

the true Kingdom.) Applying the foregoing measurements 

of the Jewish age to the Gospel age, beginning 

it at the time of our Lord's death and resurrection and 

the Pentecostal blessing, in the Spring of A.D. 33, we 

find that the period of 1841-1/2 years from the death of 

Jacob to the beginning of our Lord's ministry, 

would measure from the Spring of A.D. 33 to the 

Autumn of 1874; and the 1845 years of the Jewish 

age, from the death of Jacob to the rejection of 

fleshly Israel, applied here, measuring from the Spring of 

A.D. 33, would reach to the Spring of 1878; and the 

1881-1/2 years from the death of Jacob to the full destruction 

of Israel's polity in A.D. 70, finds its correspondence 

in this Gospel age, by measuring 1881-1/2 years from 

the Spring of A.D. 33, which would bring us exactly to 

(Autumn) 1914 A.D. —the very year and time shown 

us by Daniel's prophecy to be the full end and limit of 

the "Gentile times." Can this be accidental? Nay; 

it is design. What stronger testimony could be asked 

by the eye and ear of faith. Surely, anything plainer 

or clearer would be sight and leave no room for faith. 

THE JUBILEE PROPHECY. 



(3) Note another prophecy, similarly hidden in 
type in the Mosaic law,— Israel's Jubilee Year. No 
one is prepared to understand this line of prophecy who 
has not first learned that the second coming of our Lord 
is not for the purpose of destroying the world, but for 
the purpose of blessing it according to the promise made 
to Abraham, "in thy Seed shall all the families of the 
earth be blessed,"— with the favors lost in Adam. 
These will be offered to all and will be made perpetual 
to those who will accept them on the terms of the New 
Covenant. None can see any beauty or typical significance 
in Israel's Jubilee who have not learned that 
God has provided "times of restitution of all things" 
which are to begin in connection with the second advent 
of the Redeemer.— See Acts 3:19-23. 

We find that Israel's Jubilee years, in which every 
person and family had restored to them every lost possession 
and all personal liberties, was intended to be a 
type of the coming time of restitution, when a full opportunity 
for attaining freedom from sin and from Satan, 
and from the hereditary weaknesses of the flesh, 



shall be presented to all, and when the earth shall again 
revert to the human family in general, for whom it was 
created, and for whom it was redeemed by Christ, after 
being lost through Adam's transgression. We find 
that the Scriptures indicate, in connection with these 
jubilees, a system of counting by multiples; and that 
a Jubilee of Jubilees, or fifty times fifty years (2500 
years) constitutes a Great Jubilee cycle and that such 
a cycle began to count after fleshly Israel had observed 
her last typical Jubilee. We find from the Scriptures 
that Israel's nineteenth Jubilee year was her last, in 
the year B.C. 626. Knowing that the Jubilee was a 
part of the Law, and that no feature of that Law, not 
one jot or tittle, can pass away without reaching a 
fulfilment or antitype, we measure the cycle of the 
Great Jubilee 2500 years from the date when the last 
typical Jubilee was kept, 626 B.C., and find accordingly 
that the an ti typical Jubilee or Great Jubilee of 
Jubilees should have begun in October, 1874. Thus,— 
625 years B.C. plus 1875 years A.D. are 2500 years, 
which would include the Jubilee year: consequently, 
with the end of the year 1874, Jewish time, October, 
the an ti typical Jubilee of 1,000 years instead of one year 
was due to begin. 

Watchers will note carefully the correspondency 
of this date, and the character of the event to be expected, 
with the finding of our previous examinations 

R2359 : page 269 

(1 and 2), which showed us this very same date, 
October, 1874, was the time when the "harvest" of 
this age was due to begin, and when the Lord himself, 
as the Chief Reaper, was due to be present. The 
only thing necessary to connect this Jubilee prophecy 
with the others is the statement of the Apostle Peter 
in Acts 3:21, which shows that our Lord must be 
present (at his second advent) at the beginning of the 
times of restitution of all things, and as already seen, 
these restitution times are the Antitypical Jubilee times 
typified by Israel's Jubilees. Thus we have two very 
simple but clear and very important lines of Scripture 
testimony which indicate clearly that the parousia of 
our Lord was due to begin in October, 1874, and both 
show us the character of the work which we should 
expect would be in progress during the time of his 
presence, preceding his open manifestation to the 
world, his epiphania, his apokalupsis. 

THE DAYS OF WAITING ARE FULFILLED. 



(4) Take another line of prophecy: we find 
that the 1260 days, and the 1290 days, and the 1335 
days, so particularly set forth in Daniel's prophecy, 



and corroborated in Revelation, have had fulfilments, 
—the 1260 days ending in 1799, the 1290 days ending 
in 1829, and the 1335 days ending in 1874. Our 
friends known as "Second Adventists" were wont to 
use these "days of Daniel," and once applied them 
as we do here: but they abandoned them after 1874 
passed and they failed to see Jesus with their natural 
eyesight, in a body of flesh and with Calvary's scars. 
They have dropped these "days of Daniel" entirely 
because they find no way of applying them which 
would prolong them beyond 1874. The fault is not 
with the days nor with their application as above; but 
with the wrong things expected. They, in common 
with others who look for the Second Advent, err in 
expecting that the Gospel age which has been a spirit 
and faith epoch will end with a flesh and sight deterioration 
—in expecting that the spiritual kingdom of 
Satan will be followed by a fleshly kingdom of Christ. 
But the Watchers amongst the Adventists as well as 
in other denominations, are getting the eyes of their 
understanding opened by the anointing of the promised 
eyesalve.— Rev. 3:18. 

It was concerning this last period that the angel 
declared to the Prophet, "Oh, the blessedness of him 
that waiteth, and cometh to the 1335 days. ...Thou 
shalt rest, and stand in thy lot at the end of the 
days." What blessedness? We answer, a joy of 
heart and rejoicing to the Watchers is what is here 
intimated. It is since this date, October, 1874, where 
Daniel's 1335 days intimated that a great blessing 
would begin, where the Jubilee types indicated that the 
restitution of all things would begin, (which implies 
the second presence of the great Restorer), and where 
the parallelism of the two houses of Israel shows that 
the second presence of our Lord as the Great Reaper is 
due,— from this date a great blessing has come to the 
Watchers. Since then the Word of God has opened 
before us in a most marvelous manner. Since then the 
sure word of prophecy as a lamp to our feet has shown 
us many evidences that we are in the end of the age. 
Since then the day-star has been rising in the hearts of 
the Watchers, and has illuminated our minds, releasing 
us from the terrible nightmare of error respecting 
eternal torment, revealing to us the true character of 
our Heavenly Father, making plain to us the necessity 
of the great atonement for sin, and showing us distinctly 
the object of the permission of evil and revealing, 
one by one, various features of the divine plan,— the 
high calling of the Church to the divine nature, and to 
joint-heirship with Christ in his Millennial Kingdom; 
and the resulting blessing of restitution to human perfection 
for the world of mankind in general. Ah yes! 
all who have been brought "out of darkness into this 
marvelous light" can appreciate the words of the angel, 
and heartily say, Blessed are our ears, for they hear, 
and our eyes, for they see, for many prophets and many 



righteous persons have desired to know these things, 
and have not known them. 

(5) We might refer to other prophecies and types 
in the Scriptures, which show that we are living in the 
"harvest" time of this age, in the parousia of the Son 
of Man, but our space forbids. The fact that this world, 
as he predicted, continues in its usual course, eating, 
drinking, planting and building, etc., and knows not of 
his presence, so far from being an evidence against these 
prophetic testimonies, quite to the contrary, shows us 
that the fulfilment is coming, just as the Master predicted: 
that the day of the Lord, the day of his presence, 
has come upon the world as a thief in the night, 
secretly, quietly, stealthily, unknown;— the only ones 
favored with a knowledge of events transpiring on the 
other side of the vail being the Watchers who, if they 
have slumbered at all, have nevertheless maintained a 
waiting attitude of readiness for the announcement,— 

"BEHOLD THE BRIDEGROOM!" 



This is the announcement which we are now giving 
—Not, Behold, the Bridegroom cometh, but "Behold 
the Bridegroom!" already here, present, knocking 
gently with the prophecies to arouse the Virgins, but 
not to arouse the world. (Rev. 3:20.) This is the reading 
of the oldest Greek Manuscripts, which omit "cometh." 
Our Lord says, "If any man hear my voice 
[knock] and open the door, I will come in to him and 
sup with him." This message to the present Laodicean 

R2359 : page 270 

phase of the Church, intimates very clearly 

(1) that the "knock" and "voice" will be inaudible to 

natural ears, and heard only by the ears of the understanding, 

the hearing of faith; (2) that it will not be a 

denominational knock or call (as to Adventists, Presbyterians, 

etc.), but (3) that it will be a knock that 

must be heard individually and responded to individually 

—"any man" who hears the "knock" or "voice," 

if he so wills, may exercise faith and open the door of 

his understanding and realize his Lord's second 

presence. 

The man who never hears the "knock" is not 
counted worthy to hear it. But those who hear are 
evidently not compelled to respond and to accept the 
present, knocking King: hence he says, if the hearing 
one open the door, I will come in. However, only those 
who recognize the "knock" and who respond and by 
faith open to the Lord and receive him as their present 
King— only these are to have the great blessing of 
spiritual nourishment— the feast of "meat in due season," 
"things new and old," which the Master promised 



to provide at that time, to strengthen the faithful for 
the judgments, trials, testings and sittings which must 
"begin with the house of God." "I will come in to 
him and sup with him and he with me."— Compare 
Rev. 3:20, and Luke 12:37. 

As therefore we softly whisper— "Behold the Bridegroom!" 
it is not with any hope of arousing the world 
to faith in the Lord's presence, etc. They are not 
worthy to know and would only misuse the knowledge 
now. By and by, in the Lord's due time, they shall 
know— in the period of the epiphania and apokalupsis 
of the Son of Man. They will be awakened by the 
great crash of the day of trouble. We do, however, 
promulgate the message, "Behold the Bridegroom 
[present] ! " with the confident expectation that all 
who are of the "Virgin" class (the pure, the justified 
and consecrated), will be permitted to hear the message, 
will be aroused by it, and will trim their lamps 
(examine the Scriptures, investigate the subject), and 
find the message true, before the "door is shut" and 
the great trouble begun. We well know, however, 
from the Lord's prophetic parable, that among those 
who will be aroused to investigation, there will be two 
classes, because there are both wise and foolish "Virgins." 
The wise are those who have not only consecrated 
their all to the Lord, but who are living accordingly, 
—not unto sin, nor unto self, nor unto sectarianism, 
but unto the Lord: these, as intimated in the parable, 
will find no difficulty in trimming their lamps and 
recognizing the presence of the Bridegroom. But 
the foolish Virgins, overcharged with the cares of this 
life, or the deceitfulness of riches (wealth, reputation, 
influence, etc.), will not have within themselves ("in 
their vessels") a sufficiency of the oil (holy spirit); 
and consequently they will be unable to get the light 
in time to go in with the wise virgins before the elect 
number shall be completed, and the door of opportunity 
to become part of the Bride of Christ, shall forever 
close. True, they will later obtain the oil, as is shown 
in the parable, but too late to be of the "little flock" 
who shall be accounted worthy to share the Kingdom 
and to escape the great time of trouble coming upon 
the world: the foolish virgins will be obliged to pass 
through the trouble with the world, and will share thus 
in its distress, represented in the parable by the words, 
"wailing and gnashing of teeth." 

PAROUSIA IN THE NEW TESTAMENT. 



The word parousia occurs in the following texts 
of the New Testament, in each of which it should be 
properly translated "presence:"— 

"What shall be the sign of thy presence?"— 
Matt. 24:3. 



"So shall also the presence of the Son of Man be." 
-Matt. 24:27,37,39. 
"They that are Christ's at his presence."— 

1 Cor. 15:23. 

"What is our hope, or joy, or crown of rejoicing? 
Are not even ye, presented before our Lord Jesus 
Christ at his presence?"— 1 Thes. 2:19. 

That "he may establish your hearts unblamable 
in holiness before the Lord, even our Father, at the 
presence of our Lord Jesus Christ."— 1 Thes. 3:13. 

"We which are alive and remain unto the presence 
of the Lord shall not hinder them which are asleep." 
-1 Thes. 4:15. 

"Be preserved blameless unto the presence of our 
Lord Jesus Christ."— 1 Thes. 5:23. 

"Now we beseech you, brethren, by the presence 
of our Lord Jesus Christ, and our gathering together 
unto him."— 2 Thes. 2:1. 

"Be patient, therefore, brethren, unto the presence 
of the Lord."— James 5:7. 

"Be ye also patient, stablish your hearts, for the 
presence of the Lord draweth nigh."— James 5:8. 

"There shall come in the last days scoffers [in the 
Church] walking after their own lusts [desires], and 
saying, Where is the promise of his presence?"— 

2 Pet. 3:3,4. 

The word parousia is properly translated ("presence") 
in 2 Cor. 10:10, and Phil. 2:12. 

EPIPHANIA IN THE NEW TESTAMENT. 



The Greek word epiphania signifies bright shining 
or manifestation. It is rendered "appearing" and 
"brightness," and occurs as follows:— 

"Keep this commandment without spot unrebukable 

R2359 : page 271 

until the appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ, which 
in his times he shall show who is the blessed and only 
potentate, the King of kings and Lord of lords."— 

1 Tim. 6:14,15. 

"I charge thee, therefore, before God and the 
Lord Jesus Christ, who shall judge the quick and the 
dead at his appearing and his Kingdom."— 2 Tim. 4:1. 

"There is laid up for me a crown of righteousness 
which he shall give me at that day: and not to me only, 
but unto all them also that love his appearing."— 

2 Tim. 4:8. 

"Looking for that blessed hope and the glorious 
appearing of the great God and our Savior Jesus 
Christ."-Titus2:13. 

"Then shall that Wicked One be exposed, whom 
the Lord shall consume with the spirit of his mouth, 



and shall destroy with the brightness [epiphania— bright 
shining] of his coming [parousia— presence]."— 
2Thes. 2:8. 

APOKALUPSIS IN THE NEW TESTAMENT. 



The Greek words apokalupsis and apokalupto signify 
revealment, uncovering, unveiling (as of a thing 
previously present but hidden). The name of the last 
book of the Bible is from the same root— Apocalypse 
or Revelation. Apokalupsis is rendered revealed, revelation, 
appearing, coming and manifestation, in the following 
texts which relate to the Lord's second presence 
and power and glory, as these shall be made known,— 
uncovered or revealed to the world. Many of these 
texts also show that when he shall thus be revealed, 
his Church will be with the Lord and be revealed or 
manifested at the same time and in the same manner. 

"The sufferings of this present time are not worthy 
to be compared with the glory which shall be revealed 
in us."— Rom. 8:18. 

"Rejoice, inasmuch as ye are partakers of Christ's 
sufferings; that when his glory shall be revealed, ye may 
be glad also with exceeding joy."— 1 Pet. 4:13. 

"An inheritance incorruptible, and undefiled, and 
that fadeth not away, reserved in heaven for you, who 
are kept by the power of God through faith unto salvation 
ready to be revealed in the last time."— 
1 Pet. 1:4,5. 

"A partaker of the glory that shall be revealed." 
-1 Pet. 5:1. 

"Every man's work shall be made manifest: for 
the day shall declare it, for it shall be revealed by fire." 
(1 Cor. 3:13.) Here the reference evidently is to 
the testings of the Lord's people during the period of 
his presence in the end of the age. The Apostle's 
words thus agree with our Lord's prophecy of the same 
testings, saying that "there is nothing covered that 
shall not be revealed"— uncovered.— Luke 12:2. 

"Hope to the end for the grace that is to be 
brought unto you at the revelation of Jesus Christ." 
-1 Pet. 1:13. 

"The Lord Jesus shall be revealed from heaven in 
flaming fire [judgments against all unrighteousness], 
taking vengeance."— 2 Thes. 1:7,8. 

"So that ye come behind in no gift; waiting for 
the coming [apokalupsis— revealment] of our Lord 
Jesus Christ."— 1 Cor. 1:7. [The Lord's people will 
need to keep active, watching and waiting for the great 
blessing until the manifestation or revealment of the 
Lord; but if Watchers, they shall be made aware of 
his presence (parousia) and the work of "harvest" 
beforehand and share in the revealment.] 

"That the trial of your faith. ..might be found 



unto praise and honor and glory at the appearing [apokalupsis 
— revealment] of Jesus Christ."— 1 Pet. 1:7. 

"For the earnest expectation of the creature 
[mankind] waiteth for the manifestation [apokalupsis 
—revealing] of the sons of God [the Church]."— 
Rom. 8:19. 

"The same day that Lot went out of Sodom it 
rained fire and brimstone out of heaven, and destroyed 
them all. Even thus shall it be in the day when the 
Son of Man is revealed." (Luke 17:29,30.) That is 
to say, the judgments of the coming "time of trouble" 
as predicted will begin as soon as the "salt of the 
earth," the saints, have all been changed; and thus 
the Son of Man will be revealed a present Judge, who 
already had for some time been present sealing and 
gathering his "elect." 

PRESENCE GRADUALLY REVEALED. 



Foregoing we drew the line of distinction between 
the parousia and the epiphania or apokalupsis of our 
Lord quite sharply, to assist the reader in noting their 
difference of signification. As a matter of fact, however, 
the bright shining of the present One is due to begin 
shortly after the parousia begins; and again as at 
the first advent it will be true that "the Light shineth 
in the darkness, and the darkness comprehendeth it 
not." The revealing of the Lord's presence begins 
with the faithful of the Church speedily, and gradually 
extends to the world in general. Up to the time when 
the strength of the trouble breaks forth, only the faithful 
Watchers discern the parousia, and only by them 
can the bright-shining of the Lord's presence be appreciated. 
To these the bright-shining of the Lord's 
presence, the increased brilliancy of the light of truth 
respecting the Word and character and plan of God is 
an ever increasing joy and pleasure: thus it is that "ye, 
brethren, are not in darkness," respecting the events 
of the day of the Lord, but know in advance that its 
tribulation will come upon the world as travail upon a 
woman.— 1 Thes. 5:3,4. 

R2359 : page 272 

While the revealment of our Lord's presence thus 
illuminates the hearts of his faithful ones as the Day-star 
(2 Pet. 1:19) and causes them to understand, and 
not be in darkness with the world in respect to his 
plans, present and future, the bright-shining of the 
Lord's presence shall affect nominal Christians, and 
the civilized world in general also, but in a totally 
different manner, for the character of Christ's "harvest" 
work, during this period of his presence, is such 
as to cause a general opening of eyes along the lines 



of justice and injustice, righteousness and sin, the 
rights of mankind and the wrongs of mankind. The 
light which has been shining out for the past twenty 
years, is awakening the world to a realization of its 
rights and its wrongs, to a realization that the earth 
belongs to mankind in general and not exclusively to 
a few who have seized it and fenced it. This same 
light is exposing the corruption and falsity of many 
long-venerated theories and institutions, monarchical, 
religious, political and financial. It was in reference 
to this light of his presence at the second advent that 
our Lord declared that this day of his presence would 
bring to light the hidden things of darkness, and make 
manifest the secret counsels of the heart,— for there is 
nothing hidden that shall not be uncovered. (Luke 8:17.) 
And in this connection let it not be overlooked 
that the Apostle declares that Satan's power to deceive 
the world through Antichrist is to be consumed 
by "the bright-shining [epiphania] of his presence 
[parousia]."— 2 Thes. 2:8. 

Thus seen, the bright-shining of the present One 
is causing great joy to the hearts of the faithful, who 
wait patiently for him and the deliverance which he 
has promised, but the bright-shining, as it affects the 
worldly, has the effect of quickening their selfish propensities, 
producing discontent, and is thus preparing 
the world for the great climax of catastrophe, predicted 
in the Word of the Lord, as the consummation 
of this age;— the overthrow of all the governments 
and institutions of this present order of things in anarchy, 
—"a time of trouble such as was not since there 
was a nation." 

We noticed that it was predicted 2500 years ago, 
through the Prophet Daniel that "in the days of these 
kings" the representatives of the fourth universal empire, 
Rome, ecclesiastically conglomerated, shown in 
the feet and toes of the image, the God of heaven 
would cause the Kingdom of God to smite the image 
upon its feet, to utterly crush it; and that it would be 
after smiting the image that God's Kingdom, represented 
by the stone, would wax great and fill the 
whole earth. As we have just shown, we are now in 
this time in which the Kingdom of God is exerting 
its force against the kingdoms of this world: the King 
himself is present, must be present before he could 
destroy present kingdoms and take their power; he is 
already exerting the influences which will eventuate 
in their destruction; and he is prepared, backed by all 
the power of God, to quickly establish upon their 
ruins his own glorious Kingdom, consisting of himself 
the King, and his faithful ones of the Gospel Church 
as his Bride and joint-heir. 

The influence exerted by our present Lord, the 
Light, the Truth, is already breaking the power of 
ignorance and superstition, which for long centuries 
has held the masses of mankind in subserviency to 



Papacy; and the same bright-shining is likewise dissolving 
the lighter shackles of ignorance and error 
forged for their faithful by the various sects of Protestantism. 
Ultimately all superstition and false reverence 
will be dissolved, and false institutions will 
fall, and then will be manifest the fact that error and 
falsehood and fear never truly sanctify the heartl- 
and the world of mankind being released from its servility 
to fear will speedily manifest its true character 
of selfishness and ungodliness, and will speedily precipitate 
the great trouble predicted. 

But it would be a mistake to suppose that the 
parousia of our Lord is merely or chiefly in connection 
with the world and its preparation for the chaos of 
the present order of things. On the contrary, the 
chief work of the Lord during this period of his 
parousia is for and in connection with his Church. 
As we saw above, he foretold that on his return he 
will first reckon with his servants, to whom he entrusted 
the pounds and talents, before manifesting 
his wrath against evil-doers in the trouble of this "day 
of vengeance,"— in the slaughter of all who would 
not have him to reign over them. That slaughter 
time, in which all who will not accept the reign of 
righteousness will be destroyed from among the people 
(Acts 3:23), begins with the burning of the 
"tares" in the end of this age, when there shall be 
great trouble "weeping and gnashing of teeth;" and 
to some extent it will continue throughout the Millennial 
Age for all the way to the very last (Isa. 65:20; 
Acts 3:23; Rev. 20:8,9) all who wilfully oppose the 
Lord will perish. 

The Kingdom which we are expecting, and which 
we believe is now in process of establishment, and is 
soon to smite the kingdoms of this world and to supplant 
them, is not an earthly kingdom, but a heavenly 
one, not a fleshly kingdom, but a spiritual one, not a 
kingdom which will be visible to the natural eye, but 
an invisible yet powerful kingdom. We find nothing 
in the Scriptures to corroborate the thought entertained 
by some that this Gospel age having begun in 
the spirit is to culminate in a reign of Christ and his 

R2359 : page 273 

Church in the flesh with an earthly throne, etc. 
Quite to the contrary, the King and his joint-heirs, 
the Church, as spirit beings, will have a spiritual empire, 
tho their subjects to whom they will offer the 
blessings of the restitution purchased at Calvary will 
be men in the flesh, whose highest hope and ambition 
will be restitution to the grand perfection of the human 
nature lost in Eden, redeemed at Calvary,— an earthly 
image of the Heavenly Father. We hold that Christ 
and his saints during the Millennial Age will be no 
more visible to mankind than is the Prince of this 



world, Satan, whose associates in the misrule of the 
present evil world, the fallen angels, are likewise 
invisible. 

"THE KINGDOM OF HEAVEN COMETH NOT WITH 
OBSERVATION." 



The Pharisees at the first advent made the mistake 
of supposing that the Kingdom, which Christ 
proclaimed, would be a visible kingdom, composed of 
himself and his followers in the flesh: and seeing no 
army or other evidences of temporal power for the establishment 
of an earthly kingdom, they thought to 
expose the hollowness of our Lord's claims before his 
followers, by asking him the question,— When will 
your Kingdom of God appear— when will we see it? 
Mark well our Lord's reply, which, if the Pharisees 
had understood it, might have been a great revelation 
to them. He answered, "The Kingdom of God cometh 
not with observation." How strange they must 
have thought this answer! The Kingdom of God, 
then, would be a Kingdom which could not be observed 
or seen;— an invisible kingdom. But our Lord 
continued the explanation and increased their perplexity 
by adding, "Neither shall ye say, Lo here, or, Lo 
there." Then our Lord gave the key to the matter 
by adding, "Because the Kingdom of Heaven is [to 
be] in the midst of you." That is to say, when the 
Kingdom of Heaven shall come it will be amongst 
mankind, everywhere present but wholly invisible; so 
that they cannot observe it with the natural eye, nor 
can they point it out or locate it, altho it will be 
everywhere present amongst men, an omnipresent and 
omnipotent rule or reign of righteousness. In our 
Common Version the true thought is obscured by the 
words "within you," which would better be "among 
you." Anyone, however, can see that it could not 
have been our Lord's intention to say that the Kingdom 
of God was then or ever would be within the 
hearts of the class addressed, and which elsewhere he 
styled "hypocrites, whited walls and sepulchers, full 
of all manner of corruption." 

"THAT WHICH IS BORN OF THE SPIRIT IS SPIRIT." 



We call to mind also our Lord's explanation of spiritual 
things to Nicodemus, in which he declared plainly 
that only those who are born again can either enter into 
or see the Kingdom of God. (John 3:3,6.) Nor does 
this merely refer to the begetting of the spirit, as at 
consecration; it includes also the birth of the spirit in 
resurrection— "born from the dead." The Apostle 



Paul gives the same assurance, saying, "Flesh and 
blood [human nature] cannot inherit the Kingdom 
of God." Hence he informs us that all those who 
shall be sharers of that heavenly Kingdom must be 
"changed" from human or flesh conditions to spirit 
conditions, from weakness to power, from animal to 
spiritual conditions.— 1 Cor. 15:42-44. 

One matter which more than any other seems to 
hinder the Lord's people from grasping this subject 
clearly is the prevalent but mistaken view which is 
entertained respecting the resurrection of the dead. 
We shall not attempt to discuss this subject at length 
here, and we shall omit entirely reference to the world's 
resurrection, which will be the human conditions, nature, 
etc.; but it is necessary that we notice something 
respecting "the first [chief, best, highest] resurrection, 
which appertains only to Christ Jesus and the Church 
which is his body— the Kingdom class. These all are 
sacrificers, who "present their bodies living sacrifices, 
holy and acceptable to God." In view of this sacrifice 
of the human nature, the gift of God to these in exchange 
is a spiritual nature, and hence they are termed 
"new creatures." Their exaltation in nature is very 
high: lifted out of the human nature, which is a little 
lower than that of angels (the lowest order of spirit beings) 
they are to be exalted to the nature and likeness 
of their Lord, "far above angels, principalities and 
powers," and to be made partakers of the highest form 
of the spirit nature, namely, the divine nature, with its 
wonderful peculiarity, namely, immortality, or inherent 
life. *-2 Pet. 1:4. 

The one point which more than any other seems 
to confuse the student of this subject is our Lord's resurrection. 
They note the fact that he appeared in a 
body of flesh and bones, after his resurrection, and they 
therefore conclude that he still has a body of flesh and 
bones bearing all the scars of Calvary; hence, in thinking 
of his second advent they invariably expect it to be 
another advent as a human being (in flesh and bones), 
"a little lower than the angels." These expectations 
are wrong, as we shall show from the Scriptures. Our 
Lord after his resurrection was a spirit being, and his 
manifestations of himself to his disciples in various 
fleshly bodies, then, were similar exactly to manifestations 
made before he became the man Christ Jesus, while 
he still possessed the glory which he had with the 
Father before the world was,— the glory of a spirit being. 
For instance, are we not particularly told that 



*Send for our tract, "The Hope of Immortality,"— samples 
free. 

R2359 : page 274 



the Lord and two angels appeared as men in bodies of 
flesh and blood and bones, and in ordinary human garb, 
to Abraham and Sarah? And the record is that "they 
did eat and talk with Abraham." On another occasion 
the Lord appeared to Moses, not in a body of flesh, but 
"as a flame of fire" in a bush which apparently burned, 
and from which he spoke to Moses. We contend 
that such a power to appear in any kind of a body 
is a power which in the past was considerably used in 
communicating the divine will to mankind, and that it 
is only discontinued now because the canon of divine 
revelation is complete, so that in it the man of God is 
thoroughly furnished unto every good word and work, 
and needs no special message or revelations.— 
2 Tim. 3:17. 

In reading the narrative of our Lord's appearance 
to his disciples after his resurrection, the fact seems 
generally to be overlooked that he appeared only a few 
times, in all, and that these visits were always brief, 
and that between these visits, after the day of his resurrection, 
there were long periods of days and weeks 
in which the disciples saw nothing of him. It is generally 
overlooked, also, that he appeared in various 
forms, one of which was identical with the body that 
was crucified, because Thomas had said he would not 
believe unless he could have such a demonstration. 
Even then our Lord rather upbraided Thomas, assuring 
him that there was a still greater blessing in store for 
those who ask not for such ocular demonstration. It 
is generally forgotten that none of the world ever saw 
our Lord after his resurrection, but merely his disciples, 
to whom, it is said, he "showed himself." This 
was in harmony with his statement made before his 
death, "Yet a little while and the world seeth me no 
more."— John 14:19. 

The change of nature which our Lord experienced 
in his resurrection was no less a step upward from the 
earthly to the heavenly condition than was the change 
of nature which he experienced at his birth a step 
downward from the heavenly to the earthly condition, 
called "humbling himself," laying aside his glory. As 
he laid aside the glory of his spirit being to become a 
man, so he in turn laid aside his humanity in death in 
order to assume the glory and dignity of the divine 
nature, "far above." Concerning the change which 
he experienced at his resurrection, the Apostle declares, 
"God hath highly exalted him." It should be manifest 
to all that, since our Lord left his rich condition as a 
spirit being, and humbled himself and became comparatively 
poor in the taking of the human nature, that 
this was for some particular reason and object, and 
that, when that object would be accomplished, the 
riches of the spiritual condition would be fully restored 
to him. But instead, the general thought is that our 
Lord Jesus not only is encumbered in heaven with a 
body of flesh, wholly unsuitable to heavenly conditions, 



but that in addition to this that body of flesh has all 
the marks of mental and physical suffering which it 
received through contact with sin and sinners as our 
ransom price. 

Such a view is dishonoring to the Heavenly Father, 
for it should not be supposed that he would tolerate a 
loss to all eternity on the part of his well beloved One, 
because of his faithfulness and obedience to the divine 
will. The Scripture declaration is to the contrary, 
namely, that our Lord was "made flesh," took upon 
him our nature "for the suffering of death;" and not 
for to be encumbered with fleshly conditions to all 
eternity. Besides, if our Lord must bear the scars of 
his wounds to all eternity, the implication would be 
that his people would also bear all their blemishes and 
scars to all eternity. Surely, if such were the divine 
arrangement, that which is perfect would never come, 
for we should be encumbered with the imperfect forever. 
-1 Cor. 13:10. 

When we get the correct view of this matter, every 
difficulty and objection ceases. As the Scriptures 
declare, so it was, "He was put to death in flesh, he 
was quickened in spirit." "Tho we have known Christ 
after the flesh, yet now henceforth know we him no 
more [so]." (2 Cor. 5:16) It was at his resurrection 
that he became the second Adam— "the last Adam, a 
quickening spirit." (1 Cor. 15:45.) "Now the Lord 
is that spirit." (2 Cor. 3:17.) After appearing to his 
disciples under various peculiar conditions after his resurrection, 
in various bodies, the Lord invariably vanished, 
—as soon as he had communicated to them the 
appropriate lessons, causing, as they declared, their 
hearts to burn within them. He appeared in these various 
forms for two reasons:— 

(1) They could best receive his instructions under 
such conditions, whereas, if he had appeared to them 
in the glory of his spirit being, and had performed a 
miracle upon their eyes by which they could have discerned 
his spiritual glory, they would have been too 

much affrighted to have benefited by what he would 
have said. 

(2) They were still natural men, not fully begotten 
of the holy spirit, because Pentecost was not yet 
come (John 7:39), and hence they were unprepared to 
understand spiritual things; "for the natural man receiveth 
not the things of the spirit of God, neither can 

he know [appreciate] them, because they are spiritually 
discerned." 

The Apostle Paul was the only one of the disciples 
who saw the Lord "as he is." He tells us that 
the Lord's real spiritual presence, so far from being 
fleshly or human-like, shone with a brightness "above 

R2359 : page 275 

the brightness of the sun at noonday." The effect 



upon Paul's eyes was serious, and, we may readily believe 
the effects remained with him to his dying day, 
notwithstanding the miraculous removal of the callous 
scales, which permitted him to see, tho indistinctly. 
Very evidently our Lord's design was to educate his 
apostles up to the thought of his resurrection, and also 
to the thought of his resurrection being not to former 
conditions, limited by the flesh, but to new conditions, 
in which he (as he had already explained to Nicodemus) 
could come and go like the wind, and none could 
know whence he came nor whither he went; he could 
appear in one body or in another body, or be present 
with them without their being aware of it, just as "the 
angel of the Lord encampeth round about them that 
fear him," yet is invisible to them, because a spirit 
being. 

"WE SHALL BE LIKE HIM, FOR WE SHALL SEE HIM 
AS HE IS." 



When the right conception of our Lord, in his glorified 
condition, is gained, and when the Apostle's 
statement is remembered, that his Church shall be like 
him, and "see him as he is," it is comparatively easy 
to understand that the entire glorified Church will be 
as invisible to the world as the Heavenly Father is, 
and as our Lord Jesus was after his resurrection; and 
when it is remembered that this Church constitutes the 
Kingdom of God, the "royal priesthood," which is to 
rule and bless the world during the Millennial age, our 
Lord's words to the Pharisees are quite intelligible,— 
"The Kingdom of God cometh not with observation— 
neither shall ye say, Lo here! or, Lo there! for behold, 
the Kingdom of God is in the midst of you"— a present 
but invisible authority, government, rule of 
righteousness. 

THEY KNEW NOT THE TIME OF THEIR VISITATION. 
-LUKE 19:44.- 



Our Lord reproved the teachers of Israel because 
they did not discern the signs of the times, because 
they "knew not the time of their visitation." His 
words imply that their ignorance was a mark of carelessness 
and unworthiness, and of divine disfavor. 
He said: "Ye can discern the face of the sky; how is 
it that ye cannot discern the signs of the times?" 
There was a reason, and the realization of that reason 
might have meant, to some at least, a correction of 
it— a drawing near to God to be taught of him. So 
now in the time of our Lord's second presence we find 
the world largely increasing in wisdom along the various 



lines, and many hearts in perplexity and wonderment 

looking for those things which are coming upon 

the world, their hearts failing them for fear of the 

impending dissolution of the social structure in anarchy, 

and yet none are so blind respecting the times 

in which we live and the great changes impending, as 

the leaders of religious thought. 

They are blinded by their false theories. They 
have declared that the Lord's commission to his 
Church is that she should convert the world into a 
Kingdom of God, and thus bring about the reign of 
righteousness; and they are so determined that their 
theories must not fail that they cannot see what is 
rapidly becoming apparent even to the worldly, namely, 
that the numbers even nominally converted every 
year are increasing far less, proportionately, than the 
natural increase of the world's population: so that if 
they had millions of years before them the conversion 
could never be hoped for, but in the end of millions 
of years true Christianity could not expect to claim as 
large a percentage as at present. Their theory also 
blinds them to the fact that much of the increase of 
Church membership in civilized lands is merely for 
popularity's sake, and for the sake of worldly prosperity, 
social standing, etc., and not the result of love for 
God and righteousness, nor significant of a consecration 
to walk in the "narrow way" of self-denial, self-sacrifice, 
etc. 

The worldly, therefore, are really in a better condition 
to discern the signs of the times than many 
prejudiced nominal Christians. But none can see 
these things from the true standpoint except as they 
take that standpoint, and it is only granted to those 
who are fully consecrated to the Lord and who hearken 
to his Word. These shall not be in darkness, the 
Lord will not hide from them either his good purposes 
as respects the blessing of the Church and subsequently 
of the world, or his purposes respecting the chastisement 
of the world in a great time of trouble, preparatory 
to its blessing, after it has been humbled. 

"THE DEAD IN CHRIST SHALL RISE FIRST." 



The chief work of our Lord during this "harvest" 
time, and especially in the forepart of it (when he 
calls his faithful servants of the Gospel age and 
reckons with them and rewards them), respects his 
Church as a whole, and not merely its living members. 
And here we should note the Apostle's statement respecting 
this time and work. He informs us that the 
Lord's dealings during this harvest will be first with 
"the dead in Christ," saying, "We which are alive 
and remain to the coming [presence] of the Lord shall 
not prevent [precede] them which are asleep [those of 



the Church already dead],... for the dead in Christ 
shall rise first." Taking this statement in connection 
with our Lord's parable, it means that the faithful 
sleeping in death will be reckoned with, rewarded, 
resurrected, before the reckoning with and rewarding 
of the living members of the Church begins. Accordingly, 
if it be true, as we have briefly presented it, 
foregoing,— that we are now living "in the days of 
the Son of Man," and that his presence began in the 
Autumn of 1874, then we should also believe that the 
resurrection of the saints which "were asleep" was 
due and took place at some period not long after our 
Lord's parousia began. And we are able to fix upon 
a date for this with comparative certainty, altho the 
entire matter is invisible to natural eyes and can be 
discerned only with the eye of faith and by the light 
of our lamp, the Scriptures. 

Our lamp, as we have already seen, shows us that 
the Jewish age was in every particular a pattern or 
illustration of this Gospel age; and keeping this in 
mind, we can judge something respecting the order of 
the divine arrangement in the "harvest" of this age, 
from the order of the divine arrangement in the "harvest" 
of the Jewish age. Observing the Jewish age, 
we find that the first three and a half years of their 

R2359 : page 276 

"harvest" were devoted to the simple announcement 

of the Master's presence, and an offer to the nominal 

Church then living, and that they ended by the rejection 

of the nominal Church at the time of our Lord's 

death; and that afterward while their nominal system 

or Church was ignored, the Israelites indeed were 

called out of it into fellowship with the Lord, through 

his spirit. We note also, that it was at the very time 

of the rejection of the Jewish house that our Lord assumed 

before them typically his office of King, and 

rode upon the ass as the King of the Jews: and looking 

for the time when our Lord, in the end of the age, 

should assume his full regal power and authority as 

the King of kings, we find it should be at the corresponding 

date in this "harvest," namely, in the Spring 

of 1878. And as the first work of our Lord, after 

taking the kingly office, in the typical "harvest," 

was to reject the nominal house of Israel, that he 

might begin the work of gathering out of it the Israelites 

indeed, so we understand that in the present 

harvest time the first work of our King is the rejection 

of the nominal Gospel house of sons,— to the intent 

that he may gather out of it the "wheat," his 

"elect," from one end of the ecclesiastical heavens to 

the other. (Matt. 24:31.) This rejection of the 

nominal Church, and the call to his people to "Come 

out of her," we understand to be symbolically styled 

the fall of Babylon, and the spewing out of Laodicea. 



See Rev. 3:16-20-22; 18:2-4. 

Here, then, we have an indication of the time 
when the judgment of the Lord's servants was due to 
begin, represented in the parable by the king calling 
to himself his own servants to hear their reports; and 
in the light of the Apostle's statement just noticed, 
namely, that the living will not precede those that are 
asleep, it is clear that at that time, and before the 
reckoning with the living began, "them that sleep," 
"the dead in Christ," were awakened, granted a part 
in the first resurrection— raised in glory, honor, power, 
spiritual bodies, invisible to mankind. Nor would 
the resurrection of the spirit bodies necessitate any 
disturbance of graveyards or tombstones, or anything 
earthly. "That which is born of the spirit is spirit," 
and as our Lord after his resurrection was invisible to 
the world, and invisible also to his Church (except as 
he miraculously manifested himself), so with these: 
they are invisible, nor is there any necessity for miraculous 
manifestation, nor has any been made, neither 
is any expected. "We walk by faith, and not by 
sight." 

To all who understand the necessity for the sleep 
of the saints (namely, that it was because the call of 
the Church took place before the time divinely arranged 
for the establishment of the Kingdom), it will 
seem eminently proper that the King should, immediately 
on taking office as King, liberate from the prisonhouse 
of death his faithful followers, who during 
his absence manifested their faithfulness, and for 
whom have been set aside crowns of righteousness, to 
be given them at his return in power and great glory. 
It would be unreasonable indeed to suppose any prolonged 
delay of their resurrection, after our Lord takes 
to himself his great power and begins his reign. We 
hold, therefore, that the resurrection of the dead in 
Christ was due to take place in the Spring of 1878. 

Furthermore, we note a beautiful analogy here; 
for, thus considered, our Lord's resurrection a few 
days after his taking of office as King in typical Israel 
corresponds to or parallels the resurrection of the 
Church, "the body of Christ" a few days after his 
taking to himself honor and glory and power as the 
King of nations in the Spring of 1878. Not only so, 
but the Book of Revelation, in a scene which belongs 
to that particular time and description of the 
opening of the "harvest" of this Gospel age, shows 
"one like unto the Son of Man, having on his head a 
golden crown and in his hand a sharp sickle," beginning 
the work of reaping the harvest of this age: and 
there we find the significant statement, "Blessed are 
the dead which die in the Lord from henceforth; yea, 
saith the Spirit, that they may rest from their labors, 
for their works follow them."— Rev. 14:13,16. 

This text has been so frequently misapplied by 
theologians that its true significance will be apt to 



elude all who have not their senses exercised by reason 
of use, and who do not closely discriminate. It signifies 
that from the time of the beginning of the reaping 
of the "harvest" of this age by the crowned reaper 
(the Spring of 1878) there will be a wonderful 
blessing not previously possible, upon the certain class 
described. From this particular date onward those 
of this particular class who die will be favored or 
blessed in a manner in which none of the preceding 
members of this same class were blessed; namely, in 
that their death will not interrupt their works, which 
will continue right along, the labor and weariness 
alone ceasing, the work itself continuing under more 
glorious and more favorable conditions. 

This means that since 1878 the fully consecrated 
of the Lord's people, those who are completely "dead 
with him," will not sleep in death, as has been necessary 
with all the preceding members of the body of 
Christ throughout the Gospel age: it means that from 
1878 onward the dead who die in the Lord will in 
the moment of dying experience their "change," or 
share in the first resurrection— in a moment, in the 
twinkling of an eye, pass from mortality to immortality, 
from weakness to power, from dishonor to glory, 
from natural to spiritual condition. 

It is to this that the Apostle referred when he 
said, "Behold, I show you a mystery; we shall not all 
sleep, but we shall all be changed, in a moment, in the 
twinkling of an eye, at the last trump." To our understanding 
the last trump, the seventh of the series 
of symbolical trumpets, began in 1874, just before our 
Lord took to himself his great power and began its 
exercise— began his reign: its sound is to continue 
until the close of the Millennial Age, a thousand years. 
This "change" in a moment, in the twinkling of an 
eye, that is to occur to the living members of the body 
of Christ will indeed be a momentary change as respects 
each individual after he shall have rendered his 
accounts before the great King, and been accepted of 
him as a joint-heir in the Kingdom; but it does not 
imply that all of these will be changed in a moment. 
Quite to the contrary, the judging of the living members 
of the Church, the going in of the wise virgins in 
the end of this age, will be a gradual work, and has 
already been in progress for twenty years, and is not 
yet finished. It will include the rejection of the 

R2359 : page 277 

"foolish virgins," and the utter casting out of any 
who may take off the "wedding garment" of Christ's 
righteousness, as shown in one of the parables. 

Thus we see that immediately after this taking of 
the crown in the Spring of 1878, our Lord gathered to 
himself those of his saints, "his jewels," who had already 
been polished and fitted and prepared, and who 



slept, awaiting the time for the establishment of the 
Kingdom; and that since then, one by one, his faithful 
saints of the same class of "jewels" are being gathered 
to himself, as they finish their course. But as it was 
necessary that our Redeemer should not only consecrate 
his life to death, but that he should actually die, 
so it is necessary that every member of the body of Christ 
shall not only consecrate himself to be dead with him, 
but that each also shall actually die. They are already 
reckoned dead, but this is not sufficient; our 
Lord's words are, "Be thou faithful unto death, and 
I will give thee a crown of life," and again, "Blessed 
are the dead in the Lord [reckonedly dead, consecrated 
unto death], dying from henceforth." So also it 
had been foretold in other Scriptures, that all who 
would be of the body of Christ must, like the Head, 
pass through the portals of death; thus it is written, 
"I have said, Ye are gods [mighty ones], all of you 
sons of the Most High; ye shall ALL DIE like men, and 
fall like one of the princes." The two princes of our 
race were Adam and Christ Jesus. Adam went into 
death because of disobedience; Christ as a sacrifice for 
the sins of others, entered death in obedience; and the 
Church, the body of Christ, his "brethren," being justified 
out of the Adamic death by faith in his sacrifice, 
are reckoned as joint-sacrificers with him in his death 
of obedience, that they may be accounted also sharers 
in "his resurrection"— the first resurrection, to the divine 
nature and glory and joint-heirship.— Psa. 82:6; 
Rom. 5:12,17; 2 Pet. 1:4. 

We have given here only the briefest possible summary 
of the Scriptural evidences that we are living in 
the parousia, the presence, "the days of the Son of 
Man," in the "harvest" time of this age, and that the 
work which he, directly and through his apostles, instructed 
us to expect is now in progress, namely, the 
"sealing" of the saints of the Most High God in their 
foreheads (Eph. 1:13,14), and giving them a mental 
appreciation of the divine plan and its times and seasons, 
together with a judgment or testing of all who 
have covenanted themselves to be the Lord's and 
to lay down their lives in his service. And all who 
refuse to live up to their covenant, even tho sealed and 
blessed, and enlightened with present truth, will, we 
understand, be rejected from it, and cast again "into 
outer darkness" with the world, to share in the 
great time of trouble coming upon it. We understand 
also that the elect number will soon be completed, and 
the last one of the class who shall be blessed by the 
glorious "change" from mortality to immortality, in 
a moment, in the twinkling of an eye, shall soon obtain 
that blessing, and that then the great time of trouble 
will fully burst upon the world, and speedily bring 
down the high, the lofty and the proud, and prepare 
the world for the reign of the Prince of Peace. 

Here we have consistency, at least, and harmony 



of Scriptures which have never been harmonized in 
the past, and which cannot now be harmonized from 
any other standpoint or with any other interpretation. 
Here we have the spiritual Kingdom of Messiah, with 
all power, displacing the spiritual kingdom of Satan, 
and establishing order and righteousness through earthly 
agents of its own, and overthrowing the earthly 
agents of the prince of darkness, many of whom are 
his servants merely because "the god of this world 
[age] has blinded the minds of them that believe not." 

"THEY WITHOUT US SHALL NOT BE MADE PERFECT.' 
-HEB. 11:40.- 



We remark incidentally that following the gathering 
of the Church to glory, as above outlined, will 
come the resurrection of the holy ones of the past,— 
"Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, and all the holy prophets," 
whose resurrection will be to perfect earthly conditions, 
and who shall be the "princes in all the earth," 
seen of men, and representatives of the invisible but 
all-powerful spiritual Kingdom— the glorified Christ. 
Thus, chosen representatives of fleshly Israel will 
indeed rule the world, and bless it, as the representatives 
and agencies of the Spiritual Israel, and to the 
standard of the Lord thus set up the nation of Israel 
will be first to respond.— Psa. 45:16; Rom. 11:25-31; 
Zech. 12:10. 

Our Lord's parousia (presence in the world) begun 
in 1 874, will continue till the end of the Millennial 
age. The word is not applicable merely to a little period 
of presence at the beginning of the Millennial age: 
Christ's parousia and that of his Church will continue 
throughout the age. Nor will the epiphania and apokalupsis 
be a sudden burst of glorious light; nor do 
these words signify a visible showing to mankind of 
the Lord's person, or of the persons of his Church. 
Let us remember his words, "Yet a little while, and 
the world seeth me no more." Let us remember also 
that, as his Church is to be in his likeness, so his 
likeness is declared to be an "express image of the 
Father's person;" it is written that he is the King 
eternal, immortal, invisible. (1 Tim. 1:17.) Nor 
will it be any more necessary that the world should 
see with their natural eyes the Lord and his glorified 
ones, than that they should see the Heavenly 
Father: the world will see the earthly representatives 
of God and of Christ and of the Church, when 
they "see Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob and all the holy 
prophets," for they will be samples of perfect manhood, 
which is the earthly image of the invisible God. 

Our Lord's epiphania (bright shining) and his 
apokalupsis (unveiling) began shortly after his parousia 
began; the bright shining of his presence is now visible 



to those who are walking "in the light"— to those who 

"are not in darkness with the world." It is a mental 

illumination, an illumination to the eyes of our understandings, 

and not to our natural eyes. The eyes of 

our understanding have been opened to see him that is 

invisible to the natural sight. The epiphania of our 

Lord is already affecting the world also, tho not through 

the eyes of the understanding, for they have no eyes 

for such spiritual things: nevertheless, the bright shining 

of the Lord's presence is influencing and affecting 

the whole course of the world, through an increase of 

knowledge on every subject— specially noticeable since 

1878. Eventually all the blinded shall have opened 

eyes of understanding and 

R2359 : page 278 

"EVERY EYE SHALL SEE HIM." 



Many even who are not of the Watchers are noting 
the signs of our times and are startled, and led to 
exclaim, What do these things mean?— This remarkable 
latter-day advance in science, art and mechanical 
invention?— This latter-day discontent in the midst of 
plenty and luxury?— This latter-day growth of millionaires 
and paupers?— This growth of giant corporations 
of world-wide power and influence?— Why are 
national policies and public men and their utterances 
and doings criticized (judged) by the masses as never 
before?— And what means it that with an apparent 
growth in wealth and numbers in all denominations of 
Christians there is a growing dissatisfaction, discontent 
in them all: a growing tendency to criticise the creeds 
and the preaching and everything?— How comes it 
that nine-tenths of the preachers in all denominations 
know that their hearers desire a change, and would 
gladly "move on," if they knew how to better themselves 
even at smaller salaries? 

The Scriptural answer is, The hour of God's judgment 
is come; the time when "Christendom," political, 
financial, social and ecclesiastical is being judged— being 
tried in the divine balances. And the Scriptures 
declare that she will be found wanting, and will be adjudged 
unworthy to further administer the affairs of 
earth, which will be turned over to the elect "little 
flock," according to the divine promise.— Luke 12:32. 

The secret of the matter now is the same as in the 
Jewish "harvest," which John explained, saying, 

"THERE STANDETH ONE AMONG YOU WHOM YOU 
KNOW NOT. "-JOHN 1:26. 



"Mine eyes can see the glory of the presence of the Lord; 
He is trampling out the winepress where the grapes of wrath 

are stored; 
I see the flaming tempest of his swift descending sword; 
Our King is marching on. 

"I can see his coming judgments, as they circle all the earth 
The signs and groanings promised, to precede a second birth; 
I read his righteous sentence, in the crumbling thrones of 
earth: 

Our King is marching on. 

"The 'Gentile Times' are closing, for their kings have had 

their day; 
And with them sin and sorrow will forever pass away; 
For the tribe of Judah's Lion now comes to hold the sway: 
Our King is marching on." 



"Behold, I stand at the door and knock. If any man 
hear my voice [knock], and open the door, I will come in 
to him and sup with him, and he with me."— Rev. 3:20. 



R2359 : page 278 

ISRAEL'S OVERTHROW AND ITS CAUSE. 
SEPT. 18.-2 KINGS 17:9-18. 



AS AMOS gave a prophecy of Israel's fall, and 

some of the reasons therefore, so this lesson, 

from the historical book of the Kings, gives a record 

of its fall and of its cause. In previous lessons we 

have seen Israel's tendency to copy after the nations 

round about. The people recognized the fact that 

God had chosen them to be his special and peculiar 

people: they were quite willing to be his special people, 

and to have his special favor, but seemingly they 

did not wish to be his peculiar people. They were 

willing to be peculiar, in the sense of having a peculiar 

deliverance from Egypt, and peculiar manifestations 

of divine favor, subduing their enemies before them, 

and bringing them into the land of promise, and dividing 

the land amongst them tribally, and so long as 

they were inspired with the hope that God would continue 

thus marvelously and miraculously to lead them, 

as his people, so long they were satisfied with their 

condition. They did not realize that the people who 

would be fit to be used of the Lord as his Kingdom, 

and through whom he would operate to bring the blessings 

of the Abrahamic Covenant to all the families of 



the earth, must be not only peculiarly dealt with by 
divine Providence, but must also be peculiarly responsive 
to those providences. 

When, therefore, they came to find that as God's 
people they were restricted and restrained, and that 
deviation from the divine program was punished, this 
peculiarity, this difference from the world, they did not 
relish. They rebelled against it; and in their desire 
for an excuse for rebellion they became skeptical, 
doubting that their experiences were in any sense or 
degree of or from the Lord. Their evil hearts of unbelief 
looked out upon the nations around them, and 
beheld greater national prosperity than their own 
amongst those who worshiped other gods, and for 
whom Jehovah had not declared special care. They 
came to feel that there were different gods, and that 
the God who had charge of them as a people or nation, 
and who commanded their obedience, and who punished 
them for disobedience, must indeed be respected 
and placated; nevertheless, they hoped, evidently, to 
gain something of national greatness by the worship 
of the heathen deities, which they believed blessed 
other nations, with Jehovah, whose blessings upon their 
nation were thus far largely promises, yet to be 
fulfilled. 

First they were dissatisfied with the divine arrangement 
respecting their government. True, they had 
liberty, more than the other nations surrounding them, 
but the very fact that this liberty was not common or 
general, but rather unusual, caused them to desire 
that they might have a king like the nations round 
about them. (1 Sam. 8:5.) God pointed out to them 

R2359 : page 279 

the advantages of their peculiar condition, under which 
he had placed them, yet nevertheless granted their request, 
and gave them kings, and with the kings, as 
we have seen, came in a spirit of "broadmindedness," 
or "public policy," on the part of King Solomon. And 
his desire to be popular with neighboring kings, and 
to be considered broadminded in a religious way, led 
him first to establish, for the benefit of the foreigners 
at his court, and for his foreign wives, the religious 
customs and ceremonies common to foreign nations. 
This, as we have seen, spread amongst the people, and 
led to a laxity of views respecting the worship of the 
true God: it led to the thought that everyone should 
have some kind of a religion, but that each should be 
at liberty to choose for himself, or to blend elements 
of the various religions. We saw how, for political 
reasons, Jeroboam (after the ten tribes had split off 
from Judah, the kingly tribe, and had chosen Jeroboam 
to be its king, and form a new dynasty) took advantage 
of the "liberal" religious views to thoroughly 
engraft upon the people a false worship. And this 



false worship is stated by the Lord in the lesson before 
us to have been the cause of Israel's further decline, 
and ultimate fall, as a nation. 

The lesson states (vs. 9) that Israel favored the 
false religions, and practiced them secretly: by that 
we understand that they hypocritically built the altars 
of sacrifice to the false gods, and established the false 
worship in all their cities and villages, under the pretence 
that they were doing this in the service of the 
true God. They were claiming, and probably to some 
extent deceiving themselves with the thought, that 
they were becoming more religious, more zealous, 
more holy, and that the evidences of this increase of 
religious zeal were to be found in these various altars 
of worship in every city, whereas formerly only the 
one city of Jerusalem had been the place set apart for 
divine worship, where the sinofferings and sacrifices 
for sin should be made, and to which they were to 
come at least once a year. 

How this suggestion of Israel's secretly or hypocritically 
introducing a false worship corresponds with 
the tendency of the human heart to-day! How many 
there are to-day in Christendom who persuade themselves 
that in multiplying forms and ceremonies, in 
building of elegant churches, and in the engagement 
of finer choirs, and grander organs, and in the multiplying 
of meetings, and in publicly showing an outward 
display, they are increasing in godliness, holiness, 
and becoming more religious. How important 
that we should learn the lesson that "obedience is better 
than sacrifice"— that not by multiplying forms and 
ceremonies and emblems of holy things are we brought 
near to the Lord our God, but by taking strict heed 
unto his Word. Indeed, all these various efforts on 
the part of humanity to add to the divine plan are so 
many blemishes, so many injuries, so many things 
that are an offence to the Lord, instead of a thing of 
sweet odor. Moreover, every step taken contrary to 
the divine leading is a step away from the Lord, no 
matter how we may deceive ourselves or others with 
reference to the matter by sophistical arguments. 

Israel's service of idols finds its counterpart at the 
present time, too, for altho we are not sunken to that 
degree of ignorance that would lead us to worship images, 
Christendom nevertheless is full of idols— every 
city, every village. The idols of the present time are 
known by different names, also, from those of olden 
times. One of the idols most worshiped to-day is 
"Popularity," another is "Wealth," another "Fame," 
another "Self," another "Our Denomination." Few, 
very few indeed, have no other gods than the one true 
God. 

As the Lord dealt with Israel, sending them repeated 
warnings and reproofs, through Elijah, Elisha, 
Amos and others, so to us he has spoken by a still 
higher authority, and in still more forceful language, 



"For God hath in these last days spoken unto us by 
his Son." Nevertheless, just as many who heard the 
prophets of old were careless, so to-day many are careless 
of the voice of the Son of God, and of his special 
messengers, the Apostles, and are failing to receive 
the blessing now due, failing to make their calling and 
election sure, as Israelites indeed, called under the 
New Covenant. 

The particular seductions which hindered natural 
Israel from receiving the divine instructions are 
enumerated in verses 15-17. They sold themselves to 
do evil, that is to say, they loved the reward of unrighteousness, 
held out in the immediate present, more 
than they loved the reward of righteousness held out 
as a promise for the future. They sold themselves to 
do evil, in the sense of seeking and accepting the rewards 
of evil doing; as for instance, king Ahab was 
pleased to receive the vineyard of Naboth, altho it 
came to him as the result of dishonesty and murder. 
To him the Prophet Elijah said, "Thou hast sold thyself 
to do evil." He got temporarily the thing he desired, 
but it brought with it a curse which rested not 
only upon himself but upon his throne. And so with 
the humbler Israelites, there seems to have been a general 
desire to gratify self— self-will; and this self-gratification, 
with its unsatisfactory fruits, caused them the 
loss of divine favor. Further, they used divination 
and enchantments, we are told: they held intercourse 
with the fallen angels, operating through mediums, 
witches, wizards, necromancers, who affected to personate 
the dead, and to reveal the secrets of the future. 

R2359 : page 280 

A disposition of wilfulness and dissatisfaction with 
the divine arrangements naturally leads people into 
these delusions— to seek to know of the future from 
some other quarter, to the intent that they might 
frustrate, if possible, the operations of divine Providence, 
so as to the more thoroughly accomplish their own 
self-will. This same spirit is not lacking to-day, and 
in many instances is leading people in the same direction, 
to consult the same fallen angels, demons, who 
now, as then, attempt to personate the dead, through 

R2360 : page 280 

Spiritualist mediums. The result now, as then, is 
that those who are thus seeking in a wrong direction 
for light and leading, and because discontented with divine 
Providence and arrangements, are in danger of being 
led further and further away from the only true 
revelation, and the true prophets thereof. 

In the fervency of their religious zeal, the Israelites, 
we are informed (vs. 17) caused their sons and 
daughters to pass through the fire of Moloch— as sacrifices. 



Not that they were devoid of parental love, 
but that they esteemed it a part of duty to make such 
"religious sacrifices." And so to-day, many, misled 
by false teachings, and by mixtures of paganism with 
the divine revelation, have gotten to the place where 
they have similarly perverted ideas respecting the Lord 
and the sacrifice which would be pleasing to him. They 
have come to think of the Almighty as a ferocious deity, 
who would take pleasure in the everlasting torture 
of the children of men. 

The modern Moloch, ignorantly worshiped by 
many professed spiritual Israelites to-day, is far more 
terrible than was the Moloch of olden times, for the 
children who were then burned did have an end of 
tortures, while, according to the theories now advocated 
by many in spiritual Israel, they worship a Moloch 
who will hopelessly torture his victims to all 
eternity. As such a worship of Moloch in olden times 
tended to degradation of the feelings and conduct- 
tended toward brutality and heartlessness, so the tendency 
of the modern Moloch worship is in the same 
direction. He whose idea of God is that of injustice 
and terrible ferocity cannot well have a life and feelings 
of his own directly the opposite of this. The tendency 
of all is to copy after the character and disposition 
of their ideal God. Hence, the fact that people 
of civilized lands are becoming more and more tender-hearted 
and merciful can only be accounted for by supposing 
that the Moloch-teaching called "Orthodoxy" 
is losing its power— superstition and priest-craft are 
losing their power. And altho the Bible is losing its 
power also, with many, under the influence of Satanic 
"higher criticism," nevertheless, the spirit of its teachings 
—mercy, forgiveness, love— is recognized by its 
foes as well as by its friends. 

The statement of verse 15 is particularly noteworthy, 
as indicating how Israel got into all these other 
extremes; viz., (1) they rejected God's statutes- 
God's law, God's Word; (2) they lost sight of and neglected 
the covenant which he made with their fathers 
—they lost faith in the promises of God; (3) they lost 
sight of the testimony which he gave them respecting 
what would be the result of forsaking his counsel; 
(4) they followed vanity (foolishness,— they did not 
take the wise course) and became vain (foolish) and 
went after the heathen that were round them (copied 
after others, desiring to be not peculiar, but popular) 
concerning whom the Lord had charged them that 
they should not do like them. 

Applying these various points to antitypical nominal 
Israel of to-day, we find that to the extent she has 
gone from the Lord, in theory and in practice, it has 
been very generally as the result of (1) not heeding 
the Lord's Word; (2) of being negligent of the promises 
which were set before spiritual Israel, the high 
calling, etc.; (3) of becoming foolish, in attempting 



to serve God, and to be his "peculiar people," and at 
the same time attempting to please and to copy the 
world, and to be popular therewith. The disposition 
to "do like them," to do like the world in general, is 
the seductive point at which the great Adversary would 
switch us off from being the Lord's peculiar people, 
Israelites indeed, heirs of the promises. Let us remember, 
in this connection, the Master's words, "If 
ye were of the world, the world would love its own, 
but now ye are not of the world, for I have chosen 
you out of the world; therefore the world hateth you." 
Our course in life, as new creatures in Christ Jesus, is 
to be along wholly different lines from the course of 
the world, and we must be prepared from the outstart 
to know that the world's pathway and the pathway of 
elect Israel are different paths, as surely as they have 
different terminations. 

The fall of the Ten Tribes of Israel for the above 
reasons reminds us of the fall of Papacy for similar 
reasons. As the faithful Israelites were sifted out and 
gathered into Judah, so the faithful of God's people 
were very generally gathered out of Papacy into Protestantism. 
But as Judah subsequently became similarly 
idolatrous and instituted Moloch worship, so Protestantism 
has failed of faithfulness to God and is to 
fall as Judah fell. The testing and sifting will go on 
to the full end of this age, for the Lord seeks individually 
the Israelites indeed and not by nations nor by denominations. 
Eventually he will gather in glory the 
"elect" out of all nations, peoples and tongues to be 
his glorious Israel— his holy nation, his peculiar people, 
his royal priesthood— to bless all the families of 
the earth as the true Seed of Abraham.— Gal. 3:16,29. 



page 281 
VOL. XIX. OCTOBER 1, 1898. No. 19. 



CONTENTS. 



Views from the Watch Tower 283 

The Czar's Peace proposal 

The Second Zionist Congress 284 

The Kingdom of Judah More Faithful 

than Israel 286 

Jehoshaphat's Good Reign 290 

God's Word the Lamp of Liberty 291 

Evil Companionship Baneful 292 

Repairing Solomon's Temple 293 

"A Little Leaven Leaveneth 

the Whole Lump" 293 

Letters from Earnest Colaborers 295 

page 282 

SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
--ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 56-60 ARCH STREET, ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, N.Y. DRAFT, MONEY ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS: 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age or accident, or other 
adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, if they 
send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting the 
paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list 
constantly. 



COUNCIL BLUFFS CONVENTION. 
-OCT. lst-5th.~ 

Indications are that the attendance at the Convention will 
be good. We trust that all of the class invited in our last issue, 
who come, will come as full as possible of the Lord's spirit- 
Love; and that all departing shall overflow with the same, and 
carry home a blessing. Let each one watch and pray to this 
effect. "Brethren, pray for us!" 

Any who intend coming, but have not sent definite word to 
Allegheny, should send a postal card at once, stating number in 
their party, for whom lodgings should be reserved, to— 

C. F. ADAMS, 200 BROADWAY, COUNCIL BLUFFS, IOWA. 



The meetings will commence Sunday, Oct. 1st, at 9 A.M., at 
No. 400 Broadway, "Temple Hall." 



R2360 : page 283 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 



CZAR NICHOLAS, Emperor of Russia, has 

startled the world with a proposition looking 

toward universal peace— "a durable peace"— by 

the disarmament of the larger proportion of the armies 

of Europe. He asks a conference of representative 

men of all nations to consider the subject; and all the 

leading nations, including the United States, have responded 

favorably, promising to send delegates to the 

Peace Conference. The London Chronicle considers 

the Czar's note the most striking document of the century, 

and the London Telegraph says, "Rarely, if ever, 

was there a more important document in the history 

of the world." The Press (New York) says, "The 

document is epochal. ...The millennium of European 

disarmament is brought within the range of profitable 

discussion." The Public Ledger (Philadelphia) 

says, "It may not lead at once to a national disarmament 

and an agreement to refer all matters in dispute 

to arbitration, but it will pave the way for this desirable 

result." The Times (New York) says, "It may be 

the beginning of the most momentous and beneficent 

movement of modern history, indeed of all history." 

Among other reasons prompting to the humane 
course suggested, the Czar calls attention to the fact 
that present vast armaments were prompted by a desire 
for peace, but have proved ineffectual and instead 
are increasing financial burdens. He says:— 

"All these efforts have not yet been able to bring 
about the beneficent result desired— pacification. The 
financial charges following the upward march strike 
at the very root of public prosperity. The intellectual 
and physical strength of the nations' labor and capital 
are mostly diverted from their natural application and 
are unproductively consumed. Hundreds of millions 
are devoted to acquiring terrible engines of destruction, 
which, tho to-day regarded as the last work of 
science, are destined to-morrow to lose all their value 
in consequence of some fresh discovery in the same 
field. National culture, economic progress and the 
production of wealth are either paralyzed or checked 
in development. 

"The economic crisis due in great part to the system of 
armaments a l'outrance, and the continual danger which 
lies in this massing of war material, are transforming 
the armed peace of our day into a crushing burden 



R2361 : page 283 

which the people have more and more difficulty in 
bearing. 

"It appears evident that if this state of things 
were to be prolonged it would inevitably lead to the 
very cataclysm it is desired to avert, and the horrors 
whereof make every thinking being shudder in advance. 

"To put an end to these incessant armaments and 
to seek the means of warding off the calamities which 
are threatening the whole world— such is the supreme 
duty imposed upon all states. 

"This conference will be, by the help of God, a 
happy presage for the century which is about to open. 
It would converge into one powerful focus the efforts 
of all states sincerely seeking to make the great conception 
of universal peace triumph." 



Right glad would we be to hope just such a universal 
peace and maintenance of the present order of 
things, "the present evil world," if we had no better 
hope, no better prospect. But as Watchers we have 
been "taught of God" through his Word to expect no 
permanent peace from even the best intentioned monarchs 
and governments during these "times of the 
Gentiles." (Dan. 2:34,35,44,45; 7:4-13,14,27; 
Luke 21:24.) Not until Immanuel shall, in Jehovah's 
appointed times and seasons, take his great power and 
reign and bind Satan, "the prince of this world," who 
now "worketh in the hearts of the children of disobedience, 
can we look for the Golden Age of prophecy. 
Then humbled under the mighty hand of God, the 
world will "seek peace and ensue it." 

R2361 : page 284 

But, notwithstanding the welcome given the Czar's 
suggestion, few on sober second thought see reasons 
to hope for practical results: it is accepted rather as a 
benevolent wish rather than even the Czar's hope. Our 
own expectation is that such a disarmament as is proposed 
will come within about six years: whether or not 
it will be preceded by a great general European war, 
only the Lord knows, but we incline to think it will 
not. We expect such a disarmament surely within the 
next ten years for several reasons:— 

(1) Because within that time commercial competition 
will make merchandise of all kinds very cheap, 
and debts, interest charges and government expenses 
proportionately the more burdensome. To reduce the 
burden upon the masses it will by that time be necessary 
to force it disproportionately upon the wealthy, or 
else reduce the burden; and disarmament will probably 



result. 

(2) Humanity will delude itself with the thought 

that such disarmament is the prelude to the Millennium: 
and so it will be, but in an opposite sense from 
what they expect. "The wisdom of their wise men 
shall perish and the understanding of their prudent 
men shall not be manifested (Isa. 29:14); and when 
thus they shall be disarming, saying, Peace and Safety! 
they will be very close to the great cataclysm of 
trouble, and doing the very thing to hasten the overthrow 
of the present social structure. Because 

(3) The present glut of the labor markets of 
"Christendom" will be intensified by further application 
of machinery within the next ten years; and the 
tremendous effect of augmenting the supply of labor 

to the extent of from one to five millions of men in the 
prime of life would surely mean a financial depression 
and social upheaval which would shake the thrones of 
Europe and overthrow many of them. 

(4) Such social upheavals, eventuating in world-wide 
anarchy, are what the Scripture prophecies lead us 

to expect as the precursor of the Millennium which 
God has promised, when our Redeemer and his glorified 
Church shall intervene to deliver mankind from 
the oppression of its own selfishness, and to bless it 
with an enforced rule of righteousness along the lines 
of the heavenly law of Love. 

THE SECOND ZIONIST CONGRESS. 



The Second Congress of Israelites from all parts of 
the world, to consider the interests and welfare of the 
natural seed of Abraham, and especially looking to a 
reestablishment of Israel as a nation in the old homestead, 
Palestine, has closed. Like the first it was held 
in the city of Basel, Switzerland. All reports indicate 
that the Zionist movement has gathered much momentum 
since the Congress of a year ago: about four hundred 
delegates were present— nearly seven times as 
many as at the first one. 

Addresses were delivered by a number of prominent 
Israelites, setting forth the necessity and urgency 
of the movement, and pointing out that prophecy and 
the traditions of the nation as well as the growing hostility 
toward their race, everywhere, all urged forcefully 
in the direction toward which they were heading. 
In view of the fact that Palestine is under the control 
of Turkey, and that foreign Jews have been prohibited 
from emigrating thither for now seven years, suggested 
the idea that the duty of the hour would be to labor 
for the betterment of the conditions of Jews already 
there, and to wait and trust for the Providential opening 
of the "door" in the near future. To this end a 
Palestine Banking Company, "The Colonial Bank," 



of $10,000,000 capital was provided for— to promote 
and foster various enterprises in Palestine— all of which 
shall in every sense of the word be in Jewish hands 
and employ Jews only. An advance intimation of this 
matter had gotten abroad, and as a result it was announced 
that $1,000,000, one tenth of the capital, had 
already been subscribed, and over ninety-six per cent, 
of it in single shares of $5 each, by Jews in all parts 
of the world. This indicates that the movement is 
taking hold of the hopes of the race. A new flag was 
raised;— a white six-pointed star on a blue ground— 
and it served to add to the patriotic fervor. Even the 
populace of Basel caught the inspiration seemingly and 
cheered— "Hoch die Juden!" i.e., Hurrah for the 
Jews! Has this occurred before for over eighteen 
hundred years? Not that we know of. God's time 
has come for regathering Israel, and those who lend a 
hand will receive encouragement. 

For twenty-three years past we have been calling 
attention to Isaiah 40:1,2,— showing that it became 
applicable in April, 1878, and that within forty years 
(before 1915) the prophesied divine favor beginning 
by regathering Israel from all lands "into their own 
land," would be an accomplished fact. "Adventists" 
ridiculed, declaring that much sooner than that this earth 
would be in cinders; "orthodoxy" sneered that Israel's 
regathering and the Millennium were thousands of years 
off and that first the gentiles must all be converted; 
Jews themselves were of two opinions— one class declaring 
that they and the leaders of Jewish thought 
and the rising generation had abandoned all hope of a 
Palestine home and ignored the prophecies relating to 
the regathering, or else applied them to the United 
States— the "new Promised Land;" the other class expressing 
hope and faith in the prophecies, declared 
that according to Jewish chronology (not the Bible 
chronology which we follow) over three hundred and 
fifty years yet remained before the completion of six 

R2361 : page 285 

thousand years from Adam; and that nothing could be 
hoped for sooner. 

Only one-half of the forty years have passed, and 
what do we see! Palestine is rejuvenating: not only 
has it been connected with civilization by railroads, 
telegraphs and telephones, but the seasons are becoming 
more regular as respects rain, and the thousands 
of Jews driven thither by Russian persecution some ten 
years ago are taking root and are now to be helped 
with money, in a practical way, and the eyes of Israel 
and the world are opening to the fact that "The testimonies 
of the Lord are sure, making wise the simple," 
and that prophecies over two thousand years old are 
being fulfilled before us. 

But the "Watchers" should not for a moment lose 



sight of the chief lesson which Israel's revival teaches 
us, namely that every evidence of the return of divine 
favor to fleshly Israel is an evidence that divine favor 
to spiritual Israel is gradually drawing to a close, because 
the divine purpose respecting this Gospel age has 
about reached fulfilment— in the selection of the Gospel 
Church, spiritual Israel, the Bride, the Lamb's wife.— 
See Rom. 11:25-33. 

We add a few extracts from a Jewish journal, interesting 
and corroborative:— 

ZIONISTS AND THE PEACE PROPOSAL. 



"On Monday, Aug. 29th, the ordinary business 
proceedings were stopped in order to discuss the Czar's 
message, the most remarkable document of the century. 
Dr. Herzl said, amid tremendous applause: 

'"Since Israel's mission in the world is peace, 
anyone who labors to attain this end is ideally a brother 
in Israel! The universal peace manifestation of 
Czar Nicholas is now in order!' 

"After a lengthy discussion of its various political 
and national aspects a congratulatory resolution was 
adopted and a telegram was sent to His Majesty the 
Czar, who, with the stroke of his pen, has conquered 
the world and is destined to become the Cyrus of the 
nineteenth century. 

"There was a large attendance of delegates, the 
most numerous and most widely representative of Israelites 
that the world has seen for centuries, if ever 
before. The enthusiasm was unbounded, the confidence 
manifested, while too exuberant, running over into 
acts of aggression against anti-Zionists, yet sufficiently 
proved the ardor of the leaders; the harmony was 
unshattered, the deliberations were dignified and at 
times inspiring. 

R2362 : page 285 

"It was officially reported that there are nine 
hundred and thirteen associations now identified with 
this movement. From the half shekel subscriptions 
received it would seem to be certain that the number 
of Zionist adherents already largely exceeds two hundred 
thousand, compared to which all other organizations 
in Israel, local, national or international, dwindle 
into insignificance.... The wide-spread character of 
the movement was not due to any propaganda carried 
on from any particular centre, but to the natural force 
and intrinsic attractiveness of the movement itself all 
over the world. 

"The one great instrument that has been constructed 
by the Congress for the execution of its purposes 
is the Colonial Bank. An institution like this 



may become a powerful means for the accomplishment 
of great and definite results. These, it will be observed, 
are to be secured in Palestine, and nowhere else. That 
the construction of such an institution is practical with 
so numerous a constituency, there would seem to be no 
inherent reasons to doubt, and sufficient material evidences 
are at hand to fully substantiate. There is 
every prospect that those placed in charge will be both 
responsible and able to honestly and efficiently carry 
out the important trust that will be reposed in them. 

"As to colonization itself, the present activities of 
the movement seem necessarily limited to the advancement 
of those interests which are already located in 
Palestine. The Sultan's prohibition of further Jewish 
immigration may not work inharmoniously with the 
best interests of Zionism if it shall result in first securing 
the welfare of the Jews now inhabiting that country 
before being burdened with new and large accessions 
from without. When this has been done the 
Sultan's fears may be dissipated, or the new arrangements 
in the European kaleidescope may have placed 
this territory under more favorable conditions than at 
present. 

"Perhaps the most remarkable achievement of the 
Congress was to dispel the doubts that existed as to 
the true relation of Zionism to Judaism. Dr. Gaster, 
the haham of London, in his masterly address, declared: 
It is this religious element which knits us together 
much more strongly, tho often unconsciously, 
than mere principles of a political or racial unity.... 
Whatever the difference between individuals may be, 
the unity of religious sentiment remains with us; it is 
the abiding factor in our whole movement; it may lie 
deep down, hidden away in the breast of our people; 
it is there incontestably. It blends itself, here in our 
Zionist movement, into one harmonious whole. ...I, 
therefore, propose, for your adoption, the following 
resolutions: Zionism aims not only at the economical 
and political, but also at the spiritual regeneration of 
the Jewish people; it thus rests upon the foundation of 
modern culture and adheres to its achievements. Zionism 
will not undertake anything which would be contrary 
to Jewish religious law.'" 

"WE DO NOT WORSHIP THE PAST." 



Said another speaker at the Congress:— 
"We do not worship the past, we alone hold that 
the future is better than the past, we are known as optimists, 
and whenever any wrong is done to us or we 
are exposed to hardships, we are comforted by the 
thoughts that it must be better, and it will be better. 
We do not commence with an age of gold that deteriorates 
in time to a silver and then an iron age. We, 



on the contrary, look to the continued improvement 
and progress of mankind, and that is what we understand 
under the Messianic Age, and that hope has been 
the solace of our race in its wanderings through the 

R2362 : page 286 

world. The light of culture and education has never 
been extinguished in our midst." 

THE ZIONIST CONGRESS-MEDAL. 



"On a large, peaceful landscape bordering on the 
seashore, at a well, shaded by a very old tree of Southern 
type, there rests a Jewish family composed of father, 
mother and three children, with eyes turned upon 
the ocean, where the sun is mirrored in myriads of 
waves. The father, in the prime of life, leans on his 
travel-staff, the tragic symbol of the lot of his race on 
earth. The mother nurses the infant at her breast. 
A little child is seated on the floor; an older boy, 
stronger and determined, stands erect and already holds 
the travel-staff in his hand, which is to become the 
symbol of his destiny, as it is that of his father. 

"A supernatural vision appears to these exhausted 
and aimless wanderers; it is the personification of 
the Jewish ideal— the ideal of Zionism. Her left hand 
she lays on the shoulder of the father and points with 
her right hand in the distance to that land across the 
sea where he shall secure at last a home. Her expression 
is full of sympathy and love. Her arm and the 
movement of the hand illustrate destiny. The father 
gazes with a heart overwhelmed with emotion at the 
golden hope of the future which this genius has awakened 
in his soul. He resolves at once to follow his 
guide. The mother, half doubtful and half relying, 
grasps the strong hand of her husband,— she is the 
typical Jewish wife, that loyally speaks to her husband: 
I follow thee to the end of the world; where thou art 
there is my home; thy destiny is mine.' The little 
child is only curious, it does not comprehend yet the 
great event that is happening before his eyes. Not so 
the boy. The 'Arba Kanfoth'— the religious 'garb of 
fringes'— on his naked breast, teaches him symbolically 
that his race will eventually be 'gathered from the 
four corners of the earth.' He turns, therefore, with 
keen earnestness and profound determination to the 
destiny foretold by the heraldress, drinking in her 
words and impressed by her sympathetic features; he 
is ready to go with her, no matter what sacrifices this 
may require, what battles he will have to wage, nor in 
what struggles to endure. 

"This is the explanation of the symbolic figures 
on the Congress medal, translated from the official Zionist 



organ, Die Welt, of Vienna, while the reverse 

side of the medal contains the Hebrew letters, of which 

the following is the translation:— 

"Thus saith the Lord God: Behold, I will take 
the children of Israel from among the nations, whither 
they have gone, and will gather them on every side 
and bring them into their own land.'— Ezek. 37:21. 

"Who of those that read the signs of the times 
can shut their eyes to the important part that the restoration 
of Israel to Palestine is destined to play in 
the progress of humanity? 

"In reviewing the events of the year, none appears 
to me so great, none so significant, none so fraught 
with incalculable blessings for the future of our people 
as the awakening of Israel, manifested by over 400 
delegates hailing from every country and clime to the 
Second Congress at Basel." 



R2362 : page 286 

THE KINGDOM OF JUDAH MORE FAITHFUL THAN ISRAEL. 

-OCT. 2.-2CHRON. 14:2-12.- 

"Help us, O Lord our God: for we rest in thee."— 2 Chron. 14:11. 

WITH this lesson commences a series of studies in 

the history of the Kingdom of Judah— the 

two-tribe kingdom, as distinguished from the ten-tribe 

kingdom, which, because of its greater area and numbers, 

held the name of Israel. In our studies of the 

course of the ten tribes, we intimated that the division 

of the kingdom had worked to the advantage of the 

two tribes, Judah and Benjamin, known as the Kingdom 

of Judah, in that it had humbled them, drawn 

them nearer to the Lord, and made them more zealous 

of his worship, and more faithful in resisting idolatry 

of the surrounding nations: much of this, no doubt, 

resulted from the division of the empire, and the very 

wrong idolatrous course taken by the ten tribes. 

The inspired record indicates that King Rehoboam, 
the son of Solomon, after he was deserted by the ten 
tribes, was considerably affected thereby, so that he 
and the people of Judah experienced a sort of religious 
reformation, as a result of which we are informed that 
not only the priests and Levites, but also the more religious 
of the people, Israelites indeed, deserted the 
ten-tribe kingdom, and allied and associated themselves 
with and made their home in Judah. "So they 
strengthened the kingdom of Judah, and made Rehoboam, 
the son of Solomon, strong, for three years: for 
three years they walked in the way of David and Solomon." 
-2 Chron. 11:13-17. 

Before long, however, Rehoboam, finding himself 



strong in the kingdom, became lax in respect to its religious 
conditions, so that he and the people became 
negligent of the divine law. (2 Chron. 12:1.) As a 
rebuke for this, and as a lesson, the Lord permitted 
the army of Egypt to come up against Judah, "because 
they had transgressed against the Lord." The victories 
of the Egyptian army under Shishak brought Rehoboam 
and the rulers of the people to their senses, 
and caused them to seek unto the Lord for help. "The 
princes of Israel and the king humbled themselves, 
and they said, The Lord is righteous." Wherefore the 
Lord stayed the Egyptians, and did not allow them to 
overwhelm the kingdom, saying, "My wrath shall not 
be poured out upon Jerusalem, by the hand of Shishak; 
nevertheless, they shall be his servants; that 
they may know my service, and the service of the kingdoms 

R2362 : page 287 

of the countries. So Shishak, king of Egypt, 

came up against Jerusalem, and took away the treasures 

R2363 : page 287 

from the house of the Lord, and the treasures of 

the king's house; he took all: he carried away also the 

shields of gold which Solomon had made." Thus Rehoboam 

for a time was reduced to a subservient position. 

His kingdom had lost much of its wealth, accumulated 

under the reigns of Solomon and David, and 

all this was intended of the Lord to teach them an important 

lesson— that if the Lord let go of them they 

would be swallowed up of their enemies, and that 

the Lord, while demanding their obedience, always 

made that obedience profitable to them in their temporal 

welfare. 

All this is very contrary to the Lord's present dealing 
with the house of sons— the Gospel Church. God's 
covenant with the twelve tribes of Israel was that he 
would give them earthly (temporal) blessings, as a 
reward for their faithfulness to him, and that he would 
give them temporal adversities as punishments for unfaithfulness 
to him. That was under the covenant 
made at Sinai. (See Lev. 26.) It is well that we 
should note that that covenant, with all of its arrangements, 
was confined to the natural seed of Abraham— 
to typical Israel (divided into Israel and Judah) and 
that a wholly different arrangement and covenant has 
been made by the Lord with the spiritual Israelites of 
this Gospel Age, under the terms of the New Covenant. 
The New Covenant does not promise earthly blessings, 
nor freedom from earthly tribulations, but it does 
promise to the faithful spiritual Israelite that all the 
tribulations permitted of the Lord shall work out some 
good, some blessing, as respects his new nature and 
his preparation for future good things in the life to 



come, which God hath in reservation for them that 
love him. Natural Israel's promises were all earthly, 
while spiritual Israel's promises are all heavenly. 

The lesson learned from Shishak's invasion seems 
to have profited Rehoboam and the people of Judah 
throughout the remainder of his reign of seventeen 
years, and it does not surprise us that his son and successor, 
Abijah, was a king who acknowledged the Lord. 
This is particularly shown in the war with the ten 
tribes of Israel, which speedily followed Abijah's succession 
to the throne of Judah. Addressing the ten 
tribes, drawn up in battle array, he sends them a message: 
"And now ye think to withstand the Kingdom 
of Jehovah, in the hands of the sons of David; and ye 
be a great multitude, and there are with you golden 
calves which Jereboam made you for gods. Have ye 
not cast out the priests of Jehovah, the sons of Aaron, 
and the Levites, and have made you priests after the 
manner of the nations of other lands?. ..But as for 
us, Jehovah is our God, and we have not forsaken him; 
and the priests which minister unto Jehovah are the 
sons of Aaron, and the Levites.. ..And behold, God 
himself is with us for our Captain, and his priests, 
with sounding trumpets to cry alarm against you. O 
children of Israel, fight ye not against the Lord God of 
your fathers, for ye shall not prosper."— 
2Chron. 13:8-18. 

Thus the three years reign of Abijah, altho a very 
short one, seems to have been a good reign in many 
respects. Nevertheless, his loyalty to the Lord did not 
lead him to make a thorough reformation, and to utterly 
put away the groves and high places devoted to improper 
worship, which began to be established in Solomon's 
day, and consequently he failed to have the 
Lord's approval, as it was subsequently pronounced 
upon his son, Asa. "Asa did that which was good 
and right in the eyes of the Lord his God." "The 
heart of Asa was perfect all his days."— 2 Chron. 15:17. 

Likewise to-day there are those who are on the 
Lord's side, and get a blessing as a result, who, nevertheless, 
fail to have the Lord's hearty approval. It is 
not sufficient that we outwardly acknowledge the Lord 
to be our God: if we would have the fulness of the 
divine approval we must be zealous, not only in having 
the Lord on our side, but zealous also and faithful 
in serving his cause. Such faithfulness means activity 
in the cause of truth, and effort to bring others into full 
accord with the divine law. 

Asa's course was approved more than that of his 
father, Abijah, because, as it is stated, his heart was 
perfect: he was not serving the Lord because it would 
be the most profitable course for himself and for the 
nation— not merely to obtain divine blessing— but he 
served from a heart that was in harmony with God, 
and which wished to accomplish the divine will. So a 
right heart made of Asa a great reformer: he destroyed 



the idols out of the land, and the groves and high altars, 

some of which were dedicated to false gods, and 

some to Jehovah,— the latter being, nevertheless, contrary 

to the divine instruction, which was that no other 

place of sacrifice should be recognized than the one— 

the Temple. Asa's fidelity to God laid him open to 

the charge of narrowness and bigotry on the part of 

those who at that day considered themselves broad-minded, 

liberal. Asa even destroyed the idol which 

his mother had set up; and because she was using her 

influence in favor of idolatry he removed from her the 

dignities of her position as a queen. All this showed 

a great loyalty to the Lord, and indicated that Asa's 

zeal for the Lord was a zeal from the heart, and not a 

mere caprice, nor from a selfish motive. 

In harmony with the divine covenant, a great 
blessing rested upon Asa and upon his kingdom, and 
during the first ten years of absolute peace he fortified 

R2363 : page 288 

his country, and strengthened the kingdom. It was 

now twenty-five years since Shishak had his victory 

over Rehoboam, and carried away the gold and treasures 

of the kingdom: and now another Egyptian army 

came against Asa, probably intent upon getting more 

booty. But as God, according to his covenant with 

Israel, had prospered the Egyptians because of unfaithfulness 

on the part of Rehoboam and his people, so 

now the Lord, under the same covenant, prospered 

Asa and his army, because of their faithfulness to 

him, and gave them a great victory over the 

Egyptians. 

That Asa and the people might know assuredly 
that their victory was of the Lord, a prophet was sent 
to them, saying: "Hear ye me, Asa, and all Judah and 
Benjamin: The Lord is with you while ye be with him; 
and if ye seek him he will be found of you; but if ye 
forsake him he will forsake you. ...Be ye strong, 
therefore, and let not your hands be weak." This 
message, we are informed, encouraged Asa to still further 
prosecute the warfare he had been waging for some 
time against idols: the result was the utter abolishment 
of idols "out of all the land of Judah and Benjamin, 
and out of the cities which he had taken." More than 
this, as his zeal, and the zeal of his people increased, a 
great convention was held— a holiness convention— 
and "they entered into a covenant to seek the Lord 
God of their fathers with all their heart, and with all 
their soul, resolving that whosoever should not seek 
the Lord God of Israel should be put to death, whether 
small or great, whether man or woman; and they 
sware unto the Lord [to this effect] with a loud voice, 
and with shouting, and with trumpets and with cornets, 
and all Judah rejoiced at the oath: for they had 
sworn with all their heart, and sought him with their 



whole desire, and he was found of them; and the Lord 
gave them rest round about... and there was no 
more war unto the five and thirtieth year of the reign 
of Asa."-2 Chron. 15:12-15,19. 

Many Christian people, making the very serious 
mistake of not noticing the difference between the covenant 
which God made with fleshly Israel, and the 
different covenant and different regulations with spiritual 
Israel, have naturally fallen into the mistake of 
seeking to follow after the course of natural Israel, improperly. 
For instance, while it was perfectly right 
for Asa to interfere with the other religions in the land 
under his control, and to overthrow the false worship, 
and to burn the idols, and to destroy the altars and 
groves, it would be entirely wrong for any Christian 
king, president, governor, mayor, or one of any other 
position, to attempt to do similarly with the religious 
arrangements of others of to-day, either in Christendom 
or in heathen lands. The duty of the spiritual 
Israelite is to worship the Lord according to the dictates 
of his own conscience, and to leave everybody else 
free to do the same— not molesting him, his institutions 
or arrangements in any manner whatever. 

The only way in which he would be permitted to interfere 
with others would be by preaching, by making known 
to them the true God and the true worship;— and even 
in this he would have no privilege to intrude upon 
others contrary to their wishes, but may merely make 
known the good tidings to those who have "ears to 
hear"— to those willing to be taught. It was a wrong 
view of this matter, and a copying of Israel's doings, 
and of the things which God approved in Israel, which, 
misunderstood and misapplied, undoubtedly led to 
many of the religious excesses and violations of justice, 
as well as of love and mercy, during the Dark Ages. 
It was a failure to recognize the different law of this 
Gospel Age, over spiritual Israel, that led to much of 
the religious persecution of the dark ages, the burning 
of church edifices of so-called heretics, the burning of 
the heretics themselves, and of their Bibles, their persecution 
by Inquisitions, etc., etc. Christendom in 
general is outgrowing these false ideas, especially in 
Great Britain and the United States, where religious 
liberty for all denominations, all religions, and toleration 
for all creeds is recognized, demanded and enjoyed, 
in harmony with the enlightened judgment of 
their peoples. But those who thus recognize religious 

R2364 : page 288 

liberty as the proper thing now, very generally 
fail to see how or why anything else than religious 
liberty could have been proper at any other time. 
Such are inclined to look upon the Bible as not up to 
date— as countenancing bigotry, persecution, etc., and 
so long as they regard the matter from this standpoint 



they are in great danger of a growing agnosticism and 
infidelity. Let us understand clearly, therefore, why 
the course of Asa was approved of God, and blessed, 
while a similar course to-day, in any nation of Christendom, 
would be disapproved of the Lord, and of those 
who have his spirit. 

The explanation of the difference is that Israel, as 
a nation, took upon itself a special covenant with God 
at Mount Sinai, by which every individual of that nation, 
including the children, became bounden nationally 
and individually, to God, to be his people; while 
God bound himself to them to be their God, their king, 
their protector. In the compact or covenant the people 
further guaranteed that they would neither have, 
nor make images of, nor worship any other god. That 
covenant constituted Israel God's peculiar people; they 
became his typical Kingdom; he was the recognized 
King amongst them, and so it is written, "Solomon 
sat on the throne of the Lord, as King, instead of David 
his father." (1 Chron. 29:23.) It was God's 

R2364 : page 289 

throne all along, and earthly representatives sat upon 
it. Hence, so long as that nation was preserved as a 
kingdom amongst the nations, it was bound by the 
will or law of its King, the Lord, which specifically 
demanded that all idolatry should be put away. And 
as we have previously seen, God separated this one 
nation from all the other nations of the earth, in order 
that he might make of them a typical nation or kingdom, 
foreshadowing in them the "holy nation" 
of spiritual Israelites which he is now gathering out of 
every kingdom, people, nation and tongue, and which 
shortly he will organize under Immanuel, to be the 
Kingdom of Heaven, and to rule and bless all the families 
of the earth.- 1 Pet. 2:9,10; Luke 12:32. 

It would be wholly improper, now, for the people 
of the United States, for instance, to attempt to decide 
what is false worship and to abolish it; or to interfere 
in any manner or degree with absolute religious 
liberty; because the people of the United States are not 
God's Kingdom, as Israel was God's kingdom. God 
never did recognize any other nation than Israel (Amos 3:2); 
nor did he ever make covenants with other nations. 
On the contrary, the present governments of 
earth are all of them reckoned as "kingdoms of this 
world," in contradistinction to the Kingdom of our 
Lord and of his Anointed,— the "holy nation" now 
being prepared. While the heavenly Kingdom, the 
antitype of Israel's kingdom, is not yet set up in glory, 
as the holy nation, the peculiar people, the royal priesthood, 
nevertheless, in each individual heart of this 
"elect" class this principle applies: each Israelite indeed 
has entered into a covenant with the Lord that 
he will have no other gods, and that he will render 



worship to no other, but will serve the Lord with all 

his heart, with all his mind, with all his being, with 

all his strength. And as the nation of Israel was obligated, 

by its covenant, to abolish all idols, so each 

individual Christian, of this new holy nation, is obligated, 

by his covenant, to destroy every idol from his 

heart, and to worship the Lord only, and in the beauty 

of holiness. 

Altho Asa's heart was loyal to the Lord, his judgment 
was not always sound: for instance, when toward 
the close of his reign the king of Israel (the ten tribes) 
manifested some hostility, Asa sent a present of gold 
and silver to the King of Syria to obtain his aid against 
Israel. This ordinarily would be termed shrewd 
statesmanship, and would be a wise enough and 
proper enough course to take, as between nations— 
viz., the use of a little money as a peace agent, to thus 
avert war. Asa's statesmanship was successful, and 
did prevent the war and no doubt he congratulated 
himself on his wisdom; but it was an error on his part, 
as the Lord pointed out to him, through the Prophet 
Hanani, who after upbraiding Asa for his insufficiency 
of faith, and his forgetfulness of divine deliverances 
in the past, said to him, "The eyes of the Lord run to 
and fro throughout the earth, to show himself strong 
in the behalf of those whose heart is perfect toward 
him. Herein thou hast done foolishly: therefore from 
henceforth thou shalt have wars." Asa even resented 
this criticism of his policy and thrust the prophet into 
prison. Thus we see that the statement that his heart 
was right before God does not at all signify that he was 
right in the sense that we would use the word in connection 
with the Lord's people of Spiritual Israel, during 
this Gospel Age. The expression that his heart 
was right evidently signifies merely that he honestly, 
conscientiously, sought to do the Lord's will, as the 
king of Judah, in the putting away of idolatry, and in 
the enforcement of the Mosaic law. The use of the 
same expression in respect to the Lord's consecrated 
people of this Gospel Age would mean a great deal 
more— a full consecration in thought, and, so far as 
possible, of word and deed. 

Much ado is made by some out of the statement 
that when Asa was subsequently diseased in his feet, 
"In his disease he sought not to the Lord but to the 
physicians. And Asa slept with his fathers." From 
this it is argued that it is a sin for anyone to make use 
of medical assistance, and that God's displeasure was 
manifested in Asa's death as a lesson to his people then 
and now. We will not attempt to controvert the claim 
that much of the medicine given by physicians does 
more harm than good, but we deny that there is any 
ground for using this case as a basis for such an argument 
as the foregoing suggested. We must not forget 
that God's covenant with fleshly Israel, made at Sinai, 
implied that he not only would be their Captain, and 



give them deliverance in the time of war, and that he 
would be their Law-Giver and King, to rule them for 
their best welfare, but also that observance of his laws 
would, under his providence, protect them from pestilences 
and the common diseases of life, so that, as expressed 
in one of the commandments, their "days 
should be long in the land" which the Lord their God 
gave them. This being the case, it is understood 
amongst scholars that the physicians here referred to 
were enchanters and magicians who affected to heal 
diseases, and who undoubtedly performed some cures, 
after the manner of clairvoyant physicians and Voodoo 
and black-art doctors of to-day, by Satanic power. 
Hence, altho it was a mistake on Asa's part to seek to 
the physicians of his day, and to neglect the divine 
covenant with his people, we see no intimation here 
that it would be wrong for mankind in general to make 
use of bona-fide medical skill and aid to-day. 
We are permitted to select from nature's provisions 

R2364 : page 290 

such foods as we find to be most suited to our health 
and occupation; so also we may reasonably use anything 
from nature's laboratory which ourselves or others 
may be able to compound which would serve to correct 
or tone up our physical systems for greater usefulness 
in life. It is a mistake of some to suppose that God 
has promised to keep spiritual Israel free from sickness, 
pain and trouble. On the contrary, we know that he 
permits the difficulties of life to afflict some of his most 
loyal children. What he does promise is that whatever 
he may permit to his people will work out something 
for their good, for their blessing, if they will be 
rightly exercised thereby, and seek for the blessings. 

True, as we have frequently pointed out, those 
who live near to the Lord, and who are guided by his 
counsel respecting moderation in word, in thought, in 
act, are better prepared than others to withstand disease, 
or if attacked by disease are better prepared to 
recover from it, and on the whole we believe that the 
Lord's consecrated people enjoy much better health 
after than before giving themselves fully to the Lord, 
seeking to live according to his standard. But this, 
we take it, is generally the result of a better course of 
living, rather than the interposition of divine providence. 
Looking back to the days of the Apostles, we 
find that there is no record that the Lord or the Apostles 
ever healed the infirmities of the consecrated ones. 
Our Lord and also the Apostles healed the multitudes, 
but not the disciples. And the Apostle Paul, who 
sent handkerchiefs and napkins to the sick, far and 
near (Acts 19:12), sent no napkin or handkerchief or 
anointing oil to Timothy when he was sick. On the 
contrary, he advised the use of wine medicinally, and 
remarked that Timothy's ailment was not a trifling nor 



a temporary one, but rather a chronic disorder— "thine 
often infirmities." (1 Tim. 5:23.) We note the same 
thing in respect to Epaphroditus (Phil. 2:26) and 
Trophimas. (2 Tim. 4:20.) And the Apostle Paul had 
the same experience himself, and says, "Most gladly, 
therefore, will I rather glory in my infirmity, that the 
power of Christ may rest upon me. Therefore I take 
pleasure in infirmities, in reproaches, in necessities, in 
persecutions, in distresses, for Christ's sake: for when 
I am weak then I am strong." (2 Cor. 12:7-10.) 
Our sicknesses and diseases from which we are wholly 
relieved by the value of the precious blood administered 
by the Good Physician are soul-sicknesses. We 
are now justified freely, made every whit whole, and 
shall shortly be saved from (out of) death by him, 
through resurrection. 



R2365 : page 290 

JEHOSHAPHAT'S GOOD REIGN. 

-OCT. 9.-2 CHRON. 17:1-10.- 

"In all thy ways acknowledge him, and 
he shall direct thy paths."— Prov. 3:6. 

JEHOSHAPHAT succeeded his father, Asa, as 
King of Judah, following well in his footsteps 
and "in the first ways of his father David," copying 
after David's earliest course of devotion to the Lord. 
He sought not unto Baalim (plural of Baal), the various 
forms of Baal-worship which, as we have seen, had 
become the worship of the ten tribes, as it was the worship 
also of the various nations about them. The spectacular 
features of Baal-worship and the licentious orgies 
connected therewith were evidently strong attractions to 
the depraved heart, and must therefore have exercised 
continually a seductive influence upon the people of 
Judah, who worshiped the unseen God, of whom no 
images or idols or sensual worship were permitted. 

The result of this course on the part of the king 
and the kingdom was the divine blessing, according to 
the covenant, resulting in peace with the nations round 
about and prosperity in temporal things— "riches and 
honor in abundance." Rightly exercised by these blessings, 
the king's heart was "lifted up," not in pride and 
self-adulation, but with encouragement, as recognizing 
the fulfilment of the divine promises in the blessings 
enjoyed. This stimulated the king to still further energy 
in the Lord's service, and to a still further movement 
in the putting away of the "groves and high places." 
These had been prohibited and destroyed by his father 
Asa, but apparently some had still been preserved by 
the people in a kind of secret way, or had sprung up 



again, like thrifty weeds, so as to need continual attention 
and removal. We may suppose that these were 
not all high places and groves of Baal, but that some of 
them were attempted modifications or "improvements" 
in the worship of Jehovah. So amongst Christians, 
there are some who are continually seeking innovations, 
variations from and additions to what the Lord instituted, 
in which they take pleasure, to the neglect of the 
Lord's wishes and regulations. It is hard for such to 
learn that "obedience is better than sacrifice," that the 
following of the Lord's will is far better and more acceptable 
in his sight than any amount of unauthorized 
denominational contrivance and "machinery." Every 
alteration of the divine arrangement must eventually 
prove injurious. 

Perceiving the necessity of knowledge, as a basis 
for faith and obedience, the King Jehoshaphat very 
wisely instituted a general system of instruction throughout 

R2365 : page 291 

his kingdom, so that the people in general might 

become intimately acquainted with the Word of the 

Lord. Thus he was laying the ax of truth at the root 

of the evil tree of idolatry and disobedience, and preparing 

the people for a more hearty obedience to the 

demands of the Lord and the worship of the one God, 

Jehovah, with all their heart. 

GOD'S WORD THE LAMP OF LIBERTY. 



Christian experiences are in full accord with the 
course which Jehoshaphat followed. We find that in 
proportion as the Word of the Lord has free course 
amongst his people, in proportion as they are intimately 
acquainted with it— its instructions, its promises and 
its threatenings— in that proportion are they made free 
indeed, as respects earthly affairs, and in like proportion 
do they realize their obligations to the King of 
kings and Lord of lords. The "Dark Ages" was the 
period in which the Bible was hidden from the people, 
under a foreign language, and the Reformation movement 
started with and accompanied the translation of 
the Scriptures into the living languages of the people, 
and the progress of the Reformation and of civilization 
has kept pace with the study of the Scriptures. As the 
influence of the Lord's Word in Israel's day extended 
doubtless far beyond those who heard it taught, so likewise 
the influence of the Scriptures extends far beyond 
those who study the Scriptures: the spirit of the truth 
is a spirit of liberty and of civilization, even amongst 
those who receive it not in the love of it, and who do 
not obey it, nor walk according to its spirit of love. 

The question may arise, Why is it that with the 



greatly increased circulation of the Scriptures in civilized 
lands— millions of copies every year— that a still 
greater blessing does not go with it, to lead all mankind 
into the right ways of the Lord, into appreciation of his 
grace and truth, and to obedience to his requirements, 
instead of bringing, as we see it is bringing, and as the 
Scriptures forewarn us, a time of trouble such as was 
not since there was a nation? We answer that this can 
be accounted for in two ways:— 

(1) The study of the Scriptures is handicapped by 

the many and variously conflicting false theories, human 
traditions, creeds, which, handed down from the Dark 
Ages, still fetter the minds of the vast majority, and are 
an agency in the Adversary's hands of blinding the eyes 
of many, hindering them from seeing the grand simplicity 
and beauty of the divine plan of the ages. Many 
who are helping along the circulation of the Scriptures, 
are likewise helping along the misunderstanding of them, 
and thus hindering the truth of the Lord's Word 
from having its full and designed effect. As our Lord 
said at the first advent, so it might be truly said now of 
the majority of religious teachers, "Ye do make void 
the law of God through your traditions"— the traditions 
of the ancients, the creeds and dogmas of the Dark 
Ages. 

(2) Many of those who "seem to be religious" to 
the extent of attending religious meetings and having 
Bibles in their homes, are not religious at heart, but the 
contrary— are seeking not to know and to do the will of 
God, but selfishly seeking to do their own wills, and 
merely using the cloak of religion hypocritically to further 
their selfish schemes and purposes in life. Upon 

such the influence of the Bible, with the liberty which 
it inculcates, and the release of superstition which it 
gives, is really injurious in one sense of the word: release 
from the bondage of fear and superstition by the 
light of divine truth reflected from those whom Christ 
has made free indeed, merely makes them the more free 
to do evil, and hardens their hearts. They use the liberty 
for an occasion of the flesh (along lines of selfishness); 
and it is along these lines, which are the prevailing 
ones, that the great time of trouble is approaching, 
in which liberty will run riot in those who have received 
from the divine Word merely the breaking of the 
shackles of superstition, and whose hearts are not 
thereby brought into captivity to the will of God in 
Christ. 

The result of Jehoshaphat's course in increasing 
intelligence amongst the people led to a greater respect 
for Jehovah, not only amongst the people of Judah, 
but also amongst the nations surrounding. The nations 
in the vicinity of Palestine evidently considered that 
each nation had its own God; but apparently they knew 
that Israel's God, Jehovah, was a God of gods, the Almighty 
God, superior to their own. Some of the heathen 
kings even seemed to grasp the situation so clearly 



as to say to themselves, If we can cause the people of 
Israel to reject Jehovah, and to commit idolatry, then 
Jehovah, their God, who has hitherto given them marvelous 
success, will work against them, and we shall 
have victory over them in battle. We remember that 
this was exactly the course of Balak, who tempted Israel 
to sin in order that he might defeat them in battle. 
Thus it was that when the nations round about saw the 
growing devotion to Jehovah amongst the people of Judah, 
they correspondingly feared them, and the power 
of the Lord amongst them, as it is written, "The fear 
of the Lord fell on all the kingdoms of the lands that 
were round about Judah, so that they made no war 
with Jehoshaphat." 

So it is often with the world in respect to spiritual 
Israel: the world recognizes in a general way that there 
is some truth in Christianity, and the worldly fear to 
do injury to those whom it recognizes as humble, faithful, 
true and obedient children of God. They know, 
and so does the great Adversary, Satan, "the god of this 

R2365 : page 292 

world," that greater is he that is on our part, than all 
that be against us. Hence his effort and that of his 
willing servants is to lead us into temptations of pride 
and fond desire, selfishness, and thus to raise earth-born 
clouds between us and our Lord, as the beginnings of a 
course of evil. 

EVIL COMPANIONSHIP BANEFUL. 



The record of Jehoshaphat's reign seems to show 
only three serious mistakes, and the implication is that 
none of these was recognized by the Lord as being 
wholly intentional, but as being partly errors of 
judgment. 

(1) His prosperity brought to him the friendship 
of the king of Israel, the weak and wicked Ahab, 
and with a desire to seem courteous, and possibly with 
the thought of re-uniting the separated ten tribes at 
some future time, Jehoshaphat accepted the friendly 
advances of Ahab, and visited him, with some of his 
troops, and out of courtesy, and with a desire to cement 
the friendship, he joined with Ahab in battle 
against the Syrians. And notwithstanding the fact 
that he suggested inquiry of one of the prophets of Jehovah 
what would be the Lord's will respecting the 
battle, yet when the one prophet of the Lord, Micaiah, 
foretold the disaster of the battle, in opposition to the 
testimony of four-hundred false prophets, Jehoshaphat 
nevertheless yielded, and went with Ahab to battle. 
In the defeat which followed the declaration of the 
Scriptures is that the Lord spared the life of Jehoshaphat, 



while Ahab was killed. On his return home the 

Lord sent to him one of the prophets, saying, "Shouldest 

R2366 : page 292 

thou help the ungodly, and love them that hate 
the Lord? Therefore is wrath upon thee from before 
the Lord. Nevertheless, there are good things found 
in thee, in that thou hast taken away the groves out 
of the land, and hast prepared thine heart to seek 
God." (2 Chron. 19:2,3,7.) That the lesson was 
not lost upon Jehoshaphat is evidenced by the fact that 
shortly after this, when appointing judges throughout 
Judah, he instructed them, saying, "Take heed what 
ye do: for ye judge not for man but for the Lord, who 
is with you in judgment. Wherefore now let the fear 
of Jehovah be upon you; take heed and do it, for 
there is no iniquity with the Lord our God, nor respect 
of persons, nor taking of gifts." 

Jehoshaphat's desire to be upon friendly terms with 
Ahab, and the wrong course to which this led him, 
contains a lesson for spiritual Israelites who are seeking 
to follow the Lord's counsel. If it was improper 
for the king to "help the ungodly and to love them 
that hate the Lord" it would be still more improper 
for spiritual Israelites to follow such a course. How 
many have been led into disobedience and various improprieties 
by neglect of the admonition that "evil 
companionship corrupts good conduct!" Let us learn 
the lesson of keeping company with those that love the 
Lord, so that all of our special friends and companions, 
in business or in pleasure, shall, so far as we are able 
to control the matter, be the Lord's friends who honor 
him with their lips and serve him from the heart. 
"Blessed is the man that walketh not in the counsel of 
the ungodly, nor standeth in the way of sinners, nor 
sitteth in the seat of the scornful."— Psa. 1:1-3. 

(2) Subsequently, Jehoshaphat joined in partnership 
with Ahaziah, the son of Ahab, in the construction 

of a fleet of vessels, to trade as Solomon had done, 
in the gold of Ophir; but the Lord sent a rebuke to 
him, through the prophet, saying, "Because thou hast 
joined thyself with Ahaziah the Lord hath broken thy 
works. And the ships were broken, that they were 
not able to go to Tarshish." (2 Chron. 20:37.) Here 
is another lesson for the Lord's people not to choose 
for their associates those upon whom the Lord's blessing 
might not reasonably be expected, especially not 
to make such an alliance with those who are the enemies 
of the Lord. 

(3) Jehoshaphat's third mistake was in arranging 
a marriage between his son and the daughter of 
Ahab and Jezebel. No doubt his thought was to thus 
possibly re-unite, in the hands of his son, the divided 
kingdom. He seemed to forget that the Lord was 
abundantly able to re-unite the kingdom, if he saw fit, 



and that any union not of the Lord's approval would 
be a disadvantageous one. The wickedness of the 
daughter of Jezebel, who subsequently became the 
queen of Judah, rivaled her mother's and is a further 
illustration of how baneful an influence may be exercised 
by an ambitious and bad woman, as we have 
many instances of how good an influence may be exercised 
by a humble and godly woman. 

There is a lesson in this for all of the spiritual 
Israelites, that they should not seek advancement of 
the interests of their children through ungodly alliance, 
marriage. How many Christian parents allow the lessons 
of their own experience to go for naught and allow 
pride and ambition and selfishness to influence their 
counsel of their children so that they consent to and aid 
their marriage with the unconsecrated. How often these 
find subsequently that they have sown thorns in their 
pillows and in the pillows of their children. The difficulty 
is one or both of two: (a) Either they are not fully 
and faithfully consecrated to the Lord, and possessed 
of faith in his wisdom and power to guide their affairs, 
and hence attempt to shape their own affairs; or (b) they 
have not learned that the Lord's will by which we are 
to regulate our course in life on every subject, is found 
in his Word, and is to be followed implicitly, leaving 

R2366 : page 293 

all results to his providence, and trusting absolutely to 
his Wisdom, Love and Power. With the Lord's people 
the rule of life in everything should be to seek first the 
Kingdom of Heaven and its righteousness, trusting 
that under divine providence all things will work together 
for good to those who love God. 



R2366 : page 293 

REPAIRING SOLOMON'S TEMPLE. 

-OCT. 16.-2 CHRON. 24:4-13.- 

"And the men did the work faithfully."— 2 Kings 12:15. 

THE ERROR of Jehoshaphat in seeking an alliance 

with ungodly Ahab, king of Israel, through the 

marriage of his son to the daughter of Ahab and Jezebel, 

was a serious one. The daughter seems to have inherited 

all the evil nature of her mother, and as soon 

as her husband came to the throne of Judah, she seduced 

him, and through him the nation of Judah, from 

the worship of Jehovah to the worship of Baal, with its 

sensual orgies, attractive to the grossly depraved. And 

this evil influence continued during the reign of her 

husband, eight years, during the reign of her son, one 



year, and during her own reign (after murdering all but 
one of her grandchildren), six years, when she was 
killed, in a revolt of the people against her evil course: 
at which time her grandson, Joash, then seven years of 
age, was anointed king. 

His grandmother evidently supposed that she had 
destroyed all of the royal family, but the infant Joash 
had been secreted by his aunt, the wife of the Lord's 
high priest, Jehoiada, who hid and cared for him in one 
of the rooms connected with Solomon's temple. During 
the period of the reign of the wicked queen the temple 
of the Lord had been suffered to go to decay, while 
an imposing temple of Baal had been erected, and thither 
the worship and wealth of the people had been directed. 
Consequently the rooms of the priests, in connection 
with the temple of Jehovah, being generally neglected, 
were a very safe place for the rearing of the young king. 

"A LITTLE LEAVEN LEAVENETH THE WHOLE LUMP. 



The lessons we might draw from this are numerous. 
(1) The error of seeking worldly alliances, political or 
social. (2) The error of being unequally yoked with 
unbelievers in marriage, and the fallacy of relying upon 
good influences to overcome the evil. A careful mother, 
watching out for the youthful companions of her son, 
forbade him to make companions and playfellows of certain 
boys whose influence she perceived would be impure 
and injurious. Her son urged, on the contrary, that his 
influence upon the bad companions should be greater 
than their influence upon him, and that thus he should 
be able, by keeping their company, to do them good. 
The mother sent her son for a glass of water and a bottle 
of ink. When they were brought she instructed him 
to put a drop of water into the bottle of ink, and see 
whether it would clarify it. Of course it made no visible 
impression. She then instructed him to put a drop 
of ink into the water, and the result was that the entire 
glass of water was beclouded. This furnished her a 
suitable illustration of how the good intentions and 
purity of her son would have practically a very small 
influence upon the companions already corrupted under 
evil influences, and the deleterious influence upon a 
pure heart of even the smallest amount of impurity. 
None can be too careful in this direction; evil in every 
form should be shunned, especially little evils and impurities, 
which constitute the entering wedge for greater 
ones. 

In olden times, before the art of soap-making was 
learned, it was the custom to use a sort of clay, called 
fuller's earth, after the manner in which we now use 
soap, and based upon this is an ancient Persian fable, 
which runs thus: "One day, as I was in the bath, a 
friend of mine put into my hand a piece of scented clay. 



I took it and said to it, 'Art thou musk or ambergris? 

For I am charmed with thy perfume.' It answered, 'I 

was a despicable piece of clay, but I was some time in 

the company of the rose, and the sweet quality of my 

companion was communicated to me.'" This well illustrates 

the fact that every Christian, as a member of 

the body of Christ, must of necessity have more or less 

of his sweet spirit, meekness, patience, gentleness, 

brotherly-kindness, love, and that worldly people thrown 

into the association of such should absorb from them 

much of this spirit of gentleness and kindness. And 

as the spirit of Christianity is received in turn from the 

Lord, so it is necessary that all the members of the 

body of Christ should be much in the company of their 

Head and Lord, that they might be thoroughly filled 

with his spirit. Let us remember, however, that as the 

clay was susceptible to the delicate and sweet odor of 

the rose, it would have been equally or more susceptible 

to stronger vile odors, had it been in the company of 

that which is vile; and that if it had been thrown simultaneously 

equally near to the influence of the rose perfume 

and to the thing of vile odor, the latter would 

have been the stronger, and the result would have been 

an offensive odor. So with the Lord's people. It is as 

necessary that we shun the evil as that we cleave to that 

which is good. 

The young King Joash, under the tutelage of his 
foster-father Jehoiada, the chief priest, walked faithfully 

R2366 : page 294 

in harmony with the law of the Lord, as long as his 
foster-father lived. He even seems to have been deeply 
imbued with a heart desire to serve the Lord, for it 

R2367 : page 294 

would appear that the repairing of the temple was of 
his own thought, and not suggested by his adviser, the 
priest. The command first given by the king, for a 
collection of money throughout all Israel, to repair the 
Temple, seems to have been comparatively neglected, 
probably because the people of Judah had very generally 
come to doubt the priesthood, and to query how 
much of the money that would be collected would ever 
be directly applied to Temple repairs. But the king 
was in earnest and, seeing that this method failed, he 
adopted a new one, of placing a large contribution box 
at the entrance of the Temple, and then all Israel was 
exhorted by the priests to remember the commandment 
of Moses in respect to their giving. 

The Mosaic Law called for a tax of half a shekel 
(about 33 cents) on each male of twenty years old and 
upward, for the service of the Tabernacle, now the Temple 
(Exod. 30:11-16), besides which they might freely 
offer as much as they chose. It would appear also (2 Kings 12:13-16) 



that a regular accounting and division 

of the money was made, so that the people knew how 

their contributions were now being used, and could give 

directly to the Temple repairs. The result was a spontaneous 

giving of money enough for the work and to 

spare: and the awakening of the people to their sense 

of duty and obligation, and additionally their benevolence 

in the Lord's cause seems to have been generally 

profitable, arousing fresh interest in the proper worship 

of the true God. 

We may draw some profitable lessons from all this, 
altho the Temple did not typify our church edifices, and 
its gorgeous adornment and costly furnishments do not 
convey a lesson favoring extravagance in church building 
to-day. Quite to the contrary, the plain synagogues 
of the Jews corresponded to church buildings, while the 
Temple typified the true Church, the glorified Ecclesia. 
(1) We may remember the Apostolic statement that as 
Christians our mortal bodies are individually and severally 
temples of the holy spirit, if so be that the Lord's 
spirit dwells in us (1 Cor. 3:16,17), and consequently 
it is our duty not only to keep our bodies pure and undefiled 
as possible, in thought, word and act, outwardly 
and inwardly, but it is a part of our duty also to take 
reasonable care of our physical systems to the intent 
that they may be the better exponents and channels 
through which the spirit of the truth in us may glorify 
God and bless those with whom we come in contact. This 
does not imply excessive carefulness or pampering, nor 
hesitation to use our strength to the very last in the 
service of our Lord, and in faithfulness unto death; but 
it does imply that we should seek to regulate our lives 
and so restrain our appetites that our eating and drinking 
and general course in life may be such as will fit us 
for usefulness in divine service. The Lord's people are 
not to live to eat, in self-gratification, but to eat to live, 
that they may be the better qualified to render service 
to him to whom they have consecrated themselves living 
sacrifices. 

(2) The Apostle refers to the Church as a whole as 
the antitypical temple of God, in which each individual 
Christian is a member in particular: our Lord spoke of 
his Church from this standpoint when he said, "Destroy 
this temple, and in three days I will raise it up"— he 
spoke of the temple of his body, and the glorification 
of that body on the third thousand-year day, namely, at 
the beginning of the Millennium. In respect to this 
Temple of the Lord, each one of his people is to be very 
zealous that the Temple be kept in good condition, in 
good repair. To this end we are exhorted by the Apostle 
to build one another up in the most holy faith, to 
help one another, to encourage one another, to "restore 
one another," "if any be overtaken in a fault." 

During the "Dark Ages" the nominal temple of 
God, the nominal church, fell into great disorder through 
false doctrines, false practices, priestcraft, superstition 



and general defilement. The Reformation movement 

of the sixteenth century did much to cleanse and renovate 

this nominal temple, but those who see in the divine 

Word the clearly drawn outlines of the true Temple 

of God, realize that the nominal temple is still in a deplorable 

condition. Our King enlightens us through 

his Word that the nominal temple is not the real Temple, 

and is shortly to be abandoned, with the close of 

this age. He shows us that the real Temple is yet to 

be built, and that the work of this Gospel age has been 

to quarry, then chisel and fit and shape, and then polish, 

the "living stones" for places in the true Temple 

of God, which is not yet completed. 

He thus shows us that it is still our privilege to be 
co-workers together with God, and to help forward in 
this great work of preparing the great Temple, the spiritual, 
of which he is the foundation and capstone, and 
of which his faithful followers shall be living members 
and pillars. (Rev. 3:12; 1 Pet. 2:5.) Our great work, 
therefore, is in connection with this future glorified 
Temple of God, (a) to co-operate with God in his work 
of grace in our own hearts, by which we are being fitted 
and prepared for a place in the Temple of his glory, 
and (b) to assist others, both by precept and example, 
for places in the same. Like Solomon's typical temple, 
this great Temple will shortly come together "without 
the sound of a hammer," every part fitting to its place 
perfectly. Then, shortly, the glory of the Lord will 
fill the temple; "then the righteous shall shine forth as 
the sun in the Kingdom of their Father;" then in and 
through this glorious Temple all the world of mankind 
shall be privileged to draw near to God, for forgiveness 
of sins and for reconciliation through the precious blood 
of Christ, and the great work of the Millennium will begin 
—the blessing of all the families of the earth through 
the "elect," the "royal priesthood." 



page 295 

LETTERS FROM EARNEST COLABORERS. 



Texas. 
DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I was much encouraged 
to receive yours of the 8th instant, and you indeed 
stated the matter correctly, for it was a great 
pleasure to me to be able to minister the truth to others, 
and where the opposition was the strongest, the 
Lord stood the closer by me and strengthened me. 
How I wish I could labor more in the service of the 
Lord than I do, just for that "sweet comfort and peace" 
that the Lord gives to those who rejoice in telling his 
truth. I find the more I labor the more I receive. 



I am very glad to hear of Brother Ransom's contemplated 
tour in Texas this Winter, and I am sure 
that his visit will be productive of much good here. I 
have often wished I could meet some of the "pilgrims," 
and now it seems that my wish is to be gratified. As 
soon as I receive card announcing the time Bro. Ransom 
will arrive, we will make all necessary arrangements, 
and I will be glad to meet Bro. R. at the depot. 
I am of the opinion that the conditions existing here 
in the past have been an exception to the general run 
of events in other cities, and on account of such conditions 
I think the Lord has by various circumstances 
withheld the sickle of truth from being thrust in as thoroughly 
as it would otherwise have been. We wish to 
begin a systematic distribution of tracts at the different 
churches in this city, and to this end will be glad 
to have a further supply of tracts, and for the German-Lutheran 
churches we would be glad to have some 
tracts printed in the German language. Another Brother 
and myself have been distributing tracts in this manner, 
standing about a block away from the church;— 
so as to avoid the appearance of a "special attack." 

If you arrange for Bro. R. to stop at the places I 
have just recently visited, I would be glad to render 
what assistance I could in notifying interested ones of 
his arrival. If I can be of any service, advise me. 
Yours in Christ, E. J. COWARD. 



Kansas. 
DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I wish to tell you that 
your recent TOWER articles have been a great help to 
me, especially the one entitled "Purify Your Hearts, 
Ye Double-Minded." It led me to examine myself 
more closely, and in so doing I found in myself more 
or less of double-mindedness which, by the grace of 
God, I am earnestly endeavoring to overcome, and I 
am so pleased to tell you that I am making blessed 
progress. I more than ever realize my privilege of being 
an overcomer if I only will to do his will. The 
article, "Ye Serve the Lord Christ," has also been a 
great help to me; it has taught me to be more faithful 
in little things in my every-day life, seeking to please 
him and cultivating Love more diligently in thought, 
word and deed; and Oh, the result is so grand: it gives 
sweetest rest and holy peace. It also serves to stir 
others up around us to let them know by our conduct 
that we are seeking to come closer to Jesus and more 
nearly to overcome the weakness of the fallen flesh, 
thereby making of ourselves living epistles. Oh, that 
we may all be kept humble and faithful to the end of 
our journey, is my earnest and sincere prayer. I desire 
an earnest interest in your prayers as I also always 
remember you with all the faithful of the household of 
faith. With warmest Christian love, I remain, 



Your humble servant in Christ, MRS. R. FRITZ. 



Indiana. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-Brother M. L. McPhail 
came Saturday and held a meeting at Bro. Zorn's 
that evening. There were about fifteen present. 
On Sunday we had three meetings at our home, and 
many more came than I expected. I was so hungry 
to hear from "home" and to have someone to commune 
with who could expound these precious truths. When 
your card came, saying that Brother McPhail would 
be here on the 14th, I at once conferred with Bro. Zorn, 
arranged for the meetings and met Bro. M. at the 
depot. 

There are quite a number of Seventh-day Adventists 
in this neighborhood, and some came to ask questions 
and to tell what their belief is; and how patient 
Bro. M. was, and how determined that all questions 
should be settled by God's Word alone! I cannot tell 
you how much good it did to those who came to hear 
him; but I can tell you that it filled my heart with 
gladness to hear him preach the good tidings. How 
any one can hear and not believe is a wonder to me, 
and I thank our Lord for his blessing. Hereafter, 
whenever any of our "Pilgrim" brethren pass near us, 
surely have them stop— my home will welcome all 
whom you may commend. 

The WATCH TOWER is a great comfort to me, and 
my prayer to God is that he may bless and strengthen 
you. Your Sister in Christ, CAROLINE M. SMITH. 



Iowa. 
DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I want to give you a brief 
report of the meetings held here in conjunction with 
Brother Rogers' visit. We anticipated his coming with 
pleasure, and our expectations are more than realized. 
We had a blessed time indeed. How kind and gracious 
the Lord has been to us! Altho some outsiders received 
a blessing, it seems that the Lord intended specially 
to confer a blessing upon the little, lonely, scattered 
flock in this neighborhood. Our meetings were 
well attended, especially the second one, at which I 
think there were over 30 present. Brothers Jordan, 
Hampton and Weir were with us during the entire 
time, and symbolized their consecration by immersion 
with four of us here, making seven immersions. Bro. R. 
will no doubt give you all the names in full. The Baptist 
people kindly consented to let us use their baptistry, 
so we gathered there after the evening service 
to obey the Lord's command, and after the service we 
all felt happy and realized the Lord's favor and blessing 
more than ever. It has stimulated us to zeal and 



energy in overcoming and serving him more faithfully 
and joyfully with the best of our time and talents. 
One visible result of the meetings is that we have found 
several brethren and sisters who have been for some 
time searching for light in different directions, and we 
trust that they are true wheat and will be found of the 
truth and gladly receive and embrace it. We are truly 
grateful to our Lord for his kindness and mercy to us 
and also to his humble servants who were used of him 
to confer the blessings. Trusting that he will deem 
us worthy of another shower of the same kind before 
long and praying a continuance of his favors and blessings 
upon all his faithful servants and indeed all the 
household, we remain, 

Yours in Love and fellowship of the truth, 
G. B. IMHOFF. 

page 296 

Florida. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-Our August WATCH 
TOWER has just come, and I wish to thank you again 
and again for the words of strength and encouragement 
in its first article (have not had time to read all). It 
seems that as the time is shorter for you to work here 
in the body, you are given words to say, just the words 
that shall be a mighty power through God's blessing, 
when you shall be through with the work of writing 
with pen. Many faults in myself that I little thought 
were in me have you brought to my knowledge, and have 
opened my own heart, and I earnestly and joyfully 
thank you that you wounded to heal. We need not 
say we wish to be cleansed from all unrighteousness 
and then flinch when the cleansing comes. I think the 
very fact that some, yea many, sharp truths cut as we 
read them, is something to make us rejoice, as it shows 
that our Father is answering our prayers for cleansing: 
that we are his loved children tho we be still far from 
perfect. Because only those whom God loves as sons 
have their eyes opened to self to any extent; others, if 
they get but a glimpse of some hidden fault, will take 
refuge in anger and go faster and faster backward. 

Our daughter is an earnest Christian, doing every 
thing unpleasant or pleasant, as the duty may be, as 
unto the Lord. She and I both pray earnestly each night 
for you, never forgetting, no matter how weary or 
sick we may be, and I am sure there are very many 
who have been blessed by your ministry who, like us, 
daily pray for you. 

Your Sister in the faith, MRS. M. E. JOHNSON. 



Washington. 
DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-A letter received from 
my people at home and one from Brother Draper go to 



show that great good has been accomplished by his 

visit to that locality, and that his visit was highly appreciated. 

I am truly thankful for this good news. 

About thirty attended each of the three meetings he 

held there, and all were interested, and those in the 

truth greatly benefited. As the Brother gave several 

discourses last year without the chart, he used it this 

time to good advantage. 

The Washington friends are very glad to know 
that Brother Henninges will so soon be with us, and 
I am sure his visit will be timely and, I might say, 
providential; as just at this time there are several newly 
interested ones who have expressed a great desire 
to have someone give a chart discourse for their own 
benefit and the benefit of some of their friends who are 
likewise becoming interested through them. There will 
be about eight for immersion on this occasion, and this 
truly is a reason for much rejoicing and praise to God. 

It seems that those coming into the truth now 
make much faster progress in knowledge of the deep 
things of God than heretofore, and I have been wondering 
if this is true in other places. May it not be 
that, as the time draws on for the closing of the door 
of opportunity, they who enter become more speedily 
enlightened regarding the deeper things? It certainly 
would seem that way so far as my observation goes. 

Brother Hayes, formerly of Rock Island, called 
on me to-day, and we had a pleasant visit together in 
the office. He and Sister Hayes will meet with us 
next Sunday at our Anacostia meeting and will remain 
over to the meetings to be held by Bro. Henninges. 
We are having more than our usual allotment of meetings 
of late, and the more we have the better the friends 
here seem to like it. We certainly cannot have too 
many of the character we are having here now. We 
all enjoy them so much. We know that your prayers 
are with us, and you may be sure that all the Bible 
House friends have a share in our prayers, and may 
the dear Lord shower rich blessings upon all of like 
precious faith with us, be they near or far. 

With Christian love to all the Church at Allegheny, 
I remain,-In Christ,-Brother J. A. BOHNET. 

[Since the above was written, Brother Henninges 
has visited the Church at W. We have further good 
reports; eight were baptized.— EDITOR.] 



Chicago. 
DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL: -Thank you for your 
letter of last week with its good wishes for my brother 
and his wife. I have not pressed the "present truth" 
upon them very urgently, but will still watch for opportunities 
and use them gladly. 

R2367 : page 296 



Yesterday (Sunday) I found my way out to the 
foot of Wilson Av., where our "brethren" gathered on 
the Lake front for a symbolic baptism service. We had 
our morning service in a fishing tent, seated around 
upon boards, caring little indeed for our surroundings, 
feeding upon the Word of life as set before us by Bro. 
M. L. McPhail, and showing forth God's praises in 
hymns and prayers from full hearts. Then followed 
eleven baptisms, six men and five women. Then we 
spread lunch under the trees on a pretty little hillock, 
and afterward held an open air meeting on the same spot. 
Bro. McPhail discoursed by request upon Paul's "absent 
from the body, present with the Lord" and context, 
answering questions and inviting them. He had 
a very quiet and earnest little flock of listeners— of 
several nationalities, American, Scotch, Irish, Swedish, 
Norwegian, Danish, German and Polish, certainly, 
and possibly others. About fifty in all, men, women 
and children. 

Before the morning service I looked in some wonder 
at the unattractive faces of some of the women, 
evidently used to continuous hard work and weariness. 
When I talked to them my wonder changed to another 
sort: the heavy faces lighted, and I discovered that 
their owners were not so dull as they had appeared; 
they seemed to know just where they stood, and were 
able to give a reason for the hope that is in them. And 
then I realized that even the plainest countenances 
were free from all hardness and bitterness, and I praised 
God for his great power unto salvation, and his sweet 
and wonderful ways. 

The Lord's poor,— how different from the rest of 
the poor! And the quiet ways of these people, how 
different from some of less understanding in the divine 
Word! "The grave in front, a hating world in rear" 
seemed only to make them earnest, sober, patient, but 
not to have any terrors for them. "We must suffer 
with Christ before we can reign with him," a Danish 
Sister said, quite understanding^ setting "Christian 
Science" aside. I am told that some of these people 
have scarcely missed a Sunday meeting in five and six 
years. Praying ever the Lord's blessing upon you all 
at the Bible House, with much Christian love, 
Your Sister, ALICE L. DARLINGTON. 



page 297 
VOL. XIX. OCTOBER 15, 1898. No. 20. 



CONTENTS. 



Views from the Watch Tower 299 

Council Bluffs Convention 299 

"Man Proposes, God Disposes" 300 

Emperor William's Ambition 301 

Another Motive Back of the 
Ambition 302 

Italy's Internecine War 303 

Poem: "Good for those Who Love 

God" 304 

The Prophet Isaiah's Vision 304 

The Messianic Kingdom Foretold 307 

page 298 

SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
--ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 56-60 ARCH STREET, ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, N.Y. DRAFT, MONEY ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS: 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age or accident, or other 
adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, if they 
send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting the 
paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list 
constantly. 



R2368 : page 299 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 



COUNCIL BLUFFS CONVENTION is a thing 
of the past; but it will never be forgotten by 
those who participated. The attendance was much 
larger than we had expected— 175 from abroad, and 
at the principal sessions about the same number from 
Omaha and Council Bluffs, friends of the truth and 
their friends. The visitors were chiefly from Iowa, 
Nebraska and Kansas; but other States were fairly 
represented— Michigan, Wisconsin, Minnesota, Dakota, 
Missouri, Illinois, Ohio, Pennsylvania, Maryland, 
Georgia, Oklahoma, Colorado, Kentucky, California 
and Washington. 

The four days were a season of blessed refreshing 
to all, and were faithfully spent from 9 A.M. to 9 and 
sometimes 10 P.M., with intermissions for meals; and 
another day was spent in private conferences with colporteuring 
brethren and sisters, some of them beginners. 



It was remarked by many that they had never 

seen a convention so free from jar and friction, nor 

one exhibiting the spirit of meekness, patience, forbearance 

and brotherly love in so marked a degree. 

Neither the Chicago Convention of 1893, nor the previous 

ones at Allegheny (precious as they all were) 

were better than this one, if they equalled it. 

The public speakers were Brothers M. L. McPhail, 
F. Draper and the Editor of this journal; but nearly 
all took part in the prayers, praises and testimonies. 
Testimony meetings preceded the regular meetings 
and were extremely profitable— not a moment was lost, 
sometimes two or three being on their feet to speak at 
one time. And such testimonies— such beaming faces 
—such gratitude to God for the light of present truth 
—such love for the brethren— were the general comments. 
Visitors wondered that no collections were 
taken, no appeals made for money, but on the contrary, 
offers were made to assist any attending the 
meeting short of funds,— tho evidently none were 
wealthy. During the session a discourse was preached 
on the real baptism and its water symbol, after which 
twenty-one brethren and twenty sisters were symbolically 
baptized. The youngest of these was about 
thirty years of age and the eldest two, Bro. Gephart 
and wife, looked to be over seventy years old. Altogether, 
we all rejoiced in the divine favor enjoyed, and 
quite a number expressed the hope that another Convention 
might be held ere long. 



The convention spirit was contagious, and many 
who could not attend at Council Bluffs, because of the 
distance and expense, urged sub-conventions which we 
might attend enroute to Council Bluffs. We were 
obliged to decline most of these, for lack of time— 
the general work being retarded by every day's absence 
from Allegheny. We did, however, engage to meet 
with the Chicago Church on Sunday, the 10th, and 
found that notice of the meetings had brought friends 
from nearby points in Illinois, Indiana and Michigan. 
These, with the friends of the four Chicago meetings, 
the friends of these and others, aggregated three to 
four hundred. The meetings were held in the Masonic 
Temple and lasted from 3 P.M. until 9:30 P.M., with 
an intermission for luncheon, which the Chicago 
friends provided free, and which was shared by about 
one hundred and fifty, with zest and appreciation, and 
every way all the friends of the truth had a most enjoyable 
time, judging from their words and faces and 

R2368 : page 300 

hearty greetings and farewells, and assurances that the 
work centered at Allegheny has their heart-felt sympathy 



and prayers. 

Meantime the friends at Sippo, Ohio, concluded 
that they, too, must have a sub-convention, and Brother 
Henninges of the WATCH TOWER force went to assist. 
He reports a most enjoyable time— the attendance running 
as high as one hundred and fifty. This meeting 
lasted three days. About the same time, also, Brother 
Koetitz of the WATCH TOWER force answered a similar 
call from Eastern Pennsylvania. It is a good sign of 
the spiritual condition, when there is so burning a desire 
to commune together respecting the exceeding 
great and precious promises of our Father's Word. 
And "love of the brethren" is one of the strong impelling 
promptings to these meetings, as it should be 
in all our assemblings, and so much the more, as we see 
the Day drawing on, with its increase of light and 
blessing to the "wise" in heavenly wisdom, and its increase 
of opposition to the light by the Prince of Darkness 
and his deluded servants. 



We arrived home on the 1 1th, to find Allegheny 
and Pittsburgh in gala dress, festooned with bunting, 
interspersed with cross and crown emblems. The streets 
are crowded with thousands of citizens and visitors 
decorated with the same sacred emblems of our faith, 
and each bears a sword whose hilt is a cross. What 
does it mean? Has "the offense of the cross" ceased? 
—are these all true knights and soldiers of the cross? 
—and are they on some heavenly errand bent? 

Alas no ! they are merely one of the sects of our 
time which have "a form of godliness" and use the 
emblems of the true Church and her Lord, because 
nominally they have become popular. The Sir Knights 
are parading as we write, and, as we look at so fine a 
body of men, we wish indeed that they were all soldiers 
of the cross in the true sense: and we know not but 
what some of these, as well as some in all the various 
divisions of the nominal church, belong indeed to 
the Lord our King and will yet be amongst those 
gathered as the "elect," the "jewels," for the 
Kingdom. 

We see by the press reports that Rev. C. I. Twing, 
of New York City, Grand Prelate of the Grand Encampment, 
preached a discourse in Trinity church 
(Episcopal), opening the conclave, on Sunday, the 9th 
inst. In that discourse, as an officer of the order, he 
made an announcement, and presumably not without 
authority, which, if lived up to, would imply that this 
ancient order will in the near future cease its opposition 
to Romanism and become her ally. The Grand 
Prelate in his discourse said of the order:— 

"We have enlisted in a glorious warfare, and we 
have vowed to wield our swords, not to rescue the sepulcher, 
or any part of the holy land from the hand of 



the Saracen, but in defense of the Christian religion. 
It is assailed not by the followers of Islam, but by 
those who would supplant its teachings by a system of 
materialism, and a denial of the doctrine of the immortality 
of the soul." 

"MAN PROPOSES, GOD DISPOSES." 



"The world by wisdom knows not God." "Going about to 
establish a righteousness of their own they have not submitted 
themselves to the righteousness of God."— 1 Cor. 1:21; Rom. 10:3. 

Men of energy and ambition are, more frequently 
than others, used of the Lord; because they are instruments 
ready for service. If the energy and ambition 
be thoroughly subjected to the Lord,— controlled by a 
high spirituality, humility and veneration toward the 
Creator, and with large individuality and independence 
of character and firmness toward men,— it will 
lead to reverent and careful study of the divine will 
and to persistence and assiduity in its prosecution. 
Such characters God is pleased to use for the great 
things of his service. Next to our Lord Jesus, the 
Apostle Paul is an ideal illustration of such a character: 
God was pleased to use him largely as a mouthpiece 
and as a servant of the truth— in proportion to 
his humility, loyalty and energy. 

And likewise, but in an opposite direction, God 
has been pleased to use the energetic and ambitious 
among the worldly— whose motive power was not love, 
loyalty and humility, but to the contrary— selfish pride, 
vain-glory. God often uses such characters in another 
kind of service— causing their ambitious energies 
("wrath") to praise him, and the remainder (beyond 
what suits his purposes) he restrains. Illustrations 
of this stamp of character are seen in Satan, in Judas, 
and in persons in less prominent positions in the 
Church,— even to-day. These are active in planting 
"roots of bitterness, by which many are defiled" and 
sifted out, stumbled— leaving the remainder stronger 
and purer. See the inspired Word on this subject,— 
"I hear that there be divisions among you; and as to 
a certain part I believe it: and there must needs be 
also partyism among you [permitted of the Lord], that 
they that are approved may be made manifest among you." 
"Brethren, mark them which cause divisions and offenses, 
in violation of the doctrine which ye have 
learned [—the royal law of Love]; and avoid them." 
"They went out from us, but they were not of us; for 
if they had been of us, they would no doubt have continued 
with us: but they went out that they might be 
made manifest that they were not all of us." (1 Cor. 11:18; 

R2368 : page 301 



Rom. 16:17; 1 John 2:19.) It is doubtless as necessary 
that the Church be sifted, purged, tested, as 
that it be "built up;" and for either work God uses 
the ready and willing. 

But our thoughts run specially in the channel of 
God's supervision of earthly affairs and his use of 

R2369 : page 301 

worldly ambitions in world-affairs. In this direction 

Pharaoh, Nebuchadnezzar, Cyrus, Alexander and Napoleon I. 

are notable examples of the past,— men of 

destiny, over whose affairs Providence had a supervision. 

God utilized the energies and ambitions of these 

men in the forwarding of his plans and the fulfilment 

of his predictions— and their further ambitious efforts 

he restrained by his superior power, as it pleased him. 

Our thoughts pursue this course, because we perceive 

such a worldly ambition to do something notable, to 

achieve a world-wide fame, possessing a man of opportunity 

to-day— the German Emperor: and we regard 

him as likely to be to some extent another "man of 

destiny." 

EMPEROR WILLIAM'S AMBITION. 



As Lord Hershel was guided by his science to 
search for a new planet and thus discovered one, so the 
students of the greatest of all sciences— the divine revelation, 
the Bible— are guided thereby to search for 
its promised "things to come" (John 16:13), and, 
as was promised, they find them and thus are permitted 
to anticipate history. For instance, the "Watchers" 
know, from the unfolding of the Scriptures which 
God has provided them, that astounding changes, social, 
religious and political, are just before us— to be 
accomplished within the next sixteen years: we note 
the Scripture testimony that just prior to the great 
collapse in anarchy there is to be a revival of Papal 
influence in the world, and that Protestantism, considerably 
unified or federated, will be in practical sympathy 
and cooperation with Papacy: and that in fact 
(tho not in theory) Catholicism and Protestantism will 
for a short time jointly rule the civilized world (through 
the civil powers) and appear to have begun a human 
Millennium; but while the cries of Peace! Peace!! are 
still heard, will come the great cataclysm of social 
revolution which shall demolish all present institutions 
and demonstrate the futility of all selfish human 
schemes, and by heart-broken discouragements prepare 
mankind for the great blessing which God has in 
store— the Kingdom of God. 

Naturally, the "Watchers" are on the lookout for 



every sign of the times seeming to harmonize with the 
known coming events. Indeed, our interest in the 
"news of the day" is chiefly with the fragments which 
seem to have a connection with or a bearing upon the 
fulfilments of prophecy. And knowing that God generally 
uses "a man of opportunity" for his work, we 
are struck with the fact that the German Emperor, 
who evidently is seeking a notable destiny, has lately 
been giving expression to ambitions that seem closely 
related to Scriptural predictions. And his determination 
and pride will impel him so far as possible to make 
good his boasts: added to which he freely and repeatedly 
declares that he feels himself led and impelled in 
this direction by an unseen power, or "voice," which 
spurs him on to success. And a success on one point 
or issue would surely lead such a man to larger schemes 
in the same direction. God "raised him up" to the 
throne of the German Empire (in probably the same 
way that he raised Pharaoh up to the throne of Egypt 
at the time of Israel's deliverance) by taking out of 
the way, by death, his father— a man of very different 
temperament and ambitions. What would be more 
reasonable than to suppose of William III. that (as it 
is written of one brought miraculously to the throne 
of old) God brought him "to the throne, for such a 
time as this," and for the work he is ambitious to 
accomplish. 

The Emperor's ambition is to restore to "religion" 
some of its former power by which it cooperated with 
the civil rulers in the control of the world. Not that 
he would desire to reproduce "the dark ages" of 
priestcraft and superstition, and of inquisition, the 
stake and the rack; but that he considers those evils 
not in the light of the Scriptures, but in the light of 
to-day's world-wisdom, attributing those evils to the 
ignorance of the times and not to the false teachings 
of Anti -Christ. 

He reasons that Romanism is rejuvenating and 
adapting itself to twentieth century conditions and can 
be trusted as much as Protestantism, so far as the 
maintenance of present governments is concerned;— 
and that, after all, is to him the all-important matter. 
Indeed, he seems to feel that the revival of Papal influence 
is a necessity anyway on the ground that of 
two evils the least should be chosen to avert the greater. 
Therefore he proposes to be the mediator between 
King Humbert of Italy and the Pope, and to endeavor 
to bring about a reconciliation of interests. His thought 
apparently is that after some parley both will consent 
to modifications of their claims in the interest of harmony. 
The pope will probably be asked to waive all 
claim of civil power over the provinces once known as 
the States of the Church, and the King be asked to 
grant the pope civil control of Rome. It is barely 
possible that this will succeed on the basis of Rome or 
some portion of the claimed papal territory being placed 



under papal control or princedom by popular vote— 
which would make of the pope a sort of President 
rather than a prince. Such a reconciliation would 

R2369 : page 302 

reconcile the Catholic party throughout Italy and establish 

Humbert's shaky throne: and it would reinstate 

the pope amongst the "sovereigns" of earth. Additionally 

it would bring the blessing of the pope and of 

all the Catholics upon the German Emperor and establish 

his throne more securely. Finally— the governments 

of earth being then all at harmony with Papacy, 

its representative could pose as arbiter of disputes 

of national and international importance,— his 

old role. 

The German Emperor's scheme is even broader 
than this; for, while yet his name is popular amongst 
Romanists, he will attempt to exalt it amongst Protestants 
by assuming the part of defender, father, pope to 
the Lutherans of all nations. It is in this role that he 
has planned a visit to Jerusalem ere long— to preside 
with great display at the formal opening and consecration 
of a Protestant Cathedral (under construction 
twenty years), which he has about finished. This is 
to be specially German, but also international— for 
Lutheran churches of all lands have been invited to 
send representatives to take part in the ceremonies 
(and incidentally to admire and bless and honor the 
Emperor— who will be the centre of interest and the 
recognized head and front of Lutheranism). 

From the Emperor's own statement of his ambitious 
designs (published in the public prints) as related 
to General Hoffmann Scholz, and doubtless designed 
for publication, we furnish an extract. After telling 
of his various past efforts to bring about a reconciliation 
between the Papacy and the monarchy of Italy, 
he said:— 

"But the good that was to be done is still to do, 
and I am resolved to go on with my undertaking. The 
entire world will gain if I can bring about the rapprochement 
of Leo XIII. and Humbert I. No one will 
doubt the sincerity of my Protestant leanings. But it 
is precisely because I am a Protestant that I have a 
clear and accurate conception of the power and influence 
of the Papacy. 

"At the present day two great evils threaten humanity. 
They are Socialism and Atheism. Against 
each of these the pope is a bulwark. In fighting infidelity 
no aid should be neglected. Socialism is infidelity 
to the monarch or the State, and Atheism is infidelity 
to God. 

"The Pope is the spiritual ruler of the largest 
communion on earth, and he is by far the most powerful 
and authoritative of spiritual rulers. His word is 
promptly and willingly obeyed by hundreds of millions 



of people spread throughout the globe. He can order 
and direct the consciences of these multitudes. He can 
say: These are your religious tenets: those must be 
your social sentiments; and suddenly he is obeyed. 
His power therefore for good is immeasurable. 

"Kings and emperors are the divinely ordained 
guardians of social order and directors of social well-being 
just as the leaders of religious bodies are the divinely 
ordained moderators of conscience. But just as 
kings and emperors can have their beneficent influence 
in the religious order, so can spiritual guides help and 
promote the social weal. 

"The pope's range of power is the vastest of all, 
and consequently the possibilities of the good he may 
do are the most far-reaching. I think it imperative 
therefore that he be put in a position to freely accomplish 
all the good of which he is capable. He must be 
liberated from his self-imposed imprisonment in the 
Vatican. All the trammels that surround and harass 
him in his daily life must be removed, so that he will 
then be at liberty to fight the common enemies, Socialism 
and irreligion. And he will be in a position to 
make his voice heard in the interests of peace, when 
nations go to war without just motive, and in the interest 
of humanity, when acts of cruelty or injustice 
are being anywhere committed. 

"I have meditated long and deeply on this subject. 
The fact that it preoccupies me so much convinces 
me that I am inspired to take action in the matter. 
It is like one of the voices that Socrates had about with 
him which whispers in my ear that this also is my mission 
to remedy the pope's position and open up the 
field for his range of well-doing. It daily urges me 
to act. Whether I shall succeed or not it is beyond 
my power to foretell. Judging from the circumstances 
there is every evidence that success should not be outside 
the bounds of possibility. I am going to do my 
utmost, and more than this no man can do. 

"I feel for the moment that I have no other concrete 
and practical mission before me. To succeed in 

R2370 : page 302 

such an undertaking would be a climax and a crowning 
worthy of any man's life. As I say, I will energetically 
attempt it. The small preternatural voice unmistakably 
spurs me on, and I think than this no 
better augury of success could be desired. 

"For this moment I can say no more, and it does 
not behoove me to be too explicit about my plans. 
They are already laid, and my immediate actions will 
be a development of them. Their result will be their 
justification, and it will also be the justification of 
many acts in the past, which may have seemed strange 
and unaccountable to my good Protestant subjects, but 
which had their motive and their origin in a desire to 



accomplish great and enduring events... 

"I shall not die until my ends in this regard are 
attained. Death otherwise would find a void in my 
existence; and I feel within me that I have not been 
born in vain." 

ANOTHER MOTIVE BACK OF THE AMBITION. 



Doubtless the Emperor thinks most, and would 
have others think most, of his disinterested benevolence, 
in the matter of the proposed peacemaking. 
Nevertheless, every thoughtful observer can read between 
the lines another motive. It is not because 
William loves Catholicism more or Protestantism less, 
that he thus exerts himself; but because he loves both 
Protestantism and Catholicism in proportion as they 
make his own imperial power secure: and he sees correctly, 
and so do other potentates, that all monarchs 

R2370 : page 303 

stand or fall together. The wealthy class sees also, 

as well as the royal class, that growth of general intelligence 

amongst the masses leads to broader views and 

greater demands on their part, based on new views 

respecting human equality, rights and privileges, incompatible 

with the principles of monarchy and the 

exploded theory of "the divine right of kings" to rule 

and of others to unquestioningly obey their behests. 

This disposition of the people to claim and so far 
as possible grasp all that they consider to be their 
rights (sometimes unjustly and unwisely making extreme 
claims) is creating a reaction against liberty, 
not only on the part of rulers, who are put on the defensive 
as to every feature of law and order, but they 
have with them an increasing number of those who 
love peace and order, and who realize that too much 
power in the hands of the officers of the law is preferable 
to too much liberty in the hands of rash, inexperienced 
and irresponsible people, whose well-meant 
panaceas for the ills of human society are at very most 
experiments, whose success (if successful) would mean 
momentous changes, unfavorable to royal and financial 
princes and incidentally also for all either directly or 
indirectly associated with or dependent upon these. 
For instance, the ministers and churches of all denominations 
in Germany are supported by the Government 
at public expense, and would not be sure of an equivalent 
support for a while at least if the Government 
were in any manner changed. 

Emperor William views with alarm the condition 
of things prevailing in Italy, considerable districts of 
which have lately been placed under martial law to 
prevent bread-riots. The government claims that these 



were incited by Roman Catholic priests, who, it claims, 
are continually intriguing and endeavoring to prejudice 
the populace against the monarchy, in hope that 
the latter will yield to the Pope's demands and restore 
his sovereignty over the "Papal States," or that, failing 
in this, a revolution will overthrow the present 
kingdom and establish a republic under which the pope 
could fare no worse. Already the Socialists and Radicals 
hold the balance of power in the Parliament of 
Italy, and hence the government greatly desires the 
aid of the Papal influence to maintain order, but it 
cannot do otherwise than meet Papal intrigue with 
force, to preserve the trembling monarchy. On this 
subject a well informed writer says:— 

ITALY'S INTERNECINE WAR. 



"The scarcity of news from Italy at the present 
time is indicative of the policy of suppression begun 
by the new Premier, General Pelloux. He has begun 
his career by stifling the newspaper press of that country 
in a manner that has no equal in Europe. Not 
even Russia is under such stringent rule regarding her 
press as is Italy. 

"Italy's new Prime Minister has declared war upon 
the Vatican. Every step that his Cabinet takes is 
with a view to curtail the power of the pope... 
One feature of his program is the suppression of all 
societies that have or are suspected to have religious 
affiliations. The laws of Italy prohibit clerical ownership 
of property. This law was passed years ago, 
and was thought to be a death-blow to religious corporations. 
Since that time a large number of lay societies 
have sprung into existence, and, acting as agents 
for the clericals, have secured the ownership of vast 
and important properties. During the past five years 
no less than 1200 rural banks have been established, 
the religious character of which is shown by their being 
under the absolute control of the local ecclesiastics. 
A circular is now being drafted by the government to 
be sent to the local authorities, ordering the beginning 
of the campaign against the societies. 

"With the growing dissatisfaction over high taxes 
on wheat, which has raised bread to famine prices, and 
the large internal taxation, the Vatican has forced the 
Quirinal to rule by the force of arms. Two generals 
and two admirals hold seats in the Ministry, and they 
hope to retain them by a policy of suppression. 

"What is to be the end of all this? Already there 
is a cry throughout Italy that the monarchy is doomed 
and that the best thing that could happen would be 
for it to split up into a number of small republics under 
the general temporal control of the pope. Certainly, 
as matters stand now, the State can expect no aid from 



the clergy. The latter, as a matter of fact, are the 
most tireless agents in spreading the crusade against 
the King." 

This is the spectre that is haunting Emperor William: 
he fears that the trouble of a brother sovereign 
may result in trouble within his own empire. He realizes 
that one or many republics in Italy would be 
much more dangerous than a visit from the Cholera 
and the Bubonic Plague together. Royalty is in 
dread of the spread of popular government. Besides, 
he is kept busy at home, watching and circumventing 
the rapidly growing numbers and influence of Socialists 
and Radicals in the German Reichstag. If we digest 
the following facts we will see the mainspring of 
the German Emperor's efforts as a peace-maker. He 
realizes that he must have aid of the Romanists, or else 
destroy the present form of his own government and 
proclaim himself an Autocrat, a Dictator, a Czar,— too 
dangerous an experiment to be entertained, unless all 
else fails. The facts referred to are these:— 

Twenty-eight years ago, in the first imperial election 
the Socialists polled only 102,000 votes, and elected 
but one Deputy to the Reichstag or Parliament. In 

R2370 : page 304 

1 890 they elected thirty-five Deputies, in 1 893 the 
number of Deputies was increased to forty-five, and 
this year polling a vote of over two million ballots they 
have increased their representatives to fifty-seven. 
There are four parties in Germany— (1) The "Centrists" 
or Roman Catholic party (professedly under the 
guidance of Papal influences) has 102 Deputies, (2) 
The Conservatives, 80 Deputies, (3) The Socialists, 
57 Deputies, (4) The National Liberals, 47 Deputies. 
From this it is evident that the Socialists are already 
quite a factor throwing their influence with one or 
another of the larger parties and bartering for their 
support in return: but the most striking thing is their 
rapid growth. They are conducting their efforts wisely 
and making no end of trouble for the Kaiser. To add 
to this trouble, the largest party, the "Centrists" (the 
Papal party) has recently started on an aggressive 
campaign of cooperation with the Socialists and thus 
will put it within the power of both of these parties to 
enact laws which each has coveted for years, but been 
unable to attain for lack of numbers in cooperation. 
All this seems to imply considerable and speedy trouble 
to Emperor William, unless he can gain the good 
will and cooperation of this "Clerical" or Centrist party 
by good offices toward the pope in his dispute with 
the Italian government. 

The pope is a very shrewd man: he sees the trend 
of events too, and is working every lever that will 
help his cause: undoubtedly the proposed move of the 
Centrists of Germany was ordered from Rome and will 



continue to be manipulated in the interest of Papacy. 
The whole civilized world is to be made to feel, as far 
as possible, that its only bulwark against Socialism is 
Romanism. It is because Protestants everywhere are 
catching this thought that so many advances are being 
made Romeward by all denominations. 



R2367 : page 304 

"GOOD FOR THOSE WHO LOVE GOD. 



"They tell us that in Pisa's old cathedral 

All noises, harsh and loud- 
Grating of ponderous doors, shrill tones, the tramping 

And murmur of the crowd- 
Are caught up, softened, harmonized and blended 

Within the lofty dome; 
Then echoed back in one great wave of music, 

Sweet as a dream of home. 

"So all the harsh notes in life's mingled music: 

The burden and the woe; 
The stroke that almost snaps the quivering heartstrings, 

The loss that grieves us so; 
In heaven's o'er-arching dome of perfect wisdom, 

Power and love, shall be 
Gathered and blended in divinest marvel 

Of matchless melody. -M. L. UPTON. 



R2370 : page 304 

THE PROPHET ISAIAH'S VISION. 

-OCT. 23. -ISA. 6:1-13.- 

"I heard the voice of the Lord, saying, Whom shall I send, and 
who will go for us? Then said I, Here am I; send me."— Isa. 6:8 

PRECEDING lessons have traced for us the history 
of the ten tribes, Israel, and afterward 
the two tribes, Judah, down to about the time of Isaiah 
the prophet. We have noted the truthfulness of the 
Lord's expression respecting Israel, that they were a 
"crooked and perverse generation," according to their 
own history. They were continually gravitating toward 

R2371 : page 304 

idolatry, and even when corrected and brought back, 
through divine judgments at the hands of their enemies, 



their prosperity lasted but a brief season, until they 

were delving again in idolatry, and required fresh chastisements. 

The first five chapters of the prophecy of 

Isaiah are denunciations against Israel and Judah, mingled 

with exhortations to reformation, in which the Lord 

calls to them, saying:— 

"The ox knoweth his owner and the ass his master's 
crib, but Israel does not know, my people doth 
not consider... Wash you, make you clean: put 
away the evil of your doings from before your eyes; 
cease to do evil, learn to do well. ...Come now and 
let us reason together, saith the Lord; tho your sins be as 
scarlet, they shall be as white as snow; tho they be red 
like crimson, they shall be as wool. If ye be willing 
and obedient ye shall eat the good of the land; but if 
ye refuse and rebel ye shall be devoured with the sword." 

But these divine offers of mercy fell upon heedless 
ears, and consequently the Lord sent a different message, 
to which this lesson specially relates. And since 
the new message would be a difficult one to proclaim, a 
vision was given to Isaiah to encourage him, and to lead 
him to volunteer to be the bearer of that message. The 
vision represented the majesty of God, his greatness and 
glory: and his holiness is markedly brought to attention 
by the acclaim of the seraphim, "Holy, holy, holy 
is the Lord of hosts: the whole earth is full of his 
glory." In this vision Jehovah presents himself to 
the attention of Isaiah as a King above all kings, as tho 
to suggest to the prophet, and to all to whom the vision 

R2371 : page 305 

would be related, the thought of divine majesty, which 
ultimately shall be revealed to the whole world of mankind, 
in the light of whose glory the majesty and tinsel-grandeur 
of earthly kings will be the veriest dross. The 
vision is a prophecy of the future, when the "glory of 
the Lord shall be revealed, and all flesh shall see it together" 
in the establishment of the Kingdom of God 
during the Millennium.— Isa. 40:5. 

Only from this prophetic standpoint would the 
words of the seraphim be true, for the whole earth has 
never yet been filled with the Lord's glory. Quite to 
the contrary, the earth is full of sin and violence, and 
every evil work prospers under the dominion of the great 
adversary of God and righteousness, "the prince of this 
world." But God would have Isaiah, and especially 
the spiritual "sons" of this Gospel age, for whose benefit 
the prophet specially wrote (1 Pet. 1:12), know that 
evil shall not always prevail, but that, as expressed in 
our dear Redeemer's model prayer, eventually God's 
Kingdom shall come, and his will shall be done on earth, 
as it is in heaven. Then, with evil and evil-doers destroyed, 
and the knowledge of the Lord filling the earth, 
this prophecy will be fulfilled, and the whole earth shall 
be full of the Lord's glory. But meantime the Lord's 



people are to wait patiently for him— for his time for 

the bringing in of everlasting righteousness. And meantime 

his servants are to serve him, and to endure opposition 

from the world, as seeing him who is invisible, 

and as recognizing the glory of the Lord, which is as 

yet only in vision and promise. 

The repeating of the word "holy" has an intensifying 
effect, as signifying superlatively holy, most holy. 
Thus, in vision, did God impress upon his servant, Isaiah, 
his own holiness and indirectly as well his grace. 
All the surroundings of the vision were such as to support 
these thoughts, the very door-posts being seen to 
reverberate, and the prophet's own person thrilled with 
the sight and the message. Naturally and properly, his 
first thought was of his own unholiness, imperfection, 
as a member of the fallen race: he felt himself unworthy 
even to see so great a sight, or to be in the divine presence 
in vision, and immediately began to lament his own 
infirmity and his unworthiness, saying, Woe, I am a 
man whose lips are not clean enough to join with you 
seraphim in praising the Great King, much as I should 
like to do so. 

Thus we ever find it: those who are brought closest 
to the divine presence, and who see the divine glories 
and majesty most distinctly, with the eyes of their 
understanding, and who realize most fully the holiness 
and perfection of our God— these feel, more than do others, 
their own blemishes and shortcomings and unworthiness, 
altho actually they are far superior to others of 
the human family, else they would never be granted 
such insights to the divine plan, character and coming 
glory. Humility is not only an appropriate grace for 
all who are blemished through the fall, but it is appropriate 
also to the angels, for is it not one of the fruits 
of the holy spirit, as pointed out by the Apostle? Whoever 
has a deep humility of heart, an intense appreciation 
of his own demerits, and of the divine perfection, 
is in a condition of heart ready for divine blessing and 
for usefulness in the divine service, while the pharisaical, 
who claim perfection for themselves in thought, 
word or deed, are in a condition of heart that is deplorable, 
and are wholly unfit to be used of the Lord as 
messengers of divine grace. 

When Isaiah, in the vision, cried out lamenting 
his own imperfection, and that his lips were wholly inadequate 
to the telling of the divine glory, one of the 
seraphim brought a live coal from off the altar, and 
therewith touched the prophet's lips. Thus, in the 
symbolic language of the vision the Lord said to Isaiah: 
Since you have realized your own blemishes and divine 
goodness, you shall be granted powers of speech and 
eloquence and words that are not your own, but which 
are beyond your natural ability, and inspired by the 
Lord;— your lips shall be inspired with the message of 
the great salvation, the message of love, the fire, the 
zeal, which shall prompt and consume that sacrifice, 



and with the grand results which shall flow from it: you 
may, in your lips at least, be cleansed from all sin, even 
in advance of the great sacrifice of which you shall 
speak as my prophet and mouthpiece. 

The vision had its designed effect upon Isaiah, establishing 
more firmly his faith, manifesting to him the 
divine greatness and power, to him the highest of holy 
things. Thus Isaiah's heart was quickened with a desire 
to further engage in the divine service, no matter 
what the message which the Lord would send. Consequently, 
when further on in the vision he heard the 
Lord inquire for a faithful servant, he immediately responded, 
offering himself, and was accepted, and the 
message given to him. 

Thus it is also with those whom the Lord would 
specially use in his service during this Gospel age. None 
are forced into divine service: all soldiers of the cross 
must be volunteers— none will be drafted. The Lord 
does not even press us to become his servants, but, as 
was illustrated here with Isaiah, he shows to his faithful 
his character and plan, and lets them know that he is 
seeking such to worship and serve him, as worship and 
serve in spirit and in truth, and this knowledge is 
his "call." This is quite sufficient for all who have 
tasted of the Lord's grace appreciatively: for such to 
know that there is an opportunity of rendering service 
to the King of kings is to volunteer their services, to 
pray that the Lord will grant them a privilege of doing 

R2371 : page 306 

all their talents will fit them to do in his service. Only 
such are true mouthpieces of the Lord. The false prophets 
and teachers of error are those who affect to serve 
the Lord's cause, for hire of money or for praise of men, 
for self-adulation or aggrandizement. 

The message of which Isaiah was thus made the 
channel or mouthpiece of the Lord, was, as already intimated, 
an unpleasant one. It was a message to the 
effect that the divine counsel had already foreseen that 
all the warnings, threatenings, chastisements, which had 
come upon Israel and Judah, and which would yet come 
upon them, would fail to reach their hearts and turn 
them to repentance; and that, as a consequence, the 
land would be made desolate, the people being carried 
away into captivity. Such a message would be difficult 
to deliver to any people, yet this was the message which 
the Lord sent, and for which he specially prepared his 
servant. We are not surprised to learn that the message 
was resented, and altho Isaiah lived to the good 
old age of seventy, there seems to be reasonable ground 
for the truth of the claim made by tradition that he 
eventually died a martyr's death, being sawn asunder. 
Even the ray of hope which his message contained, to 
the effect that a remnant of the people would be spared 
and returned to their land, and that the national hope 



would thus be revived, was no doubt considered to be 
the addition of insult to injury by the proud and self-willed 
people to whom the message was delivered. 

It was not long after Isaiah had this vision that 
the ten tribes were carried away into captivity, and altho 
a reformation set in with Judah, it was but temporary, 
and Judah's share in the prophesied captivity occurred 
about one hundred and fifty years later. 

This same message of the Lord was quoted by the 
Lord Jesus and the Apostle Paul, as further applicable 
to Israel, at the first advent, when, on their rejection of 
Messiah, the nation as a whole was rejected of the Lord 
and scattered amongst all the nations of the earth, and 
only a "remnant" of Israelites indeed, who accepted 
the Messiah, were received into the higher dispensation 
of divine favor of this Gospel age, as sons of God and 
joint-heirs with Jesus Christ our Lord.— Matt. 13:13-17; 
Jno. 1:12; Rom. 11:5-11. 

Finding, as we do, in the Scriptures, that natural 
Israel was a type of nominal spiritual Israel, we are not 
surprised to find also that there is a somewhat similar 
message due to the spiritual house now, in the end of 
this age. The Lord's message now is that the harvest 
of the earth is ripe, that the time of harvest has come, 

R2372 : page 306 

that he is seeking Israelites indeed, that he is gathering 

out his jewels, which, during the prevalence of evil in 

the past, have been undergoing polishing to fit and prepare 

them for coming glory, and to reflect the divine 

light and beauty. The message now is that nominal 

Christendom is hereafter to be known as "Babylon," 

confusion, and that all who are truly the Lord's people 

are now to hear his voice and to flee out of Mystic Babylon, 

that they be not partakers of her sins, and that 

they receive not a share of her plagues from the vials 

of wrath which shortly shall be poured out upon her. 

-Rev. 18:1-4. 

While the Lord has indeed put into our mouths a 
new song, that we may show forth the praises of him 
who has called us out of darkness into his marvelous 
light, and that we may tell of his loving-kindness and 
his tender mercies over all his works, and that eventually 
all shall come to a knowledge of the Lord, that 
they may be saved, if they will, nevertheless, this particular 
feature of the message of present truth, which 
calls God's people out of Babylon, is, in many respects, 
like the message which Isaiah was bidden to deliver to 
the faithful of Israel in his day: it is a message that is 
not favorably received; a message that is resented, and 
that brings upon those who present it, even in the most 
gentle and loving manner, the maledictions and the 
scowls of those who love sectarianism and the worship of 
human theories and creeds better than they love the 
Lord and his message. 



Those who would speak the message of present 
truth in love, and yet with courage and fearlessness of 
man, need just such an encouragement as the Lord 
granted to Isaiah. They need that the eyes of their 
understanding be granted a vision of the King in his 
beauty; and they need to hear distinctly uttered the 
fact that ultimately the Lord shall establish his Kingdom, 
which shall fill the whole earth with his glory. 
And just such a view and such a message the Lord is 
now granting to those whom he would use as servants 
and mouthpieces. The present truth, the eating of the 
"meat in due season," now provided by our present 
Lord, affords his faithful a waking vision of the Lord's 
glory, never conceived of before, but now clearly recognized 
by the eye of faith, in the light of the clearer 
truth. In this light of the divine plan of the ages we 
indeed see the divine character as never before,— divine 
wisdom, divine justice, divine love and divine power, 
fully coordinated, operating in absolute accord in all 
the great work of our God, comprehending the past, the 
present and the future. 

In this our vision there comes to us also the seraphic 
testimony, "Holy, holy, holy is the Lord of hosts. The 
whole earth is [to be] full of his glory." From this 
standpoint of the future work of our God, through the 
Millennial Kingdom of the glorified Christ, Head and 
Body, who shall bless all the families of the earth, we 
can see divine holiness, love, wisdom and justice, as it 
is not possible for them to be seen from any other. As 
it is, those who thus see divine grace in its effulgence, 

R2372 : page 307 

and who, nevertheless, realize their own imperfection 

and unworthiness, these it is who to-day have granted 

to them the opportunity of being mouthpieces of God 

by being touched with an antitypical coal from the antitypical 

altar,— touched with the consecration of the 

great sacrifice. And these are they who are anxious to render 

service to our Lord, and who are commissioned to 

bear the message of present truth to others. 



R2372 : page 307 

MESSIAH'S KINGDOM FORETOLD. 

OCT. 30.-ISA. 11:1-10. 

"The earth shall be full of the knowledge 
of the Lord, as the waters cover the sea." 

ONLY those who recognize the typical character 
of God's kingdom of old, and the typical character 
of the kingdom of Babylon which overthrew it, 



are prepared to understand the prophecies: because in 

the prophecies the affairs of Fleshly Israel and those of 

Spiritual Israel, and the affairs of literal Babylon and 

those of mystic Babylon, are so interwoven as to be unintelligible, 

absurd, from any other standpoint. There 

are some who fail to recognize antitypical Spiritual Israel, 

who, nevertheless, distinctly see that the Babylon 

of old, which perished more than two thousand years 

ago, was not the Babylon of Revelation— mystic Babylon, 

—whose surpassing power and greatness were not 

even dreamed of in the days of the type. Many who 

distinctly discern mystic Babylon, and her approaching 

fall, have failed to discern that the natural Israelites 

were broken off from the root of divine promise made 

to father Abraham, and that the spiritual Israelites 

were grafted into that root, and have become heirs of its 

chief promises and blessings, taking the chief place of 

the natural Israelites, so that when they are restored, 

it will be to a lower, an earthly favor. The proper 

standpoint of view from which the entire plan of God 

is clear and reasonable takes cognizance of both of these 

facts. 

In our last lesson we considered the Prophet Isaiah 
at the time when he was commissioned to declare to his 
people their utter overthrow in captivity, and that but 
a remnant would remain. There were three distinct 
climaxes to the complete fulfilment of the message: 

(1) It was about one hundred and seventy years from 
the time of his vision and the last year of King Uzziah, 
before Judah was carried captive to Babylon, from 
which only a remnant returned seventy years later. 

(2) The vision and the message were about eight hundred 
years before the final rejection of Israel by Messiah 

at his first advent, when only a remnant was accepted 
into the Gospel age, the house of sons, and the people 
as a whole were scattered into every nation. (3) Isaiah's 
vision and message were about 2650 years before 
the rejection of nominal Spiritual Israel, preparatory to 
gathering out of the "Israelites indeed," the Royal 
Priesthood, the holy nation, which, with Messiah as 
its Head, is now shortly to be invested with divine 
power and majesty, as the Kingdom of God which 
shall rule and bless all the families of the earth. 

The remnant of natural Israel, delivered from literal 
Babylon, was but a type of the remnant of God's 
people now about to be delivered from symbolic Babylon, 
Christendom, and the fall of literal Babylon, at the 
hands of Cyrus, was but a foreshadowing of the fall of 
mystic Babylon as a result of the battle of the great 
day of God Almighty under the antitypical Cyrus, the 
Captain of our salvation. And the extravagant language 
used throughout the prophecies in respect to the fall of 
Babylon was made extravagant because the divine testimony 
had reference to mystic Babylon, more particularly 
than to literal Babylon. Thus have the divine 
purposes been hidden, and yet declared, throughout the 



ages.— Compare Isa. 13:1-15 with Rev. 17 and 18,— 
the latter part of Isa. 13 evidently referring only to 
literal Babylon. 

In harmony with the above suggestions, it will be 
found that Isaiah's prophecies repeatedly mingle and 
commingle the events of his day with the events of our 
day— God's providences toward his people then, and 
his subsequent deliverance of them to Babylonian captivity, 
and his later judgments upon Babylon, all of 
which were accomplished literally within two hundred 
and fifty years of Isaiah's vision, are interspersed with 
declarations respecting Messiah and his everlasting 
Kingdom, and the blessing of the remnant of Spiritual 
Israel, and the eventual healing and recovery of all Israel 
to divine favor. An illustration of this intruding 
of the Messianic Millennial Kingdom into the prophecies 
which specially related to natural Israel and the 
condition of things present in the Prophet's day, is afforded 
in this lesson; also in chapters 2:2-4; 8:14-18; 
9:1-7; 32:1-4; 33:5-24; 52:7-15; 60:1-5; 61:7-11; 
65:17-25. 

In the prophecy under consideration the Lord pictures 
natural Israel as entirely cut off, leaving nothing 
behind but the root of divine promise, and yet he shows 
that out of this root shall ultimately come all the 
blessings originally promised to Abraham, and confirmed 
unto Isaac, unto Jacob, and unto David, the last 
confirmation reading, "I will set up thy seed after thee, 
which shall proceed out of thy bowels, and I will establish 
the throne of his kingdom forever. I will be 
his father and he shall be my son." (2 Sam. 7:12,13.) 

R2372 : page 308 

This prophecy seems, indeed, to have a fulfilment in 
Solomon, but only because Solomon was a type of the 
greater son of David, who was also the son of God. 
Solomon indeed built the typical house of the Lord, but 
Christ, the antitypical son of David and Son of God is 
now building the true, the antitypical Temple, the 
Church which is his Body, a temple of the holy spirit, 
a house of sons. David himself prophetically grasps 
the truth of this promise, saying, "Jehovah hath sworn 
in truth unto David; he will not turn from him; Of the 
fruit of thy body will I set upon thy throne." (Psa. 132:11.) 
The Apostle Peter, moved by the holy spirit 
on Pentecost, refers to this same promise, and definitely 
applies it to our Lord Jesus.— Acts 2:30. 

In the prophecy our Lord is not spoken of as the 
root out of David, but as the root out of Jesse, David's 
father; because David himself is a type of Christ, his 
name signifying beloved. Hence also the fact that in 

R2373 : page 308 

many prophecies our Lord's Millennial reign is spoken 



of as the reign of David, the reign of the Beloved. 

It is worthy of note that the Scriptures, in speaking 
of the Gentile governments, symbolize them as 
trees, and their destruction as the cutting down of those 
trees. Many trees do not sprout again from their roots 
when once cut down, as for instance, the cedars of Lebanon 
to which great Babylon was likened. On the 
contrary, the Lord speaks of Israel as a vine of his own 
planting; and one peculiarity of the vine is that it seems 
to thrive the better in proportion as it is pruned. Thus 
our Lord also speaks of Spiritual Israel, as branches of 
himself, the true Vine, and declares that the Father 
prunes the vine to the intent that it may bring forth 
more fruit. It is said that amongst the vine-growers of 
Palestine it is customary to cut back the vine clear to 
the roots yearly, in order to get fresh sprouts therefrom. 
And so we find that the Lord, with Fleshly Israel, frequently 
pruned them by disciplines, captivities, etc., 
cutting off many of the branches, and preserving only 
a remnant. This process was followed at the first advent 
in the cutting off of Israel from all further share 
in the spiritual features of the Abrahamic promise,— 
except the remnant which received the Lord, and on 
this account were granted privileges to become members 
of the house of sons. (John 1:12.) During this Gospel 
age the Lord deals with his people not collectively, 
not as a nation, but individually: each branch is pruned, 
and every branch is expected to bring forth fruit, or 
else it will be entirely lopped off. 

Here, then, we have the thought of the Lord, expressed 
through the Prophet, respecting Christ Jesus, 
our Lord, that he from the time of his baptism and 
anointing with the holy spirit, became the new spiritual 
shoot out of the Abrahamic promise, and out of the roots 
of Jesse. But they greatly err who see in this study 
our Lord Jesus only, and who fail to recognize the fact 
that he is the Head of the Church, which is his Body. 
The true vine is therefore the entire body of Christ, as 
our Lord explains. (John 15.) This stem or new Vine 
had its start in our Lord Jesus, and has grown and prospered 
and had branches which have borne their fruit 
under the great Husbandman's care in all these centuries 
of the Gospel age. But neither the Vine nor its 
fruitage have been specially delightsome either to the 
Fleshly Israelites or to nominal Spiritual Israelites: on 
the contrary, our Lord's prophetic declaration has been 
accurately fulfilled: "Ye shall be hated of all men for 
my name's sake." Our Lord and the Apostles were 
hated by the chief religionists of their day, not because 
they were evil, but because of their faithfulness to God; 
because that faithfulness, as a light, rebuked, as darkness, 
the unfaithfulness of those who hated them. 

The prophecy does not touch upon our Lord's pre-human 
existence, nor upon his earliest experiences while 
coming to manhood, nor need we. It begins with our 
Lord at the time when he reached manhood's estate, at 



thirty years of age, when he made his consecration, and 

was accepted, and the acceptance was sealed by the impartation 

to him of the holy spirit, of which John bare 

record. (John 1:32.) From that time onward the spirit 

of Jehovah rested upon him, and was in him a spirit 

of wisdom, understanding, counsel, strength, making 

him alert in the use of his knowledge in reverence and 

submission to the divine will. Thus it is written by 

the Prophet again, "By his knowledge shall my righteous 

servant justify many, for he shall bear their iniquities." 

(Isa. 53:11.) While his perfection of being 

(in that he was holy, harmless, undefiled, separate from 

sinners) had undoubtedly much to do with our Lord's 

obedience to the divine will, yet his knowledge of God, 

based upon his prehuman existence, had also much to 

do with his implicit confidence and trust in Jehovah, 

that his every requirement and condition would be found 

eventually to be the embodiment of justice, wisdom and 

love— this knowledge undoubtedly was the main-spring 

of our dear Redeemer's implicit obedience in all points 

to the Father's will. 

And the same observations are applicable in respect 
to the Church of Christ— the members in particular of 
his Body, of which he is the Head. Like their Master, 
each branch in the Vine is the recipient of the holy 
spirit, through him— for the anointing oil (typical of 
the holy spirit) was all poured first upon the head of 
the high priest and subsequently flowed down over his 
person. Those who are made partakers of the Lord's 
spirit have that spirit as the beginning of their new life, 
for "if any man have not the spirit of Christ he is none 
of his." And this spirit of Christ and of Jehovah, 
coming upon the Body of Christ, from the Head, is to 

R2373 : page 309 

each (as it was to the head) a spirit of wisdom and of 
understanding and of counsel and of power; and a spirit 
of obedience to the Father's will, in proportion as this 
spirit dwells in them. And herein we see the distinction 
that our Lord Jesus, being perfected, could receive 
of the Father's spirit unlimitedly, "without measure," 
while we who are imperfect, blemished through inherited 
weaknesses, can receive the spirit only limitedly, 
by measure— according to the capacity and condition 
of our "earthen vessel," into which we receive this new 
treasure. (2 Cor. 4:7.) It is of course a part of our 
duty and privilege to do all in our power for the repair 
of the blemishes of the earthen vessels, to the intent 
that we may receive larger measures of the spirit of 
holiness, and may be the better able to retain the same. 

Suddenly passing from the perfecting of Christ, 
Head and Body, under the influence of the spirit of 
the Father, down to the time when these graces which 
are supplied in this present age (and under which the 
body of Christ groweth unto a holy temple of the Lord, 



by the fitting, molding, polishing and fashioning, of 

each member), shall have been perfected, the next suggestion 

of the prophecy is the exercise of these graces 

of the divine spirit by the complete Christ in the Millennial 

Kingdom— in judging, blessing, correcting and 

assisting the world of mankind, or so many as will avail 

themselves of their help, to return to divine favor. The 

thought is that, as soon as the entire Christ (Head and 

Body) has been prepared for the work to be done, the 

work itself will be commenced. It is in full accord 

with this that the Apostle says that the prophets spake 

beforehand of the sufferings of Christ, and of the glory 

that should follow. 

Not that the sufferings of Christ were completed 
more than eighteen centuries ago, and the glory failed 
to follow; but that the sufferings of Christ, which began 
in our Lord, the Head of the Body, are being filled 
up or accomplished in all the members of his body, 
and, as soon as the last member of the Body has been 
made perfect through suffering, and been fitted for his 
share in the glory, then at once the glory shall follow, 
—follow the completion of the sufferings. (Compare 
Col. 1:24.) It is because there are some members of 
the Body of Christ still lacking to make up the elect 
and predestinated number, foreknown of the Lord 
(Rom. 8:29), that the glory has not yet been ushered 
in. And fortunate this is for us who hence still have 
hopes of attaining to this high calling of God in Christ 
Jesus, to become heirs of God, joint-heirs with Jesus 
Christ our Lord, to an inheritance incorruptible and 
never-fading, reserved in heaven for those who shall 
make their calling and election sure. 

The glorified Church, Head and Body, will be so 
filled with the spirit of Jehovah— his wisdom, his love, 
his power— that they will be fully qualified to do all 
the great work which divine love and wisdom has purposed 
and arranged for, since before the foundation of 
the world. 

Accustomed to the misgovernment, as the Israelites 
were, and as all mankind since have experienced 
it, it was necessary that they and all who would appreciate 
the coming Kingdom, should be given some assurance 
that the new ruling power would not only have 
good and wise motives and intentions, but also possess 
superior power of knowledge and judgment. And this 
is what is pointed out: that the new King would not 
need to rely upon the common channels of information 
in the giving of his blessings, and in administering of 
his reproofs and chastisements, but will have a super-human 
endowment of power, by which he shall know 
the very thoughts and intents of the heart, and need 
not to judge either by the hearing of the ear nor by 
the sight of the eye, as must all earthly rulers, however 
well intentioned. It was proper also that the Israelites 
and others should know that the new Kingdom would 
be an absolutely just and impartial one, for their experience 



had been that the very wisest and best of their 
kings had been governed largely by selfishness, so that 
they amassed wealth at the expense of their subjects, 
and made special friends of the wealthy, and granted 
them special privileges oftimes at the expense of the 
poor, the helpless, the despised. Hence, the Lord, 
through the Prophet, assures us that the special care of 
the new King will be to administer his office with equity 
toward all, and that the meek, the backward, the 
modest, undisposed to press their claims and to assert 
their rights, will have his special care; likewise the poor, 
that in the present time find few to sympathize with or 
to encourage or to help them, shall find in the new 
King a friend. 

The ordinary idea of the method by which the 
Lord will introduce the Millennium is wholly at variance 
with all the testimony of the divine Word, in that 
it presupposes that the world will be converted to the 
Lord through the efforts of the Church along its present 
lines of progress, and that thus the world will get better 
and better, until the full noontide of Millennial blessing 

R2374 : page 309 

is everywhere spread abroad. According to this idea, 
the Lord began setting up his Kingdom eighteen centuries 
ago, and at the same rate of progress it may require, 
according to the most optimistic view, thousands 
of years to reach the Millennial degree of blessing. But, 
according to the facts of the case impartially considered, 
we can readily see that the Kingdom, which God has 
promised, could never come as a result of efforts such 
as have been put forth during the past eighteen centuries. 
We mention but the one fact, known to all mankind 
from the published reports; viz., that the increase 

R2374: page 310 

of nominal Christian professors annually is small, out 

of all proportion to the natural increase of the human 

family annually, so that if every Christian professor of 

to-day were a very saint, and if the same ratio of conversions 

continued for a thousand years as at present, 

or if the number were doubled or trebled, the result, 

at the end of the thousand years would be a much 

smaller percentage of professing Christians than now. 

Those who cannot see so simple a proposition as this 

are evidently blinded by their love of error— their love 

of their own theory. Similarly blinded are those who 

cannot see that only a small percentage of the nominal 

Christians of to-day are true saints of God, and that, 

if the whole world were converted to the same degree 

as the best cities in the most civilized and Christianized 

countries in the world, it would still not be true that 

God's Kingdom had come, in the sense that our Lord 

Jesus taught us to expect it: for in his model prayer he 



taught us to pray and to expect, not only that God's 
Kingdom would come, and that it had not already come, 
but also to expect that, when it shall be fully established, 
God's will would be done on earth even as it is 
done in heaven— absolutely, perfectly. 

Those who expect the Millennial Kingdom to come 
as a result of present efforts along present lines, and 
who believe that the world is gradually approaching 
that condition by an evolutionary process, should consider 
the Word of the Lord through the prophet, to the 
effect that, when Messiah takes the reins of government, 
his first step will be to judge the poor, and to reprove 
the rich with equity, in the interests of the meek of the 
earth. How could this be possible, if equity had already 
prevailed by a gradual process, so that there were 
no poor, and no rich, and so that all were meek? Other 
Scriptures, in harmony with this, show that the very 
object of the beginning of our Lord's reign is to correct 
the wrongs that will then be prevailing, and he himself 
implies that the earth will not be in a faithful and 
blessed condition at his second advent, by asking the 
question, whose answer is implied— "When the Son of 
Man cometh, shall he find the faith on the earth?" 

The Scriptural position throughout is harmonious 
and consistent. It describes the present time of evil as 
"the present evil world," in which "the prince of this 
world" rules, and in which the Lord's people, "the 
body of Christ," the heirs of the Kingdom, "suffer violence," 
and that this violence, through suffering persecution, 
is working out for those who are rightly exercised 
thereby a preparation for the time when the 
entire body of Christ, having been thus purified and 
prepared, will be given the Kingdom under the whole 
heavens, the said dominion of earth being wrested with 
force from the prince of this world, and the kingdoms 
of this world, and bestowed upon the Son by the Father's 
power, and through the great time of trouble with 
which this age shall end, and in which the prince of 
this world will be bound. 

The Lord, through the Prophet, shows the means 
by which the righteous reign of the Messiah shall be 
inaugurated— the time of trouble such as was not since 
there was a nation, predicted by the Prophet Daniel,— 
saying, "He shall smite the earth with the rod of his 
mouth, and with the breath of his lips shall he slay 
the wicked." It is evident, then, that there will be not 
only poor, needing assistance and equity, but there will 
be wicked at the time the Kingdom is established. 
(Compare Mai. 4:1,6; Rev. 19:15.) The rod of Messiah's 
mouth signifies the judgments which he has already 
expressed, and which have very largely gone unheeded 
by Christendom. We remember his declaration, 
"He that rejecteth me and receiveth not my words hath 
one that judgeth him; the word that I have spoken, the 
same shall judge him in the last day." Christendom 
in general has admitted the righteousness of the Lord's 



Word, but those who attempt to live according to that 
Word are remarkably few. Consequently, when the 
time shall come that judgment shall be laid to the line, 
and righteousness to the plummet, and when this judgment 
shall begin at the nominal house of God, the 
nominal system in general will fall— will fall condemned 
under that Word. Only the faithful few, the Lord's 
jewels, shall be "accounted worthy to escape those 
things coming upon the world," when the Lord shall 
smite the earth, Christendom, the present social order, 
with the rod of his mouth, when, as elsewhere described, 
"The Lord shall speak to them in his anger, and vex 
them in his sore displeasure"— when he shall render 
vengeance to his enemies, and recompense to those who 
have known the Master's will and have done it not. "Vengeance 
is mine; I will repay, saith the Lord." "Wait 
ye upon me saith the Lord, for my determination is to 
gather the nations, that I may assemble the kingdoms, 
to pour upon them mine indignation, even all 
my fierce anger: for all the earth shall be devoured with 
the fire of my jealousy." And "then will I turn unto 
the people a pure language, that they may all call upon 
the name of the Lord, to serve him with one consent."* 
"Righteousness shall be the girdle of his loins, 
Faithfulness the girdle of his hips." 

The girdle figuratively represents mercy, diligence, 
service, and the proclamation here is that the Messiah 
shall be a faithful, a diligent servant of Jehovah, in 
accomplishing all the work entrusted to his care. 

The reference to the change of disposition in the 
animal kingdom, so that the wolf and the lamb, the 
leopard and the kid, the calf and the lion, will dwell in 



*See MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOL. IV., "The Day of Vengeance.' 

R2374: page 311 

harmony, is in full accord with the general Scriptural 
outlines of the "times of restitution of all things." 
Not only is mankind to be restored, or brought back 
to his primeval condition of human perfection, and 
harmony with God, like Adam before the fall (tho with 
increased knowledge and experience), but the lower 
animals also, which have shared in the ruin and disorder 
resulting from the fall, will also share in the 
blessing and restoration of order to be accomplished by 
Messiah. 

In the first account of the lower animals, furnished 
us in the Scriptures, there is nothing to imply that they 
were wild, vicious and at enmity with mankind; on 
the contrary, the implication is that they were all 
thoroughly in subjection to the perfect man. We may 
reasonably suppose that when, under the influence of 
the sentence of death, mankind gradually lost more 



and more of the image of God originally possessed, he 
at the same time lost his power over the lower animals. 
The nature of the power possessed by the perfect Adam 
may still be imperfectly traced in the superior powers 
of certain of the fallen race in controlling the brute 
creation. Thus we see that some men can exercise mental 
force and control, not only over wild horses, but also 
over the most ferocious beasts of the jungle, so that they 
are known as horse-tamers, lion-tamers, serpent-charmers, 
etc. Adam was declared by the Lord to be the 
king of the earth, and as such he was recognized by the 
brute creation. (Gen. 2:19,20.) After mankind had 
lost the original mental power to control the lower 
animals, a warfare sprang up between them, in which 
mankind has been obliged to pit force against force, having 
so largely lost the power of mental control. The 
restoration of mankind to that condition which was lost 
through sin implies naturally, therefore, a restoration 
of the brute creation to primeval conditions, such as 
are suggested in the prophecy before us. The same 
thought is conveyed in the statement that "A little 
child shall lead" or control the wild beasts when 
brought into their proper relationship with mankind. 

All of the foregoing, and, indeed, the entire Scripture 
testimony, shows that the heavenly rest and blessing 
which God has in reservation for mankind in general 
is earthly. It would be utterly and wholly unnecessary 
to change the disposition of the brute creation, 
if mankind were to be changed to another nature, and 
to become as the angels. Other prophecies speak of 
mankind in the restitution condition as perfect human 
beings, of the earth and adapted to the earth, and tell 
us that in the perfect condition they shall sit every man 
under his own vine and fig-tree, with none to molest or 
make him afraid, and that they shall long enjoy the 
work of their hands. These promises, which are the 
lights of the world's hope during the Millennial age, 
have nothing whatever to do with the hope set before 
the Gospel Church of this age— a heavenly hope, the 
realization of which, our Lord and the apostles assure 
us, will require that all who would attain to it must of 
necessity be changed from animal to spiritual bodies, 
from weakness to power, from human nature to spiritual 
nature; because flesh and blood cannot inherit the 
Kingdom of God. 

The difficulty with many is in the failure to discern 
that the Kingdom of God per se consists of our Lord 
Jesus and the Church— the little flock, to whom it is 

R2375 : page 311 

the Father's good pleasure to give the Kingdom. These 
constitute the royal or reigning class or family of God. 
The world of mankind in general shall at first be the 
subjects of this spiritual kingdom, and afterwards become 
citizens or members of it, to the extent that they 



come into harmony with its rules and regulations, and 
are accepted back into reconciliation with God, and thus 
again become his children through Christ. Thus it is 
that the Scriptures declare that when this Kingdom 
shall be set up it will be but a small stone, a little flock, 
which in the end of this age shall, with divine power, 
smite the dominion of earth, and crush it to dust in the 
great time of trouble. (See Dan. 2:34,35,44,45.) 
But after crushing present institutions under and connected 
with the prince of this world, God's Kingdom 
will not remain small, but will gradually expand, until 
it shall fill the whole earth. This is the holy mountain 
mentioned in the prophecy under consideration, a 
mountain being a symbol of a kingdom. Nothing shall 
be permitted to do violence or work injury throughout 
all God's holy kingdom, as a result of its establishment. 
Love shall be the law, and divine power shall be the 
force which will enforce that law, and all who will not 
conform thereto shall be "cut off from among the people," 
as the Lord has declared through the Apostle. 
(Acts 3:23.) How evident it is that this Kingdom has 
not yet come, when we see that so far from love being 
the rule of mankind, selfishness is the rule, individually 
and nationally, and that there are many influences of 
evil, hurting and destroying throughout the world to-day. 
This is an evidence that God's kingdom is not yet 
set up, and hence we continue to pray, "Thy kingdom 
come, thy will be done on earth as it is done in heaven." 

The power by which the Lord shall accomplish the 
blessing of mankind, after he has crushed the power of 
evil and established the reign of righteousness is stated 
to us in this prophecy— it is to be by the spread of a 
knowledge of the Lord. The Apostle assures us (1 Tim. 2:4) 
that it is the will of God that all men shall come 
to a knowledge of the truth that they may be saved. 
He assures us that there can be no salvation without 
knowledge (Rom. 10:14,15), consequently the knowledge 
of the Lord being very limited throughout this 

R2375 : page 312 

Gospel age, only comparatively few of earth's millions 
have come to such a knowledge of him as to permit 
them to exercise faith in God, and in the great sacrifice 
and pardon for sin which God has provided in Christ. 
But the fact that few in the present life have come to 
this knowledge shall not in any degree thwart the divine 
plan, nor make the death of Christ on their behalf 
of no avail, for the Lord assures us that in due time 
the true light of the world, Jesus, shall lighten every 
man that cometh into the world— this includes all 
the heathen, all those of imbecile mind, who could not 
grasp the truth, and all the infants who die without a 
knowledge of the only name under heaven whereby we 
must be saved. God has thus made ample provision, 
first, in the redemption which is in Christ Jesus, our 



Lord, and secondly, in the Millennial age which he has 
provided through him, in which the knowledge of the 
Lord shall be caused to fill the whole earth. 

Nor are we to suppose that this will be merely a 
little sprinkling of knowledge, such as has come to a 
very limited portion of the world of mankind here and 
there in spots during this Gospel age. The Lord's people 
have received these showers of grace and truth, and 
sometimes appropriately sing and pray for more abundant 
showers for their refreshment, but the Lord's provision 
for the world of mankind in general, under the 
Messianic Kingdom, during the Millennial age, is that 
this knowledge of his shall be world-wide, and ocean-deep, 
so that none shall thereafter be able to plead 
ignorance or any other excuse for failure to avail themselves 
of the grace of God in Christ. Hence again it 
is written by another prophet, that whosoever dies in 
that age will die not for Adam's sin, but for his own 
sin; because the death of Christ has cancelled the 
Adamic condemnation, and has thus secured to every 
member of the human family a full, impartial opportunity 
for eternal life through faith in the Redeemer and 
obedience to his requirements. The Apostle says of 
the Jews that they are blinded; that a vail is over their 
hearts, that they cannot see, and he points us to the 
fact that in God's due time this vail of ignorance shall 
be removed from Israel, and that they shall be saved 
from their blindness, and "shall obtain mercy through 
your mercy"— shall obtain mercy at the hands of elect 
spiritual Israel, the Body of Christ, now being selected, 
which will then be in power, as the kings and priests 
to bless and judge the world in righteousness. (1 Cor. 6:2.) 
Similarly, the same Apostle assures us that the 
god of this world is exercising a blinding influence upon 
the whole world of mankind (2 Cor. 4:4), and the 
prophets point us to the time when Satan shall be 
bound, and when all the blind eyes shall be opened, 
and when the vail of the covering of ignorance shall be 
destroyed from over the face of all the people, that all 
may look, with the eyes of their understanding, upon 
him who was pierced, and through whom all may have 
redemption, the forgiveness of sins. 

The last verse of our lesson points us to the Millennial 
day, and seems to suggest another root of Jesse, 
as connected with the blessing of the Gentiles, and as 
an ensign or standard for all the people to pattern after. 
We understand this to signify that after the spiritual 
seed of Abraham and David has been exalted to the 
Kingdom glory, then an earthly seed, out of the 
same root, shall come into prominence in connection 
with the heavenly, and be the agent and representative 
of the heavenly Kingdom in the blessing of the world 
of mankind. The Apostle Paul in Rom. 4:16, seems 
to imply that while Christ and his spiritual Church of 
the Gospel age are the seed of the promise, nevertheless 
there is another subordinate seed, which shall be used 



of the Lord in the blessing of mankind. This latter 
seed seems to be referred to also in Heb. 11:39,40, where 
the Apostle, after mentioning the faithful worthies of 
the past as approved unto God, most positively states 
that they are not of the Gospel Church, not, therefore, 
of the Kingdom class per se, but that they, nevertheless, 
having obtained a good report through faith, will receive 
a share in the original promise, and be participants in 
the work of blessing the Gentile world, but not with or 
as a part of the Church, "God having provided some 
better thing for us [the Messianic body] that they without 
us should not be made perfect." Under the ministration 
of the spiritual Kingdom, the ancient worthies, 
restored to human perfection, shall not only be the 
princes, the representatives of the spiritual, invisible, 
Kingdom, but shall also be the grand ensigns or standards 
set up before mankind, as illustrations of what all 
mankind may attain unto, if they will render faithful 
obedience to the laws of the Kingdom— the conditions 
of the New Covenant. 



THE BIBLE. 



Whence but from heaven could men unskilled in arts, 
In various ages born and various parts 
Weave such agreeing truths? Or how or why 
Should all conspire to cheat us with a lie? 
Unasked their plans, ungrateful their advice, 
Starving their gains and martyrdom their price. 

—Dry den. 



It is, indeed, very generally supposed that the souls of good 
men, as soon as they are discharged from the body, go directly 
to heaven: but this opinion has not the least foundation in the 
oracles of God. —John Wesley. 



There is not one place of Scripture that occurs to me, where 
the word death, as it was first threatened in the law of innocency, 
necessarily signifies a miserable immortality of the soul, either 
to Adam, the actual sinner, or his posterity. —Dr. Watts. 



page 313 
VOL. XIX. NOVEMBER 1, 1898. No. 21. 



CONTENTS. 



The Colporteur Work 314 

"If God be for Us, Who Can be 

Against Us? 315 

"The Light of the World is 

Jesus" 318 

A Question in re Justification 321 

Hezekiah's Great Passover 322 

Two Prayers and their Answers 325 

Another Defeat and Another 

Victory 328 

page 314 

SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
--ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 56-60 ARCH STREET, ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, N.Y. DRAFT, MONEY ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS: 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age or accident, or other 
adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, if they 
send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting the 
paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list 
constantly. 



R2379 : page 314 

THE COLPORTEUR WORK. 

God has been pleased to specially use and bless the colporteur 
branch of the service. Very largely through this instrumentality 
nearly a million copies of the various volumes of 
MILLENNIAL DAWN series are now scattered throughout this land 
of freedom and intelligence: and these are constantly coming to 
the attention of new readers, here and abroad. 

"THE HARVEST IS GREAT, BUT THE LABORERS ARE FEW." 

"HE THAT REAPETH RECEIVETH WAGES AND GATHERETH FRUIT UNTO 

ETERNAL LIFE." 

This testimony is true now, as it was in the Jewish "harvest;" 



and hence we urge all who are so situated that they can 

engage in this work, to do so. It is one of the best opportunities 

we know of for preaching the true gospel: going from house 

to house all are reached— not only those who attend church services, 

but also those who do not; the latter class including some 

of the true "wheat" who absent themselves because they cannot 

there obtain the spiritual nourishment for which they hunger 

and thirst. 

Do not think of this as a "book business;" for it is no such 
thing. It is "preaching," "evangelizing," "teaching" in the 
truest and best sense of those terms. The Colporteur is one 
with the books and tracts which he circulates, and their teaching 
is associately his teaching. 

This work is open to both brethren and sisters who are not 
hampered by family obligations. It is not merely for those who 
are out of employment and know of nothing more profitable; it is 
specially for those who have talents and employment and who 
desire to sacrifice something for the privilege of being co-workers 
with God in the greatest and grandest work men or angels were 
ever privileged to engage in. "He that is ashamed of me and 
my word, of him will I also be ashamed," said our Savior. 

Write to us for "Hints to Colporteurs." 



R2375 : page 315 

"IF GOD BE FOR US, WHO CAN BE AGAINST US?" 

-ROMANS 8:31.- 

WHAT wonderful thoughts these words arouse! 
God for us! God on our side! It means almighty 
wisdom enlisted in our interest, almighty power 
to be exerted on our behalf, almighty love and infinite 
goodness watching over us and caring for and helping 
us. What immeasureable lengths and breadths, 
heights and depths of infinite grace are here so forcibly 
and so concisely set before the mind! 

But, we notice a limitation: The Apostle's suggestion 
is not that God is for every one, but for "us." 
To whom does he refer by this word "us?" Is it possible 
that divine love and energy, wisdom and power 
are not being exerted on behalf of the world, but only 
on behalf of the Church in this present time? 

Christian people are divided in their opinion respecting 
this matter. Our Methodist friends and generally 
Universalists and Unitarians hold that God is 

R2376 : page 315 

not for us, the Church, specially; but that he is for 
everybody, everywhere. They hold that he is today 
trying to save everybody, and that he has been so trying 
for the past six thousand years. They must of 
course admit, when making such a claim, that thus far 



the divine plan has failed of success for six thousand 

years; because, men are not saved, and only a small 

proportion have yet had the necessary opportunity for 

salvation; namely, a knowledge of the only "name given 

under heaven or amongst men whereby we must be 

saved." They must realize that the logic of facts is 

against their contention, and against all hope that by 

present methods and arrangements the world would 

ever be converted; for, they are aware that while it is 

claimed in a general way that nearly a million heathen 

have been converted during the last century (and it is 

safe to say that a very large proportion of these are 

not as thoroughly converted as might be desired— that 

comparatively few of them could be termed "saints"), 

yet, during the same time it is estimated that the numbers 

of the heathen have increased, in a natural way, 

to the enormous sum of two hundred millions. How 

long would it require at this rate, at this ratio of conversion, 

one million converts to two hundred million 

births, to convert the world? All can see that such 

hopes are quite illogical. Nevertheless, we can sympathize 

with and greatly appreciate the warmth of 

heart on the part of many of these whose theology we 

now criticise. Many of them— at least the founders 

of the systems— were forced to such conclusions (namely, 

that God is doing the best he can do for the world), 

in opposition to the doctrine of election and foreordination, 

as it has heretofore been misunderstood. 

On the other hand, the great majority of Christian 
people, namely, the various branches of the Presbyterian, 
the Episcopal, the Lutheran, the Baptist and the 
Congregationalist churches deny the theory that God 
has been trying to save the world for the past six 
thousand years and has failed of his purpose. They 
hold, to the contrary, that his purpose has been to select 
or elect out of the world a Church and that this 
work of election has been progressing and will finally 
be consummated; and that thus God's Word through 
the prophets shall be fulfilled, "My Word that goeth 
forth out of my mouth shall not return unto me void; 
but it shall accomplish that which I please, and it shall 
prosper in the thing whereto I sent it." (Isa. 55:11.) 
They hold that, since all of God's purposes shall be 
accomplished, it can not have been his purpose either 
to have converted the world, or to have brought 
every creature to a knowledge of Christ during the 
past six thousand years; because neither thing has 
been accomplished, therefore neither thing could have 
been purposed. 

We were about to say that we agree with the last 

R2376 : page 316 

mentioned numerous families of Christians in reference 
to the doctrine of election; but we cannot make so 
broad a statement. While we find in the Scriptures 



the declaration that an election is in progress during 
this age especially, and to some extent during all the 
past, yet it is not the kind of election to which such 
large numbers of our Christian friends hold. Their view 
of divine foreordination implies not only the election 
of a Church, but the damnation of all who are not 
elected; and here we must differ; for we find nothing 
of this kind in the Word of the Lord. We find nothing 
in it to imply that all the non-elect are hopelessly 
lost; but, on the contrary, the teaching that the election 
of the Church (Christ the head, the Church his 
body), during this Gospel age, is for the very purpose 
that they as the "seed of Abraham" may fulfil 
the divine plan as expressed in God's promise to 
Abraham, namely, that in this seed (Christ and the 
Church— Gal. 3:16,29), as the heirs of the divine 
promise and benevolent intention, "all the families of 
the earth shall be blessed." Not only is the character 
of the Scriptural election a very different one from 
that which has generally been held by Calvinism, but 
the object of the election is as widely as possible different 
from their conception. We would use the same language 
as our Calvinistic friends in speaking of the 
"us" of our text, in that we would say that it refers 
to the elect Church, but we deny that the damnation 
of all others is either stated or implied. 

In the preceding verses (29,30) the Apostle explains 
the character and methods of the divine selection 
of the elect Church: and we cannot do better than 
notice its details, because so much depends upon 
this point. If we can find in the Apostle's description 
good and sufficient evidence to assure us that we are 
of this elect Church, then we shall have great cause 
for thankfulness, confidence and joy, in realizing that 
God with all his almighty power, and wisdom and love 
is enlisted on our behalf. A great difficulty with many 
seems to be, not that they doubt that there is such an 
election in progress, nor that they doubt that God is 
for some, but that they doubt that they belong to that 
elect class— doubt, therefore, that they are of the "us," 
and that God is for them; and that he is causing all 
things to work together for good to them. 

By reason of their natural constitution, some of the 
humble-minded of the Lord's people lack the confidence 
which they should have, while in some instances others 
who have such confidence, have no real basis for it. 
Knowledge, therefore, clear knowledge of the Apostle's 
argument, is essential to proper faith respecting 
this subject, and proper confidence in God's care over 
those who have been adopted into his family and are 
seeking to make their calling and election sure. Our 
faith is made necessarily dependent to a large extent 
upon our understanding of the divine revelation on 
these subjects. Let us therefore critically examine the 
Apostle's statement with reference to the various steps 
in this election, and note our own connection with the 



same, step by step, that we may know to a certainty 
whether or not we are of the "us" class which he mentions, 
on behalf of whom the Lord's power and wisdom 
are and will be exerted. 

The Apostle begins by asserting divine foreknowledge; 
a divine attribute which will not be questioned 
by any Christian. God not only foreknew the sin that 
would enter into the world through the liberty given 
to father Adam and mother Eve, but he also foresaw 
the fall that would take place as the result of his own 
sentence, and the mental, moral and physical degradation 
which have resulted. Moreover, he foreknew 
that in due time he would send his "Only Begotten 
Son," our Lord, to ransom all from sin and its penalty, 
so that ultimately he might be the Deliverer of all 
who desire to return to harmony with their Creator. 
He not only foreknew the humiliation of our Lord, 
his First-begotten Son, from his condition of glory and 
spiritual nature to the lower conditions of human nature, 
but he foreknew his trials, and his faithfulness 
through them, even unto death, even the death of the 
cross. In all this he foresaw our redemption sacrifice. 
He foresaw also the glory which he designed to bestow 
upon our Lord Jesus following his obedience, as expressed 
by the Apostle Paul, saying, "Him hath God 
highly exalted, and given him a name [title, honor, 
etc.] above every name." 

But our Heavenly Father foreknew and foreordained 
still more than all this,— the selection of the 
Church to be the "body" of Christ, the "bride" of 
Christ, his associate, not only in the sufferings and 
trials of the present life, but also in the subsequent 
glory, and great work of "blessing all the families of 
the earth." This is distinctly stated by the same 
Apostle in his letter to the Ephesians (1:4), where he 
declares that "God hath chosen us in him [Christ] before 
the foundation of the world." The same foreordination 
is distinctly stated by the Apostle Peter, who 
writes to consecrated believers, addressing them, "elect 
according to the foreknowledge of God, the Father, 
through sanctification of the spirit," etc.— 1 Pet. 1:2. 

But the predestination of this verse (Rom. 8:29) 
is not at all what has generally been understood: it is 
not said that God predestinates that some should go to 
heaven and others to eternal torment. That is where 
false human reasoning has corrupted the testimony of 
God's Word and made it of none effect, or worse— of 
bad effect. The Apostle's statement is very clear, that 
God predestinated that all who shall be of this elect, 

R2376 : page 317 

foreknown and foreordained Church in glory must 
first be "conformed to the image of his Son"— or, as the 
literal reading would give it, "copies of his Son." How 
reasonable this predestination, how unreasonable the 



false view! God is calling a number of sons to "glory, 
honor and immortality," and has made Christ Jesus 
the Only Begotten, faithful in every trial, the Head or 
Captain of this foreordained company, whom he has 
since been calling, testing and preparing for the foreordained 
glory. And as it was but a reasonable thing 
that God should determine that if our Lord Jesus would 
be faithful he should receive the highest exaltation, so 
it was equally right and proper that the divine will 
should be forcibly asserted and that he should predestinate 
that none could be of that glorified "body of 
Christ," except as they would become imitators of 
Jesus, who is the firstborn among these his "brethren." 
Having thus stated the matter concisely, the Apostle 
proceeds to apply it to the Church individually, 
and to show the steps which God is taking during this 
Gospel age for the purpose of finding amongst men 
this class which he has foreordained shall be found. 
The Apostle gives the particulars in the following 
verse (30); and altho it is simply stated, it has very 
generally been stumbled over, not only by believers in 
general, but also by theologians, because of two things. 

R2377 : page 317 

(1) The last word of this verse translated "glorified" 
should be translated "honored;" and should be understood 
to refer to the honor conferred upon all who, 

during this age, are brought to any knowledge of 
Christ— the true light. This honor went first to the 
Jews, and selected a "remnant;" but when that nation 
proved unworthy of this "honor" it was turned to the 
Gentiles, to gather out of them a peculiar people, a 
holy nation, to bear the name of Christ. (Acts 15:14.) 

(2) The reader naturally expects the Apostle to begin 
with present conditions and trace them up to the grand 
result— the glorified Church,— while on the contrary 
the Apostle very properly begins at the other end, and 
traces the results downward. He does not begin, as 

is generally supposed, by saying, God honored you 
with the knowledge of the Gospel of Christ, and when 
you believed he justified you, and after you were justified 
he called you, and if you are faithful to your 
calling he will by and by exalt you to the condition 
which he foreknew. Indeed, it would not be possible 
to state the matter truthfully from that side; because, 
many are honored with a knowledge of the Gospel of 
Christ who are never justified (because they do not 
accept the knowledge— do not accept Christ), and 
of those who do accept Christ and who are thus 
justified, it would not be true to say that they will 
all be sanctified; nor would it be correct to say 
that all who once are sanctified will reach the condition 
of glory; for "many are called but few chosen:" 
few "make their calling and election sure." 
But the Apostle argues the matter from the only 



proper and logical standpoint: having stated that God 
has foreknown or fore-intended the election of the 
Church, he steps forward to the time when God's purpose 
and intention will have been completed, accomplished 
—the time when the election will be finished 
and the Church accepted to glory. From that future 
standpoint he indicates the various steps which led up 
to it, saying,— All those of the foreknown ones, glorified, 
will previously have been called; because it is a matter of 
grace, and no man taketh this honor unto himself, 
but "he that is called of God;"— as the "Head of the 
body," so each member of the body. And, says the 
Apostle, every one thus "called" will previously have 
been "justified;" because God calls no enemies, no unreconciled 
sinners, to this high position. It was for 
this reason that Christ died, that through faith in his 
blood repentant believers might be "justified" and 
might be thus prepared to be "called." It is thus 
evident that the high calling to this glorious position 
of joint-heirship with Christ is a very different thing, 
indeed, from the calling of sinners to repentance. Sinners 
are called to repentance anywhere and everywhere 
and at any time. And when they repent, the Lord 
engages that in due time he will point them to 
"The fountain filled with blood, 

Drawn from Immanuel's veins; 
Where sinners plunged beneath that flood 
Lose all their guilty stains." 

When they have lost their guilty stains, through 
repentance and faith in the Redeemer, they have 
reached the condition of justification, and are ready to 
be "called" to sonship and joint-heirship. But the 
Apostle is still going backward in the argument and, 
having told that the foreordained class would all be 
"called," and that they would all previously have 
been "justified," he declares that the justified ones 
would all previously have been favored or "honored" 
(not glorified): honored or favored with a knowledge of 
the truth, a knowledge of the gospel. 

Perhaps only a comparatively small number of 
Christians have realized what a great honor was conferred 
upon them in the first knowledge brought to 
them of the Lamb of God that taketh away the sin of 
the world. This "honor" has been so widely dispensed 
that many forget that it is a special honor, a special 
favor, just as they forget to recognize as special blessings 
the sunshine and the rain. But this "honor" is 
not yet as common as some other of God's blessings. 
"He maketh his sun to rise on the evil and on the 
good, and sendeth rain on the just and on the unjust," 
throughout the whole world: but not so the gospel 

R2377 : page 318 

sunlight and the spiritual showers. These blessings 
have been general only in certain quarters. 



"THE LIGHT OF THE WORLD IS JESUS." 



When Christ as the "Great Light" arose in Palestine, 
and when on the day of Pentecost the Church 
was illuminated by him, as a light for the world,— that 
light was not sent Southward into the darkness of Africa: 
the Africans were not "honored" with having 
the gospel of Christ. Neither was it sent Eastward 
through India to its hundreds of millions: India was 
not "honored" with the gospel of Christ. Neither was 
it sent still farther East to the hundreds of millions of 
China: China was not "honored" with the gospel of 
Christ. But it was sent Northward and Westward 
through and to Europe and America. These lands were 
"honored," these peoples "have seen a great light," 
and with that light have received a great blessing. But 
how comparatively few have really seen this light, 
even when it shone around them on every hand. Alas ! 
like the partly cured blind man of old they see a brightness 
and can discern something, but see nothing clearly. 
The Apostle explains their case, saying, "The 
god of this world hath blinded the eyes of them that 
believe not."-2 Cor. 4:4. 

Having followed the Apostle's reasoning, we are 
enabled to see clearly each step of divine providence 
taken in connection with the divine purpose and 
foreordination. 

(1) We see that first of all, to a certain extent, 

God was "for" us, for the people of Europe and North 
America: he was for them or favorable to them to the 
extent of "honoring" or favoring them with the light 
of grace "as it shines in the face of Jesus Christ, our 
Lord." 

(2) In a still fuller sense God was "for" or favorable 
towards those who accept the light of truth, those 

who through repentance and faith in the precious blood 
are "justified" from sin, through his grace. 

(3) He was yet more "for" these justified ones, 
to the extent that he "called" them,— to suffer with 
Christ during this Gospel age, and by and by to share 
his glory. 

(4) In a still fuller sense he is "for" all those who 
accept the call and who are seeking to "make their 
calling and election sure." God is in an especial sense 
"for" all these who are so running as to obtain the 
prize which he offers. "They shall be mine, in that 
day when I make up my jewels." 

It is to this called and faithfully running class 
that the Apostle speaks as "us." He and those whom 
he addressed ("called to be saints"— Rom. 1:6,7) had 
first been "honored" with the light; second, they, by 
repentance and faith, had accepted it and been justified; 
third, they had been "called;" fourth, they had 



accepted the calling and given themselves wholly to 
the Lord. And with the Apostle and the early Church 
all who to-day can recognize themselves in this same 
position, as having taken these same steps, may properly 
apply to themselves the Apostle's words and 
say, God is for us. Who can be against us! 

All the "saints" throughout the whole world, 
who have taken the afore-mentioned steps, are probably 
altogether not a great multitude; but rather, comparatively, 
a "little flock:" yet each one of these may 
say to himself, and realize to the very bottom of his 
heart as applicable to himself, these wonderful words, 
—God is for us. He may endeavor to grasp the significance 
of these words, but he will surely fail of getting 
all of their wonderful meaning. It is not possible 
for the human mind to grasp the riches of divine 
grace and love and power. We cannot comprehend 
them, we can merely apprehend them. If God be for 
us, with all of his infinite wisdom and power, it implies 
also that Christ is for us, for he is one with the Father; 
it implies also that all the angels, Cherubim and Seraphim, 
and all the heavenly powers of our knowledge 
and beyond our knowledge are for us;— all enlisted 
upon our side, to do us good, to help us, to succor us 
in time of need, to uphold us in time of temptation, to 
strengthen us to do the Father's will. "All things 
are yours, for ye are Christ's, and Christ is God's." 

The view granted to Elisha's servant, of countless 
horses, chariots and horsemen of fire or like fire, was 
of course merely a vision, nevertheless it represented 
a truth,— that divine power is round about God's people 
on every hand for their protection and their deliverance. 
"The angel of the Lord encampeth round 
about them that are his and delivereth them." "Are 
they [the angels] not all ministering spirits sent forth 
to minister for those who shall be heirs of salvation?" 
(Heb. 1:14.) Our Lord expressed the same thing, 
saying, of his faithful followers: "Their angels [messengers] 
do always behold the face of my Father." It 
matters not whether we shall understand this to signify 
that spirit beings continually surround those called 
to be the "elect" of the Lord, to guide and shape their 
interests for their highest good, or whether we shall 
understand it to be merely a figure of speech, signifying 
that divine power surrounds God's people; for the 
results would be the same, it matters not by which 
means the Lord would deliver them from the evil and 
help them in trial and adversity. The fact that God 
is "for us," and that he is making all things to work 
together for good to those who love him, is the central 
thought, the essence, the strength of this message to 
"us." 

How wonderful is all this! Let us cast our minds 

R2377 : page 319 



for a moment over the world with its fifteen hundred 
millions of inhabitants. Let us remember that they 

R2378 : page 319 

are all under the "curse," under the sentence of divine 

displeasure, except the few who have heard of the redemption 

—of the Way, the Truth and the Life— and 

who have by faith and obedience "escaped the condemnation 

that is on the world" and come back into harmony 

with the Father and into fellowship with his 

Son. Let us imagine, if we can, this "little flock" of 

the "honored," "justified" and "called," heaven-led 

and heaven-blessed, scattered here and there amongst 

the fifteen hundred million fellow-creatures. O, what 

joy, what comfort, what peace, what strength the 

thought must bring to each one who can realize that 

he has taken all of these steps thus far, and that he is 

still pressing along the same line "for the mark of the 

prize of our high calling ! " And this joy is not dimmed, 

but is greatly enhanced, by the thought that soon, in conformity 

with God's gracious foreordination, all the 

"elect" may have a share in the great work of blessing, 

with the knowledge of the True Light, the masses 

who are yet in darkness, "without God and having no 

hope" in him. For altho a redemption has been provided 

for all, the knowledge of God's grace has not 

yet reached any but the favored or "honored" minority. 

As the Apostle declares in this very same chapter 
(Rom. 8:22), it is indeed a groaning creation; it has 
been groaning ever since the sentence of divine wrath 
was expressed in Eden, and it must continue to groan 
until the great Deliverer shall have established his 
Kingdom, and shall have rolled back the "curse" of 
death and depravity. Oh, what riches of grace have 
come to "us" through Jesus Christ, our Lord! And 
yet, as the Apostle says, altho we have all this blessing 
and favor, we have also with it certain trials, difficulties 
and painful experiences, which the Father sees 
necessary for our development in order that we may 
come up to the terms of his predestination, "copies of 
his Son." And in consequence of this, as the Apostle 
declares, "We ourselves also [as well as the whole creation] 
groan within ourselves [while suffering with 
the world we suppress the groan,— "We lay our burdens 
at his feet and bear a song away"] waiting for 
the adoption, to wit, the redemption of our body"— 
"the body of Christ," the elect Church. 

The word if in this text does not signify a doubt 
or question on the subject; but quite the reverse. The 
Apostle has given the evidence that God is for "us," 
in the preceding verses, and now uses if as tho he 
said,— If I have proved that God is for us, then who 
can be against us! 

"WHO CAN BE AGAINST US?" 



Who can be against us, if God is for us? The 
Apostle does not mean that, having God on our side, 
none would dare to oppose our way. Quite to the contrary, 
we have bitter enemies and relentless foes. Who 
are against us?— Their name is legion. The devil is 
against us, as the Apostle declares, Our adversary, the 
devil, goeth about as a roaring lion, seeking whom he 
may devour. The same Apostle assures us that we 
must contend against "the wiles of the devil." Our 
Lord declares that we must "resist the devil." The 
Apostle informs us that Satan is cunning and deceitful, 
as well as desperately wicked; and says that therefore 
we must have a battle, and as good soldiers we 
must have on the armor of God, and use it faithfully. 
Thus we are to resist the devil, and he will flee from 
us. We are to "quench all the fiery darts of the adversary" 
in open attacks, and yet to remember that 
we battle not with flesh and blood, but with a demon 
host; with "principalities and powers and spiritual 
wickedness in high places."— Eph. 6:12. 

Nor is this all: we have a great enemy in ourselves; 
—the "carnal mind," "the old man," reckoned 
dead, which must be kept in subjection. Perhaps the 
greatest battles and the greatest trials, which we are 
called upon as "new creatures" to endure, are these 
battles of the new self, the mind of Christ, against the 
old fallen self, the mind of the flesh. 

Furthermore: we have the "world" as "children 
of darkness" arrayed in opposition to us. They love 
the darkness and consequently hate not only the light, 
but also the "children of the light." This our Master 
declared, saying, "Ye are not of the world, for I have 
chosen you out of the world." "Marvel not if the 
world hate you; you know it hated me before it hated 
you." "If ye were of the world, the world would love 
its own; but now ye are not of the world, therefore the 
world hateth you." And the world's hatred is not 
conducted along honorable lines of warfare. It would 
be ashamed to declare that it loved darkness, and 
ashamed to declare that it hated us because of the 
light. Its policy, rather, guided by the great adversary, 
is, to "put light for darkness, and darkness for 
light:" to misrepresent our best efforts to be evil and 
selfish, and to misrepresent its own selfish efforts as being 
honorable and good. "Marvel not, if the world 
hate you." "The darkness hateth the light." 

Nor are these great adversaries the only ones to 
oppose us: we must expect to endure from still another 
quarter. As our Lord declared, "A man's foes shall 
be they of his own household." Those whom you 
have dearly loved of your own family circle, and with 
whom you have had Christian fellowship, may turn 
against you and hate you for the truth's sake. Nor 



will this always be because of wickedness of intention: 
sometimes at least the persecutions will come conscientiously; 
as for instance, Saul of Tarsus (who afterward 

R2378 : page 320 

became the great Apostle Paul) was once a persecutor 
of "this way," and ignorantly did many things 
against Jesus and those who loved him. He himself 
tells us that he obtained mercy because he did it ignorantly, 
thinking that he did God service. And so 
doubtless it has been with much of the persecution 
that has come to the Lord's faithful ones in every age. 
Much of it has been inflicted conscientiously. It is 
quite remarkable, too, how the Adversary succeeds 
sometimes in deceiving those, who once knew better, 
into thinking that anger, malice, hatred, strife, bitter 
words and slander ("works of the flesh and the devil") 
are "duty." Alas, how blinding is the spirit of 
the Adversary ! 

All these adversaries must be resisted, unto blood, 
unto death, if need be,— must not be permitted to hinder 
our walking in the footsteps of him who set us an 
example,— must not be permitted to prevent us from 
becoming copies of our Lord and thus making our calling 
and election sure. But while resisting them with 
all our might, we must avoid carnal weapons and not 
render railing for railing; rather, so far as possible, we 
should use the sword of the spirit, the Word of God, 
and Michael-like say, "The Lord rebuke thee." God 
is "for us," and declares that in his due time he will 
right present wrongs and falsehoods, saying, "Vengeance 
is mine, I will render recompences." Indeed, 
toward the class who war against us ignorantly and 
conscientiously we should feel no bitterness, but rather 
sympathy, love and an earnest desire and effort for an 
opening of the eyes of their understanding. 

The Apostle was not ignoring all of these great 
adversaries which, like "roaring lions," would terrify 
us, and if possible arrest our progress in the path of 
consecration and sacrifice, which leads on to glory. 
This is not his thought when he says, "If God be for 
us, who can be against us?" Quite to the contrary, 
his thought is, that notwithstanding all these things 
which are against us, we may realize that God is for us, 
that he has predestinated a Church in glory and has 
justified and called us to be members of it, and brought 
us on the journey thus far, through all of these various 
steps. And if we can realize that God has thus been 
leading us up to the present time, to bring us to share 
his glory, and that all things thus far have been working 
for our good, this is our assurance that all wisdom, 
power and love shall be exerted on our behalf down to 
the very end of the racecourse, if we continue to abide 
in Christ, faithfully. 

What shall we fear? What could oppose our way 



so as to hinder it, if God be on our side? This reminds 
us of the adage, "God with one is a majority." So, 
God with us, and for us, and leading us, makes us 
mighty indeed, stronger than all these adversaries with 
all their arts and wiles and perversity, and able through 
his grace to come off conquerors, yea, more than conquerors 
through him who loved us and bought us with 
his own precious blood. 

We urge that each reader mark the various steps 
of progress through which divine grace has already led 
him, and that, whatever he finds to be his present 
standpoint, he go on as the Lord leads,— not content 
with anything short of "the whole counsel of God." 
The reader has been "honored" with a knowledge of 
the grace of God in Christ: if he has not yet accepted, 
let him quickly accept this grace by repentance for sin 
and with faith in the ransom. If he has done this and 
has received the grace of justification, and, as the 
Apostle expresses it, has "joy and peace through believing," 
then let him remember that still there's 
more to follow, and that the justified are "called." 
Not called to glory merely, but called to obedience, 
called to present their bodies living sacrifices to God in 
his service, holy and acceptable through Christ. 

Alas! how many who have received the grace of 
justification stop there: they hear the call to suffer 
with Christ for the truth's sake, they hear the invitation 
to stand up for Jesus, in their thoughts and words 
and deeds, but heed not. They perceive that such a 
full consecration would necessarily mean not only the 
giving up of sinful pleasures, but also the giving up of 
some not sinful, that they might devote their words 
and thoughts and deeds as far as possible as he did, 
doing good to others. But of those who hear the call 
to present themselves, how few obey it, how few surrender 
themselves to him who bought them with his 

R2379 : page 320 

own precious blood! Yes, many are called; tho few 

are chosen. All the justified are called to self-surrender, 

full obedience, full trust in the Lord and full submission 

to his will. And of those who do accept the 

call and who have made the covenant, and who are 

therefore of the "us" class mentioned by the Apostle, 

how many become "overcharged with the cares of this 

life, or the deceitfulness of riches," or the perplexities 

of poverty, and so fail to obtain the fullness of heart-obedience, 

and consequently will fail to make their 

calling and election sure. 

We are not now discussing what will be the fate 
of those who fail to be victors and to gain a crown and 
to sit with Christ in his throne; we are considering, 
rather, the privileges of those who have been "honored" 
of the Lord and led step by step up to present 
attainments of knowledge and privilege. We are seeking 



to bring before our minds at least a faint conception 
of the wonderful provisions of divine grace, and 
the full ability of every one so called to make his calling 
and election sure by laying hold of this grace of 
God, provided in Christ, by which, to them, all things 
shall work together for good, because they love God 
and are the called ones according to his purpose. 



R2383 : page 321 

A QUESTION IN RE JUSTIFICATION. 



Rhode Island. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-There is some difference 
of opinion amongst the friends here respecting a point 
of Scripture teaching, and we request your aid in its solution 
at your earliest convenience and, if you think 
proper, in the columns of the WATCH TOWER. Briefly 
stated, it is this:— What is the faith taught in God's 
Word, by which the sinner is justified in God's sight? 

With Christian love, Yours in our Lord, 

G. W. A . and J. B . 

IN REPLY:— It is faith in "the redemption which is 
in Christ Jesus," that justifies the sinner. But this implies 
much more than appears on the surface— much 
more than many suppose. It implies:— 

(1) That the sinner recognizes his own condition 

of imperfection, sin, separation from God, and his sentence, 
even if he does not understand fully and correctly 
what the penalty for sin is— death, destruction. It 
implies this, because to admit that God has provided a 
redemption implies that there was need for redemption 
on the part of the sinner, and that a condemnation rested 
upon the sinner justly, because of sin. 

(2) Faith in this redemption implies that the sinner 
discerns at least something of the sinfulness of sin; 
and that he desires to escape, not only from the extreme 
penalty of sin (death, destruction), but also from the 

other features; viz., his own imperfections and his alienation 
from the divine mind. Such a faith, therefore, 
implies repentance— a desire to return unto God and to 
righteousness. It means, therefore, dissatisfaction with 
sin, and a longing desire for righteousness, which is 
willing, yea, glad, to avail itself of the divine provision 
in Christ. This faith, therefore, implies not only a desire 
for the forgiveness of "the sins that are past through 
the forebearance of God," but also a desire to live godly, 
righteously, soberly, and to henceforth avoid all sin, 
so far as possible. 

(3) This faith is said to justify us in the divine 

sight: that is, God, through the merit of the great sacrifice, 



can be just in recognizing those who, altho still 
blemished by sin, and unworthy actually of his notice, 
have thus, by his appointed way, through the merit of 
the redemption, come back to a condition of mind, of 
heart, which he can thoroughly approve. 

(4) It is called justification by faith, because it is 

not an actual justification. An actual justification would 
mean that the sinner was made absolutely perfect or 
correct, but a justification by faith signifies that, altho 
actually imperfect, still he is now accepted of the Lord, 
and treated by him as tho he were perfect, because his 
heart or intentions are now perfect, and the sacrifice for 
sins, in which by faith he has shared, is reckoned as covering 
all his past shortcomings. 

(5) This new condition of justification, having 

been entered upon, implies, therefore, as we have seen, 

a determination upon the part of the justified one to 

live in thought, word and deed righteously, to the extent 

of his ability. At first this may seem to him to be 

a comparatively easy thing— simply to do right, and to 

avoid doing wrong. But whoever tries to do this will 

shortly find that it is no easy task, that the weaknesses 

and tendencies of his own fallen nature, and similar weaknesses 

in those with whom he daily and hourly comes 

in contact, have a tendency to oppose his resolves for 

a life of righteousness, justice, equity, toward God and 

men. He finds the necessities of life and the conditions 

of the world, socially and financially, to be a strong 

current, to be against which would imply much more 

than he had at first thought. As he looks the question 

squarely and honestly in the face, he finds that neither 

his own flesh, nor the world in general, are friends to 

grace to help him on to God, and that the only thing 

to do is either to join with the majority in unfaithfulness 

to the highest sense of righteousness, truth and 

love, or else to reckon himself dead to the world— a 

living sacrifice to God and his righteousness. 

(6) This is a turning-point in the pathway 

of all the justified during the Gospel age. There is no 
escaping it. They must either go onward to a full consecration 
to the Lord (Rom. 12:1), or they must retrograde 
from the standard of righteousness, and be content 
to avoid the grosser sins, and to live on the common 
plane of nominal Church worldliness. This the 
majority seem to do. So far as we may be able to judge, 
they, in thus compromising themselves, lose their position 
of justification, which was reckoned to them at the 

R2384: page 321 

time of their earliest faith and resolves to follow righteousness, 

justice and truth. Their justification remained 

so long as they were conscientiously doing this. Their 

justification would seem to lapse from the moment that, 

coming to the place where they realized that obedience 

to righteousness in this present time would mean self-sacrifice, 



they turned back and followed no further in 

the footsteps of him who has set us an example that 

we should walk in his steps. 

(7) Some, yea many, stop when they reach the 
point of decision: unwilling to compromise righteousness, 
and yet unwilling to bear the reproaches and losses 
or sacrifices demanded by a life of full consecration. 
These show that they have the spirit of the truth, 
tho not in overcoming measure,— not in the measure 
of sacrificers, "priests." These the Lord bears with 
patiently for a time, peradventure under his disciplines 
and the instructions of his Word they may see their 
privileges and learn that the things they would sacrifice 
are but loss and dross as compared with the glory, honor 
and immortality they would gain. If these do not learn 
the lesson and make the sacrifice they will ultimately 
be forced by divine providences to the point of decision 

R2384 : page 322 

with its reward of everlasting life or its punishment of 
everlasting death. 

But such as need to be forced are not to be counted 
amongst the overcomers, the "elect," the "little flock," 
who will sit in the throne with the Lord. No, they are 
represented in the undetermined number who will come 
up to spiritual conditions through great tribulation.— 
See Rev. 7:9-17. 

If we have not fully answered your question, it is 
because we have failed to get at its point, and if so, 
please state it again. 



R2379 : page 322 

HEZEKIAH'S GREAT PASSOVER. 

-NOV. 6.-2 CHRON. 30:1-13.- 

"Yield yourselves unto the Lord, and enter into his sanctuary. 

OUR LAST lesson respecting Isaiah's vision and 
his commission, to announce the fall of Israel, 
was "in the year that King Uzziah died." (Isa. 6:1.) 
The wicked king, Ahaz, succeeded Uzziah in the throne 
of Judah, and reigned wickedly, in neglect of God and 
his law, for sixteen years. It would appear, however, 
that he had an excellent wife, Abijah, under whose careful 
training their son, Hezekiah, was prepared for the 
kingdom, and became in many respects a model ruler, 
and a faithful servant of God. It is even supposed that 
the Prophet Isaiah, who was related to the royal family, 
was Hezekiah's tutor, and helped to guide him into 
right ways of thinking and doing. The fact that so 
good a son could come of so evil a father is an evidence 



to us that under divine providence it is not necessary 
that we should inherit all the evil traits of our ancestors. 
Altho we cannot overcome them completely, so that 
none of the fallen race of Adam can ever hope to regain 
perfection as a result of personal effort and of training, 
nevertheless, we see that favorable conditions, religious 
training, etc., lead to a vast improvement in those who 
are rightly exercised thereby. 

And here we get a suggestive hint of the methods 
which the Lord will employ in the world's blessing and 
uplifting during the Millennium. The human family 
is unable to lift itself out of the degraded condition in 
which it is, because of shortness of life, and because of 
the general prevalence of evil; hence, the power that 
will lift mankind must be a power from the outside, uncontaminated 
by the fall. Moreover, under the terms 
of the divine sentence, the penalty of man's sin must 
be cancelled, his penalty must be paid for him, before 
he can be fully released from its condemnation and 
weaknesses. It is this redemption or purchase which 
has already been accomplished for mankind: the deliverance 
out of sin and its consequences, mental, moral 
and physical depravity, is a future work, made possible 
by Christ's great sacrifice. And, gracious thought, 
it is he who redeemed mankind, and who has been 
highly exalted to power and great glory, who is shortly 
to use this power on man's behalf, in uplifting to righteousness 
and perfection whosoever will accept his grace, 
of all the families of the earth. The uplifting, nevertheless, 
will be along lines of instruction, chastisement 
and correction in righteousness, in which the individual 
will be obliged to cooperate in order to the attainment 
of full "restitution of all things, which God hath spoken 
by the mouth of all the holy prophets since the world 
began. "--Acts 3:19-21. 

That Hezekiah was already well instructed, and 
thoroughly consecrated to the Lord, at the time of his 
father's death and his own entrance to kingship, is evidenced 
by the fact that he immediately began, in the 
first month of his reign, to inaugurate reforms of the 
character noted in our lesson,— the restoration of the 
worship of Jehovah, as divinely appointed. Had he 
not been consecrated to the Lord, and thus in the proper 
attitude of heart, his accession to power would have had 
an influence the very opposite of this: it would have led 
to self-gratification and personal vanity. 

His first public work was to open and prepare the 
Temple of the Lord, which had been closed and out of 
repair for years, and in which had been permitted to 
accumulate a vast amount of rubbish, etc. The king 
called to his aid the proper assistants for this work— 
the divinely appointed tribe of Levi. The cleansing of 
the Temple proceeded according to the law of Moses, 
and when completed the first thing in order was a great 
sin-offering. King Hezekiah was broadminded, and 
gave special instructions that the offering was to be, not 



only on behalf of the people of Judah, the two tribes, 
but on behalf also of their separated brethren— "for all 
Israel." He recognized properly that the nation was 
still in some respects one, in the sense that the divine 
promises were made to all the seed of Abraham: whoever, 
therefore, of all the tribes would recognize the 
Lord God and seek his face was properly to be esteemed 
a brother-Israelite. 

It was the time for the Passover Feast, in commemoration 
of the Lord's deliverance of Israel from Egypt; 
typical of the deliverance of Spiritual Israel from the 
bondage of sin and Satan; and typical also of the ultimate 
deliverance of those who love righteousness, and 
desire to serve the Lord, from Satan's bondage, by his 
complete overthrow during the Millennium. It was 
determined that this Passover Feast should be properly 
observed that year, for, altho, from the account, it had 
evidently been kept by a few Israelites, yet the general 

R2379 : page 323 

religious disorder was such, that apparently it was not 
observed by the nation, nor with all its appointed particularity 
by any. This time the king determined that 
its proper observance should be reinaugurated, preceded 
by all the proper arrangements of the law respecting 
the cleansing of the people (Exod. 12:15-20) and the 
putting away from their houses of leaven, a symbol of 
sin: thus, in figure at least, typically, the people were 
sanctified, in order that they might properly keep the 
feast. But all this required time— to issue the decrees, 
to succeed in stimulating the zeal of the people, and on 
their part to perform these works, symbolizing holiness 
to the Lord and separation from sin. The nation being 
thus defiled, the time was too short to be ready to observe 
the Passover on its appointed day, the 14th day 
of the first month, and hence the 14th day of the second 
month was observed instead— as the Lord had given 
permission.— Num. 9:10,11. 
The same breadth of mind and heart which characterized 

R2380 : page 323 

Hezekiah's instructions that the sin-offering 
should be on behalf of all Israel, still controlled him, 
and led him to desire not only a reformation of "Judah," 
but also amongst their separated brethren, known as 
"Israel." Accordingly, special messengers were sent, 
from Beer-Sheba, the most southern town of the land 
of Israel, to publicly invite all Israelites of every tribe 
to return to the worship of Jehovah, and to specially 
come up on the occasion of this feast. The postal system 
of the present day was not in vogue, and hence a 
special postal arrangement was made for the carrying 
of these letters. 
The time for such an invitation was most favorable, 



for the prophecy of Isaiah respecting the carrying away 
of Israel into captivity was already in progress: the ten 
tribes were at this date paying tribute to Assyria, and 
the carrying away of many of the people had already 
actually begun. Thus, the Lord's arrangement served 
to draw attention of any who might be "Israelites indeed" 
to the fact that their captivity was a punishment 
for their rejection of the Lord, and thus to incite those 
who had any faith and zeal to return to the Lord's worship. 
King Hezekiah's letters, briefly summed up, 
were an exhortation to remember the past and to return 
to Jehovah: "Be not ye like your fathers and like your 
brethren, which trespass against the Lord God of your 
fathers, who therefore gave them up to desolation, as ye 
see... .Yield yourselves unto the Lord, and enter 
into his sanctuary,...that the fierceness of his wrath 
may turn away from you." 

The exhortation held out the suggestion, not only 
of present deliverance, but also of the return of their 
brethren already deported. But the postmen who bore 
these messages were laughed at in the northern kingdom. 
In proportion as the people were far from the 
Lord they were proud and vain, as is always the case; 
and it was in large measure, no doubt, their pride that 
was leading them on to destruction as a nation. All 
who are in harmony with the Lord are humbleminded, 
and only such receive the Lord's gracious messages with 
appreciation or love and well entreat the servants who 
bear the messages. We may note also that their obedience 
under such circumstances would imply considerable 
faith and devotion to Jehovah, for they would be 
the subjects of the scoffs and scorns from the unbelieving 
masses, as well as the messengers who invited them. 
Some, but not many, we are told, yet in all a fair 
number, humbled themselves and came, from the tribes 
of Asher, Manasseh and Zebulon, and of course got 
the blessing which God always grants to those who 
humble themselves and are obedient. In addition to 
this mention in verse 11, we find another, that "many" 
came also from the tribes of Ephraim and Manasseh, 
Issachar and Zebulon. (Verse 18.) Thus, at least 
five of the ten tribes were represented more or less numerously, 
and of the remainder two were already in 
captivity,— Reuben and Gad. We are to remember, 
furthermore, that some from the ten tribes had already 
allied themselves with the kingdom of Judah, because 
of the idolatry prevalent in their own land and of the 
better religious opportunities in Judah.— 2 Chron. 15:9. 

Throughout Judah the invitation to the Feast of 
the Passover seems to have been well received: "The 
hand of God was to give them one heart to do the commandment 
of the king and of the princes by the Word 
of the Lord." In consequence there was an unusually 
large assemblage of the people at Jerusalem that 
year. The record is, that no such Passover had been 
observed since the days of Solomon,— over two hundred 



and fifty years. The Feast was observed with 
great joy and gladness, singing and praising God; and 
so imbued did the people become with religious fervor, 
that it was by their own proposition that the Passover 
week of praise and sanctity to holy things was prolonged 
for an additional week.— Verses 21-26. 

We break from our topic here, to call attention to 
the fact that the true faithful Israelites were gathered 
out of the ten tribe kingdom into the two tribe kingdom 
at that early day. After the later captivity of Judah 
the division of Israel was lost sight of. The decree of 
Cyrus permitting return from captivity ignored any division 
and was to all Israel: and the faithful of all the 
tribes who returned were unitedly recognized as Israel, 
and are subsequently so referred to in the Bible. Use a 
concordance and note the New Testament references to 
Israel. It was the remnant of Israel and not merely of 
Judah that was gathered into the Gospel age, while the 
remainder were "blinded" and broken off from the 
covenant promises, until after the Gospel age shall have 

R2380 : page 324 

selected the "elect," Spiritual Israel.— See 
Rom. 11:7,25-32. 

Nor did the revival of true religion inaugurated by 
Hezekiah stop with that Passover. While it filled the 
people with zeal for the true worship of the Lord, to 
give liberally for the support of the priests and Levites, 
the maintenance of the sacrifices, etc., it led also to a 
strong movement against every form of idolatry throughout 
Judah, extending even throughout the land of the 
ten tribes: as a consequence, there was a general destruction 
of idols out of the land, a cutting down of the 
obscene high places, devoted to the licentious worship 
of Baal, etc. The result of this proper turning of the 
people to the Lord brought to them and to their king 
great earthly blessings, in harmony with God's covenant 
made with that nation. The king became very 
rich, and the people also, so that their tithes and offerings 
to the Lord were not only sufficient for the supply 
of the priests and Levites, but far in excess of this, so 
that store-houses had to be built to receive them. 

Looking for analogies in Spiritual Israel, we find 
several. (1) All true religion is identical with order 
and cleanliness, as the Apostle intimates, saying, If any 
man defile the Temple of God, him God will destroy, 
and correspondingly we may say that whoever attempts 
to cleanse the Temple of God, and to bring it into accord 
with the divine arrangement will be blessed now, 
as were Hezekiah and his kingdom, only we should remember 
that the rewards promised to Spiritual Israel 
are spiritual and not temporal blessings. As heretofore 
noticed, the congregation of the Lord in the present 
time may be considered nominally his Temple, tho the 
real Temple is the Church triumphant, not yet completed. 



Nevertheless, it is proper also to apply this 
lesson to our own individual hearts; for, as the Apostle 
also points out, each Christian is a temple of the holy 
spirit, and the Church in general, therefore, may be 
properly considered, even in its present imperfect condition, 
a temple of the holy spirit, devoted, consecrated, 
to the Lord. So then, each individual Christian, 
justified and sanctified by the great atonement of our 
High Priest, should seek to keep himself (and, so far 
as possible, all others associated with him, and imbued 
by the same spirit) free from all worldly contamination, 
if they would have the Lord's blessing in spiritual 
things. All of the Lord's people need to remember the 
necessity for cleansing from worldly defilements, not 
only those of the past, but also those which are ever 
present in the world. We remember the Apostle's 
words, "Let us cleanse ourselves from all filthiness of 
the flesh and spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear of 
God."-2Cor. 7:1. 

Not only should the cleansing be done, but it should 
be done according to the divine arrangement. As Hezekiah 
and the priests and Levites cleansed and sanctified 
"according to the law of Moses," the mediator of Israel's 
covenant, so we, who belong to the house of sons, 
are to seek cleansing and sanctification in strict accordance 
with the law of Christ, the Mediator of the New 
Covenant, under which "we are accepted in the beloved." 
As there was a formal ritual to be observed under 
the law, so there is a form of faith, of sound words 
and of obedience, to be observed under the Gospel. Our 
cleansing is not with the blood of bulls and goats, but 
through the merit of the more precious blood of Christ, 
which does not call for vengeance upon us because of 
his death, but on the contrary calls for mercy, pardon, 
grace, to all those who come unto the Father by him. 

(2) There is a lesson for us also in Hezekiah's 
broad conception that all Israelites who were willing to 
join in the worship of the Lord were to be esteemed as 
brethren, and to be invited so to do. Nor would it have 
been sufficient that he should have broad and liberal 
and Scriptural ideas on this subject: it was his duty, as 
well as his privilege, to make sure that there were no 
fences of separation between any of the Lord's people, 
and the arrangement for the Lord's worship in the 
Lord's house, the Temple. So with Spiritual Israelites, 
there should be a realization that all "Israelites indeed" 
are one in Christ Jesus, and all are to be esteemed and 
treated as Israelites indeed who trust in the precious 
blood of Christ, as the great sin-offering of atonement, 
and are consecrated to the service of the Lord. Such 
a general recognition of Christian character is, we are 
glad to believe, greatly on the increase during the last 
half century. But more is still to be done along proper 
lines: sectarian fences should all be pulled down and sectarian 
names and creeds all be abolished, and true 
Christians (all who trust in the precious blood, and are 



fully consecrated to the Lord, to obey the instructions 
of his Word as best they can understand them) should 
mingle together, and be one people, without other distinctions 
than that some may have attained to greater 
knowledge and sanctification than others— all, however, 
seeking to "come to the full stature of manhood in 
Christ Jesus." 

(3) There is a lesson for us also in the fact that 

such a message of true fellowship to the true Israel, and 
in the promises of God, made alike to all, and ignoring 

R2381 : page 324 

all creeds and parties, would not be popular to-day, as 
it was not popular with many at that time. Now, as 
then, the majority are disposed to "laugh with scorn," 
and to mark as visionary enthusiasts those who advocate 
the simplicity which is in Christ Jesus, as taught in the 
Scriptures, and practiced in the early Church. Nevertheless, 
now as then, some are attracted by what they 
realize to be the proper message, the truth. Many will 
hear the message, no doubt, who will not have sufficient 

R2381 : page 325 

courage to act upon it, as no doubt there were some 

in Israel. A few, nevertheless, from almost all sects 

and parties and creeds will be attracted; and they will 

be found to be the meek, those ready and willing to 

humble themselves. The proud will stand up for sectarianism 

and for the honors and dignities which go 

therewith, and will fail to get the divine blessing, "Blessed 

are the meek." 

(4) A true revival of religious sentiment toward 
God, and his worship in the beauty of holiness and in 
accordance with the directions of his Word, will imply 
now, as well as in Hezekiah's day, a general breaking 
up of idols. And Oh! how many idols there are which 
the Lord's people should be zealous in overthrowing. 
They are many in form and feature, but one in general 
character. One of these idols, before which thousands 
upon thousands prostrate themselves in the dust, is 
Sectarianism; another is Money; another is Lust; another, 
Selfish Ambition; another, Pride; another, Ease; 

and on the whole, they are legion, with the one family 
name, Selfishness. Whoever has come into a condition 
of full consecration to the Lord through the redemption 
that is in Christ Jesus, whoever has come to worship 
the Lord in the beauty of holiness, will readily 
realize the abominable character of these idols which 
the great Adversary has induced him, through sin, to 
bow down to and worship. And in proportion to our 
zeal for the Lord, in proportion to the measure of his 
spirit in our hearts, will we be zealous in putting down 
all these idols, and bringing not only the words of our 
mouths and the acts of life, but also our very thoughts, 



into subjection to the will of God in Christ— 2 Cor. 10:5. 



R2381 : page 325 

TWO PRAYERS AND THEIR ANSWERS. 

-NOV. 13.-2 KINGS 19:20-22,28-37.- 

"God is our refuge and strength; a very 
present help in trouble."— Psa. 46:1. 

HEZEKIAH, king of Judah, is one of the most 
notable characters of Old Testament history, 
and our present lesson relates to him. The preceding 
lesson showed us the beginning of his reign, accompanied 
by a great religious reformation and revival amongst 
the people. The present lesson shows him under severe 
trials, and how they developed and manifested his faith 
in the Lord, and the Lord's responses to his trust and 
prayers. 

The Assyrian king, Sennacherib, had invaded the 
northern or ten-tribe kingdom, and carried its people 
captive, and had placed peoples of other nationalities 
in the land in their stead; and eight years after that 
conquest he determined upon an invasion of the kingdom 
of Judah. Already, one after the other, the Assyrians 
had conquered various nations, and were now 
evidently bent upon conquering Egypt, but first were 
disposing of the intermediate kingdoms, and Judah was 
the last of these which lay on the route between Assyria 
and Egypt. Bent upon conquest and mastery, rather 
than upon destruction, Sennacherib, while laying siege 
to some of the intermediate countries, first sent letters 
and subsequently his representative and general, Rabshakeh, 
with an armed host to Jerusalem, demanding 
the full surrender of the kingdom, that the people 
might be deported to other lands, as the people of the 
ten tribes had been. 

These letters and the message were full of boastings 
of the power of Assyria, and the conquests already 
made, and promised the people of Judah homes and 
circumstances similar to those then enjoyed, the object, 
apparently, being to establish the Assyrian empire on a 
firm basis by obliterating as far as possible the feelings 
of patriotism in the various peoples conquered. Not only 
did these messages boast of the power of Sennacherib, 
as exemplified in other wars, but taking cognizance of 
the fact that Israel trusted in Jehovah, they first declared 
that the Assyrians were sent there by Jehovah 
for the very purpose of overthrowing the kingdom, and 
taking the people captive, and secondly declared that 
their trust in Jehovah was vain, because the various 
nations which had been conquered trusted severally to 
their own gods, and yet all alike failed; and that Israel's 



God, Jehovah, could do nothing more for them than 
could the other gods for the other peoples, against the 
mighty power of Assyria, which was rapidly becoming 
a world-empire. 

Hezekiah's first move was to placate his adversary, 
by becoming his vassal, and paying annual tribute, and 
as a preliminary step in this direction he sent Sennacherib 
a present of great value, gold and silver, ivory couches, 
etc.,— even stripping the gold and silver ornaments from 
the Temple for this purpose. Herein we believe he greatly 
erred, and it would appear to have been as a consequence 
of this failure to at once recognize Jehovah as the almighty 
ruler and preserver of his people and typical 
kingdom, that the Assyrians were permitted to assail 
them, and to destroy many of the outlying smaller cities, 
and to besiege Jerusalem, the capital city, with fortresses, 
etc. Nevertheless, when it came to the extremity, 
Hezekiah's faith in the Lord increased in proportion 
as the power of the Assyrians was manifested, and 
the condition of his own city and people became the 
more critical. Then it was that he did what he should 
have done at the very beginning— he, with Isaiah, the 
prophet (his faithful friend and adviser and supposed 

R2381 : page 326 

tutor in earlier years), joined together in prayer to the 
Lord (2 Kings 19:1,2,14-19), in the Temple, laying 
before the Lord the letters received from the haughty 
Sennacherib, and recounting his boastful words, beseeching 
the Lord to have mercy upon his covenanted people, 
who now, more than for centuries, were seeking to 
please and serve him, and to grant them deliverance 
from their enemies, when there seemed no hope from 
any other quarter. 

It was in answer to this prayer that Isaiah sent to 
Hezekiah the message of our lesson: "Thus saith the 
Lord God of Israel, that which thou hast prayed to me 
against Sennacherib, king of Assyria, I have heard," etc. 
The remainder of Isaiah's message was evidently intended 
to be the answer which Hezekiah should send to 
Sennacherib, through Rabshakeh, that the people of 
Jehovah laughed to scorn his boastful message and ultimatum. 
The answer calls attention to Sennacherib's 
boastful pride and his blasphemy of the only true God, 
the God of Israel. The threat of the hook in the nose 
and the bridle in the mouth is figurative, representing 
the manner in which bullocks and horses are controlled: 
thus would the Lord control the Assyrian army. "Isaiah 
said unto him, Thus shall ye say to your master 
[Hezekiah], Thus saith the Lord, be not afraid of the 
words which thou hast heard, with which the servants 
of the king of Assyria has blasphemed me. Behold, I 
will send a blast upon him, and he shall hear a rumor, 
and shall return to his own land; and I will cause him 
to fall by the sword in his own hand." (2 Kings 19:6,7.) 



The message calls attention to the success of the Assyrian 
monarch previously, and points out that it was 
because the Lord had so permitted, designed and foretold, 
but points out, also, that Sennacherib is equally 
under the divine power, and on the present occasion, 
having blasphemed Jehovah, would be unsuccessful, 
would be turned back, while his people, Israel, and 
their king Hezekiah, would be heard and succored. 

Spiritual Israelites may draw valuable lessons from 
the foregoing. We should beware how at any time we 
lose sight of the Lord's power on our behalf, no matter 
how threatening or great or dark the evil which assails 
us. A proper faith will look up to God, under such 
circumstances, and relying upon his promises will seek 
his aid, rather than seek to purchase deliverance from 
the great adversary, Satan, by any compromises. But how 
many, on the contrary, are disposed to do as Hezekiah 
did, purchase peace with things consecrated to the Lord, 
—to compromise the truth: for instance, if threatened 
with the disfavor of friends or neighbors or employers, 
how many are willing to conciliate such adversaries by 
a more worldly course, by subtracting from the time, influence, 
means, etc., consecrated to the Lord, considerable 
portions to be given to worldly service, or to secure 
domestic peace or social advancement, or commercial 
prosperity. So surely as the Lord's consecrated people 
do this, we may expect that the Lord will permit to 
come upon them the very difficulties which they dread 
and seek to avert by unholy compromise. 

They need just such a lesson; and as a faithful 
father will give needed chastisements and corrections to 
his son, so the Lord deals with those who have been 
adopted into his family. But with the world in general 
matters are different; God's special dealings and special 
corrections are the manifestations of his special care for 
those whom he is now selecting from amongst mankind 
for a great future work, for which they need to be prepared, 
and for which unlimited faith and trust in the 

R2382 : page 326 

Almighty are absolutely essential. As David expressed 
it, "Before I was afflicted I went astray:" in other 
words, it was because he went astray, and because he 
was a consecrated servant of God, therefore, instead of 
permitting him to go far astray he was corrected in 
order to bring him back. So with all who have entered 
into the New Covenant, and accepted the call to joint-heirship 
with Christ; they are not permitted to go astray 
and make compromises whose tendency would be to 
lead them further and further astray from faith and 
trust in the Lord. Therefore they are chastened, and 
happy it is for all of Spiritual Israel who, like Hezekiah, 
permit the divine chastisements to develop more 
and more of faith and obedience. 
It required great faith and courage on the part of 



Hezekiah and his princes, and the people of Judah in 
general, to resist the great power of Assyria, and to send 
to Sennacherib such a reply as the Lord had indicated, 
yet evidently their faith and trust were developed in 
proportion to the difficulty; and shortly they beheld 
the fulfilment of the Lord's declaration respecting the 
Assyrians. Rabshakeh returned to meet Sennacherib, 
and to give him Hezekiah's answer, and then, apparently 
was fulfilled the catastrophe upon Sennacherib's 
army, referred to in our lesson. 

In one place this is called "the blast of the Lord," 
from which some have supposed that it was a simoon, 
or sandstorm, not uncommon in the vicinity of the 
Arabian desert. In the lesson it is spoken of as the 
smiting of the angel of the Lord, and others have assumed 
from this that it was a pestilence which broke out 
in Sennacherib's army and destroyed in one night one 
hundred and eighty-five thousand of his warriors; because 
elsewhere pestilence is spoken of as being the work 
of a destroying angel or messenger. (See 2 Sam. 24:16,17.) 
Jewish tradition ascribes the destruction to a 
pestilence. The word "angel" here, as often elsewhere 
in the Scriptures, does not necessarily refer to a member 
of the angelic order of beings, but simply signifies 
"messenger;" and God is as able to use winds or waves, 

R2382 : page 327 

lightnings or sandstorms, or pestilence, as any other 
agency in the execution of his will. "Who maketh the 
winds his angels, and flaming fire his servants."— 
Psa. 104:4. 

Egyptian history contains an account of the remarkable 
departure of Sennacherib's army, and ascribes 
its retreat to an invasion of field mice, which gnawed 
the quivers and bowstrings and the thongs by which 
their shields were managed. But some have suggested 
that this is the Egyptian figurative way of speaking of a 
pestilence, because with them the mouse was a symbol 
representing pestilence. There are many other notable 
instances in history in which, apparently, divine providence 
has similarly intervened and protected those whom 
it was not the divine will should be further injured. 
For instance, the notable case of the Spanish Armada, 
designed to work great havoc upon the people of Great 
Britain, and apparently well qualified to do the work, 
was destroyed by a remarkable storm. Similarly, Napoleon's 
army, which had invaded Russia, and was encamped 
at Moscow, was, it is said, forced to retreat because 
of a heavy fall of snow, which is said to have 
caused the death of 20,000 of Napoleon's horses, and 
compelled the retreat which involved the almost complete 
destruction of his army, numbering over a quarter 
of a million. In the churches of Moscow the narrative 
of the destruction of Sennacherib's army is read on the 
anniversary of the retreat of the French from their city, 



as marking a similar interposition of divine providence. 

As the Israelites accepted the overthrow and turning 
back of Sennacherib's forces as of divine interposition, 
altho the sceptically inclined might view it differently, 
and ascribe it to natural causes, so Spiritual Israelites 
often find that God's answers to their prayers, and fulfilments 
of his promises are of such a kind that the 
trustful may see in them the hand of God, while those 
living less near to the Almighty will see in them nothing 
but the casualties of nature. Thus it is that our own 
spiritual condition has much to do with our joy in the 
Lord, and our appreciation of his care over us, and of 
the fulfilment of his promises. All of the divine leadings 
are along this line, namely, "According to thy 
faith be it unto thee." He who will not exercise faith 
in God cannot have the joy and peace which come to 
and are intended for believers only. It is the proper 
thing that as the Lord's people we should not only trust 
him for his goodness and providential care, and call to 
mind his promises, and plead them before him in our 
supplications, but it is also equally proper that we 
should seek to see at every step of life's journey how 
divine providence is directing our way, and causing all 
of life's affairs to work together for good to those who 
love God. Such expectations of divine care, and such 
waiting for it and looking for it, are evidences of true 
faith, and pleasing to the Lord. Accordingly, he assures 
us that without faith it is impossible to please him and 
again he assures us, "This is the victory that overcometh 
the world, even your faith." 

In those days wars were not accomplished so quickly 
as at the present time, and the Israelites might well 
have been fearful that the retreat of Sennacherib's army 
was only temporary, and that he would come upon 
them again, and hence the Lord gave them a sign; viz., 
that altho they had been hindered from planting their 
crops that year they should have a sufficiency of food 
from that which would spring up of itself, and likewise 
the year following. The sign was fulfilled, and the people 
understood that they were effectually delivered: and 
altho Sennacherib lived for some twenty years after his 
retreat, he did not again attempt to conquer the land of 
Judah, and subsequently was assassinated by his own 
sons, as was set forth in the Lord's prophecy.— 
Verse 7. 

Assyrian history records, on tablets and cylinders 
of baked clay (the books of those days), Sennacherib's 
many victories, but they make no mention of this disaster 
which the Lord brought upon him, just as upon 
Napoleon's tomb in Paris are inscribed the various 
battles of his wars, but Waterloo is omitted. The first 
features of Sennacherib's victory over Judah are described 
in these words, on what is known as the "Taylor 
cylinder," now in the British Museum: "Because Hezekiah, 
king of Judah, would not submit to my yoke I 
came up against him, and by force of arms, and by the 



might of my power, I took forty-six of his strong fenced 
cities; and of the smaller towns, which were scattered 
about, with the march of a host and surrounding of a 
multitude, with attack of ranks, and force of battering-rams, 
and mines and missiles, I besieged and captured 
a countless number. From these places I took and 
carried off 200,150 persons, old and young, male and 
female, together with horses and mules, asses and goats, 
sheep and oxen, a countless multitude, and Hezekiah 
himself I shut up in Jerusalem, his capital city, like a 
bird in a cage, building towers round the city, to hem 
him in, and raising banks of earth against the gates, so 
as to prevent his escape. ...Then upon this Hezekiah 
there fell the fear of the might of my arms, and he sent out 
to me the chiefs and the elders of Jerusalem, with thirty 
talents of gold, and eight hundred talents of silver, 
precious stones, of large size, couches of ivory... 
woods of every kind— an abundant treasure... all 
these were brought to me at Nineveh, the city of my 
dominion, Hezekiah having sent them by way of tribute, 
as a token of submission to my power." Thus Sennacherib 
boasts of Hezekiah's mistake, but wholly omits 
Hezekiah's subsequent victory, through prayer and the 
manifestation of divine power. 

R2382 : page 328 

ANOTHER DEFEAT AND ANOTHER VICTORY. 

In consequence of this marked deliverance of Judah 
from the superior power of Assyria, we read, "And 
many brought gifts unto the Lord at Jerusalem, and 
presents to Hezekiah, King of Judah; so that he was 
magnified in the sight of all nations from henceforth. 
...And Hezekiah had exceeding much riches and 
honor, and he made himself treasuries for silver and 
gold, and for precious stones, and for spices, and shields, 
and for all manner of desirable instruments," etc. 
(2 Chron. 32:22,27,30.) But prosperity is often a 
severer test of character than adversity, and hence we 
read, "But Hezekiah rendered not again, according to 
the benefit done unto him, for his heart was lifted up. 
Therefore there was wrath upon him and upon Judah 
and Jerusalem. Notwithstanding, Hezekiah humbled 
himself for the pride of his heart, both he and the inhabitants 
in Judah, so that the wrath of the Lord came 
not upon them in the days of Hezekiah."— 
2 Chron. 32:25,26. 

"In those days Hezekiah was sick unto death." It 
was somewhere in this period of time, we may not be 
certain exactly when, but evidently the sickness had 
somewhat to do with Hezekiah's prosperity and consequent 
pride; but his sickness, in the midst of various 
great projects for the advancement of his country, and 
the welfare of his people, was a sore disappointment to 
Hezekiah, and led him to the Lord in prayer. Doubtless 



he realized from the nature of the message delivered 

to him by Isaiah, that his sickness and premature 

death were penalties for his failure to render unto the 

Lord according to the multitude of his blessings. And 

so realizing, the king prayed most earnestly for forgiveness 

and help, promising that henceforth "I shall go 

softly all my years. ...We will sing my songs to the 

stringed instruments all the days of our life in the house 

of the Lord." Isa. 38:9-22 records, in poetic form, 

Hezekiah's resolves, and is evidently the embodiment 

of his previous prayer, with thanksgiving for his deliverance: 

for the Lord was gracious to him, accepted his prayer, 

covered his sins, and healed him. The prophet 

R2383 : page 328 

was sent back to him with the message of his recovery. 

The king, anxious to assure himself that he was 
indeed the subject of a divine miracle, requested a proof 
of the increase of his life fifteen years. Isaiah proposed 
that the proof should be that the sun's record on 
the sun-dial should be suddenly advanced ten degrees, 
but Hezekiah thought it would be a still greater miracle 
if it should be turned back ten degrees, and his request 
was granted. The possibility of such a miracle has 
been questioned by many, who have insisted that it 
could in no way be possible, that it would involve not 
only stoppage of the motion of the earth upon its axis, 
but an impossible retrograde movement, to be accomplished 
in a moment of time. However, Professor 
Garbett, writing for a magazine called Knowledge, declares 
that he knew of an afternoon some years ago 
when, on many sundials in Southern England, there occurred 
exactly the wonder described in the book of Kings. 

Asked by Astronomer R. A. Proctor to describe 
it, he writes as follows:— "The shiftings of the shadows 
on the dial, that Isaiah predicted to sick Hezekiah, are 
liable to occur at any place, when these two circumstances 
occur: (1) That the upper atmosphere 
is in that condition which causes two bright parhelion 
or mock suns to appear on opposite sides of the sun; 
and (2) that the lower air contains drifting clouds, 
massive enough to hide often two of the three [apparent 
suns]. When the real sun and eastern mock sun 
are hidden, there is only the western [mock sun] to 
cast shadows, which then coincide with what the sun 
would cast an hour and a half later; but if the cloud 
shift so as to hide the west parhelion, and disclose 
the eastern, the shadows instantly become such as the 
sun cast an hour and a half earlier.... On March 
29, 1858, these effects occurred, had any one been looking, 
on every dial of Portsea, and very probably of much 
of Hampshire besides. The parhelia were present and 
bright enough at about 1 1 A.M. and still better at 1 P.M." 

But the fact that Joshua's long day can be accounted 
for by the reflected light of the sun in clouds of a peculiar 



kind, and the fact that the turning back of the 
shadow for Hezekiah can be accounted for somewhat 
similarly, as above, by no means lessens either of these 
as miracles; because they were not accidental, but 
specially given as proofs of divine power. The fact 
that we may learn how the divine power acted in the 
fulfilment of the divine prediction subtracts nothing 
from the miracle, just as in the case of Hezekiah's recovery 
the fact that a fig poultice was applied, and that 
God thus made use of a means to an end, detracted 
nothing from the miraculousness of his recovery. As 
children of God, this is an important lesson for us to 
have deeply engraven upon our memories: God still uses 
natural means for the accomplishment of the exceeding 
great and precious promises of a spiritual kind, which 
he has bestowed upon us. Has he not promised us 
grace to help in every time of need? It is not necessary 
that we should suppose that this grace will come to us 
without a channel; it probably will come through a 
human channel. Has God promised to us meat in due 
season to the household of faith? It is reasonable for 
us to expect that it will come to us, as his other mercies 
and blessings have come, from his Word, and through 
the helpfulness of the fellow-members of the body of 
Christ, whom the Lord will make use of in serving the 
meat to the household of faith. --Matt. 24:45. 

Hezekiah's experiences in respect to the Lord's remarkable 
answers to his two prayers seem to have 
wrought in him a commendable faith and trust, so that 
subsequently, when servants of the king of Babylon 
visited him with a present, and to congratulate him 
upon his recovery from sickness, and to view the wonderful 
aqueducts and evidences of engineering skill 
which he had accomplished, and when Hezekiah unwisely 
had shown these foreigners the great wealth of 
his treasuries, etc., and Isaiah was sent to reprove him 
for this, and to tell him that the king of Babylon would 
ultimately come and despoil the city of its treasures, 
etc., but not in Hezekiah's day, he said, with prompt 
resignation to the divine will, "Good is the word of the 
Lord, which thou hast spoken." He said, moreover, 
"For there shall be peace and truth in my day."— 
Isa. 39:3,8. 

Similarly all who are learning to trust the Lord, or 
who have tasted that he is gracious, should more and 
more be coming to this attitude of heart and mind: to 
a recognition of the fact that all God's ways are perfect, 
so that they can say, "Tho he slay me yet will I 
trust him." "I will rejoice in the God of my salvation." 



page 1 
VOL. XIX. NOVEMBER 7, 1898. EXTRA. 



CONTENTS. 



Views from the Watch Tower 3 

The Czar's Peace Proposal 3 

The Second Zionist Congress 4 

The Parousia of our Lord Jesus and 
His Subsequent Apokalupsis and 
Epiphania at His Second Advent 6 

For What are We Watching? 7 

Proofs of His Presence 12 

"Behold the Bridegroom!" 16 

Presence Gradually Revealed 16 

"Cometh not with Observation" 19 

"Knew not the Time of Visitation" 20 

Letters from Earnest Colaborers 24 

page 2 

SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
--ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 56-60 ARCH STREET, ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, N.Y. DRAFT, MONEY ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS: 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age or accident, or other 
adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, if they 
send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting the 
paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list 
constantly. 



SAMPLE COPIES OF THIS ISSUE FREE. 



Friends are invited to send in lists of addresses of persons 
already interested in the pre-millennial coming of our Lord, 
but not familiar with what we here present as "present truth,' 
in re the spiritual nature of the Kingdom to be established. 

OLD THEOLOGY TRACTS. 



We have these in good variety and supply. Order all you 
can judiciously use, as sample copies, free. 



ABOUT BIBLES-WANTED BEFORE CHRISTMAS. 



Last year about this time, through no fault of ours, many 
of our customers were greatly disappointed by delays— the 
publishers being unable to fill our orders. This year we have 
sought to guard against such a contingency by laying in a large 
supply: still we fear a dearth toward Christmas. 

WHAT SAY THE SCRIPTURES ABOUT HELL? 



This is the title of a pamphlet in which every text of Scripture 
containing the word hell is cited and examined in the light 
of Scripture and reason, together with other Scriptures and parables 
supposed to teach eternal torment. Price 10 cents, post-paid; 
50 cents per doz.; $4.00 per hundred. 

WHAT SAY THE SCRIPTURES ABOUT SPIRITUALISM? 

--ALSO-- 
WHO ARE THE SPIRITS IN PRISON? AND WHY ARE THEY THERE? 

This booklet is now ready and will be supplied at 10 cents 
each: wholesale rates 50 cents per dozen are open to all TOWER 
readers who may desire to circulate these among their friends. 
In leatherette binding, 25 cents. Prices include postage. 

page 24 

LETTERS FROM EARNEST COLABORERS. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I want to quote an extract from 
a letter received from a dear Brother who for many years has 
been a minister in the Presbyterian Church. I think the letter 
will be interesting also to WATCH TOWER readers. It serves to 
show that some are on the side of truth at heart from whom 
you and we all very rarely hear pointedly of their deep interest 
in the divine plan of the ages. The extract from the letter follows: 

"I have not tried lately to get any articles into the 'Observer.' 
The last one sent was on 'The justice, love and power of 
God'— showing his dealings with this world in the past, and 
the hope we have for the future. In returning the article the 
explanation given was that it was not quite what they wanted. 
The truth is that religious newspapers do not want to let their 
readers see the truth now due— they do not see it themselves. 
It is a sad condition to hear them cry out, 'Peace! Peace!' when 
there is no peace. 

"I have had MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOL. IV., for the last ten 
days and am reading it through with carefulness. What a strong 
presentation Brother Russell makes of present conditions; and 
how clearly he shows these conditions portrayed in God's Word. 
But only a few will receive the truth, and only a few will read 



the book— compared to the vast multitude who spend days over 
trashy and worthless books. I thank God that this truth was 
brought to my notice, and that I was led to give it prayerful 
consideration. 

"The other day, sitting in my study, surrounded by my 
books— about a thousand,— this thought came to my mind:— 
What book, except the Bible, do you value most? I answered 
to myself, I value MILLENNIAL DAWN more than all the rest: 
and would rather part with every one of them than with this 
set: for from these books I have gotten more Bible truth and 
help in understanding than from all the rest put together. 

"Truly, we are living in a wonderful age, and may God 
help and strengthen us to stand the test of this day. Many will 
not stand, and only those can stand who trust in the blood that 
was shed on Calvary for a lost world. I often wonder at the 
carelessness and indifference of God's preachers, when they 
profess to believe that so many are being eternally lost without 
a ray of hope: and yet, believing thus, they seek to get all the 
ease and comfort they possibly can for themselves, and to lay 
up as much of this world's goods as possible. Blessed be God, 
his grace and favor will yet be revealed to all mankind, and 
the whole world will see and be privileged to rejoice." 

I am still seeking to serve the truth as I find opportunity, 
and regret that I cannot be regularly and constantly in the colporteur 
work. Pray for me that the Lord will more and more 
open up before me the door of opportunity to serve him, his 
people and his truth. Your brother and servant in the Lord, 
J. M. DAVIDSON-Bells Valley, Va. 

MY DEAR BROTHER :-Altho we have never met each other 
face to face, yet somehow I feel attached to you. Seven years 
ago when I for the first time began to read the DAWN, VOL. I., 
my pastor rebuked me for doing so and told me that I should 
first leave "my teens" before I attempted to read heresy. That 
man (Wm. Roeber, pastor of the 67th street German Baptist 
Church of New York City) committed suicide a year ago. How 
sad! Men judge by outward appearances. God sees the hearts. 
I took his advice but only to my disadvantage. Altho I have 
been a pre-millennialist for years and fought post-millennialism 
during my Theological course at the Rochester Seminary, yet 
the doctrine of Christ's second coming has become more precious 
to me since I have read your books. Thanks be to God 
for such a clear unfolding of his precious Word. We want more 
of it. Within us there is an unquenchable yearning to see God 
in his beauty, in his love, and it makes us sad when modern 
theologians misrepresent God's plan of the ages by confounding 
the doctrines of the Bible respecting the "present evil world" 
and "the world to come." The DAWNS have found much opposition 
here, but notwithstanding that, I have been trying to be 
faithful to my Master in preaching Christ's pre-millennial coming. 
Last Sunday evening I explained from the chart the Plan 
of the Ages as given in DAWN. Tomorrow evening (D.V.) I 
shall preach on "Are we living in the end of the world?" (the 
present evil world). 

Last Sunday morning I tendered my resignation as pastor 
of the Church. Brother, I am disgusted with the hireling ministry. 



We are God's servants and should therefore depend on 
him for the sustenance of our lives. 
Yours in Christ, J. A. KIEFERLE,-Nebraska. 

WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY, 

DEAR FRIENDS:— Inclosed please find one dollar for my subscription. 
I saw a note in a dictionary this morning that reminds 
me of Daniel's prophecy as you explain it in DAWN, VOL. III. 
It reads, "All attempts to read hieroglyphics had for centuries 
been given up when in August, 1799, the French found among the 
ruins of Ft. St. Julien near the Rosetta Branch of the Nile a stone 
which has since been called the Rosetta Stone." It tells of an inscription 
upon the stone, "first in hieroglyphics, next in the 
hieratic character of Egypt and in Greek, which afforded a key 
to the hieroglyphics, but one very difficult to apply" and how 
several "made advances toward solving the enigma [of hieroglyphics] 
so that Dr. Birch and other Egyptologists are now 
continually translating hieroglyphics from the monuments." 

[The point is that 1799 was the very year beginning "the 
time of the End" when many would run to and fro and knowledge 
be increased. "-DAWN, VOL. III., Chapter II.-EDITOR.] 

Sincerely Yours, WM. BRADLEY,- Virginia. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-Your good letter of the 15th inst. 
came duly to hand and is highly appreciated by Sister Owen 
and myself. We are glad to know that you were surprised at 
the goodly number of the dear friends in the truth who met 
you at our home on the occasion of your recent flying visit. 
We are glad, too, that you were so favorably impressed by their 
appearance and conduct. We do not feel that we have done 
much, but as you suggest we are glad the dear Lord has permitted 
us to minister to his flock here; and that in a small degree 
at least we have been instruments in his hands in bringing 
about the happy condition which you noted. To him alone 
be all the praise! 

I cannot tell you how precious to all our hearts was that 
one hour's meeting with you at our house; and I am sure that 
it will prove profitable to all. I know that it has already been 
of great benefit to one very dear brother, who for some time 
has been lukewarm, but now seems full of love and zeal again. 
I must tell you about our meeting last Sunday. I had announced 
the week before that I would speak on the subject of baptism, 
by request. My work the last three days of the week had been 
very heavy, and when Sunday morning came I was so tired 
that I could scarcely stand or think; and but for the fact that I 
had made a special announcement of my subject, and several 
had come who did not fully understand our position. I would 
not have attempted to lead the meeting at all. But looking to 
the Lord for strength, I was not disappointed. He wonderfully 
sustained me, while I spoke for an hour and a quarter; and Oh! 
what a precious season we had, every one in the house being 
sensibly moved by the Lord's blessed holy presence. 

I am glad to tell you that my temporal affairs are brightening 
of late. Almost providentially I have gotten into a business 
which, besides meeting my expenses, is gradually putting 
me into a position where I shall soon be able to contribute more 



to the Tract Fund than I have been able to do for several years. 
It may be that there are others who, like myself, are unable to 
engage in the noble and effective work of colporteuring the 
DAWNS and are not profitably engaged, and who are able and 
willing to do a moderate day's work. As I have all the business 
I can attend to in this city, I could operate the business 
through brethren (and sisters too) in other places, and will 
pledge 10 per cent, of all such receipts to the Tract Fund, which 
amount may be increased hereafter, if the business prospers. 

Unable to give much time to the service of the truth, I consider 
this my best opportunity aside from my humble ministry 
to the Lord's people in this city, and occasional trips to the 
surrounding towns. Mention this matter as you may think 
proper to any out of employment. Yours in our dear Redeemer, 
C. A. OWEN,-623 W. Michigan St., Indianapolis, Ind. 

DEAR BROTHER:-I am thankful for the interest you take in 
my welfare and for your prayers on my behalf. I am an old 
man, in my 90th year, and I cannot expect to be of much use; 
but Oh! how gladly I would proclaim the good news, if the infirmities 
of age did not prevent. Both of my parents were 
Methodists, and I gave my heart to God and joined the Methodists 
in my 13th year, and my name has been enrolled in their 
books (a good deal of the time as an official member) until last 
conference held in Guelph, when I withdrew. 

I loved God's Word and tried hard to understand it, but 
there were very many passages that I never understood until 
I was providentially led to read MILLENNIAL DAWN and other 
WATCH TOWER publications: then I saw that the blasphemous 
doctrine of the eternal torture of the finally impenitent had so 
obscured the light as to hide many of the glorious features of 
God's plan from view. 

I rejoice in the promised restitution of all things; and that 
Christ will be King over all the earth in that day; and that the 
creature itself also shall be delivered from the bondage of corruption 
into the glorious liberty of the children of God. In 
short I am a firm believer in that glorious plan of the ages so 
Scripturally, clearly and logically unfolded in the volumes of 
MILLENNIAL DAWN. Yours in Christ, HENRY HALL, -Ontario. 



page 329 
VOL. XLX. NOVEMBER 15, 1898. No. 22. 



CONTENTS. 



The Colporteur Work 330 

A Fulfilment of Prophecy 331 

The Influence of Evil Passions 332 

Justification Must Precede 



Sanctification 332 

"Many Shall be Purified and Made 

White and Tried" 333 

Manasseh's Transgression and 

Repentance 335 

"Avoid It, Pass not Near It, 

Turn from It" 338 

The Lost Book Found 341 

Interesting Letters 344 

page 330 

SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
--ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 56-60 ARCH STREET, ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, N.Y. DRAFT, MONEY ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS: 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age or accident, or other 
adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, if they 
send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting the 
paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list 
constantly. 



R2384: page 331 

A FULFILMENT OF PROPHECY. 



"They shall cast their silver in the streets, and their gold shall 
be removed: their silver and their gold shall not be able to 
deliver them in the day of the wrath of 
the Lord."-Ezek. 7:19; Zeph. 1:18. 

NO DOUBT some others as well as we overlooked 
important items of news respecting the 
ferocity of the bread riots in Italy during the early 
Summer. These accounts are so graphic, and so clearly 
foreshadow what may be expected during the dark 
trouble approaching, in which all law and order will 
go down before anarchy, that we think it well to give 
them space here even tho too late to present as news. 
The items were cabled from London and Berlin, as 
follows:— 

"London.— Italy has got to the brink of revolution 
almost unobserved by a world intent on Spanish-American 
affairs. Years of discontent and grinding 
poverty on one side and tremendous taxation and almost 
unparalleled official corruption and thievery on 
the other, then a few bread riots as advance rumblings 



of the storm, have so inflamed the masses, that to-day 
throughout the peninsula there are burnings and murders, 
a peasantry in arms against the existing order. 

"A secret junta has been at work organizing rebellions. 
The present outbreak was sooner than they 
planned, but may serve their purpose. It is against 
the dynasty, against the nobility and against the rich. 
Scenes already enacted bear startling similarity to those 
in France before the fall of the Bastile. The murder 
of Miller Bartella, who thanked the Virgin for dear 
bread, then offered the mob in vain his fortune for his 
life, is a picture throwing lurid light upon the 
situation. 

"Reports coming in to-day are of renewed fighting 
by well armed mobs, the government in panic and 
a growing fear that the army may go over to the populace. 
Only the sternest repressive measures will serve 
to check the rebellion, and these are acknowledged inadequate 
for the bottom trouble." 

"Berlin.— The accounts that reach here of the 
troubles in Italy show that in some parts of the country 
the worst outrages of anarchism have occurred. Murder 
and incendiarism are the order of the day. It is 
already known how the mob did Physician Brandis to 
death at Minerveno. From his house, which was set 
on fire, the rioters went to the residence of a mill 
owner named Bartella, whose mills had already been 
plundered. This man did not have the reputation of 
being a philanthropist. Only a few days before he had 
a thanksgiving mass read in the presence of all his employes 
in his private chapel because the madonna had 
made it possible for him to sell corn at 50 francs per 
hundred-weight. 

"When the mob reached the house of this miller 
millionaire he had shots fired from the windows at them. 
This doing no good, he threw 1,000 francs in small 
nickel pieces into the crowd, but all in vain. The doors 
of the house were battered in, and a terrible scene 
followed. 

"Bartella bargained for his life. He offered thousands 
upon thousands of francs, all his fortune, but 
amid savage cries of 'We want your head,' the old 
usurer was beaten to death. His wife was frightfully 
injured by blows from a hatchet, and the children barely 
escaped being dashed from a balcony. 

"The mob then went on plundering. They penetrated 
all the houses occupied by the better classes, 
robbing and burning. After eight hours plundering 
the military arrived on the scene and the mob fled, 
heavily laden with loot." 



R2384 : page 332 

THE INFLUENCE OF EVIL PASSIONS. 



THE FORCES of evil, and their effect, not only 

upon ourselves but upon others, especially the influence 

of the parents upon children, already referred to 

in these columns, was recently set forth by Prof. Gates, 

showing that our various mental conditions exercise 

a strong influence for good or evil, as respects the health 

or disease of our bodies. His claim is that anger, 

malice, hatred, fear and in general all the evil passions 

which sweep over fallen mankind, mentally exercise a 

deleterious chemical influence, through our nerves, 

upon the blood, while wholly pure, happifying, loving 

thoughts exercise a healthful influence. Referring to 

this subject, the Congregationalist says, "Prof. Elmer 

Gates asserts that the malevolent passions create poisons 

in the blood which are detectable by chemical analysis. 

It has been demonstrated, over and over again, that the 

nursing child can be poisoned, or even killed, by a sudden 

fit of anger in the mother, and we begin to understand 

why, when we realize that the anger actually 

caused material poisons to germinate in the lifegiving 

fluid [the mother's milk]. Then we can begin to comprehend 

how a state of unrest, of fear, of rage, of jealousy, 

of lack of self-control, in the mother, will interfere 

with perfect nutrition of the child, and fill its tissues 

with the poisons which these malevolent passions 

generated in the mother's blood." 

Thus we see how it comes that wherever the purifying 
and uplifting influence of the Gospel of Christ 
goes, not only are the parents benefited, and caused to 
enter into a rest and peace and joy which the world can 
neither give nor take away, but additionally the influence 
of the spirit of righteousness, through kindness, 
love, extends to the neighborhood, and especially to the 
families of the consecrated. Thus it is that during centuries 
those who have come in contact with the Word of 
God, the fountain of the pure Gospel, have been most 
blessed and most uplifted in the scale of human civilization, 
and are the most noble specimens of the race, 
the best mentally, possessed of a larger degree of the 
spirit of a sound mind than others. And the more 
Christian people learn respecting the good influence of 
the true religion, taught in the Lord's Word, upon the 
health and happiness of themselves, their children and 
others, the stronger and the better that influence should be. 

When last we referred to this subject of the influence 
of the mind over the body for health or for disease 
some seemed to get the impression that it was a concession 
on our part to the theories of so-called "Christian 
Science" which claims to be a "mind-cure," pure and 
simple. But we answer No; there is not the slightest 
sympathy between the view which we have just expressed 
and the theory of "Christian Science." The two theories 
are exact opposites. "Christian Science" teaches 



that there is no pain, no sickness, no sorrow, no death, 
except as people imagine these. Their system of cure 
is that people should lie to themselves and stick to the 
lies until by anti-suggestion self-hypnotization is effected 
and they believe the lie— Satan cooperating to establish 
this latter-day delusion that, if it were possible, the very 
elect might be deceived and perverted from the truth as 
laid down in the Lord's Word, and that still others 
might be confused and made skeptical. 

The opposite of all this is what we teach. It is not 
new but old. It truthfully admits the fact (1) that the 
whole creation is groaning and travailing in pain; (2) 
that this is a part of the dying process, the result of the 
original sentence or "curse" upon father Adam, as the 
just penalty of sin. But (3) it not only assures us that we 
are sadly and seriously wounded, physically, morally and 

R2385 : page 332 

mentally undone, but it presents an all-healing remedy 

—the blood of Christ, the merit of our Redeemer's sacrifice 

on our behalf,— and offers us "life more abundant" 

through obedience to him. It is to such as have 

thus laid hold of the hope set before us in the gospel, 

that we declare that true faith and trust in this 

Savior rests the mind as well as binds up the broken 

heart, and thus in proportion to our faith, trust and obedience 

it becomes a fount of joy, peace and blessing 

which extends its influence to all of life's affairs and to 

a considerable extent to our physical health. "Blessed 

[every way] is the man that trusteth in the Lord:" he 

is able to rejoice in tribulation, in sickness, in poverty— 

in every condition he is blest, and may be joyous in realizing 

that the light afflictions of the present time are 

working out a far more exceeding and an eternal weight 

of glory to those who are rightly exercised by them. 



R2385 : page 332 
JUSTIFICATION MUST PRECEDE SANCTIFICATION. 



DEAR Brother Russell:-The Nov. 1st WATCH 
TOWER is at hand, and I note the answer given 
my question re Justification. But you have not quite 
satisfied me. I fear I did not make the question sufficiently 
clear. Let me state again the point respecting 
which I am specially solicitous:— 

Do you understand the Scriptures to teach that the 
sinner is justified in God's sight before he is "a new 
creature in Christ Jesus," or, is he justified at the moment 
he is accepted as a member of the body of Christ, 
as a new creature? 



ANSWER:— He is justified before he becomes a new 
creature in Christ. 

Your difficulty arises from a failure to discern that 
justification and sanctification are two separate steps, 
both of which are necessary to those who would accept 
the high calling of this Gospel age, the only calling now 

R2385 : page 333 

extended to any. Sinners cannot be sanctified or set 
apart in the divine service: sinners therefore are not invited 
to present their bodies living sacrifices to God. 
Sinners are called to repentance, and to the exercise of 
faith in Christ as the Redeemer and only way by which 
they can approach God. The moment the sinner accepts 
Christ by faith, with a desire to approach God, he 
is justified by his faith, and at once becomes privileged 
as a justified man. 

The next step of consecration should follow quickly, 
as soon as God's grace is fully appreciated, yet with 
many, because of lack of Scriptural instruction, the 
second step of consecration is neither seen nor taken 
for some time, and God apparently exercises mercy for 
a season, waiting for his justified creature to realize his 
privilege, and to present himself a living sacrifice, holy 
and acceptable to God, and his reasonable service. He 
is reckoned holy and acceptable to God, because he has 
been justified— he is accepted as a sacrifice upon the 
Lord's altar because his sins and blemishes are not imputed 
to him, having been transferred to his Redeemer's 
account, at the moment of his justification. 

We understand, however, that no one can maintain 
his reckoned justification who indulges in wilful sin— 
nor can he long continue in a justified attitude without 
progressing to the next legitimate step of full consecration 
and self-sacrifice. If he loses his justification 
without making use of it in consecration, etc., he has 
merely slipped back again to the plane of the world, 
and if he has not enjoyed full opportunity for consecration, 
he probably will have some future opportunity 
to revive his justification and to consecrate himself; but 
in any case he loses all the precious opportunities of the 
high calling to the new nature, besides the blessings 
which he might have enjoyed in this present life. Furthermore, 
his greater knowledge having added to his 
greater responsibility, he may expect "many stripes" 
in the future, or disciplinary judgments, in proportion 
to his resistance to the light, and failure to use it- 
Luke 12:47,48. 

But for those who have been clearly enlightened, 
and who have made the covenant of consecration, there 
is no Scriptural hope of a future opportunity with the 
world in the Millennial age. They, having received 
their full share of the ransom-bought blessings and opportunities 
for eternal life as human beings, and having 
exchanged those for the proffered "new nature," with 



its terms and conditions, of sacrifice of his justified 
human nature, must proceed to offer themselves 
willing sacrifices, and thus ultimately be accepted as 
overcomers. Or (2), hesitating and being overcome by 
the cares of this life, they will be liable to the "great 
tribulation," to be of the second company, who shall 
be "saved so as by fire." Or (3), by repudiation of the 
Lord, or the repudiation of his principles of righteousness 
(transgressing against their clear enlightenment), 
they will be reckoned as the sow which returned to her 
wallowing in the mire, and will have their portion in 
the Second Death. 



R2385 : page 333 

"MANY SHALL BE PURIFIED AND MADE WHITE AND TRIED. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-Just a few 

lines to let you know that we are well. 
I was sorry that I was unable to be present with you at 
the Convention, but was with you in spirit. That very 
same Sunday, somehow, we seemed to have a special 
blessing in our afternoon meeting, and I feel sure that 
all the little gatherings were remembered by the brethren 
who were present at Council Bluffs: the spirit of 
that Convention overflowed and reached us who were 
obliged to stay at home. 

I have just received a letter from one of the brethren 

at stating that they have had a severe shaking 

up and sifting, at which I am not altogether surprised, 
considering the circumstances in the case. 

The Church of this place sends love, and please 
accept much love from Sister Thorn and myself. 

Your Brother in Christ, W. J. THORN. 



IN REPLY:— We are glad to know that the influence 
of the Convention was far-reaching. You are quite right 
in supposing that the dear flock of the Lord in every 
place was feelingly remembered by the company there 
assembled. The fellowship of spirit which you mention, 
and the attendant blessing, is undoubtedly a part 
of the divine provision for the Lord's flock: where our 
love and sympathy go out toward the fellow-members 
of the body of Christ, it is sure to bring us nearer to 
our great Head, and thus to bring us increased blessing 
of fellowship with him. 

Respecting the "Sifting" at : It should 

not surprise us to hear of "sittings" in every direction. 
That which we have reiterated for the last eighteen years 
becomes daily more strikingly manifest; viz., that the harvest-time 



of the Gospel age, which began in the Autumn 

of 1874, and will end with the Autumn of 1914, is to 

be not only a period of great spiritual enlightenment 

and refreshment to some, but also a period of sifting 

and testing to the same class. And it is but reasonable 

to expect such sifting to follow such blessing: for where 

much light is given much responsibility follows. It was 

just so in the "harvest" of the Jewish age; the blessings 

of the new dispensation, and the light from the Lord's 

presence (subsequently represented in his apostles), 

were accompanied with trials, siftings, testings, proportionate 

to the blessings then enjoyed. 

Since the Lord has granted to us so clear a knowledge 
of his own character and plan, and granted us to 

R2385 : page 334 

see the wonderful harmony and beauty of the word of 
his grace, it is but reasonable that he should look for 
the spirit of the truth in those who have become blessed 
with so clear an appreciation of its letter. Judged from 
this standpoint, "What manner of persons ought we to 
be, in all holy living and godliness?" It would appear, 
too, that these siftings specially take hold of those who 
have been for some time enlightened, and do not as 
readily affect the beginners, altho when a root of bitterness 
springs up its defiling influence may affect the 
beginners also. 

It would seem as tho worldly minds have reached 
certain standards respecting conduct in life which are 
helpful, and that while the standard of the fully developed 
children of God, fully enlightened by his Word, 
should be a still higher one, viz., the "perfect law of 
liberty," yet if the advanced Christian has not developed, 
or if he subsequently loses the spirit of love, 
which is the very essence of the truth, he is in a worse 
condition, in some respects, than those who have never 
looked into the perfect law of liberty;— for, losing the 
element of fear, and not proportionately developing the 
spirit of love, he is much more likely to go to the extremes 
of inconsistency than are those who have enjoyed 
the grace of divine truth in a lesser degree. Hence, 
while knowledge is a great blessing, and a great power, 
an absolute essential to the Lord's people in the present 
time to enable them to "stand," it is also a great 
responsibility. 

God's object in furnishing his people "present 
truth," and all truth, is to develop in them faith, and 
all the various fruits of the spirit, which unitedly come 
under the name Love. Whoever, therefore, is blessed 
by the knowledge of the truth, and fails to cultivate in 
himself the fruits of the spirit, Love, fails utterly to realize 

R2386 : page 334 

the Lord's design in his call and in bringing him 



to the light of present truth. Our Master summarized 
this whole matter, respecting the object of giving the 
truth, in his prayer to the Father, "Sanctify them 
through thy truth." Where the truth has been received, 
and has been held in unrighteousness, and has not produced 
sanctification of life, it has been received in vain; 
and the only thing to be expected is that the Lord, after 
a reasonable trial, will cast out of the light, out 
of the present truth, out of the fellowship with those 
who are in the light, all who have any other spirit than 
the spirit of the truth, Love,— the law and mainspring 
of the new life in Christ. "For if any man have not the 
spirit of Christ [the spirit of love], he is none of his." 

The Apostle mentions just such a condition as prevailing 
in the Church at Corinth, and its attendant 
"sifting." He first points out to them (1 Cor. 1:10) 
that there should be no divisions, but that they should 
"be perfectly joined together in the same mind and in 
the same judgment." There is one line of judgment 
which should govern all who have the Lord's Word and 
spirit; viz., the letter and spirit of the truth. All should 
be familiar with the teachings of the divine Word, or 
if not familiar should be teachable, and amenable to it; 
and all having the spirit of love, the spirit of the truth, 
will be so: such, while contending earnestly for the 
faith once delivered to the saints, will not be contentious 
along other lines, but patient, forbearing and meek 
—not envious, not heady, not high-minded, not boastful, 
not slanderers and backbiters. 

But gradually the Apostle leads his readers onward 
and points out to them their low spiritual condition 
(1 Cor. 3:3), as evidenced by the facts which he cites, 
saying, "There is amongst you envying and strife and 
divisions" (a party spirit, dividing themselves under 
human leadership rather than uniting themselves under 
Christ, the true and only head). Let it be noted that 
the Apostle does not accuse the Church at Corinth of 
what would be termed gross worldly sins, murder, theft, 
blasphemy, etc., but of the more refined evidences of 
a wrong condition of heart— a lack of the spirit of love: 
And yet, as our Lord pointed out, anger, hatred and 
malice are murder in the heart. Proceeding further, however, 
he shows that not all of them, but only a part, 
are in this seriously wrong condition of heart. He adds, 
therefore (11:18), "I hear that there be divisions 
amongst you, and I believe it respecting part of you; 
for there must be also parties amongst you, that they 
which are approved may be made manifest among you." 

Likewise the siftings in progress during this harvest 
time are not only to separate those whom the Lord disapproves, 
but are also to make manifest those whom 
the Lord does approve: and in no way can this matter 
be more clearly and distinctly noted than in respect to 
the difference of spirit manifested where there is a division, 
a sifting, in progress. We do not refer particularly 
to the difficulty which you mention, of which we 



have no other knowledge as yet: we are dealing merely 
with general principles, which seem applicable in every 
such case. Those who have not yet had a sifting have 
had special opportunities to grow strong in the knowledge 
of the truth and in the spirit of it, and when their 
sifting does come, it probably will be severe in proportion 
to the blessings previously enjoyed. 

We urge, therefore, upon all of the Lord's people, 
everywhere, that they set their own hearts in order, 
purging out all the leaven of malice, envy, strife, hatred, 
evil speaking (incipient murder), and fill every 
corner and interstice of their nature, so far as possible, 
with the spirit of the Lord, the spirit of the truth, Love: 
and that when sittings or separations shall come, they 
take heed and be not deceived by the Adversary, who 
always will attempt to put darkness for light, and will 

R2386 : page 335 

not hesitate at misrepresentations, back-biting, evil 
speaking, slander, etc. And as the Adversary does not 
hesitate at these, neither do those who become, either 
knowingly or unknowingly, his agents and tools. Such 
seem to lose not only their self-respect and sense of propriety 
and justice and love of truth (which even the 
world and nominal Christians would have), but in their 
bitterness of spirit seem to give full testimony respecting 
which spirit it is that animates them. In these 
trials and sittings we may be sure that only the one 
class will come off victors, viz., those who abide under 
the shadow of the Almighty, trusting in the precious 
blood, and seeking in all things to be conformed to the 
image of the Lord, not only in their doctrines, but also 
in the acts of daily life, and in their words and thoughts. 
Remember the words of the Apostle Peter, respecting 
the necessity for putting on the graces of the spirit:— 
"If ye do these things ye shall never fall: for so an 
entrance shall be ministered unto you abundantly into 
the everlasting Kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus 
Christ." 

The duty of the faithful in every case is the same: 
to hold up the light— to manifest the spirit of the truth 
and to refuse to tolerate the evil— to reprove it by the 
Word of the Lord and in a spirit of love and gentle 
firmness. The sooner all who love evil— anger, malice, 
hatred, etc.— depart from those who delight to speak 
the truth in love, the better. As the Apostle suggests 
of this class— "They went out from us, because they 
were not all of us." Let not those who love the truth 
and have its spirit of love depart; but let them forget 
not the assembling of themselves together, and so much 
the more as they see the Day drawing on. 

But nothing in the foregoing should be understood 
to advise the forcing of a breach, or carelessness as to 
who may "stumble." Quite the contrary, true love 
of the brethren means patience, long suffering, gentleness, 



kindness,— willingness to yield to them and accommodate 

them in anything non-essential— in anything 

not opposed to the letter or spirit of the truth. 

For love and faithfulness to God alone takes precedence 

to love and faithfulness to the brethren. Each, therefore 

should not only sacrifice his own non-essential preferences 

(to preserve the unity of the spirit in the bonds 

of peace), but more: the Apostle declares the proper 

measure of this love is willingness to "lay down our 

lives for the brethren." 

Only after we have thus done all in our power to 
preserve unity along Scriptural lines and a rupture is 
unavoidable, may we regard it as a providential sifting 
from which good will result. And each should previously 
carefully and prayerfully scrutinize his own heart 
and conduct to make sure that not selfishness and vainglory 
are ruling him, but only love. And when a rupture 
does occur, each should be careful to avoid any 
unkind words or acts and looks, which later on might 
be barriers to hinder the return of any who, seeing the 
error of their way, might subsequently desire to return 
to holy fellowship. And such returning ones should 
be most heartily and joyfully received;— "pulling them 
out of the fire," etc. 

These "sittings" seem to emphasize the Master's 
words,— "Take heed that no man take thy crown." 
Our joy at seeing some come into the light of present 
truth is necessarily modified by the thought that they 
are probably taking the places in trial of some who 
have been weighed in the balances and found wanting. 
"Let us fear," as the Apostle suggests, lest a promise 
being left us of entering into his rest, any of us should 
seem to come short of it by losing either the faith or the 
spirit of the truth: for the loss of either one means soon 
or later the loss also of the other. 



R2386 : page 335 

MANASSEH'S TRANSGRESSION AND REPENTANCE. 

-NOV. 20.-2 CHRON. 33:9-16.- 

"If we confess our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our 
sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness."— 1 John 1:9. 

MANASSEH was the son of the good king of 

Judah, Hezekiah, the reformer, whose faith 

and works we considered in our last study. And tradition 

being true that Hezekiah's wife was the daughter 

of the Prophet Isaiah, we might reasonably expect from 

such parentage a noble son, with large reverence and 

spirituality, who would follow closely in the steps of 

his father as a reformer. But we find to the contrary, 

that Manasseh made the people to err and to do worse 



than the Canaanite nations whom the Lord had destroyed 
before the children of Israel when he brought 
the latter into the land of promise. 

Manasseh was but twelve years of age when he 
entered upon his kingdom at the death of his father, 
Isaiah, his supposed grandfather, having died previously. 
It does not surprise us that one so young, even 
tho well-born and well-endowed naturally, should be 
in danger of taking the wrong path; indeed, it is the 
brightest children, the most precocious, that are in 
greatest danger if placed in positions of responsibility 
and influence early in life, without experienced advisers. 
Lacking experience, this precocious boy-king evidently 
concluded that the inferiority of the kingdom of Judah 
to some of the surrounding nations in riches and strength 
was in great measure because it did not have the same 
kind of gods and of religious worship. Consequently, 

R2386 : page 336 

it was probably within ten years of his accession to 
power that he began to institute what he no doubt regarded 
as a religious revolution, in recognition of the 
various deities which his father had neglected to worship 
and to propitiate. No doubt he was helped along 

R2387 : page 336 

in such a course of reasoning by friends of the false 

religions or by evil counsellors, who adopted his views 

and pandered to them and extolled the wisdom of his 

course, to thus gain his kingly favor and to feather their 

own nests;— for there seems to be plenty of such an unprincipled 

class in every age, everywhere. 

Some have spoken of Manasseh as a most wicked 
person, comparing him to the worst character on the 
pages of history; but to us this seems unjust. We concede 
that he "did wickedly" as do all who violate righteousness: 
but we do not concede that he was a wilful, 
intentional evil-doer. It appears rather that his wrong 
course was in large measure the result of his youth and 
inexperience, and his ambition to be great,— which led 
to his loss of confidence in his father's God and his nation's 
religion and tradition. The religious qualities 
(veneration and spirituality) inherited from good parents, 
took a turn in a wrong direction, so that instead 
of being a zealous, earnest champion of true religion, 
he became the zealous promoter of false religion, 
idolatries, etc. His zeal and conscientiousness are both 
attested in the fact that he spent large sums of money 
in establishing idolatry, and even caused his own children 
to pass through the fire of Moloch,— a sacrifice to 
these false gods. 

Thus it has been with zealous promoters of false 
religions, we believe— the largeness of the religious organs 
of their heads, which would have made them 



zealous for the service of the Lord, being misdirected 

made them zealous in evil, tho unwittingly. We have 

no record that Manasseh was a promoter of moral wickedness, 

except as his false religions sanctioned immoralities 

and led to them, and the statement that "he shed 

innocent blood very much:" and we consider it quite 

probable that this latter crime was done in ignorance 

also— under the frenzied zeal of false religion— Satan 

blinding his eyes.— 2 Cor. 4:4. 

The intimation of the context is that Manasseh got 
under the influence of wicked spirits, spiritism, as we 
would call it to-day: he placed himself under the guidance 
of wizards, necromancers, etc., and was guided by 
a wicked spirit, "a familiar spirit," who, pretending to 
represent the dead, and to be able to give him super-human 
wisdom and advice, deceived him, as they have 
deceived the whole world, under various forms and by 
various errors,— leading mankind more and more into 
separation from God and his righteousness, as they 
come under their influence.* 

There is a lesson in this for all;— to the effect that 
no matter how well-born, how intelligent, how zealously 
conscientious they may be, they need right instructions 
—they need to become the Lord's people by 
the New Covenant and consecration; that they "may be 
all taught of God." Whosoever does not get the right 
teaching— the truth— to direct his conscience and zeal 
will be sure to be found by the great adversary and be 
blinded with plenty of false teaching, to pervert his 
talents and opportunities to the interest of falsehood, 
error and sin. And the same wicked spirits which deluded 
and misled Manasseh, and which we find are 
active in all parts of the world, opposing the true God 
and his instructions, are ready still to assist and to mislead 
all who have not found the only true guide to life 
—the Lord. How important then that all, and especially 
those who would make progress in religious life, 
should seek and find the true guide, and the wisdom 
that cometh from above. 

The record is that God spoke to the king and to the 
nation respecting their wrong course, but they were so 
infatuated that they would not hearken— the glitter, 
show and sensuous fervor and spirit of sacrifice of the 
false religion, appealing more to the degenerate mind 
and heart, than the reasonable, true religion. The Lord 
probably spoke to these people through his prophets,— 
Micah in the early part of the reign, and Nahum 
later on. 

The arch-deceiver, Satan, the forwarder of all false 
systems, is still at work in the world; and while he has 
not been able to hinder the advancing light of Christianity, 
which rising in Judea, has spread with more or 
less effulgence over Europe and America, he nevertheless 
does not abandon his efforts to seduce those who 
have been partially enlightened with this true light. 
He well knows that it would be absurd to attempt to 



turn back Christianity, and to substitute therefor the 

worship of Moloch, and he makes no such attempt: but 

he continually endeavors gradual encroachments upon 

the simplicity of the gospel of Christ. With some he 

favors ritualism, vestments, ceremonies, genuflections, 

etc., that he may thus lead as near to idolatry as civilized, 

enlightened minds could sanction: to the intent 

that the worshipers might the more draw near to the 

Lord with a merely lip service and outward formalism, 

which would satisfy the cravings of their religious organism, 

while their hearts might be far from grace. 

With others the adversary suggests an opposite extreme, 

which equally ignores the Word of the Lord, leading 

the deceived to reject the simple and meaningful arrangements 

which the Lord has prescribed. 

The Adversary's attempt upon those who have 
been enlightened with the present truth are more along 
the latter line. Those who have been made free by the 



*See What Say the Scriptures About Spiritualism?— 10c, this office. 

R2387 : page 337 

truth from various superstitions and false doctrines, 
from the worship of God as a fierce, merciless Moloch, 
and who have been brought by the truth to the liberty 
wherewith Christ makes free, and to the simplicity of 
the gospel arrangements set forth in the New Testament; 
these the Adversary would fain seduce to what he is 
pleased to represent to them as a still larger liberty— a 
liberty beyond that which our Lord and the Apostles 
and the early Church recognized:— a liberty to ignore 
the assembling of themselves together; claiming a greater 
blessing through private communion with the Lord 
and the study of his Word than through any human 
help or communion. Those whom the Adversary gets 
to this point, of considering their own judgment superior 
to the testimony of the Lord's Word, respecting his 
will, are in a fair way to be side-tracked entirely and 
very quickly. 

Others he persuades to believe, that since they see 
the real meaning of baptism to be a heart consecration 
to the Lord (burial to self and the world), it is wholly 
unnecessary that they should perform the symbolic immersion 
in water— persuading that since it would be only a 
symbol or an outward form, to represent an invisible 
transaction, therefore it would be improper,— or at least 
not obligatory. This is an extreme of anti-formalism, 
which has its basis often in too great self-confidence, too 
large an appreciation of their own wisdom, a too small 
appreciation of the wisdom that cometh from above, 
and that has been plainly set forth to us in the Word of 
God. Such persons evidently do not realize that by 
their arguments and conduct they are claiming to be 



more wise than our Lord, who not only performed the 
true baptism, but also submitted to the symbolical one, 
saying, "Thus it behooveth us to fulfil all 
righteousness." 

They also set themselves up as being more wise 
than the Apostles, who both taught and practiced the 
symbol. Our Lord commended them to us as his 
mouthpieces, assuring us that he would guide their 
judgments and teachings so that we might have full confidence 
in the same, saying, that Whatsoever they would 
make binding upon earth we might know would be 
binding in heaven;— so fully would they be under the 
control of the holy spirit in their doctrinal presentations 
to the Church. How unwise on the part of any who 
admit that God has taught them all that they know of 
his grace through these very Apostles, to claim a superiority 
of wisdom on one or two points. Such as are 
thus "heady" will pretty surely soon or later stumble 
over other truths; because it is one of the conditions 
that those who are "taught of God shall be the meek, 
the teachable: as it is written, "The meek will he guide 
in judgment; the meek will he teach his way."— 
Psa. 25:9. 

Others still hold that it is not proper to celebrate 
the Eucharist since we discern that the real spiritual 
significance of the Last Supper is our partaking of the 
merit of our Lord's sacrifice by faith, feeding on him 
in our hearts,— and our consecration to be broken with 
him in the service of his truth, and to drink with him 
the cup of suffering and self-denial for the truth's sake. 
Seeing these realities they hold that we should no longer 
perform the symbol of these by commemorating our dear 
Redeemer's death, as he commanded all his followers 
should do, saying, "Eat ye all of it;" "drink ye all of it:" 
and as the Apostles did and taught the early Church to 
do. Surely, such renouncements of the beautiful and 
simple symbols which our Lord left us is not "taught 
of God"— and cannot be sustained by his Word. It is 
the great adversary, who thus would seduce us from the 
simplicity and obedience which is pleasing to the Lord 
and acceptable to all the "meek." Let all who have 
been "taught of God" adhere closely to his teachings, 
as presented in the Scriptures, ignoring on the one hand 
a tendency toward formalism and idolatry, and on the 
other hand a tendency to lean to their own understanding 
and wisdom, and to ignore the simple and meaningful 
observances which the Lord has commanded. No 
other course is either reasonable or safe. 

As a punishment for taking the wrong course, and 
to open the eyes of the king and the people, the Lord 
permitted the king of Assyria to invade the land, and 
cause much affliction, and to carry away the king a 
fettered prisoner, to Babylon. There the king came to 
his senses, and came to realize that the gods he had so 
zealously worshiped and sought to propitiate had no 
care over him: realizing his mistake, he bethought him 



R2388 : page 337 

of the religion and God of his fathers, and prayed to 
the true God for deliverance, and was heard and brought 
back again to his capital city and to power. The record 
is that "Then Manasseh knew that Jehovah is God." 
The clear intimation is that previously he did not know, 
was honestly mistaken. That his sin was largely of 
ignorance is testified to by his subsequent zeal in the 
Lord's cause— pulling down the idols and the altars 
which he had previously mistakenly built, under a misguided 
religious enthusiasm. 

Manasseh's character and experiences remind us 
considerably of Saul of Tarsus: both were religious enthusiasts; 
both for a time were evil-doers, through lack 
of knowledge of the truth; both were remarkably chastened 
of the Lord, and found it "hard to kick against 
the pricks." Both were prompt to acknowledge divine 
disciplines, and to profit thereby; and both showed their 
sincerity by their subsequent zeal in the Lord's service. 

The Lord evidently loves warm, ardent natures, 
altho they may be more liable to mistakes than more 
coldly calculating ones. It was their ardent temperaments 

R2388 : page 338 

that caused our Lord to specially love Peter and 
James and John and Paul, and which caused them to 
manifest so fervent love for him. If Peter did make 
some blunders through impetuosity he learned afterward 
a better exercise of judgment, under which his 
zeal found glorious exercise. If Paul's zeal for a time 
made him a bitter opponent of the truth, it afterward, 
under the control of the "spirit of a sound mind," made 
him a most valiant soldier of the cross and defender of 
the faith. 

Therefore, let us never despise opponents or even 
persecutors; for they may be conscientious, but blind: 
they are worth far more if turned to the truth and its 
service than many of the cold, indifferent, listless. And 
if we find ourselves cold or luke-warm, let us cultivate 
fervency, let us fan the flame of sacred love in our hearts 
by frequent reflection on the Lord's grace toward us— 
our covenant with him— and the exceeding great and 
precious promises of his Word. 



R2388 : page 338 
"AVOID IT, PASS NOT NEAR IT, TURN FROM IT." 

-NOV. 27.-PROV. 4:10-19.- 
"My son, if sinners entice thee, consent thou not."— Prov. 1:10. 



HOWEVER well or illy Solomon followed his own 
teachings, it is conceded by all that those 
teachings were sound wisdom— as true to-day as when 
uttered. While Solomon's writings may not be ranked 
exactly with the inspired prophecies of the Scriptures, 
the fact that we are told that the Lord heard his prayer 
for wisdom, and granted the request, together with the 
fact that his writings were accepted as a part of the 
sacred canon in our Lord's day, and not objected to by 
New Testament writers, but on the contrary quoted 
from, is sufficient guarantee to us that the wisdom of 
these Proverbs is of a kind that cometh from above. 

In the lesson under consideration the wise man represents 
himself as a father giving good advice to a son, 
and it were well for all the youth of the world, if their 
fathers more frequently communed with them and gave 
them the benefit of their experiences in life. Fathers 
recognize a responsibility for those whom they bring 
into the world, in respect to natural things, food, clothing, 
etc. Have they not a much greater responsibility 
respecting the culture of the minds and hearts of their 
children in the path of wisdom, justice, righteousness, 
truth? 

One of the growing evils of our day, even amongst 
Christian people, is the disposition of parents, and we 
believe particularly of the fathers, to shirk this responsibility 
which they assumed when they became fathers. 
They incline to leave the instruction, reproof, guidance, 
counsel of their children entirely to others— to the 
church minister, to Sunday School teachers or to mothers. 
It is well that children whose fathers are so lacking 
in the proper parental instinct should have the 
counsel, advice, etc., of others, especially of their 
mothers; but all of these will not properly take the place 
of the father's counsel, if he be a father in the true 
sense of the word,— taking watch-care over the highest 
interests of those committed to his care by divine 
providence. 

Nor is it merely the children who are injured by 
such parental carelessness of divinely imposed responsibilities: 
the matter reacts upon the parents— the neglected 
child realizes the neglect of its highest interests, 
and depreciates the parent correspondingly. The result 
is a home lacking respect for parents and hence lacking 
obedience to parents; therefore a home in which disorder 
is sure to reign— an unhappy home. In such a 
home it is most difficult for the Christian graces to take 
root or flourish in any member of the family; yet it 
sometimes does take hold in just such a place. Many 
parents learn when it is too late, how seriously they 
neglected to cultivate right principles in the gardens of 
their children's hearts, and allowed them to become 
overgrown with weeds of ill dispositions,— unkindness, 
disobedience to parents, unthankfulness, etc. We cannot 
urge too strongly, upon Christian parents, the necessity 



of training up a child in the way it should go: 
in precept and also in example, illustrating patience, 
kindness, thankfulness, gentleness, meekness, love, as 
essential rules of daily life. Such are giving their 
children a good start in the right way; a start which 
they need at the entrance to life, and which they and 
society have a right to expect at the hands of those who 
brought them into being. 

Father Solomon suggests that the obedient son of 
a wise father will prolong his days, by giving heed to 
the good counsel. The parent's whole course of life 
should manifest toward his children his love for them, 
and his deep interest in their welfare. The child is 
naturally disposed to think highly of its parents, and 
to appreciate their advice, unless this childlike confidence 
has been shattered by unkind treatment, threats 
and parental neglect. Children reason often as correctly 
as do older people, sometimes more so; they should 
be able to reason, upon evidence, (1) that they have 
the parental love and interest in their welfare; (2) that 
parental experience in life should be valuable to them 
at its threshold, to start them properly. And who will 
say that the child thus guided and helped by parental 
counsel would not be saved from many of the difficulties 
and pitfalls and troubles in life, and from much 

R2388 : page 339 

sickness, physical debility, etc., to a longer life? Moreover, 
the parent thus interested in the child, and seeking 
to give it lessons from his own book of experience, 
will find himself profited by his review of the successes, 
disappointments and mistakes of his life, and the 
causes of these. Whoever, therefore, performs his duty 
as a father is blessing himself as well as his child— and 
adding to his own years as well as to the years of his 
child. 

How blessed for any parent to be able truly to use 
the words of the eleventh verse of our lesson as he lies 
upon his death-bed, addressing his children, "I have 
taught thee in the way of wisdom; I have led thee [by 
my example] in right paths," and how blessed are 
such children; how much less liable than others to 
stumblings in life's pathway: how much more likely 
they are to be ready to hear and heed the voice of the 
Heavenly Father, and to walk in his paths. 

Indeed, we may profitably apply this lesson to the 
sons of God, and consider God to be the speaker: for in 
holy things we but copy the Heavenly Father. While 
we were yet sinners he redeemed us, and by his love 
and justice he has drawn all that have been so far drawn 
to Christ as the Redeemer. Coming to Christ for forgiveness 
of sins, even justification, through faith in his 
blood, we thus came to the Father. It was then that 
the Heavenly Father addressed us, through his Word, 
saying, "My son, give me thine heart"— thy affections 



—thy love. And those who gave their love, their affections, 
to the Lord, gave their all; for our affections control 
us, whether for good or for evil. When we accepted 
the Lord's invitation, and gave him our hearts, our 
all, a living sacrifice, to be his and to do henceforth his 
good pleasure, it was not because we first loved him, 
but because he first loved us, and gave his Son to be a 
propitiation (satisfaction) for our sins. Now, therefore, 
having been accepted of the Father as new creatures in 
Christ, having been adopted into his family, by receiving 
the spirit of adoption and sonship, he speaks to us 
as to sons, in the language of Solomon,— that we take 
heed to his Word; and he promises us that by so doing 
the years of our life shall be many— very many, 
everlasting. 

All who have been "taught of God" can bear testimony 
to the applicability of the 11th verse to themselves 
and to all the sons of God: "I have taught thee 
in the way of wisdom; I have led thee in right paths." 
And all such, relying upon the exceeding great and 
precious promises of the Scriptures, can look forward 
in confidence to the 12th verse as a prophecy respecting 
the divine care over all those who have put themselves 
thus under divine protection and instruction as sons of 
God, and who will to abide in his love. They are assured 
that their steps in the spiritual way, in the narrow 
path, shall be guided of the Lord, and that in their 
race for the great prize of their high calling they shall 
not stumble, so long as they are followers in that path 
in which the Lord's providence guides them: yea, all 
things shall work together for good to those who love 
God, supremely. 

And the older and more experienced the son may 
be,— the spiritual son of the Heavenly Father, or the 

R2389 : page 339 

natural son of the earthly father,— the more he should 
appreciate the testimony, "Take fast hold of instruction; 
let her not go; keep to her; for she is thy life." 
It is along these same lines that the Apostle urges the 
Church, saying: "We ought to give the more earnest 
heed to the things which we have heard, lest. .we should 
let them slip." (Heb. 2:1.) It evidently is not enough 
that we should hear the Lord's Word; nor yet that we 
should receive it into good and honest hearts. It is 
necessary that we take fast hold of it; that we act upon 
it; that we incorporate it as a very part of our being: 
thus the spirit of the truth becomes the spirit of all the 
children of God;— the holy spirit in them is in harmony, 
in full accord, with the Heavenly Father's mind, 
disposition, will. 

What better advice could be given to either natural 
or spiritual sons than is presented in the 14th verse? 
We are to remember that, no matter how far along we 
may have gone in the "narrow way," there are always 



branching paths leading from it— paths of self-will, of 
pride, of worldly ambition, of selfishness, which lure 
us to leave the direct path, and which sometimes we 
may be in danger of entering, unintentionally, unwittingly. 
These paths at first emerge so gradually from 
the "narrow way" as to seem very little different from 
it, but gradually they diverge more and more from it, 
so that any of the Lord's people, filled with the spirit 
of righteousness, truth, love, may soon discern the 
change, the different spirit and tendency. 

All pilgrims seeking the heavenly city, the Kingdom, 
are exhorted by the Word of God to be very 
watchful against all the wiles of the Adversary, especially 
his disposition to switch us from the "narrow 
way." It is well that we should be on guard, to note 
the spirit of all with which we have to do, and to refuse 
to go forward in any direction in which the spirit of 
holiness, meekness, purity, love, does not lead. Thus, 
if we have gotten into the wrong way, and our hearts 
be still loyal to the principle of love, we need not go 
far upon the wrong course without finding out and retracing 
our steps: but it is still better, as expressed in 
our lesson, that we enter not the path of the wicked. 

Once entered, we may be able to retrace our steps 
with more or less difficulty, but the safe program is never 
to enter these by-paths. One of the Adversary's 
seductions, by which many are led astray into by-paths 

R2389 : page 340 

of wickedness, contrary to their consecration vows, is 
through the human quality known as curiosity. They 
reason,— "I know it is untrue and has a wrong spirit, 
but I want to see and know: the knowledge of evil will 
but do me good." But we remember that it was mother 
Eve's curiosity and her fearlessness to disobey the Lord's 
command, that got her into difficulty as the first transgressor; 
and this reminds us of the Apostle's words, "I 
fear lest by any means, as the serpent beguiled Eve 
through his subtilty, so your minds should be corrupted 
from the simplicity which is in Christ." (2 Cor. 11:3.) 
The wise man seeks to impress the lesson of the 
necessity of not tampering with evil, not touching it, 
not tasting of it, not putting himself within the reach 
of its influence, saying,— "Avoid it, pass not near it, 
turn in another direction away." 

The spirit of liberty is a part of the spirit of the 
Lord, the spirit of the truth, and no Christian can too 
highly appreciate this liberty, nor too faithfully maintain 
his hold upon "the liberty wherewith Christ hath 
made us free," nor too carefully avoid any "yoke of 
bondage." But this is made one of the Adversary's 
strong points of attack— liberty. He even used this 
argument upon our dear Redeemer— Use your liberty- 
Command that the stones be made bread, etc. The only 
safe or proper course for God's children is to walk 



carefully in the footprints of our Redeemer and Forerunner, 
Christ Jesus, and to avoid every appearance of 
evil— avoid the use and exercise of liberty where there 
would be the slightest danger of being led into temptation 
and into sin. And be it noted that our Adversary 
never tempted us along the lines of liberty until our 
Lord set us free. The slavery from which we were set 
free by our Redeemer was the bondage of Sin, and being 
thus made free, we in consecration presented our 
bodies living sacrifices to the Father, in order that we 
might receive the adoption of sons in his spiritual family. 
This meant that we voluntarily gave up all human 
rights, liberties and preferences, accepting instead the 
divine will represented in the divine law, summed up 
in the one word, Love. 

Since we have taken this step, we are no longer at 
liberty to do anything contrary to this law of the New 
Covenant, Love, even as God himself has no liberty to 
do contrary to it. We are therefore to scrutinize carefully 
all the matters, incidents and affairs of life as they 
come before us, lest the Adversary should beguile us 
from this "narrow way" of self-denial, self-sacrifice: 
lest he should seduce us into doing something that would 
be contrary to our Father's Word, and in violation of his 
spirit of love. Hence, if any pathway has the slightest appearance 
of evil, or the slightest antagonism to the spirit 
of our law of Love, we (as obedient sons of God) should 
"avoid it, pass not through it, turn from it away." 

Next we have a description (vss. 16,17) of those 
who, having become the servants of Sin, have pleasure 
in unrighteousness. We all know of some wicked characters 
(men and women) who make it their business in 
life to entrap others, financially, morally or socially: 
persons to whom it seems the chief end of life to 
do evil, and to seduce others into evil doing; and often, 
as in verse 17, their business in life takes on this form 
of entrapping the unwary. In this sense it is their 
food and drink to do evil: they make their living in 
that way. 

And we regret to say that we have knowledge also 
of a similar class of Satan's more or less deluded 
servants, who seem to make it their business in life. 
They accept good salaries for misrepresenting, yea, blaspheming, 
the Heavenly Father's character and plan: it 
is their business— to entrap the ignorant and to bind 
them with superstitions. Still others delight in mischief, 
in sowing discord, in slanders, malice, hatred, envy, 
strife, to stumble and entrap, mislead, the spiritual sons 
of God. They are not content to have these evil principles 
at work in their own hearts, but are active agents 
of the great Adversary in planting roots of bitterness, 
and misleading those who wish to walk in the right 
way. And if these last do not live literally by their 
evil work, it is at least their spiritual life— an evil spirit 
—their light become darkness. In any case the Lord's 
children and the world's children are to pass by all 



such, recognizing the unrighteousness of their course, 
and have neither fellowship nor sympathy with their 
evil work, nor countenance it in any respect. 

The next two verses show us the two paths, and 
give us their general characteristics, and especially their 
terminations. Since there are none who are absolutely 
just, "None righteous, no, not one," we must understand 
the reference to "the just" here to signify the 
justified children of God— reckonedly justified by 
faith. And from this standpoint this entire lesson may 
properly be regarded as a prophecy or teaching to the 
justified class of this Gospel age. It is true of every 
one of the Lord's children— justified sons— that his path 
through life should be one of increasing light and blessing: 
one of personal progress and of blessing to others, 
through the light of the knowledge of the truth. 

However, the application, we believe, is specially 
for the entire Church as a whole— Head and Body:— 
Christ the Just One, we his justified members. Our 
Lord was the great Light, which came into the world; 
his consecrated followers are his representatives in the 
world, who seek to let their light shine before men, and 
to glorify their Father in heaven. The pathway of this 
Church, Head and Body, has lain through a wilderness 
state, and a night of darkness, "gross darkness covering 
the people" of the world in general. Divine favor 

R2389 : page 341 

has been manifested toward this consecrated holy Body, 
in that the light of the divine Word has shone upon 
the pathway step by step. Of this light Solomon's 
father wrote, prophetically representing the Body of 
Christ, saying, "Thy word is a lamp to my feet, a lantern 
to my footsteps." The Head of the Body was 
thus enlightened by the Word of God, and guided in 
doing the divine will— even unto death; and so each 
member of the Body has been similarly guided by the 
same lamp of truth. 

We have the assurance that no part of the true 
Church's pathway has ever been left in darkness, nor 
will it be— even to the end of the age. As the Apostle 
said, "Ye, brethren, are not in darkness, that that day 
should overtake you as a thief." The text under consideration 
seems to harmonize with this declaration, 
that the path of the Just would shine more and more 
clearly (lighted by the lamp, God's Word) even unto 
the perfect day. Since we have not yet reached the 
perfect day, we cannot know how much more brightly 
our lamp may shine in the future; but we do know that 
it is now shining more brilliantly than ever before for 
all those who are walking in the "narrow way." In 
its light we can see, as never before, the glories of the 
divine character, illustrated in the divine plan of salvation 
for mankind. We can see also our own position as 
sons of God, justified through the precious blood and 



called to be heirs of God and joint-heirs with Jesus 
Christ our Lord, with a clearness and distinctness that 
before was unknown. And yet all this light, this increasing 
light, as we near the perfect day, is coming 
from our Lamp which God provided,— the Bible. 

But while the Bible lights the pathway of the true 
Body of Christ, the consecrated "little flock," it sheds 
no particular brilliancy upon the world's pathway: that 
is to say, no light that the world can specially profit by. 
What light may be reflected to the world's pathway is 
perhaps fully counteracted by shadows which rather 
confuse and perplex them. And this also is set forth 

R2390 : page 341 

in our lesson: "The way of the wicked is as darkness; 
they know not at what they stumble." 

In the light of our path the Body of Christ now 
sees that we are in the "Day of Vengeance," that a 
testing is taking place with those who have named the 
name of Christ,— to test, to prove, to separate the true 
from the untrue; and again, to separate amongst the 
true, the consistent "wise virgins," who faithfully follow 
the Lord in self-sacrifice, from the "foolish virgins" 
who attempt to please both the Lord and the world, 
and make a failure of both. Our lamp shows us that 
as soon as this testing in the nominal Church is completed 
a great time of trouble will break out: "a time 
of trouble such as was not since there was a nation." 
Our lamp shows us the great stumblingstone in the path 
of the world's progress in its present course. It shows 
us that the Christian world is about to stumble over 
that Stumblingstone and Rock of Offence over which 
the typical Israel stumbled eighteen centuries ago,— 
that the Christian world is to stumble over the second 
presence of Christ, as the Jewish nation stumbled over 
his first advent; and that the stumbling here will mean 
the wreck of Christendom, as the stumbling there meant 
the wreck of Judaism. 

The light upon the path of the Just— the path of 
the Christ— shows that the present social order of Christendom 
is to stumble and be wrecked in a time of anarchy, 
because the time has come for the establishment 
of God's Kingdom, and because the world is not in the 
condition of heart to be ready to receive it, and hence 
are kept in darkness respecting it: "They know not at 
what they stumble," altho they realize that we are living 
in peculiar times, and that there is great danger of 
stumbling over something in the darkness with which 
they realize they are surrounded. 

In harmony with this is the statement in our Lord's 
Word, respecting the testing of this day of the Lord: 
"It shall come as a thief and as a snare upon all them 
that dwell upon the earth [the world in general, especially 
the Christian world who, having made a covenant 
with the Lord, are living contrary thereto, and therefore 



are styled "wicked"— as was that servant who hid his 

Lord's money in the earth, and returned it to him unused]." 

(Luke 21:35.) "But ye, brethren, are not in 

darkness, that that day should overtake you as a thief." 

Of these same classes the Prophet declares, "None of 

the wicked shall understand; but the wise shall understand.' 

-1 Thes. 5:2-4; Dan. 12:10. 

Let us, dear brethren, as sons of God, heed our 
Father's Word most carefully, that we take not the 
wrong paths, but that we follow strictly and carefully 
and watchfully the "narrow way" of consecration, 
self-denial, humility, love, in which shines the light 
of the Lamp of Truth, and which alone leads to the 
Kingdom. 



R2390 : page 341 

THE LOST BOOK FOUND. 

-DEC. 4.-2 KINGS 22:8-20.- 

"Blessed are they that keep his testimonies, 
and that seek him with the whole heart." 

MANASSEH'S son, Amon, succeeded him as 

king of Judah. Born and reared during 

the period of his father's blind idolatry, he seems not 

to have shared in his father's repentance and reformation: 

his short reign of two years was full of wickedness 

and endeavor to reestablish idolatry, and ended 

with his own assassination by his servants. He was 

followed in the kingdom by his son Josiah, a lad of 

eight years, who developed a very different character, 

became a true servant of God, and one of the greatest 

reform kings upon the throne of Israel. We are not 

to regard this as a miracle, but rather to expect and 

look for natural causes, as having something to do 

with it. We find some suggestion along this line in 

his name, for in olden times names were given to indicate 

the characters hoped for, and thus at least became 

a manifestation of the attitude of the parental 

hearts. The name Josiah signifies, "Jehovah will 

support." He was born during the period of his grandfather's 

reformation movement. His mother was doubtless, 

R2390 : page 342 

according to the custom of that time, chosen by his 
grandfather, Manasseh. Her name indicates that 
she was of godly parentage,— Jedidiah signifying "the 
beloved of Jehovah;" and her mother, the king's grandmother, 
was by name Adiah, "The honored of Jehovah." 
From such good parental stock, on the maternal 
side at least, we should expect the foundation of 



a good character, and developments substantiate this. 

This religiously inclined boy, we may reasonably 
infer, was under the council of his religious mother, 
and his state counsellors were probably those whom 
Manasseh had gathered about him after his reformation, 
and who were evidently rejected by Amon. Josiah's 
sixteenth year dates his conversion— the date at 
which the chronicler says, "He began to seek after the 
God of David, his father." And this brings to our 
attention a fact that is lost sight of by many; viz., that 
it is one thing to be well-born and well disposed, 
and another thing entirely to consecrate the heart to 
the Lord; and this last step many morally inclined, 
"good" people, neglect to take,— to their own permanent 
disadvantage. It is not sufficient that we be 
well disposed, moral; it is necessary that we become 
the Lord's, devoting ourselves wholly to his will, and 
then seek after him to know his will that we may do 
it. It is only to those that thus draw near to the Lord 
that his promise extends— "Draw near unto me, and 
I will draw near unto you." 

The result of the king's thus seeking the Lord 
culminated four years later, when he was twenty, in 
a determination to use his influence and power for the 
complete overthrow of idolatry throughout the kingdom; 
and the next six years of his reign were devoted 
to this work. He prosecuted it not only in Jerusalem 
and throughout Judah, but extended his influence over 
a large portion of the territory once ruled by the ten-tribe 
kingdom, and pushed the work of reformation 
and destruction of idols as far as Naphtali on the sea 
of Galilee. Apparently there was a certain amount 
of opposition to this reform-work, which required six 
years for its accomplishment; moreover, it seems to 
have required the king's presence with his servants, to 
insure thorough destruction of the symbols of idolatry 
which apparently abounded in every district. 

It was on the king's return to Jerusalem, after 
having seen to the accomplishment of the cleansing of 
the land of its idols, that looking about for the next 
proper step to the service of God, he determined that 
it should be the repair of the Temple. Altho his grandfather, 
Hezekiah, had cleansed the Temple, repairing 
its doors, etc., it would appear that it had subsequently 
been entirely neglected, so that many of the rafters 
were broken, and thorough repairs were requisite. 
Accordingly, money donations were invited for the 
repair of the Temple, and the work was carried to 
completion. 

As it was with Josiah's public work, so it should 
be with the heart work of all who present themselves 
to the Lord: they should first begin by breaking off 
their sins in righteousness, by utterly destroying the 
fleshly idols of the heart, selfishness in various forms, 
as the Apostle suggests. "Put away all filthy communications 
out of your mouths." "Put away all 



filthiness of the flesh and of the spirit [mind] perfecting 
holiness in the reverence of the Lord." (Col. 3:8; 
2 Cor. 7:1.) After having thus become servants of 
righteousness in our own hearts and lives, we may 
properly begin to look out for other conquests, fields 
of usefulness and service to the Lord. We may then 
begin to lend a hand in building up the true Temple 
of God, the Body of Christ, the Church— in cleansing 
it from defilements and in instituting in it the proper 
reforms. But all reform should begin with our own 
hearts first. He who has not sought the Lord personally, 
and then, obedient to the Lord's leading, broken 
down the idols of his own heart, and begun a thorough 
cleansing work in his own life and heart, has no business 
whatever to take hold of the repairs of the great 
antitypical Temple. 

Josiah's repairing of the Temple was over two 
hundred years after the very similar repairing made 
by king Jehoash, and brought to light a very ancient 
manuscript of the Law, probably the book of Deuteronomy. 
Presumably this was the copy of the Law 
which Moses wrote with his own hand, and commanded 
to be placed in the side of the Ark, with the golden 
pot of manna and Aaron's rod that budded. Quite 
probably the Ark, as the most sacred and most valuable 
of the Temple's furniture, had been secreted at the 
time the Temple was denuded of much of its golden 
ornamentations to pay tribute to invaders, and was 
now discovered. We are to remember too, that books 
were little in that day, and that few could either write 
or read them, and that the Law of Moses was communicated 
to the people orally by the priests, from memory. 

It is not surprising, therefore, that when the Book of 
the Law was found by the priest Hilkiah, it was esteemed 
a treasure, delivered to Shaphan, the king's secretary, 
and read in the king's hearing. Its delineations of 
the Law of God incumbent upon his people Israel, 
were so different from what the people had been taught 
by the priests, by word of mouth, that the king was 
astonished, and rent his garment (an expression of 
dismay). Nor could we expect otherwise, when we 

R2391 : page 342 

remember that idolatry had flourished to a considerable 
extent for over three hundred years, with only occasional 
reformations, and that during all that time the 
priests and Levites who had in any degree remained 
faithful to the Lord were without support from the 
people; for they had no land of their own, and were 
largely dependent upon the tithes, and consequently 
during the period of idolatry would be obliged to engage 
considerably in secular employment. 

Realizing how far short Israel had come of the 
demands of the Law, and noting the punishments prescribed 
in that Law for unfaithfulness, the king was 



greatly troubled. Accordingly he sent several of his 
court officers with the high priest, to inquire of 
the Lord, through a prophet, respecting the status 
of the case, and respecting what should be done by 

R2391 : page 343 

Israel to escape the punishments which he realized 
justly belonged to the nation under the conditions of 
that Law Covenant. The prophets Jeremiah and Zephaniah 
were then living and prophesying, but the king 
for some reason sent his messengers to a prophetess, 
Hulda, daughter-in-law of one of his court officers. 
Why the king passed by two prominent prophets, to 
make inquiry at the mouth of one otherwise unknown 
in the Scripture narrative, we can only conjecture: 
(1) It may have been that, of a woman the king might 
hope to receive a softer and more peaceful message than 
from a man, especially as this woman, through her 
father-in-law, was connected with his own court, and 
would therefore be disposed to give as kindly a message 
as possible. (2) Another suggestion is that 
Jeremiah and Zephaniah may have been absent from 
Jerusalem, on preaching tours, and thus could not be 
readily communicated with. (3) An additional and 
even more forceful suggestion is that Jeremiah and 
Zephaniah had been prophesying in the name of the 
Lord publicly— foretelling the judgment of the Lord 
about to come upon the nation, and that their preaching 
probably had somewhat to do with the reformation 
which Josiah had inaugurated. Thinking favorably 
of his own reforms, the king doubtless thought their 
predictions unwarranted and extreme. He felt, therefore, 
that he knew what answer these prophets would 
make to his questions, and desired to hear through 
still another channel which he might hope would be 
less severe. (4) Besides, Jeremiah was the son of the 
high priest, Hilkiah; and Zephaniah was the king's 
own cousin. The king's desire, therefore, would seem 
to be to obtain an outside testimony, and as favorable 
as possible. 

A moral may be drawn from this part of the lesson, 
applicable to individual cases. At first, when we began 
to seek the Lord, we recognized certain things and 
conditions of heart as sinful and requiring the divine 
forgiveness, and necessary to be put away to the extent 
of our ability; Josiah destroyed the idols: but it 
was only after we had been considerably exercised in 
the matter of reform in our own lives, and in connection 
with the Temple, the Lord's Church, that the 
Lord supplied that clearer knowledge of his own perfection 
and the righteousness of his law, which enabled 
us to see that with all the reforms and cleansings 
accomplished we still came far short of the grand standard 
set forth in the divine law— Thou shalt love the 
Lord with all thy being, and thy neighbor as thyself. 



And as the king rent his garment, and manifested 
greater contrition of heart after years of zealous service, 
so it is usually with the Christian who has passed 
through several stages of reform, and whose mind at 
last discerns the true meaning of the great law of Love. 
Then it is that he feels more than at first his shortcomings. 
While the world may be considering him as 
a great reformer, a great saint, he himself has gotten 
to a place where he sees the majesty of the divine law 
as with a telescope, and his own imperfections as with 
a microscope. Then it is that he also seeks the Word 
of the Lord for guidance, instruction, help. 

The Lord's reply through the prophetess was most 
direct— confirmatory of all that had been declared by 
the mouth of Jeremiah and Zephaniah, but adding 
words of comfort and consolation for the king himself. 
—"Because thine heart was tender, and thou hast 
humbled thyself before the Lord, when thou hearest 
what I spake against this place... and hast rent thy 
clothing and wept before me, I also have heard thee, 
saith the Lord." It was too late for any national reformation; 
the nation had been tried for several centuries, 
and it had been found wanting, and according 
to the divine plan the time was near at hand when the 
typical kingdom should be entirely overthrown— overturned 
until he should come, Messiah, whose right the 
antitypical Kingdom is, and to whom it will be given. 
There was no reason, from the divine standpoint, why 
this course should be altered, and the repentance of 
the king could therefore only be treated as an individual 
matter, and dealt with accordingly, for God has 
an individual providence over all those who are consecrated 
to him, as well as a general supervision of the 
affairs of the nations. 

Much in this narrative reminds us of the somewhat 
parallel condition and circumstances at the present 
time. Looking back through the vista of "the dark 
ages," we see the parallel to Israel's and Judah's tendency 
towards idolatry, superstition, etc. We see false 
religions, doctrines and dogmas set up and worshiped 
in Christendom. We see here, as we saw in Judah's 
history, not only the worship of false gods, but also 
false worship of the true God— worship contrary to the 
commandments of his law. We see in the Reformation 
movement of the sixteenth century something corresponding 
in many respects to Josiah's reformation. It 
has led to a considerable smashing of false doctrines, 
errors and false gods— and of misrepresentations of the 
character and teachings of the true God. The present 
reformation movement also has had much to do with 
the cleansing and repairing of the Temple— the true 
Church, the saints,— and in the reestablishment of a 
true worship, based upon truth more clearly discerned, 
and better sacrifices. And finally we have found the 
book of God's Law— we found the Bible. It was rescued 
from seclusion by the Reformers, and through 



the printed page has been laid before all Christendom. 
Not only so, but to us also it is being "read,"— explained, 
made clear, under divine providence. We are 
seeing its heights and depths, its lengths and its 
breadths, as never before. 

In this Book also, "we read the righteous sentence 
of the crumbling thrones of earth." We read of the 
"Day of Vengeance" that is coming upon the antitypical 
Israel, and as we inquire of the Lord respecting 
it, and whether or not it may be averted, we hear 
his decision in the Scriptures, as Josiah received it concerning 
his kingdom. The Word of the Lord informs 
us that so far as Christendom is concerned there is no 
balm in Gilead that will help and recover her. Her 
case has gone too far to be rectified, and to have the 
old garment patched. The Lord's decision is that the 
present social structure shall pass away in a great time 
of trouble, and that on its ruins he will establish 
through the glorified Church, the Kingdom which he 
has so long promised, and for which we are to pray, 
"Thy Kingdom come, thy will be done on earth as it 
is done in heaven." 

Nevertheless, the Lord's promise is comforting to 
all those who mourn in Zion, to all those who are out 
of sympathy with evil and unrighteousness, to all those 

R2391 : page 344 

who love the law of the Lord their God, and who are 
seeking to serve him with all their mind, soul and 
strength, and to exercise his law of Love toward their 
neighbor also. To this class, fully consecrated to the 
Lord, comes the assurance, "They shall be mine, saith 
the Lord, in that day when I shall make up my jewels, 
and I will spare them, as a man spareth his own son 
that serveth him." 



R2391 : page 344 

INTERESTING LETTERS. 



Chefoo, China. 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY, 

DEAR BRETHREN:-The two boxes of books- 
MILLENNIAL DAWNS, pamphlets, tracts-despatched 
by you three or four months ago, via New York to 
Shanghai, came thence to this place where they were 
safely received. To me they are most welcome, even 
as precious bearers of light. I heartily thank you for 
such a bountiful supply of tracts. I will do my best 
to secure readers for them all. I have now studied the 
present truth carefully for two years, at first critically, 



then I wondered and admired, then was I captivated 
and satisfied. I read the DAWNS first alone, then with 
my wife, and now am reading them again with my 
children. Spiritual food,— such as I never before tasted, 
—they have been to me, meat in due season indeed. 

Being persuaded that this testimony is of God, 
and having feasted thereupon, I desire now to rise and 
serve others. I have been a Baptist missionary in 
China since 1876. How often have I been pained, aye 
groaned, to see the most evident failure of missionary 
work, to produce self-denying followers of Christ, from 
among the Chinese! Last May I resigned my connection 
both with the Mission Board, and the Baptist 
Church, that I may be free from all creeds and parties, 
to do the Lord's work in the Lord's own way. 

My desire now is to reach all missionaries and 
other Christians (foreigners specially) in China, Japan, 
Corea and Siam, and this can only be done by correspondence 
and advertisement, both of which methods I 
hope to use, to spread abroad in these Eastern lands 
some knowledge of the present truth. I ask your 
prayers for all the necessary equipment for this service, 

R2392 : page 344 

and that the light of the dawning of the Day may find 
its way into many hearts. I am, dear Brethren, 

Yours, in hope of the Redemption which draweth 
nigh, HORACE A. RANDLE. 



"Cincinnati, Ohio. 
"TO THE AUTHOR OF 'The Day of Vengeance,' 

"DEAR SIR:— In its application of spiritual principles 
to social, political, economic and ecclesiastical questions, 
your work is the peer of Henry George's 'Progress 
and Poverty.' 
"Respectfully, GEORGE M. HAMMELL,- 
Literary Editor Western Christian Advocate, 
Member Cincinnati Conference M.E. Church." 



"The Day of Vengeance' is VOL. IV. of the MILLENNIAL 
DAWN series— a literal exposition of Sacred 

Scripture seriously offensive to papists, hierarchic ecclesiasticism, 
world-conforming Christians, monopolists, 
hypocrites, politicians, adherents of parties, sects 
and lodges, paganized rulers of the earth, aristocrats 
and anarchists, money-lenders and usurers. It is an 
open attack upon all existing social, political and ecclesiastical 
organizations, in the name of New Testament 
Christianity. Primarily, an appeal to pessimism, 
it is ultimately an appeal to that optimism which believes 
that, after the day of vengeance, the Kingdom 



of Christ will come in all its glory."— Western Christian 
Advocate. 

Chicago, Illinois. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-You will be interested 
in the young Hebrew I brought to the Chicago 
meeting. It seems a remarkable series of Providential 
interpositions in this case, and it makes me think it 
may be for some ulterior good. I expected to bring 
this Brother Segall to the afternoon meeting, but he came 
to the evening meeting. We were late, but his interest 
was very great; he said he had frequently thought 
of subjects you mentioned, and believed in the same 
way, but had never met any one who had talked upon 
them as yourself. The next Sunday we arranged to 
go to Brother McPhail's meeting on the West Side. 
He was most kindly received among the brethren, and 
Bro. M. had a very interesting talk with him. I had 
already (a week or two before) given him a copy of 
DAWN, VOL. I., and I asked him if he had read it. He 
said that he had not had time. I asked him to bring 
the book, and we would go through it together which 
we did. He has a very bright mind, and quick of apprehension, 
that it is a pleasure to talk on these matters 
to him. He said he would from that time read 
DAWN steadily. Two days after this he was to return 
to Milwaukee. We have received several interesting 
letters from him, and of course have replied thereto. 
He is staying with his parents who are orthodox Hebrews, 
but his conversation has been such that his 
father (from Germany) seems quite desirous to read 
the DAWN in the German language. 

The history of Brother Segall's conversion from 
Judaism is one of the most interesting experiences I 
have heard of: this was some years since, but he tells 
me he has not been a consistent member of any Christian 
church, as his ideas on the trinity, on hell and on 
other points, were not what are generally received in 
the nominal church. I was most surprised at this and 
showed him more of the divine plan and Word, and 
this has stimulated his desire to be with us. We seem 
still to be in the days of persecution, as in the earliest 
Christian times, when the disciples on that account 
were scattered abroad, everyone preaching the glad 
tidings. I think this dear Brother, notwithstanding 
his tribulations, will take a delight in spreading the 
good news among his friends. In fact he has already 
commenced.... 

The preparations of Great Britain to be ready for 
any combined attack upon her sphere of influence seem 
to betoken that the rumblings of the great storm may 
soon be heard. May God protect those peoples who 
most love freedom and his holy Word. 

I will now conclude, dear Brother Russell, always 
yours, in love and fellowship. R. W. E. BRAY. 



page 345 
VOL. XIX. DECEMBER 1, 1898. No. 23. 

CONTENTS. 



Millennial Dawn, Vol. IV., in 

German 346 

The Bible Versus the Evolution 

Theory 347 

A Live Topic Discussed by 

Traveling Ministers. 
Report of a Friendly Discussion 

on Board a Crowded "Lightning 

Express," Witnessing the 

Fulfilling of Dan. 12:4 

Fighting Against God 357 

The Holy Land Desolated 359 

page 346 

SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
--ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 56-60 ARCH STREET, ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, N.Y. DRAFT, MONEY ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS: 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age or accident, or other 
adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, if they 
send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting the 
paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list 
constantly. 



R2399 : page 346 

MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOL. IV., IN GERMAN. 

Some months since we noted the fact that our German friends 
were urging its publication in their language, and were unwilling 
to accept our refusal. We finally offered that, if a sufficient 
number were ordered in advance, to amount to $500, we would 
consider it the Lord's will to proceed with the matter and grant 
the request. 

We are gratified to be able to state that the required sum 
has been subscribed. The translating is being done by Brother 
Pillichody of Switzerland and Sister Giesecke of Germany, and 
will then be criticized by Bros. Koetitz and Kuesthardt of this 



country. All this, and the typesetting, printing, etc., will require 
several months; but the work is already started. May the 
Lord's blessing attend it to the praise of his glory and the blessing 
of his people of the German tongue! 



OUR NOVEMBER EXTRA. 

The demand for our Sept. issue was so great that it speedily 
exhausted our 20,000 edition: so we got out another 40,000 edition 
of the same "Parousia" article and other matter as a Nov. 
7th Extra, and sent a copy to each subscriber. You will not 
need it for your file and can give it to any friend known to be 
interested in our Lord's second coming. Send us addresses of others, 
and we will mail them samples, free. 



page 346 

"BIBLE TALKS IN SIMPLE LANGUAGE." 

This book, described in our Nov. 7th issue, we find we can 
supply for less than stated: hence we are sending six of our 
booklets to each person who has already ordered, and will do 
the same with future orders. 



R2392 : page 347 

THE BIBLE VERSUS THE EVOLUTION THEORY. 

-A LIVE TOPIC DISCUSSED BY TRAVELING MINISTERS. 

Report of a friendly discussion, on board a crowded 
"Lightning Express," witnessing the fulfilling of Daniel 12:4. 

ALPHA.— Is this seat engaged? 

Betha.— No, it is at your service, and I will 

be pleased to have company— sit down. You are a minister? 

—Of what denomination, may I ask? 

A.— I am a Presbyterian minister, and now en 
route to a meeting of the synod of which I am a member. 

B.— Ah! this affords me a good opportunity to 
inquire how the Presbyterian ministry in this vicinity 
stands on the subject of Evolution. My observation 
leads me to believe that the Evolution theory, which 
I consider quite unscriptural, is becoming very popular 
in all denominations;— amongst the ministers as 
well as amongst their parishioners. I will be glad to 
know the attitude of the Presbyterians hereabouts. 
I know, of course, that Presbyterian doctrinal standards, 
like the doctrinal standards of all orthodox 
churches, uphold the Scriptural doctrine that man was 



created perfect and fell from his perfection into sin and 
degradation: and my question, therefore, in substance 
is,— Are Presbyterians in this vicinity holding to the 
Bible and to their creeds on this point, or are they 
abandoning both in favor of the speculations of Darwin, 
Huxley, et al? 

A.— Not being authorized, I cannot speak for my 
brethren of the Presbyterian ministry as a whole, but 
I can speak for myself, and I assure you that I am a 
firm believer in Evolution: and I have every reason to 
believe that my views on the subject are in full accord 
with the sentiments of the best educated people in my 
own and other denominations. 

B.— I concede the point that the tendency of education 
for the past twenty-five years has been in the 
direction of Evolution and against the Bible: I incline, 
however, to the opinion that the majority of the advocates 
of evolutionary theories are not aware of the violent 
and irreconcilable difference between these theories 
and the Bible. It appears to me that if it were generally 
known that if evolutionary theories are true, the 
Bible doctrines are false, and that if the Bible is of God, 
his inspired Word, evolutionary theories are absolutely 
false, many Evolutionists would give the subject deeper 
study before accepting and advocating a theory 
which gives the lie to the words of our Lord and of his 
Apostles and all the holy Prophets. 

A.— Oh well, I do not go to the extreme of some 
Evolution theories— to claim that there was no divine 
interposition in the operation of Nature, no life-giving 
at the beginning: that inert matter became vitalized 
without supernatural aid I deny. Even Prof. Huxley 
on this subject says,— "At the present moment there 
is not the shadow of trustworthy, direct evidence that 
abiogenesis (life derived from the not living) does take 
place or has taken place within the period during which 
the existence of life on the globe is recorded." 

B.— Yes, surely there are very few that go to the 
extreme you mention. But I maintain that the entire 
philosophy of Evolution is opposed by the plainest 
statements both of the Old and New Testament Scriptures. 
(1) The extreme view, if it does not deny the 
existence of God, claims at least that he had nothing 
whatever to do with the creation of man; but that 
Evolutionary processes began with inert matter. (2) 
Also extreme hypothesis assumes that divine power 
did operate upon inert matter, but that it began at the 
very lowest point of living organism, and created a 
microbe, or more exactly speaking a "protoplasm" 
which became the parent of all living things, including 
man, by a supposed process of Evolution. (3) The 
most conservative theory of Evolution hesitates to go 
so far back as the "protoplasm," and ignoring the 
method by which divine power operated in the development 
of the lower animals, begins its philosophy 
with man: searching amongst the lower animals, for the 



one most nearly resembling humanity in structure and 
shape, it lights upon the monkey, the baboon and the 
chimpanzee, and asserts that human nature represents 
a second step in advance of these (for it is forced to admit 
many dissimilarities), and that "a missing link" is still 
being sought— a grade or condition of life between the 
highest monkey-developments and the lowest form of 
the human creature known. 

Those who accept this last theory often strenuously 
object to tracing their genealogy back to a microbe, a 
"protoplasm," but feel less hesitancy about thinking 
of Adam's grandfather as a monkey, and Adam himself 
as but one remove from the monkey family, and 
himself the very lowest and most degraded of his own 
species. This last is the thought, I believe, that is the 
most prevalent throughout Christendom; and those 
who entertain it, while somewhat abashed at the humble 

R2392 : page 348 

origin which they attribute to our race, nevertheless 
pass over it lightly, to expatiate in glowing terms respecting 
the great progress that mankind has made, 
and especially on the high degree of development attained 
in this nineteenth century. 
A.— Well, do you dispute the greater general intelligence 

R2393 : page 348 

of the masses to-day, as compared with the 

past? And if you do not dispute that, is it not an unanswerable 

argument in support of the Evolution theory? 

B.— Assuredly I do not dispute the fact that we 
of to-day are enjoying a higher degree of general 
knowledge and civilization than has ever before been 
known to the world. But instead of accepting in explanation 
of present conditions a theory which makes 
void the Word of God, I accept the explanation of 
present conditions which the Bible presents,— stronger 
and sounder by far, and more reasonable every way, 
than the Evolution theory. 

The Bible foretold the present conditions, and explained 
how they would come about, and how they are 
to result, with a detail and an accuracy which evolutionary 
speculation knows nothing about. I call to 
your remembrance the revelations given to the Prophet 
Daniel, concerning the things to come to pass in the 
closing epoch of the present age. I remind you of the 
Prophet's deep interest in the stirring scenes of that 
vision, and how he prayed and fasted seven whole 
weeks, desiring to know of these things— the purposes 
of God: and how then an angel was sent to him who 
delivered the divine message, "Go thy way, Daniel, 
for the declarations [of the vision] are closed up and 
sealed until the time of the end." This "time of the 
end," you will remember, is elsewhere in the Scriptures 



spoken of as "The day of His Preparation"— the 

day or period in which the Lord will be preparing the 

world for the new dispensation, the Millennial Age. 

Perhaps you will recall also the testimony of the 
angel sent to Daniel respecting some of the peculiar 
characteristics of this "Day of Preparation" or "time 
of the End"— he said: "In the time of the end many 
shall run to and fro and knowledge shall be increased— 
and the wise shall understand, but none of the wicked 
shall understand." (Dan. 12:4,10.) This inspired 
statement, it seems to me, is most remarkably fulfilled 
before our eyes to-day, and not only proves that we are 
now living in this period, "The Time of the End," 
the day of God's Preparation, but also furnishes a 
much clearer and more satisfactory explanation of the 
present day enlightenment and progress than any Evolution 
theory extant. It begins by calling attention 
to what every one will concede is one of the most notable 
features of our time, differentiating it from all 
past time, viz., the fact that everybody travels. The 
whole world seems to be "running to and fro;" just as 
was revealed to the Prophet twenty-four hundred years 
ago. Here we are ourselves, at this very moment running 
at the rate of fifty miles an hour and the car 
crowded full: and we know that similar trains are rushing 
in every direction, similarly laden with people. 
We wonder why there should be so much "running 
to and fro," and yet it is on the increase every year. 
And mark you, my friend, the railway, and the steamboat 
and the trolley car, which permit this running to 
and fro, belong to this century. Remember, again, 
that you and I have probably traveled over more miles 
of country within the last twenty-five years than did 
all our ancestors back to Adam, during that period of 
six thousand years. 

Take the next feature of the Lord's revelation to 
Daniel respecting the present time: "Knowledge shall 
be increased." I hold, in harmony with this Scriptural 
statement, that the present wonderful increase of 
knowledge is not the result of Evolution, but the result 
of divine interposition at the present time: that it is 
one of the features of this "Day of His Preparation" 
—making ready for the Millennial Kingdom. If the 
theory of Evolution were correct, this increase of 
knowledge should have been gradual, during the past, 
and not sudden, now, toward the close of six thousand 
years of man's history— within the present century, 
and particularly within the past fifty years. 

I call your attention also to the fact that the increase 
of knowledge has accompanied and followed the 
running to and fro of the past sixty years. In his own 
due time it has pleased the Lord to draw to man's attention 
the powers of steam and electricity, and to 
quicken him with intelligence for the handling and 
harnessing of these to his service. (See Exod. 31:6; 
36: 1 .) Pots had boiled and kettle-lids had rattled for 



centuries before the mind of Watt was led to reflection 
on the power of steam, and how it might be utilized in 
human affairs. Similarly simple were the first thoughts 
respecting contrivances for making use of steam power, 
and subsequently electrical power. But for those 
simple thoughts to which we believe divine providence 
led in God's due time, these great factors in our nineteenth 
century awakening might have lain unnoticed 
for centuries to come, as they did for centuries in the 
past. But in his own due time God made these the 
bases, the starting points, for the fulfilment of the divine 
prediction— "in the Time of the End many shall 
run to and fro, and knowledge shall be increased." 

As the discovery of the power of steam led to the 
construction of engines by which, on boats and cars, 
the people by running to and fro and commingling 
with each other gave fresh impulses to thought and 
action, so also the same steam power was attached 
to printing presses; and as a result the world is flooded 
with literature in every language, and thus again the 
world's thinkers and writers are brought in contact with 
the millions of its population, and increase of knowledge 
became unavoidable— as God foreknew. Electricity 
coming in assists in this commingling of mankind and 
their thoughts, throughout the world, by telegraph, 
telephone, etc. Very evidently the all-wise God, the 
Author of the Bible, which he caused to be written by 
his various instruments and agents, knew well what 
would be the result of letting in of the proper light at 
the proper moment, to cooperate with all the features 
of his great and wonderful plan of the ages. 

Moreover, you will bear me witness that the stoutest 
Evolutionists stand somewhat in awe of what may 
be the outcome of present conditions, viewed along the 
lines of Evolution. They begin to fear that the increase 
of knowledge signifies eventually a danger of social 
wreck and possibly of ultimate anarchy, or, to avert 
this, a return to some degree of restraint of education or 
of liberties. They see that the increase of knowledge of 
our day permits a twelve-year-old child to have before 
him the accumulated knowledge of centuries, as well as 
of modern investigations and discoveries, gives him 
much more theoretical knowledge at his command than 
had his grandfather (mainly of his own personal experience) 
at seventy years of age. They see also that 
a century ago the educated were extremely few, whereas 
to-day knowledge is so increased that in civilized 

R2393 : page 349 

lands education is compulsory, and comparatively few 
are without its privileges and advantages. And yet 
they see, contrary to all their Evolutionary expectations, 
that these hitherto undreamed-of blessings and comforts 
of our day are not apparently favorable in the 
masses of the people to the cultivation of happiness 



and contentment. On the contrary, it is manifest that 
the more and the greater the blessings enjoyed, the 
more and the greater will generally be the discontent 
in unregenerate hearts. Thus Evolutionists stand in 
dread of a retrograde movement, the logic of which 
disputes their hypothesis. 

On the contrary, all of these facts are in most absolute 
accord with the Scriptural delineation of the 
cause, object and result of the present running to and 
fro and increase of knowledge. The Scriptures indicate 
that the present increase of general knowledge 
and skill is now due, in order to the preparation of 
machinery, and the various mechanical arrangements 
and contrivances for the benefit of mankind during 
the Millennial age; nevertheless, it points out also 
that this knowledge is premature, so far as mankind 
in general is concerned— that mankind is not in proper 
condition to appreciate and use with wisdom the knowledge 
and opportunities, liberties and blessings thus 
thrust within his grasp, because of innate, inherited 
selfishness,— which left to itself would turn blessings 
into curses. The Bible points out that unregenerate 
man needs a strong superhuman government, which 
will give him practical lessons along the lines of wisdom, 
righteousness and the spirit of God, Love: and 
it points out that God is preparing to establish such a 
strong superhuman government, which will prove a 
blessing and an uplifting power to all who will come 
into accord with it, after its establishment. This 
superhuman government is the Millennial Kingdom, 
the kingdom or dominion of heaven, for which our 
Redeemer taught us to pray, "Thy Kingdom come, 
thy will be done on earth as it is done in heaven." 

A.— Pardon the interruption, but I should have 
considered you too logical a reasoner to hold the theory 
that Christ will come a second time in "glorified flesh," 
sit upon an earthly throne, hold earthly court, etc., 
during the Millennium. It strikes me that is a very 
gross conception of divine government— a retrogression 
as compared to the present spirit dispensation. 

B.~ I agree with much of your criticism of a common 
view of Christ's Kingdom. Such is not my view: 
I understand the Scriptures to teach that our Lord 
Jesus is no longer a man, a human being, in any sense, 
but a spirit being, "the express image of the Father's 
person." And when his kingdom shall come into control 
in the world, the heavenly king and his associates 
(the glorified Church) will no more be visible to mankind 
than are the holy angels now. The coming Kingdom 
will be a spiritual and invisible one, but will operate 
and rule through human representatives. As an 
illustration of a spiritual ruler operating and governing 
through earthly agents, take "the present evil world" 
or age, of which Satan is the prince. A spirit being, he 
is invisible to humanity, and rules for evil through his 



R2394 : page 349 

human servants. With the end of this age comes the 
binding of Satan and the overthrow of his dominion- 
God's due time for the establishment of the Kingdom 
of Heaven having come. Christ's Kingdom will be the 
reverse of Satan's in respect to its character in that it 
will be a Kingdom of light, a Kingdom of righteousness, 
but it will resemble it in that its King and his associates 
will also be spirit beings of a still higher order, 
of "the divine nature," and equally invisible to men. 

A.— I could not object to that view of the Kingdom. 
Proceed, please, as before. 

B.— The Scriptures point out that the present blessing 
and preparation for the incoming Millennial age, 
will prove eventually a curse in the end of this age- 
in that the increase of knowledge and of liberty, combined 
with the innate selfishness of the depraved man, 
will eventually lead to the very condition which our 
Evolutionist friends foresee and dread. But the Scriptures 
point out that even this dread condition of anarchy, 
with which the present age will terminate, will be 
overruled of God so as to make of it a practical lesson 
for mankind, humbling the power and the pride of the 
great and of the small, and teaching all the great lesson 
that human perfection is not attained through processes 
of human evolution, but only through divine 
interposition for the uplifting of mankind, through the 
agency of the Kingdom of God, long promised through 
the Prophets and Apostles, and by our Lord himself, 
to be the divine agency— the Seed of Abraham, in 
which all the families of the earth shall be blessed. 

The prophecy already mentioned calls special attention 
to this. It will be as a result of the running to and 
fro and the increase of knowledge, and the strange parallel 
increase of dissatisfaction, that the prophecy declares, 
—"There shall be a time of trouble such as never 
was since there was a nation"— and at that time, to intercept 
that trouble, and to save mankind from self-destruction 
in anarchy, Michael, the great Prince (Christ) 
shall stand up, the leader and the commander of the 
people. "And it shall come to pass that whosoever 
will not hear [heed] that Prophet shall be cut off from 
amongst the people."— Dan. 12:1,4,9,10; Acts 3:23. 

A.— What you say is very interesting and certainly 
does account for present-day enlightenment and progress 
in a manner different from my previous thoughts 
on the subject. I do not yet see, however, what ground 
you have for your assumption that the Evolution theory 
is in direct conflict with every teaching of the Bible, 
and that the one gives the other the lie, so that whoever 
holds to the Evolution theory must ipso facto deny 
the teachings of the Bible, and whoever holds to the 
Bible must, to be logical, renounce all faith in the Evolution 
theory. I would be pleased to have you substantiate 
your statement, if you can, with as keen logic 



as you have just used in accounting Scripturally for 
our nineteenth century intelligence. 

B.~ I will be pleased to submit to you the proofs 
that the hope set before mankind in the Scriptures is 
most radically opposed at every point to the Evolution 
theory: but first let me call your attention to a few 
other facts bearing upon the subject, aside from Scriptural 
declarations respecting the divine purpose and 
plan for man. I would have you notice that the world's 
history does not accord with the theory of Evolution, 
as evinced by the following facts: 

While conceding that this is preeminently the day 
of increase of knowledge, as the Scriptures foretold, I hold 
that it is not preeminently the day of increased ability. 
We do not find that the world is becoming greater in 
ability, but merely, as the Scriptures declare, greater 
in knowledge, which is generally diffused as never before. 
(1) In the domain of Art. Modern artists point us 
back to Raphael, Michael Angelo, and others, as the masters 
whom they still copy, in the matter of artistic skill. 

(2) In Poetry. If we inquire respecting poets, 

R2394 : page 350 

without disparagement to any of the able ones of recent 

years, we are, nevertheless, pointed back to the greatest 

poets, and told that the poetry of the Book of Job has 

no equal to-day in literature. We are pointed also to 

the Psalms of David, and to Homer, Virgil and Shakespeare, 

all past-masters, whose works and style are 

studied and to a large extent imitated to-day. 

(3) As for Laws. It is well known that the Mosaic 
laws have served as a basis, pattern and guide in the 
formation of the laws of Christendom, special adaptations 
being made to harmonize with present conditions: 

and yet there were features of the Mosaic law not incorporated 

into the laws of Christendom, which it is 

generally admitted would be blessings, if adopted in 

some measure; for instance, the law of the Jubilees, 

the cancellation of all debts every fiftieth year, the 

beneficial results of this law being attained in part only, 

and for a limited class only, by modern bankruptcy laws. 

(4) In the Sciences. Of present day arts and 
sciences special boast is made; and we are ready to admit 
generally the claim, accounting for it as before explained. 
Nevertheless, it behooves us to remember 

that the people of the past accomplished wonders without 
our modern appliances. For instance; the great 
pyramid at the delta of the Nile gives evidence of 
having been oriented in harmony with late astronomical 
deductions; and even in its mechanical structure 
implies a skill which causes modern architects 
and builders to wonder, when they find some of its 
immense stones so closely fitted at their joints that the 
dividing line is not thicker than a knife-blade. It is 
admitted that it is doubtful whether such immense 



stones could be raised and thus accurately placed in 

position even with the aid of modern mechanical appliances. 

We are not to forget, either, that some of 

the valuable arts of the past were so thoroughly lost 

that even with all our present-day enlightenment they 

have not yet been re-discovered: for instance, the process 

of manufacturing flexible glass; and the process 

of tempering steel which gave the swords of Damascus 

a world-wide fame for flexibility; and the process of 

tempering copper so as to render it useful for tools. 

And while considering these matters we are to remember 
that the Scriptures indicate not only that the 
Children of Israel became much degraded through their 
several centuries of bondage in Egypt, but also that 
among all the Gentiles there was a retrogression. This 
is particularly stated by the Apostle Paul in his letter 
to the Romans (1:21-28), where he points out that the 
degradation of the Gentile nations was not the result 
of their creation in a depraved condition, but resulted 
from their not choosing to retain the knowledge of 
God in their hearts— for which cause he gave them over, 
abandoned them to their own way, permitting them 
to hasten and to increase their degradation, so that to-day 
throughout the world there are some, indeed, 
sunken so low as to be only a few steps removed from 
the brute creation. 

A.— I thank you for this dissertation, but urge 
that you come directly to the point of my question now, 
and mention specifically the antagonism between the 
Bible and the Evolution theory. 

B.~ I will do so, and to begin with I call your attention 
to the Scriptural account of man's creation, as 
given in Genesis— that man was created, not as a microbe 
or protoplasm, nor one step removed from a 
monkey, but, as specifically stated,— "In the image of 
God created he him." Man was created a moral image 
of God (—not a physical image, because God is a spirit, 
while man is of another nature, human, fleshly, earthly). 
And this thought, of man's original perfection 
of being, is borne out by the context, which declares 
that God looked upon his creature with approval, seeing 
him to be "very good." It is borne out also by 
the general testimony of Scripture respecting God as a 
Master workman— "His work is perfect." (Deut. 32:4.) 
It is borne out by the statement of the Prophet, "Thou 
madest him [man, Adam] a little lower than the angels, 
thou crownedst him with glory and with honor 
[his moral likeness to his Creator]; thou didst set him 
over the works of thy hands,"— the beasts of the field, 
the fish of the sea and the fowl of heaven— "and didst 
make him ruler over them all"— giving to man the 
rulership, the dominion of the earth, with its lower 
orders of creation, in likeness of God's dominion over 
heavenly things. (Psa. 8:5,6.) It is borne out again 
by the statement of the Prophet, that God made man 
upright, but he sought out many inventions, and defiled 



himself.— Eccl. 7:29. 

Additional to all these evidences of man's condition, 
is the fact that he was placed on trial for eternal 
life. It is not supposable that an imbecile creature, 
one remove from a monkey, would be in a fit condition 
to be tried before the bar of Divine Justice for eternal 
life, with the assurance that he might live forever in 
the condition then enjoyed, provided he maintained it 
by obedience. Surely the fact of Adam's trial implies 
that his condition was then a good condition, that his 
abilities were then perfect abilities, and that his only 
lack was in experience, in the use of his good abilities 
and the knowledge which the use of those perfect abilities 
would bring. It would be thoroughly unreasonable, 
inconsistent with divine justice, and out of harmony 
with expression of the divine Word, to suppose 
the Lord would have given everlasting life to Adam, 
with the prospect of maintaining it forever, and with 
the risk of losing it forever, had he been but one remove 
from the brute creation, or had he been even as 
low as are the majority of mankind to-day. 

On the contrary, the facts that Adam is Scripturally 
termed a "son of God," and that he maintained 
that sonship and fellowship with God while in 
the Garden of Eden, prior to his transgression, and 
came under the penalty of death, with its concomitants, 

R2395 : page 350 

sickness and pain (the results of mental, moral and 
physical decay), assure us most unmistakably that the 
Almighty intended us to understand by this Genesis 
account of man's creation that man was created perfect, 
and that whatever has come upon the race since 
has been the result of transgressions against the divine 
commands— has been the penalty of sin. 

Furthermore, note the Scriptural consistency, for 
while the Apostle Peter tells us that "a day with the 
Lord is as a thousand years," Genesis tells us that the 
sentence upon Adam was that he should die "in the 
day" of his disobedience, and that he did die within the 
limits of that thousand-year day. Nevertheless, the 
record that the dying process in him lasted for nine 
hundred and thirty years fully corroborates and sustains 
the declaration that God's creation was perfect, and 
possess powers of vitality, mental and physical, which 
since have almost entirely disappeared— for the average 
of human life to-day does not exceed thirty-five years. 

This story of man's creation in the image of God, 
in sinlessness and perfection, the very reverse of the 
Evolution theory, is fully confirmed by all the testimony 

R2395 : page 351 

of the Old Testament. The Prophets pointed 

out the fallen condition of Israel and the world, and 



pointed forward to the coming of the Messiah as the 
only hope of relief and blessing. Our Lord himself 
was announced by his Forerunner, John the Baptist, 
as "The Lamb of God which taketh away the sin of 
the world." These declarations that there are sins of the 
world to be removed, and which would require the 
sacrificial death of Christ as the Lamb of God, a Messiah, 
a Deliverer, are in direct contradiction to the Evolution 
theory, which claims that man has been gradually 
and grandly climbing upward into the likeness of 
God. According to Evolution, there is no sin of the 
world, unless it be a sin to evolve, to progress, upward. 
According to Evolution also, the world needs 
no Redeemer, for as it could not be claimed to be a sin 
to progress upward to perfection, neither could it be 
claimed that man was a sinner while thus progressing 
upward, nor could it be claimed that Justice could require 
any redemption price for that which had not 
fallen from grace, but which was approaching more 
and more to the divine standard. 

At our Lord's first advent he found some Pharisees 
"who trusted in themselves that they were righteous;" 
and in reproving these he declared that he had not 
come to call the righteous, but sinners, to repentance: 
declaring also that those who feel themselves to be 
whole do not feel their need of a physician, but that 
he himself, nevertheless, is the Good Physician. The 
Evolution theory is in accord with the Pharisaical view 
of matters;— theorizing that it is progressing grandly 
upward it does not recognize the necessity for the great 
sin-offering which God has provided. 

Again, we remember that our Lord declared that 
he "came to seek and to save that which was lost." 
(Luke 19:10.) According to the Evolution theory 
nothing was ever lost, all that we have as a race is gain: 
according to this theory, therefore, our Redeemer's 
statement was worse than void of meaning— a falsehood. 
But from the Scriptural standpoint, as presented 
in Genesis, and confirmed by the Prophets and 
Apostles, the whole world was lost in father Adam; 
because when he came under the penalty of sin the impairment 
of his dying process extended to all his posterity 
as yet unborn,— according to the laws of his 
nature. From this standpoint our Lord's words are full 
of meaning. They mean that he came to recover Adam 
and all his race from the sentence of death, and to give 
to all an opportunity to attain eternal life through him. 

The Apostle Paul (Rom. 5:12-19) states this matter 
most forcefully. He places himself, as a teacher 
and expounder of the divine dealings with humanity, 
in absolute and direct opposition to the Evolution 
theory. He says: "By one man's disobedience sin 
entered into the world, and death by [as a result of] 
sin: and so death passed upon all men, in that all are sinners 
[inheritors of their father Adam's blemishes]." 
The significance of this clear statement is unmistakable. 



It tells us that there was no sin in the world 

prior to father Adam's transgression. It tells us that 

there was no death in our race until the divine sentence 

fell upon Adam as the penalty for his sin. It 

thus accords with Genesis, in showing us that father 

Adam in the image of God occupied an exalted position, 

and not a low and almost bestial condition, as 

the Evolution theory teaches. It teaches us that 

Adam fell from divine favor and lasting life (which 

the Apostle assures us was not through ignorance— 1 Tim. 2:14) 

into sin, alienation from God, and under 

the sentence of death, with its associated sickness, pain, 

decay and degradation: and hence that these evils are 

not our inheritance through poor workmanship on the 

part of the Creator, but are our inheritance by heredity, 

by reason of father Adam's transgression, disloyalty, 

disobedience to God. 

Nor does the Apostle leave the matter here, but 
pursuing the same thread of thought, he assures us 
that all hope of escape from this sentence of death, 
and this alienation from God, centers in Christ Jesus 
our Lord. He thus implies most distinctly that Evolution 
hopes are worse than useless, inasmuch as they 
would frustrate and make void the very faith in Christ 
and his redemptive work which is essential to the 
blessed condition of reconciliation with the Father. 

Notice now how the Apostle contrasts the first 
man, Adam, and his failure, and the blight which came 
through that failure upon all his posterity, with the 
faithfulness of "the man Christ Jesus" who bought us 
with his own precious blood, to release us from the 
Adamic penalty. He says, "As through one offence 
sentence came upon all men to condemnation [death]; 
so also through one righteous act, sentence came upon 
all men to justification of life. For as through the 
disobedience of one man the many were constituted sinners, 
even so through the obedience of the One [Jesus] 
the many will be constituted righteous,. ..that as 
sin reigned unto death, even so grace [favor] might 
reign unto eternal life, through righteousness, by Jesus 
Christ our Lord."— Rom. 5:18-21. 

In harmony with this same thought is the Apostle's 
expression in his letter to the Corinthians (1 Cor. 15:21,22), 
"Since through a man there is death, 
through a man also there is a resurrection of the dead; 
for as all in Adam die, even so all in Christ shall be 
made alive"— brought back from present dying, imperfect 
conditions to the perfection of life. 

Indeed, all the Scriptural statements— that "Christ 
died for our sins," that he "suffered, the just for the 
unjust, that he might bring us to God," that "God 
was in Christ reconciling the world unto himself, not 
imputing our trespasses unto us [but unto our substitute, 
our Redeemer]," that God "might be just, and 
yet be the justifier of them that believe in Jesus," that 
"he is the propitiation [satisfaction] for our sins, and 



not for ours only, but also for the sins of the whole 
world," and that "by his stripes we are healed"— all 
these and many other Scriptures of similar import, 
which will occur to your mind, most positively contradict 
the Evolution theory, and with equal positiveness 
uphold the Scriptural theory that man was originally 
created perfect, "upright," in God's image,— 
and that he fell from that exalted position into sin and 
degradation, mental and physical, from which he needs 
first to be ransomed with a corresponding price, and 
secondly to be saved or recovered to perfection of being 
and everlasting life. 

Have you ever read the Plan of the Ages— the first 
volume of the MILLENNIAL DAWN series? 

A.— I have not; altho I have in my library four 
volumes of the series which were presented to me by a 
dear Christian brother who seemed very solicitous that 
I should investigate their teachings. 

B.— Taking my own experience as a criterion, you 
have been missing a good thing. For while you might 
not at first or second reading agree with all of the 
author's presentations, it would be impossible for you 

R2395 : page 352 

to leave even the first volume without some increase 
of knowledge respecting the divine Word and character 
and plan of salvation. I assure you that the thoughts 
therein suggested have brought a great blessing to me, 
and a much greater reverence for the Bible than was 
before possible in my limited knowledge of it, and of 
the lengths and breadths, and heights and depths of 
the divine character and plan therein set forth. However 
little of it you may ultimately accept, I certainly 
urge upon you its careful investigation. 

The author begins with his subject at the very 
point to be desired by thinking minds: viz., an examination 
of the Scriptures themselves to see what proper 
claim they have as to credibility. In the light of the 
presentations therein made, I have a deeper love and 
reverence for the Bible as the Word of God than I 
ever before had, and was thoroughly forearmed against 
the form of modern infidelity known as "Higher Criticism." 
Otherwise the bold assertions of present-day 
scholarship, that Isaiah wrote nothing beyond the 
twenty-eighth chapter of the Bible-book which bears 
his name, and similar statements respecting other portions 
of the Word, might indeed have unsettled my 
confidence in its divine authorship and inspiration: but 
armed with the internal evidences of the truth of the 
Scriptures which MILLENNIAL DAWN presents, my 
faith can rest secure and unassailable. 

Now I can see that the claims of these worldly 
wise professors, Higher Critics,— that our Lord and 
the Apostles in their various quotations from the twenty-ninth 
chapter of Isaiah, and onward, erred in saying 



that they were written by Isaiah, whereas they were 

R2396 : page 352 

written by some other and unknown writer— these 

claims, so far from causing me now to lose confidence 

in the wisdom and inspiration of our Lord and the 

Apostles, and in general in the Bible, have quite a contrary 

effect: they cause me to utterly lose confidence 

in worldly wisdom, and the more firmly to rely on the 

wisdom which cometh from above, so that I am enabled 

to see in this very matter of "Higher Criticism" 

a fulfilment of Isaiah's prophecy, "The wisdom of their 

wise men shall perish."— Isa. 29:14. 

A.— I think myself that much of the boasted 
knowledge of self-styled higher critics is merely guesswork, 
and a desire to be highly esteemed amongst men 
for their erudition. Some of their startling claims furnish 
cheap advertising, and bring men into notoriety 
who would be little known in the world except for these 
extravagant and unsustained and frequently unsustainable 
pretentious claims,— assertions. 

B.— As we still have a little time before reaching 
your station, let me give you a little outline of the divine 
plan, as set forth in the book I mention— MILLENNIAL 
DAWN. As you are a Presbyterian I will first 
give you its presentations respecting the doctrine of Election, 
for I know that will be of special interest to you. 

A.— We Presbyterians are not preaching the doctrine 
of Election, nor holding it so stoutly as we used to do. 

B.~ Ah yes, I know— I know— not that you are 
disinclined to be elected, nor that you wish to drop that 
feature of it; but because the doctrine of an election 
implies the opposite doctrine of a non-elect class: and 
the theory that that elect class is a "little flock," composed 
only of the "saints," implies that the non-elect 
class is of terribly large proportions. The difficulty 
which confronts you is that neither your own hearts, 
nor the hearts of intelligent worldly people, can any 
longer countenance the thought that all the hundreds of 
millions of the non-elect were predestinated before their 
birth to an eternity of torment;— as the catechism puts it, 
"passed by" of the Lord, and not "elected to salvation." 

A.— Yes, there are difficulties, insurmountable 
difficulties there; and hence the matter is very rarely 
preached upon now. As you are probably aware, an 
effort was made to alter the statements of our Confession 
of Faith along these lines; but the majority did 
not favor a change, evidently fearing that any tampering 
might shake confidence in the Confession as a 
whole, and deprive the denomination of the prestige 
which attaches to others of its old, established and 
long revered dogmas. 

B.— Just so; and undoubtedly their course was 
worldlywise. But now, seeing these difficulties in the 
Calvinistic view of the doctrine of election, yet remembering 



that the Scriptures distinctly teach some kind of 
an election, you will be all the more interested in noticing 
what a beautiful doctrine it becomes under the light shed 
upon it by the book I mention-MILLENNIAL DAWN. 

It shows that there was an election during the 
Jewish age, by which that one nation, and it alone, 
was God's people, the recipient of his promises and 
providences, as says the Prophet Amos (3:2), "You 
only have I known [recognized] of all the families of 
the earth." The Apostle Paul also points this out, 
saying, "What advantage hath the Jew? Much every 
way, chiefly because to them were committed the oracles 
of God." (Rom. 3:1,2.) But the writer of MILLENNIAL 
DAWN points out that the Scriptures say 
nothing whatever respecting the damnation or eternal 
torment of the other non-elect nations outside of Israel. 
He points out, further, that there was a system of 
election in vogue to some extent before the Jewish age, 
viz., that Abraham was elected or chosen to be the 
father of the faithful; that his parents and relatives 
were not chosen, nor in any manner connected with 
him in his election; that even his friend and nephew, 
Lot, was debarred from any share in that election; 
that the elect line proceeded from Abraham, not to his 
firstborn son, Ishmael, but to his second son, Isaac, and 
that the same election proceeded through Isaac, not to 
his first-born son, Esau, but to his second-born, Jacob, 
surnamed Israel. The author of DAWN points out that 
the Scriptures say nothing whatever respecting a condemnation 
of Abraham's non-elect relatives and friends 
and children, but, on the contrary, mention some of 
them favorably, and promise them other blessings, outside 
the special line or purpose of the election. 

Our author proceeds to point out (and to cite 
abundant Scriptures in evidence) that the work of this 
Gospel age— the selection of the Gospel Church— is 
likewise in the nature of an election, in that God during 
this age is not attempting to bless the whole world, 
but merely certain portions of it,— not attempting to 
save the whole world, but merely to elect a Church, a 
"royal priesthood, a holy nation, a peculiar people," 
out of it. But he points out that no Scriptural statement 
either says or implies that all the remainder of 
mankind not thus elected during this Gospel age are to be 
damned and tormented forever, but quite to the contrary. 

A.— Some of those thoughts are decidedly good 
and helpful— but I am not prepared to endorse the 
thought that God has not been trying to save the world, 
during this Gospel age. 

B.— Yes, that thought strikes us peculiarly at first, 
because we have been inclined to decide for God what 
he is to do, and how and when he is to do it, instead 

R2396 : page 353 

of humbly admitting that no man, of his own wisdom, 



knows anything about the divine arrangements. Rather, 
we should humbly and teachably inquire at the 
divine oracle, respecting the divine program. 

The Lord declares through the Prophet, "My 
word that goeth forth out of my mouth shall not return 
unto me void, but it shall accomplish that which I please, 
and shall prosper in the thing whereto I sent it." (Isa. 55:11.) 
Since, therefore, "All his purposes shall be 
accomplished," and since we know it to be a fact that 
the Gospel has not in the past reached more than one-tenth 
of humanity, and even to-day reaches very few 
more than that proportion, it follows that if "All his 
purposes shall be accomplished," it cannot have been 
the divine purpose to have sent the Gospel message to 
every creature during this age,— thus far at least. 

A.— That is sound enough logic, and it is Scriptural, 
however it may conflict with our prejudices. But 
since the author you mention is such a stickler for the 
Scriptures, how does he account for the breadth of the 
Gospel commission, "Preach the Gospel to every creature," 
and for the Apostle's statement, "The Gospel 
which is preached to every creature under heaven?" 

B.— The answers are very satisfactory, I think 
you will admit: the author shows that as the Law was 
given to Israel alone, and not to the other nations, so 
the Gospel was preached "to the Jew first," and to 
the Jew only, up to the time that they rejected the 
Messiah and their national favor ended. This turning 
point is clearly marked in our Lord's words, "Now I 
say unto you, Your house is left unto you desolate." 
This statement was made just five days before his crucifixion, 
at which time his work took on its larger proportions; 
for our Lord Jesus died not only for Israel, 
—"to redeem those who were under the Law,"— but the 
value of his death extended beyond that people, as it 
is written, "Jesus Christ, by the grace of God, tasted 
death for every man." (Heb. 2:9.) And it was after 
he had thus "died for all" and had risen again, that he 
gave his disciples the broader commission for the Gospel, 
to which you have referred. Previously, when 
sending them out two and two to the cities of Israel, 
he said "Go not into the way of the Gentiles," and his 
declaration after his resurrection, viz., "Go ye into all 
the world and preach the Gospel," was meant to contradict 
their thought that the Gospel message was to 
be to the Jews only. He would have them understand 
that henceforth the message is for any member of the 
human family, because every member of it has been 
redeemed. Of similar import is the Apostle's statement, 
"This Gospel which is preached in all the world:" 
it is no longer a Gospel restricted to one nation of the 
world, but is open to any who have ears to hear and 
hearts to receive it— "even as many as the Lord your 
God shall call." 

A.— Even so, while accepting that as a satisfactory 
answer to my question, I cannot see that God is a 



"respecter of persons," and that there is any special 
election now in progress, even tho my church so teaches, 
and I have so confessed to believe. 

B.— Let us look at that point. I will voice the 
arguments of MILLENNIAL DAWN on this subject, and 
you shall tell me afterward whether or not they meet 
the question fully, broadly, satisfactorily. 

I call your attention to the fact that the Gospel 
light arose in Palestine, which lies at the juncture, we 
may say, of three continents— Europe, Asia and Africa. 
It would have been nearest to have sent the 
Gospel southward into Africa, to its benighted millions: 
but Africa still lies in darkness, touched with 
the light of truth only a little upon its northern borders. 
It would have been almost as near to have sent 
the Gospel light eastward to India's hundreds of millions, 
and into China with its hundreds of millions: 
but India and China have lain in darkness for eighteen 
centuries, except as little glimpses or flashes of the 
light of truth have reached them. Europe lay farther 
away, but to Europe, and through Europe to America, 
the Lord has been pleased to send the light of the Gospel, 
"A light to lighten the Gentiles." 

Nor are we to suppose that the coming of the Gospel 
light to these lands that have been so greatly blessed 
by it was a matter of chance or accident. Quite to the 
contrary, a few words recorded in the Acts of the Apostles (16:6,7) 
relating to the mission of the great 

Apostle to the Gentiles, St. Paul, show us unquestionably 
that the sending of the Gospel to Europe was of 
divine intention— predestination— choice or election. 
The narrative is that, while Paul and his company had 
purposed to go into Asia, the spirit suffered them not to 
do so, but providentially hindered their going; and while 
they were thus perplexed and seeking to know the 
mind of the Lord, the Apostle Paul had a dream in 
which he saw a man of Macedonia beckoning to him and 
saying, "Come over and help us." As a consequence 
of these divine providences, and gathering from them 
the Lord's will in the matter, the Apostle and his co-laborers 
at once proceeded to Macedonia, there beginning 
the preaching of the Gospel in Europe. When 
Paul returned to Palestine, and apparently with no 
thought of further prosecuting the work in Europe, 
divine providence permitted him to be arrested and sent 
a prisoner to Rome: and there the same divine providence 
held him a prisoner for a long time, but gave 
him sufficient liberty to preach the Gospel there for a 
number of years. It was from these providential lightings 
of the Gospel lamp in Europe that all the great 
blessings which have reached us proceeded. 

Now tell me, Do not these facts prove that divine 
providence has had much to do with the progress and 
direction of the lamp of truth?— Are they not a manifestation 
of divine election or selection? Mark you, I 
am following the hypothesis presented in MILLENNIAL 



DAWN, that the non-elect and non-enlightened are 
similarly and proportionately uncondemned. Nor am 
I claiming in this that God is a respecter of persons. 
It is quite another thing that God may have been, nay, 
evidently has been, a respecter of races, and has specially 
blessed and favored certain branches of the Aryan 
race in Europe and America. But the fact, that the 
white race has been more abundantly blessed with the 
light of the Gospel than others, is not to be understood 
to signify that when members of other races heard and 
appreciated the Gospel, they were repulsed or rejected 
by the Lord. This view is in full harmony with the 
suggestion that God is no respecter of persons, but that 
"In every land he that feareth God and worketh righteousness 
is accepted of him." In harmony with this, 
the author of MILLENNIAL DAWN holds that, while 
the elect Church will probably be composed chiefly of 
the highly favored white race, nevertheless, it will 
probably have in it representatives out of "every kindred, 
people and tongue." 

A.— The theory as you present it is certainly consistent 
at every point with the facts of history, and 
the statements of Scripture; and if our theological 

R2397 : page 354 

opinions have been at variance with these, it is high 
time for correction. 

B.— Let me interrupt myself to say that the author 
of MILLENNIAL DAWN, in harmony with your last expression, 
claims that his presentations are not the result 
of superior wisdom or ability on his part; but are 
discernible now because God's "due time" for their 
unfoldment to his people has come. He points out 
that we are now in "the Time of the End," spoken of 
in Daniel's prophecy, and evidenced by the running to 
and fro and general increase of knowledge. He holds 
that the unfolding of spiritual and Scriptural truths 
is also referred to in that prophecy, in the statement 
that "The wise shall understand." He is particular, 
moreover, to distinguish between the wisdom of 
this world (much of which is at this time to be proved 
foolishness) and the wisdom from above; and holds 
that the truly wise are those humble ones who are willing 
to be "taught of God" through the Scriptures. 

A.— Consistency certainly marks all the features 
of the theory you are presenting; and I am glad to see 
that the author of MILLENNIAL DAWN takes so humble 
a view of his own work, ascribing the merit and 
the wisdom of what he presents to the great fountain 
of wisdom, Jehovah himself; but proceed with the outline, 
please, for we are nearing my station. 

B.— Our author holds that the election of the 
Church, which is progressing during the present or 
Gospel age, is by the Heavenly Father, Jehovah, tho 
through his Son, our Lord Jesus. He quotes our 



Lord's statement, "No man can come unto me, except 

the Father which sent me draw him," and applies it 

and limits it to the present age, and to this selection 

or election of the Church,— variously called the Body 

of Christ, the Bride of Christ, the Royal Priesthood, 

etc. He then quotes the words of our Lord Jesus, "I, 

if I be lifted up, will draw all men unto me" (John 12:32), 

and applies this to a future age— the Millennial 

age— in which Christ and the glorified Gospel 

Church (in the glory of the heavenly condition and 

power) shall both rule and bless the world of mankind, 

and bring back into harmony with God and to human 

perfection all who will then accept God's grace, eternal 

life under the conditions of the New Covenant. 

Thus seen, the election of the Church, so far from 

meaning a damnation of the non-elect, implies a future 

blessing for the world of mankind in general (the non-elect), 

in that a favorable opportunity for attaining eternal 

life will be granted to all. 

A.— But I see several objections. Let me put them 
to you. Wherein would be the consistency of first 
making an election from amongst the world, and subsequently 
dealing with all the remainder in exactly the same manner? 

B.--I see your difficulty, which arises from the 
fact that I am endeavoring to state the great divine 
plan very briefly, whereas really what I am telling you 
fills four volumes. To answer your objection: Our 
author shows most clearly, fortifying every point with 
Scriptural texts and citation, that the elect Gospel 
Church is called to a "heavenly calling," to a change 
of nature,— from human nature, a little lower than the 
angels in its perfection, to be partakers of the divine 
nature, far above angels, principalities and powers. 
But very different from this will be the blessing which 
God will offer to mankind in general, through the 
elect Church, during the Millennial age, viz., an offer 
of restitution. One of his proof texts on this subject 
I remember is Acts 3: 19-23. Here the Apostle Peter, 
speaking on the day of Pentecost, under inspiration, 
refers to the second coming of Christ, and the blessings 
which then shall come to the world in general. He 
refers to the complete Christ (Jesus the Head and 
the Church his Body) as the antitype of Moses, the 
Lawgiver, declaring that this Great Lawgiver then 
raised up in power and authority over the whole world 
shall bless those who will hear and obey him, and shall 
destroy in the second death all who will not then obey 
him. And the Apostle speaks of this period of the reign 
of the glorified Christ (Head and Body) as "the times 
of restitution of all things which God hath spoken by the 
mouth of all the holy prophets since the world began." 

Restitution is the blessing which God has in store 
for mankind in general,— for all who shall gladly accept 
this blessing at the hands of the Redeemer when 
the due time shall come for it to be offered to them. 
And by accepting it, we mean accepting the then to 



be proffered blessing of restitution upon the terms or 

conditions of obedience which will accompany the offer. 

The word restitution is simple enough and easily understood: 

it signifies neither more nor less than a return 

to primeval conditions. Those who shall ultimately receive 

at the Lord's hands this blessing of restitution to 

the full, will have gotten fully back into the divine 

favor, and fully free from all the blemishes and imperfections 

of humanity which have tainted the entire 

race to putrefaction. It will mean, therefore, not only 

physical health, strength and perfection, but also mental 

and moral ability restored. In a word, it will mean 

a return to that moral image and likeness of God in 

which Father Adam was created, and from which he 

fell, and we by him under the law of heredity. 

The author claims that as God had already created 
various orders of spirit beings before creating man, 
he determined that as a further exercise of his creative 
power, he would make an earthly creature in his own 
likeness, and put him in possession of the earth for 
his home, adapting him constitutionally to it, and providing 
the earth with various orders of animals, also 
adapted to it, and placing man as lord of earth in 
charge, subject, however, to Jehovah as his Overlord. 
He points out that the intrusion of sin was not unforeseen 
by divine wisdom, and that its permission for six 
thousand years has not in any degree altered the original 
divine purpose; and that, consequently, when the time 
shall come, there shall be no more dying, no more sighing, 
no more crying, because the former things will 
have passed away (Rev. 21:4); the condition of things 
which will be permitted to remain, and that to all eternity, 
will be— this earth, a Paradise, fully peopled with 
a human race, who, through knowledge and experience 
shall have learned to know their Lord and Creator, 
and to have absolute confidence in his wisdom, 
his love, his justice and his power, having learned that 
his ways are ways of pleasantness, and all his paths are 
peace;— a race which shall have passed through experiences 
and tests which will have destroyed from 
amongst it all who in any degree are in sympathy with 
unrighteousness; leaving only those who shall, of their 
own free will, delight to do the will of the Father who 
is in heaven. 

He points out that in the divine plan God, foreseeing 
and not preventing Adam's disobedience, and thus the 
entrance of sin and death into the world, decided to utilize 
that evil for the special trial, testing, proving, of an 
elect Church, whose members, by a change of nature, 

R2397 : page 355 

will pass from being men, a little lower than the angels, 
to be new creatures of the divine nature, far above 

R2398 : page 355 



angels in glory and power. Calling these to so very 

high exaltation, even his own divine nature, "to glory, 

honor and immortality," it is appropriate that they 

shall first be subjected to crucial tests, as to obedience 

to the Father, and be perfected for that new nature 

through sufferings and disciplines, otherwise described 

as presenting their bodies living sacrifices, holy and acceptable 

to God through Christ and the merit of his 

sacrifice. It is for this reason that the Gospel Church 

is called during the present age, while sin abounds and 

the prince of this world, Satan, is permitted to have 

much power through those who possess his spirit. 

Those who would make their calling and election sure 

to a place in this Heavenly Kingdom, as heirs of God 

and joint-heirs with Jesus Christ their Lord, are required 

to show their fidelity, their love, by such zeal 

for God and for righteousness during the present time, 

when sin prevails, as will surely imply to them self-sacrifice 

—the sacrifice of human interests. It is this 

class, now being called, that is required to walk in the 

"narrow way." The way is narrow, because of the 

prevalence and power of sin in the world: and this is 

permitted of God in order to thus test the elect Church 

"whose names are written in heaven— regardless of 

earthly denominational lines and systems. 

On the contrary, as our author points out, the 
Scriptures everywhere indicate that the Millennial age, 
in which the world will have blessings from him, will 
be a period of blessing, of refreshment, of restitution, 
when "the Sun of Righteousness shall arise with healing 
in his beams," and "all the knowledge of the Lord 
shall fill the whole earth as the waters cover the great 
deep;" because "all shall know him, from the least unto 
the greatest." 

We get, in the words of the Psalmist, the strong 
contrast distinguishing between the present age when 
evil holds sway, and the coming age, when the Lord 
our righteousness shall assume control of the world, 
establishing his Church with himself in glory as the 
Kingdom of God; comparing the Gospel age to a night, 
to be followed by a morning of light and blessing, he 
says, "Weeping may endure for a night, but joy cometh 
in the morning." (Psa. 30:5.) Again, the Scriptures 
represent that the Millennial age will be introduced 
by the binding of all evil influences represented 
by Satan, that the world may no longer be deluded, 
deceived, misguided by Satan and his servants, willing 
or ignorant.— See Rev. 20:1-3. 

A.— Your presentations have given me considerable 
to think about, dear brother, and have answered 
several of my objections. And this thought of restitution 
being the Lord's promise for the obedient of the 
world of mankind, which Peter declares is more or less 
the theme of all the holy prophets since the world began, 
certainly deals a death-blow to my Evolution theory: 



for nothing can be plainer than the inference that 
the restitution to be inaugurated at the second coming 
of Christ is in the nature of a blessing to mankind, a 
great blessing, whereas, if the Evolution theory be in 
any sense of the word true, restitution would be the 
worst thing that could possibly happen to poor humanity. 
If our race began life as a protoplasm, or even as 
one step removed from monkeys, "restitution" would 
signify a loss of all that Evolution claims has been 
gained in human development: it would mean his return 
to bestial conditions— an injury, an evil, a curse. 

I see clearly, as I never saw before, that we must 
decide between this human Evolution theory, and the 
teachings of the divine Word. And as one result of 
our conversation I feel my old love and reverence for 
the Bible springing up again— indeed more than I ever 
had, because I am seeing new beauties, yea, grandeurs 
in it, of which I had never dreamed. I now begin to 
appreciate the Apostle's expression respecting the 
lengths and the breadths, the heights and the depths of 
the love of God, which passeth all human understanding. 

B.— I am glad to hear you thus express yourself; 
and glad to tell you that you but echo the sentiments 
of my own heart and mind: and I urge that you begin 
at once, not merely a reading, but a systematic study, 
of these books which you say you have in your library. 
But before we part let me mention another point of 
their teaching, viz., that the seed of Abraham meant 
the larger Christ,— not Christ Jesus our Lord merely 
(altho all the merit of salvation is fully accorded to 
him, and his sacrifice), but also his redeemed, called, 
chosen and faithful followers of this Gospel age are 
members of this Seed of Abraham. This is supported 
by Gal. 3:16,29. The latter verse declares that, since 
we belong to Christ (as the bride belongs to the bridegroom; 
or, as the body belongs to the head of the body 
by which it is directed and represented), we are thus 
and therefore members of this promised Seed of Abraham, 
and heirs of the promise made to that Seed. 

That promise, you will remember, reads, "In thy 
seed shall all the families of the earth be blessed." 
There can be no question that the promise has never 
yet been fulfilled, and that it never can be fulfilled except 
through such a resurrection and restitution process 
as our author points out;— for all the families of 
the earth include not only the living families, but all 
who have ever lived, from Abraham's day to the present 
time, the vast majority of whom have gone down 
into the great prison-house of death, without the slightest 
blessing or enlightenment; and without any hope 
except as it is contained in this promise— that in due 
time the whole world of mankind, justly brought back 
from under the death penalty, shall be blessed with an 
opportunity of return to divine favor and the attainment 
of everlasting life, by God's grace, operating 
through the elect Church, Head and Body .—Rom. 11:31. 



A.— This is certainly a grand hope for the world, 
as well as a glorious prospect for the elect Church. How 
strange it seems that Bible students for so long have 
overlooked these gloriously bejeweled promises! 

B.— "In due time" is the secret which explains the 
entire matter. We are to remember, too, brother, that 
the six thousand years of earth's experiences with evil 
seem long to us because of the brevity of our lives and 
present conditions: from God's standpoint, as the Apostle 
points out, a thousand years are but as yesterday, 
or even as a watch in the night, after it is past. The 
night of sin has only had six watches after this measurement, 
and the morning of everlasting righteousness 
and blessing is just about to dawn. 

A.— Another question: How about the Day of 
Judgment? What and when will that be? 

B.— Our author shows conclusively from the 
Scriptures that it is not one of our days of twenty-four 
hours, but "a day with the Lord"— a thousand years: 
that it will be the thousand years of Christ's reign,— 
the Millennium. During that Day of Judgment the 
world will be on trial or on judgment for eternal life, 
as we, the called out ones of this Gospel age, are now 

R2398 : page 356 

on judgment or on trial; only that our trial is, as already 
pointed out, severer, along a narrow "way." 
The Apostle distinctly tells us that we, the Church, 
shall not come into condemnation (trial or judgment) 
with the world in the next age, but pass now from 
death to life, before the world's day of judgment begins. 
(John 5:24; 1 Cor. 11:32.) He also declared-"God hath 
appointed a [future] day, in the which he will judge 
[grant trial to] the world, in righteousness"— by Christ. 
And he distinctly tells us that when the world of mankind 
will be on trial (during the Millennial age), the 
overcoming elect Church then in glory, partakers of 
the divine nature, glory, honor and immortality, will 
be the judges of the world, associated with their Lord. 
He says,— "Know ye not that the saints shall judge 
the world?"— 1 Cor. 6:2. 

A.— And what about the finally impenitent at the 
close of the Millennial age, and those who in this age 
sin against the holy spirit? What will be their doom? 

B.— God's law changes not. As it was expressed 
to Adam, and executed against him, so it still stands 
the same to-day— "The wages of sin is death." (Rom. 6:23.) 
The prophet, speaking of the Millennial age, 
declares that then none shall die for inherited sins, as 
all die now, but that it will be an individual trial, with 
an individual penalty against all who shall then sin 
wilfully. His declaration is, "The soul that sinneth, 
it shall die." He reminds us of the proverb now in 
general application, viz., "The fathers ate a sour grape 
[sin], and the children's teeth are set on edge [all of 



Adam's posterity are fallen, depraved, dying, as a result 

of his transgression];" but assures us that this 

shall not be true in the next age. None will die except 

for his own personal wilful sin. God willeth not 

the death of him that dieth, but would that all should 

turn unto him and live.— Ezek. 18:23,32; 2 Pet. 3:9. 

The Apostle, speaking of wilful sinners, declares 
that they "shall be punished with everlasting destruction 
from the presence of the Lord and from the glory 
of his power." Whoever will not have God's gift of 
eternal life through Jesus Christ our Lord, cannot have 
life at all, for "All the wicked will God destroy."— 
Psa. 145:20. 

A.— What then about hell, purgatory, etc., so 
generally believed throughout Christendom? 

B.— The general view is a great and serious error 
which has done much to hinder many of earth's best 
minds from careful consideration of the Word of God; 
because they believed the Bible to teach the God-dishonoring 
doctrine that the majority of his creatures, 
with his foreknowledge, consent and predetermination, 
would be eternally tormented. The simple teaching 
of the Scripture is terrible enough, without depraved 
human embellishments of flame and agony indescribable. 
The great hell to which the entire human family 
was consigned because of sin is the great prison-house 

R2399 : page 356 

of death,— the tomb. The wages of sin is death; 

and there would have been no resurrection, no future 

life, except for our Lord's great sacrifice on our behalf. 

Christ ransomed or bought us with his own life— he 

died for our sins and thus secured for man legal privilege 

to be resurrected, restored. Thus it is written, 

"I will ransom them from the grave."— Hosea 13:14. 

You are probably aware that the word translated 
"hell" in our Old Testament Scriptures is in Hebrew 
sheol, and signified the death state, and never in any 
sense or use of the word a place or condition of torture. 
You probably have noticed also that the same Hebrew 
word has been translated still more frequently "grave" 
and "pit,"— much nearer its correct signification in 
our language. You have also noticed that the word 
hades of the New Testament Greek is the exact equivalent 
of the Hebrew word sheol, and is always used to 
translate it wherever a passage is quoted in the New 
Testament. Hades, therefore, signifies the same as 
sheol, viz., the tomb or the death state. In the New 
Testament the word tartarus occurs once, descriptive 
of the place or condition in which the fallen angels are 
reserved, waiting for their trial in the Millennial age 
(for the glorified Church is to grant them also a trial 
forlife).-lCor. 6:3. 

The only other Greek word of the New Testament, 
translated "hell," is the word gehenna, which, as all 



scholars recognize, is applied in our Lord's parables to 
the Valley of Hinnom, outside the city of Jerusalem, 
where the offal of the city was destroyed. It was used 
as a symbol of the Second Death, in which all found 
unworthy of life shall be destroyed from amongst men 
as offal. But I will take pleasure in sending to you 
gratis a little tract, bearing upon this subject, entitled, 
Do the Scriptures Teach that Eternal Torment is the 
Wages of Sin? It points out various misconceptions 
and misinterpretations of our Lord's parables, and of 
the Book of Revelation, in which alone anything is 
found which has even a semblance of teaching eternal 
torment. The punishment of sin is death, and it will 
be an everlasting punishment in that there will be no 
resurrection from the Second Death. 

A.— But will there be no future retribution of any 
sort for evil deeds, etc., of the present life? 

B.— Oh, decidedly yes! Future retribution is distinctly 
taught in the Scriptures, but no punishment 
that will be hopeless except the punishment of deliberate, 
wilful sin, the Second Death. All other punishment 
will be reformatory in its character and tendency. 

The Roman Catholic doctrine of purgatory is evidently 
a corruption or perversion of the Scriptural 
teaching respecting a future retribution during the Millennial 
age, which will be not merely a time of blessing, 
but also a time of retribution. All wilful sins 
against light and much knowledge will receive stripes 
in proportion to their wilfulness, and the light and 
knowledge sinned against. Every such transgression 
undermines character and debases the individual, and 
in the Millennial age each will come forth from the 
tomb in the moral condition in which he entered: hence 
he will have that much more of a journey before him 
as he shall attempt to "go up" on the highway of holiness 
—to return into full harmony with God. And his 
corrections in righteousness, his chastisements, his 
stripes, will be proportionately more than those who 
now, equally vile, were ignorant of the will of God, 
and hence did not violate knowingly nor undermine 
their consciences and characters. 

A.— Grand! Sublimely grand! Reasonable, just, 
good, loving!— yet just what we should expect of him 
who declares, "My thoughts are not as your thoughts, 
nor my ways as your ways, saith the Lord, for as the 
heavens are higher than the earth, so are my thoughts 
higher than your thoughts, and my ways higher than 
your ways." Thank God that I have met you, dear 
brother, and that you so kindly, yet pointedly and 
forcefully have brought to my attention the fact that 
I was on the wrong track, and was fast losing whatever 
portion I ever had of the Gospel of the cross of 
Christ, and was laying hold upon a false gospel of 

R2399 : page 357 



Evolution, which is not another gospel, but merely a 
theory, a human speculation, and as I now see it, radically 
in opposition to the divine revelation. This is 
my station. Good bye! I must preach this fuller Gospel. 

B.— Good bye! I am glad to hear you say that you 
will preach the true Gospel, of which the Apostle Paul 
said that he was not ashamed. (Rom. 1:16.) And, my 
brother, let me assure you that if you fulfil this resolve 
it will doubtless mean that you are thus making your 
calling and election sure to a place in the elect Church. 

A.— How so? Is the Kingdom the reward of preaching? 

B.— Not exactly; the Kingdom is the reward of 
faithfulness to the Lord through evil and through good 
report— the reward of becoming dead with him to the 
world— the reward of suffering for righteousness' sake 
—the reward of laying down our lives for the brethren. 
All the brethren are preachers— declarers of the whole 
counsel of God to the extent that they have learned it 
and have ability and opportunities for presenting it to 
others. This is their duty as well as their joyful privilege 
now, as it will be, under more favorable conditions 
in the next age— telling the whole world of the privilege 
of reconciliation to God, through the blood of the cross. 

But what I meant in your case is this: and I mention 
it to forearm you, and to strengthen you when 
the trial time shall come. While your heart is burning 
with the love of the Lord and the grandeur of his 
plan of salvation, you fondly hope that your brethren 
in the ministry, and Christian people everywhere, will 
receive the message of divine love which unlocks the 
Word of God, and is now "meat in due season:" you 
even anticipate that they will receive it with joy and 
gladness. But you are mistaken, dear brother. Only 
comparatively few have ears to hear the truth, or eyes 
to discern the real beauties of the exceeding great and 
precious promises of the Scriptures. 

To your surprise, they will not only reject these 
"good tidings of great joy which shall be to all people," 
as was announced at our Savior's birth, and prefer 
the horrible inconsistencies received through tradition 
of the fathers, and utterly antagonistic to every 
proper idea of justice and love and goodness,— but 
more than this, so blinded are they by prejudice that 
they will hate you, just as the Jews hated our Lord 
and the Apostles in the end of their age, because they 
announced the truths of the Gospel then being ushered 
in. Remember our Lord's words, "Marvel not 
if the world hate you. Ye know that it hated me before 
it hated you." "Whosoever shall live godly in 
this present time shall suffer persecution." 

The Master of our house was called Beelzebub, 
and we must not hope to be treated more kindly. Remember, 
too, that it was the nominal professors of the 
Jewish Church that opposed the Gospel, and that parallel 
requires that it should be the nominal professors 
of the Gospel Church that will oppose the Gospel of 



the Millennial Kingdom. But, dear brother, be faithful 
to the Lord and to his truth and he will be faithful 
to you, and eventually say, "Well done, good and 
faithful servant, enter thou into the joys of thy Lord." 
Remember, too, if you want further reading matter 
along these lines, and tracts for distribution, to address 
the WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY, at 
Allegheny, Pa. Good bye! 



LATEST VIEWS OF EVOLUTIONISTS. --Prof. Japp, 
a distinguished biologist, has expressed as his latest 
conclusion that the decided difference between organic 
and inorganic molecules precludes the possibility of 
the spontaneous evolution of life. 

Herbert Spencer, in Nature (Oct. 20th), discussing 
the same question, declares as his latest opinion 
that "Life is incomprehensible." 



R2400 : page 357 

FIGHTING AGAINST GOD. 

-DEC. 11. -JER. 36:20-32.- 

"The word of our God shall stand forever."— Isa. 40:8. 

JEREMIAH prophesied in the days of Josiah and 

of his four successors, Jehoahaz, Jehoiakim, 

Jehoiachin and Zedekiah. He was of about the same 

age as Josiah, and seems not to have been seriously ill-treated 

by that reformer: altho, as noted in our last lesson, 

he was passed by when the king sought heavenly 

counsel respecting the Book of the Law and the turning 

away of the penalties for sin therein recorded. 

Jeremiah's position was a peculiarly trying one, for 
altho his prophesying evidently had a marked effect and 
greatly influenced the king and the princes and the 
people in cleansing the land of its idolatry and in reestablishing 
the worship of Jehovah, yet he was not permitted 
to compliment the people on these measurable 
reforms, and to promise them a return of divine favor, 
as did the false prophets of that time, and was considered 
unpatriotic. On the contrary, under the Lord's 
inspiration, he kept pointing out to Israel the flagrant 
sins of the past, and their natural tendency to leave the 
Lord and to follow other gods in idolatry. Under various 
pictures he represents Israel as wholly indifferent 
to the Lord's goodness of the past, wholly negligent of 
the covenant relationship entered into with him as a 
nation, except when they got into adversity, when their 
repentance would be but for a short time, and only from 
the selfish motive of desire to escape the troubles which 



their own course had brought upon them. 

The Lord's messages, at the mouth of Jeremiah, 
practically held out no hope for a permanent return of 
divine favor in the near future; but on the contrary predicted 
that Judah would be carried away captive as Israel 
(the ten tribes), her sister, had been. And as tho 
emphasizing this thought, the Lord declared to Jeremiah, 
"Tho Moses and Samuel stood before me, yet my 
mind could not be [changed] toward this people: cast 
them out of my sight."— J er. 15:1-7. 

Thus Jeremiah was what would be esteemed a 
prophet of evil— a pessimist. It is not surprising, therefore, 
that in his obedience to the Lord, in his faithfulness 
in speaking forth the word of the Lord, he became greatly 
disesteemed of his fellow countrymen, who doubtless 
would have honored him highly, had he prophesied 
unto them smooth things, promises of coming blessings 
and greatness as a nation. Thus we see that Jeremiah 
had not only the opposition of the idolatrously disposed 
people of the kingdom, but the disfavor also of the reformers 
of his day, who thought indeed that they were 
doing a grand work, and should be complimented thereon, 
and should have messages of divine favor. 

We cannot avoid noting the remarkable similarity 

R2400 : page 358 

of Jeremiah's position to that of the Lord's people to-day, 
who are enlightened with the present truth, and 
who, as the messengers of God, declare this truth. 
Similarly these note with pleasure the fact that there are 
many great reforms in progress at the present time, in 
Christendom. Nevertheless, they are obliged to speak 
from the divine standpoint, "He that hath my word let 
him speak my word." (Jer. 23:28.) And in thus speaking 
the word of the Lord they oppose and contradict 
the many fanciful dreams of present day reformers who 
are vainly hoping that as a result of civilization and 
through human efforts, and especially those of their 
party, all the promised blessings are about to flow to 
the world of mankind, and thus by human efforts establish 
righteousness in the earth, and bless all the heathen. 

The Lord's faithful mouthpieces of to-day, Jeremiah-like, 
are obliged to contradict these fanciful dreams, 
and to point out that they are unreasonable as well as 
unscriptural— that much of the present-day progress, 
civilization, benevolence and loving-kindness of Christendom 
is only an outward veneer, a drawing near to 
the Lord with the lips, and in some of the outward 
forms of conduct, while the hearts of Christendom are 
far from him, and far from the law of the New Covenant 
—perfect love toward God and toward the neighbor. 

The Jeremiah class of to-day is obliged to point out 
that all the various efforts being put forth for the conversion 
of the world will never bring the desired result, 
"Thy Kingdom come, thy will be done on earth as it is 



done in heaven;" but that on the contrary the increase 
of the earth's population is far more than keeping pace 
with the increase of even nominal Christian Church 
membership, so that, as someone has reckoned recently 
(basing the calculation upon the various censuses from 
1833 to the present time), at the present rate of increase 
of the non-Christian world over the professedly Christian 
world, Christianity would entirely disappear from 
the earth within seven hundred years. The estimate 
shows a loss of about one per cent, every ten years. 

And as Jeremiah was, in faithfulness to the Lord, 
bound to proclaim the coming overthrow of the kingdom, 
so the Lord's people of the present time who have 
his word of present truth, cannot disguise or withhold 
the fact that a great time of trouble is approaching— is 
nigh, even at the door— and that it will mean the complete 
obliteration of the present order of things in anarchy. 
On this account we are esteemed by many to be 
pessimists, and prophesiers of evil things only; our opponents, 
in their bitterness, entirely overlooking and 
ignoring the fact that we present at the same time and 
from the same Word of the Lord the most glorious optimism 
conceivable— and show most clearly that the 
approaching time is merely the precursor of the great 
blessing which God has promised shall come to all the 
families of the earth, not through the imperfect powers 
of fallen men, but through the perfect powers of our 
glorious Lord and his glorified Church, his Bride, who 
will then be with him, his joint-heir in the Kingdom. 

The method by which the Lord communicated his 
message to and through Jeremiah and the other Old 
Testament prophets is not distinctly set forth in the 
Scriptures; except that the Apostle Peter declares that 
they "spoke and wrote as they were moved by the holy 
spirit." Many Bible students overlook this fact, and 
hence attempt to explain the peculiar predictions, etc., 
of the prophets, as tho they were their own thoughts, 
the results of their own reasonings, expressions of their 
own views, or opinions. Quite to the contrary, they 
were God's views, God's expressions, and God's illustrations; 
and the prophets merely did, spoke and wrote 
what the Lord directed. The only wilfulness of the 
prophets, as we may understand it, was that they willingly 
gave themselves up to the Lord, thus to be his 
mouthpieces: the Lord would not take as his mouthpiece 
and prophet an unwilling, inharmonious person. 

To our understanding, the Lord spoke to these 
prophets of olden time much after the manner in which 
the evil spirits now speak to spiritualist mediums— 
"clairaudiently." In other words, we believe that the 
fallen angels, personating the dead, make use of certain 
channels of human nature, which in time past God 
made use of in communicating the truth to his prophets.* 
As a guard upon this point, however, let us remember 
that God no longer speaks to his people in this way, 
but has closed the canon of his revelation by speaking 



"unto us through his Son" and his specially commissioned 
and empowered apostles.— Heb. 1:1,2. 

Our present lesson is located in the days of King 
Jehoiakim, the son of Josiah. Jeremiah had been restrained 
of the liberty which he possessed during the 
lifetime of King Josiah, the reformer, and altho not imprisoned 
was apparently forbidden to address the people 
in public. He therefore adopted (doubtless at the divine 
instance) the method of having a scribe take down 
his prophecy in writing, and Baruch was the one found 
worthy of this service, altho he well knew that it meant 
the loss of the king's favor and the putting of himself 
on the unpopular side of an unpopular matter. After 
Baruch had written the prophecy respecting Jerusalem, 
declaring its utter overthrow at the hands of Nebuchadnezzar, 
etc., he (as the representative of Jeremiah, who 
was not permitted to teach) entered into the court of the 
Temple and read the prophecy in the hearing of all the 
people, who came there to worship. Some heard with 
interest and astonishment, and as a result the prophecy 
was brought to the attention of the king, peradventure 
he, as the representative of the people, might take some 
steps toward repentance, which might save the people 
from some of the disaster, even tho as a whole it might 
not be prevented. When the king heard respecting the 
matter he was curious to hear it also, but he became so 
incensed and indignant at what he considered the extreme 
improbability of the prophecy that, taking the 
scribe's knife, he cut the manuscript into small pieces 
and burned it in the fire before him. 

Jeremiah's God-directed course may serve as a lesson 
to God's people of to-day, who have "present truth" 
to present. Their message is to be delivered, and if they 
are hindered or restrained or forbidden to speak it in the 
temple (in the nominal churches), they should adopt 
some other method of presenting their message to the 
attention of those who are seeking to worship the Lord. 
They may do this either by the written or the printed 
message. As a result, the right ones will hear, and yet 
when the knowledge of the present condition is brought 
to the attention of those in power, they will be similarly 
disrespectful to the message, and skeptical respecting 
its divine authority. They may even attempt to destroy 
the printed page, or hinder its circulation, but the attempt 
will be futile, as it was in the case under consideration. 

Amongst those who were present at the destruction 
of the Lord's message by the king, three only offered 
any protest, and they manifested no indignation, no 



*See What Say the Scriptures About Spiritualism?— 10c, this office. 
R2401 : page 358 
sorrow, but merely advised in a worldly-wise way that 



the king be not too rash. So there are to-day those who 

R2401 : page 359 

have some interest in present truth, some knowledge respecting 

it, and who, nevertheless, for fear of their influence 

in worldly-church and political circles would do 

no more than advise a more liberal course. Meantime, 

realizing the king's attitude of heart and opposition to 

the message, Jeremiah and Baruch fled and hid themselves, 

or, as expressed in the lesson, "The Lord hid 

them"— prevented their royal enemy from finding them. 

We shall not be greatly surprised if in the not very distant 

future not only the message of present truth will be considerably 

in disrepute before those in high positions, but 

also its servants and promulgators: these also may need 

to hide from injustice, but the Lord is able to shield them. 

The king may have thought that he had utterly 
wiped out the Lord's message and annulled it when he 
burned the roll, but the result was quite to the contrary. 
At the Lord's instance Jeremiah prepared another manuscript 
containing the same prophecy, and with additional 
matter, and the king brought upon himself additional 
trouble, as a punishment for his contumacy. 

It is still possible to endeavor to destroy God's 
Word, tho all such efforts will fail: the Word of God 
will eventually triumph. It may be attempted variously: 

(1) By rejecting the Word of God, the Bible— perverting 
its statements and ridiculing them. 

(2) By speaking of its truths irreverently and connecting 
them with funny stories, and thus vitiating its 
influence upon speaker and hearers. 

(3) By neglecting it, leaving it unread, unstudied. 

(4) By forbidding people to read the Bible, or even 
by limiting or hindering Scriptural investigation. 

(5) By persecuting those who preach and teach it 
conscientiously because their interpretations are contrary. 

(6) By misrepresenting the Word of God, substituting 
for its teachings the traditions of men— hymnbook 

and creed theology, misrepresenting it to be Bible 
theology— and thus misrepresenting God's character and 
plan, while professedly serving him, honoring his Word. 

(7) By skipping over and ignoring certain teachings 
of the Scriptures, because they do not harmonize with 
preconceived opinions and preferences, as on election, 
free grace, the Second Death, etc., etc. 

All of these are modern methods of fighting against God, 
sure to bring punishments— darkness, divine disfavor. 



R2401 : page 359 

THE HOLY LAND DESOLATED. 
-DEC. 18.-JER. 52:1-11.- 



"Ye shall seek me and find me, when ye shall 
search for me with all your hearts."— Jer. 29:13. 

MORE than a thousand years had elapsed from 

the time God led Israel out of Egypt to be 

his covenanted people, and during that entire period 

they had been rebellious. While manifesting toward 

them his favor, it had been accompanied with chastisements, 

defeats in battle, captivity to surrounding nations, 

pestilence and drouth, intermingled. God had 

faithfully kept his part of the covenant during all that 

time, chastising them for unfaithfulness, nevertheless 

in great mercy hearkening to their repentance and promise 

of reform, and delivering them, and blessing them. 

Now the time had come to give them a more severe lesson 

than they had ever previously had, and to take 

away their national independence completely. 

The Lord's determination, as expressed through 
the Prophet Jeremiah, was that he would deliver them 
into the hands of Nebuchadnezzar, and that the land 
should lie desolate for seventy years, and that their 
King Zedekiah should be the last one who would sit 
upon the typical throne of the Lord. The prophecy 
concerning these matters was most explicit, declaring, 
"Thou profane and wicked prince of Israel, whose day 
is come when iniquity shall have an end, thus saith the 
Lord God, Remove the diadem, and take off the crown: 
this shall not be the same: exalt him that is low [humble] 
and abase him that is high [proud]. I will overturn, 
overturn, overturn it, and it shall be no more, 
until he come whose right it is; and I will give it him." 
-Ezek. 21:25. 

The Lord dealt with Israel tenderly, carefully, giving 
them every opportunity to learn the needed lessons: 
(1) In the separation of the kingdom into two parts, 
and the object lesson furnished to Judah (the loyal remnant) 
to notice the works of idolatry in Ephraim (the 
disloyal ten-tribe kingdom). To a certain extent this 
for a time was beneficial to Judah. (2) When they 
witnessed the captivity and dispersion of the ten-tribe 
kingdom because of disloyalty to Jehovah, the lesson 
should have been deeply impressed. 

Judah represented those Israelites who were faithful 
to the Lord, those who trusted in the promises, all 
of which centered in Judah: and, as we have seen, into 
their territory many of the faithful of the ten tribes 
removed. Yet with all these lessons, and with the instructions 
of the prophets, the history of the nation was 
one of unfaithfulness to their great King, Jehovah. Now 
the time for the change which God saw best to bring 
upon them had come, and nothing could avert it, as we 
saw in the last lesson. Nevertheless, they were given a 
hope that at the end of a certain period of seventy years' 
chastisement the Lord would graciously bring back those 
who reverenced him. And it is worthy of note that 



only those who had respect unto the Lord and to the 

promises made to their fathers would find any inducement 

to return; for the Land of Promise meanwhile had 

become a veritable wilderness, while seventy years residence 

in a new land would root and attach to it all who 

had not considerable faith in God's promises. And altho 

the edict of Cyrus gave permission to all of the multitudes 

of the entire twelve tribes then in captivity in 

his dominion to return to Palestine, less than fifty-five 

thousand persons availed themselves of it and returned. 

The others were faithless, better pleased to remain in 

Babylon. The whole number of the children of Israel 

at that time must have been at least two millions "scattered 

abroad." 

Thus did the Lord sift out from that nation all except 
the more faithful families; to give them a better 
opportunity of profiting by his instructions and disciplines, 
and to the intent that, if possible, a sufficient 
number of that people should be brought to a condition 
of heart-readiness to receive Messiah at his first advent, 
and to be received by him as his joint-heirs, his elect 
Bride. God's dealings with that nation did develop, 
as we know, a considerable number who received the 
Lord, and to whom he gave liberty to become "sons" 
and of the Kingdom class. (John 1:12.) Nevertheless, 
these were but a "remnant" selected out of that 
nation, after it had been sifted, as we have seen, several 
times. And these, fortunately for us Gentiles, were not 
enough to complete the elect number, and hence the call to 
joint-heirship with Christ has been extended also to us. 

R2401 : page 360 

By Israel's failure to develop a sufficient number to 
complete the elect Body of Christ, this great privilege 
and blessing has come to the Gentiles;— "to take out of 
them a people for his name," to complete the elect number 
of the Seed of Abraham which is to bless all the 
families of the earth.— Gal. 3:29. 

Another thought: there has been a parallel between 
the experiences of Fleshly Israel and Spiritual Israel. 
During the period of Moses and Joshua and the Elders 
that outlived Joshua, Fleshly Israel prospered, because 
obedient to the Lord: so the Church, Spiritual Israel, 
prospered during the days of our Lord and his apostles. 
By and by, neglecting the Lord, they became worldlike, 
and the result was the splitting off of the ten tribes: so 
the Christian Church, becoming worldly through neglect 
of the Word of the Lord, suffered the loss of the 
great majority in the "falling away" of Papacy, which 
substituted the mass for the ransom and worships the 
creature ("saints," relics, the Virgin, etc.) instead of 
the Creator. As the Lord sifted the faithful of the ten 
tribes into the two tribes (Judah), so he gathered the 
faithful out of Papacy. And as he sifted Judah, so he 
has been sifting Protestants to gather out the "jewels." 



As only a remnant of the whole of nominal Fleshly Israel 
was found worthy in the Jewish "harvest," so only 
a remnant of nominal Spiritual Israel will be found 
worthy of the Kingdom in the present "harvest." But 
how glad we are to know from the Lord's Word that 
neither those sifted out during the Jewish age, nor those 
sifted out during the Gospel age as non-elect, were sifted 
into eternal torment: and that, altho they will be caused 
to suffer "stripes" in proportion as they knew to do 
well and did it not, yet they were all redeemed and are 
all to be brought into the clearer light of the Millennial 
Kingdom and thus be blessed with opportunity for restitution 
and eternal life through the elect Church— the 
Christ, Head and Body. 

The captivity of Judah by Nebuchadnezzar was in 
two parts: (1) He carried captive the chief of the 
warriors and craftsmen, and noble people of the land, 
about eighteen thousand being specified— Daniel and 
his companions being of this number. (2 Kings 24: 12-18.) 
He left the poor and less capable people in the 
land, appointing over them as under-king the uncle of 
Jehoiachin, viz., Zedekiah, whom he compelled to take 
an oath of allegiance to the Kingdom of Babylon. (2) 

R2402 : page 360 

The second captivity was eleven years later, and was 
the result of Zedekiah's unfaithfulness to his oath of 
allegiance, for he attempted to throw off the yoke of 
Nebuchadnezzar. 

This is one of the points at which chronologists in 
general blunder. They begin to count the seventy years 
mentioned by the prophet from the captivity of Jehoiachin, 
instead of eleven years later, at the captivity of 
Zedekiah. They very generally fail to notice an important 
item; viz., that the Lord does not specify through Jeremiah's 
prophecy, seventy years of captivity, but seventy 
years of desolation of the land without an inhabitant— 
See chapter on Chronology in MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOL. II. 

The fulfilment of two very remarkable prophecies 
is noted in the concluding verses of this lesson. The 
Prophet Ezekiel had explicitly declared (1) that King 
Zedekiah should be led into Babylon a captive, should 
live there and die there, and nevertheless never see the 
city. (Ezek. 12:10-13.) (2) Apparently to the contrary 
of this was Jeremiah's prophecy, while he was in 
a dungeon in Jerusalem during the siege; he declared 
that Zedekiah should speak with Nebuchadnezzar mouth 
to mouth, and see his eyes. Our lesson shows how 
both of these predictions were fulfilled: Zedekiah did 
indeed see the eyes of Nebuchadnezzar and did talk 
with him; then, his eyes being put out, he was carried 
a prisoner to Babylon, in which city he lived without 
seeing it. Thus sometimes the Lord speaks to us 
through his prophets matters which seem contradictory 
and require considerable faith; yet subsequently, 



when we note the fulfilment of the predictions, these 
peculiarities of statement and fulfilment serve to strengthen 
faith, and to convince us that the affairs about us are 
not occurring haphazard or by chance, but so far as God's 
people are concerned (spiritual as well as natural Israel), 
they are all under the divine supervision and guidance. 

In Ezekiel's prophecy of the dispersion of the Jews 
the Lord intimates that he would pursue them even in 
foreign countries with the sword and famine and pestilence, 
so that the worst characters amongst that people 
should be cut off, and thus the sifting be the more complete. 
If there were anything in the Scriptures to indicate 
that the Israelites, in coming under the terms of 
the Law Covenant at Mount Sinai, became liable to a 
penalty of eternal torment if unfaithful to it, it would 
be indeed a terrible thought; but there is no such intimation 
anywhere. The highest penalty of their Law 
was death: "He that violated Moses' law died without 
mercy." Consequently, even if our Lord Jesus had 
not come, or if at his coming he had accomplished nothing 
for those who were under the Law, the worst penalty 
they could be subjected to was death. Hence, if the 
death of Christ had effected nothing as respects the Jews 
under the Law Covenant, but had affected the Gentiles 
only, bringing them forgiveness and the possibility of a 
reconciliation to God and the attainment of eternal life, 
it would but prove that Israel according to the flesh was 
disadvantaged by the Law Covenant entered into at 
Mount Sinai. But the Apostle, divinely guided, points 
out to us explicitly that our Lord's death not only redeemed 
those who were not under the Law Covenant, 
but also that those who were under the Law Covenant 
were "redeemed from the curse of the Law."— Gal. 3:13. 

Accordingly, we have the good hope that not only 
the living Gentiles shall come to the light and blessing 
of the Millennial Kingdom (Isa. 60:3), but also the 
living Jews at that time; and that eventually that Light 
shall be manifested to all the families of the earth (Isa. 40:5; 
Luke 3:6)— the dead as well as the living— and 
it is to this end that the Lord has promised that the 
hour is coming, in the which all that are in their graves 
shall hear the voice of the Son of Man, and come 
forth (John 5:29)— that all may have a trial, a judgment, 
under the favorable and righteous conditions 
which his Kingdom will inaugurate. 

This future hope, as respects Israel, is expressed in 
our Golden Text, "Ye shall seek me, and find me when 
ye shall search for me with all your heart." The Apostle 
Paul assures us that during the present Gospel age natural 
Israel has been nationally "blinded," so as not to 
have been able to discern the Lord; but he also shows 
us that when the Gospel Church shall have been completed 
from amongst the Gentiles, favor shall return to 
Israel, they shall be saved from their blindness, and 
obtain mercy at the hands of the glorified Spiritual Israel: 
and then, through Spiritual Israel and reclaimed 



Natural Israel, the blessings of the Lord, the knowledge 

of his grace, shall be extended, with all the blessed opportunities 

that implies, to all the families of the earth. 

-Rom. 11:25-32. 



page 361 
VOL. XIX. DECEMBER 15, 1898. No. 24. 



CONTENTS. 



Gathering the Lord's Jewels 363 

"As Many as the Lord shall Call" 364 

"Spake often One to Another" 366 

"The New Song in their Mouth" 367 

"The Lord Hearkened and Heard" 368 

Tract Society's Report for 1898 368 

"Unto You is Born a Savior" 371 

"The True Light that Lighteth 

Every Man" 373 

Index for Zion's Watch Tower, 1898 376 

Dawn, Vol. III., in Swedish, etc 362 

Do You Desire Z.W. Tower for 1899? 362 

page 362 

SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 56-60 ARCH STREET, ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, N.Y. DRAFT, MONEY ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS: 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age or accident, or other 
adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, if they 
send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting the 
paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list 
constantly. 



R2410 : page 362 

M. DAWN, VOL. III., SWEDISH, AND DANO-NORWEGIAN. 

Our Swedish friends who have been anxiously waiting for this 
volume for some time will be glad to learn that it is now ready. 
We regret to say that our Danish and Norwegian friends 



must not expect the third volume in their languages: the demand 
is small, and the loss would be too great. These friends, we believe, 
can, if interested, gain from the Swedish edition considerable 
knowledge of the subjects treated. 

The price of this volume is the same as the English— tho 
because of extra expense and smaller edition it costs us nearly 
double the wholesale figures. 



page 362 

DO YOU DESIRE ZION'S WATCH TOWER FOR 1899? 

Please notice the terms upon which you can have this journal, 
if desired. They are as liberal as we can consistently make 
them. We desire to hear at once, from all whose subscriptions 
expire with this number, whether or not they desire our ministries 
further. Those who cannot pay now, but hope to remit 
subscription later, will please send postal card so stating. Those 
of God's people who are unable to pay are welcome to the TOWER 
free, if they will send a postal card request to this effect. "He 
that asketh receiveth," is the Lord's rule which as his stewards 
we follow. Write the card the minute you read this, and thus 
save us the trouble of resetting your name in our list. 



WATCH TOWER BINDERS. 

We supply at 50 cents, post paid, Emerson's Patent Self-Binders, 
holding three years' issues of the TOWER. We advise 
all to keep a regular file of TOWERS for future reference. We 
often answer your questions by referring to back TOWERS. Get 
extra copies for loaning, etc. 



R2404 : page 363 

GATHERING THE LORD'S JEWELS. 



"They shall be mine, saith the Lord of hosts, in that 
day when I make up my jewels."— Mai. 3:17. 

JEWELS have a value of their own, an intrinsic 

quality, and no doubt would be appreciated, if 

they were very plentiful, but their appreciation is all 

the more marked because of their comparative scarcity. 

The figures and similes used throughout the Scriptures 

by the holy spirit are full of significance, and this 

one as well as others. When the Lord likens his faithful 

people to the precious stones, jewels, it signifies 

that there is an intrinsic value or beauty that he appreciates, 



and it implies also that such characters are 

in comparison to the world very scarce— a "little flock." 

Our text points to the close of the Gospel age, and 
not only tells us that the Lord will not gather his jewels 
sooner, but implies also that the only class to be 
gathered at that time will be the jewel class— he comes 
to make up his jewels. We have here a contradiction 
of the ordinary thoughts on this subject: (1) That 
the Lord has been gathering his jewels all along for 
the past six thousand years: evidently an erroneous 
thought, since he has appointed a day, in the end of 
this age, in which he will gather or make up his jewels. 
(2) It exposes the fallacy of the thought that 
everybody who is respectable, half-way decent, is to 
be gathered to the Lord, and share in his Kingdom, for 
it distinctly points out that a very exceptional class 
only will be sought for and gathered. 

The class here described as jewels are contrasted 
with other classes in the context (vs. 15), "the proud," 
who have much of the success of the present time, and 
workers of wickedness, who tempt God, and are not 
careful to please and serve him— and such evidently 
are the majority of mankind. The jewel class is described 
in vs. 16 as "They that feared Jehovah"— that 
reverenced him, "and that thought upon his Word." 

But we inquire, where are jewels usually found? 
The answer of the figure is that jewels may be found 
in very unexpected places, as for instance the diamonds 
of South Africa are sometimes mingled with the ordinary 
gravel, and sometimes embedded in a bluish black 
clay. They all require to be searched after, and generally 
require to be washed from the mire, before being 
prepared to refract the light. So some of these "jewels" 
whom the Lord is now seeking out from the world, 
are found in the ordinary walks of life, and some came 
from deep down in the mire of sin. The Lord does 
not expect to find in the world of mankind the jewels 
which he seeks in perfect order, shaped, cut, polished 
and ready for the setting in glory. On the contrary, 
by one class of his servants he lifts them out of the 
mire of sin and out of the horrible pit, and washes 
them, cleanses them from sin through the merit of his 
own precious blood, and through his Word: and then 
through other servants and providences he polishes 
them with divine skill, to the intent that they may reflect 
and refract the light of the glory of God— the divine 
character,— justice, wisdom, love. 

As the diamond, in its rough state, uncut, unpolished, 
would have no more value than any other common 
stone for ordinary purposes, so those whom the 
Lord is selecting and preparing as his jewels are to derive 
their ultimate value from the cutting, shaping, 
polishing of their characters under divine providence: 
as it is written: "We are his workmanship." (Eph. 2:10.) 
We cannot suppose the illustration to be perfect 
in every particular, yet we may readily see that, while 



divine grace is to be credited with the entire outcome, 

the beauty and grace of the finished jewel, yet nevertheless, 

divine grace operates according to principles 

and conditions, under divine law. As the experienced 

diamond miners reject the soft clay and various of the 

R2404 : page 364 

hard stones, in seeking for those of the desirable kind, 
so the great Jewel-Gatherer operates according to a 
principle in seeking for his jewels. 

"EVEN AS MANY AS THE LORD SHALL CALL." 



The hardness of the diamond may be used to represent 
character, and we are to remember that character 
belongs to the individual, and not to God. Each 
of us must have his own character, and only in proportion 
as each has character, can he hope to be accepted 
finally as a jewel, for those without character 
will not endure the tests. As the diamond-seeker lays 
hold upon everything in his path that gives evidence 
of having the diamond quality, so divine grace, operating 
in the diamond field of the world (Christendom, 
and wherever the Word of the Lord has gone), lays 
hold upon all who have anything resembling character. 
The soft, the pliable, the uncrystallized, are not being 
sought now, and coming in contact with divine grace 
are passed by. Only such as give evidence of character 
are thought even worthy of washing and testing. 

The hard crystallization of the diamond corresponds 
to willingness towards righteousness in the individual; 
and unless there be such willingness toward God and 
righteousness, there is none of the jewel quality which 
the Lord is now seeking. It is those whose wills are 
formed, crystallized, set, determined, for righteousness, 
that the Lord is now seeking. And here we have the 
imperfection of the simile; for, while all diamonds are 
alike hard, the great Jewel-Seeker accepts some in 
whom the crystallizing process is incomplete, and 
"helps our infirmities," developing in us by his providences 
the quality of firmness for righteousness, at the 
same time that he polishes us.— Rom. 8:26. 

But even when the rough diamond has been found, 
as before observed, it would be of no value, except as 
it could be cut— indeed, of less value than other stones 
and clay for many purposes. So it is with those whom 
divine grace finds in the mire of sin, as having, nevertheless, 
will or character desiring righteousness, truth, 
goodness, justice,— "feeling after God" (Acts 17:27): 
the great Jewel-Cutter, the great Lapidarist, must really 
give them all their value, by his wisdom and skill in 
shaping, cutting and polishing them. Yet, on the 
other hand, he could not cut, shape or polish that which 



had not the quality or character, the will for righteousness, 
essential to the receiving of such a polishing. 
Those, therefore, who are in the hands of the great 
Lapidarist, and undergoing his polishing process, must 
first have passed through the previous experience of 
having been found of divine grace— found of the Lord 
Jesus; must first have been washed; and must have been 
accepted as having wills desirous of harmony with the 
divine mind. Therefore, they may take pleasure in all 
the trying experiences and difficulties through which 
our Lord Jesus causes them to pass, as various parts 
of the grinding and polishing process, necessary to 
their completion as Jehovah's jewels, to be made up 
with the close of this Gospel age, and to be set in the 
gold of the divine nature, to reflect the beauties of the 
divine character forever. 

R2405 : page 364 

It is in harmony with this thought that the Apostle 
encourages us to rejoice in tribulation, knowing 
that it is working out for us patience, experience, hope, 
brotherly-kindness, love,— the various facets of the 
jewel essential to it in the eyes of him who is shortly 
to gather his jewels. The Apostle again speaks of 
even the most trying and difficult experiences of the 
Christian life as being "light afflictions," and he speaks 
of the present life as being, in comparison to the eternal 
future, but "a moment," saying, "Our light affliction, 
which is but for a moment, worketh for us a 
far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory;"— 
Rom. 5:3-5; 2 Cor. 4:17. 

"ABANDON US NOT IN TEMPTATION." 



The lapidarist takes firm hold upon the jewel which 
he has already tested, and proved to have the requisite 
jewel quality, and encasing it in a suitable instrument, 
he presses it against the friction, a lap-wheel, with just 
the required amount of pressure to cut away the roughness 
and unevenness, and to effect the necessary shaping 
and polishing. The process requires great skill, 
otherwise at times much of the value of the stone 
might be lost through misshaping; hence only skilled 
workmen are employed in this department. 

For instance, the celebrated Kohinoor diamond originally 
weighed nearly 800 karats, but in the hands of 
a poor cutter was reduced to 280 karats. Yet so much 
of a diamond's value depends on skilful cutting, that 
more than one-half of its size was subsequently sacrificed 
in recutting it, to obtain symmetry, beauty and 
refractive power, and now it weighs less than 107 karats. 

So it is with the polishing of the Lord's jewels: 
their value depends much on proper cutting; and this 



is entrusted only to the skilled hands of our Lord Jesus 

Christ, of whom we are assured in advance that he was 

tempted in all points like as we are— that he himself 

passed through similar experiences of testings, etc., at 

the Father's hands. He knows just what we need to 

perfect us, so that we will be pleasing and acceptable 

to the Father, to reflect and refract the light of his 

glory when it shall fall upon us in our finished state. 

A part of our lesson is to have faith in this great Master-workman 

whom the Father has appointed to shape 

and polish us. We may require much more trimming 

on some sides of our characters than on others; and 

the disposition often is to "draw back," to be not fully 

R2405 : page 365 

submissive, to fear that the Lord has forgotten and 
abandoned us in trial. But infinite wisdom assures us, 
guarantees us, that this is not so and that to draw back 
would leave us "unfit for the Kingdom."— Heb. 13:5; 
Luke 9:62. 

The earthly lapidary imbeds the jewel he is polishing 
in cement, except the facet which he is grinding, 
so that neither he nor others see it during the 
operation, except as he lifts it, cools it and examines 
the progress of his work; but all the while he knows 
just what is being done, for he has an instrument called 
a "Lapidary's Dial," which indicates the position of 
the jewel exactly and avoids the poor cutting of olden 
times. 

And just so it is with the Lord's jewels: "The 
world knoweth us not"— it has seen the wheel of discipline 
which has been cutting the Lord's jewels for 
centuries, but it has not understood the necessity and 
value of the process. It may even have caught an occasional 
glimpse of the jewels but not to any advantage 
—not so as to be able to know the real merit of 
their characters nor the value of the cutting and polishing, 
for even the already finished facets are smeared 
with the cement and the slime from the grind-wheel. 
But the great, loving Master-workman and Lapidarist-in-Chief 
knows and has explained it all to the "jewels;" 
and they know in part now, and by faith are 
trusting all the remainder, singing in their hearts, 
"He knows, he knows!" "He will not suffer us to be 
tempted above that we are able to bear, but will with 
the temptation provide also a way of escape." Yes, the 
Lord knows just how much pressure to apply,— just 
how much friction is necessary— and will not willingly 
afflict us, nor cause tribulation which he cannot and 
will not overrule for our good. And being thus assured 
that all things are working together for good to 
them that love God, his living jewels can "rejoice in 
tribulation," knowing that it is working out in them 
the peaceable fruits of righteousness— of love, and that 
such experiences are essential, and that without them 



they could never be amongst the gathered jewels. 

"WHAT SON IS HE THAT THE FATHER CHASTENETH 
NOT?" 



Our text, after speaking of the gathering of the 
jewel class, drops the figure, and refers to the same 
class as God's sons, saying, "And I will spare them, 
as a man spareth his own son that serveth him." 
Here we have the distinction always held out, as between 
those who are servants merely, and those who 
are serving sons. Moses was faithful as a servant over 
his house (natural Israel), but Christ is faithful as a 
Son over his house (the elect Church)— the house or 
family of sons, who have received the spirit of adoption, 
the holy spirit. Altho sons, yet they must learn 
obedience no less thoroughly than if they were merely 
servants. Indeed, as sons, it is all the more necessary 
that they learn the lessons of obedience to the 
Father; more, much more, is to be expected of a son 
in his father's service, than of one who is not a son. 
He is expected to engage in the service in the spirit of 
his Father, moved by the same impulses of justice and 
love, because "begotten again" by that spirit of holiness. 
As a son he requires not less careful but more 
careful training than a servant: more careful disciplining 
at the Father's hands; for is he not his representative 
and to be his heir?-Heb. 3:5,6; 12:7; 
Rom. 8:15,17. 

While these sons are not to be spared from the 
polishing processes necessary to make them acceptable 
as sons,— "accepted in the Beloved,"— nevertheless, 
they are to be spared from something, our text assures 
us. Other Scriptures show us that this class is to be 
spared, (1) from the great time of tribulation which 
is to come upon the whole world of mankind in the 
end of this age: in harmony with our Lord's words, 
"Watch ye, that ye may be accounted worthy to escape 
all these things that shall come to pass, and to stand before 
the Son of Man." (2) They are to escape the 
thousand years of judgment or trial, coming upon the 
world, which has its beginning in the time of trouble 
of "the time of the end." Thus the Apostle declares 
that this class of faithful sons, the jewel class, "shall 
not come into condemnation [judgment] with the 
world."-Luke 21:36; 1 Cor. 11:32; John 5:24. 

Nor does this imply that the world's trial or judgment 
will be an unendurable one, for, quite to the contrary, 
we are assured that it will be most favorable, 
that the Lord "will judge the world in righteousness" 
during the Millennial age. But for the Church to have 
share in that trial would mean a prolongation of the 
period of trial; it would mean also a thousand years of 
delay of entering into the joys of the Lord in the fullest 



sense,— a thousand years of delay in attaining to 
that which is perfect. And not only so, but, as we 
have seen from other Scriptures, and as is implied in 
this Scripture, the class now being selected is a jewel 
class, differing in many respects from the world of mankind 
in general, all of whom have been redeemed, and 
for all a way of escape has been provided, from the 
inherited Adamic sin and penalty. 

"AFTERWARD IT YIELDETH THE PEACEABLE FRUITS 
OF RIGHTEOUSNESS." 



Nor are we to suppose that those who are now 
pressed against the wheel of tribulation, trial, affliction, 
difficulty, are thereby made miserable. Quite to 
the contrary, they realize, as the Scriptures point out 

R2405 : page 366 

they should, a joy and peace which the world knows 
not of,— which the world can neither give nor take 
away. And when it is remembered that their severe 
experiences and polishings are "but for a moment," 
as compared with the longer disciplines of those who 
will be dealt with in the Millennial age,— when it is 
remembered also that in proportion to their trials and 
difficulties they are granted the "more grace," and 
additionally that the reward shall be exceedingly, 
abundantly more than they could ask or think, according 
to the exceeding great and precious promises of the 
divine Word,— then we can see that this house of sons, 
these "jewels" now being prepared by the Lord, are 
truly highly favored above all men, and may well take 
the spoiling of their goods (worldly reputation, etc., 
included) joyfully: knowing that these things are but 
working out their "far more exceeding and eternal 
weight of glory."— 2 Cor. 4: 17. 

In speaking of us as sons of God, the Scriptures 
declare that we are in the school of Christ (the same 
thought as the cutting of the jewels): and of those 
who will ultimately be accepted as sons, they show that 
they will be such as finish their course with joy,— 
such as will have complied with the predestinated conditions; 
viz., that all who will be of that son class (the 
jewels) must be copies of God's dear Son, who himself 
is the greatest, most brilliant and absolutely perfect 
one.-Rom. 8:29,30. 

This process of seeking the house of sons, the 
jewels, and polishing them, has already been in 
progress for over eighteen centuries; and the Scriptures 
indicate to us that now the end of the age is upon us, 
the time for making up or gathering these jewels, and 
setting them in the glory of the divine nature, preparatory 
to the new age in which they shall be exalted 



as the light of the world. The signs of the times clearly 
indicate, in harmony with this, that the great time 
of trouble for the world is nigh, even at the door, to 
prepare the world for the coming blessings. Hence 
we see that if we are to be amongst the acceptable 
jewels, amongst the sons who shall be spared from the 
calamities approaching, we have need to give diligence, 
and to cooperate with the great Master-Workman, 

R2406 : page 366 

that the shaping and polishing of our hearts, our wills, 
may be perfected quickly, and that we may be ready 
to share a glorious part, when he comes to make up 
his jewels, his loved and his own. 

"THEN SHALL YE.. .DISCERN BETWEEN THE RIGHTEOUS 
AND THE WICKED." 



The Lord, through the prophet, indicates that as 
soon as the jewels shall have been gathered there will 
be a general change in his dealings with the world of 
mankind. Verse 15 shows how it is at the present 
time, while the polishing of the Lord's jewels progresses: 
—the unfaithful and the worldly frequently seem to 
have the advantage; but vs. 18 points out that after 
this polishing of the jewels is completed, and they have 
been set in the great crown of rejoicing at the end of 
this age, "Then shall ye return, and discern between 
the righteous and the wicked, between him that serveth 
God and him that serveth him not." 

Now, while evil predominates, while "the prince of this 
world" (John 14:30) reigns unbound, and while "they 
that tempt God are even delivered," it would be difficult, 
by outward evidences, to judge of who are the Lord's 
favored ones. Indeed, his favored ones, his "jewels," 
seem to be less favored and have more afflictions, more 
trials, more persecutions, more difficulties, a narrower 
way, than others. And amongst them, consequently, 
are not found many great or rich or wise, but chiefly the 
poor of this world, rich in faith, and prospectively heirs 
of the Kingdom (Jas. 2:5). But when these shall be glorified 
with their Lord in the Kingdom— then there shall 
be a general change, a turning round. No longer will 
the wicked and those who tempt God be found in power 
and in influence and in prosperity, and the humble, 
the meek, the godly, suffer persecution and tribulation: 
but contrariwise, of that time, when Christ's Millennial 
reign shall be inaugurated, it is declared prophetically, 
"In his day the righteous shall flourish," and 
the "evildoer shall be cut off"— Satan shall be bound 
also.-Psa. 72:7; 37:9; Rev. 20:2. 

"THEY.. .SPAKE OFTEN ONE TO ANOTHER." 



But glancing back at the context, we see another 
suggestion respecting the disposition of this "jewel" 
class during their time of polishing. We read, "They 
that feared [reverenced] the Lord spake often one to 
another." (vs. 16.) Ah yes! What could be more natural 
than a desire for communion with all who are of 
"like precious faith," all who are similarly in the hands 
of the Lapidarist, undergoing polishing, all who are 
of the same character, disposition, as respects God and 
his righteousness? Our Lord points out that "love of 
the brethren" will be a marked quality in all his servant-sons, 
for he that loveth him that begat loveth also 
him that is begotten of God. (1 John 5:1.) And the tendency 
of the mutual love of the "brethren" is to meet 
frequently and (personally or through the printed or 
written page) to speak to each other. The Apostle Paul 
distinctly calls to our attention the propriety, yea, the 
necessity, for this class meeting together. He exhorts, 
"Forget not the assembling of yourselves together,... 
and so much the more as ye see the day [the day of 
gathering of the 'jewels'] drawing nigh." It is to the 
same end that our Lord has made some of his promises 
to his people collectively, saying, "Where two or three 

R2406 : page 367 

of you are met in my name, there am I in the midst." 
-Matt. 18:20; Heb. 10:25. 

There is a thought also in the word "together:" 
the sons of God are not merely anxious for a meeting, 
in which the world, the flesh and the devil will commingle 
—they are anxious specially for fellowship with 
each other, with those who have similar characters, 
similar faith in the precious blood, similar consecration, 
and who are similarly passing through the hands 
of the great Polisher, to be prepared for association in 
glory. This desire for fellowship with one another is 
not selfishness, nor an impropriety; on the contrary, 
our Lord declares that those who love the light come 
to the light, while those who love darkness shun the 
light, and the Apostle inquires, "What communion 
hath light with darkness?" and he points out distinctly 
that while Satan and the children of darkness may 
simulate the table of the Lord and the grace of his 
truth, yet there is no real harmony or fellowship between 
their table and the Lord's table, upon which he 
sets forth the precious truth for his loved and his own. 
-1 Cor. 10:21. See WATCH TOWER for Dec. 1st, '95, 
"The Cup of the Lord and the Table of the Lord." 

When we read that these faithful "spake together," 
we naturally inquire respecting the topic of their 
converse, the subject upon which they communicate, 
it is not stated here, but is clearly stated elsewhere in 



the inspired Word. The Apostle points out that such 
"mind heavenly things," and contrasts them with others 
of the earth, earthly, who "mind earthly things," 
and whose god is their belly. Their converse, therefore, 
will not be respecting earthly pleasures, food and 
raiment, the ambitions of the natural mind, the pride 
of life, etc., but will be respecting "the things which 
belong unto their peace," the things which are uppermost 
in their hearts: for these are all seeking first the 
Kingdom of heaven and its righteousness, and in earthly 
matters are "content with such things as they have," 
—as the Lord's providence shall arrange for them. 

THE NEW SONG IN THEIR MOUTH. 



Neither do they come together to lament the trials 
and difficulties by the way, altho there may be some 
occasions when the majority may "weep with those 
that weep." Usually, however, the proper condition 
is that in which each should live so in the light of the 
Father's countenance that the trials and difficulties of 
the present life, which would be terrible and burdensome 
to the world, unsustained by divine grace, will 
be to these but "light afflictions:" and as children of 
the heavenly King, instead of going mourning all their 
days, they will rejoice— rejoice in tribulation and adversity, 
as well as in prosperity. Accordingly, as the 
sentiment of this class, it is written,— "He hath put a 
new song into my mouth, even the lovingkindness of 
our God." 

It is quite in harmony with this that the Apostle 
prays for some, that they may be enabled to "comprehend 
with all saints the length and the breadth, the 
height and the depth of the love of God, which passeth 
all understanding." Those who have received the 
"new song," and have comprehended its meaning, 
with the saints in general, will have, in this love of 
God, and in the wide and deep and high, glorious plan 
of God for the salvation, first of the elect Church and 
subsequently of the world of mankind— "whosoever 
will"— an abundant theme, a never-ending theme, a 
theme above all others, which will fill their hearts and 
fill their minds. It will crowd out worldly topics, as 
being not worthy to be compared. It will crowd out 
complainings and murmurings, as being wholly improper 
on the part of those who have been recipients of so 
many divine favors, and "much advantage every way," 
in that we have delivered unto us the divine oracles,— 
and especially in view of our adoption into the family 
of God as sons and "joint-heirs with Jesus Christ our 
Lord, if so be that we suffer with him, that we may 
be also glorified together."— Rom. 8:17. 

"HIM THAT IS WEAK IN THE FAITH RECEIVE." 



While it would be wholly improper for the consecrated 
ones to thrust out others who desire to meet 
with them, or to attempt to judge the hearts of those 
who profess faith in the ransom and full consecration 
to the Lord, yet to the extent that those who have received 
the holy spirit of adoption let their light shine 
out properly, and seek to "edify one another," and to 
"build one another up in the most holy faith," in that 
proportion the insincere, the unconsecrated and the 
hypocritical will find less and less to attract them. And 
in consequence "those who fear the Lord and who 
think upon his Word" find all the more of blessed 
spiritual communion and edification. 

The class of whom the Apostle says that they are 
sensual, earthly, having not the spirit of the Lord, 
make disturbance when they come amongst the true 
sons of God, and do injury, because with them, as well 
as with others, it is true, as it is written, "Out of the 
abundance of the heart the mouth speaketh," and their 
hearts, filled with pride, selfishness, vain-glory and ambition, 
overflow through their mouths; and communication 
with such is unprofitable. From such evil hearts 
come evil words of envy, slander, hatred, malice, strife, 
selfish suggestions contrary to the word and spirit of 
the Lord. Such edify no one; their influence is always 
pernicious; they build not up in the most holy faith, 
but, on the contrary, tend to develop and to cultivate 
roots of bitterness, whereby often "many are defiled." 
-Heb. 12:15. 

R2406 : page 368 

Those who fear the Lord, who reverence his name, 
who think upon his Word, who are seeking to copy 
his disposition, and to be fashioned under the hand of 
divine providence, should see to it that the class we 
have described, of whom the Apostle declares that their 
envy, malice, hatred, strifes, etc., are works of the 
devil, do not get opportunities to work their evil works. 
They should do this, first, by showing their disapproval 
of all evil-speaking and evil works: and those who 
cannot show their disapproval by words of kindly admonition, 
pointing out that such things are not from 
God, but from the Adversary, should at least manifest 
their disapproval in their withholding any look of sympathy 
with such a course, and by breaking off the conversation, 
and very generally avoiding the company of 
such; and by the more strict attention to their own 
words and conduct, that therein they may "show forth 
the praises of him who hath called us out of darkness 
into his marvelous light." 

R2407 : page 368 



"AND THE LORD HEARKENED AND HEARD." 



Another thought in this connection, that we should 
not overlook, is that brought to our attention in the 
words, "And the Lord hearkened and heard it." How 
often would the sons of God be greatly blessed as they 
meet together to talk over the divine plan, the divine 
goodness, wisdom, love, justice, and to help one another, 
and to encourage one another with psalms, hymns, 
spiritual songs, and by refreshing one another's minds 
with the exceeding great and precious promises which 
belong to them that reverence the Lord,— how much 
would such be blessed, if they could always have in 
memory this statement, that the Lord is hearkening, 
is listening to our conversation when we speak together. 
He listens to see which, out of good hearts, speak 
forth those things which are loving, gentle, pure, good, 
true, as distinguished from those who are careless of 
the truth, and whose words are vain or frivolous, or 
worse than this, slanderous, enmitous and selfish. 

And even amongst those who are on the Lord's 
side, amongst those who are showing forth his praises, 
endeavoring to build one another up in the most 
holy faith, and in the fruits and graces of the spirit, 
—we may be sure that our Lord hearkens to such teachers 
and helpers, and takes knowledge of the purity of 
their motives, as well as of their words; he takes knowledge 
of whether they are seeking to glorify themselves, 
or to glorify him in their use of such privileges and 
opportunities. If their words are boastful, it would 
indicate pride in the heart, a flaw in the "jewel," which 
would make it unworthy to be amongst those to be 
"gathered." If vaingloriously any attempts to take to 
himself the honor which belongs to the Lord, he is 
showing himself disloyal to his Master, Christ. Such 
would thus prove that he had not the spirit of the 
Master, who humbled himself, and who gave all glory 
and honor to the Father, in respect to every feature of 
the great salvation. 

Let all the sons of God remember the importance 
of honesty, "truth in the inward parts," when they 
come together as members of the body of Christ, to 
study the divine Word, and to help one another, and 
"let nothing be done through strife or vain glory," but 
let each esteem the other greater in saintliness than 
himself,— seeking to see, so far as possible, in each 
other the good, the noble, the true: and let each seek 
to watch his own heart, and to know of his own blemishes. 
Thus let personal humility and love of the 
brethren keep pace with our growth in knowledge of 
divine things; otherwise let us be assured that we are in 
the sifting and separating time, and that all who have not 
this spirit of humility, patience, gentleness, brotherly-kindness, 



love, will surely be separated.— 1 John 2:19. 

Some will not be amongst those who are gathered 
as jewels, because the jewels which the Lord will gather 
will be pure, "first-water" diamonds— stainless. 
They are to be faultless in love before the Father; and 
perfect love not only casts out fear, but casts out also 
selfishness, animosity, evil surmisings and evil-speakings, 
as well as self-love, pride. O how beautiful will 
be the Lord's jewels! How full of meaning is the statement 
that our Lord Jesus, the great Jewel, polished by 
the divine hand, and after whose likeness we are to be 
polished, "shall come to be glorified in his saints, and 
to be admired [head and body] of all them that believe 
in that day"— by all those who, during the Millennial 
Day, come into harmony with God, through Christ, 
under the terms of the New Covenant sealed by the 
precious blood.— 2 Thess. 1:10. 



R2402 : page 368 

WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY. 

-REPORT FOR FISCAL YEAR ENDING DEC. 1, 1898.- 

WE ARE confident that many of our readers, 

deeply interested in the present "harvest" 

work are anxiously awaiting this annual report: for 

such reports show, as nothing else can so accurately 

show, the real status of the work in which you as 

well as we are absorbingly interested. There is a wide 

difference between interest and curiosity; and it is the 

former that we seek to serve. We seek no publicity for 

our affairs before the world; but feel it a privilege as 

well as a duty to report yearly for the satisfaction of 

our many colaborers, who otherwise might judge of 

the work merely from their own surroundings and experiences 

and be either unduly elated or depressed and 

discouraged. 

It will be interesting for those of our readers who 
preserve and file their WATCH TOWERS to look back 
over these annual reports to their first appearance— 
for 1891. The progress for these eight years is encouraging 
to the friends of the truth and astounding 
to its enemies. The lesson is that the work of grace 
is progressing; for zeal must be either the result of superstition 
or of grace: and as it must be admitted that 
WATCH TOWER readers, translated out of darkness into 
the marvelous light of present truth, are freer from 
superstition and from bondage to human creeds than 
others, it is but reasonable to credit their zeal to growth 
in grace and knowledge and to increasing thankfulness 
for the liberty wherewith Christ makes free. 

R2402 : page 369 



If each year has seemed to bring intenser trials, 
testings and sittings, and to inspire opponents to more 
bitter and yet more unscrupulous envy, hatred and 
slanderings, each year has also found those who are 
walking as "children of the light" stronger, more on 
the alert against "the wiles of the devil," and better 
prepared to resist him and his blinded servants: because 
better armed with the panoply of divine truth and forewarned 
by the Captain of our salvation to expect such 
things. To such the divine promise is fulfilled so that 
they are enabled to realize that all things are working 
for good to those who love God,— the called ones according 
to his purpose. 

For several years back we have felt (when making 
out these reports) that we had reached the highest 
limit, and that of necessity the showing of the following 
year would be smaller: but thus far we have been 
agreeably disappointed, and the year 1898 quite outranks 
its predecessors, as will be seen from a study of 
the following reports and a comparison with those of 
previous years. 

By the Lord's favor the present year has brought 
to the Society the ownership of the entire plant at Allegheny: 
-the WATCH TOWER, the Bible House with 
its complete outfit of office fixtures, type, stock of Bibles, 
DAWNS, booklets, tracts, etc., together with tons 
of valuable electroplates of DAWNS, tracts, etc., in various 
languages. The Bible House is a four-story 
building, built for our use and intended from the first 
to be sooner or later presented to us. It is valued at 
$34,000, and has against it a mortgage of $15,000, 
which may remain indefinitely— the interest on it being 
more than provided for by extra rooms rented out. 
The net equity of this entire donation is appraised by 
the Society's Board of Directors at $164,033.65. This 
much of an explanation is necessary, that you may 
understand the Treasurer's financial report which follows 
—which of necessity will assume a slightly different 
form from previous ones. Formerly the Tower 
Publishing Co. met all expenses and furnished the 
books, tracts, etc., to our Society at an agreed upon 
price: now the Society pays its own expenses, buys its 
own paper— in a word, does its own publishing. Formerly 
the Tower Publishing Co. furnished the capital, 
and all debts of colporteurs, etc., were owing to it: 
now this Society furnishes its own capital, and all such 
accounts are owing to it. 

We have separated this special donation in the account, 
because it is out of the usual, and so that the 
records of future years may not be overshadowed thereby. 
It will hereafter appear as "Plant, Real Estate, etc." 

The items of borrowed money need explanation. 
Several friends of the cause who have already contributed 
liberally had money which they desired should go 
to this Society at their death; but they desired that it 



be actively in use in the service of the truth while they 

R2403 : page 369 

live, and presented it to us on these terms: if they 
should ever come to need a portion or all of it, they 
are to call for it— giving reasonable time. If they never 
need it and do not call for it, it shall at their death be 
credited in their names as donations. Some of these 
need interest on their deposits to live on, and get it: 
others do not need interest, having other income, and 
get none. 

Envious enemies will as usual whisper that these 
reports and the "Good Hopes" blanks are solicitations 
for money. We deny this: we neither covet, nor ask 
for any man's silver or gold, and entreat that those 
who feel thus send us nothing. Our God is rich. He 
tells us that all the gold and silver are his, and we believe 
him. He is abundantly able to give us ten times 
as much annually, if he choose. What he supplies for 
the spread of the truth is but a drop in the bucket, as 
compared with the millions spent annually in the propagation 
of error. But we are satisfied and thankful, 
and appreciate his wisdom. We perceive that as the 
lack of "laborers" in the harvest-field is a call and an 
incentive to some to enter who would not enter if the 
supply were abundant, so with those who have the 
financial "talent"— the fact that the means for the propagation 
of the truth is so meager as compared with the 
plethora of error, furnishes opportunity and incentive 
to the consecrated to do with their might in this direction 
also. And our experience is that all who are active 
in the Lord's service, using in love whatever talents 
they possess, are the most blessed and stand the firmest. 
Is it then wrong for us to make known to such 
opportunities for service that will bring them spiritual 
returns and blessings? No! It is duty! It would be 
wrong to withhold the knowledge and the opportunity. 
It would be withholding a means of grace. 

Our report of the work we classify as follows:— 

(1) ZION'S WATCH TOWER we esteem as a messenger 
used by our present King to stir the hearts and 
minds of his people whom he is feeding with the meat 
of present truth. As such it is your servant, and its 
editor rejoices greatly in this privilege. Respecting 
its service during the year, that is not for us to report 
—the Lord knoweth. We have merely done what we 
could, regretting that we could not serve the "brethren" 
more and better. We have, however, been encouraged 
by many letters telling us of help by the way 
rendered to pilgrims on the "narrow way" to the Celestial 
City. But we are waiting, hoping, praying and 
striving, trusting that the Master's decision may be, 
"Well done, good and faithful servant,— thou hast 
been faithful over a few things." 

We hear almost daily of some who are deeply interested 



R2403 : page 370 

in these things and who long for the regular 

visits of the WATCH TOWER but find themselves financially 

unable to spare even one dollar a year. Every 

issue of the TOWER contains our offer to supply such, 

as "the Lord's poor," free, if they will write us to this 

effect, yearly. We know not what more to do for this 

class: those who think they can pay later may have 

credit indefinitely, while to the hopelessly poor it is 

sent as cheerfully as to those who do pay. Possibly 

the fact that the WATCH TOWER is no longer of individual 

ownership, but the property of the Tract Society 

may encourage more of these classes to ask that they 

may receive— freely. 

(2) CORRESPONDENCE DEPARTMENT.-During 
the year we received 29,523 letters and sent out 14,371, 
—our largest record thus far. We value very highly 

the privileges of the mail, which bring us into so close 

touch with so many of the Lord's people throughout 

the world: from your letters we are the better enabled 

to appreciate and sympathize with your varied experiences 

of joy and sorrow, your trials and triumphs, 

and to reflect these in turn upon you all, through the 

WATCH TOWER.-blending these with the light of divine 

revelation through the lenses of the Scriptures, 

to our mutual benefit. As an evidence of the general 

character of much of this correspondence (that it is 

not merely "business") we note the fact that we received 

about twenty-five special requests for remembrance 

at the throne of grace each week, or thirteen 

hundred during the year. These are remembered regularly, 

specially, and are personally mentioned in prayers, 

in addition to our general requests for the welfare of 

all the Lord's flock, at our WATCH TOWER home which 

is on the fourth floor of the Bible House, and shared 

by the office assistants. Moreover, those who ask our 

prayers usually assure us that we are remembered in 

their petitions, morning and evening, daily. The very 

knowledge of this loving interest and sympathy is a 

blessing, a strength, an encouragement, and helps us 

to esteem our share of the trials of life as "light afflictions, 

which are but for a moment," designed of the 

Lord to "work out for us a far more exceeding and 

eternal weight of glory." Thus— 

"We share our mutual joys, our mutual burdens bear; 
And often for each other flows the sympathizing tear." 
"Blest be these ties which bind our hearts in mutual— LOVE!" 

(3) THE COLPORTEUR WORK. This we sometimes 
describe as the Evangel branch of the work; for 

by it the good news is being borne everywhere, much 
after the manner of the work of the disciples at the 
first advent— when they went from house to house and 
from city to city to make known— the Kingdom of 
Heaven at hand. The dear brethren and sisters engaged 



in this service often endure hardness as good 
soldiers of the cross of Christ. And they need, and 
because of their self-sacrificing service deserve, the love 
and sympathy and prayers of all of the Lord's faithful 
people,— they have ours daily. Theirs is the pioneer 
work, so indispensable. 

It is a mistake to suppose that this service is merely 
for those who are out of other employment: it is for 
those who seek first the King's business, preferring it 
to all other. These colporteurs forsake other vocations 
of greater ease and profit to use their talents in 
this fullest, best and truest sense, whether the world 
so recognizes them or not. Moreover, in going from 
house to house they get better opportunities for presenting 
the true gospel than can be had in any other 
method known to them or to us. 

It will be noticed from the Secretary's report following 
that the number of DAWNS disposed of this year 
fell behind that of last year; but really the quantities 
were about the same— the difference being accounted 
for by the eight thousand copies of VOL. IV, sent to 
TOWER subscribers in 1897. Besides, the booklets 
have become quite a feature— very effective in the 
spread of the truth. Nor do the Colporteurs merely 
circulate the DAWNS: they leave tracts where DAWNS 
are refused, note the interested ones and call in the 
evenings and help them, and before leaving a city introduce 
them to the WATCH TOWER, or, if possible, 
start them as a little meeting of truth seekers and servers. 
God bless these noble servants! There are evidences 
that the improvement of times is encouraging 
others to enter this service with all their time. 

Nor should we neglect to mention the many noble 
souls, whose family duties hinder continuous service 
for the truth, who are nevertheless doing with their 
might what their hands find to do, to find the "lost 
sheep" of Spiritual Israel and to bring them to the 
green pastures of present truth, and to point out to 
them the glories of our Heavenly King and the beauties 
of his Word and plan. These sent out thousands 
of DAWNS and booklets the past year— loaning, selling 
or giving them gratis, according to circumstances and 
judgment— together with millions of tracts. These 
also are faithful soldiers and overcoming, and being 
blessed accordingly. 

(4) PILGRIM LABORS. -The "Pilgrims" are chosen 
from amongst those whose age, experience, knowledge 
of the truth, general "moderation" and ability for 
public speaking, and freedom from domestic cares and 
obligations fit them specially for their service. They 
visit the friends at different accessible points where 
there are as many as five WATCH TOWER readers and 
hold meetings with them— counseling them in the good 
way. Four brethren are continually engaged in this 

R2403 : page 371 



work at present, besides a number who give a portion 
of their time. 

These take up no collections, either publicly, or 
privately. Their expenses are met out of the Tract 
Fund and are very moderate. Receive them joyfully 
as ministers (servants) of the Lord. And be prompt 
to avail yourselves of their ministries, for their stay 
will be short— from one to three days. They come 
prepared to speak at least twice a day, so drop other 
matters, so far as possible, and enjoy with them a feast 
at the Lord's table. Cards are sent out by the Society 
notifying you of the coming of these "Pilgrims." It 
is desirable that some, at least, of the meetings be for 
believers of "this way"— but you may rely upon it 
that any thus introduced to you by card, as "Pilgrims," 
are fully competent to hold public meetings that will 
be both creditable and profitable. 

(5) TRACT DISTRIBUTION. -All WATCH TOWER 
readers are considered representatives of the tract work, 
and are supplied on application with all they can use 
judiciously as sample copies. Some who can and do 
supply the funds have fewer opportunities for tract 
distribution than others who are unable to contribute 
to the fund— and thus this service is blessedly divided. 
The report of our Secretary and Treasurer on quantities 
of tracts distributed and of the economy with which 
such large results were attained is surely good cause 
for rejoicing. No other Society in the world ever attained 
anything like such results at so proportionately 
low cost. The secret of this is, that the WATCH TOWER 
force labors for the love of the truth and for a future 
reward— accepting merely their very moderate expenses, 
from the Society's funds. 

"Finally, brethren, pray for us, that the Word of 
the Lord may have free course and be glorified."— 
2 Thes. 3:1. Very truly your brother and servant in 
Christ, C. T. RUSSELL, President. 

TREASURER IN ACCOUNT DR. 



To Cash on hand, Dec. 1, '97, $ 191.80 

Good Hopes," 9,286.65 

" " Other Donations, 2,114.07 

Amount, $11,592.52 

Special Donatiom-ZIONS WATCH TOWER, 
office, plant, books, tracts, type, electroplates, 
etc., etc., including the Bible 
House building. Value, appraised by 

Board of Directors, $186,000.00 

Less-Mortg. on Bible House, $15,000.00 
Obligations to friends, 6,966.35 



$21,966.35 

Net Value of Special Donation, $164,033.65 

Total Amount, $175,626.17 



TREASURER IN ACCOUNT CR. 



Net Appraisement of plant, stock, cash, 
etc., approved by Audit Committee of 

Board of Directors, $188,401.53 

Less-Mortgage on Bible House, $15,000.00 

Obligations to friends, 6,453.32 



21,453.32 
Working Capital, Dec. 1, 1898, $166,948.21 



SECRETARY'S REPORT. 



Copies of MILLENNIAL DAWN, circulated 

during the year 1898, 62,027 

Copies of various "Booklets," circulated 

during the year 1898, 20,658 

(This department of the work is self-supporting.) 
Copies of ZION'S WATCH TOWER supplied 
gratis, to "the Lord's poor," and other 

sample copies, sent out free, 228,313 

Copies of Tracts sent out during the year, 2,091,875 

This, represented as usual when referring 

to tracts, represents tract pages, 40,778,102 

E. C. HENNINGES, Sec'y & Treas. 



R2407 : page 371 

"UNTO YOU IS BORN.. .A SAVIOR." 

-DEC. 25.-HEB. 1:1-9.— 

"Behold, I bring you good tidings of great joy, which shall be to 
all people. For unto you is born this day in the city of David 
a Savior, which is Christ the Lord."— Luke 2:10,11. 

"CHRISTMAS Day," in celebration of our dear 
Redeemer's birth, has for long centuries 
been celebrated on December 25th; and altho it is now 
well known that this date is in error, and that it more 
properly corresponds with the date of the annunciation 



to Mary, nine months before our Lord was born, and 
that he was born about October 1st,— nevertheless, since 
the Lord has given no instructions whatever upon this 
subject, and since it is proper to do good deeds and 
think good thoughts upon any day, it cannot be improper, 
in harmony with general usage, for us to remember 
in a social way our dear Redeemer's birth at this time. 

Our Lord Jesus was God's great gift to Israel and 
to the world, as yet appreciated fully only by the Spiritual 
Israelite. Through him also all of God's gifts are 
promised and to be bestowed. (Eph. 4:8.) In view 
of these things, the custom throughout Christendom of 
making Christmas Day a joyful one, by the interchange 
of little tokens of love in the family, and to the poor, 
seems most appropriate. 

The central thought of our Golden Text is that 
Christ is a Savior, provided for the world— for "all people." 

R2407 : page 372 

And while all may gather something of the force 
and meaning of the word "Savior" as signifying deliverer, 
its underlying force and significance are not generally 
recognized. It is supposed that the Lord and his 
disciples spoke the common language of Palestine, the 
Syriac, and in that language this word, rendered Savior, 
signifies "Life-Giver." How much force this adds to 
the meaning of this beautiful text! Jesus was born to 
be a Life-Giver, and this joyful news is to all people. 
He may give life to whomsoever he chooses; and he 
chooses to give it, in harmony with the divine will, only 
to those who come unto the Father through him, by 
faith and obedience. 

A life-giver is a father, and it is from this point of 
view that our Lord Jesus is prophesied to be, by and by, 
known as the Everlasting Father— the Giver of everlasting 
life— to the obedient of the world, not to the 
Church. (Isa. 9:6; 1 Pet. 1:3.) Adam, the father of 
the race, failed to give to his posterity perfect and lasting 
life: through sin he came under the sentence of 
death himself, and transmitted to his posterity only a 
blemished, dying condition. What the whole world 
needs, therefore, is life— eternal life,— and in sending 
Jesus into the world, God was meeting our necessities 
most bountifully. 

But God does not propose to give eternal life to any 
of his creatures unless that gift would be a real blessing: 
and we know that eternal life would be a curse, 
instead of a blessing, to any not in full accord with the 
Lord and his righteous arrangements. Accordingly, we 
are told that all who would have the life which Jesus 
came to secure for mankind, and to offer to all, must 
accept the same according to the terms, conditions and 
limitations of the New Covenant— faith in the Redeemer 
and heart-harmony and obedience to God, to the extent 
of ability. In the present time (sin abounding and 



Satan deceiving and blinding) not many can appreciate 
this great gift of God's love, and not many become his 
disciples in verity. This is the time, therefore, in which 
the Lord selects, "elects," from the whole world of the 
redeemed ones the "little flock," who shall be joint-heirs 
with Christ in the Kingdom. 

But thanks be unto God, we can now see that the 
plan of salvation does not stop with the gathering of 
the elect Church, but that in the full sense of the word 
it is merely beginning there. And the testimony of the 
angelic choir which sang at our Savior's birth, and of 
the angel who declared, "Behold, I bring you good tidings 
of great joy, which shall be to all people," shall 
yet be completely fulfilled. 

In the lesson above set forth (Heb. 1:1-9), the 
Apostle calls attention to the fact that our Lord Jesus 
and his testimonies were but further developments of 
the great divine plan of which God had been speaking 
to his people Israel, "at sundry times and in divers 
manners" in the past. He points out that if it was always 
appropriate to hearken to the Lord's messengers, 
it is much more appropriate that we hearken to the great 
Chief Messenger of Jehovah, our Lord Jesus, "whom 
God hath appointed heir of all things." 

He next points out the basis of our good hopes of 
salvation through Christ— the basis on which divine 
justice and love may operate toward fallen mankind; 
viz., that this Jesus "himself purged our sins and has 
sat down on the right hand of the majesty on high," 
far above angels and principalities and powers. 

When the Apostle points out the high exaltation 
of our Lord Jesus, and that it was a reward for his obedience 
in suffering death on our behalf, he proves four 
things: (1) That our Lord Jesus did give a ransom for 
our transgressions, which was satisfactory to the divine 
justice; so that through his stripes we might be healed, 
notwithstanding the sentence of eternal death which 
was against us through father Adam's transgression. 
(2) He proves this by the fact of our Lord's resurrection 
and high exaltation above angels, to share the 
Father's throne and nature in glory. (3) This exaltation 
of the Savior implies power— power to carry out 
the blessed provisions of the New Covenant, which he 
merely sealed with his precious blood. It must yet be 
made effective to mankind. (4) To make it effective 

R2408 : page 372 

will imply the use of the power and exaltation granted 

to this Life-Giver by Jehovah. Having bought the 

world from under the sentence of death he will in due 

time proceed to the establishment of the heavenly Kingdom: 

thus he shall bring in everlasting righteousness as 

the law of earth; lay judgment to the line and righteousness 

to the plummet; sweep away all the refuges of 

lies; bind the great Adversary, Satan; and, opening the 



eyes of the blind and the ears of the deaf, he then will 
cause all mankind to know respecting the love of God 
which passeth all understanding, which would not that 
any should even perish, but that all might turn unto 
him and live.-Isa. 11:9; 28:17; 35:5; 2 Pet. 3:9,13; 
Rev. 20:2. 

The exalted and fully empowered Life-Giver will 
then stand ready, not only to make known to all mankind 
the terms of the New Covenant under which all 
may have eternal life, by obedience to God in him, but 
as the great Prophet he will stand ready to teach, and 
as the great Priest he will stand ready to help their infirmities 
and to direct their paths in the way of 
righteousness. 

"Hallelujah! What a Savior!" 

"He is able to save unto the uttermost all that come 
unto the Father by him." "I am not ashamed of the 
Gospel of Christ, for it is the power of God unto salvation, 
to everyone that believeth." 



R2408 : page 373 
"THE TRUE LIGHT THAT LIGHTETH EVERY MAN." 
--JAN. l.-JOHN 1:1-14.— 

"In him was life, and the life was the light of men."— John 1:4. 

REACHING far into the past, to the beginning of 
earth's creation as mentioned in Genesis, our 
lesson informs us that even then the Logos, the Word, 
existed, with God. "The Word" is a very good title 
for our Lord Jesus in his prehuman condition: it is the 
translation of the Greek word Logos, which might more 
literally be rendered, "the Expression:" for the great 
and honorable one, the heavenly Father's companion 
"before the world was" made, who is declared to have 
been "the beginning of the creation of God," was in 
every sense of the word a full and complete expression 
of the divine will, mind, purpose, character. Of this 
First-begotten-one the Apostle writes that he was "in 
the form of God"— a likeness of Jehovah (Phil. 2:6), 
but he does not claim, as our common version would 
appear to make him say, that the Logos thought it not 
robbery to be equal with the Father, Jehovah God. The 
Apostle's argument is to the very contrary of this: he 
is showing that the Logos was fully subservient to Jehovah; 
and that it was a proof of this subserviency and 
obedience and humility, that the Logos became flesh, 
the "man Christ Jesus." And further, in harmony 
with the same humility and obedience to the Father, 
he became obedient to death, even the death of the 
cross; and on this account ("wherefore") Jehovah God 
highly exalted him by a resurrection to the divine nature, 



far above angels, principalities, powers, and every 
name that is named,— to a position higher than any 
other, higher than his prehuman condition, next to the 
Father, and an associate of his throne, his glory, his 
power, his nature. 

What the Apostle does say is to the very contrary 
of the statement of our common translation. A good 
translation is furnished in the Emphatic Diaglott:— 
"Who, tho being in God's form, did not meditate a usurpation 
to be like God, but divested himself, taking a 
bondman's form." This is in agreement with the rendering 
of the passage by various Greek scholars, thus: 
"Who. ..did not think it a matter to be earnestly desired," 
—Clarke; "Did not earnestly affect,"— Cyprian; 
"Did not think of eagerly retaining,"— Wakefield; "Did 
not regard.. .as an object of solicitous desire,"— 
Stewart; "Thought not. .a thing to be seized,"— 
Sharpe; "Did not eagerly grasp,"— Kneeland; "Did 
not violently strive,"— Dickinson; "Did not meditate a 
usurpation,"— Turnbull; "Who, being in the form of 
God, counted it not a prize [margin, a thing to be grasped] 
to be on an equality with God, but emptied himself, 
taking the form of a servant."— Revised Version. 

But altho the Scriptures nowhere place the only 
begotten and well-beloved Son of God on an equality 
with Jehovah himself, either while he was here on 
earth, nor while he was the Logos, before he was "made 
flesh," they do assure us that now, in his highly exalted 
condition, the Logos still, Christ Jesus still, he is 
partaker of the divine nature, glory and all power in 
heaven and in earth; and accordingly we are instructed 
that "all men should honor the Son, even as they honor 
the Father." (John 5:23.) However, our lesson introduces 
us to our Redeemer in his prehuman condition, 
a spirit condition, higher than the angels, and assures 
us that all things were made by him: literally, "Without 
him was not one thing made that was made." Thus 
we see that in all of Jehovah's creative work on every 
plane the Logos had preference— "that in all things he 
might have the preeminence."— Col. 1:18. 

The number of Bible students who are non-critical 
is very large. It is not, therefore, surprising that many 
have fallen into the error of supposing that this 
first verse of John's Gospel is a declaration that the Logos 
was the full equal of Jehovah— that the Word, the message, 
was the full equal to the one who sent the Word, 
the expression, the message. Yet this is contradictory 
to reason, as well as contradictory to the testimony of 
our Lord Jesus himself, who unequivocally declared, 
"Of mine own self I can do nothing; as I hear I judge;" 
and again, "The Father is greater than I."— John 5:30; 
14:28. 

Scholars are all aware that the word that is translated 
God in the Old Testament is not equivalent to the 
word Jehovah. Altho its significance is "mighty one," 
it is frequently used for others besides the All-mighty, 



Jehovah: it is used for angels; it is used for great 
men; it is used for false gods. The word Jehovah is the 
specific name for the All-mighty One, to whom all other 
elohim (gods— mighty ones) are subject. So in the New 
Testament, the word theos is the equivalent to elohim, 
and signifies mighty one. It is used in the New Testament 
most frequently in reference to Jehovah himself, 
but sometimes, in referring to man, and to false gods, 
and several times in referring to our Lord Jesus. The 
first verse of John's Gospel is a marked instance of the 
use of theos in referring to Jehovah's Logos, his Only 
Begotten Son, "the beginning of the creation of God." 
(Rev. 3:14.) But the critical Greek student should 
find no difficulty in distinguishing between these two 
Gods, and noting that the one is distinctly referred to 
as the superior of the other, for this distinction is clearly 
shown by the use of the Greek article before theos in 
referring to Jehovah, and the absence of that article 
when theos is used in referring to the Logos. The effect 
of this, expressed in our English language, would render 
the passage thus:— 

"In the beginning was the Logos, and the Logos 
was with the God, and the Logos was a God. The same 
was in the beginning with the God." 

This translation will not be disputed by any Greek 
scholar; and it sets at rest all ground for dispute respecting 
the primary relationship between the Father and 
the Son. Indeed, the expressions, "Father" and "Son" 
imply what is elsewhere stated,— that the Son "proceeded 
forth and came from God" (John 8:42). Otherwise 
these terms, Father and Son, are meaningless. A son can 
never be his own father, nor can it be claimed that a 
son never had a beginning, for the term, son, implies a 
life, existence, being, which had a beginning, and which 
was derived from a father. The Scriptures, when permitted 
to interpret themselves, are beautifully consistent, 
and harmoniously reasonable. But when warped 
and twisted by preconceived ideas and false doctrines, 
the light of truth becomes darkness, and mystery is 
written upon everything connected therewith— not the 

R2408 : page 374 

mystery of God, however, but "the mystery of iniquity," 
of darkness, of error. 

"In him was life." Our Lord's separateness from 
the human family is thus pointed out: in no other man 
than "the man Christ Jesus" was there life. In all the 
race of Adam, the entire human family, aside from 
Jesus, death was working; it thus reigned in the entire 
race from the time father Adam became disobedient and 
forfeited the life that was in him originally, and was 
able to impart to his posterity only dying conditions. 
It was this life in Christ— the fact that he was separate 
from sinners, holy, harmless, undefiled, that constituted 
this Savior, whom the Father sent, a beacon light of 



hope for our race. Had he in any manner forfeited his 
rights to life, either before he came to human conditions, 
or while he was the man Christ Jesus, our light of hope 
would have been extinguished: but possessing his rights 
to life he, according to the Father's program, laid down his 
life on our behalf— a corresponding price for the life of 
Adam, which had been forfeited through sin;— a corresponding 
price, therefore, for all who had a share in 
Adam's death penalty. 

Having thus bought us with his own precious blood, 
he thus became light-giver, hope-giver, to the world of 
mankind, and also its life-giver. Praise God for this 
great light and life provided for a dying world; and altho 
it is true that the light shone amidst the darkness of 

R2409 : page 374 

human depravity without being generally comprehended 
or appreciated, it is also true, nevertheless, that "that 
was the true [antitypical, the real, genuine, not counterfeit 
or typical] light, which lighteth every man that 
cometh into the world." It matters not, therefore, that 
this true light was not comprehended and appreciated 
by the Jews in the days of his flesh, and that he is not 
comprehended even to-day by the world of mankind; 
he, nevertheless, is the true light, and in the Father's 
due time he shall accomplish the great plan of God, of 
which he is the center, the expression, the Logos;— he 
shall enlighten every man born into the world. Nor 
shall any be permitted to languish in darkness, or to fail 
of eternal life by reason of lack of knowledge; in due 
time all the blind eyes shall be opened, all the deaf ears 
shall be unstopped, and the blind shall see out of obscurity 
the great Light which God has raised up, to be 
a prince and a Savior for whosoever cometh unto the 
Father through him.— Isa. 35:5; John 8:12; 14:6. 

True, only a minority have yet seen this light, for 
still "Darkness covers the earth, and gross darkness the 
people." (Isa. 60:2.) We are waiting, however, for 
the glorious Millennial Day in which this great light, 
this true light, shall shine forth as the sun in the Kingdom 
of the Father, and when his faithful ones, his 
jewels, chosen and polished during this time of darkness, 
shall be glorified with himself, and be associated 
in the great work of enlightening mankind, and as the 
Seed of Abraham, in blessing all the families of the 
earth with this enlightenment, and with accompanying 
opportunities for harmony with God, and eternal life. 
-Matt. 13:43; Rom. 8:17; Gal. 3:16,29; 
Gen. 22:17,18. 

Nothing in this, however, offers excuses for those 
catching even a glimpse of this great light in the 
present time. Blessed are their eyes if they see, and 
their ears, if they hear, and such will have the graver 
responsibilities and "stripes," if they do not walk according 
to the light which they have received.— 



Luke 12:47,48. 

The Apostle carefully distinguishes between the 
messenger of the light and the Light itself. Subsequently 
(John 5:35) our Lord speaks of John the Baptist 
as a burning and a shining lamp (mistranslated light). 
A totally different Greek word is used when our Lord is 
spoken of as being the Light, but this same Greek word, 
phos, is used with respect to the Church which is the 
Body of Christ, and with her Lord partaker of the holy 
spirit. Respecting these members of his Body, members 
of the ecclesia, the elect, our Lord expressly says, 
"Ye are the light of the world," using the very same 
Greek word that in this lesson is used with respect to 
himself. It is this same word, phos, that is used in the 
following Scriptures: "If the light that is in thee become 
darkness;" "The children of the light;" "What union 
hath light with darkness?" "Put on the armor of light;" 
"Now are ye light in the Lord;" "Walk as children of 
the light;" "Out of darkness into his marvelous light;" 
"Walk in the light, as he is in the light." A similar 
distinction, as between John and Christ, is to be noted 
in the fact that our Lord is the Logos, the Word, while 
John the Baptist was not the Word, but was merely "A 
voice crying in the wilderness." 

When the Logos was made flesh, became the man 
Christ Jesus, altho he was in a world which he had created 
by the Father's power vested in him, yet the world 
did not recognize him, and even his own nation, to 
whom he specially presented himself, received him not. 
Nevertheless, some of them received him, and as many 
of them as did so were blessed— blessed with the power 
and privilege of becoming sons of God, whereas previously 
their highest possibility had been to be God's 
servants and friends. Here we note the change of dispensation 
from the Jewish to the Christian, and that 
this change was made possible by something which our 
Lord did or offered. What he did was to redeem the 
Jews from the sentence of the Law Covenant, under 
which they rested, and to redeem all mankind from the 
death sentence which came upon all through Adam's 
disobedience. 

Until this ransom had been paid to divine Justice, 
the condemned ones could not be received back to the 
condition of sonship primarily enjoyed by father Adam, 
but forfeited for himself and posterity when he became 
a sinner. The mission of the great Light into world 
was not only to redeem man's life, but also to enlighten 
him and to restore as many as may be willing to accept 
sonship, and this work has not yet been accomplished. 
Nay, it may be said scarcely to have begun, for only a 
remnant of his own nation received the true Light; and 
only a little flock in all, from every kindred, nation or 
people, have received him and his blessing, as now offered 
to mankind,— the vast majority being blinded by 
Satan, and thus hindered from seeing the true Light, as 
the Apostle explains.— 2 Cor. 4:4. 



Those called during this time of darkness, when 
gross darkness covers the people, are called to what the 
Scriptures denominate a "high calling," a heavenly 
calling— not merely to a restoration to human nature, 
and its privileges and blessings lost through sin: they 
are called to special fellowship with the Logos himself 
—called to be partakers of his light, and sharers with 
him in the future work of enlightening and blessing 

R2409 : page 375 

the world. These are sons of God in an especial sense 
—in a sense different from Adam even in his state of 
innocence. (Luke 3:38.) These are invited to be sons 
of God on a plane of sonship higher than the angelic 
sons; viz., as heirs of God, joint-heirs with the Logos, 
partakers with him of the divine nature, which is far 
above angelic and all other natures.— 2 Pet. 1:4; 
Rom. 8:17. 

This power to become sons of God is not granted 
to sinners, but to the justified— to those who have been 
justified by faith, by believing on his name. These are 
begotten, not after the ordinary manner in which fleshly 
children are begotten, not by blood, nor has the will 
of the flesh anything whatever to do with their begetting, 
as it always has to do with the begetting and character 
in a fleshly begetting. In their begetting of the 
spirit of the truth, altho that truth may be presented 
through human agencies, the begetting cannot be accomplished 
by the will of man, but only in proportion 
as the natural will is rejected and ignored, and the will 
of God received instead. The Apostle James (1:18) 
explains this begetting, saying, "Of his own will begat 
he us with the word of truth, that we should be a kind of 
first fruits of his creatures." These "new creatures in 
Christ Jesus," sons of God and prospectively joint-heirs 
with Christ, are expected to receive of the Father's spirit 
so fully (through the word of his grace) that they will 
be willing to suffer reproach for his cause and his truth, 
and like the Logos himself be willing to lay down their 
lives for the brethren, in harmony with the divine arrangement 
of this age, as living sacrifices to God, holy, 
acceptable through Christ. And it is only upon condition 
that they suffer with Christ that they may hope 
eventually to be his joint-heirs in the Kingdom and 
glory and power promised him by the Father.— Rom. 8: 17; 
John 1:11,12. 

The fourteenth verse goes back to take up the subject 
at the same point as verse five, and to repeat the 
narrative from another standpoint. "The Logos was 
made flesh, and dwelt among us." This does not teach 
what is ordinarily called the doctrine of the Incarnation, 
which is understood to signify that the only begotten of 
the Father, the Logos, came as a spirit being, and inhabited 
a fleshly or human body for a time, and was 
again liberated from that body at or about the time that 



the body was crucified. This view of the incarnation 
of the Logos makes nonsense of much of the Scripture, 
and beclouds and mystifies the minds of many Bible 
students. From this standpoint they think of our Lord 
as really a spirit being, who never ceased to be a spirit 
being, and who never was in any sense of the word a 
man, a human being, but who merely appeared to be a 
human being, but actually was not. From this standpoint 
of view our Lord's prayers to the Father, his 
temptations in the wilderness, and his tears and dying 
cry are all made to appear as so much clever acting; because 
this false claim makes it appear that he really was 
so far above human conditions that he could not be 
tried, tempted, suffer, etc. Furthermore, it implies 
that he did not really die, but merely appeared to die, 
and that at the moment the flesh was crucified the Logos 
merely stepped out, and became a silent invisible spectator 
of the tragedy of Calvary. 

But it was no such farcical sacrifice for sins, and 
pretended death without dying, that God had typified 
during the preceding sixteen hundred years, in the 
sacrifice of bulls and of goats, etc., year after year continually. 
Adam's death-sentence was a real sentence, 
a genuine penalty, and the ransom by which we are made 
free from sin was a no less real sacrifice, which our 
Lord— "the man Christ Jesus"— gave on our behalf. 
-1 Tim. 2:5,6. 

The Apostle assures us that he who was rich for our 
sakes became poor: he did not merely pretend to be 
poor, by merely putting on an outer coat of a lower 
nature, but he actually became poor, actually left the 
glory and honor of a higher nature, he actually humbled 
himself and took human nature;— not, however, 
fallen human nature, not sinful flesh, but the human 
nature unfallen, the likeness of humanity free from its 
blemishes through sin and death. 

This is in exact accord with the Scriptures under 
consideration, "He was made flesh:" literally, "he became 
flesh." Nothing less than this great stoop or humiliation 
enabled him to be our Redeemer, and qualified 
him to give to God the ransom price for man's transgression; 
as it is written, "By a man came death, by a 

R2410 : page 375 

man also came the resurrection." It was a man that 
was sentenced to death, and neither an angel's life, nor 
the archangel's life, nor any other life than a man's life 
could be the "corresponding price" which would release 
Adam and his posterity from the death penalty. 
Just so the sacrifice of lower animals could never take 
away sin; because, altho innocent of sin, they were not 
of the same identical nature as the sinner, and therefore 
could not be accepted of divine justice as man's 
ransom price. The Logos did not die in his change from 
spirit nature to human nature; but when "the man 



Christ Jesus" died, it was the full giving up of life in 
every sense of the word— nothing was retained; "He 
gave all that he had" (Matt. 13:44,46),-he gave his 
life, the life of the man Christ Jesus, which had previously 
been the life of the Logos. His being ended: 
"He poured out his soul [being] unto death; he made 
his soul [being] an offering for sin." This is further 
testified to by the Lord himself who, after his resurrection, 
declared, "I am he that liveth and was dead— behold, 
I am alive forever more." "Christ dieth no more; 
death hath no more dominion over him."— Isa. 53:10,12; 
Rev. 1:18; Rom. 6:9. 

"We beheld his glory," his grandeur, his perfection, 
his nobility; it shone out clearly to those who had 
eyes to see it— those who were not blinded by the prince 
of this world. These very glories of the man Christ 
Jesus attest fully that he was not of the sinner race of 
Adam, but that he was indeed an exception to all mankind; 
giving evidence of having been begotten of the 
heavenly Father, in that he was full of grace and truth. 
"As he was so are we in this world," says the Apostle: 
and altho we are by nature sinners and children of 
wrath even as others, yet by grace we have been begotten 
again to a new nature, and this grace of God operating 
in our hearts, enlightening, purifying, sanctifying, 
should, gradually at least, transform us, change us "from 
glory to glory," bringing us more and more to the likeness 
of God's dear Son, our Redeemer and Lord, to 
whom, with God the Father, be praise and thanksgiving 
now and forever, for "so great salvation, which at 
the first began to be spoken by our Lord, and was confirmed 
unto us by them that heard him."— Heb. 2:3. 



