




A prominent feature of Lake Nicaragua is the island of Ometepe, a lush landmass with two massive volcano cones joined by an isthmus





LANDS AND PEOPLES
A Visit to Nicaragua









PEOPLE often call Nicaragua the land of lakes and volcanoes. This land boasts the largest lake in Central America​—Lake Nicaragua. Indigenous tribes called it Cocibolca, meaning “Sweet Sea.” It has hundreds of islands and is the only freshwater lake with oceanic life such as sharks, swordfish, and tarpon.





The sacuanjoche (frangipani) is the national flower of Nicaragua




Nicaragua also has one of Central America’s most isolated regions​—the Mosquito Coast. This is a 40-mile-wide (65 km) band that runs along most of the eastern shoreline and into neighboring Honduras. The Miskito (alternate spelling for Mosquito) are one of several indigenous groups of people in Nicaragua whose history dates back prior to the arrival of Europeans in the 16th century.
The Miskito have strong social ties and unique customs. For example, the Miskito language has no formal words of address, such as “Mister” or “Miss.” In rural communities, younger people address older ones as “Uncle” or “Aunt,” whether they are relatives or not. An older custom among the Miskito is for a woman to greet close friends or relatives by touching her cheek to the other person’s cheek. Then, the woman who initiated the greeting inhales through her nose.





Indigenous people












Literature about the Bible in Mayangna and Miskito, published by Jehovah’s Witnesses

FAST FACTS
Population: 6,176,000

Official language: Spanish. However, in the autonomous regions, Miskito, Mayangna, Rama, and Creole English have equal status

Government: Republic

Capital: Managua

Climate: Mostly tropical, but cooler in the highlands

Land: Coastal plains, mountains in the interior




TEST YOUR KNOWLEDGE
Answer true or false to these statements about Nicaragua:
                 The country’s name is derived from that of Nicarao, the leader of an indigenous tribe centuries ago.

               Nicaragua is the only country in Latin America colonized by both the Spanish and the British.

               During past centuries cities along the shores of Lake Nicaragua were raided by pirates from the Caribbean.

               Nicaragua is the least densely populated land in Central America.


Answers: All are true.


