Service Meeting Schedule
Week Starting January 9
Song 10
10 min: Local announcements. Using the suggestions on page 8 or other presentations appropriate for your territory, demonstrate how to present the January 15 Watchtower and the January Awake! In one of the demonstrations, show a publisher working business territory.
15 min: “The Bible Teach Book​—Our Primary Bible Study Aid.”a Generate enthusiasm for starting Bible studies in the new book.
20 min: “How to Start Studies in the Bible Teach Book.” Audience discussion with demonstrations based on page 3 of the insert. We can begin using the Bible Teach book immediately to start and conduct Bible studies with those who show interest. Arrange for three well-prepared demonstrations showing how to use (1) pages 4-5, (2) page 6, and (3) the first paragraph on page 7 to start a Bible study when making a return visit. Outline each presentation beforehand, and review it afterward. The consideration of the paragraphs in the Bible Teach book may be abbreviated as needed. Conclude each demonstration with the publisher arranging the next visit.
Song 125 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting January 16
Song 178
10 min: Local announcements. Selected Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry. Encourage everyone to view the video Transfusion-Alternative Health Care​—Meeting Patient Needs and Rights in preparation for the discussion that will be held in two weeks at the Service Meeting.
15 min: Organized to Do Jehovah’s Will. Talk and audience discussion based on pages 4-7 of the book Organized to Do Jehovah’s Will. Following an introduction of less than three minutes based on page 4, conduct an audience discussion of page 5 to the subheading on page 7. Further portions of the Organized book will be considered at future Service Meetings.
20 min: “Young People Who Are Shining as Illuminators.”b Invite youths to comment on how they have been able to witness at school. One or two comments may be arranged in advance.
Song 107 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting January 23
Song 60
10 min: Local announcements. Read accounts report and donation acknowledgments. Using the suggestions on page 8 or other presentations appropriate for your territory, demonstrate how to present the February 1 Watchtower and the February Awake! Have a youth give one of the presentations.
15 min: Local needs.
20 min: “Show Personal Interest​—By Asking Questions and Listening.”c When discussing paragraph 2, ask the audience what questions they have found to be effective for starting conversations. Demonstrate how to draw a person out by using tactful questions and listening attentively.
Song 205 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting January 30
Song 197
10 min: Local announcements. Remind publishers to turn in field service reports for January. Mention the literature offer for February, and have one presentation demonstrated.
15 min: Loving Provisions for Our Benefit. To be handled by an elder. Read and discuss the January 3, 2006, letter from the branch office to all congregations concerning ways to benefit from the activities of the Hospital Liaison Committee (HLC) and the Patient Visitation Group (PVG).
20 min: “A Video That Highlights an Important Medical Trend.” Read Acts 15:28, 29, and briefly emphasize that the principal reason why Christians refuse blood transfusions is to honor God’s law on the sanctity of blood. Then get right into a discussion of the Patient Needs and Rights video, using the questions that are provided in the article. Conclude by reading the last paragraph.
Song 45 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting February 6
Song 74
10 min: Local announcements.
25 min: Getting to Know Our New Teaching Tool. Talk and audience discussion. Invite audience to comment on features of the Bible Teach book that they appreciate, such as the introductory questions and review box that highlight the main points of each chapter (pp. 106, 114), the visual aids (pp. 122-3, 147, 198), and the appendix (p. 197, pars. 1-2). The book’s tone is warm and appealing (p. 12, par. 12). It gives simple, clear explanations (p. 58, par. 5) and uses effective word pictures (p. 159, par. 12). The preface is designed to help us start Bible studies (pp. 3-7). Demonstrate how to use the box on page 7 with a new Bible student. Relate experiences that have been enjoyed using the new book.
10 min: Auxiliary Pioneering Brings Blessings. (Prov. 10:22) Invite those who served as auxiliary pioneers last spring to relate how they arranged to do so and what joys and blessings they experienced as a result. Encourage all to consider prayerfully whether they can auxiliary pioneer during March, April, and May.
Song 16 and concluding prayer.
[Footnotes]
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.

