The Bible Teach Book​—Our Primary Bible Study Aid
1 How thrilling it was to witness the release of the book What Does the Bible Really Teach? at the “Godly Obedience” District Convention! Delegates rejoiced to receive a personal copy at the close of the Saturday program. How will this new teaching tool be utilized? It is designed to be our primary Bible study aid. Although the new book will first be featured as the literature offer in March, publishers are encouraged to begin using it immediately to start and conduct Bible studies.
2 Current Bible Studies: Publishers conducting Bible studies in the Knowledge book or Require brochure should use good judgment in deciding how and when to begin using the new publication during the study. If a study was started recently, you could simply start from the beginning of the new book. If you are further along in the Knowledge book, you might continue the study in the corresponding chapter of the Bible Teach book. If you are toward the end of the Knowledge book, you may decide to complete that publication.
3 No doubt all of us know many people who would benefit from studying the Bible Teach book. Why not offer each person a Bible study in this progressive study aid? For example, those who have studied the Require brochure or the Knowledge book but who did not progress to dedication and baptism may wish to resume their study using the new book. Parents may decide to use the publication as they impart accurate knowledge of God’s will to their children.​—Col. 1:9, 10.
4 Studying a Second Book: Is there a provision for a Bible student to study a second book after completing What Does the Bible Really Teach? Yes. If it is evident that a student is making progress, although slowly, and is developing appreciation for what he is learning, the Bible study may be continued using the book Worship the Only True God. We are confident that the Bible Teach book will be a powerful tool in our hands as we carry out the commission to make disciples.​—Matt. 28:19, 20.

