Young People Who Are Shining as Illuminators
 1. How does the Bible indicate that Christians would stand out, and how do those words apply to Christian youths today?
1 Jesus told his disciples: “You are the light of the world.” (Matt. 5:14, 16) Like a city situated on a hilltop, gleaming in the sunlight, they would stand out. Today, many young Christians are “shining as illuminators in the world” by their upright conduct and zealous witnessing.​—Phil. 2:15; Mal. 3:18.
 2. What are some ways you can witness to teachers and classmates?
2 At School: How might you give a witness at school? Some youths have taken advantage of class discussions on such subjects as drugs, evolution, and the Holocaust​—to name just a few. One sister used an assigned essay on terrorism to give a witness about God’s Kingdom as the real hope for mankind. The teacher was impressed by the well-thought-out report, and this opened the way for a further witness.
 3. How can you let your light shine at school through your conduct?
3 Another way to shine as an illuminator is by your conduct and modest dress and grooming. (1 Cor. 4:9; 1 Tim. 2:9) When students and teachers see that your deportment is different, some may be drawn to the truth as a result of your fine conduct and give you an opportunity to share Bible truths. (1 Pet. 2:12; 3:1, 2) Displaying godly conduct may not be easy, but Jehovah will bless you richly. (1 Pet. 3:16, 17; 4:14) To arouse interest in the good news, you may read Bible literature during breaks or leave it where others can see it.
 4. What are some benefits of witnessing at school?
4 Letting your light shine at school strengthens your faith and helps you build a wholesome pride in serving Jehovah. (Jer. 9:24) It likewise serves as a protection. One sister said, “One benefit of speaking about my beliefs is that students do not try to pressure me into doing things that are not in harmony with what the Bible says.”
 5. (a) How are some youths expanding their ministry? (b) What are your spiritual goals?
5 Expanded Service: Another way in which many youths are shining as illuminators is by expanding their ministry. After finishing high school, one brother moved to serve where there was a greater need for Kingdom proclaimers. He was part of a small congregation with only one elder. “I am having the time of my life here,” he wrote to a friend. “The ministry is so refreshing! We talk for about 20 minutes at each door because people want to hear all you can tell them.” He added: “I just wish that every young person would do something like this and feel what I feel. There is nothing better than to serve Jehovah with all we have.”
 6. What do you appreciate about the young people in your congregation?
6 How proud we are of you young people who are shining as illuminators in the world! (1 Thess. 2:20) As you serve Jehovah with your whole heart, soul, mind, and strength, you will reap “a hundredfold now in this period of time . . . and in the coming system of things everlasting life.”​—Mark 10:29, 30; 12:30.

