Announcements
◆ Literature Offer. For June: New World Translation and the Word of God book, for $1.25. For July: “Then Is Finished the Mystery of God” with one booklet, for 50c. Try to cover territory not covered with the “Mystery” book in May.
◆ District assembly lapel cards in English and Spanish may be ordered by overseers. Wearing these to the assembly will contribute to advertising en route and at the convention city. Lapel cards are not obtainable at the book counters at assemblies. Lapel cards are 1c each and celluloid holders are 5c each. There will be no bumper signs this year. Pioneers should bring their cafeteria tickets with them and treat them as they would cash, since replacements will not be available.
◆ Due to increasingly perilous times, and so as not to invite thieves, it might be best not to advertise in the newspapers through press releases the names and addresses of brothers out of town attending an assembly.
◆ Outlines for public talks delivered circuit and district servants during the past few years are being sent to all congregations with the May written review. Speakers may be assigned to give these talks and scheduled when convenient, adding further variety in subjects for public lectures.
◆ Starting May 3 circuit servants will give the public talk “Education That Equips You for Life.”
◆ The world’s “Memorial Day” holiday comes on Saturday, May 30, this year. Where appropriate, special witnessing may be arranged at cemeteries; otherwise, congregations may find it advantageous to share in regular magazine day activity.
◆ The Society now has a limited supply of deluxe songbooks. If any congregation wishes to order some, you may do so at the ratio of one to every five publishers. We will fill orders as long as they last. They are 50c per copy. Pioneers may receive a copy for 25c.
◆ New publications available:
The Truth That Leads to Eternal Life​—Armenian, Ga, Icelandic, Polish, Russian, Sango, Twi
“Make Sure of All Things; Hold Fast to What is Fine”​—Spanish
“Your Word is a Lamp to My Foot”​—Cebuano, Greek, Hiligaynon, Iloko, Swahili, Tagalog, Twi
“Singing and Accompanying Yourselves with Music in Your Hearts”​—Sango
The Approaching Peace of 1,000 Years​—Danish
◆ Available again in U.S.A.:
“Make Sure of All Things”​—Japanese
Concordance​—French
“Let Your Name Be Sanctified”​—French
God’s Way Is Love​—Polish
What Has God’s Kingdom Been Doing Since 1914?​—Arabic
◆ Out of stock in U.S.A.:
Watchtower bound volume 1969​—Spanish
Awake! bound volume 1969​—Spanish

