Being Well-Pleasing to God
1 Jehovah’s witnesses appreciate the fact that it means everything to them to please God. Jesus took the lead in this and, while on earth, set the pattern for us. He said: “He that sent me is with me; he did not abandon me to myself, because I always do the things pleasing to him.” (John 8:29) He told the crowds that came to bear him: “This is the work of God, that you exercise faith in him whom that One sent forth.”​—John 6:29.
2 Accordingly, to have Jehovah’s favor and approval on ourselves and our families, and to expect our ministerial work to prosper, we must exercise faith​—faith in the leadership of our Lord Jesus Christ, whom Jehovah sent forth. This faith will impel us to do the same work that Jesus did. He had faith in his Father, knowing that God was with him. Jehovah and Jesus Christ are more interested than we are in ourselves and in the Kingdom interests we are caring for. Consequently, we can be sure that God will prosper our work that is done in faith.
3 The work that we are doing during May to acquaint people with the meaning of the Bible book of Revelation is certainly backed fully by Jehovah, for he gave his Son the Revelation to John. We want everyone to hear this message, especially since it applies to the things taking place now and momentous things shortly to occur. Where we find those who will read with faith, we will be bringing them happiness, as John himself wrote.​—Rev. 1:3.
4 The book “Then is Finished the Mystery of God” should therefore be offered with full confidence. Why? It is really God who draws people. (John 6:44) Assuredly his spirit is strong in the understanding supplied by the “Mystery” book. Keep in mind that we are searching for persons who have some desire in their hearts to worship God, persons whose mental inclination is toward spiritual things. Jehovah has shown through the leading of his people during the past years that he knows exactly what is needed at just the right time to influence the minds of men and he knows best because he created man. We would never know in our own wisdom what to say or do.
5 During the first eight months of this service year, and especially during April, thousands of persons have taken up Jehovah’s service, and a great number of these have been baptized. These good-hearted persons hope to survive the “great tribulation” that will soon befall this system of things, as emphasized in the “Mystery” book. Many are still studying the Truth book. What better opportunity to help them additionally to get the stronger “meat” of God’s Word than by taking them along with us in presenting this book on Revelation to the people and taking them on studies that we start in this publication?
6 The apostle Paul says: “Moreover, without faith it is impossible to please him well, for he that approaches God must believe that he is and that he becomes the rewarder of those earnestly seeking him.” (Heb. 11:6) By Christian works along with faith we can confidently expect to be rewarded with a prosperous ministry, as well as being blessed by seeing Jehovah reward the honest-hearted persons whom we help.​—Jas. 2:20-23.
[Blurb on page 1]
Well-pleasing to God by faith with works.

