Branch Letter
Dear Kingdom Publishers:
Forward! was the watchword for March. With the Memorial and the special public talk a great impetus was given to our work, so much so that 374,878 publishers went forth preaching the good news. Isn’t that a marvelous new peak?
That means that for the first seven months of our service year our average of publishers has been 364,360. When that figure is compared with last year’s we find that on the average we have 20,687 more regular publishers in the field each month this year. And during the same seven months 20,721 persons were baptized in the United States. Is it not remarkable that the number baptized is so close to the average increase in regular publishers? It is clear that those dedicating their lives to Jehovah are doing exactly what they should do​—moving right into the field service and offering regular support to those who have continued faithful for many years. This is a delight to our hearts.
And there’s another fine increase​—185,351 new subscriptions in March, or about 21,000 more than last March. Also, 7,082,547 magazines were distributed, and this represents over three-quarters of a million more than for March last year. The number of Bible studies is also moving up again. There were 307,873, and these are not people we have been studying with for years and years with little result. No, for every six months on the average we are studying with a new group of people, people who are grasping the truth and fleeing from Babylon the Great. How good that is!
So far reports show that over 810,000 attended the Memorial in the United States. That signifies an increase already of well over 60,000, with about 90 congregations still to be heard from.
Things are truly moving ahead, and now the April report will be looked for with keen anticipation. After that, onward to the assemblies this summer and the fine spiritual feast we can confidently expect. When we think in terms of the overall activity of this 1970 service year, all of us are saying to ourselves, “What increases!” and, “How fast the time is going!” Let us make good use of the time remaining to aid as many as possible to become men of goodwill. Let us help them to attend one of the “Men of Goodwill” District Assemblies. Abounding with you in joy, we remain
Your brothers making disciples,
BROOKLYN BRANCH OFFICE

