Keep Lending a Helping Hand
1 “Strengthen the weak hands, you people, and make the knees that are wobbling firm” (Isa. 35:3, 4) This is what is needed in rendering help to those new ones who have just begun to share in the field service in March and April.
2 Arranging to give assistance cannot be left to chance. Those who have conducted studies with new publishers should continue to help them, taking one progressive step after another until they are walking without “wobbling” in Jehovah’s service. Help them to prepare for the service and then make definite appointments to take them with you into the ministry. If they get results and have joy in the ministry, they will want to go again.
3 Oversees should check regularly to see if new publishers as well as others who may be faced with some discouragement or problems in the ministry are receiving the assistance they need. Periodically, it would be good to sit down with each book study servant and go over the spiritual needs of each one in the group and review how help can best be given. Personal visits to the homes of families and individual publishers help to build their spirituality.
4 Book study servants, do you in reflecting ability also demonstrate dependability in doing your part in the shepherding of the flock? Do you see that each one is assisted each month according to his individual need? Is the next step for a certain one house-to-house work? Or has the time come now when a concerted effort, with Jehovah’s help, will produce a Bible study? Do you have good arrangements for the service in your group each week, with sufficient territory and the working of the territory planned out for the best results? Help others to work with you in lending a helping hand.
5 Do you enjoy a cheerful, upbuilding visit from someone you know well? We all do, especially when the visit is by one of our brothers and when we need a little encouragement, or when we have been ill. Even though we are very busy, let us not neglect to visit those who need our help. Perhaps at times what you do will not amount to much in your eyes, but to the one visited it will mean very much. it is reassurance that you care.
6 There is one thing about giving in behalf of others​—you usually get a richer blessing from this than the one receiving. Paul made reference to this principle enunciated by Jesus, at Acts 20:35, in discussing with overseers how, in following his example, they “by thus laboring . . . must assist those who are weak.” Have you noticed that the ones who are so generous in giving of their time and ability in assisting others are the ones who are the happiest? Increase your happiness by regularly looking for and using your opportunities to lend a helping hand.

