Plan to Attend All Four Days!
1 By this time you have undoubtedly selected the convention you will attend this summer. If not, we urge you to do so now; and as you plan, be sure to include all FOUR days. The program for each “Men of Goodwill” District Assembly is loaded with spiritual blessings from start to finish. We suggest that you plan to arrive in the convention city Wednesday evening. This will give you opportunity to get settled in your accommodations ahead of time. If this is not possible, schedule your arrival a couple of hours before noon on Thursday. Occasionally some have missed the opening talk because they were unable to get their noon meal and be in their seats by that time. Therefore allow plenty of time.
2 To ensure having a place to stay, fill out the Room Request form very carefully and completely so the convention department will know the kind of accommodations you desire. The Room Request form should be mailed to the assembly city four to five weeks before the assembly.
3 Can you volunteer to work at this assembly? As you know, there is a great deal of work to be done to take care of everyone’s needs at the convention city. Why not fill out a Volunteer Service slip designating the kind of work in which you desire to share? Give it to your congregation servant, who will send it to the convention city where you will be attending. Do not send it to the Society.
4 To ensure Jehovah’s full smile of approval on all of us as we attend the assemblies, we all need to watch how we conduct ourselves. When we are a little tired or have to wait a few moments to be served, how refreshing it is to be with persons who manifest love and consideration! We should all endeavor to show these qualities. And what about the children? They need the loving supervision of their parents.
5 Plan to be in your seat when each session starts and make every effort to stay for the united expression of thanks to Jehovah at the close of the day. It is good to be there so you can say “Amen” to the closing prayer. We look forward with you to the many blessings Jehovah has in store for us at the assemblies this summer.
[Blurb on page 8]
Plan now for attending a district assembly.

