Presenting the Good News​—On Back-Calls with the “Mystery” Book
1 We hope it is your privilege to place the “Mystery” book with some right-hearted ones in your territory during May. What will you do once placements are made? Interest has already been shown in the book, so it may be possible to direct the discussion toward a Bible study, either when the book is placed or on the back-call. The question booklet may be helpful to you in doing so.
2 Be positive about starting the study in this publication, even though it is more specialized than the Truth book. We never know how and in what way the minds of individuals will be turned to the truth. A study of Revelation may be just what some people are looking for. When you place the book, if a particular point interests the householder, then this can be further developed on the back-call, leading into a Bible study.
3 The study can be started right in the first chapter, or elsewhere in the book. The meaning of the four horsemen, riding the different colored horses, may prove to be just the thing to catch a person’s interest. If deemed advisable, chapter 15, on the “Earthly Survivors of ‘The Great Tribulation,’” could be considered, showing how he can be one of those who will survive the impending destruction of this system of things, now so very near. You might even skip over to the last chapter, “The Finished ‘Mystery of God’ and You,” if it seems appropriate to discuss the operations of God’s kingdom in removing wickedness and the blessings that will come to those who survive the “great tribulation” into God’s new system of things. You could also mention that this publication is now being studied in neighborhood groups, and you could take up a few points discussed the week before at your book study group and then invite him over to join the study.
4 When you return, it will be good to bring a copy of the “Babylon” book with you, for interested ones may wish to get the volume that takes up in detail the rest of Revelation, namely, chapters 14 to 22. If you find it more appropriate in some cases to lead from the initial discussion of the “Mystery” book right into a study of the Truth book, do so. The important thing is to start a Bible study so that those of good heart can learn the truth that leads to eternal life.

