Revelation​—Does It Make You Happy?
IF YOU paused to name your reasons for happiness, what would you include? Knowledge of Jehovah, companionship with fellow Christians, your family . . . Yes, you’d probably have quite a list.
But would you include your understanding and use of the book of Revelation? ‘What do you mean?’ you may wonder. The apostle John was inspired to write in the opening words of Revelation: “Happy is he who reads aloud and those who hear the words of this prophecy, and who observe the things written in it; for the appointed time is near.” (Rev. 1:1, 3) Don’t you think that receiving the visions of Revelation thrilled John? Surely! But what about us? Though John could not have understood all that he wrote, we have Biblical and historical proof that today “the appointed time is near.” Consequently, what is in Revelation can make us happy.
This is an especially pertinent matter during the month of May, for we will be offering the book “Then is Finished the Mystery of God” in the ministry, as well as having our regular study in it at the congregation book study. Let’s examine our personal outlook toward Revelation and the “Mystery” book; our happiness is involved.
How do you react to the idea of placing the “Mystery” book in the ministry during May? Likely you’ll agree that we should try to leave a copy with those with whom we study and others on whom we call regularly. But are you a bit reluctant about placing the book from house to house? Do you think that you will place more copies of some other book during May than the “Mystery” book? Of course, each Witness can leave with a householder whatever literature he thinks best for that one, be it the Evolution book, the Truth book or something else. But before you conclude what you will try to do in May, consider these points:
They Want to Understand
The first is that many persons are truly interested in learning more about Revelation. They have heard about it, such as about the “horsemen of the Apocalypse.” Yet undoubtedly they do not know what the symbolic language means. One woman studied with Jehovah’s witnesses for a while, but did not make much progress. She attended the Kingdom Hall and heard a talk on Revelation. The overseer writes: “The woman was thrilled with the talk because she had always been interested in Revelation and had never been able to learn about it.” A Witness in California placed a Truth book and a “Babylon” book with a young man in the navy. The man later said: “I concentrated on the ‘Babylon’ book because it dealt with the book of Revelation, which was more interesting to me.” Now he is a brother.
Don’t you believe that there are persons in your territory like that, even though you may never have mentioned Revelation to them? It would be doing such ones a kindness to let them know that we have a book that explains, verse by verse, over half of Revelation and that discusses the remaining chapters in a condensed form (chapter 24). At least offer it to them. You may be surprised to find that some people will accept a book on Revelation though they would not take one on another subject.
They Need to Know
The second point we have in mind is that if persons are going to gain eternal life they need to know many of the very things considered from Revelation in the “Mystery” book. What we mean is this:
If someone is going to live forever, it is essential that he get to know Jehovah God. Does not Revelation chapter four, by presenting a vision of God’s holiness and glory, help one to do that? To live in the new order one must appreciate God’s Son. Revelation chapter five deals with Jesus and his worthiness to be used by God.
A person needs to grasp the meaning of the troubles since 1914 and see that they point to the establishment of God’s kingdom in the hands of Jesus Christ. Doesn’t the “Mystery” book cover that in explaining the sixth and twelfth chapters of Revelation? To understand the Bible one needs to see how the heavenly and earthly classes fit into God’s arrangement. If one is disgusted with immoral conditions, including what the churches permit, he needs to know that there is an organization that stresses moral cleanness, yes, requires it of its members. The new book shows that, when handling the second and third chapters of Revelation. And though the new book does not deal with a great many of the common doctrinal matters, it delivers a strong blow to the Trinity.​—Pages 177, 187-189.
It is interesting that we received a number letters from non-Witnesses who got the “Babylon” book. The book pleased and impressed them. These persons read it rapidly, not lingering on details, and they learned major points, such as the identity of “Babylon the Great” and God’s view of the churches. We feel that the “Mystery” book, in the same way, will help persons to see things that they need to know in order to gain life, don’t you?
One final point is that placing the new book, during May, will help persons in our territory to see certain things about Jehovah’s witnesses that they ought to realize. For example, they ought to realize that Jehovah’s witnesses deal with solid and complicated portions of the Bible, not just the “milk” of the Word. (Heb. 5:12-14) Such deep material is usually shunned by the churches. Don’t you agree that if we place the “Mystery” book with persons they will recognize this difference between Jehovah’s organization and the churches?
As we share in the ministry during May, we can keep in mind these points about the “Mystery” book and the people in our territory. Then as we leave with persons the explanation of Revelation found in the new book, it will be a way in which Revelation makes both us and them happy.
Happiness Through Knowledge and Understanding
As Jehovah’s witnesses we are intensely interested in Revelation, for we recognize that since 1914 we have been living in the “Lord’s day.” (Rev. 1:10) Using the “Babylon” book, we studied the final nine chapters of Revelation verse by verse, and now we are doing the same in our congregation book studies with the thirteen chapters covered in the “Mystery” book. We believe that the more knowledge and understanding of Revelation we get, the greater will be our happiness.
But there are many, many important prophetic details in the book. It would be easy for one, without realizing it, to concentrate on the details and still miss the marvelous overall picture. However, Revelation is not a disjointed collection of dissimilar visions of beasts, trumpets and so forth. Rather it is a smooth progression of connected parts that blend together and build up to a stunning climax. One brother who had a fairly good knowledge of the meaning of various individual symbols and visions in the book was helped to see the beautiful unity and progressive development of Revelation. He was so moved and happy with the knowledge and understanding gained that he exclaimed: “It’s as if I’ve been blind for twenty years and at last can see!”
There follows herein a summary of Revelation from this overall viewpoint. It does not provide all the details or prophetic meanings, but it should deepen appreciation for the broad scope and harmony of the book. Read it, observing how the various chapters connect. Note that often one point in Revelation concludes by leading into the next, which expands and explains what was just considered. Sometimes a matter is mentioned only briefly in one chapter and later taken up and discussed in detail. We truly believe that considering this summary will make the sections of Revelation that you have already studied much more meaningful and moving for you, and that it will aid you as you continue to study the “Mystery” book.
Summary of Revelation
The book of Revelation is in letter form, written about 96 C.E. by the apostle John to “seven congregations” in Asia Minor, representing all the congregation of anointed Christians. The introduction (1:1-3) identifies God as the source and Jesus as the channel for the Revelation. It assures happiness for those who hear and observe the words of the prophecy.
After mentioning Jehovah, the spirit and Jesus, John introduces himself and indicates that what follows pertains particularly to “the Lord’s day” (since 1914). He has a vision of the glorious appearance of the resurrected Jesus, the channel for the entire book. Letters are to be written to seven congregations. (1:4–3:22) Knowing the spiritual condition of the anointed, Jesus provides commendation, counsel and warning. This should give us confidence that God trains those who will be heavenly kings over the earth.
Having seen the one who is the channel of the revelation, John next has a vision of its Author. (4:1-11) God is glorious and awe-inspiring, deserving of our admiration and worship. Around God’s throne are cherubs that emphasize His qualities. And twenty-four older persons (the anointed as reigning in heaven) both worship the Creator and acknowledge that all creatures should do likewise. Jehovah has a sealed scroll, but who can open it?​—5:1-4.
John sees the Lamb, Jesus, take the scroll. Chapter five explains why Christ is worthy this honor. So we should ascribe him honor and be interested in the scroll’s message about God’s purpose affecting heaven and earth in our day. Instead of just reading the scroll, John sees it in action. Christ begins to open the seven seals. The first reveals Jesus as a kingly ruler going forth to the final conquest. The second through the fourth depict by mounted horses the war, famine and extraordinary death since 1914 that have sent millions to Hades. With the breaking of the fifth seal, assurance is provided that God will avenge persecuted and martyred Christians. What John sees when the sixth seal is opened shows that there will be heavenly and earthly changes and that men will seek to be hid from the coming wrath of God.​—6:1-17.
During an interval before the seventh seal is opened John sees what work has to be done before God allows the destructive storm of tribulation to come. (7:1-17) The completion of the work of sealing the 144,000 has to be accomplished. (Later in Revelation [14:1-3] it is shown as accomplished.) Also, holding back the destructive tribulation allows the “great crowd” to gain God’s approval and to worship him along with the anointed.
Now the seventh seal is broken and there is a brief period of prayer and preparation what is to come. (8:1-6) Seven trumpets are to be sounded by seven angels (God’s earthly servants began to deliver judgment messages at their conventions in 1922-1928). So in a series of seven seals, the final one widens out into a vision of seven other things (the trumpets); there is an orderly sequence of connected information. Five trumpet-like messages about elements of Satan’s organization are sounded. The fifth involves a plague of locust-like preachers; it is also said to be the first of three woes. When the sixth trumpet is sounded, comment is made about the releasing of those bound at the Euphrates, where ancient Babylon sat (the remnant were released from Babylonish captivity after World War I). Also the vision shows an army of 200,000,000 cavalry.​—8:7–9:21.
There is an interruption of the sixth trumpet; John sees an angel with a little, eatable scroll. (10:1-11) The apostle learns that in the days of the sounding of the seventh trumpet the mystery of God will be finished. Then he gets the scroll to eat and is told of additional prophesying work to be done. Yet there is more. He is to measure the spiritual temple, and he is told about witnesses who prophesied for a time (1914-1918), were killed by the wild beast and finally revived. So a wild beast is brought into the picture but not explained. The standing up to life of the witnesses precedes an earthquake in antitypical apostate Jerusalem, bringing to an end the sixth trumpet and the second woe.​—11:1-14.
At the sounding of the seventh trumpet an announcement is made about the established Kingdom (the “third woe” to God’s enemies). This results in wrathful persecution from the nations. (11:15-19) The next chapter explains more fully what happened. John sees God’s wifely organization give birth safely to the Kingdom, despite the Devil. There is war in heaven and Satan is cast down to earth, where he persecutes the remnant because of their faithfulness. (12:1-17) This gives warning of one great enemy, Satan. But other enemies come into view. One is the Devil’s beastly political organization out of the sea. It wars against Christians, who thus need endurance and faith. (13:1-10) Another enemy is the modern, dual political beast with two horns that encourages worship of the image of the sea beast.​—13:11-18.
Will these enemies block the sealing of the 144,000? No! John sees the 144,000 happily singing on Mount Zion. (All of this is still under the seventh trumpet.) Then notice is given that there is trouble ahead for the enemies. An angel declares that God will execute judgment, hence he commands: “Fear God and give him glory.” A second angel announces that Babylon the Great has fallen. A third promises torments for worshipers of the beast or its image. Other angels foretell a reaping and announce a crushing at Armageddon.​—14:1-20.
After these judgments and preliminary announcements John sees seven angels with seven plagues. This is under the sounding of the seventh trumpet, so again one series merges into the next. Despite the persecution many come off victorious and they sing praises. The seven angels will pour out bowls of anger, which point out God’s view of various world conditions and the results or effects of his judicial opinion. As with the sixth trumpet, the sixth bowl involves the Euphrates (Babylon). Mention is made also of the gathering to Armageddon, but details are not yet given. With the seventh bowl a voice says, “It has come to pass!” and Babylon is shaken apart and falls.​—15:1–16:21.
Revelation now begins to explain the destruction of Babylon and to show the results. She is likened to a harlot riding upon a scarlet-colored beast with ten horns, it being an eighth king springing from the preceding seven. An angel says that in time the horns will battle with the Lamb, but no details are here given. The ten horns are shown turning on the harlot and destroying her. (17:1-18) Individuals are urged to get out of Babylon the Great before that happens. After she is destroyed kings and merchants miss her, but heaven rejoices. Her destruction is complete and final. (18:1-24) God is to be praised for executing this judgment. It is especially a source of joy to the Lamb’s bride (whose marriage began in 1918) for she has proved victorious over the harlot.​—19:1-10.
Now the thread of Armageddon and those who fight against the Lamb is taken up again and expanded. Both organizations and individuals meet their end at Armageddon. (19:11-21) What about the heavens? Satan is next cast into the abyss for a thousand years. For that period Christ and the 144,000 will be kings and priests in a special sense. Jumping quickly to the end of the thousand years to show Satan’s complete end, the vision depicts his loosing and the rebellion of some humans. Together they are cast into the lake of fire. (20:1-10) Moving back to describe events during the Millennium, the vision shows the dead as resurrected and being judged as worthy of eternal life or of death.​—20:11-15.
Since the old heaven and earth fled away, John sees a new heaven and earth, as well as the blessings that these bring to humankind. He also sees a city, not Babylon, but Christ’s bride. It is holy and perfect, with a river of water of life flowing from it. Abundant provisions are made for life. With this glorious, climactic picture of the governing organization of the new system the series of visions of Revelation concludes.​—21:1–22:7.
John is overwhelmed emotionally and wants to worship the agent who communicated the vision; but he is reproved. The prophecy is not to be sealed. Hearers of it are to invite others to take life’s waters free. No one should add to or take away from the scroll. Jesus again reminds readers that he is coming quickly. John responds, and concludes with a benediction upon the holy ones.​—22:8-21.
Brothers, with this summary before you, why not quickly go through Revelation, perhaps striving to read it at one sitting. We feel it will aid you to get the overall sense and significance of the prophecy. The summary should help you as you study the “Mystery” book in the congregation study, producing happiness. And that happiness will even be multiplied during May by distributing the book in the ministry. In regard both to ourselves and to those with whom we place the new book we can expect fulfillment of the assurance about Revelation: “Happy is anyone observing the words of the prophecy of this scroll.”​—Rev. 22:7.

