Your Service Meetings
WEEK STARTING MAY 10
Theme: Working to Please God and “The Prince of Peace.” Song
11 min: Introduction, text and comments. Include consideration of Branch Letter.
12 min: “Singing​—a Part of Our Worship.” Talk by mature brother. Use practical points in April 1, 1970, “Watchtower.”
12 min: “Being Well-Pleasing to God.”
(9 min.) Discuss main points in article by audience participation.
(3 min.) Ask audience to give reasons why they feel “Mystery” book will be appropriate to offer to people in local congregation’s territory.
12 min: “Keep Lending a Helping Hand.” Combination talk and audience participation. Make local application. Audience can be invited to amplify the different ways all can lend a helping hand spiritually.
 2 min: Accounts servant’s report.
11 min: Concluding comments. Discuss local report for April and “How Did We Do in March?” Song 28.
WEEK STARTING MAY 17
Theme: Walking So As to Help Others. Song 88.
 5 min: Introduction, text and comments.
10 min: “Gossip Can Be Deadly.” Talk by mature brother based on article in April 15, 1970, “Watchtower.” Conclude with positive, warm appeal for all to let only good things spring from the heart and through the mouth.​—Luke 6:45.
15 min: “Revelation​—Does it Make You Happy?” pars. 1-12. Discuss with audience by questions and answers.
11 min: Presenting the Good News​—“On Back-Calls with the ‘Mystery’ Book.” (Demonstration) After very brief introduction using points from paragraphs 1 and 2, go right into demonstration on starting a Bible study in the “Mystery” book.
(6 min.) Publisher returns in week, to find interested person has read first chapter and thumbed through other chapters. Publisher asks if he has seen picture on page 60. Both turn there and publisher briefly explains by asking questions to draw out householder. He recognizes that rider on white horse represents Christ Jesus. Calendar in background shows the time is October 1914. A sword, he acknowledges, represents war, which was raging at that time on an unprecedented scale. If food items were so short they had to be weighed out, what would this represent? Yes, food shortage or famine conditions. The next rider is readily recognized as symbolizing death. The coming of all of these from and after 1914 gives proof that we have entered the “time of the end.” Interested one is fascinated by this discussion. Publisher turns to page 37, and suggests that they consider vision in more detail. Introduces question booklet and study is started.
(3 min.) Discuss how study might be started at beginning of book or at other points in book.
10 min: “Plan to Attend All Four Days!” Father sits down with family and final plans are made for attending the “Men of Goodwill” District Assembly. They discuss getting there on time and not missing any part of the four-day program. They briefly review facts needed for completing Room Request and all are given Volunteer Service forms to fill out, except Johnny, who, because of being quite young yet, will work with his father. Father then discusses some points on conduct at the assembly.
 9 min: Concluding comments. Song 58.
WEEK STARTING MAY 24
Theme: Honoring Jehovah Wholeheartedly. Song 22.
11 min: Introduction, text and comments, also Theocratic News.
12 min: “Preparing Now for Summer Activities.” Audience participation. Conclude with discussion of what congregation is planning in helping all to have full share in Jehovah’s service during summer months.
25 min: “Revelation​—Does It Make You Happy?” from subheading “Happiness Through Knowledge and Understanding” to the end. Discourse.
12 min: Concluding comments. Overseer gives few comments about meeting attendance for past few months. Commends where progress has been made; calls attention to need for improvement, where this exists. Include appropriate announcements on page 7. Song 55.
WEEK STARTING MAY 31
Theme: Conquering Evil with Christian Good.​—Rom. 12:21. Song 14.
 5 min: Introduction, text and comments.
12 min: Talk on theme for the month. Experiences from the “Yearbook” can be used to illustrate theme. (One or more on the following pages might be used: 131, par. 2; 154, par. 1; 271, par. 3, and 311, par. 2.)
14 min: Do You Pray That God “May Open a Door of Utterance” to You? (Col. 4:3, 4) Talk and “Yearbook” experiences to illustrate the need to be alert to opportunities for incidental witnessing.
Why do some brothers always seem to have good experiences in witnessing to fellow employees, schoolmates business contacts, etc.? The answer lies in being alert to speak the truth at every appropriate opportunity. They just want to speak out what is in their hearts, hoping that those who hear may be prospective “sheep.” Select a few of the following experiences from the “Yearbook” to illustrate opportunities and results. Traveling: See pp. 188, par. 1; 231, par. 6, and 263, par. 2. To fellow workers: See pp. 86, par. 2; 141, par. 6; 213, par. 4, and 249, par. 3. In waiting room: See p. 182, par. 3. Ask audience for other opportunities.
17 min: Presenting the June Offer. (Demonstration)
(2 min.) Chairman: Again have privilege of offering “New World Translation” and “Word of God” book. What a fine combination this proved to be when offered in December! Publishers may use any method in presenting offer, but following presentation or variation may be helpful.
(6 min.) (After greeting and giving name) “I’m making brief visits on my neighbors to show them one of the most popular and helpful Bible translations published today. [Show Bible.] Most people tell us, when we show them this Bible, that they already have a Bible. Likely you do, too. [Let householder answer.] We are not here as Bible salesmen, to sell you just another Bible, but we would like you to obtain this modern up-to-date translation and this Bible-study aid that goes with it. The two go together so you will have the means in your home to understand the Bible. Both are only $1.25.”
Even before householder replies to offer, publisher could continue at this point, inquiring sincerely, “Do you find sometimes, in reading the Bible, questions come to mind? [Likely the answer will be Yes.] In fact, some wonder if the Bible is really the Word of God. Possibly you have heard statements made by prominent clergymen, casting doubt on the Bible. [Allow for response.] But here is where this book will be of much help. Here is proof positive that the Bible is really the Word of God. It will help you see from the Bible that God has not forgotten mankind upon the earth and how you (and your family) can share in the wonderful future he has promised. This modern-language Bible and the book can be yours.” (Extend to householder.)
(6 min.) The above presentation could be varied according to what you find best in your territory. After same opening, and proceeding to point where mention is made that some clergymen are doubting the Bible, you could say: “Did you know the same was true in Jesus’ day? [Allow for response.] Looking here in the concordance of the ‘New World Translation’ under ‘Word of God’ we find the first reference takes up what Jesus said about some of the religious leaders of his day. [Read Mark 7:13.] Just a few verses earlier he said . . . [read vss. 7, 8]. But how should the Bible be viewed? Jesus, in praying to God in behalf of his followers, said . . . [read John 17:17]. The Bible, then, contains the words of truth. Moreover, its words are life-giving, since it points the way to everlasting life. We invite you to accept the ‘New World Translation,’ which we have been reading from and this companion Bible-study aid.”
(3 min.) Chairman concludes encouraging all to prepare well and buy out the time to share regularly in the house-to-house work with the offer.
12 min: Concluding comments. Include discussion of Question Box. Song 77.

