Kingdom Hall Construction​—An Important Aspect of Sacred Service
 1. What has been accomplished in Kingdom Hall construction, but what need still exists?
1 During the past five years, 633 Kingdom Halls have been built, 1,193 remodeled, and 1,785 repaired in the United States branch territory. We sincerely appreciate the hard work of the Regional Building Committees and all who assisted them. While a tremendous amount of work has been accomplished, there is still much to be done in Kingdom Hall construction. How can all of us support this important aspect of our sacred service to Jehovah?​—Rev. 7:15.
 2. How can we directly support the work of Kingdom Hall construction?
2 Be Willing: If you are a baptized publisher, we invite you to make yourself available to work with the Regional Building Committee by filling out a Kingdom Hall Volunteer Worker Questionnaire. (Ps. 110:3) All who volunteer must be willing workers and have a spirit of cooperation. (Ps. 133:1) Even if you do not have construction skills, you can still contribute much to the success of a building project. You may also receive training that will allow you to be used more extensively in the future.
 3. In what other ways can we show our support for this arrangement?
3 If you are unable to volunteer, you can show your support by encouraging others who are able to participate in the arrangement. You can help to cover the assignments in the congregation of those who are away. By planning ahead, elders can make sure that the congregation is well cared for when some are working on a Kingdom Hall project. Undoubtedly, Jehovah is pleased when we work together unitedly for the advancement of Kingdom interests.​—Heb. 13:16.
 4. How can we build up those who participate in Kingdom Hall construction projects?
4 Be Positive: Building places of worship involves much time and hard work. Understandably, then, those invited to assist on building projects will be away from their home congregations at times. May we be quick to offer commendation and encouragement to construction volunteers, who make sacrifices to care for this “necessary business.”​—Acts 6:3; Rom. 14:19.
 5. How can construction volunteers show balance?
5 Be Balanced: Preaching about God’s Kingdom is our primary theocratic activity. (Mark 13:10) With this in mind, Regional Building Committees endeavor to schedule projects so that volunteers are not required to be away from their congregations unnecessarily. Likewise, construction volunteers strive to be balanced in caring for their many responsibilities. They take the initiative to make sure that their congregation assignments are cared for when they are away.
 6. What is accomplished when all in the congregation cooperate together to advance true worship?
6 The apostle Paul described the members of the congregation as working together in unity “for the growth of the body for the building up of itself in love.” (Eph. 4:16) Our love for Jehovah and for true worship moves us to cooperate together to get the good news preached and to support Kingdom Hall construction.

