Service Meeting Schedule
Week Starting May 8
Song 2
10 min: Local announcements. Selected Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry. Using the suggestions on page 4 or other presentations appropriate for your territory, demonstrate how to offer the May 15 Watchtower and the May Awake! In one of the presentations, have the publisher place the May 1 and May 15 issues of The Watchtower and the May Awake! with a person on his magazine route who has missed receiving the May 1 Watchtower. When offering the three magazines, feature only one issue. Publishers may visit magazine-route calls either once or twice a month.
20 min: “Follow Me Continually.”a Briefly interview an exemplary publisher who strives to keep his life simple and limits personal pursuits in order to do more to advance Kingdom interests and serve others. Highlight the blessings he receives from doing so.
15 min: Local experiences. Invite audience to comment on the blessings they have received from exerting themselves in the ministry during March and April. Highlight results achieved in starting Bible studies and helping new ones to attend the Memorial. One or two outstanding experiences may be reenacted.
Song 91 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting May 15
Song 9
10 min: Local announcements. Encourage everyone to watch the video Noah​—He Walked With God in preparation for the Service Meeting the week of May 29.
10 min: Working Together in Unity Under Christ’s Leadership. A talk based on the material under the subheading “What Recognition of His Role Means” on pages 13-15 of Organized to Do Jehovah’s Will.
25 min: “Kingdom Hall Construction​—An Important Aspect of Sacred Service.”b When discussing paragraph 2, show a Kingdom Hall Volunteer Worker Questionnaire (S-82) form and explain how copies may be obtained. Interview some who have shared in the construction or renovation of Kingdom Halls.
Song 133 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting May 22
Song 86
12 min: Local announcements. Read accounts report and donation acknowledgments. Using the suggestions on page 4 or other presentations appropriate for your territory, demonstrate how to offer the June 1 Watchtower and the June Awake! As the setting for the demonstrations, show a family having a practice session.
15 min: “Show Personal Interest​—By Being Gracious.”c When considering paragraph 4, briefly review the box “What Do You Say to an Answering Machine?” on page 2 of the November 2000 Our Kingdom Ministry.
18 min: Good Personal Appearance. Audience discussion based on the Ministry School book, pages 131-3. Consider the five principles listed that bear on our dress and grooming. Mention that we can tactfully use this material to help Bible students understand how to dress appropriately for congregation meetings.
Song 215 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting May 29
Song 42
10 min: Local announcements. Remind publishers to turn in field service reports for May.
10 min: Feature the Teacher book in June. Using the suggestions on pages 3-4 of the January 2005 Our Kingdom Ministry or other presentations appropriate for your territory, demonstrate how to offer Learn From the Great Teacher. As time permits, invite the audience to comment on the good results obtained from using the publication in the field or with their own family.
25 min: “An Example for All Ages.” Following an introduction of less than a minute, get right into an audience discussion of the quiz for the Noah video, using all the questions listed in the second paragraph. Then ask families to relate how they have benefited from participating in the suggested “Learning Activities” on the DVD edition. Afterward, discuss the question and the scriptures in the third paragraph.
Song 9 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting June 5
Song 176
10 min: Local announcements.
15 min: Local needs.
20 min: How to Be Successful in Making Return Visits. Audience discussion based on the box on page 16 of the November 15, 2003, Watchtower. Consider each of the seven suggestions, and invite the audience to comment on how these can be applied locally. Encourage publishers to make return visits with the goal of starting Bible studies with all who accept literature or express interest. Using one of the suggestions found on page 6 of the January 2006 Our Kingdom Ministry, demonstrate how to offer a Bible study when making a return visit.
Song 57 and concluding prayer.
[Footnotes]
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.

