Show Personal Interest​—By Being Gracious
1 “Jehovah is gracious.” (Ps. 145:8) Although he is the Universal Sovereign, he is kind, considerate, and courteous in his dealings with imperfect humans. (Gen. 13:14; 19:18-21, 29) We can enhance our presentation of the good news by imitating our gracious God. (Col. 4:6) This involves more than simply being polite and respectful in our speech.
2 From Door to Door: What if we visit the householder at an inopportune time or when he is too busy to speak with us? We do well to acknowledge such circumstances by keeping our presentation very brief or by offering to return at another time. We kindly refrain from insisting that people accept literature if they choose to decline. Consideration for others will also prompt us to show respect for their property, such as by closing gates and doors and by training our children to do the same. We should make sure that any literature left at not-at-homes is out of sight. Indeed, graciousness will move us to treat others just as we would want them to treat us.​—Luke 6:31.
3 In Street Work: While engaging in street work, we can show courtesy by not blocking the flow of pedestrians and by not congregating in front of businesses. We will be sensitive to the circumstances of others, seeking to speak with those who may have a few minutes rather than those who are clearly in a hurry. At times, we may need to speak up in order to be heard over street noise. Yet, we should do so with dignity, not calling attention to ourselves.​—Matt. 12:19.
4 When Telephone Witnessing: Consideration for others will move us to do telephone witnessing in a place where background noise can be controlled. We show good manners when we readily identify ourselves and explain the reason for our call. Speaking directly into the mouthpiece and maintaining a pleasant tone will help to engage others in an upbuilding Scriptural conversation. (1 Cor. 14:8, 9) By being kind, considerate, and courteous in these various ways, we imitate our gracious God, Jehovah.

