Announcements
HOLY WORSHIP OF JEHOVAH
Those who have now come to know the true God of the universe and his name Jehovah are delighted to honor his name. They want to express to others their knowledge of Jehovah. That is why you find Jehovah’s witnesses actively serving Jehovah in holy array. They say, “I will sing unto Jehovah as long as I live: I will sing praise to my God while I have any being.” (Ps. 104:33; 1 Chron. 16:29, AS) A result of this holy worship is the gathering into association with Jehovah’s people a “great crowd” of persons out of all nations. They swell the ranks of those who regularly praise Jehovah by telling the good news about his incoming New World society to all who will hear. During the month of December Jehovah’s witnesses and their companions will offer to the people the New World Translation of the Christian Greek Scriptures or of the Hebrew Scriptures, and a bound book, on a contribution of $2. Where persons have the Greek Scriptures, Volume I of the Hebrew Scriptures will be presented. Let all worship Jehovah in holy array.
AFTER ARMAGEDDON—GOD’S NEW WORLD
An audience of 165,829 persons from ninety-six nations and islands of the sea heard the stirring discourse “After Armageddon—God’s New World” at the New World Society Assembly of Jehovah’s Witnesses, Yankee Stadium, New York, July 26, 1953. Of this number 117,000 were within and about the stadium, while some 49,000 heard the talk at the assembly’s Trailer City in New Jersey by direct telephone line. All world conditions point to the near-at-hand battle of Armageddon, this lecture revealed, and those who heard it rejoiced to know of the grand hope for surviving into a perfect and righteous earth under a “new heavens.” You may obtain this splendid and heart-cheering message in booklet form with attractive cover design for only 5 cents a copy, or seven copies for 25 cents. Not only will you enjoy reading After Armageddon—God’s New World, but all your friends who like good news will enjoy it too. So why not send today for seven or more copies and help your friends and neighbors to gain hope for a new world?
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES
Week of December 20: The Day for Salvation, ¶1-26.
Week of December 27: The Day for Salvation, ¶27-48.

