Announcements
◆ Literature offer:
May: God’s Kingdom of a Thousand Years Has Approached, with a booklet, on a contribution of 50c.
June: New World Translation and Peace and Security book, $1.25.
July: Peace and Security book for 25c.
◆ Congregations of 75 or more publishers may wish to stock at least two copies of the large-print edition of the New World Translation, perhaps The Bible in Living English, also the Aid book and the Concordance. Then if publishers get an order for one of these publications by showing interested persons their own copies, they can be supplied right away from the local Kingdom Hall supply. Two copies of each of these large expensive books should be enough for such a congregation. When these are placed, order two more. They are cash items.
We suggest that the responsible brothers carefully check their records to determine how many copies of these publications moved out of their stock in the past four months. Do not order more than a four-month supply. We do not wish to store these books on the shelves of the congregations if you will not be using them.
◆ District assembly lapel cards in English and Spanish and also celluloid holders should be ordered on the Literature Order Blank. They will be charged to the congregation literature account. Lapel cards will not be available at the assembly.
◆ If you are planning to attend a convention in another country or want a Kingdom Hall address overseas, it is necessary for you to write the branch office for that country, not the Brooklyn office, to get details. Branch addresses appear in the back of the Yearbook. If you do not find a particular country or island in the branch listing, you can refer to the service chart in the Yearbook to see which branch has jurisdiction and then you may write to that branch office.
The Society is not arranging any Watchtower Tours to any country this year.
◆ The six-month period given for any baptized Witnesses to desist from using tobacco expired in December of 1973. So, all cases involving persons who continue to use tobacco should have been given attention by the congregation judicial committee by this time.

