Presenting the Good News​—Introductions
1 Many publishers have said that one of the biggest challenges they face in house-to-house work is catching the interest of the householder, getting a hearing ear​—yes, finding an effective introduction. Is this true in your case too?
2 Notice the suggestion that Jesus made as recorded at Luke 10:5. He said: “Wherever you enter into a house say first, ‘May this house have peace.’” While this is a greeting that is not common among people in this country today, yet it gives us an idea as to how we might introduce ourselves and begin conversations. How? By identifying ourselves as friends and by featuring something encouraging, something that may bring peace of mind to the householder. You might say: “I’m very glad I found you at home. I have brought something that I’d like to share with you and I hope it will make today one of the happiest days of the year for you.” Does that sound like a warm and encouraging way to start a conversation? How about your introduction? Will it tell the householder that you have come in peace and to bring a good message to him?
3 Would you like to know how some of your brothers are introducing themselves with considerable success in various parts of the country?
INTRODUCTIONS THAT DISPLAY WARMTH
4 Some publishers start the conversation by saying: “How are you today? I’ve brought something encouraging for you.”
5 If the householder comes to the door with a smile, one brother says: “It is a pleasure to meet someone with a smile. It shows you are a happy person. Most people today do not have much to be happy about, do they? . . . I have stopped by to add to your happiness.” If the householder has no smile, the brother says: “I have stopped by with something encouraging. When you read the newspaper you don’t read much to be happy about, do you?”
6 Another starts by saying: “I’m one of Jehovah’s witnesses. You may wonder why we are calling again. Well, we have the very best in mind for you; that’s why we came.”
INTRODUCING A SUBJECT
7 Some publishers have found that if they introduce a subject of interest to the householder, it helps to catch interest. For instance, if a brother notices that a householder may be busy, he says: “Everyone is so busy these days. We often wish we had more time, isn’t that true? Well, I have good news for you. Things are going to change. May I tell you about it?”
8 Some draw attention to problems that concern the householder, saying: “We would like to get your idea on a problem we have here in the community.”
9 One brother says: “I’m looking for people who would like to live forever. Have you ever thought of that?”
10 Talk with other brothers and sisters in your area and you may get some good ideas as you learn what has been successful for them. Try different introductions. When you find an effective way to introduce the good news, use it. What will prove effective depends on the interest of people in your territory, the kind of people you talk to, as well as your personality. Keep the matter before Jehovah in prayer. He can help us to improve our effectiveness in reaching people and presenting the good news.

