Show Loyalty to Our God!
In following up tract distribution and in offering Thousand Years book
1 Our distribution of Kingdom News No. 18, scheduled to be completed by May 12, is a token of our loyalty to Jehovah. How? Though it is a quickly completed work, quite different from our usual approach to the people, we do it because we realize that our God Jehovah knows the minds of men, and through his servants on earth he presents the message that is needed, and at the time when it will be most effective.
2 Loyalty involves sticking closely in devotion to our Sovereign God. Those who have distributed Kingdom News recognize that we must stand loyally by the message delivered. Therefore we return to these people to back up what has been said. We want to cultivate any interest raised by Kingdom News​—to follow through so that it will achieve fully its desired effectiveness. This is also loyalty to our commission to help the people who are “skinned and thrown about like sheep without a shepherd.” We feel an attachment to them and want to lead them to the place of safety.​—Matt. 9:36.
3 An excellent way of expressing our loyalty, both to God and to the spiritually needy people, is by offering them the book God’s Kingdom of a Thousand Years Has Approached. This we will do in May.
4 What has particularly appealed to you in the Thousand Years book? It provides the finest view of what the thousand-year reign will do for mankind. We can actually be most enthusiastic about the points that interest us. Select some of these that you find most attractive.
5 In presenting the book some publishers have been simply showing householders the title and telling them that the Kingdom for which they have long prayed has approached and that they will be encouraged by reading the book. These brothers and sisters have been having excellent success. Others have read to the householder the first paragraph in chapter one and the first sentence of paragraph 3 and in this way have aroused their interest. What have you found to be an appealing way to present the book?
6 Some have first read Isaiah 11:6-9, then have directed the householder’s attention to the first sentence in paragraph 12 on page 144, which says: “In accordance with this, we can look for the charming description of animal life as set out in Isaiah 11:6-9 to have a literal fulfillment with the birds, fishes and land creatures of earth during the millennial reign of the Prince of Peace.” Of course, you will undoubtedly try various presentations, according to the thinking of people in your territory.
7 The Thousand Years book impresses us with the loyalty that God has manifested over six thousand years of time. (Rev. 15:4) He has never deviated from his promise to bless mankind through the Seed, even though mankind has been disloyal and at this time expresses no loyalty at all toward him. God’s loyalty inspires loyalty, however, in his faithful servants today. The final paragraph of the book forcefully expresses our inmost thoughts. After remarking on the unparalleled blessing the approaching thousand years will bring, the book states: “How worthy that thrilling prospect is of each one’s now putting forth his best efforts to realize it in his own case, in faith and appreciation toward Jehovah God, who holds out the inviting prospect!” True, indeed, and our loyalty will prompt us to do all we can to set this same brilliant prospect before many others as the living hope.
[Blurb on page 1]
Loyal to God in the Time of the End.
[Blurb on page 8]
Can You Help a Newer Publisher This Week?

