Would You Be Willing to Help?
1 How? you ask. Well, first let us consider some facts with you and you will no doubt see for yourself how you might help. You were thrilled to learn that during the past service year 193,990 were baptized the world around, weren’t you? Yes, we all were. Did you know that 55,775 of those baptized were here in the United States? Have you heard that during the first six months of this service year another 31,579 disciples have been baptized here? And do you remember that during December, when we distributed Kingdom News, 525,007 shared in the witness work, and that that was 103,112 more than shared in the field service in this country one year previously? Yes, there are many, many new ones associated with us in serving Jehovah. What joy this brings us!
2 Now, can you think of ways you might help these new ones? Some have shared in the field service just a few times. They may not feel strong enough to take the initiative to go out by themselves. Are there some in your congregation who would share in the field service more regularly if they had someone with whom to work​—if you invited them to go along with you? (Eccl. 4:9, 10) Take the initiative in extending the invitation regularly.
3 Some publishers enjoyed offering the Kingdom News to people but do not feel they can make other presentations in the house-to-house work. Could you help one of these to prepare a magazine presentation? Would you be willing to practice it with him until he feels at ease with it? Or you might help him to prepare a one-scripture presentation to use in the regular house-to-house work.
4 New publishers may feel disappointed when some householders choose not to listen to them. But it is good to call to mind what Jehovah told Jeremiah: “And you must speak to them all these words,” but he also told him, “they will not listen to you.” Show them that verse at Jeremiah 7:27. It may be very encouraging to them to learn that their success in the field ministry is not measured by how many persons listen to them. While many do not listen to our presentations, there are many who do and there are many more who observe us. When we are in the service, the angels see us, Jehovah and Jesus see us, and so do the people in the territory. So our presence there and the few words we do speak about Jehovah and his kingdom can be a fine witness and a great honor to Jehovah.
5 On the other hand, many who do not choose to speak to us at length may feel they are too busy to talk. In parting, new publishers could easily extend a handbill and invite the householder to the Kingdom Hall. Some publishers, with reference to the June offer, may tell the householder: ‘If it is not convenient to talk now, perhaps you would like to accept this fine Bible and Bible study aid. They can be yours for a contribution of just $1.25.’
6 Are you one of the newly associated publishers? Then you have tasted the pleasure that comes from serving Jehovah, who gave us the truth as well as all the other things that we enjoy in life. And you have experienced to some extent the happiness that comes from “giving” to others in the witness work. (Acts 20:35) Would you like to have a greater share in the work? Then we encourage you to take the initiative and ask experienced publishers if you may go along with them in the service.
7 Whether you have been in Jehovah’s service for many years or are newly associated, will you take the initiative? Will you show your love for Jehovah and for your brothers by helping them to share regularly in his service?

