Your Service Meetings
WEEK STARTING MAY 12
12 min: Song 14. Introduction, text and comments, Branch Letter and Theocratic News.
 3 min: Accounts report.
17 min: “How Are You Using Your Life?” Question-and-answer consideration of first half of article, up to subheading “A Service to Be Treasured.” Some may wish to comment on scriptures not quoted. Read selected paragraphs as time permits.
15 min: “Show Loyalty to Our God!” Questions and answers. Read selected paragraphs. Include one or two brief demonstrations presenting the “Thousand Years” book.
13 min: Concluding comments. As time permits, relate one or two experiences from the article “Preaching the ‘Good News’ in the Frozen North” in the March 1, 1974, issue of “The Watchtower.” Use the material to encourage the brothers to have a full share in the field service and also to read “The Watchtower.”
Appropriate information from “Announcements” and “Covering Unworked Congregation Territory” can also be included. Song 13.
WEEK STARTING MAY 19
10 min: Song 77. Introduction, text and comments.
20 min: “What Protection for God’s People?” This can be a discussion between one or two elders and one or two publishers who are concerned about Jehovah’s protecting us during the “great tribulation.” Use material in March 15, 1974, issue of “The Watchtower.”
Elders will want to point out the issue involved and that, in the case of Job, it included ‘touching his bone and his flesh’ to determine if he served God out of love or was prompted by selfish considerations. Yes, Satan challenged, “Everything that a man has he will give in behalf of his soul.” Now the question is, Do we consider it a privilege to share in the vindication of God’s name even if it causes us physical suffering, even if it costs us our lives? God will never permit the adversary to wipe out all of His people.
What about God’s preservation of the three Hebrews?
Consider why some of God’s people may die during the “great tribulation.” It is because of the hatred of Satan’s organization for true worship. See the prophecy at Ezekiel 38:15, 16. It may be from physical hardships, the strain of which are too much for some to bear.
There will be survivors. Not a single one of Jehovah’s people will perish at the hands of Jehovah’s executional forces. Jehovah knows how to reward his people in a manner that is beyond their fondest expectations.
17 min: “How Are You Using Your Life?” Cover material from subheading “A Service to Be Treasured” to end of article. Questions and answers. Some may wish to read or comment on scriptures not quoted. Read the last three paragraphs, as well as other selected paragraphs as time permits.
13 min: Concluding comments. Experiences from local brothers in presenting the “Thousand Years” book. You may choose to have one or two of the brothers demonstrate briefly how they have been presenting the book in house-to-house work or to friends and neighbors. Encourage all who can do so to share in field service on the coming worldly holiday. Song 15.
WEEK STARTING MAY 26
10 min: Song 16. Introduction, text and comments. See also Question Box.
18 min: “Would You Be Willing to Help?” Chairman might begin his part by relating briefly one or two of the most upbuilding experiences in the article entitled “Thousands Baptized Each Week,” from the March 8, 1974, “Awake!” The majority of time, however, should be spent in a question-and-answer consideration of the article “Would You Be Willing to Help?” Publishers may also have additional suggestions as to how they might help one another locally.
12 min: Offering the Bible and the “Peace and Security” book. Demonstrate presentations that brothers have found to be effective locally in making the offer. (For further ideas see the November 1973 “Kingdom Ministry.”)
Remember also, we have the large-print “New World Translation,” “The Bible in Living English” as well as the “Kingdom Interlinear Translation.” We have the complete “New World Translation” in Dutch, German, Italian, Portuguese and Spanish, also the Greek Scriptures in French and Japanese.
Persons with whom you study may appreciate having a copy of the “Aid” book, the “Concordance,” or other publications. Feel free to offer any of the Society’s publications that you have on hand.
20 min: Concluding comments. Include an upbuilding and encouraging talk based on the article “What Prevents You from Getting Baptized?” from the June 1, 1974, “Watchtower.” Song 107.
WEEK STARTING JUNE 2
10 min: Song 21. Introduction, text and comments.
20 min: Gaining Personal Benefit from Jonah’s Way of Life.
Jonah probably lived during the ninth century B.C.E. He lived through the experience about which he wrote. The book that he wrote is the only one in the Hebrew Scriptures dealing exclusively with a prophetic message from Jehovah to a non-Israelite city whose people actually repented.
Invite the brothers to open their Bibles to the book of Jonah. Draw them out with the following questions:
1. According to Jonah 1:1, 2 what was Jonah’s assignment from Jehovah, and what problems did it present to him? According to verse 3, what was Jonah’s reaction to the assignment?
WHAT DO WE LEARN FROM THIS? Accept assignments of service willingly and try, with Jehovah’s help, to carry them out without grumbling, finding fault or running away from them.
2. When Jonah fled from his assignment, what did Jehovah do, according to verse 4? What happened after the ship’s crew hurled Jonah into the sea? (1:15-17) What evidence do we have that Jonah recognized that he had followed a wrong course? (2:1, 7, 9) How do we know that Jehovah heard Jonah’s prayer and showed mercy? (2:10)
WHAT DO WE LEARN FROM THIS? When we show sincere repentance for past wrongdoing and ask Jehovah for help, he grants it. We should be careful that we do not accept his undeserved kindness and miss its purpose.
3. What command did Jehovah restate to Jonah? (3:1, 2) What did Jonah now do? (3:3, 4) What were the results? (3:5-9) What was God’s reaction? (3:10) How did Jonah feel about the mercy God extended? (4:1-3, 5)
WHAT DO WE LEARN FROM THIS? Do not feel, like Jonah did at first, that Jehovah owes it to us to do a certain thing. Jehovah did not have to destroy the people of Nineveh just because Jonah preached that message. We should not feel that those to whom we preach should receive an adverse judgment because of their reaction to the message we bring; rather, we should wait on Jehovah and hope the best for them. There may be a change of heart and repentance.
At one time we did not think that so many would be coming back in the resurrection, but there is no reason to be displeased at Jehovah’s mercy; rather, we rejoice that judgment decisions are in the hands of Jehovah and his Son.
4. What added blessing did Jehovah give Jonah? (4:6) What happened to interfere with Jonah’s comfort? (4:7, 8) What fitting comparison did Jehovah make? (4:10, 11)
WHAT DO WE LEARN FROM THIS? Never lack in appreciation for the undeserved kindness Jehovah shows us. Rejoice also when mercy is extended to others.
The account reveals that Jonah proved to be a faithful servant of Jehovah. He was candid, honest, even writing about his own attitude and Jehovah’s dealings with him. Remember the account and benefit personally from it.
17 min: Getting Acquainted with Our Brothers. Interview a number of publishers to bring out points that will be encouraging to the congregation.
Interview some who are newly associated with the congregation. What did you notice about Jehovah’s organization that attracted you to it? What have you come to appreciate about it now? Why is it that you arrange to get to meetings regularly? What would you do if family members or relatives started to oppose you or ridicule the truth? (Encourage tact.) What have you done to share the truth with your friends, neighbors and relatives?
Interview publishers who have been with the organization for a number of years. Why have you stuck with the truth? Why do you keep going from door to door? As you see this old system of things continue to deteriorate, how does it strike you? Have you seen cases where brothers showed tact, kindness and love toward family members not in the truth and it worked out well? With Jehovah’s help, what are your plans for the future? Do you have a favorite scripture that encourages or strengthens you?
13 min: Concluding comments. Draw attention to some of the introductions mentioned in “Presenting the Good News.” Encourage brothers to read and use the suggestions they find most appropriate.
Include local field service report for May if this is available. Song 32.

