Be Prepared
1 Jehovah’s love for mankind is great. “He does not desire any to be destroyed but desires all to attain to repentance.” (2 Pet. 3:9) Yes, God really cares for people, and we do too because we serve God and imitate his quality of love. We want others to know Jehovah and to love him as we do. But Satan has blinded the minds of unbelievers, so we need to overcome objections and prejudices.
2 The apostle Paul counseled that Christians should be “ready for every good work.” (Titus 3:1) They should be prepared in mind and heart, having the right outlook, so they are willing to share. And when they know what good work needs to be done​—preaching the good news to others, for example—​it is only reasonable that some further preparation be done. Thus they will be not only willing but also able to explain the truth clearly, and to overcome objections and prejudices in order to gain a hearing ear.
3 In what ways can we prepare? Of course, our personal study of the Bible, the meetings at the Kingdom Hall and our student talks are definitely included. But is there some additional preparation that can be of great practical value? Yes, we can talk to other brothers and sisters, asking them for suggestions and practicing together how to handle objections and questions that come up in the field ministry.
4 An excellent opportunity for this sort of preparation is when Bible students progress to the point where they want to accompany you in the field service. Why not take some time after your weekly study with them to let them practice what they will be saying in the service? Keep it simple and commend them warmly. Improvement will come gradually, and practicing together will help.
5 Another time we can do some preparing is when we are in a car group traveling to a territory. We may present objections common to that area and ask those in the group for points they have found useful in overcoming them. Then, too, a fine place to practice field points is at meetings for field service. When we get into the territory the suggestions will be fresh in our minds. Also, what about practicing within the family circle? At a suitable time, perhaps after the family study, each family member could take turns being the householder, raising objections. The others could offer suggestions as to how they can be overcome.
6 In these brief periods of practice, keep in mind that there may be several ways to deal with a situation or objection. What works for one may not be as effective for another. We help each other when ideas are shared that each one can work into the type of presentation he finds best suited for himself.
7 No doubt about it, just as preparation will help to sharpen skills in any other human activity, preparation will help to sharpen our preaching and teaching skills. Of course, there is no substitute for the experience of actually talking to people in the field ministry. That is the best practice of all, but we can help that along by some preparation in advance.

