Branch Letter
Dear Fellow Publishers:
Imagine our surprise when, as of October 15, letters had been received from 1,552 persons​—some even from Alaska, Bermuda, Britain, Colombia, Hawaii, Jamaica and Peru—​saying that they would like to be among the one hundred invited to share in urgent work at Bethel for a year! Thank you very much for this tremendous response! It reminds us of Psalm 110:3, where it foretold how Jehovah’s people would offer themselves willingly in this His day.
We are happy to say that the hundred brothers needed are now here. No more will be invited on this basis, but, due to the press of work, we will not write personal letters of reply to the rest of you who volunteered. However, if any of you desire to come to Bethel on the regular four-year basis, you may request an application from the Society or from your circuit servant.
Yes, there are certainly a lot of new faces around Bethel these days, some 250, due in part to the expansion of the Kingdom Ministry School and the start of the fifty-second class of Gilead. Our housing facilities here are once again filled to the hilt, even though nine buildings are now being used to house us here in Brooklyn.
But we are happy, for we are able to accomplish a lot in the Lord’s work. With 91 brothers on a night shift, production is tremendous. Why, in just the first seven weeks of this double shift 4,638,604 bound books, 2,028,943 booklets and 35,718,200 magazines were produced. This made it possible to speed up shipments to the Branches and congregations before the New York dock strike took effect October 1. In September alone 3,392,081 books and Bibles were shipped out in both English and Spanish.
There is much for all of us to do, and we all desire to prove faithful to God. So whether here at Bethel or in the field, let all of us display Christlike obedience under test, to Jehovah’s praise!
Your brothers and fellow servants,
BROOKLYN BRANCH OFFICE
[Blurb on page 1]
Display Christlike obedience under test.
[Blurb on page 8]
Are you having a regular family study in your home?

