They Will Have to Know Jehovah
1 How thrilled we were this past summer to receive the new book “The Nations Shall Know that I Am Jehovah”​—How? The urgency of the times, the importance of the sacred name, the impending change in the administration of man’s affairs​—these are points that were vividly impressed on our minds as we read this book. One brother after reading it exclaimed: “It’s the most exciting preview of things to come that we have ever had!”
2 But not many persons have read this exciting “preview of things to come.” As a result, few persons have any idea of Jehovah’s violent judgments soon to befall the false religions systems of which they themselves may be a part.
3 It is not because these people never had the opportunity to know. By and large, the apathy of the people is due to the Devil’s blinding their minds. Does that mean that it is futile to continue going from house to house? Not at all! Whether people listen or not, it is God’s will that the witness continue to be given. (Ezek. 2:5) This magnifies his love and his justice, and it is our privilege to have a share in it. Furthermore, in your community there are no doubt some persons who ‘sigh and groan’ because of the detestable conditions in Christendom. These individuals must be ‘marked on the forehead’ in order to escape destruction. But how?
4 In large measure it is up to us. This new “Know” book is particularly important to these “sighing and groaning” ones. Hence, we ought to be diligent to share its contents with everyone who will accept it. Distributing this book is a privilege that not many of earth’s population have. It is also a challenge that few are willing to accept. Let us therefore joyfully seize this privilege and challenge and feature the “Know” book in our field ministry during the month of November.
5 First of all, offer this new publication at every door and give everyone to whom you speak an opportunity to know Jehovah as we know him. Do you think this is a difficult assignment? Not when compared to Ezekiel’s assignment. Leaving with people a bound book, which they can read at their leisure, is much easier than lying forty days on one side and then three hundred and ninety days on the other without turning, while at the same time living on a very restricted diet. Truly our assignment is much easier.​—Ezek. 4:1-17.
6 But some may feel that an explanation of Ezekiel’s prophecy is too deep and difficult for the average person, and therefore we should offer the people something simpler. Well, comparing the new book with the book of Ezekiel, which of the two is easier to read and understand? Is not the prophecy as it was first delivered more difficult than the published explanation in the “Know” book?
7 Let us remember, too, that it was Jehovah who told Ezekiel what to say to his generation. It was not Ezekiel’s prerogative to complain that it was a message too difficult for the people to understand. Similarly today, it is not for us to complain about Jehovah’s methods and arrangements for warning the nations of impending destruction. Actually, Jehovah in his mercy has made the message very understandable and has made it much easier for people today to get to know him for their salvation.
8 Tens of millions of persons already have the Truth book. Most of them are no longer on our back-call lists but they are friendly when we call. Try again to help them. Perhaps the powerful message in the new book is what will shake them out of their apathy. So, offer the “Know” book at every door, and with real enthusiasm.
9 Likewise, do not overlook the opportunity of offering the “Know” book to all the people on whom you are presently making back-calls, as well as to all those with whom you are conducting home Bible studies. Certainly all these people especially need to read this book in addition to the material we are now studying with them. If they do, it may well hasten their progress in the way that leads to everlasting life.
10 We have a message from Jehovah. Let us deliver it. They will have to know Jehovah!

