Those Who Stick
1 There are many fine privileges of service that one can have in Jehovah’s organization. Pioneering and Bethel service are examples. Many have held on to such special privileges for five, ten, twenty or more years, even as early prophets and apostles stuck to their special assignments. What enables persons to stick?
2 One vital factor is that they find joy in their service to God. As Nehemiah said: “The joy of Jehovah is your stronghold.” (Neh. 8:10) Such joy gives them a feeling of security and is a source of strength. But does that mean they never became discouraged? No. Even Jehovah’s faithful prophet Jeremiah became discouraged, and once he felt like quitting. But he did not act rashly, and he got over his problem.​—Jer. 20:8, 9.
3 Unresponsiveness and opposition were what caused Jeremiah to get discouraged. The prophet Elijah also became downhearted; he felt alone in carrying on God’s service, having no one, as it were, to work with. (1 Ki. 19:9-18) At times Jehovah’s servants today get discouraged for similar reasons. But those who stick have the “joy of Jehovah.”
4 Obviously this joy does not come only from finding sheeplike persons in the field ministry. It is not dependent on doing work that in itself is necessarily pleasant. True, meeting people who accept God’s truth is a source of uplift. But in some places there is little favorable response. And there is much that must be done in operating Bethel homes and printeries, to provide Bible literature, that is just plain hard work. What enables some to stay on in such assignments? “The joy of Jehovah.” Do you have it?
5 Such joy does not rest simply on the response of others​—whether they accept literature, an offer of a home Bible study, and so forth. Nor does it depend upon having personal conveniences, perhaps a partner with whom to work or a car for transportation. It is not something that a person has when carrying out certain theocratic activities but loses when given other assignments.
6 The sustaining “joy of Jehovah” is the portion of those who have learned to see things from Jehovah’s viewpoint. They are grateful to be used by Jehovah, and personal convenience does not dictate their decisions. (Ps. 110:3) They count it as privilege beyond compare to contribute in full measure to the praise of their loving God, Jehovah. Appreciation of their relationship to Jehovah is what helps them to stick.

