Your Service Meetings
WEEK STARTING NOVEMBER 7
Theme: Love of God Means Obedience. (1 John 5:3) Song 118.
10 min: Introduction, text and comments. Also, discuss the Branch Letter.
23 min: “They Will Have to Know Jehovah.” Audience participation. Build up enthusiasm for the privilege of having a part in giving a powerful witness to Jehovah’s name by distribution of the new book.
Demonstration: Have a publisher make two house-to-house calls with the new book. At the first door, the householder is not interested, so publisher uses brief presentation suggested on page 2 of October “Kingdom Ministry.” No placement. Ask audience what good was accomplished. Next, publisher calls at another door. Here he is able to give fuller presentation and places book. Use discussion on theme “Know Jehovah” from October “Kingdom Ministry.” At certain points you may want to stop publisher and ask audience why certain things were effective or how to handle situations that have arisen. Direct attention to specific points in the book that can be shown to householder.
Conclude with reminder about special public talk based on “Know” book. Encourage publishers to bring as many interested persons as possible, also personally to read material from the book in advance, if they can work it into their schedule.
15 min: Christian Obedience to Law. Talk based on principles in Chapter 18 of “Truth” book; also see pages 1240 and 1241 of “Aid.” Work in experiences from “1971 Yearbook,” pages 111, ¶3; 224-226; 289, ¶4. Draw audience into discussion on points that show how this counsel applies in our own lives.
12 min: Concluding comments. Include accounts report. Encourage all to remember those in their own congregation who may be enduring severe tests because of obedience to God; recommend personal visits and other encouragement. Song 88.
WEEK STARTING NOVEMBER 14
Theme: Teaching That Reaches the Heart. (Rom. 10:10) Song 108.
13 min: Introduction, text and comments. Arrange in advance for some to relate experiences drawing attention to fine arguments, or good teaching, used by those who helped them to learn the truth. (If needed, see “1969 Yearbook,” pages 74, 111; “1971 Yearbook,” page 92.)
15 min: How to Reach the Heart When Teaching. Talk showing how to do this in teaching one’s own children, also when making back-calls and conducting Bible studies. For source material see pages 75-78 of “Theocratic Ministry School Guidebook,” also “Watchtower” of March 1, 1971.
22 min: “Be Prepared.” Audience participation. When considering paragraph 4, demonstrate: Conclusion of home Bible study conducted with family of three. Students were assigned in advance; two prepared magazine presentations (one featuring “Watchtower,” the other emphasizing “Awake!”), and one found an answer to a Bible question common in local territory by using “Watch Tower Publications Index” and Kingdom Hall library. Each one is asked to present what he has prepared; publisher commends, also asks others in family what they learned from the other’s presentation. Encourage them not to be unduly concerned about phrasing but to speak from the heart.
10 min: Concluding comments. If group witnessing planned for November 25, mention this. Encourage any who plan to vacation pioneer during December school holidays to turn in applications. Build up enthusiasm for special public talk. Comment on Romans 10:10. Song 103.
WEEK STARTING NOVEMBER 21
Theme: Help Those Related to You to Grow in Faith. Song 60.
10 min: Introduction, text and comments. Also discuss Question Box.
20 min: “Presenting the Good News​—to Your Relatives.” Questions and answers. Arrange in advance for publishers to relate experiences showing how their relatives endeavored to interest them in the truth or how they are trying to help their relatives now. May include experiences from “1969 Yearbook,” page 118, ¶3; “1967 Yearbook,” page 215, ¶2; November 8, 1967, “Awake!” page 20.
20 min: Are You Having a Regular Family Study in Your Home? (Material may be drawn from “Theocratic Ministry School Guidebook,” pages 37, 38, also article “Family Study a Blessing,” in February 15, 1971, “Watchtower.”) This part should be handled by a brother who sets a good example in this regard. Ask audience to read key scriptures; analyze them together. Talk in advance to family heads, as well as those in divided homes, and find out what problems arise that interfere with regular family study, why some do not continue, etc. Bring up these problems and draw out suggestions from audience. Emphasize the importance and value of family study. Discuss how to make it enjoyable for all the family. Offer suggestions on when to have the study and point out the need to consider home circumstances in determining how long study sessions should be.
10 min: Concluding comments. Include appropriate Announcements and Theocratic News items. Song 71.
WEEK STARTING NOVEMBER 28
Theme: Everywhere Be Witnesses of Jehovah’s Messiah. (Acts 1:8) Song 51.
 5 min: Introduction, text and comments.
12 min: Talk on service theme for December. (See “Watchtower” of December 15, 1970.) Show that as witnesses of the Messiah we draw attention to Jehovah, the One who anointed Jesus. When we tell about Jesus’ teaching, we publicize God’s name, as Jesus did. Point out difference between worldwide witnessing and world conversion. Emphasize value of “Know” book in giving the witness.
15 min: “Those Who Stick.” Questions and answers; read paragraphs. Draw out comments to show how these points affect every publisher of the good news. Could arrange for someone to relate experiences found in “1968 Yearbook,” page 122, ¶4, 5; “The Watchtower” for 1970, page 763, ¶7, to page 764, ¶2; page 510, col. 1, ¶3; for 1967, page 255, col. 2, ¶1; for 1966, page 446, col. 2, ¶1.
18 min: Witnessing with the “New World Translation” During December. Discussion and demonstration.
Explain that offer for the month is “New World Translation” and “Is the Bible Really the Word of God?” for $1.25. If the householder already has the “New World Translation,” offer the book “‘The Nations Shall Know that I Am Jehovah’​—How?” with booklet, for 50 cents. If publishers want to keep on using the Scripture presentation that they used during November, that is fine. If some want a different presentation, the following thoughts may be helpful:
Usually we have little difficulty engaging people in conversation about economic problems, violence, immorality, family difficulties, etc. Your presentation could be designed to invite their expressions on one of these current problems. Then use their response as an opportunity to direct attention to some practical advice from the Bible. (See “Word of God” book, Chapter 11, “Is the Bible Practical for Our Day?” for talking points.) You can read from the Bible, or, if you prefer, read the scriptures out of the book along with the accompanying explanation. Having showed the value of the Bible’s counsel, offer the modern-language “New World Translation” and the “Word of God” book.
10 min: Concluding comments. Include suggestions on how to plan field service during cold weather so as to accomplish the most good. Song 100.

