Feature Magazines in Your Ministry
1, 2. How have The Watchtower and Awake! touched people’s lives?
1 “Interesting, timely, and uplifting.” “The most encouraging journals I’ve ever read.” These comments well describe how readers the world over feel about The Watchtower and Awake! Indeed, our magazines have proved to be invaluable tools in reaching “all sorts of men” with the good news.​—1 Tim. 2:4.
2 A career-oriented man obtained an Awake! magazine on a subject that interested him. Later, he read the accompanying issue of The Watchtower, which contained an article that prompted him to scrutinize his lifelong belief in the Trinity. This sparked his interest. Six months later he was baptized. Another man regularly received the magazines but never read them. His wife, on the other hand, avoided the Witnesses but read the magazines left with her husband. Her heart was touched by the Bible’s promise of an earthly paradise filled with righteous people. In time, she, her son, and her sister became servants of Jehovah.
 3. What is the advantage of offering the magazines as a set?
3 Offer Them as a Set: As the foregoing examples show, we cannot be sure who will read our magazines or what may arouse their interest. (Eccl. 11:6) Therefore, it is advantageous to offer The Watchtower and Awake! together as a set, even though we will generally highlight only one magazine in our presentation. In certain circumstances, it may be appropriate to offer several different issues of our magazines on a visit.
 4. How might we schedule magazine work?
4 It is beneficial to schedule one day each week to share in magazine work. On the 2005 Calendar of Jehovah’s Witnesses, every Saturday is designated as “Magazine Day.” Of course, since local and personal circumstances vary, some may set aside another day to focus on offering our journals. Is this part of your weekly schedule?
 5. What opportunities to place magazines should we be alert to, and what can help us to do so?
5 Set a Personal Goal: Setting a personal monthly goal of magazine placements can help us to be more magazine conscious. Do you have a magazine route? Do you offer magazines to those whom you meet in the ministry? Could you offer magazines in street work, in business territory, and in public places? Do you carry magazines with you when traveling, shopping, and going to appointments? Take advantage of every appropriate opportunity to help others benefit from The Watchtower and Awake!
 6. How can we make good use of older issues of the magazines?
6 We might also make it our aim to place older issues that we have on hand. Even if magazines are not placed within a month or two of the issue date, the information retains its value. Get them into the hands of interested ones. For millions of people, the Watchtower and Awake! magazines have been “a word . . . at the right time.” (Prov. 25:11) Let us use them to help millions more come to know and serve Jehovah.

