Give Thanks for Jehovah’s Loving-Kindness
Christ’s Death to Be Commemorated on March 24
 1. How has Jehovah shown us loving-kindness?
1 The psalmist exclaimed: “O let people give thanks to Jehovah for his loving-kindness and for his wonderful works to the sons of men.” (Ps. 107:8) God’s loving-kindness is more than just the tender regard he has for people. That is made clear in the inspired expression of praise: “Your own loving-kindness, O Jehovah, kept sustaining me.” (Ps. 94:18) What extraordinary loving-kindness Jehovah demonstrated in giving his only-begotten Son in our behalf!​—1 John 4:9, 10.
 2. How can we show our thankfulness to Jehovah?
2 As the Memorial of Christ’s death approaches, how can we thank “the God of loving-kindness”? (Ps. 59:17) Each of us will want to set aside time to meditate on Jesus’ final days on earth. (Ps. 143:5) It will also be beneficial to follow the special Bible reading scheduled for the Memorial, as outlined in Examining the Scriptures Daily​—2005 and, if possible, do additional reading and research in chapters 112-16 of the Greatest Man book along with other Bible-based publications. Linger over the passages you read, and become absorbed in them. (1 Tim. 4:15) Prayerful reflection on God’s Word not only nourishes our heart but also expresses our love for Jehovah.​—Matt. 22:37.
3, 4. (a) How can we imitate the spirit of our Liberian brothers? (b) Whom do you plan to invite to the Memorial?
3 Incite Others to Thank God: Last year 16,760,607 attended the Memorial worldwide. In a village in Liberia, the brothers wrote a letter to the town chief, informing him of their intention to observe the Lord’s Evening Meal in his town. The chief gave permission for the brothers to use the local football field for the event and had an announcement made about it throughout the area, inviting people to attend. Though there were only five publishers in that village, the attendance for the Memorial was 636!
4 Likewise, we want to help as many as possible to join us for the Memorial observance. Why not make a list of those you want to invite? The illustrations on the back covers of the March 8 Awake! and March 15 Watchtower extend an invitation. The printed Memorial invitations can also be used. Type or neatly write the time and location of the commemoration on the slip, and leave one with each person you invite. As March 24 approaches, call again to remind each one and to finalize any arrangements.
 5. How can we encourage Bible students to attend?
5 How can we help Bible students who are not yet coming to meetings to attend and benefit fully from the event? Spend a few minutes during each study to build appreciation for the importance of the observance. Excellent material can be found in the March 15, 2004, Watchtower, pages 3-7, and the Reasoning book, pages 266-9.
 6. Why is it important to welcome visitors at the Memorial?
6 Welcome Visitors: At the Memorial, approach visitors and welcome them. (Rom. 12:13) Arrange to sit with those you invited, and make sure they have a Bible and a songbook. We will especially want to take the initiative to greet warmly any inactive brothers and sisters who have made the effort to attend. Our loving interest may help them to resume regular association with the congregation. (Luke 15:3-7) On this most sacred occasion, may we do all we can to encourage others to join us in giving thanks to Jehovah for his “wonderful loving-kindness.”​—Ps. 31:21.

