Part 6​—Conducting Progressive Bible Studies
When a Student Raises a Question
1 Once a Bible study is well established, it is usually best to consider Bible teachings in an orderly manner rather than jump from subject to subject. This helps the student to build a foundation of accurate knowledge and to progress spiritually. (Col. 1:9, 10) Often, though, students raise questions on various subjects during the study. How should these be handled?
2 Be Discerning: Questions related to the study material being considered can usually be answered on the spot. If a question will be addressed later in the study publication, it may be sufficient simply to point that out. However, if a question is unrelated to the study material or will require research to answer properly, it may be better to consider the matter after the study or at another time. Some find that writing the question down assures the student that his question is being taken seriously and helps prevent the study from becoming sidetracked.
3 Many Bible teachings are considered only briefly in our basic study publications. What if a student has difficulty accepting a certain teaching or holds strongly to a false belief? It may be beneficial to consider additional material that thoroughly discusses what the Bible says on that subject. If the student is still not convinced, leave the subject for another time and continue on with his regular study. (John 16:12) As he gains a broader knowledge of the Bible and progresses spiritually, he may come to understand that Bible teaching.
4 Be Modest: If you are not sure of the answer to a question, resist the temptation to venture an opinion. (2 Tim. 2:15; 1 Pet. 4:11) Explain that you will research the matter and return with an answer. You might even use the opportunity to teach the student how to do research. Progressively show him how to use the various research tools provided by Jehovah’s organization. In this way he will eventually be able to answer his own questions.​—Acts 17:11.

