Service Meeting Schedule
Week Starting February 14
Song 174
10 min: Local announcements. Selected Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry. Use the suggestions on page 8 (if appropriate for your territory) to demonstrate how to present the February 15 Watchtower and the February 22 Awake! Briefly review how the sample presentations can be tailored to the needs of the local territory.​—See the January 2005 Our Kingdom Ministry, p. 8.
35 min: “The Memorial Season​—A Time of Increased Activity.”a To be handled by the service overseer. When discussing paragraph 6, include comments on the Awake! of September 8, 2004, pages 12-13. Announce those who have enrolled as auxiliary pioneers. Outline the extra meetings for field service that have been arranged. Encourage all to increase their spiritual activity in some way during this Memorial season.
Song 14 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting February 21
Song 31
10 min: Local announcements. Review main points from the box on page 6, “Help Them Receive a Further Witness.” Encourage all to fill out the Please Follow Up (S-43) form promptly when the need arises.
20 min: “Give Thanks for Jehovah’s Loving-Kindness.”b Announce the time and place of the Memorial along with the name of the speaker and any other pertinent details. When discussing paragraph 4, include a brief demonstration of a publisher inviting a person on his magazine route to the Memorial. The printed Memorial invitations should be made available following the meeting, if this has not already been done.
15 min: “Conducting Progressive Bible Studies​—Part 6.”c Include a four-minute demonstration in which a Bible student asks why so few in attendance at the Memorial partake of the bread and the wine. The conductor commends him for his question, writes it down, and suggests that they discuss it after they consider the study material for the week. At the conclusion of the study, the conductor directs the student to the material under the question “Who is to partake of the bread and the wine?” on pages 267-8 of the Reasoning book. They read it together, and the student expresses appreciation for the clear answer to the question he raised.
Song 21 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting February 28
Song 42
15 min: Local announcements. Accounts report. Remind publishers to turn in field service reports for February. Using the suggestions on page 8 (if appropriate for your territory), demonstrate how to present the March 1 Watchtower and the March 8 Awake! Other realistic presentations may be used. At the conclusion of one of the presentations, show the publisher inviting the householder to the Memorial using the back cover of the March 8 Awake!
20 min: Show Concern for Those Who Are Weak. (Acts 20:35) Following an introduction of less than one minute, conduct a question-and-answer discussion of the July 1, 2004, Watchtower, pages 17-18, paragraphs 12-16, in the manner of the Watchtower Study. Have the paragraphs read by a brother who is a capable reader. Focus on how the information can be applied in connection with the upcoming Memorial and special talk.
10 min: Offer Keep on the Watch! Discuss and demonstrate presentations that can be used to offer the brochure during March. Sample presentations in the January 2005 Our Kingdom Ministry insert or other presentations that are effective in the local territory may be used.
Song 72 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting March 7
Song 12
10 min: Local announcements. Review main points from the box “Memorial Reminders.”
15 min: Local needs.
20 min: “Feature Magazines in Your Ministry.”d When discussing paragraphs 3 and 4, make local application of the material. Briefly interview one or two publishers who are effective in placing magazines at businesses, in street work, in public places, or when witnessing informally. Ask them to explain how they offer magazines in these settings. Have a brief demonstration of a presentation or a reenactment of an experience.
Song 192 and concluding prayer.
[Footnotes]
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.

