Announcements
PROSPERING WITH GOD’S NATION
True prosperity comes only from Jehovah. No matter what else happens, Jehovah is sure to prosper his chosen people because his own great name is involved and because he has pleasure in the prosperity of his servants. (Ps. 35:27, AS) The course of wisdom is to associate with God’s organization in order to enjoy prosperity. “Remember me, O Jehovah, with the favor that thou bearest unto thy people; oh visit me with thy salvation, that I may see the prosperity of thy chosen, that I may rejoice in the gladness of thy nation.” (Ps. 106:4, 5, AS) In all nations today there is a “great crowd” of people of good will who must be informed and observe the spiritual prosperity of Jehovah’s organization, and desire to share in it. To aid them, during the month of June Jehovah’s witnesses will present three bound books on a contribution of $1.50, with three booklets given free. Contact Jehovah’s witnesses locally or write the Society for opportunity to share in this three-book distribution during June. Tracts, too, will be a help to you in informing people about the organization of God in these last days. Send for 200 of the small tract What Do Jehovah’s Witnesses Believe? and pass them out everywhere. The cost is only 25c. Ask for the tract by name.
GOD’S WAY IS LOVE
The world today does not operate on the principle of love, because it is not following God’s way. Nor does the world understand how the system of things in human society could possibly function completely on the basis of love. Yet the Bible shows that everything Jehovah God does demonstrates love; and that it is his purpose to create a new world based upon love as its moving force. The 32-page booklet entitled “God’s Way Is Love” gives credit to God for his love already expressed toward humankind. It is urgent that men recognize what God is doing and not despise the expressions of his love, if they want to live, as pointed out in the booklet. All Scripture quotations in God’s Way Is Love are taken from Catholic translations of the Bible. In plain and simple language, with logic and sound reasoning, this booklet magnifies the great love of God. Why not share in the distribution of this booklet among your friends? Order seven copies, remitting 25c; or single copy, 5c.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES
Week of June 21: Predestination or Individual Choice—Which? ¶1-18.
Week of June 28: Predestination or Individual Choice—Which? ¶19-37.

