Jehovah’s Witnesses​—The Organization Behind the Name
ON OCTOBER 6, 1990, the crowd of almost 5,000 gathered in the Assembly Hall of Jehovah’s Witnesses in Jersey City, New Jersey, U.S.A., for the annual meeting of the Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society were about to get a surprise. The chairman, John E. Barr, informed the audience of the release of a 55-minute video entitled Jehovah’s Witnesses​—The Organization Behind the Name. This was the first video ever produced by the Society, but certainly not the last.
The video shows how Jehovah’s people are organized to witness to the divine name and publish the “good news of the kingdom.” (Matthew 24:14) The headquarters at Brooklyn, New York, and the facilities at Watchtower Farms are highlighted. More than 500,000 copies in English have been produced, and it is now (or will soon be) available in 26 other languages.a
What Has Been the Response?
How have people who are not Jehovah’s Witnesses responded to the video? One business man wrote:
“I found the tape to be of excellent quality. I was particularly taken by the brightness and professional composition of the images. I had the tendency to forget that it was a tape and thought of it more as a movie. This tape should be exceptionally useful in explaining the purpose of your New York headquarters. Congratulations on this outstanding piece.”​—J. J.
Those who study the Bible with Jehovah’s Witnesses have benefited by viewing the video. The following explains why:
“I study the Bible with a young man who is 20 years old and who attends the local university. He has been concerned about the worsening world situation. But after viewing the tape and seeing all those fine young Bethel brothers with a real purpose in life, his entire attitude has changed. He attended our Special Assembly Day and asked to study the Bible twice a week. Another Bible student, a high-school teacher, borrowed the video to show to her relatives. They thought Jehovah’s Witnesses were just some weak, unpopular, small organization. They were stunned at the global nature of our work and the difference we are making, thanks to Jehovah.”​—J. B.
“Words cannot express the joy I felt when a woman with whom I study the Bible burst into tears of joy and appreciation after seeing this video. She said tearfully: ‘How can anyone not see that this is the organization of the true God, Jehovah? I never knew that such people existed.’ And then she said: ‘I want to get baptized.’”​—C. D.
“We have had a lot of success using the video with Bible students. Last night the husband of one of my wife’s Bible students came over. He had been very opposed. He watched the video. Afterward he asked questions and left here with a Bible and the Bible-study book You Can Live Forever in Paradise on Earth. Previously he had burned all his wife’s Bible literature!”​—D. H.
Young people have also found the video to be absorbing, as the following comments show:
“I am six and a half. I liked the part about the Bibles and when the boxes went fast.”​—K. W.
“Our young children said it was better than any program they’ve seen on TV.”​—R. C.
“After viewing the video for the second time, our five-year-old son, who paid close attention throughout, asked, ‘Can we see this every day?’ Our three-year-old daughter chimed in with, ‘I want to go to Bethel and make books!’”​—M. E.
“My children, Robin and Shannan, 12 and 9 years old, keep playing this tape over and over. My youngest daughter after seeing the tape declared, ‘I love going out in the field service. It is a lot of fun.’ We feel that this video has had a direct effect on our family life. How refreshing to turn on a television program that you feel safe in watching!”​—N. B.
“I am 131/2 years old. The new video made me realize how much I take for granted the wonderful provisions from Jehovah. It is a privilege to be one of God’s people.”​—K. W.
“I am 16 years old, and this video has helped reinforce in my mind that this is a global work being done.”​—A. M.
“Our children remarked that regular TV lost something in their eyes as a result of seeing what real theocratic entertainment could be like. It has also strengthened their desire to enter full-time service.”​—L. M.
Even those who have been Jehovah’s Witnesses for many years have been moved by what they saw.
“If the video leaves such an impact on us as Jehovah’s people, how much more will it affect others? When this system gets to be too much to handle, I take an hour of my time and visit Bethel in the comfort of my living room!”​—K. B.
“After I had seen the care and precision that goes into every piece of work, I felt like going into my room and hugging my Bible literature.”​—L. P.
We encourage you, too, to take the time to see the video Jehovah’s Witnesses​—The Organization Behind the Name. It will give you a different perspective on life and help you to have confidence in a secure future.
[Footnotes]
American sign language, Arabic, Basque, Cantonese, Catalan, Croatian, Czech (Bohemian), Danish, Dutch, Finnish, French, German, Greek, Hungarian, Italian, Japanese, Korean, Mandarin, Norwegian, Polish, Portuguese (Brazil), Portuguese (Europe), Romanian, Slovak, Spanish, Swedish.

