Shining as Illuminators in the World
IN A world corrupted by moral crookedness and perversity, true Christians earth wide are to be sources of light. They are to be illuminators in a dark world. (Philippians 2:15) Many thousands are willing to do this as pioneers, or full-time preachers. A large number of them have spent long years in this service and have been rewarded by seeing people of all kinds make changes in their lives to become genuine disciples of Jesus Christ.​—Matthew 28:19.
To encourage these pioneers to continue in this sacred service and to improve in their teaching skills, Jehovah’s Witnesses have organized the Pioneer Service School. It is a ten-day Bible-based course designed to help pioneers in three areas: walking with Jehovah as followers of Jesus Christ; abounding in love for the whole association of brothers; shining as illuminators in the world.
Pioneer School in Central African Republic
In Bangui, the capital of Central African Republic, 48 students and 2 instructors came together during August of 1991. The students were to receive instructions and practical suggestions for their work. What was so exciting about the Bangui class?
For one thing, 21 of the students were still attending secular school. While in school, they were able to make room for the regular pioneer service. They used their vacation months, their free weekends, and afternoons to preach and to teach.
These young people have seen the importance of serving their Creator now. (Ecclesiastes 12:1; compare 1 Corinthians 7:29.) Noteworthy was the fact that 12 of them had unbelieving parents. At home they were alone in the truth. Two young boys, fleshly brothers, were forced by their father to leave home because of their faith. A young couple in the congregation opened their home to these two boys.
The case was different for Michée and Sulamithe Kaleb. Both of them are pioneers and they also go to school, but their parents are Jehovah’s Witnesses. In fact, their father was a student in the same class!
The congregations in Bangui participated in the school too, only in a different way. They cared for the material necessities, such as the food. Money, as well as chickens, sugar, rice, and manioc were contributed to feed the class.
Kitchen crews were organized by the nearby congregations to prepare simple but delicious meals. The Central African Republic is famous for ngunza, a dish everybody appreciates. The recipe? Manioc leaves, palm oil, onions, lots of garlic, chunks of peanut butter, and patience to let it cook thoroughly. Each crew had its own special way of preparing it. It was a great success; nobody could resist it.
Outside of Bangui two other classes were held, one in Bouar and one in Bambari, bringing the total number of students to 68. During the past two years, the Central African Republic has seen an increase in the number of pioneers. During January 1992 there were 149 regular pioneers and 17 special pioneers along with 78 auxiliary pioneers. This has resulted in increased activity in the entire country with new peaks in publishers, hours, return visits, and Bible studies. When there are more workers, the harvest is increased.​—Isaiah 60:21, 22; Matthew 9:37, 38.
Our thanks go to Jehovah God for these provisions and to his earthly organization for arranging these classes. They help students and instructors alike to shine as illuminators in this dark world.
[Picture on page 24]
Twenty-one pioneer-school students still in high school
[Picture on page 25]
These two boys had to leave home because of the truth

