VOL. XVI. DECEMBER 1, 1895. No. 23. 



CONTENTS. 



Special Items 270 

Views From the Tower 271 

The Cup of the Lord and the Table 

of the Lord 273 

"Dawn Circles for Bible Study" 276 

Poem: The Plan of the Ages 277 

Bible Study: David Anointed King 277 

Bible Study: David and Goliath 278 

Encouraging Letters 279 

page 270 

SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
-ADDRESS TO- 

TOWER PUBLISHING CO., BIBLE HOUSE, 58 & 60 ARCH ST., 
ALLEGHENY (NORTH PITTSBURG), PA., U.S.A. 

SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR, IN ADVANCE, 

INCLUDES A SUBSCRIPTION TO "THE OLD THEOLOGY TRACTS"-QUARTERLY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, N.Y. DRAFT, MONEY ORDER, 

OR REGISTERED. FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN 

MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS: 

Those of the interested, who by reason of old age or accident, or 
other adversity are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, 
if they will send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and 
requesting the paper. 



R1901 : page 270 

A NEW GERMAN TRANSLATION. 

SOME time since a German brother in conversation with the Editor 
remarked, "Although I am a German, I can understand the English 
DAWNS better than the German translation, which contains too many 
foreign words, not pure German." Investigation proved that, while the 
translation might be termed a good one, its language is in some places 
out of the range of the average reader. 

We have accordingly had a new translation prepared, Brother 
Otto Koetitz being the translator. We have good reason to believe that 
the desired form of language has been attained. 

The first volume is now ready, and the other two are in course of 
preparation. The prices of these will be uniform with the English edition. 
Indeed, for about a year and a half we have been purchasing the old 
edition and supplying them to our readers and to the colporteurs, at these 



prices, although many of them cost us seven cents per copy more than 
this. We will so continue to fill orders for vols. II. and III. of the old 
lot, as our new translation of these will not be ready for some months. 



R1897 : page 271 

VIEWS FROM THE TOWER. 



THE Episcopal Convention has closed its session without 

electing one of its Bishops a "Primus" or 

chief; so that question lies over for three years more. 

The tendency, however, among the "clergy" of all 
denominations, is toward the episcopal form of church 
government, and away from the congregational form. And 
each step in this direction is favorable to the federation of 
all with the Episcopal church. 

The Lutherans are moving for at least one bishop, believing 
that in this form of government lies much of the 
success of Episcopaleans, Methodist-Episcopals and Roman 
Catholics. At their recent Conference at Lancaster, Pa., 
the subject of bishops was freely discussed. The "clergy" 
said that the "laity" favored the movement; and the only 
question amongst the "clergy" seemed to be whether or 
not they should send to Sweden for a bishop. It was not 
claimed that the Lutherans had an apostolic succession of 
bishops any more than have the Methodists; but it was 
claimed that long usage would carry additional respect and 
reverence for the office. 

"Rev. Dr. John Kohler said the church wanted a historical 
succession. He thought a proper authority could not 
sustain the establishment of an indefinite supervision, but if 
the episcopate be established the history of the past would 
be a good authority back of the movement." 

The Baptists are gravitating more and more toward denominational 
organization; and, failing to see the Lord's 
method for supervising the Church, they also are moving 
toward a hierarchy with bishops. These are not proposed 
under these names, but suggested to be (1) A "Permanent 
Council" and (2) "Pastor at Large." These matters, 
recommended by a committee, are set forth in several columns 
of the leading Baptist journal, The Examiner. Apparently, 
by the time the Protestant Federation is ready to 
form, the Baptist churches will be a denomination also and 
ready to be received as a member of the alliance. 



We recently called attention to the fact that the young 
people's societies amongst the United Presbyterians, Methodists, 
Lutherans and Baptists were intended in a quiet way 
to offset the Y.P. Christian Endeavor Society which, starting 
amongst Congregationalists, had proved so popular and 



unsectarian a movement. Now it appears that our Presbyterian 

friends are disturbed on this subject also, fearing 

that their young people will become too independent, and, 

learning to vote for themselves, may learn also to think for 

themselves. A committee appointed to consider the subject 

met in Pittsburg during the past month. It appears 

that young people's societies have already been formed in 

several of the churches hereabouts, and the name Westminster 

is favorably considered. No definite action as to a 

denominational society has yet been taken, but the committee 

will report to the next General Assembly. 

Objection is made that Christian Endeavor societies 
are too "interdenominational," and not calculated to promote 
sectarian "loyalty." The hope was expressed that 
if the General Assembly were to offer some suggestions the 
C.E. Society might accept them rather than risk so important 
a deflection. It is doubtful, however, if it is not 
too late to fight the Y.P.S.C.E. It is as likely to split 
some churches as to split the ranks of the Christian Endeavorers. 
Young Presbyterians are about as independent 
as the old ones. 

After all, though, the liberty and activity of the C.E. 
may yet prove a snare to many of them. Not having the 
great divine plan before their minds, they are open to many 
assaults from which they were previously protected by the 

R1897 : page 272 

bondage of superstition and the errors of their denominations. 
Now is the time to let these Young People have the 
truth, before they fall into the traps of Theosophy, Christian 
Science, Spiritism, no-ransom evolutionism, the infidelity 
of Higher Criticism and Good Citizenship moralism. 



As an evidence of the so-called gospel that is being 
preached, we notice the following among "Summary of 
Principal Sermons" in the N.O. Times-Democrat: 

Rev. F. F. Passmore, Denver, Col., subject, Preachers. 
He said in substance, "Our great preachers to-day are 
preaching for big salaries, fine mansions and sumptuous 
living, and they are getting them." 

Rev. Dr. Lloyd, Christian Church, Nashville, Tenn., 
subject, Ignorance. He in substance said: "The greatest 
tyrant oppressing the masses to-day is King Ignorance. A 
people rushing at such a rate of progress as we are going 
to-day need to keep informed, to think some for themselves. 
They should read the newspapers." 

How to vote is also considered by many preachers to 
be a part of the gospel to-day. As an illustration, on Sunday 
evening, Oct. 20, the Cornell Memorial Methodist 
Church had a political meeting presided over by Mayor 
Strong, to whom it was surrendered by the pastor after an 
opening prayer. The Mayor, the report says, "was greeted 
with loud applause." The N.Y. Sun says, "He told the 



R1898 : page 272 

congregation that 'a better ticket to vote for than the fusion 
ticket' could not be selected; and he complimented 'the 
clergy of New York' for being 'willing to devote an evening,' 
that is, to open their churches on Sunday evening, for 
political meetings in its behalf. 'This is the third church,' 
he continued, 'that I have been invited to attend to-night to 
talk about whom we should vote for, and I suppose next 
Sunday there will be many more churches open for the 
same purpose.' 

"Commissioner Roosevelt then entered the pulpit and 
was received with enthusiastic applause. He made a rattling 
speech in his best vein, hitting out against his critics 
without mercy; and his many spirited sallies provoked frequent 
applause and much merriment." The session closed 
by singing the Doxology. 

In the same great city recently another great preacher's 
gospel was an advocacy of the German Sunday. He (Rev. 
Heber Newton— Episcopalean) explained that the Germans 
have services at 9.30 Sunday morning which are well attended; 
at 1 1 o'clock the children's session has its turn till 
noon. In the afternoon the whole population in families 
visit the beer gardens and chat pleasantly and drink beer 
and listen to the strains of sweet music. Rev. Newton 
pleads for saloons to be permitted to be open on Sunday 
afternoons that the American Christians might similarly 
have the (spiritual?) refreshment of music and beer. 

How strange that those various preachers and their 
intelligent congregations should consider that they preach 
and hear "the Gospel of the Son of God." Ah! they 
think that the old, old story is worn out and has lost its 
charm; they consider the crowds and the applause of men 
and the big salaries,— and these they must have. 

The trouble is that in both the pulpits and pews the 
"tares" outnumber the "wheat," the sanctified in Christ 
Jesus. The gospel, because it acts only upon the heart, 
controls only the "wheat." The preponderating "tare" 
element needs constantly to be rubbing up the outside, 
because inwardly they are full of the spirit of the world 
—pride, ambition, selfishness, envy. "Come out of her, 
my people, that ye be not partakers of her sins, and that 
ye receive not of her plagues."— Rev. 18:4. 



A speculative craze has recently spread over Europe. 
South African gold fields are reported to be very rich; and 
on the strength of this report numerous share-companies have 
been started. The purchasers of these shares are chiefly of the 
"middle classes" who by economy have saved a little 
money, and who now hope by these investments to have a 
comfortable income for the remainder of life. Beginning 
with England, this wave has spread all over Europe. 

Prudent, far-sighted men see that the "promoters" 



who organize these companies and boom them to fabulous 
prices will make immense fortunes (many have done so already), 
and that the people who invest their hard-earned 
hoardings at the boom prices will lose their little alls; and 
they so advise them, but to no purpose;— the whole world 
is racing for wealth. 

The boom may last a year or two, but it must sooner or 
later collapse in a panic. The fluctuations in the value of 
these shares in one day recently was $500,000,000. When 
the crash comes and these investors lose all it will tend to 
make them, the "middle class," sour, gloomy and dejected; 
and thus it will push many of them into the ranks of the 
socialistic and anarchistic, hopeless "lower classes." Thus 
we see another factor preparing for the bringing forward of 
the great crash of the "time of trouble." 



The threatened dismemberment of Turkey is exciting 
great interest the world over. It seems imminent; and our 
"Second Adventist" friends have long held the theory 
that Turkey is the False Prophet of Rev. 19:20, and that 
its overthrow means "the end of the world." As our 
readers are aware, we take a totally different view of these 
things, believing that Turkey has nothing whatever to do 
with the symbolic False Prophet referred to. Should dismemberment 
be determined on it will be done very cautiously; 
for all Europe dreads war as never before. But if 
war should occur, it would by no means be even a part of 
the final "trouble such as was not since there was a nation." 
If this were the year 1905, instead of 1895, the matter would 
have a totally different aspect. How blessed in the midst 
of so many rumors of wars and commotions and trials of 
life to have the peace of God which passeth all understanding 
keep our hearts! Our Master's words were, "My peace 

R1898 : page 273 

I give unto you, not as the world giveth, give I unto you. 
Let not your heart be troubled, neither let it be afraid." 



We have already called attention to the Jew-haters, 
the anti-Semitic party of Austria. It grows more bitter 
and more strong daily. This party has by recent elections 
gained a large majority in the Municipal Council of Vienna, 
on the proposition that the Jews be persecuted— by being 
refused public office and contracts, that present contracts 
held by them shall be cancelled and that their children be 
separated from others in the public schools: and these are 
only beginnings of persecutions. This Council elected a 
rabid "Jew-hater" for mayor, charged with executing these 
measures. The Emperor, contrary to custom, exercised 
his power and set aside the choice and ordered a new election. 
The Council re-elected the same man by way of 



showing their determination; whereupon the Emperor's 
representative declared the Council dissolved. Great excitement 
results, and the Jews, who represent one-tenth of 
the population and one-third of the wealth, are sorely 
perplexed. 

Yes, we are in "the time of Jacob's trouble;" and we 
shall not be surprised if bitterness against the race shall 
reach such intensity as to expel them from Austria, Germany, 
France, Spain and Portugal— possibly from England. 
The Lord has promised to gather the "remnant of Israel" 
that they shall come back to their own land "with weeping 
and with supplication."— Jer. 31:8-10. 



R1898 : page 273 

THE CUP OF THE LORD AND THE TABLE OF THE LORD. 



"Ye cannot drink the cup of the Lord and the cup of devils: ye cannot 
be partakers of the Lord's table and of the table of devils. Do we 
provoke the Lord to jealousy? are we 
stronger than he?"— 1 Cor. 10:21,22. 

WE find these words of warning addressed, not only 

to "the Church of God at Corinth," but also 

"to them that are sanctified in Christ Jesus, called to be 

saints, with all that in every place call upon the name of 

Jesus Christ our Lord." (1 Cor. 1:2.) They apply to 

the entire probationary membership of the Gospel Church 

down to the end of the age. 

Those whose hearts are still loyal and true to God may 
at first think strange of such an admonition, and say, 
"Paul, Paul, why so counsel us when we have no desire to 
touch or taste or handle the devil's goods? Such counsel 
seems to betoken some mistrust of our loyalty to the Lord." 
But Paul replies, "Let him that thinketh he standeth take 
heed lest he fall." The warning is a wholesome one: our 
testing and trial are not yet finished: while the Lord's 
cup is presented to us, the devil, as an angel of light, and 
with great subtlety, presents his cup also; and while the 
Lord spreads his table, the devil spreads his also. 

What is the Lord's cup? Call to mind the Lord's reference 
to it— "The cup which my Father hath given me 
to drink, shall I not drink it?" And again, when its bitter 
dregs were to be drained to the end, hear him pray, 
"O my Father, if it be possible, let this cup pass from 
me! nevertheless, not as I will, but as thou wilt." And yet 
again, "O my Father, if this cup may not pass from me 
except I drink it, thy will be done." It is the cup of 
sacrifice, even unto death. And not only is it the sacrifice 
of life, but of reputation and all that humanity holds dear. 
The life is sacrificed in the midst of reproaches and persecution 
and extreme trials of faith and patience. After the 



last supper with his disciples Jesus took the symbolic cup, 
saying, "This is my blood of the new testament which is 
shed for many for the remission of sins. ...Drink ye all 
of it." (Matt. 26:27,28.) The Apostle (1 Cor. 10:16) 
refers to the same cup saying, "The cup of blessing, for 
which we bless God, is it not a participation of the blood 
of the Anointed one?" And so also, "The loaf which we 
break, is it not a participation of the body of the Anointed 
one? Because there is one loaf we, the many, are one body." 

Thus we see that the body of Christ is invited to share 
the same cup with the Head— the cup of sacrifice, of ignominy 
and reproach. "Drink ye all of it." And blessed 
is he who has thus far so faithfully partaken of the 
Lord's cup that he can say, "The reproaches of them that 
reproached thee have fallen upon me." 

We have seen what is the Lord's cup: now what is the 
cup of devils? Well, it is a cup of sacrifice also; and 
those who drink of it sacrifice their true happiness in the 
present life and their prospects for the life to come. 
These, however, are the dregs of Satan's cup: these do 
not appear upon the surface. Its surface sparkles with 
hopes of earthly prosperity, pride, self-exaltation and 
"honor one of another;" and to attain these hopes, time, 

R1899 : page 273 

talent and influence are sacrificed to the bitter and disappointing 
end. 

That is indeed a cup of intoxication, a cup of deceptions 
and delusions, whose awful potency finally is unto 
eternal death. Well does the Apostle say, "The things 
which the Gentiles [the unbelieving world] sacrifice they 
sacrifice to devils, and not to God: and I would not that 
ye [believers, Christians] should have fellowship with devils. 
Ye cannot drink the cup of the Lord and the cup of devils." 
In other words, we cannot partake of the spirit of the 
world, the spirit of selfishness, ambition, pride, and sacrifice 
our lives to these ignoble aims, and at the same time 
partake also of the spirit of Christ, which is unselfish, 
humble, self-denying and glad to sacrifice earthly ambitions 
in the service of him who bought us with his own precious 
blood. We cannot partake of both spirits; for the 
one is the reverse of and antagonistic to the other. "Ye 

R1899 : page 274 

cannot serve God and Mammon." Nor can ye long halt 
between the two. "A double minded man is unstable in 
all his ways," and "Let not that man think that he shall 
receive any thing of the Lord."— Jas. 1:7,8. 

Since this warning is addressed, not to the world, but 
to those who have already pledged themselves to drink of 
the Lord's cup, their partaking now of the devil's cup implies 
their turning away from the Lord's cup. And if any 
are so foolish as to give the consent of their minds to the 
partaking in some measure of both the cup of the Lord 



and the cup of devils,— of the spirit of the Lord and the 
spirit of the world and of devils, of the doctrines of the 
Lord and the doctrines of devils, he is wilfully despising 
his covenant and doing despite to the spirit of favor. 

Let us consider now what is "the table of the Lord." 
It is the board richly spread with a bountiful supply of 
divine truth— bread of life and meat in due season and 
honey in the honeycomb, and the choicest beverages of 
milk and wine, and of the pure water of life, clear as 
crystal. (John 6:32-35; Matt. 24:45; Psa. 19:10; Isa. 55:1; 
Rev. 21:6; 22:1.) It is spread for every one 
that is hungering and thirsting after righteousness; and 
blessed are they that come to it, for they shall be filled: 
they shall be richly fed and abundantly satisfied, and their 
souls shall delight themselves in fatness.— Isa. 55:1,2; 
Matt. 5:6; Psa. 22:26. 

This table of the Lord has been spread for his saints, 
his Church, from the very beginning of the Gospel age; 
and it has always been supplied with meat in season; and 
some of the Lord's people have been appointed to serve. 
Thus, for instance the apostles served in the beginning 
of the age, not only in setting before the Lord's people 
the meat in due season, but also in laying up in store food 
for the Church in future days. (2 Pet. 1:15,19.) Their 
service has been valuable to the entire Church, even to the 
present day. And all through the age there have been 
devout, godly men who called the Lord's people to his 
table, and ministered to them from its bounty; and the 
hungry have been fed and blessed. 

But now the end, the harvest of the age, has come, 
the richest season of all the year, when the buds of prophecy 
and promise have developed and are now bringing 
forth their golden fruit, and the table of the Lord fairly 
groans under its bounty. And not only so, but the Lord 
of the harvest himself, being now present, according to his 
promise, comes forth and serves his people. (Luke 12:37.) 
Here, as never in all the past, the richness and fatness of 
the purposes and promises of God are made manifest in all 
their completeness. Here is a systematic theology such as 
the Church has never before known,— the plan of salvation 
set before us in such order and beauty that it surpasses our 
brightest hopes; a plan consistent and harmonious in every 
part and wrought out silently and grandly through all the 
ages past on principles of the most profound moral philosophy, 
and with a precision and exactness of time and order 
that are suggestive of the mathematical precision of the 
great Designer, Executor and Revealer. So glorious is it 
in its completeness, its symmetry and beauty, that the satisfied 
soul perceives that no addition could be made to it 
without marring its excellence, and joyfully exclaims, "It 
is the Lord's doing and the Lord's revealing, and it is marvelous 
in our eyes;" and "What more can he say than to us 
he hath said" of his wisdom and love and grace? Though the 
Lord makes use of human agency to portray and proclaim 
the riches of his grace and his loving kindness to the sons 
and heirs of God, and though he permits all at the table 



to be co-workers together with himself in serving one another 
at the feast, to God belongs all the glory of both plan and 
execution; and to our Lord and Head belongs the praise 
of this service of the revealing, and of the anointing of 
our hearts to receive it, and our eyes to behold it, and our 
ears to hear it, and our tongues to declare it. Glory to 
God in the highest, and unto the Lamb forever and ever! 
Let the whole earth be filled with his glory! 

While the Lord's table is thus richly spread with a satisfying 
portion for all who hunger and thirst after righteousness 
and after the knowledge of God, whom to know 
is life and peace, there are many other tables spread to 
which the people of God are invited. Papacy has its table 
upon which, with some fragments of truth, are found in 
abundant supply the abominable doctrines of the mass, of 
eternal torment, and purgatory, and the idolatry of Mary, 
and the presumed saints, and auricular confession, and implicit 
obedience to scheming priests, etc., etc. Protestants 
also have their several tables, upon which may be found 
some truth, such as the redemption through the precious 
blood of Christ, baptism, faith in God and in his inspired 
Word, etc.; but oh! what fragments of truth they have are 
all befouled; for, says the Prophet (Isa. 28:8,— and his 
words are true), "All [their] tables are full of vomit and 
filthiness, so that there is no place clean." They are full of 
rejected matter— old errors swallowed in the past with 
thoughtless complacency. But the shakings (Heb. 12:26,27) 
of these judgment times are making the people sick, so that 
they cannot retain those horrid doctrines of eternal torment, 
the predestination to eternal woe of the great majority 
of mankind before they were born, etc., etc. And 
yet, lacking the moral courage openly to disown and abandon 
them, their tables are therefore polluted with the sickening 
rejected matter: their tables are all unclean. 

Before the "shakings" of this present time produced 
the nausea that befouled those tables, many of the Lord's 
dear people were permitted to sit there and select the good 
food and to antidote the poison of the errors with larger 
draughts of the water of life from the fountain of God's 
Word. But now, harvest having come, and the separating 
work being due (Matt. 13:30), all the true people of God 
are called away from those tables to the bountiful harvest 
table where the Lord himself is now serving. In obeying 
the voice of the Lord and abandoning the unclean tables 

R1899 : page 275 

many enemies are made, but blessed are those who have 
the hearing of faith and obey the call to the Lord's table. 
It was of this the Psalmist sung, saying, "Thou preparest 
a table before me in the presence of mine enemies: thou 
anointest my head with oil: my cup [of blessing] runneth 
over." 

But there are other tables besides the unclean tables of 
Babylon. There are tables of devils: tables laden with all 
manner of subtle and ingenious evil doctrines, bringing in 



"damnable heresies, even denying the Lord that bought 
them," wresting the Scriptures, perverting them, undermining 
their teaching, and substituting human philosophies. 
Of these are such tables as the Papacy— that "masterpiece 
of Satanic ingenuity," Theosophy, Spiritism, Christian 
Science (falsely so called), Evolution, and all the various 
phases of human philosophy which ignore the doctrine of 
redemption through our Lord's vicarious sacrifice, and aim 
to teach men how to climb up to eternal life by some 
other way. These all are tables of devils, against which 
the Apostle warns us, saying, Ye cannot partake of the 
Lord's table and the table of devils. 

Some, alas! after they have accepted the invitation to 
the Lord's table, and have tasted and seen that the Lord is 
good, do turn away from the Lord's table to the tables of 
devils, apparently thinking they can return at their pleasure 
and be welcomed again at the Lord's table, and come and 
go at will and partake of both. "Oh yes," say they, "we 
are not narrow-minded weaklings, afraid to taste anything 
except what we find on one table. True, the table of the 
Lord is a very good one; but there are good things on the 
other tables too, and we taste every thing; yes, we 'prove 
all things, and hold fast that which is good,' no matter 
where we find it." 

Such, alas! is the attitude of many, who forget that 
"Pride goeth before destruction, and a haughty spirit before 
a fall;" and if the efforts of faithful brethren fail to 
convince them of the error of their way, it is not long 
before they begin to manifest a distaste for the food supplied 
at the Lord's table, and it becomes more and more 
evident that soon they must leave it altogether. The unwholesome 
and poisonous dishes on the devil's table soon 
vitiate the taste, undermine the spiritual health, and produce 
abnormal cravings for that which is not good; and 
the spiritually sick soul has no longer any disposition to 
feast at the Lord's table. Nor does the Lord desire that he 
should; for in leaving the table of the Lord he has done 
despite to the spirit of favor, and if he persist in such a 
course he must depart altogether; for "Ye cannot be 
partakers of the Lord's table and the table of devils." 
"Ye cannot please two masters." 

In the act of going from the Lord's table to the table 
of devils he who does so virtually says that he is not satisfied 
with the bounties of divine providence, and that he 
still has some respect for the devil, the great enemy of 

R1900 : page 275 

God. Thus he proves his disloyalty to God by his fellowship 
with unrighteousness. In quoting the scripture, 
"Prove all things, hold fast that which is good," he 
forgets the accompanying modification, "Abstain from all 
appearance of evil." (1 Thes. 5:19-22.) We have much 
to do, and all we can do, if we do it well, in proving the 
abundant merits of the food upon the Lord's table, and in 
appropriating it to our spiritual life and health and serving 



it to others. We taste and see that the Lord is good, and 
prove the healthfullness of his doctrines, but we have nothing 
to do with the doctrines of devils, except to abstain from 
them, and to warn others of their ill effects, as illustrated 
in those who have tampered with them. 

Any child of God should be able to tell at a glance the 
devil's table from the Lord's table, especially after he has 
been fed at the Lord's table. The foundations of any 
system are easily discovered, and there is only one true 
foundation— Christ, the ransom. "Other foundation can 
no man lay." (1 Cor. 3:11; 15:3.) And any one whose 
soul has been satisfied with the truth, should perceive at 
once the deformity of error. As a musician's ear, trained 
to the beautiful harmonies of sound, quickly detects a discordant 
note, or as an artist's eye, trained to all the fine 
distinctions of form and color and order, quickly marks the 
defective work of an amateur, so the mind and heart, educated 
in the beautiful harmonies and the perfect and artistic 
order and system of the Divine Plan, quickly detect the discord 
of error, and they need no other satisfaction and can 
find no higher delight; and the soul armed with this "whole 
armor of God" needs no other preparation to be able to 
withstand either the subtle or the brazen-faced incursions 
and attacks of error. "Put on the whole armor of God, 
that ye may be able to stand against the wiles of the devil;" 
rest in the Lord, and be satisfied; and feed at the Lord's 
table only, if you would have that spiritual health and vigor 
which is proof against all the pestilences of this evil day. 

To those who are not satisfied at the Lord's table after 
having feasted there, apply those words of the Lord by the 
Prophet Isaiah (1:1-6), "Hear, O heavens, and give ear, 
O earth, for the Lord hath spoken: I have nourished and 
brought up children, and they have rebelled against me. 
The ox knoweth his owner, and the ass his master's crib; 
but Israel doth not know, my people doth not consider." 
The ox and the ass know enough to return again and again 
to the owner and crib where hitherto they have been well 
fed. In this they manifest more discretion than those of 
the Lord's people who forsake his table to prove the dishes 
offered on the devil's table, or to turn to the unclean tables 
where all that is good is made unclean by association with 
that which is unclean. 

It is not surprising, then, that the Lord will not permit 
such to return to his table— "Ye cannot be partakers 
of the Lord's table and the table of devils." Why? Because 
in thus turning away from the Lord's table where they 
have been so richly fed, and where the Lord has girded 
himself to serve, they have manifested disloyalty to him, 

R1900 : page 276 

and have despised the riches of his grace, and done despite 
to the spirit of favor. Those who wilfully do so after being 
once enlightened are of that sinful class typified by rebellious 
Israel. The Prophet describes them in no uncertain 
terms, saying, "Ah, sinful nation, a people laden with iniquity, 



a seed of evildoers, children that are corrupters! 
They have forsaken the Lord, they have provoked the Holy 
One of Israel unto anger, they are gone away backward. 
....The whole head is sick, and the whole heart faint. 
From the sole of the foot even unto the head there is no 
soundness in it." 

Nor are we narrow-minded in confining our studies to 
the divine plan, regardless of all vain philosophies and 
human traditions and speculations; for its scope is as wide 
as redemption, its science the most exact, and its philosophy 
the most profound. Having learned the divine plan 
revealed in the Scriptures, it is the privilege of all who are 
imbued with its spirit to apply its measuring lines to the 
whole matter of divine revelation, and thus, by its assistance 
together with the hallowed influences of prayer and 
communion with God, to receive that education in spiritual 
things which enables us to appreciate with a musician's ear 
the finer strains of the heavenly melody and its precision 
of rhythm and order; and with an artist's eye the fine and 
beautiful shadings of divine wisdom and grace. 

Oh, no! we shall not be narrow-minded in thus following 
the guidance of the Lord into "the deep things of 
God," now revealed in his due time, "which things the 
angels desire to look into," and which will be the saint's 
delight through all eternity. What think you? Will the 
saints and angels be narrow-minded when the devil and his 
tables are all destroyed? Let us away with every evil thing, 
and find our delight in God, and be satisfied with the consolations 
of his abundant grace. Let the language of our 

page 276 

hearts continually be:— 

"No longer far from rest I roam, 
And search in vain for bliss; 
My soul is satisfied at home: 
The Lord my portion is." 



R1900 : page 276 

"DAWN CIRCLES FOR BIBLE STUDY." 



IN our issue of Sept. 15, we commended these as profitable 
for the upbuilding of the Church by establishing 
each one in the general features of the complete plan 
of the ages, whereby alone all Scripture can be rightly 
divided and appreciated. This method has four specially 
commendable features. (1) It brings into use and study 
the entire range of Scripture from Genesis to Revelation, 
instead of confining the attention to a few verses of one 
chapter. It is a topical, instead of a verse and chapter, 
study of the Bible. (2) It leads the mind and heart 



to refreshment in that which we all have proved to be 
rich and nutritive food from the Master's storehouse, 
and away from vain speculations which neither satisfy nor 
strengthen the heart. (3) It accustoms each one to think 
for himself, and to study to arrange his conceptions of the 
truth in harmony with all the Scripture statements bearing 
thereon, and also to express to others the truth which he sees. 
(4) These are the objects of all teachings in the Church, as 
the Apostle states them— "For the edifying of the saints 
"for the work of ministry." 

We notice, however, that a few, very few we are glad 
to say, have totally mistaken the suggestions made respecting 
this kind of meetings, and understood us to advise the 
abandonment of the Bible and instead that the MILLENNIAL 
DAWN be read. Nothing could be farther from our 
thought. As for the mere reading of the BIBLE or the 
DAWN, that can be better done privately, each for himself. 

On the contrary, the suggestion is to make Bible studies 
general; and as the light has come to us all by studying 
God's orderly plan as set forth in DAWN, so it will continue 
to become more and more clear in all its minutiae as we 
continue to study it from the same standpoint. If the Plan 
of the Ages gives the only true outline of the divine plan, 
and if we have learned that outline thoroughly, let us use 
the same helping hand, observe the same divine plan and 
order, in continuing the study of the minutiae of God's 
plan of the ages. 

It is for this purpose that we advise "Dawn Circles 
for Bible Study;" and as an illustration of the proposed 
method we offer the following as a sample analysis of the 
first paragraph of DAWN, VOL. I., viz.— 

What constitutes the divine revelation?— 2 Pet. 1:21; 
2 Tim. 3:16,17. 

When and how did sin come into the world?— Rom. 5:12; 
etc. 

Who is the "Sun of Righteousness"?— Mai. 4:1,2; 
Matt. 13:43; Dan. 12:3. 

When will this "Sun" arise?-Acts 3:19-21; Col. 3:4. 

What will its shining effect?-Mal. 4:1,2; Isa. 60:18,19; 
25:7-9; Acts 3:23. 

What will be its "healing," and how performed?— 
Rom. 5:18,19. 

Do sin and death, directly or indirectly cause present 
"weeping" and trouble? How? 

Upon what sure ground can we hope for the "morning" 
and its "joy"?-Rom. 5:6-8; 14:9; 1 Cor. 15:3,21; 
2 Pet. 1:16,19; Prov. 4:18; Job 14:13-15; 
Psa. 49:14,15. 

Will that "glorious day" be followed by a night?— 
Rev. 21:21-25; Isa. 60:20,21. 

Other Scriptures might be brought forward profitably, 
but all will see the necessity for not permitting too much 
latitude, and the leader of the class will exercise his best 
judgment in kindly reminding any who might be disposed 

R1900 : page 277 



to digress considerably. The class should contain several 
Bibles, and we recommend that all meetings be opened and 
closed with praise and prayer. The plan of some of having 
pencils and noting the references in the margins of 
their DAWNS is also commended. It will be of great help 
to all when endeavoring again to prove the truth to the 
skeptical. 

A Bible-study more interesting or more profitable than 
the foregoing could scarcely be imagined. In this everyone 
can take part; all can thus be assured of the firm foundation 
upon which the good tidings of great joy rest; all can 
edify and build one another up in the most holy faith; the 
"meat in due season," now provided by the Lord for all 
who feast at his table, is thus with an open Bible before the 
entire class, and each one may pass to the others refreshing 
portions. 

A class of three would find abundant and rich Bible 
food for an hour, suggested by this one paragraph; and a 
larger class of say a dozen would scarcely get through with 
it at one meeting. We commend to all the little companies 
of the Lord's flock these "Dawn Circle Bible Studies" 
for one meeting in each week. They will tend to make all 
proficient in the understanding of God's Word which is a 
prerequisite to the required "work of ministry," serving it 
to others. (Eph. 4: 12). It is a much safer plan than to 
meet to speculate and try to make types out of every person 
and every thing mentioned in the Bible, a plan that has 
led many (into pride of skill in making something out of 
nothing and thence) into "outer darkness." And it will 
generally be found much more profitable than to take any 
chance subject, or to be without some previously appointed 
subject. Each lesson should be thought out by all and 
especially by the leader or "elder." However, each class 
ought to be willing to consider any Bible topic suggested 
by any attendant, and considered by a majority of the class 
to be a profitable topic. For this purpose the DAWN lessons 
could be temporarily discontinued or, preferably, extra 
meetings could be appointed. 



R1901 : page 277 

THE PLAN OF THE AGES. 



A beautiful vision of glory has caught my enraptured gaze; 
It is thrilling my heart with gladness, and filling my mouth with praise. 
My soul had so longed for this vision; I knew it must come to view, 
When Faith would behold God's goodness in the light which makes all 

things new. 
And so I have searched for the treasure, believing I yet would find; 
And that God in his infinite mercy would open my eyes, so blind, 
To see the Truth in its grandeur, all fresh with the dews of grace, 



And sparkling in the glory that beams from the holy place; 

To know his love, passing knowledge in its length and depth and height, 

With a breadth no man can measure, and a strength sin cannot blight. 

The Lord hath his time appointed to fulfil our hearts' desires, 

And there comes an hour in his "due time" when the weary watch expires. 

So, standing upon my tower in the dawn of a better day, 

And waiting there for the vision he promised should not delay, 

I saw God's plan of the ages on tablets of truth made plain, 

And the love wherewith he loved us, and his plan man's love to regain. 

Oh, truly, the scene was blessed, transcending my noblest thought; 

With my cup of joy overflowing, I cried, "What hath God wrought!" 

In the past I had had some glimpses of what his great love might be; 
But the scene had so many shadows it seemed a vast mystery. 

The creeds of men, and false doctrines, had formed a veil o'er my eyes, 

And the truth of God looked sombre when hidden 'mid such disguise; 

But now it is joy and gladness, "glad tidings of great joy!" 

And e'en if I had a thousand tongues I could each one employ 

To tell it out to his people, and call to his saints beloved, 

To come and gaze on the vision with the shadows all removed; 

To trace with love's guiding finger, in the light of the holy oil, 

God's plan for the world's redemption from sin and all its turmoil. 

For, Oh, such a vision, surely, will quell all their doubts and fears; 

And such a bright dawn of promise will banish night's falling tears. 

Then come to the watch tower, pilgrims, come up to this height serene, 
And gaze on this rapturous vision, and take in the blessed scene, 
'Til the truth of God, so mighty, shall break every captive's chain, 
And the bliss that was lost in Eden is restored to mankind again. 

F. G. BURROUGHS. 



R1901 : page 277 

DAVID ANOINTED KING. 

-DEC. 1.--1 SAM. 16:1-13.- 



Golden Text— "Man looketh on the outward appearance, 
but the Lord looketh on the heart."— 1 Sam. 16:7. 

IN selecting David to reign over Israel God chose one 
who was not only suitable to the necessities of that 
people and time, but one who aptly prefigured the Christ, 
Head and body, selected during the Gospel age and anointed 
to sit on the throne of the Kingdom of the Lord. 
In this view of the matter the golden text forcibly reminds 
us of the statement of the Apostle Paul (1 Cor. 1:26), "Ye 
see your calling, brethren, how that not many wise men 
after the flesh, not many mighty, not many noble, are called: 
But God hath chosen the foolish things of the world to 
confound the wise, and God hath chosen the weak 
things of the world to confound the things which are 
mighty; and base things of the world, and things which 



are despised hath God chosen; yea, and things which are 
not, to bring to naught the things that are; that no flesh 
should glory in his presence." 

God looked for the same characteristics in David that 
he now seeks in those whom in this age he calls to be 
anointed for the Kingdom. He found in him faith, meekness, 
courage, energy and loving obedience. Yet he was 

R1901 : page 278 

young and inexperienced and untrained and unskilled in 
the duties of the high office to which he was called. This 
latter condition, which, in the estimation of men, would 
have been an insurmountable barrier, was no obstacle in 
God's sight; for God is able to inspire his called ones with 
his spirit and to arm them with his might. So he did with 
David, and so he does with the Christ— our Lord Jesus and 
his body, the church. In the Psalms of David his typical 
character is very clearly indicated, sometimes personifying 
Jesus our Head, and sometimes the whole body of Christ. 
Thus, for instance, when he says, "They part my garments 
among them, and cast lots upon my vesture," the reference 
is only to our Head; while in other cases, as in Psa. 23, the 
application is to the whole body, whose Shepherd is the 
Lord Jehovah. 

It required the two reigns of David and Solomon to 
represent the great work of the Lord's Anointed. David's 
reign represented the work of the church in the flesh, while 
Solomon's reign represented the work of the church glorified 
and at rest from all her enemies. 

David when anointed was but a youth. He was not 
one, however, who wasted the precious spring time of life 
in sowing "wild oats." He was a bud of promise, a 
noble youth,— meek, modest, gentle, faithful, courageous 
in the line of duty, and brave to face danger and to endure 
hardness in any good work, especially wherever the interests 
of God's cause or God's people were at stake. Seeing in 
him this sterling stamp of character God called him to 
higher service. So he has been calling and anointing with 
his holy spirit a similar class all through the Gospel age. 
They are the Lord's anointed kings; but their kingdom, 
like that of David, is not established: they are surrounded 
by enemies on every side as was David, and the whole time 
of their life in the flesh is a continual warfare as was his. 
Like David, too, they have had it in their hearts to build 
the temple of God in the present age, that all the world 
might come and worship. But this privilege is not granted 
to the church in the flesh, even as the building of the typical 
temple was denied to David, but was reserved for Solomon, 
to whom the Lord gave a rest, peace and prosperity which 
made it an apt symbol of the reign of the glorified 
church.- 1 Chron. 22:7-9. 

But while David was not permitted to build the temple 
of God, he was permitted to gather together and prepare 
the materials for the building. So the church in the flesh 
makes ready the materials for the temple of God which in 



the dawn of the Millennium will come together noiselessly 
as did Solomon's temple, without the sound of a hammer. 
David's warfare, then, was a type of the warfare of the 
whole church, Head and body, while in the flesh, against 
the principalities and powers of darkness on every side 
that oppose her to the very end of her earthly course, so 
that, though she is anointed for the kingly office, she is 
never established in power, peace and security to the day of 
her death. Her work on this side the vail is to war a good 
warfare, and to industriously gather the materials and prepare 
the living stones for the glorious temple which shall 
by and by call all the world to worship. 

Beyond the vail of the flesh this same anointed company 
(all the faithful overcomers of this age) will enter into 
the glorious reign prefigured by the reign of Solomon— 
"They shall rest from their labors, and their works follow 
with them." (Rev. 14:13.) And the temple of God 

R1902 : page 278 

shall rise and shine in its beauty, and in it shall all the 
nations of the earth be blessed, which blessing was typified 
by the abundant blessing, peace and prosperity of Israel 
during the reign of Solomon. 

Let all who have this glorious hope in them remember 
the words of our golden text— "The Lord looketh on the 
heart." He is looking to see who is worthy to sit on the 
throne of his Kingdom; and has shown us very clearly the 
traits of character for which he is looking. It behooves 
us, then, to see that our hearts (our will, purpose, intention 
and effort) are in such a condition of loyalty, faithfulness 
and obedience as will bear the inspection of the all-seeing 
eye, while we remember for our encouragement that, as 
shown in the type, no conditions of birth or station or 
circumstances can form any obstacle to our acceptance with 
God and our future exaltation with Christ if we are 
faithful. 



R1902 : page 278 

DAVID AND GOLIATH. 

-DEC. 8.-1 SAM. 17:38-51.- 

Golden Text— "The battle is the Lord's."— 1 Sam. 17:47. 

THE lesson to the Christian to be gathered from this 
narrative is briefly embodied in the golden text— 
"The battle is the Lord's." Let him ever bear this in 
mind, and daily go forth to battle with the great powers of 
darkness, strong in the strength which God supplies, with 
the faith, courage and heroism that distinguished David, 
and no foe can stand before him. The one great essential 
to victory is faith. "This is the victory that overcometh the 



world, even our faith." "Without faith it is impossible to 
please God" or to secure his interposition on our behalf. 

Having faith, we need no carnal weapons, and no 
armor of human invention is of any service to us; but 
trained and practical faith can work wonders as great as 
did David's sling and stone. The sling and stone were not 
an untried weapon with David. He was in constant practice 
with them, and thus he had gained skill and confidence 
in their use. So the Christian must practice dependence 
upon God continually in all the small affairs of life, and 
then when the giant trials come his practised faith will be 
abundantly able to meet and overcome them. And the 

R1902 : page 279 

more severe the trial, the more glorious the victory of faith 
and the greater the strength of character derived from its 
exercise. Doubtless it was the previous struggle with the 
lion and the bear, and the victory God gave him then, that 
gave David such boldness in defying the power of Goliath. 
So every battle we fight and every victory we win through 
faith in God develops strength for future conflicts and 
makes the more sure our final overcoming. 



R1902 : page 279 

ENCOURAGING WORDS FROM FAITHFUL WORKERS. 



New York. 

DEAR BROTHER AND SISTER RUSSELL:-You are entitled 
to a little report of our "Dawn Circle for Bible 
Study." We have been longing for a Sunday afternoon 
meeting, and have prayed for a brother in our midst to be 
touched with the spirit of truth to take the care of such a 
meeting. At one time it looked as though our requests 
were to be granted, but every hope of a present answer was 
taken away as we found unwillingness or faintheartedness 
among all the good men we thought interested. So the 
meeting must be abandoned or I must take the forward 
step, which, in the strength of the Lord, I did, and announced 
a series of Bible studies on the Plan of the Ages 
with chart illustrations. Last Sunday we began with but ten 
present; nevertheless the Lord was present to fill all the 
vacancies, and we spent a blessed time. All expressed 
themselves as greatly interested and enlightened, and purposing 
to attend regularly and to bring others. It was all 
the Lord's doings. 

I was led in opening to give a little of my experience 
in Bible study, past and present, and the dear friends 
seemed very much touched, so much so that when I came 
home I thought I would try to express the same in verse, 
and wrote the enclosed, which I know is too long to be used 



in the TOWER; and which please return to me, as I have 
no copy. 

We have a table at the meeting place, containing tracts 
and books and TOWERS, which we urge the attendants to 
take with them; and last week they did so very generally; 
so we hope for good results from this mode of circulating 
the truth. You must count us now as really a little Church, 
and pray for us daily. Remember especially the poor earthen 
vessel the Lord has to use, that his may be all the glory. 

Your sister in His service, F. G. BURROUGHS. 

[We are well pleased with the report of your "Dawn 
Circle for Bible Study." We think that under the circumstances 
there you have done right to step forward and take 
the initiative, which we perceive you have done in the 
spirit of meekness with all deference to the Lord's will in 
the choice of brethren generally for the more public service. 
But if there be no brother in the company sufficiently 
or equally competent to lead, then the interests of the 
flock should not be permitted to suffer from that cause, 
when a sister with the necessary qualifications stands ready 
with consecrated talents meekly and faithfully to serve them. 
We call to mind that once God raised up a female judge 
in Israel; and if in these days of more general education 
and enlightenment he should bring forward some sisters 
with marked meekness, faithfulness, sobriety and ability to 
serve his flock with a little more prominence than others, 
we may not despise these indications of the Lord's will. 
No brother who is a mere novice in the knowledge of the 
truth, or a mere babe in Christian experience, should be 
asked to take a leading part merely because he is a brother. 
If a sister have preeminent talents, by all means use them. 
You did well, too, in starting the class with a Chart 
exposition. 

Believing all will enjoy our Sister's poem, "The 
Plan of the Ages," we here published it on another page 
of this issue. --EDITOR.! 



Virginia. 

DEAR SIR AND BROTHER:-I loaned the DAWN to a 
man recently, whose comments were, "Oh! I must go over 
it again;" adding, "It is splendid." 

I find that very few members of the church wish even 
to talk about Christ's coming now. Of course, there is 
but little oil in their lamps. Some tell me I would be 
frightened at his coming. The idea of being frightened 
at the coming of my Brother, with whom I am on the best 
of terms of love; never! Neither will any Christian who 
is striving and praying without ceasing. 

Well, as the child grows in grace his troubles accumulate; 
hence we have to tighten the cords of prayer. 

Since Christians are liable to sins of omission or sins 
committed inadvertently, or sins committed because of 
doubt as to whether "so and so" is a sin (And so many 
take advantage of this doubt!), I am constrained to ask 



them to read the seventh chapter of Joshua, which clearly 
explains why prayers are so often not answered. 

In this chapter it is recorded that God said to Joshua, 
"Get thee up; wherefore liest thou thus upon thy face?" 
Joshua had asked God why it was that Israel was defeated 
in battle, and his army put to flight? God answered, The 
children of Israel cannot stand before their enemies, because 
a theft has been committed by one of the people. 

Thus we see that our prayers and our efforts in life will 
not be blessed by our heavenly Father if our hearts are 
sinning against God as did Achan, who with his sons and 
daughters was put to death for the theft in question. Thus 
it is that millions of good deeds and fervent prayers are 
nothing in the sight of God. Why? Because a wrong 
has been committed, and until reparation has been made 
it will be vain to plead at the throne of God. 

Our faith may be strong; we may love God; if we are 
his children he does love us; but if we have committed 
that which is evil in his sight, until we make a clean surrender, 
our prayers will not be answered: there are formidable 
barriers between us and heaven. 

To any in that condition I would say: You promised 
an unconditional surrender when you declared you would 
stand on the Lord's side. Do you not know that you did? 
But probably "one thing thou lackest;" and doubtless 
you know what it is. Does the thought of surrendering it 
make you sad? Is it a "sweet morsel?" Ask yourself 
what is its name! Is it worldly gain? malice? envy? 
revenge? or a want of charity? with which you have built 
a barrier around yourself, excluding your prayers from 

R1902 : page 280 

heaven? Be it what it may, you will be compelled to 
make a clean surrender ere you can expect a realization of 
divine favor. Will you surrender now? or will you continue 
your warfare against your own soul, and remain like 
an army that is whipped and continues to fight until nearly 
annihilated over a long and fruitless retreat? 

The religion of many who profess to be God's children 
is of three kinds. Either they have never become children 
of God, and hence their religion is wholly theoretical; or 
they have been truly converted, but fail to live a consistent 
Christian life; or, not having kept very close to our 
Heavenly Father, temptation has found them unsheltered, 

R1903 : page 280 

sin has crept in and taken root and developed to such 
alarming proportions that suddenly they awaken to a sense 
of their condition, and become doubtful as to whether God 
really owns them or not. [A small minority, having by 
their own experience or that of others come to appreciate 
the above dangers, are living close to him; and because in 
Christ they endeavor to do always those things which please 
Him, they are able to approximate the sentiment expressed 



by him when he said, "I know that thou hearest me always." 
-John 11:42; 8:29.-EDITOR.] 
Yours in Christ, LEWIS W. BURWELL. 

South Dakota. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I am still holding the 
truth, and hope to remain faithful to the end. 

I have just returned from Minnesota, where Bro. Melin 
has been preaching the Gospel of the Kingdom. Many 
Swedes are stepping into the light there. I have visited 
N. Dakota twice this summer, and have been blessed and 
encouraged. 

Three years ago I preached the gospel of restitution 
in my native country, Norway. Many were interested, 
and would, I believe, have been brought into the full light, 
if I could have remained longer with them. I intend to 
go back soon. 

Yours in the faith, K. P. HAMMER. 

page 280 

Alabama. 

DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:-I am getting more and more 
every day into the knowledge of our gracious Lord and 
Savior Jesus Christ and God's glorious plan for redeeming 
poor fallen man. I have been a student of the MILLENNIAL 
DAWN series for about one year. I am entirely a 
different man to what I was when I first commenced their 
study, and since through a diligent search of the Scriptures 
I have come over on the Lord's side and have left Babylon. 
I am now happy in Christ, when before all was dark and 
gloomy. I was raised a Methodist, my father being an 
itinerant Methodist minister. He says their church is not 
what it used to be when he was actively engaged in the 
service. He is very much grieved that the ministry and 
the church have so far retrograded from its old teachings. 

I am studying hard and praying that I may not only 
hold on to what I already have but that I may see more and 
more of God's glorious plan, and receive "meat in due 
season" for the household of faith, which is so necessary 
for growth and development in the Christian life that 
I am trying to live. A great field is open here for the 
spread of the truth. Pray for me, dear brother, in my solitary 
efforts for its advancement, and "Pray the Lord of the 
harvest, that he will send forth more laborers into his 
harvest." Your brother in Christ, J. L. BAKER. 

Nova Scotia. 
DEAR TOWER:— I have heard that some of the members 
in the church from which I withdrew have been enquiring 
of the minister and elders why I left; and they 
have been told that I did not leave the church, only withdrew 
from the eldership. And on the strength of that 
they have called on me for money for the church. I was 
going to write the minister and explain to him my reasons 
for coming out of Babylon, but fear he would not read my 



letter before the congregation. He knows my position, 
for I have sent him many tracts and TOWERS. 

I see in a recent TOWER that you have prepared a 
letter for just such cases, and I gladly avail myself of the 
chance to set some of my friends at rest on the matter. 
See enclosed order. 

Yours in love, PETER DOUGLAS S . 

R1903 : page 280 

New York. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I have made a startling 
discovery lately. Although I left the M.E. church four 
years ago, I find upon inquiry that the minister under 
whose pastorate I left the church did not take my name off 
the church roll as I told him to do. And he has misrepresented 
me greatly. A great many regard me as a backslider, 
others think me an infidel, etc. I have searched 
into the matter and brought these things to light. Your 
suggestion about the letters of withdrawal in a recent 
TOWER seems to me very good, and I will be glad to avail 
myself of them. I am glad so much provision is made by 
the Lord for all his sheep, and praise him for his bountiful 
providence. 

May the Lord abundantly bless and use you is my 
prayer every day. Continue to pray for me. 

Yours in Him, ARTHUR CLARK. 

[The "Withdrawal Letters" were meant for just such 
cases, or, rather, to prevent such misrepresentations. They 
are kindly presentations of our reasons for standing separate 
from sects of "Babylon." They show that we feel 
no bitterness, but only love and sympathy, toward all of 
the Lord's sheep,— whether in or out of Babylon. Use 
these letters freely. They are now a number of the O.T. 
Tract series.— EDITOR.] 

page 280 

Oregon. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELLr-Enclosed you will find one 
dollar for a WATCH TOWER subscription for a brother to 
whom I have already sold DAWNS. He is delighted with 
them. 

Am happy to say our "Dawn Circle" is making progress 
and I have strong hopes it will be a fruitful source of 
growth in the truth and knowledge of God in just the manner 
the Lord delights in. (See Jer. 9:23,24.) It is this that 
has caused us so much joy. Bro. Mogensen has been baptized, 
and is full of preparations to go forth colporteuring. 

Yours in love and the faith, T. H. LLOYD. 

Scotland. 
MR. RUSSELL: -Early this year MILLENNIAL DAWN 
VOL. I. came into my hands, I might say heart; for no 
book ever laid hold of me in the same way. I cannot tell 
you what it has done for me and cost me already. It is no 



small thing at sixty-seven to be turned upside down and 
outside in, until I don't know where or what I am, only a 
sinner saved by grace, and that I stand on the Word which 
liveth and abideth forever! Many are the questions I would 
ask if I saw you face to face. I want to prove all things by 
the Word. Praying that God may use and bless you in 
work for the saints, 
I remain yours very sincerely, MARY DRUMMOND. 



page 281 
