God’s Word Is Alive
No Unlucky Spell Can Harm You
ARE you like this man? He is afraid that someone will hurt him by casting a spell, by the evil eye, by juju or by Obeah. Should you be afraid of such witchcraft or magic?
No, you need not fear. Although others have been harmed by such things, Jehovah God guarantees protection for those who obey him. “The name of Jehovah is a strong tower,” the Bible says. “Into it the righteous runs and is given protection.”​—Proverbs 18:10.
God hates all spiritistic practices. The Bible says: “There should not be found in you anyone . . . who employs divination, a practicer of magic or anyone who looks for omens or a sorcerer, or one who binds others with a spell or anyone who consults a spirit medium or a professional foreteller of events or anyone who inquires of the dead.”​—Deuteronomy 18:10, 11.
The Bible tells about a man who practiced a form of spiritism called divination. This is the practice of trying to find out about the future, or about something unknown, with the help of unseen spirits. That man was Balaam, seen here beating his donkey. He was on his way to curse God’s people when an angel stood in the road, causing the donkey to lie down.​—Numbers 22:7, 20-35.
Jehovah made Balaam’s divination useless. He changed the curse into a blessing. Balaam had to admit: “There is no unlucky spell against Jacob, nor any divination against Israel.”​—Numbers 23:23.
Jehovah continues to defeat those who practice divination, so that they are unable to harm those who remain faithful to him. Do you see this witch doctor’s magic becoming useless against Jehovah’s Witnesses? He used witchcraft to harm people, but this time he failed. Jehovah’s Witnesses said: “You will see that Jehovah, our God, is stronger!”  They stood firm, and the witch doctor fell to the ground.
Yes, “the angel of Jehovah is camping all around those fearing him, and he rescues them.” (Psalm 34:7) If we trust God completely and keep on the spiritual armor he provides, Jehovah will defeat anyone who tries to use witchcraft to harm us.​—Ephesians 6:10-18.

