Guarding Freedom for Doing God’s Complete Will
“BE TRANSFORMED by making your mind over, that you may prove to yourselves the good and acceptable and complete will of God.” What is this complete will of God, and why is it imperative that we do it? How can we guard freedom for doing God’s complete will?—Rom. 12:2.a
God’s complete will for us involves every aspect of our lives, for as dedicated Christians we are full-time ministers even though many of us may be part-time preachers. Whether we are eating or drinking, whether we are doing secular work to provide things right in the sight of all men or caring for our families, or whether we are doing anything else, all must be done as to Jehovah and in line with his righteous requirements. His complete will for us requires that we not only obey but do so readily, not only serve but serve joyfully, not only accept added privileges but welcome them. Yes, do all things “whole-souled as to Jehovah.”—Col. 3:23.
Having become free to do God’s complete will, we must be on our guard to keep that freedom. Why? Because of the many snares placed in our path by the Devil, the world and the desires of our own fallen flesh. Unless we keep on guard these will bring us into bondage again, even as it happened to the Galatian Christians.—Gal. 5:1-12.
Against what things must we guard our freedom? Against such snares as false religion in all its forms, national customs and patriotic practices, the many degrading works of the flesh, materialism and socializing with worldlings. Demands of Caesar contrary to Scripture, business inducements, fear of man and, in particular, fear of one’s undedicated mate, worldly culture and worldly wisdom also are things we must guard against to keep our freedom to do the complete will of God.—1 Cor. 15:33; Gal. 5:19-21.
However, even as the snares are many, so we have many aids to our guarding freedom for doing God’s complete will. To begin with, there is personal study of God’s Word and the helps providentially provided to understand it. There is meditation and frequent and earnest prayer, both of which we may tend to slight because of the press of time. Further, there are congregational meetings and the larger gatherings where we can be strengthened by the association with others who are likewise determined to do God’s complete will. Training ourselves in self-control and all the other fruits of the spirit will also greatly help, as will buying out the opportune time for Kingdom work.
As we continue to take advantage of all these aids to guarding freedom for doing God’s complete will ours will be the priceless treasures of divine wisdom and knowledge, the sincere love of true friends in the New World society, the joys of unselfish service and the sure hope of everlasting life in God’s new world.
[Footnotes]
For details see The Watchtower, May 1, 1959.

