Announcements
● Literature offer for February: Any 192-page book published prior to 1980 that the congregation has in stock for the reduced contribution of 50¢, with the following exceptions: Family Life, Great Teacher, This Life, Truth, and Youth. There is a limited supply of Commentary on James that may be ordered from Brooklyn. (For obtaining credit, elders should refer to the guidelines in the Society’s letter of December 21, 1988.) If the congregation has no stock of books to be offered at the reduced rate, the Worldwide Security book should be offered for a contribution of $1.00. This book may be ordered from Brooklyn. March: The Bible​—God’s Word or Man’s? for a contribution of $1.00. April and May: Watchtower subscription. Where a subscription is not obtained, two magazines and a copy of any brochure, except the School brochure, may be offered for the contribution of 80¢.
● The secretary and service overseer should review the activity of all regular pioneers. If any are having difficulty meeting the requirement of hours, elders should arrange for assistance to be given. For suggestions, review Society’s letters (S-201) of October 1, 1988, and October 1, 1989. Also, see paragraphs 12-20 of the August 1986 Our Kingdom Ministry insert.
● On April 28 the Brooklyn Bethel Home and factory and Watchtower Farms buildings will be closed for spring cleaning, so there will be no arrangements for tours or for congregations to pick up literature on that day.
● The Memorial celebration will be held Tuesday, April 10, 1990. Although the talk may start earlier, please remember that the passing of the Memorial bread and wine should not begin until after sundown. Check with local sources to determine when sundown occurs in your area. No other meetings are to be conducted on that date. If your congregation normally has meetings on Tuesday, you may want to switch those to another time of the week if the hall is available. If your Service Meeting is affected, it may be possible to incorporate into another Service Meeting any parts scheduled for that week that are particularly applicable to your congregation.
● Every baptized publisher who has been issued an identification card (S-65) should turn in the old card to the presiding overseer in exchange for an updated and revised card, if this has not been done already. A supply of the new cards was included with the annual shipment of forms. Please refer to the February 1989 Our Kingdom Ministry for details.
● Starting with the January 1, 1990, issue, the Ukrainian Watchtower became a semimonthly edition. Beginning with the January 1990 issue, the Ukrainian Awake! became a quarterly publication.
● The Arabic Awake! magazine became a semimonthly publication as of the January 8, 1990, issue.
● New Publications Available:
Questions Young People Ask​—Answers That Work—​Chinese, Korean
Should You Believe in the Trinity?​—Indonesian
● New Cassette Recordings Available:
Exodus (set of three; congregation and public: $4.50; pioneers: $3.75)​—Spanish
Leviticus (set of two; congregation and public: $3.00; pioneers: $2.50)​—Spanish

