Meetings to Help Us Make Disciples
WEEK STARTING FEBRUARY 5
Song 180
10 min: Local announcements. Plan now to auxiliary pioneer in April. Order additional magazines you will need for April and May. Inform congregation of what older books are available, or encourage use of Worldwide Security book as alternate offer.
20 min: “Skilled Workers Using God’s Word Aright.” Question-and-answer coverage. Read scripture citations as time permits. Emphasize that first and foremost we are ministers. Strive to be skilled in use of Bible. Do not be content just to place literature. School or service overseer demonstrates helping new publisher get acquainted with features of New World Translation (1984 Edition).
15 min: Question Box. Talk by elder. Make tactful but specific application of counsel to local situation as needed. May draw audience into discussion.
Song 190 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING FEBRUARY 12
Song 85
10 min: Local announcements and selected Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry. Encourage all to be out in field service this weekend. Review articles in current magazines that can be used effectively in local territory. Accounts report. Read Society acknowledgment of contributions received during January. Commend brothers for contributions in support of local congregation.
15 min: “Outstanding Magazines Featured.” Talk and discussion of material with some questions. Include a few local experiences of publishers placing magazines in street work, informal witnessing, or on magazine routes.
20 min: Practical Suggestions for Placing Magazines. Discuss the following suggestions and have publishers comment on success they have enjoyed in applying them: (1) Read the magazines and get to know the articles well. (2) Select articles that will be of special interest in the community. (3) Try evening witnessing with magazines. (4) Speak on just one subject, and highlight just one magazine, offering the other one as a companion. (5) Speak slowly and distinctly with a friendly tone of voice. Encourage all to try these practical suggestions as they seek to place magazines in the local territory.
Song 6 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING FEBRUARY 19
Song 207
 8 min: Local announcements, including arrangements for weekend field service. Theocratic News.
 7 min: The Benefits of Regular Family Bible Study. Talk. For decades Jehovah’s organization has encouraged family heads to conduct a regular Bible study with family members. Where this has been done, the benefits have been many. Such study has contributed to a spirit of love and peace within the family circle. Children have progressed to the point of becoming dedicated servants of Jehovah, have exerted a positive influence on the local congregation, and often have entered full-time service. This has brought great joy to Christian parents and others who have watched the progress made.
17 min: Reaching the Hearts of Youths. Elder briefly discusses points from publications especially designed to assist youths. In addition to a regular family study, family members benefit from spiritual discussions as occasions may arise. Demonstrate a family discussion where father has a warm relationship with children. Their discussion is an informal interchange of comments, not question-and-answer session. One child in family has asked if he can play ball with neighborhood children. Develop material on pages 64-7 of Young People Ask book. Parent asks searching questions to discern whether child understands and agrees with Scriptural principles involved. Emphasize that close friends do not have to be of same age. Select young ones who have read portions of book, and get their observations. Have them point out why material is helpful. Encourage young ones to read book, and stress need for parents to be familiar with its contents so as to include appropriate points in family discussions.
13 min: Elder interviews parents who have had or who are having success rearing children in the truth. Emphasize the joy received and what they have found to be helpful in having regular, meaningful family study and discussions. Make heartwarming appeal for parents to conduct family study regularly and for youths to cooperate. Circumstances will not always be ideal. All in family need to work together. Doing so, they can help one another to stay on the way to life.​—1 Tim. 4:16.
Song 123 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING FEBRUARY 26
Song 172
 5 min: Local announcements. Encourage all to obtain adequate supply of God’s Word book and have a full share in offering the new book in field service this weekend.
22 min: “Presenting the Good News​—With the God’s Word Book.” Questions and answers. In connection with paragraph 4, have an experienced publisher demonstrate presentation in the door-to-door activity. Emphasize how to reason with householder, using paragraphs 2 and 4 in chapter 1. When considering paragraph 5 of the article, have a pioneer demonstrate use of introductory paragraph on page 5 for presenting the book in business territory or street work.
18 min: “Showing Trust in Jehovah by Pioneering.” Warm, enthusiastic question-and-answer coverage by service overseer. Interview one or two pioneers, highlighting joys received as difficulties were overcome. Relate what is being done locally to offer practical assistance to the pioneers.
Song 14 and concluding prayer.

