Outstanding Magazines Featured
1 The April and May issues of The Watchtower and Awake! will feature striking articles of interest to all who seek a happy future. For example, “Who Will Lead Mankind to Peace?” and “World Peace​—What Will It Really Mean?” are the subjects of the April 1 and April 15 issues of The Watchtower. Few people know the correct answers to these questions. But Jehovah has not left us in doubt. (Amos 3:7) Surely, millions of honesthearted ones would also like to have a truthful answer.
2 Awake! issues for April and May will include the subjects “What Prospects for Longer Life?,” “A Clean Earth​—Will You Live to See It?,” and “A World Without Guns​—Is It Possible?” Do you agree that people in your territory should have the opportunity to read these issues?
INCREASED PARTICIPATION
3 We should plan now to participate fully in the distribution of all these outstanding issues coming in April and May. Why not make arrangements to devote more than the usual amount of time to magazine distribution? With such timely subjects being considered, we can offer the magazines with confidence and enthusiasm.
4 What will help us increase our magazine placements? To begin with, we should read the magazines thoroughly. The more familiar we are with the magazines, the greater our zeal will be in offering them. While reading, we should try to find points to highlight in various articles. What is there in each article that might appeal to certain types of people? We can ask ourselves: ‘Who would especially appreciate these articles? What would appeal to a neighbor, an acquaintance, a businessperson, a student, and so forth?’ To be truly effective, we should be able to make a personal recommendation of the magazines based on our knowledge and enjoyment of the timely articles.
SET A PERSONAL GOAL
5 Some may want to set a personal goal for magazine placements in April and May. If you do that, be sure to request a corresponding increase in your magazine order. This should be done right away, especially if you plan to auxiliary pioneer during these months. In this way the congregation can order extra magazines in sufficient time to have them on hand when needed.
6 Of course, there are many ways to place magazines other than in the house-to-house ministry. We can offer magazines in street witnessing and while calling on businesses. Many brothers have established magazine routes. When making return visits on interested persons, the latest issues can be left. Informal witnessing is also an excellent way to give a witness and place magazines. Sometimes just showing their eye-catching covers is enough to start a conversation or to place them.
7 Remember that our magazines are different. They point the way to peace, happiness, and everlasting life. (John 17:3) So plan now to enjoy extra activity with the outstanding articles to be published in the April and May issues of The Watchtower and Awake!

