Presenting the Good News​—With the God’s Word Book
1 In his letter to a fellow evangelizer, the apostle Paul wrote: “All Scripture is inspired of God and beneficial for teaching, for reproving, for setting things straight, for disciplining in righteousness.”​—2 Tim. 3:16.
2 As modern-day proclaimers of the good news, we believe this statement with all our heart. We accept the Bible as God’s inspired Word. We welcome its guidance in every aspect of our lives. (Ps. 119:105; John 17:17) But how can we help others to accept the Bible as God’s Word and apply its principles in their daily living?
HOW TO DO IT
3 As we share in the first public distribution of the new book The Bible​—God’s Word or Man’s? during the month of March, we will be building confidence in the Bible and helping people see the benefits of living according to its inspired counsel. What a privilege this will be!
4 What can we say when offering the book? After a friendly greeting, we might call attention to Proverbs 14:12 to show that successful living requires wise direction. Wrong direction can be calamitous. Then read Proverbs 2:6, 7 to show that Jehovah provides true wisdom. We could reason with the householder regarding the need to turn to the Bible to find godly wisdom. Then we could say: “This publication shows that the Bible is a reliable source of sound advice on problems people face. Please note what is stated here in paragraph 2 on page 5. [Read paragraph 2, and if time permits, read paragraph 4.] This publication will help you appreciate that the Bible is indeed God’s Word and that it contains practical guidance in all matters of life. This book is yours for a contribution of just $1.00.”
5 A householder may appear to be busy or say he is not interested, not wanting to get involved in a lengthy discussion. To make a brief presentation, you might say: “No doubt you would agree there are many problems facing mankind.” Then read the introductory paragraph of chapter 1. After the householder comments on the concluding question in that paragraph, you could say: “The Bible tells us that very soon now God himself will solve all mankind’s perplexing problems. This book gives powerful evidence to show that the Bible is true, since it is God’s Word and not man’s. I would like you to have it for a contribution of just $1.00.”
FILLING THE NEED
6 This new book, The Bible​—God’s Word or Man’s?, will enable sincere readers to understand and appreciate that the Bible is truly God’s Word. Honestly considering what it says may start them off on the road to life. Therefore, make a special effort to place this book with as many people as you can.
7 All of us should have read the new book through before the March campaign begins. We will want to give the God’s Word book the widest distribution possible, featuring it in every aspect of the ministry.

