Showing Trust in Jehovah by Pioneering
1 Putting Kingdom interests first requires trust in Jehovah. (Ps. 56:11; Prov. 3:5; Matt. 6:33) We have to turn our mind away from what the world considers important and concentrate on spiritual values. While the world appeals to the desire for material things, Jehovah entreats us to be content with the really important things.​—1 Tim. 6:8; Phil. 1:10.
 2 This is especially a challenge to Christian youths who want to take Jehovah’s commands seriously. They may be pressured by their teachers and their peers at school who consider higher education essential to success in life. While recognizing they have material needs, many Christian youths wisely resist such pressure and choose the pioneer ministry as their career. Trusting in Jehovah’s promises, they look to him to care for their needs.​—Ps. 62:2; 68:19; 1 Tim. 5:8; 6:9, 10.
REVIEW PERSONAL CIRCUMSTANCES
3 The Watchtower of November 15, 1982, encouraged each one of us to ask: “Can I really justify before Jehovah the fact that I am not a pioneer?” Obviously, many were not then in a position to pioneer. But they did not become discouraged, knowing that wholehearted service in any amount is always acceptable to Jehovah. (Mic. 6:8; 2 Cor. 8:12) Later, as personal circumstances changed, prayerful reconsideration of that 1982 Watchtower article has enabled some to be among the thousands of individuals who have more recently taken up the regular pioneer service.
4 If personal circumstances prevented you from entering the pioneer service when the above statement was printed in 1982, have your circumstances changed? In the United States, over 17,000 pioneer applications were processed last year! No doubt many of these applicants wanted to become pioneers earlier but had to wait for a change in circumstances.
5 In some cases, the necessary change may have to do with one’s mental attitude about pioneer service. Or it may simply involve making a good schedule for service. At times a change in personal responsibilities and obligations is needed for opening the way to pioneer service. Therefore, it is good to make this a regular matter of prayer to Jehovah along with an honest evaluation of ourselves and our circumstances. Thousands have done so and are now enjoying the blessings of pioneer service.
6 If a frank appraisal of your circumstances indicates you may be one who could begin pioneering in the not-too-distant future, why not start auxiliary pioneer service on a continuing basis now? Within a few months, you will likely develop return visits and Bible studies. This can aid you in making a smooth transition to the regular pioneer service, possibly before the beginning of the new service year.
7 Jehovah is accomplishing great things in the last days of the present wicked system. Now is the time for all of us to draw close to him and to bless his name “all day long.” (Ps. 145:2; Jas. 4:8) If your circumstances allow you to do so and you qualify, let pioneer service be another evidence of your trust in Jehovah.​—Ps. 94:18.

