Skilled Workers Using God’s Word Aright
1 Christian ministers are rightly referred to as “God’s fellow workers.” (1 Cor. 3:9) It should be our goal to develop skill as workmen who handle “the word of the truth aright.”​—2 Tim. 2:15.
2 To help us become skilled in the Christian ministry, the Society has included several unique features in the New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures. Are you familiar with them? Do you use these features in your field ministry and in your personal Bible study?
A VERSATILE PROVISION
3 When the New World Translation of the Christian Greek Scriptures was released in 1950, we found the cross-references, footnotes, appendix, and chain references to be very helpful in our ministry, in preparing for congregation meetings, and in general personal study. Then, in 1984, how thrilled we were to receive the New World Translation Reference Bible! What a superb provision to assist us in our effort to become skilled workers who use God’s Word aright! Through diligent use of this versatile provision, we are now better equipped than ever before to build solid spiritual qualities in ourselves and others.​—Matt. 7:24; 1 Tim. 4:16; Heb. 5:14.
4 While engaging in the ministry, you may meet a sincere Catholic who cites Matthew 16:18 as proof that Peter is the rock upon which the Catholic Church is built. When this happens, you can look up the scripture in your New World Translation with cross-references and find five scriptures referenced on the word “rock-mass.” These scriptures show that Christ, rather than Peter, is the Foundation of the congregation. By consulting the same text in the New World Translation Reference Bible, you will find additional information in the footnote on the word “rock-mass,” explaining its meaning in the original Greek.
5 A section entitled “Bible Topics for Discussion” is another feature that has proved to be helpful in the field ministry. When working in territory that is frequently covered, you may want to select a topic different from what is featured in Our Kingdom Ministry. Under subjects such as “Earth,” “Kingdom,” and “Last Days,” you will find scriptures that could be used in a house-to-house presentation or a Scriptural discussion on a return visit.
MEMORY AIDS
6 If you cannot remember where a certain scripture is located when having a Bible discussion, you can turn to “Bible Words Indexed” in the back of your Bible and get the needed help. Do you use this valuable feature?
7 The foreword on page 5 gives convincing evidence to show that the New World Translation is a scholarly work. The appendix provides a clear explanation of why the use of the divine name is appropriate. It also proves Scripturally what “Gehenna,” “Hades,” “Sheol,” and “soul” mean. Additionally, by referring to the “Table of the Books of the Bible” on pages 1546-7, we can find out who wrote each book, where it was written, when it was written, and the time covered.
8 Truly, Jehovah has provided what we need to be “completely equipped for every good work.” (2 Tim. 3:17) By using the New World Translation along with the Bible publications we will be offering, we can effectively do the work assigned. (Luke 6:47, 48) As we prove to be skilled workmen, using God’s Word aright, we can confidently expect the Master to say: “Well done”!​—Matt. 25:21.

