From Our Readers
The World Since 1914
I really must thank you for the series of articles entitled “The World Since 1914.” (March 8 through June 22, 1987) At school I had to write an essay on the way human relations have deteriorated because of modern civilization. In the first part, before describing modern civilization, I reviewed the situation after World War I. I took inspiration from these well-written articles. I obtained my best grade yet. I am 16 and in the 12th grade.
C.P.S., France
The World of Artificial Eyes
I always read my magazines from cover to cover. When I reached the article “Peering Into the World of Artificial Eyes” (August 8, 1986), I actually thought, ‘What a strange thing to talk about.’ Nevertheless, I read it. In January of this year I visited my optician for a routine eye check and found that I had a large, fast-growing malignant tumour in my right eye, and within a week I was in the hospital in Scotland for an operation. There were complications, and the eye had to be removed. I was so grateful for your article, which I immediately remembered. Although I received much loving care from the medical staff, I was not told a lot in detail about the nature of the operation. So your article has been of much help to me.
M. G., England
Salty Drink That Saves Lives
Thank you for all the marvelous articles you print on the many facets of everyday life. Recently, shortly after surgery and thinking I had a bladder infection, I drank so much water I caused a sodium depletion in my body. I didn’t even know this was possible. I became violently ill. About the same time a friend who is a registered nurse called me and told me to drink “the salty drink that saves lives.” (September 22, 1985) I began to get immediate relief. This kept me from having to be hospitalized again. I had remembered the article and had thought I would be using it on my grandchildren, not on myself.
G. S., United States
How Did Life on Earth Begin?
I am very grateful to you for the article “How Did Life on Earth Begin?” (January 22, 1987) This article strengthened my faith in Jehovah because it explained in simple terms how the universe came into existence by means of a Creator, and it clearly showed why evolution is not possible. This material will help me explain creation to others.
R. L., Italy
Just a Crush?
Your article “Who Says It’s Just a Crush?” was very helpful. (January 8, 1987) When I was in school, I thought I loved one of my teachers for three years. I was one of his outstanding students, so he gave me extra attention, especially since I was shy. He was very special, and I still like him as a person, but I never knew how wrong it was to think I loved him till now. He is married, and it was very easy to start imagining what would happen if his wife died. I really appreciated that article and the following one on “How Can I Get Over a Crush?” (January 22, 1987) I used to cry because I missed him, and I even wrote poetry about him, which I’ve destroyed.
I. L., United States

