Do You Remember?
Have you read the recent issues of The Watchtower carefully? If so, you will doubtless recall these points:
● What did King Solomon mean when he said: “Foolishness has been put in many high positions . . . I have seen servants on horses but princes walking on the earth just like servants”?​—Eccl. 10:6, 7.
In this world, unqualified persons may be put over capable men of noble or princely disposition. These princely men may be granted no dignity but may be treated as servants by those who have the authority but who really lack the qualifications to discharge it properly.​—P. 6.a
● Why could the apostle Paul say that his ‘tribulation meant glory’ for Christians?​—Eph. 3:13.
Paul’s faithful endurance exalted Christianity as something worth suffering for and even dying for. It demonstrated the conviction that being a disciple of Jesus Christ was of the highest value, deserving any sacrifice.​—Pp. 57, 58.
● What is the point of Proverbs 15:15: “All the days of the afflicted one are bad; but the one that is good at heart has a feast constantly”?
The person who allows his affliction or sorrow to dominate his life finds that every day is gloomy. He is blind to the blessings that may surround him. But the person who does not permit unpleasantness to dominate in his heart experiences an inward joy from day to day. His positive outlook enables him to be cheerful, as if enjoying a “feast constantly.”​—P. 69.
● Does God’s promise to remove “pain” mean that all sensations of pain will be a thing of the past?​—Rev. 21:4.
No, sensations of pain serve a beneficial purpose in alerting a person to danger, enabling him to act quickly in avoiding further contact with the source of the pain. Pain will ‘be no more’ in that the causes of human suffering​—oppression, crime, sickness, death and the like—​will be removed from the earth.​—P. 131.
● At Hosea 2:16, what is meant by the fact that, as foretold, the Israelites would call Jehovah no longer “My owner,” but “My husband”?
This pointed to the changed situation of the repentant Jewish remnant. No longer would they as a composite wife want to feel as being just owned as if by a slave master. The designation “My husband” reflected a greater intimacy and a feeling of being like a helper to God. Also, because of previous defilement with the worship of the false god Baal, which means “owner,” they would rightly avoid using the title “Baal” with reference to Jehovah God. Thus they would not be reminded of their sin and that of their forefathers in worshiping Baal.​—Pp. 182, 184.
● In what sense is Jehovah humble as stated at Psalm 18:35?
Though in submission to no one, Jehovah is humble in the sense that he condescends to deal with sinful humans, showing favor even to those whom men despise.​—Pp. 197, 198.
[Footnotes]
All references are to The Watchtower for 1976

