Second Corinthians​—Paul Speaks Out with “Great Freeness of Speech”
PAUL wrote his first letter to the Christians in Corinth apparently early in 55 C.E. But after writing it he was much concerned as to the effect that his admonition and strong reproof would have on his spiritual children. Would they take it to heart or ignore it? While waiting to hear from them Paul journeyed on to Troas and then to Macedonia before Titus arrived with a favorable report.
However, a certain condition still existed among those Christians that greatly distressed Paul. A number of individuals of considerable prominence among them were downgrading Paul’s ministry. As a result, his second letter to them became an intensely personal one. In almost every chapter he refers to his ministry, telling of his irreproachable course and of the persecutions he endured. He has great love for them​—“you are in our hearts to die and to live with us”—​and so he feels he can use “great freeness of speech” toward them; all of which might be said to be in line with the proverb: “The wounds inflicted by a lover are faithful.”​—2 Cor. 7:3, 4; Prov. 27:6.
He begins his second letter by blessing God for the comfort He gives his servants. Then Paul tells of the persecution he (and his companions) endured and how he ‘conducted himself with holiness and godly sincerity among them.’ In chapter two he writes of his great joy at hearing a good report regarding them and then notes that he (and his companions) are adequately qualified, for they are not peddlers of God’s Word but speak in sincerity. Continuing, he tells that he does not need letters of recommendation to them, for they themselves are his letters, written on hearts.
In chapter four Paul says that he did not act with cunning nor did he adulterate God’s Word, but acted in a way to recommend himself to every human conscience in the sight of God. Again he reminds them of the persecution he endured. Continuing, he tells them: “We are pressed in every way, but not cramped beyond movement.” However, he is able to endure all these things because he has his sight trained on the unseen things that are eternal. Yes, “we are walking by faith, not by sight.” He appeals to them, “I hope that we have been made manifest also to your consciences.”
Paul begins chapter six by entreating them “not to accept the undeserved kindness of God and miss its purpose,” and then goes into detail as to how careful he was that his “ministry might not be found fault with.” After again assuring them of his love and telling them to widen out in their affection for him, he warns them not to be unequally yoked with unbelievers. Continuing, he counsels: “Let us cleanse ourselves of every defilement of flesh and spirit, perfecting holiness in God’s fear.” Then Paul again defends his course: “We have wronged no one, . . . we have taken advantage of no one.”
In chapters eight and nine Paul touches on the matter of their making contributions for their needy brothers in Jerusalem and then gives wise and comforting assurance: ‘Whatever a person gives is especially acceptable according to what a person has and not according to what he does not have,’ and “he that sows sparingly will also reap sparingly; and he that sows bountifully will also reap bountifully. Let each one do just as he has resolved in his heart . . . for God loves a cheerful giver.”​—2 Cor. 8:12; 9:6, 7.
Next Paul tells that in his Christian warfare he did not make use of fleshly methods and “weapons” but his “weapons” were, nevertheless, powerful for overturning reasonings and for bringing every thought into subjection to the Christ. He thus reproves them for complaining that his letters are powerful but ‘his speech and bodily presence are weak.’ All his counsel, however, is out of concern for their spiritual well-being, for he has promised them in marriage as a virgin bride to Christ. He therefore rebukes their “superfine apostles,” lists his own qualifications and then recounts an impressive list of things that he endured as a servant of Christ. Yes, if anyone was a devoted servant of Christ, Paul was one even more so!​—2 Cor. 11:1-33.
Truly Second Corinthians is an expression of Paul’s great loving concern for his spiritual children at Corinth. No question about it, his “great freeness of speech” toward them is in keeping with the proverb that ‘the wounds of a friend are faithful.’

