Happy Trinidad Has Real Reason to Rejoice
WHEN you hear the name Trinidad, what comes to your mind? The steel band? Calypso tunes? Well, this Caribbean island is the home of both of these. It is also home for a friendly, hospitable people who enjoy life and a fete. Their principal fete​—the Carnival, held two days before Lent begins—​draws thousands of visitors each year.
Trinidad is a small, beautiful island, the last of a tropical chain stretching from Puerto Rico to just off the coast of Venezuela. For many years most of these islands were known as the British West Indies. Our Venezuelan neighbors call Trinidad La Isla Bella, or “The Beautiful Island,” while others term it the land of the hummingbird.
Here there are mountains, valleys and plains, all clothed with lush greenery. There are sparkling streams in the valleys where you find cocoa estates. Miles of coconut palms stud the beaches on the eastern side of the island, and large sugar plantations cover the central plains. Here, too, are tropical birds: the scarlet ibis, egrets, cornbirds, hummingbirds, parrots and many others. Not many wild animals live here, although large herds of domestic water buffalo can be seen on the sugar estates.
On this island of pleasing contrasts is also to be found a population that is nearly as varied as the terrain. This mixed and polyglot population well reflects the history of Trinidad. Following the discovery of this island by Christopher Columbus, it was governed or influenced by a succession of nations​—Spain, France and England. For many years slavery prevailed, and when it was abolished thousands of East Indians were brought here to work on the sugar estates in place of the freed Negroes. These form the two basic races in Trinidad, but a number of European nations are represented, as well as a substantial number of Chinese. The mixing of these various groups by marriage has resulted in a blend of handsome and friendly people. Many religions flourish here, the largest groups being the Roman Catholic, the Anglican, the Hindu and the Muslim.
Spiritual Rejoicing Begins
“Jehovah himself has become king! . . . Let the many islands rejoice,” says Psalm 97:1. And the Christian apostle Paul urged fellow believers to “rejoice in the Lord.” (Philippians 4:4) It was in the year 1912 that spiritual rejoicing began for persons in many parts of Trinidad and Tobago. The Watch Tower Society then assigned Evander J. Coward to do evangelizing work in these islands.
An aged witness of Jehovah of East Indian and Hindu background recalls: “On the platform Brother Coward had quite an imposing appearance in his black frock coat, as that was the garb of the speakers of those days. He had a masculine voice and used considerable emphasis and modulation. He had the habit of raising his right hand and snapping his fingers to emphasize a point.”
From the start of Brother Coward’s lecturing in the towns, some rejoiced in the wonderful truths that freed them from Babylonish bondage. (Revelation 18:2, 4) Religious opposers charged that Coward taught there was no hell. Actually, however, he showed that the Bible hell is the common grave of mankind. (Job 14:13) Those receiving the good news with appreciation also rejoiced over learning that Jehovah God, Jesus Christ and the holy spirit do not constitute a Trinity. Other Bible truths brought them joy as they pursued their association and study together.
In a short time, study classes were organized in several places. The first met in the home of Gilbert L. Talma at Port of Spain. But the group soon outgrew the home and rented a lodge hall that served as the congregation’s meeting place for 62 years. In 1919 there were 214 present at the Lord’s Evening Meal. (1 Corinthians 11:20-26) A number of persons who embraced true Christianity during Brother Coward’s time proved faithful until their death many years later.
Opposition and Further Help
Following World War I, an opposition element broke away into little groups that criticized the work of the Society and attempted to counteract it. But they were not successful, and their efforts are hardly remembered today.
While Brother Coward was still in Trinidad, he was joined by William R. Brown, who became a zealous declarer of the good news. Eventually, he became well known in West Africa as “Bible Brown.” He also spent many years in full-time service in Trinidad and accomplished much in helping people to rejoice in the truth. Besides giving lectures and bearing witness from house to house, Brother Brown showed the Photo-Drama of Creation to large audiences. He and his wife are still remembered for their work in spreading Bible truth in Trinidad and Tobago.
During the 1920’s, George Young and John C. Rainbow spent some time in Trinidad and performed a fine service in stabilizing Jehovah’s people and their work here in the face of the opposing group that had manifested itself. In a report, Young wrote: “The truth is spreading quite rapidly in Trinidad. The brethren here are doing a good work. In some respects Trinidad is the best field in the West Indies for spreading the truth.” During Young’s last tour, he spoke in the grandstand of the Queen’s Park Savannah. Thirty-eight years were to pass before Jehovah’s Witnesses again met there.
Serving Under Ban
Things did not move very rapidly during the early 1930’s. Then, without warning, on August 20, 1936, a ban was placed on the Society’s publications, even the Bible. A little later, the Bible and a few of our other publications were allowed to enter the island. But the ban itself lasted for nine years. During that time, if a person was found to possess any literature that was on the banned list, he could be arrested and imprisoned. So it came about that several Witnesses were arrested and put in prison for a period of time.
One brother who spent two months in prison had many fine opportunities to witness to the other inmates. During the seven Sundays he was in jail, he had the privilege and joy of speaking to over 200 prisoners. They preferred to listen to him rather than to attend some service in the prison church.
The Coming of Missionaries
In March of 1946, Witness missionary Alexander Tharp was sent to Trinidad to work in the Watch Tower Society’s branch office along with elderly and ailing Gilbert Talma. Brother Tharp’s arrival coincided with the visits of N. H. Knorr and F. W. Franz from the New York headquarters. This was the first time Trinidad had ever been visited by a president or a vice-president of the Society. A convention was arranged with the help of three missionaries assigned to the neighboring island of Barbados, which was under supervision of the branch office in Trinidad. This fine assembly proved to be a milestone, for 39 persons were baptized and 1,611 attended Brother Knorr’s public lecture.
Later that year, eight more missionaries were assigned to Trinidad. A new branch building was purchased, which also served as the missionary home. It remained as branch headquarters for 26 years. Eventually, a total of 30 missionaries served in Trinidad at one time or another, working out of three missionary homes. In time they were joined by a number of local Witnesses who were trained at the Watchtower Bible School of Gilead and who then returned to Trinidad. Some missionaries have served here faithfully until death. Today the original missionary sent to Trinidad remains, together with six others. Although experiencing some of the problems of advancing age, they still find joy in bearing fruit and serving to the glory of their heavenly Father.​—John 15:8.
The growth in the work was rapid for some years. There were 325 Kingdom publishers on Trinidad and Tobago during May 1946, but in ten years the number rose to 1,447. It was not uncommon for a missionary to conduct 25 or more home Bible studies a week. While many individuals drifted away in time, some who studied as early as 1946 are serving as appointed Christian elders today.
Traveling Overseers Promote Happiness
The congregations of earlier years were small, and most of them did not have electricity in their meeting places. Traveling overseers lived in the modest homes of the local Witnesses, ate with them and enjoyed their fellowship. It was easy to get an audience for a public talk. So for several years it was customary to give two talks each week​—one in the Kingdom Hall and another by the light of a gas lantern in the open air under a shop’s overhanging roof.
Once a circuit overseer speaking under a shop roof saw a hairy spider (a tarantula) come into the circle of light. Slowly and deliberately, the spider advanced until it crossed the lighted area and disappeared into the darkness. Where it went was never known, but the circuit overseer had quite a time concentrating during the rest of that talk.
Visits by circuit overseers have strengthened the congregations. More and more people rejoiced in learning the truth, and spiritual progress continued. Now local Witnesses serve in circuit and district work.
Some Who Rejoiced
Over the years, people of all kinds have found joy in the truth. For instance, a young Chinese invalid asked many intelligent questions and progressed rapidly with a home Bible study. Then he wrote the Knights of Columbus, the Seventh-Day Adventists and a Muslim group for information with which to compare what he was learning. But none of these could satisfactorily answer his questions. Although this young man was unable to attend meetings, he shared in them by correspondence. He had a private baptism and kept up to date in the truth until his recent death as a nationally known artist.
A young girl was contacted and disclosed that she could tell fortunes. But she showed keen interest in the Bible, and a study was arranged. In time, she saw Jehovah’s view of spiritism clearly and destroyed all her books and other things connected with occultism. (Acts 19:18-20) After her baptism, this young woman migrated to the United States, where she has served as a full-time Kingdom proclaimer for a number of years.
Some from other lands have learned Bible truth in Trinidad. A few years ago a young university graduate came here on his first teaching contract. He and his wife had radical and atheistic leanings. Although he knew a little about the truth, he had many questions and telephoned the branch office for an interview. They obtained some of our literature. During the next week a Witness couple called on them and asked: “Well, what are the questions you wish to discuss?” The answer was: “No questions!” They had read the books and had been convinced that evolution was wrong and the Bible right. Immediately they began attending meetings and changing their style of dress and appearance. Soon they were sharing in the field service. After spending a year in Trinidad, they returned to England and succeeded in helping some relatives to acquire a knowledge of Bible truth.
Many young people here have overcome bad habits and now “serve Jehovah with rejoicing.” (Psalm 100:2) For instance, a certain drug pusher was earning about $200 a day, Trinidad currency. He was arrested a number of times and seemed to be in a hopeless situation. Then one day he was visited by a former friend and drug user who had become one of Jehovah’s Witnesses after cleaning up his life. A Bible study was arranged, and the former drug pusher says: “In the next two weeks I began to change. I started to shave and attend meetings. I had a haircut and began to dress as the brothers did. In a short time, I stopped the drug traffic. After about 11 months, I became a regular publisher. Now, when I see a policeman, I don’t feel nervous anymore.”
Continued Reason to Rejoice
In 1972 larger branch home and office facilities were acquired. Later a new annex was added. These developments have resulted from Jehovah’s blessing on our work in Trinidad and Tobago. We especially rejoice over our advancing knowledge of God and his Son and we deeply appreciate the privilege of serving Jehovah. He continues to bless our work of gathering together those who love him. In 1982 we reached a peak of 3,444 Kingdom proclaimers, and our attendance at the Memorial of Jesus Christ’s death was 9,100.
Surely, we have real reason to rejoice in God’s worship and service. And it is our sincere prayer that we, together with our fellow believers throughout the earth, will keep on bearing much fruit to the glory of our Father, Jehovah.

