Announcements
● Literature offer for April and May: Watchtower subscription for one year for a contribution of $5.00. Six-month subscriptions are $2.50. June and July: Survival Into a New Earth or Happiness​—How to Find It for contribution of $1.00 each.
● District convention badge cards for 1988 in English and Spanish will be consigned and included with April literature shipments. It will not be necessary to order these. Based on the size of each congregation, consignments in lots of 25 will be made. The literature account will be billed at the rate of two cents per card.
● Elders should be sure to notify the Society whenever a regular pioneer is removed or has to go off the list, using the S-206 form. Anyone who has to stop pioneering must wait six months before he or she can reapply. A new application must be submitted before reappointment can be made.
● New Publications Available:
New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures​—1986 Edition (Regular edition; bi12 with marginal references)​—Dutch
New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures​—1987 Edition (Deluxe edition), available in black or maroon—​Italian
New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures, (Deluxe pocket edition; DLbi25), available in black​—Japanese
United in Worship of the Only True God​—Igbo
Worldwide Security Under the “Prince of Peace”​—Indonesian
You Can Live Forever in Paradise on Earth (Small size)​—Romanian
“Look! I Am Making All Things New” (Brochure)​—Arabic, Gujarati, Gun, Romanian, Sinhalese, Tamil
The Divine Name That Will Endure Forever​—Estonian
The Government That Will Bring Paradise​—Romanian
Tract No. 13​—Cebuano, Estonian, Iloko, Polish, Tagalog
Tract No. 14​—Cebuano, Iloko, Italian, Polish, Tagalog, Thai
Tract No. 15​—Cebuano, Croatian, Dutch, Iloko, Italian, Portuguese, Tagalog, Thai
Tract No. 16​—Cebuano, Chinese, Croatian, Dutch, German, Greek, Iloko, Italian, Japanese, Korean, Portuguese, Tagalog, Thai
● Out of Stock in U.S.A.:
Our Incoming World Government​—God’s Kingdom—​English, Spanish

