Helping Others Appreciate Spiritual Things
1 What a heartwarming occasion the Memorial proves to be! Each year we are reminded of the value of Christ Jesus’ sacrifice in behalf of all mankind. This very special celebration affords us the opportunity to help new ones appreciate more fully the spiritual things God has provided through his beloved Son. (Mark 9:7) How can we help those who attend the Memorial to associate regularly with the congregation?
2 Undoubtedly, the majority who attend the Memorial, even for the first time, recognize in themselves a spiritual hunger that needs to be filled. (Matt. 5:3) What can we do to stimulate them to seek ways to care for this need?
3 One thing would be to call on them as soon as possible. Show a personal interest and offer to help them make spiritual progress. Many who attend the Memorial do not have a personal home Bible study. Help them to understand that in order to benefit fully from Christ Jesus’ sacrifice and have Jehovah’s approval, a regular study is needed. Endeavor to make arrangements for such a spiritual feeding program at their convenience.
4 If you make a visit the week following the Memorial and endeavor to arrange for a Bible study, at the same time you can extend a warm invitation to the special talk on April 10, “Why Live by Bible Standards?” Offer to accompany them to the Kingdom Hall, providing transportation if needed.
EXTEND THE INVITATION TO WITNESS
5 What about those who are studying already and perhaps attending meetings on a regular basis? What further progress do they need to make? Have you suggested that they try to witness to their friends, relatives, workmates, and others on an informal basis? This will help them to progress spiritually. They will be showing their gratitude for Jesus’ sacrifice and the truths they are learning.
6 The Bible student may hesitate to speak with others, thinking they will not listen to the truth. He may need to learn that each individual is important to God, who sees the heart and knows when someone is ready to accept the good news. Help your student to realize that it is God’s will “that all sorts of men should be saved and come to an accurate knowledge of truth.” (1 Tim. 2:4; Acts 17:26, 27) Show him that Jesus Christ was sent by God to give himself as “a ransom in exchange for many.” (Matt. 20:28) If your student can be helped to appreciate this, he will see why he should try to talk about the truth to everyone whenever he has the opportunity. His personal conviction will be strengthened, and he will have the joy that comes from giving of the most valuable treasure he possesses.​—Gal. 6:6; Acts 20:35.
7 Those who qualify should be invited to participate in the field ministry during the month of April. (Matt. 9:37, 38; om pp. 97-9) Jehovah favors those who are inclined to serve him even if their ability is limited. Truly, all of us are greatly privileged to be sharing in a lifesaving work in imitation of our Savior, Jesus Christ. (Matt. 28:19, 20) By fulfilling the commission to preach, we will all be heeding the counsel given by the apostle Paul: “Working together with him, we also entreat you not to accept the undeserved kindness of God and miss its purpose.”​—2 Cor. 6:1.
8 We do not know how many more will yet come to appreciate the privilege of serving Jehovah. But we are assured that by continuing to help others appreciate spiritual things we will receive grand blessings, and so will they.​—2 Cor. 6:2.

