Meetings to Help Us Make Disciples
WEEK STARTING APRIL 3
Song 10
12 min: Local announcements. Summarize information in “What Are Your Plans for April?” There is still time to submit an application for auxiliary pioneer service during April. Encourage resumption of evening witnessing if it was curtailed during winter months. Recommend that special effort be made on Saturday, April 9, to invite people to the special talk “Why Live by Bible Standards?” If time permits, ask audience to comment on what they plan to say when inviting friends, neighbors, and relatives to talk. Suggest using T-13, Why You Can Trust the Bible.
18 min: “Not Missing the Purpose of Our Field Ministry.” Question-and-answer discussion. Feature two or three brief demonstrations using information on pages 13-15 of Reasoning book under “Last Days,” “When Many People Say: ‘I Have My Own Religion,’” and “When Many People Say: ‘I’m Busy.’” Encourage enthusiastic participation in subscription offer.
15 min: “Helping Others Appreciate Spiritual Things.” Questions and answers. After paragraph 7, have an experienced publisher demonstrate how to invite a Bible student to share in the field ministry.
Song 126 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING APRIL 10
Song 91
10 min: Local announcements and appropriate Announcements in Our Kingdom Ministry. Accounts report. Include Society donation acknowledgments and commend brothers for material support of congregation. Demonstrate two 30- to 60-second presentations for current magazines.
15 min: Why Christians Must Be Honest. Talk based on cover articles in February 15, 1988, Watchtower.
20 min: “Setting Aside Time for Theocratic Provisions.” Questions and answers. Draw out comments from audience as to how newly interested ones can be encouraged to prepare thoroughly for their weekly Bible study. Include comments on cited scriptures.
Song 177 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING APRIL 17
Song 203
12 min: Local announcements and Question Box. Have well-prepared publisher demonstrate subscription offer, tying it in with concluding comment on Isaiah 48:17, 18 according to Topic for Conversation.
18 min: How Can We Help Our Pioneers? Talk based on key points from August 1986 Our Kingdom Ministry insert, paragraphs 12-20, and article in March 1, 1982, Watchtower on “Jehovah Sustains His Army of Full-Time Servants.” Pioneers need and appreciate our support. Emphasize what local congregation can do to give encouragement and assistance.
15 min: Service overseer interviews brothers assigned to care for literature and magazine departments. (om p. 124) Have them review briefly the functions of their departments. Explain how cooperation of all in congregation is important. Encourage placing orders for special items through the congregation rather than ordering directly from the Society, regularly picking up personal magazine order, giving notice well in advance for any changes in magazine order, and so forth. Include expressions of appreciation for the work ministerial servants do on behalf of the congregation and for the cooperation of the publishers in these necessary matters.
Song 223 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING APRIL 24
Song 130
12 min: Local announcements. Theocratic News. Demonstrate brief presentation of current magazines to be offered this week. Feature one article in each issue that may have the most appeal locally. Encourage sharing in service on first Sunday of May.
18 min: Presenting the Good News​—By Using Tracts at Every Opportunity. Question-and-answer discussion. Include brief demonstrations of using tracts in informal witnessing at school and at work.
15 min: Local needs. Or talk on “Ignoring Warnings and Testing God” in December 15, 1987, Watchtower, pages 21-5.
Song 55 and concluding prayer.

