Not Missing the Purpose of Our Field Ministry
1 In many areas today a publisher may spend an hour or more in the field ministry without having an opportunity to witness to anyone or place any literature. Perhaps few people are at home, or when someone is found at home he may tell us he has his own religion and is not interested in changing. Another may say: “You are doing a fine work, but my religion supplies me with all the literature I need.” When this happens, do we just say “Thank you” and proceed to the next door, or do we at least attempt to explain the purpose of our call?
2 Jesus met with similar problems in his ministry. When certain disciples of the Pharisees said: “Teacher, we know you are truthful and teach the way of God in truth,” he unhesitatingly gave such an effective witness that they marveled at what he said. He did not allow their flattery to deter him from giving a bold witness.​—Matt. 22:15-22.
MORE URGENT NOW
3 Some day we will make our last call on the people in our territory. Every time we engage in the field ministry, we should do so with that thought in mind. (2 Cor. 6:2; Isa. 55:6) People must be warned that Jehovah’s “day of vengeance” is near, and they must be helped to find the only way of survival.​—Isa. 61:1, 2; Ezek. 33:8, 9.
4 When presenting the current literature offer, doing magazine work, or making a return visit, do not hold back from speaking the truth with dignity, tact, and good manners. Always show proper respect for the householder, and at the same time, do all you reasonably can to help the householder understand the purpose of your call.
ACCOMPLISHING OUR PURPOSE IN APRIL
5 Your opening words are very important. What you say in your introduction often determines whether you will capture the person’s attention and be able to continue the conversation. What are some of the common objections in your area? It may be advisable to raise one of these in your introduction.
6 For example, if the people in your territory are religiously inclined and the territory is worked frequently, you might say: “You probably recognize that we are Jehovah’s Witnesses. If you personally are associated with one of the churches in the area, you may wonder why we call so often. [Allow for comment.] One serious problem that concerns us is the worldwide breakdown of the family. The World Book Encyclopedia said: ‘Entire civilizations have survived or disappeared, depending on whether family life was strong or weak.’” From that point, lead into Genesis 1:27, 28.
7 Problems associated with the family will be featured in the April and May issues of The Watchtower. Therefore, after reading Isaiah 48:17, 18, state with conviction that The Watchtower has helped millions of families to live happier, more productive lives. You may wish to mention how it has helped you personally. Comment briefly on one of the feature articles and let the person know he can have The Watchtower come in the mail for an entire year for just $5.00.
8 “The time left is reduced.” (1 Cor. 7:29) We do not know how many opportunities are left to locate the remaining sheeplike ones. People who are not displaying a love for the truth need to be warned. With the world gripped in a plague of apathy, we must preach the truth with boldness and conviction while there is yet time. (Acts 4:29, 31; 14:3) If we do our part to accomplish the purpose of our ministry, we can rest assured that the “sheep” will respond to the Fine Shepherd’s voice.​—John 10:4, 27.

