Presenting the Good News​—By Using Tracts at Every Opportunity
1 Some plants may produce hundreds or even thousands of seeds. In this way, Jehovah ensured that such plant life would always flourish on earth.​—Gen. 1:29, 30.
2 Similarly, in his great generosity, Jehovah makes the seed of Kingdom truth abundant not only in the mouths of his devoted servants but also in the form of the printed page. Think of the hundreds of millions of books, booklets, magazines, and brochures that have been distributed over the years. Last year a new set of tracts was produced. Are we using the tracts to spread the good news at every opportunity?
3 In order to use the tracts effectively, we need to familiarize ourselves with them. Note that they are colorful and are printed on durable paper. Their handy size makes it convenient to carry some with us wherever we go. Most importantly, the Bible-based message in each tract is clear, to the point, and persuasive. Do you see the many opportunities there are to make use of them?
4 House-to-House Work: Many publishers find that offering a free tract in their introduction opens the way for a conversation with the householder. You may wish to try this with the current Topic for Conversation, using Life in a Peaceful New World or Why You Can Trust the Bible. During a discussion at a door, you may learn that the person recently lost a loved one in death. How appropriate it would be to share the comforting message contained in the tract What Hope for Dead Loved Ones? Or the conversation may reveal that the person has some misconceptions about what Jehovah’s Witnesses believe. The tract What Do Jehovah’s Witnesses Believe? may be just what is needed. Often the householder is willing to accept a tract even if the literature offer is refused. We do not know what effect one tract may have on that person or on others in his household who may read it.​—Eccl. 11:6.
5 Informal Witnessing: During the course of our daily routine, we may have contact with any number of worldly persons. Wherever we are, the tracts help us to be prepared to give a witness. Opportunity for a brief oral witness can be enhanced by offering a tract for the person to read later.
6 At your workplace, do workmates or others speak about the pressures and problems of living in this system of things? Would they like to know what has given you a hope for the future? If they truly are “sighing and groaning” over the world’s unrighteous conditions, the information in Life in a Peaceful New World will strike a responsive chord in their hearts, opening the way for further discussion.​—Ezek. 9:4.
7 Do you young ones at school hear teachers or fellow students question the reliability of the Bible? Why You Can Trust the Bible contains a faith-building message showing the scientific and historical accuracy of the Bible that may stimulate their interest in learning more.
8 Jesus said that our field for witnessing is the entire inhabited earth. (Matt. 13:38; 24:14) Thus, wherever there are people​—at work, at school, in the waiting room of a doctor or a dentist, at the Laundromat or where we shop, at the homes of relatives or neighbors, or even at our own door when people stop for various reasons—​let us take every opportunity to spread the seeds of Kingdom good news, trusting that some of these will fall on “fine soil” and result in further fruitage to Jehovah’s praise.​—Matt. 13:23.

