Setting Aside Time for Theocratic Provisions
1 Jehovah has been most generous in fulfilling his promises to make divine wisdom available to his servants today. (Isa. 55:1; Dan. 12:4; Rom. 11:33; 1 Cor. 2:8-10) Are we personally showing our appreciation by setting aside time to take full advantage of his program for instructing us in the way of truth?
2 It requires some effort and self-control on our part to set aside quality time for personal study and meeting preparation. But do we not feel refreshed, yes, richly rewarded, when we buy out the necessary time each week for theocratic education? (Eph. 5:15-17) What are some of the wonderful provisions that Jehovah has made for teaching us?
WHAT HE HAS ARRANGED
3 First and foremost, we have the Bible as our main textbook. A fine Bible-reading program has been scheduled for each week. Are we keeping up with it? Is there a need to set aside time in our personal schedule for this?
4 Is anything else needed, or is reading the Bible enough? (Jas. 1:5, 6) We also need the visible organization that Jehovah is using to supply us regularly with an abundance of spiritual food. This spiritual “food at the proper time” is provided in the form of Bible-based publications, arrangements for congregation meetings, circuit assemblies, and district conventions.​—Matt. 24:45.
5 Another of Jehovah’s provisions for theocratic education is that of loving shepherds. (Acts 20:28) When they visit us, elders may have specific information they want to discuss. Are we alert to apply quickly the suggestions they give? Conscientious overseers study diligently to keep abreast of the organization. (2 Tim. 2:15) They recognize that they have a serious responsibility before Jehovah to feed and protect the flock. All of us can benefit from their experience and the time they spend in our behalf.
HELPING OUR CHILDREN AND OTHERS
6 Instructing our children in the truth is an especially important aspect of theocratic education. Christian parents do not view it as optional for their children. Skillfully providing “discipline and mental-regulating” is so important. (Eph. 6:4) It often spells the difference between their growing to spiritual maturity or leaving the truth entirely. Time is needed for this instruction. There is no substitute.
7 Newer ones can be helped to appreciate the value of the time they set aside for their weekly Bible study. We should encourage them to be well prepared for each study. Right from the beginning we want them to be thoroughly “taught the word.” (Gal. 6:6) If we do our part in teaching them, it will not be long before they will be eagerly participating with us in the evangelizing work. Theocratic education does not stop when they learn “the elementary things.” (Heb. 5:12–6:3) We want to help them “press on to maturity.” This takes time.
8 These are only a few of Jehovah’s provisions for teaching us what we need. Other provisions are the circuit overseer’s visit, the Pioneer Service School, and the Kingdom Ministry School.
9 All thanks are due Jehovah for providing the only education that will protect and guide us through these final days. May we make it our determination to set aside time to take full advantage of the theocratic provisions that our Grand Instructor has made for us. We can be sure that as we do so, we will keep progressing on the way to life everlasting.​—Isa. 30:20, 21; Phil. 3:13-16.

