Kingdom News No. 34
Why Is Life So Full of Problems?
Is a trouble-free paradise possible?
SERIOUS PROBLEMS GROW WORSE—WHY?
People have always had problems. Although many thought modern technology could solve them, serious problems are worsening.
Crime: Few feel safe walking on the streets or even sitting in their own homes. In one European country, nearly 1 person out of 3 was a victim of a crime in a recent year.
Environment: Air, land, and water pollution is more and more widespread. In developing nations, one fourth of the people do not have access to clean water.
Poverty: There are more poor and hungry people than ever. Over 90 percent of the people in some lands live in poverty; 30 percent of the world’s labor force, about 800 million, are unemployed or underemployed—and the numbers grow.
Hunger: Even if you yourself have enough to eat, increasing millions do not. In underdeveloped countries, each year at least 13 million people, mostly children, die from the effects of hunger.
War: Hundreds of thousands have been killed in recent ethnic violence. And in the 20th century, wars have killed well over a hundred million people.
Other Problems: To the above, add worsening family breakdown, more unwed mothers, increasing homelessness, widespread drug abuse, rampant immorality. Rightly, a former U.S. cabinet member said: “There are just too many signs of . . . civilization gone rotten.” In a recent 30-year period, the U.S. population grew 41 percent, but violent crime shot up 560 percent, illegitimate births 400 percent, divorces 300 percent, the teen suicide rate over 200 percent. The situation is similar in other nations.
Why Have Problems Grown Worse?
Our Creator provides the answer. His Word calls these problem-filled times “the last days,” a period when “critical times hard to deal with” would be here. (2 Timothy 3:1) The last days of what? Well, the Bible speaks of “the end of the world.”—Matthew 24:3, King James Version.
Today’s growing problems are clear evidence that the end of this system of things is near, including the end of wickedness and those responsible for it. (Matthew 24:3-14; 2 Timothy 3:1-5; Revelation 12:7-12) Soon God will intervene and see to it that all of today’s problems are completely solved.—Jeremiah 25:31-33; Revelation 19:11-21.
THIS WORLD’S RELIGIONS HAVE FAILED
Instead of helping to solve today’s problems, this world’s religious systems add to them. During wars, Catholics kill Catholics, Protestants kill Protestants—by the millions. Not long ago in Rwanda, where most are Catholic, people killed one another by the hundreds of thousands! (See picture at left.)
Would Jesus go to war with a rifle or a machete and kill his disciples because their nationality was different from his? Surely not! “The one who loves God,” the Bible says, “should be loving his brother also.” (1 John 4:20, 21) This world’s religions have failed to do that. “They publicly declare they know God, but they disown him by their works.”—Titus 1:16.
Further, by not really upholding Bible standards of morality, the world’s religions contribute to the shocking moral breakdown earth wide.
Jesus said that you could tell false religion from true religion ‘by its fruits’—by what its members do. He also said: “Every tree not producing fine fruit gets cut down and thrown into the fire.” (Matthew 7:15-20) God’s Word urges us to flee from religion that bears bad fruit and thus faces destruction.—Revelation 18:4.
True Religion Has Not Failed
True religion “produces fine fruit,” especially love. (Matthew 7:17; John 13:34, 35) What united international brotherhood of Christians practices such love? Who refuse to kill those of their own religion or anyone else?—1 John 3:10-12.
Jehovah’s Witnesses have the reputation of bearing that “fine fruit.” All over the globe, in more than 230 lands, ‘they have beaten their swords into plowshares.’ (Isaiah 2:4) Their love for people is also shown by their obedience to Christ’s command to preach the “good news” of God’s Kingdom worldwide. (Matthew 24:14) They also practice and advocate the high morals taught in the Bible.—1 Corinthians 6:9-11.
True religion has not failed. It directs people to the only One capable of solving mankind’s problems. Soon that One will bring about an entirely new world. Who is that One? (Please see the back page.)
A TROUBLE-FREE PARADISE IS A CERTAINTY
If you could, wouldn’t you solve all the problems that afflict mankind? Of course you would! Should we think that our loving Creator, who alone has the power and the wisdom to solve mankind’s problems, will do any less?
The Bible reveals that God will intervene in human affairs by means of his heavenly government in the hands of Jesus Christ. It will “crush” corrupt governments on earth. (Daniel 2:44; Matthew 6:9, 10) And why? Addressing God, the psalmist answers: “That people may know that you, whose name is Jehovah, you alone are the Most High over all the earth.”—Psalm 83:18.
When this world ends, will there be survivors? “The world is passing away,” the Bible says, “but he that does the will of God remains forever.” (1 John 2:17) Where will these survivors live forever? “The righteous themselves will possess the earth, and they will reside forever upon it,” the Bible answers.—Psalm 37:9-11, 29; Proverbs 2:21, 22.
In God’s new world, “death will be no more, neither will mourning nor outcry nor pain be anymore.” (Revelation 21:4) No more crime, poverty, hunger, sickness, sorrow, or death! Why, even dead ones will live again! “There is going to be a resurrection.” (Acts 24:15) And the earth itself will be transformed into a literal paradise.—Isaiah 35:1, 2; Luke 23:43.
What must we do to enjoy life in God’s new world? Jesus said: “This means everlasting life, their taking in knowledge of you, the only true God, and of the one whom you sent forth, Jesus Christ.” (John 17:3) Millions of honesthearted people all over the world are taking in that knowledge. This enables them to cope with many of their personal problems now, but more important, it gives them full confidence that problems beyond their ability to solve will be fully remedied in God’s new world.
[Picture Credit Line on page 2]
WHO photo by P. Almasy
[Picture Credit Line on page 3]
Jerden Bouman/Sipa Press

