Fiery Tragedy Strikes Vila Socó
IT WAS 11:00 p.m. on Friday, February 24, 1984. Most of the people were sound asleep, but others were awake, feeling uneasy about the heavy stench of gasoline that hung in the air. Of course, the folks here in this illegal housing project in Vila Socó in Cubatão, Brazil, were used to the odoriferous fumes that wafted up from the swampy waters. Their houses were built on wooden stakes, or piles, two to three feet above the water. And the rough board walkways enabled everyone to get around without walking in the fetid waters below. During the past four months, there had been six gas leaks, but there really seemed to be nothing to worry about.
Suddenly, the quiet night was shattered by the noisy footsteps of policemen running excitedly from house to house. Knocking and banging loudly on the doors, they shouted, “Wake up!” “Get out!” “Do not strike any matches!”
About 40 minutes later a terrifying explosion rocked the area, shooting hot flames of fire across the gasoline-covered swamp waters. So intense was the fire that the heavy downpour of rain at the time did not stop it from engulfing about a thousand homes. The next morning, stubs of burned piles, remains of stoves and bottled-gas containers dominated the smoldering ruins. As many as 500 persons may have died in the tragedy! The Petrobrás oil refinery, whose fuel lines run under Vila Socó, denies that it was that many. It is doubtful the truth will ever be known.
The irony of this tragedy was that six months previously a warning was sounded about the possibility of its occurring. Secretary Paulo Nogueira Neto declared almost prophetically: “I know the whole country from end to end. I am familiar with many cities, but I have seen none like Cubatão. Cubatão is sitting on a bomb; if there is a leak in the pipeline or a mudslide, we will have a tragedy.” And Veja magazine reported that as far back as 1977 the oil refinery had warned the state authorities about the possible danger to the homes built over its pipelines. Some improvements were made to lessen the danger, but alas, the wooden houses and boardwalks remained to feed the tragic fire that broke out that night.
Details are not clear as to what caused the fire. For some reason, a buildup in pressure of gasoline in the lines blew out a piece of pipe. It is estimated that probably 175,000 gallons (662,000 L) of the highly inflammable liquid spurted out over the whole area. All it took was a tiny spark to ignite it into a blazing inferno of death and destruction.
Governor Franco Montoro confessed most sadly, “We are all guilty.” The loss of dear loved ones or the emotional damage to the survivors cannot be estimated. But it is regretable that the published warnings were not acted upon sooner and more effectively. Even worse is the fact that many of the casualties had paid no attention to the frantic cries of the policemen. One survivor summed up their attitude: “I paid no attention nor was I afraid. We are so used to these leaks and the strong smell from the pipes. Besides the Petrobrás men always come soon and fix the leaks.” This time they never came!

