Announcements
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES
Week of August 13: “Equipping the New World Organization,” ¶1-7 inclusive, also “Organized Testimony to the New World”, ¶1-14 inclusive, The Watchtower July 15, 1950.
Week of August 20: “Organized Testimony to the New World,” ¶15-20 inclusive, also “Postwar Enlargement of the Theocratic Organization”, ¶1-15 inclusive, The Watchtower July 15, 1950.
Week of August 27: “Postwar Enlargement of the Theocratic Organization,” ¶16-20 inclusive, also “Dedication”, ¶1-13 inclusive, The Watchtower July 15, 1950.
“THEOCRACY’S INCREASE” ASSEMBLY OF JEHOVAH’S WITNESSES
All persons loving truth and righteousness are cordially invited to attend the “Theocracy’s Increase” Assembly of Jehovah’s witnesses. The place: Yankee Stadium, New York city. Starting time: July 30, 1950, 9:25 a.m. Ending: Sunday evening, August 6. Try to arrange your trip so you’ll be in New York early Sunday morning. Before the program opens the new 96-page songbook will be available at Yankee Stadium. You will be delighted with it.
At 10 o’clock A. H. Macmillan will address the convention on the subject, “Without Faith It Is Impossible to Please God.” At 10:30 you will hear the address of welcome by the chairman, Grant Suiter. Then at 1:30 p.m. the graduation exercises of the 15th Gilead class will begin. The president of the Society will be one of the speakers addressing the students and the conventioners. In the evening you will hear from the students themselves.
On Monday, July 31, representatives of the Society from Argentina, South Africa, Canada, Mexico, and other places, will report and Brother Covington talks on “Defending and Legally Establishing the Good News”. Monday starts off a series of meetings in various languages: Spanish, Greek, Danish, Portuguese, Swedish, and German. See the program for times and places of meetings There will be meetings in other languages on other days.
Trailer and Tent Camp. It is a pleasure to announce that a camp will be set up at the Butterworth Farm, Old New Brunswick Road, near New Market, N. J. If you are traveling toward New York on U. S. Route 22, near Plainfield you will notice a large sign saying “Turn Right to Dunellen”. Make the right turn and drive through Dunellen to the camp. If you are traveling toward New York on U. S. Route 1, just after you leave New Brunswick turn left at the sign that says “To Camp Kilmer”. After you leave the main highways you will see “J.W. Camp” signs to guide you to the camp.
If you did not receive through your company of Jehovah’s witnesses the special form for requesting camp parking space, you may write to the Watchtower Convention Rooming Committee, 557 West 157th Street, New York 32, N. Y., and request the form. Please use the form when requesting parking space. There will be a small charge to those using this rented land.
To reach Yankee Stadium from the camp, which is about 40 miles away, you should travel by U. S. Route 1 or 22 to either the Holland or the Lincoln Tunnel or the Erie Ferry near the Holland Tunnel. In Manhattan take the West Side Express Highway (no trucks permitted) to 158th Street exit. The bridge at 155th street will take you across the Harlem river to the stadium. There are no parking facilities right at the stadium.
It is hoped talks at Yankee Stadium will be transmitted by telephone lines to the camp for the benefit of those who must be on duty, but to get the real blessing come to Yankee Stadium daily.

