From Our Readers
Rain Forests Under Siege  I decided to send the issue about rain forests (March 22, 1990) to the Brazilian Institute for the Environment and Renewable Natural Resources. They replied: “We thank you for sending us a copy of the Awake! magazine dealing with deforestation. We take this opportunity to commend your initiative and to point out the high level of the magazine, which certainly will contribute to developing a collective ecological awareness.”
C. H. A. S., Brazil
Former Racist  I can’t tell you how much I enjoyed Virgil Dugué’s story, “I Tried to Change the World.” (March 22, 1990) It made me realize the effects of racism and how cruel it can be.
J. N., United States
New York City Subway  After reading the article “Riding the ‘Hole in the Ground,’” I was compelled to say, “Thanks.” (April 22, 1990) As a daily subway rider, it’s hard to view the train system for what it really is​—fascinating. This morning as I headed for work, I descended the stairs and boarded the train with a very different outlook.
M. H., United States
Battered Wives  I am a reforming wife beater, and the November 22, 1988, Awake! really helped me to see how ugly wife beating is. After reading the magazine, I broke down and cried. I pray that our family can put this in our past.
D. S., United States
Insecurity  I am writing in reference to the article “Young People Ask . . . Why Do I Feel So Insecure?” (April 22, 1990) I am 33 years old, and the article helped me so much. When I was a child, my mother committed suicide. My father was an alcoholic and abused me verbally, physically, and sexually. He constantly downgraded us and made us feel useless. So as a youngster, I was very insecure. On occasion, I still suffer from insecurity, but nothing like before. Being a full-time evangelizer has also helped me tremendously, for I have seen Jehovah’s blessing on me in this work. And if Jehovah loves me, I say to myself, I don’t need to feel worthless.
C. R., United States
It was tremendously encouraging to know that other young people nurture these same feelings. Because the examples were clear and detailed, I was able to make a comparison with my own situation. The article also pointed out that a sense of security doesn’t develop immediately and that there would probably be setbacks. This is gentle advice. When I see these calming words, my heart swells, and I have a hard time holding the tears back.
C. T., Japan
World Without Guns  Your recent articles on guns (May 22, 1990) disturbed me. The statement “the more guns, the more shootings” was reinforced by a series of examples and quotes that misrepresent the true situation. For example, you state that Switzerland has the highest per capita gun ownership in Europe. But nowhere in the articles is it mentioned that Switzerland also has one of the lowest crime and murder rates in the world! To blame guns for the problems wicked men cause seems to have missed the point.
K. C., United States
We appreciate these comments. Some clarification might have been given regarding some of the more controversial statistics cited in our articles. Nevertheless, “Awake!” was not taking a stand on the political issue of gun control but was advocating a future “world without guns” under God’s Kingdom. Until then, Christians are guided by the principles at Isaiah 2:4 and Matthew 26:52.​—ED.

