Announcements
LIVING NOW AS A NEW WORLD SOCIETY—Matt. 19:28, 29, NW.
The expression “the New World Society” is becoming more and more prominent with each passing day. Just what is it? The New World society is a group of people, Christian people, organized and working together in a common work, meeting together regularly and worshiping the one true God, and striving to live according to a common standard, God’s standard. Being located in 159 different lands its members spread beyond the bounds of any one nation or empire. But regardless of their individual location, one and all look to and serve Jehovah God. During December Jehovah’s witnesses and their companions in all 159 lands will work together, well organized to call at the homes of as many people as they can with Bible truths and aids to Bible study. Three books and three booklets will be offered on a contribution of $1.50, or the New World Translation of the Hebrew or Greek Scriptures and one book on a contribution of $2. The placing of this literature will enable many more to start learning and living for the new world.
ARE YOUR PLANS LAID?
Though it seems almost no time since Jehovah’s witnesses gathered for their 1954 district assemblies, it is already time to lay your plans for the 1955 gatherings. Such cities as Chicago, Vancouver, Los Angeles, Dallas, New York, London, Paris, Rome, Nuremberg, Stockholm and The Hague will be scenes of theocratic rejoicing, Christian fellowship and spiritual encouragement. Thousands of Jehovah’s witnesses will attend four, five or more of these assemblies, especially those in Europe. Will you join this enthusiastic group of conventioners traveling to Europe, benefiting from the rich spiritual feasts that will be provided? being stirred to greater activity through the zeal of the brothers you meet in other lands? and being a strength and encouragement to them by your presence there? If you have not yet decided which assemblies you can attend and how you will get there, then now is the time to talk to your local congregation servant and make definite plans. Do it now! June is only six months away, and the first convention will be under way.
A WORLD-WIDE REPORT
To the headquarters of the Watchtower Society, from all directions, have come reports of the inspiring work Jehovah’s witnesses have done as another year of their activity comes to a conclusion. Compiled into a comprehensive record the 1955 Yearbook of Jehovah’s Witnesses brings you the account of their world-wide ministerial work. The entire book is filled with interesting and true accounts and happenings they have experienced in preaching the kingdom of God as the only hope for mankind. You will be amazed and inspired on reading this absorbing report. Also, the Yearbook contains helpful texts and comments for each day of 1955. Order your copy for 50 cents right away. As a companion publication to the Yearbook is the 1955 calendar displaying the yeartext with appropriate illustration. Calendars are 25 cents each or five to one address for $1. Order now.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES
Week of January 16: Prospects of Fearers of Jehovah for 1955, ¶1-22.
Week of January 23: Prospects of Fearers of Jehovah for 1955, ¶23-25; also, Freedom from Fear in 1955.

