What Is This Christmas Spirit?
WHAT is it that men call “the beautiful spirit of Christmas”? Is it a crowded department store, charged with emotion, packed with excitement, loaded with gadgets and glimmering with inflated “cut-rate” prices? Is it the electrified commotion of mobs surging through the streets, the frenzy to board overcrowded buses, the dash to squeeze in crammed subways or the honks of automobiles snarled in endless traffic jams? Is it haggard-looking women with their arms full of gaily wrapped bundles and their hands full of children? Or is it the resigned husband who condescends but wishes it were not so?
What is this spirit of Christmas? Is it the carillon at Sts. Peter and Paul, filling the gray morning air with the timeless chimes of tradition? Is it the choral concerts and organ music and the tinkling of noisy bells? Or is it the blaring of a thousand jukeboxes ringing out the cynical sentiments of “Santa, Baby”?
What is this Christmas spirit? Is it the Salvation Army musicians marching from corner to corner reminding passersby that it is more blessed to give? Is it a legless man in front of Hotel Ritz selling pencils on a cold sidewalk waving a “merry Christmas” to prospective customers as they step out of their long shiny limousines? Is it the wreath at the entrance of Pearl Street flophouse, with a sign on it that says, “Please do not steal this”?
Is this the Christmas spirit? An exhausted elevator operator at Mixie’s dress shop hoping for a generous bonus that she will never get? A huge diamond ring or a pearl necklace being fondled by Mabel with cold, avaricious lust? A loud necktie that Dad will never wear?
What is this Christmas spirit? Is it a week’s vacation, a respite from work, an escape from school, a breath of country air, a moment with family, a word with friends, a retreat to quiet solitude? Is it a table covered with candy and nuts, gingerbread and mince pie, a roast pig or fried chicken? Is it a cocktail party with loud music, the making up of a big batch of eggnog for uninvited guests, or becoming “good and drunk” or licentious, or that of being “a jolly good fellow”?
What is this spirit of Christmas? Is it junior staring transfixed at an electric train as it spins in crazy circles, or sister cuddling her tiny doll that says “Mommie”? Is it the feverish search for the right gift that cannot be found, the evergrowing anticipation in the eyes of the young that want toys but cannot read price tags? Is it the endless chain of Christmas cards that flutter across the desk on their way to the wastebasket? Is it the Christmas tree covered with artificial snow and laden with colored bulbs that tell of pagan star gods? Is it the candles that chase away the evil spirits, the mistletoe that commemorates superstitious legends, or the yule log that repeats a pagan lie?
Just what is this spirit of Christmas? Is it the spirit of God and Christ? Is it the spirit that proclaims “peace on earth, good will toward men”? Is it the spirit that magnifies the great God of the universe? Or does this spirit defame and abominate the pure worship of God? “Beloved ones,” said the apostle John, “do not believe every inspired expression [“spirit,” footnote], but test the inspired expressions [spirits] to see whether they originate with God.” “Make sure of all things,” urged Paul, “hold fast to what is right. Keep yourselves free from every form of wickedness.” What is this Christmas spirit, its origin, and what does it have to do with God and Christ? In the following article let history and the Word of God answer for us.—1 John 4:1; 1 Thess. 5:21, 22, NW.

