Aid Others to Become God’s “Men of Good Will”
WHAT does it mean to be “men of good will”? The expression calls to mind the song that the angelic choir sang at the time of the birth of the babe Jesus: “Glory in the heights above to God, and upon earth peace among men of good will.” (Luke 2:14)a “Men of good will” means persons enjoying God’s goodwill or favor.
How does one go about gaining God’s favor, his goodwill, so as to be able to receive the peace of God? The Bible itself answers: “The one finding me [heavenly wisdom] will certainly find life, and gets good will from Jehovah.” (Prov. 8:35) We must be so concerned with what is right and good and wise in God’s sight that we will be in fear of him, which means to hate what is bad. (Prov. 8:13) Thus we are further told: “Jehovah is finding pleasure in those fearing him, in those waiting for his loving-kindness.” It follows, therefore, that only by taking in knowledge of Jehovah and his Son, Jesus Christ, and then acting upon it, by dedicating ourselves to do God’s will, can we hope to become God’s “men of good will” and receive the resultant peace.—Ps. 147:11.
Today there are many persons who are kindly disposed toward God, but unless they gain God’s favor or goodwill they will suffer destruction at the battle of Armageddon. Having become “men of good will” ourselves, we owe it to Jehovah and our neighbors to aid these kindly disposed toward God to obtain God’s favor and goodwill. Among other things, we must show them how to heed the Scriptural injunction: “Seek Jehovah, all you meek ones of the earth, who have practiced His own judicial decision. Seek righteousness, seek meekness. Probably you may be concealed in the day of Jehovah’s anger.”—Zeph. 2:3.
Further, we want to set a fine example as to our conduct so that these will also want to become “men of good will.” Above all, we must give priority in our lives to the preaching of the good news of God’s kingdom to others. For those in the north February will be a cold month, and they will need to show fortitude and determination so as not to slacken in their efforts to aid others to become God’s men of goodwill. Resolve not to let the weather unduly interfere; prepare for it in your mind, and also in a practical way by dressing for it. Put forth a particularly earnest effort at the beginning of the month, knowing that the weather may well get worse as the month wears on. Severe inclement weather is often the best time to find persons at home and so you will be rewarded for the greater effort put forth, as well as for the added discomfort endured.
Let us never forget that for persons to become God’s “men of good will” they need more than just Bible literature. While featuring The Watchtower on a subscription basis, we do not want to forget to make return visits and to establish a regular Bible study with them if at all possible, so that they can continue to grow in knowledge and understanding to the point where they will dedicate themselves to do Jehovah’s will, thereby winning his goodwill, and, in turn, aiding still others to become men of goodwill. Jesus said: “You received free, give free.” Happy are we if we heed those words!—Matt. 10:8.
[Footnotes]
For details please see The Watchtower, October 15, 1964.

