R1237 :page 1 

VOL. XL ALLEGHENY, PA., AUGUST, 1890. NO. 9. 



THE TYPICAL TABERNACLE 
AND ITS TEACHINGS. 



ITS FURNITURE-ITS APARTMENTS-ITS 
PEOPLE. 

The Tabernacle which God commanded 
Israel to construct in the Wilderness of 
Sin, in connection with which all their 
religious services and ceremonies were instituted, 
was, Paul assures us, a shadow of 
good things to come. ( Heb. 8:5 ; 10:1 ; 
Col. 2:17 .) In fact the whole nation of 
Israel, with their laws and their religious 
services and ceremonies, were typical. 
This being true, our understanding of the 
plan and work of salvation now in progress, 
as well as their future development, 
cannot fail to be greatly enlightened by 
a careful study of that Jewish shadow 
which they repeated year by year continually 
until the Gospel age, for the edification 
of the saints.- 1 Pet. 1:12 . 

It is not simply to gain a historical 
knowledge of the Jewish forms, ceremonies 
and worship, that we come to the 
investigation of this subject, but that we 
may be edified by understanding the 

substance from an examination of the 
shadow, as God designed in arranging it. 

We will fail to attach sufficient weight 
and importance to the shadow, unless we 
realize how carefully God guided and directed 
all of its details: First, he took 
Moses up into the mount and gave him 
an illustration of just how things were to 
be made; Secondly, he charged him to 
be careful of every particular— "See, saith 
he, that thou make all things according to 
the pattern shewed to thee in the mount." 
( Heb. 8:5 ; Exod. 25:40 .) So, too, 
with all the minutiae of the service: every 
jot and tittle must be exactly performed 
in the type, because it illustrated something 
greater and more important coming 
after. And in order that these shadows 
might all be exactly performed, and that 
the people might not become careless, the 



usual penalty for any violation was death. 
For instance— 2 Sam. 6:6,7 ; Lev. 10:1,2 ; 
Exod. 28:43 ; Num. 4:15,20 
and 17:13 . 

Realizing God's care in making the 
"shadow" should not only give us confidence 
in its correctness, that not one jot 
or tittle of it shall fail until all shall be 
fulfilled ( Matt. 5:18 ), but it should also 
awaken in us so great an interest in God's 
plan as would lead us to examine closely, 
and search carefully, for the meaning of 
those shadows. And this, with God's 
promised blessing, we now propose to do, 
assured that among those who are truly 
God's consecrated ones— children begotten 
of the Spirit— "he that seeketh findeth; 
and to him that knocketh, it shall be 
opened." 

The directions given to Moses for the 
construction of the Tabernacle may be 
found in Exod. 25 to 27 , and the account 
of the performance of the work, in Exod. 35 to 40 
Briefly stated, the Tabernacle 
was a house constructed of a series of 
boards of shittim wood "overlaid" or 
plated with gold, and set on end into 
sockets of silver, and firmly fastened together 
by bars of the same wood, also 
covered with gold. 

This structure was 15 feet wide, 15 feet 
high, and 45 feet long, open at the front 
or east end. It was covered by a large 
linen cloth, with figures of cherubim 
woven into it, in blue, purple and scarlet 
colors. The open end, or front of the 
structure, was closed by a curtain of similar 
material to the covering cloth, called the 
"door," or first vail. Another cloth of 
the same materials and colors, and similarly 
woven with figures of cherubim, called 
the "Vail" (or second vail), was hung so 
that it divided the Tabernacle into two 
apartments. The first or larger apartment, 
15 feet wide and 30 feet long, was called 
"The Holy."* The second or rearmost 
apartment, 15 feet wide and 15 feet long, 
was called "The Most Holy." Over this 
Tabernacle proper was a tent to shelter it. 
It was made of a covering of cashmere cloth 
or goat's hair, another of rams' skins dyed 
red, and another of seals' skins, mistranslated 
badgers' skins. 

The Tabernacle was surrounded by a 
yard or "Court," toward the rear of which 
it stood. This court, 75 feet wide and 150 



feet long, was formed by a fence of linen 
curtains suspended from silver hooks, set 
in the tops of wooden posts 7-1/2 feet high, 
which were set in heavy sockets of copper 
(translated brass), and braced like the 
tent which covered the Tabernacle, with 
cords and pins. This enclosure was all 
holy ground, and was therefore called the 
"Holy Place"— also the "Court of the 
Tabernacle." Its opening, like the door 
of the Tabernacle, was toward the east, 
and was called the "Gate." The "Gate" 
was of linen embroidered with blue, purple 
and scarlet. It will be noticed that 
the three entrance passages, viz.: "the 
Gate" to the Court or "Holy Place," 
"the Door" to the "Holy" and "the 
Vail" to the "Most Holy," were of the 
same material and colors. 

The furniture of the Court consisted of 
but two pieces: the "Brazen Altar" and 
the "Laver." 

THE BRAZEN ALTAR. 

First on entering the gate, and immediately 
in front of it, stood the Brazen 
Altar. This altar was made of wood and 
covered with copper, and was 7-1/2 feet 
square and 4-1/2 feet high. It had various 
utensils belonging to its service— fire pans, 
called censers, for carrying the fire to the 
Incense Altar; basins to receive the blood; 
flesh-hooks, shovels, etc. 

THE LAVER. 

Next, between the Brazen Altar and 
the door of the Tabernacle, was the Laver. 
It was made of polished copper and was 
a receptacle for water for the washing of 
the priests before entering the Tabernacle. 

The furniture of the Tabernacle consisted 
of a Table, a Candlestick and an 
Incense Altar in the Holy, and the Ark 
of the Testimony in the Most Holy. 

THE TABLE OF SHEW-BREAD. 

Within the Tabernacle, on the right 
(north), stood the wooden "Table" overlaid 
with gold, and upon it were placed 
twelve cakes of unleavened bread in 
two piles, with frankincense on top of 
each pile. ( Lev. 24:6 .) The bread was 
for the priests; it was holy, and was renewed 



on the seventh or Sabbath day. 

THE GOLDEN CANDLESTICK. 

Opposite the Table was the "Candlestick," 
made of pure gold, beaten work 
(hammered out), having seven branches 
and in each branch a lamp. It was the 
only light in "The Holy," for, as we 
have seen, the natural light was obscured 
by the walls and curtains, and there were 
no windows. 

THE 

"GOLDEN 

ALTAR." 

THE 

"INCENSE 

ALTAR." 

Further on, close up to "the Vail," 
stood a small altar of wood, covered with 
gold, called the "Golden Altar" or "Incense 
Altar." It had no fire upon it except 
as the priests brought it in the censers, 
which they set in the top of this Golden 
Altar, and then crumbled the incense upon 
it, giving forth fragrant perfume. 

THE ARK OF THE TESTIMONY. 

Beyond the Vail, in the Most Holy, 
there was but one piece of furniture— the 
Ark. It was a rectangular box made of 



*Frequently this, in the English translation, is 
improperly called the "holy place;" and in such 
instances the word place will be found in italics, 
indicating that it has been supplied by the translators, 
as for instance in Exod. 26:33 . This error 
is quite confusing, as "the court" was properly 
called "the holy place." When place, is not in 
italics, "the court" is always meant. See Lev. 14:13 
and 6:27 . In some instances "The Holy" 
is termed "The Tabernacle of the congregation" 
and the "Most Holy;" the "Sanctuary" is also 
sometimes called "the Holy place"— place in italics. 
Instances, Lev. 16:17,20,33 . In our mention 
of them we will call these apartments severally 
"The Court," "The Holy," and "The Most 
Holy;" surrounding which was "The Camp" of 
Israel. 

A lack of appreciation of the interest of Christians 



in these typical pictures, and of the necessity 
of uniform exactness, on the part of the translators 
of Leviticus, must have been the cause of the 
varied translations which have so aided in confusing 
the student. 

R1237 : page 2 

wood overlaid with gold, having a lid or 
cover of pure gold, called the Propitiatory, 
or "Mercy Seat." Upon it (and of the 
same piece) were two cherubs of gold 
—beaten work. Within this Ark (under 
the Propitiatory) were placed the golden 
bowl of manna, Aaron's rod that budded, 
and the two tables of the law. 
( Heb. 9:4 .) Upon the Propitiatory a 
supernatural light appeared, shining out 
between the cherubim, representing the 
divine presence. This was the only light 
in the Most Holy. 

It is noticeable that everything inside 
the Tabernacle was of gold, while in the 
Court everything was of copper. Wood, 
which was used as the basis, and was covered 
by these metals, was used, we believe, 
to make the articles of lighter weight 
than if of solid metal. This would be an 
important consideration when they traveled. 
The vessels of the Temple, representative 
of the same things, were of solid 
metals. ( 1 Kings 7:23,48 .) These two 
metals, gold and copper, were used, we 
think, to represent two different natures- 
copper representing the human nature in 
its perfection; and gold representing the 
divine nature— much alike in their appearance, 
yet different in quality, as the human 
is an image of the divine nature. 

It will be noticed that the arrangement 
of the structure formed three general 
divisions— the 

CAMP, COURT AND TABERNACLE. 

The Camp represented the condition 
of the world of mankind in sin, typified 
by the nation of Israel. These were separated 
from all holy things by the curtain 
of white linen, which to those within 
represents a wall of faith, but to those 
without, a wall of unbelief which hindered 
their view of, and access to, the holy things 
within. The only way to enter the "Holy 
Place" or "Court" was to come through 
the "Gate"— Jesus. "I am the way.... 



No man cometh unto the Father but by 
me." "I am the door."— Jno. 14:6 ; 

10:9. 

The Court represented the condition of 
Justification, entered through faith in 
Christ, the "Gate." Into this Court, only 
Levites (typical of justified believers) 
were allowed to come. These had access 
to the brazen Altar and to the Laver, and 
did service in the Court, but had no right 
as Levites (believers) to go into the Tabernacle; 
no, nor even to look into it. 
( Num. 4:19,20 .) Here in the "Court" 
all things were of copper, to indicate that 
the class admitted there were justified 
men only. 

The Tabernacle represented the condition 
of all who have changed their nature; 
that is, those who (as Levites— justified 
believers) have consecrated their human 
nature to death, and have become 
partakers of the divine nature, by being 
begotten of the Spirit. No human being, 
be he ever so full of faith, be he washed 
from every sin, and in God's sight justified 
freely from all things, reckoned perfect, 
can have any place or privilege in 
divine things unless he fully consecrate or 
sacrifice himself. He cannot even look 
into spiritual things, in the sense of appreciating 
them. "The natural man receiveth 
not the things of the Spirit,... 
neither can he know them, because they are 
spiritually discerned."— 1 Cor. 2:14,12 . 

All things in the Tabernacle were of gold, 
representing the divine nature, and only 
those of the Levites who were consecrated 
to the work of sacrifice (the Priests) had 
access to the Tabernacle. So only those 
of the household of faith who are consecrated 
to sacrifice, even unto death, enter 
the divine conditions represented in the 
Tabernacle. 

The "Court" or justified human condition 
is entered by faith only; but while 
we must retain the faith that justifies, we 
must do more, if we would change our 
nature and become "new creatures," 
"partakers of the divine nature." If we 
would enter the Tabernacle or divine 
condition, we must crucify the justified 
flesh, presenting our human wills and bodies 
a living sacrifice to God; no longer to 
seek for human pleasure, honor, praise, 
etc., but to be dead to these and alive to 
the heavenly ones. Yet into this condition, 



also, we come through Christ Jesus 
our Lord, who not only opened for us the 
"gate" of justification through faith in his 
blood, but who also opened the "door" into 
the Tabernacle, "a new" way of life, as 
spirit beings, through and beyond the vail 
by the sacrifice of the justified flesh.— 
Heb. 10:20 . 

The two apartments of the Tabernacle, 
the Holy and the Most Holy, represented 
two phases or stages of the divine life. 
The "Holy" represented the present condition 
of those begotten of God through 
the Word. These, as divine minded, 

"new creatures," though still "in the 
flesh," have their real life and walk with 
God, within the vail and beyond the sight 
of the world and the unconsecrated believers. 
These enjoy the light of the 
candlestick, eat of the special food, and 
offer incense at the golden altar, acceptable 
through Christ Jesus. 

The "Most Holy" represented the perfected 
condition of such new creatures, 
when born from the dead in the resurrection. 
Then, beyond both vails— the fleshly 
mind and the fleshly body— such shall 
be glorious spiritual bodies, as well as 
spiritual-minded. They shall be like 
their Leader, and forerunner beyond the 
vail, who, having entered, hath consecrated 
for us this new and living way. 
The spiritual-minded creature in the 
"Holy" by faith looks forward through 
the rent Vail into the "Most Holy," 
catching glimpses of the glory, honor 
and immortality beyond the flesh; which 
hope is an anchor entering into that beyond 
the vail.- Heb. 6:19 ; and 10:20 . 

We see, then, that justification by faith 
brings us into a condition of peace with 
God. When our sins are forgiven, we are a 
step nearer to God, but still human —in 
the Court. If we would attain the prize of 
our high calling which is OF GOD in Christ 
Jesus, and enter through the "Holy" into 
the "Most Holy," we must follow 

IN THE FOOTSTEPS OF JESUS, 

our Leader and Head— "the High Priest 
of our profession." By faith in his ransom 
we have entered the "gate" to the 
Court— the vail of unbelief and sin is 
passed. By renouncing our human wills, 
and all our human aspirations and hopes, 



we pass the first vail, or vail of human-mindedness, 

counting our human will as 

dead; henceforth not consulting it, but 

the will of God only. 

We now find ourselves as "new creatures" 
in the "Holy"— in the first of 
"the Heavenlies" or Holies ( Eph. 2:6 . 
— Diaglott); and here we are enlightened 
by the Golden Candlestick (God's Word), 
refreshed and strengthened daily with the 
truth as represented in the Shew-bread, 
lawful only for the Priests to eat. ( Matt. 12:4 .) 
And thus enlightened and strengthened, 
we are daily offering up sacrifices at 
the "Golden Altar," acceptable to God 
through Jesus Christ— a sweet perfume to 
our Father.— 1 Pet. 2:5 .* 

Thus all the saints, the consecrated, 
are in a "heavenly" or "holy" condition 
now— "seated (at rest and communion) 
with Christ in (the first of these) 
heavenly places," but not yet in the Holiest 
of all. No, another vail must first 
be passed: As the passing of the preceding 
vail represented the death of the human 

will, so the passing of the second 
vail is the death of the human body; and 
it requires both to complete our sacrifice. 
Both fleshly mind and fleshly body must 
first be passed before we shall be in the 
"Holiest of all"— perfected as partakers 
of the divine nature and its 
spirit-conditions. 

With these thoughts as to the three 

conditions represented by these three places 
—Camp, Court and Tabernacle— let us 
notice particularly the three classes occupying 
these conditions, viz.: the Unbelieving 
World, Justified Believers, and the Saints 
or Consecrated Believers, typified respectively 
by 

ISRAELITES, LEVITES AND THE 
PRIESTHOOD. 

In understanding the significance of 
the Tabernacle service, it is necessary not 
only to get a clear idea of the structure, 
its furniture and their typical signification, 
but also of the actors and their significance 
as types. 

Israel is used in many instances to typify 
the Christian Church. For instance: 
When they left Egyptian bondage, they 
were a type of God's children who hear 
his call to come out from the world and 



engage in his worship. 

The wilderness journey represents the 
tedious pilgrimage through which many 
pass, seeking the promised Canaan rest— 
"Come unto me, and I will give you rest." 
As in the type, so in reality, the promised 
Canaan of rest is not far off, if God's children 
had faith enough to go up and enter 
in. God has made abundant provision 
for them; yet they journey through the 
wilderness of sin, seeking rest but finding 
none, because they lack faith in God's 
promises. Some wander thus a long time; 
and some never enter the Canaan rest because 
of unbelief. But while Israel, according 
to the flesh, is thus and in other ways 
used to typify the spiritual Israel, yet it 
is a totally different type, as we are now 
examining it, in its relation to the Tabernacle. 
Here, Israel unquestionably typifies 
the whole world of mankind. The 
sin-offerings, sacrifices, atonement, etc., 
made typically for them (and them only), 
were typical of better sacrifices and atonement, 
made on behalf of the whole world; 
for, "He is a propitiation for our sins, 
and not for ours only, but also for the sins 
of the whole world."— 1 John 2:2 . 

In a word, Israel was a type as well as 
the Tabernacle, Priests, Levites and sacrifices. 
And what was there done in 
symbol with and for Israel is, since the 
first advent of Christ, being carried out 
on a higher plane, and on a larger scale; 
the latter being the reality, of which that 
was the type or shadow. 

As Israel typified the world, so the tribe 
of Levites typified the "Household of 
faith," or all believers in Jesus and his 
ransom. The Priesthood, one body under 
one chief or High Priest, was typical 
of the "little flock" who with their 
"Head" or High Priest are to be Kings 
and Priests to reign on the earth. ( Rev. 5:10 .) 
Thus viewed, we see Jesus the 
High Priest not of the Aaronic order, 
which was but the type of a greater and 
grander profession or order, but the head of 
the real priesthood of which others were 
but figures.- Heb. 3:1 ; 4:14 . 

But before the under-priests, the members 
of the body of Christ, the priesthood, 
shall be united to their Head and 
begin their reign, they must first "suffer 
with him" in making the sacrifices, as we 
shall shortly see.— 2 Tim. 2:12 . 



Peter shows who were typified by the 
priests, when, addressing those who are 

sanctified, he says: ( 1 Pet. 1:2 and 2:5,9 .) 

"Ye are. ..an holy priesthood 
to offer up sacrifices acceptable to God by 
Jesus Christ." "Ye are. ..a royal 
priesthood." 

That the head or chief priest of this 
priesthood, this "little flock," is Jesus, is 
repeatedly mentioned by the apostles. 
We give but one quotation: "Holy brethren 
(the Royal Priesthood), partakers of 
the heavenly calling, consider the apostle 
and High Priest of our profession, Christ 
Jesus."— Heb. 3:1 . 

As we now pass to the consideration of 
the inauguration of the typical priesthood, 
we notice that the tribe of the Levites 
(typical of all the justified believers) existed 
for a long time before the Priesthood 
was instituted. So in the antitype, 
the "Royal Priesthood" began with the 
anointing of Jesus the High Priest (at 
baptism, Luke 3:22 ; Acts 10:38 ); but 
believers, justified by faith in Christ, had 
lived long before that. For instance, 
Abraham believed God, and was justified 
by his faith. ( Rom. 4:2,3 .) Though even 
the type had not yet come in his day, 
yet Abraham as a justified believer was a 
member of the "household of faith," 
typified by the Levites. But none of the 
"Royal Priesthood" were selected until 
after the Chief or High Priest of this order 
was first initiated and installed in 
office; since then the initiation and installment 
of the under-priests has been the 
special work of this Christian dispensation. 
Thus the priests now being installed 
and now sacrificing are being prepared 
as God's instruments for the blessing 
of all the families of the earth. 

R1237 : page 2 

THE PRIESTHOOD. 

THEIR TYPICAL CLOTHING, ANOINTING 

AND CONSECRATION. 

In this ceremony, as in every other relating 
to the ordination and work of the 
priesthood, it will be well to notice that 
Jesus was the first —the Leader, Captain, 
Forerunner— teaching clearly that none 
preceded him, hence that none of the patriarchs 
or prophets are of the "little 



flock," "the royal priesthood," otherwise 
called "the Bride, the Lamb's wife." 
Though they will be greatly blessed as 
the Lord's servants, their service will not 
be so grandly high as that of the priests, 
nor their honor so great; yet, as represented 
in the Levites, both their service 
and honor are great. 

"The narrow way to life" (Immortality) 
was not opened up until Jesus came. 
He was the first to walk in it. He 
"brought life and immortality to light." 
( 2 Tim. 1:10 .) And though all believers 
(Levites) shall become possessors of 
everlasting life and the world (Israel) 
also, if they will accept it during the Millennial 
age, yet only the priesthood, who 
overcome and follow their Leader in the 
narrow way to life— sacrificing the human 
—thus seeking glory, honor and immortality, 
will ever become the possessors of 
that unlimited degree of life called Immortality, 
as yet possessed only by Jehovah 
and our Lord Jesus. (See "The Plan 
of the Ages," Chapters X. and XL) 



*The word spiritual in this text is omitted by 
the oldest Greek MS., the Sinaitic MS., with evident 
propriety. Not spiritual but human rights, privileges, 
life, etc., are sacrificed. 

R1237 : page 3 

Under the Law, the ANOINTING was the 
ceremony by which the priests were installed 
in God's service. They were 
anointed to their office with a peculiar 
ointment, called the Holy Anointing Oil, 
used upon none but the Priests, and unlawful 
for any one else to have or to make. 
( Exod. 30:25-33 .) This oil typified the 
Holy Spirit of adoption whereby we, 
the real "Royal Priesthood," are sealed. 
Only the consecrated ones are ever to be 
anointed thus. Aaron, the typical High 
Priest, represented Jesus the head, and the 
Church as members of the body, of the 
great High Priest. Being but a sinful 
man like others, he has to be washed in 
order to fitly represent the purity of the 
antitype. 

Aaron was then clothed with the holy 
garments of "glory and beauty" ( Exod. 28 .), 
and then the anointing oil was 



poured on his head. Each article of this 
glorious apparel was typical of qualities 
and powers of the Great Deliverer— head 
and body— as Jehovah discerns them, looking 
down into the future to the time for 
"the manifestation of the Sons of God," 
and the fulfilment in them of his promises. 

THE HIGH PRIEST IN GARMENTS OF TYPICAL 
"GLORY AND BEAUTY." 

"And these are the garments. ..a 
breastplate, and an ephod, and an upper 
robe, and a broidered coat, a mitre 
and a girdle."— Exod. 28:4 . 

The linen "coat" represented the High 
Priest's purity, while its embroidery showed 
the outgrowth of that character in works. 
The "mitre," a strip of fine linen (typical 
of righteousness), worn around the 
forehead, to which was fastened with a 
blue lacer the golden plate, or "crown," 
shows that the crown is righteously his. 
Upon the golden plate was inscribed 
"Holiness to the Lord," thus proclaiming: 
This High Priest is entirely devoted 
to the accomplishment of Jehovah's purposes. 
The golden crown proclaims his 
royalty: He is to be "a priest upon his 
throne"— "a priest forever, after the order 
of Melchizedek." ( Psa. 110:4 .) The 
linen "girdle" indicates a righteous 
servant; linen— righteousness; girdle- 
servitude. 

The "upper robe," of blue, represented 
his faithfulness. The fringe of it was 
made of golden bells and pomegranates. 
The pomegranate, being a choice fruit, 
showed that the faithful performance of 
his work of sacrifice had borne rich fruit 
—the redemption of the forfeited life of 
the human race. The golden bells signified 
that when the High Priest appears in 
glory and beauty, the fruit of sacrificial 
work shall be made manifest to all— proclaimed 
to all the world, as in the type 
the bells proclaimed it to all Israel. This 
is indicated by the close proximity; the 
bells drawing attention to the fruit. 

The "ephod" was made of a cloth of 
purple, blue, scarlet, white and gold 
threads, interwoven skilfully and beautifully. 
It was of two parts, one hanging 
in front and the other over the back. 
These two parts were fastened together by 
two gold clasps which rested on the 



shoulders. This ephod, we believe, typified 

two covenants, the Abrahamic represented 

by the front part, and the New 

Covenant represented by the back part, 

both of which are thus shown to be dependent 

on this High Priest. They are 

laid on him; if he fails to support them 

they must fall to the ground. But, thank 

God, they are firmly clasped on him by 

the gold clasps (divine power), as well as 

bound to him by the "curious girdle" 

—a cord made of the same materials as 

the ephod. This girdle seems to say, This 

is a servant; and as this is the girdle of 

the ephod it tells us that this one is 

"The Messenger (servant) of the Covenant 

whom ye delight in."— Mai. 3:1 . 

That part of the Abrahamic covenant referring 
to the spiritual seed is represented 
as complete in God's sight, the person of 
the High Priest representing the complete 
spiritual seed as it will be clothed with 
honor and power at the beginning of the 
Millennium. Yet the Abrahamic covenant 
is partially fulfilled in the person of 
the High Priest, who is the Seed, the spiritual 
seed, which is to bless all. But as 
we have previously seen, this covenant 
has two phases, the heavenly, or spiritual, 
and the earthly, or fleshly, the literal descendants 
of Abraham. The latter was the 
only one recognized by Abraham, the 
spiritual being hid until God's due time. 
During the Gospel Age the spiritual seed 
develops, becoming members of the body 
of the High Priest; growing up into the 
head. After this spiritual seed has been 
developed, then that phase of the covenant, 
understood by Abraham and all his 
descendants to this day, will be fulfilled. 
And its fulfilment hangs on the great spiritual 
High Priest, too. So says Paul: 
"As concerning the Gospel [the spiritual 
part of the covenant] they [the literal 
seed] are enemies for your sakes; but as 
touching the election they are [still] beloved 
for the fathers' sakes. For the gifts 
and callings of God are not things he 
will repent of. For this is my covenant TO 
THEM. There shall come out of Zion [the 
spiritual Church] the deliverer [this great 
High Priest, the servant of the Covenant 
—Jesus, the head, and the "little flock," 
his body], and shall turn away ungodliness 
from Jacob."- Rom. 11:26-29 . 

So then, after the body of Christ, the spiritual 



"seed," is complete, the Abrahamic 
covenant must have a fulfilment to the 
fleshly seed; that fleshly seed must become 
great "as the sand by the sea 
shore," as the heavenly seed is likened to 
"the stars of heaven." ( Gen. 22:17 .) 
They must first be turned to righteousness 
and truth, and such shall then become an 
agency through which the spiritual seed 
will operate, to bless all mankind with 
truth and knowledge. 

Thus the earthly phase of the Abrahamic 
covenant is seen still to depend on 
and to be upheld by the Great High 
Priest, who is also the mediator of the 
"New Covenant" which Jesus sealed or 
ratified with his own blood, in which sacrifice 
the members of his BODY have been 
privileged to join with him; and they 
will be also privileged to share with him 
in conferring upon mankind the blessings 
of that "New Covenant," when the day 
of sacrifice is ended and the reign of 
glory begins. ( Jer. 31:31 ; Ezek. 11:19 
and 36:24 ; Rom. 11:27 .) This New 
Covenant is typified by the back part of 
the ephod. 

The scarlet, blue, purple, etc., which 
composed the ephod, indicated the conditions 
of the Covenant; the scarlet showed 
how God provides redemption from 
the Adamic curse through the blood of 
the ransom; the white linen indicated the 
restoration of man to his original purity; 
the blue vouchsafes to him the ability to 
faithfully maintain his righteous character; 
the purple proclaims the restoration 
of the royalty of earth as possessed by 
Adam, earth's first monarch. All of these 
blessings woven together are made sure 
by the divine power of the anointed 
Priest, as shown by the interwoven thread 
of gold. Thus, Jehovah has laid both of 
these covenants, as they relate to men, upon 
one who is both mighty and willing to 
execute these glorious covenanted blessings 
—"in due time." 

The breastplate of judgment was placed 
on the front of the ephod. It was suspended 
by a gold chain from the clasps 
on the shoulder, and was fastened to the 
ephod by a lacer, through golden rings— 
this fastening being so concealed underneath 
that to the casual observer it might 
appear to be a part of the ephod. ( Exod. 28:26-28 .) 
This breastplate represented 



beautifully the Law: It was not a part of 
the Abrahamic covenant (ephod) but "it 
was added" to it. ( Gal. 3:19 .) As the 
Israelite regarded them (not seeing the 
hidden connection), the covenant to 
Abraham and "the law, which was 430 years 
after," were all one. But Paul shows us 
that there are two parts— two seeds— to 
this covenant, the spiritual and the natural; 
and that the Covenant and the Law 
were distinct, "to the end that the promise 
might be sure to all the see; not to 
that only which is of the Law, but to that 
also which is of the Faith." — Rom. 4:16 . 

This Law emblem (the breastplate) 
was one of the most beautiful of the High 
Priest's garments. It was made of the 
same materials as the ephod. It had in 
it, set in gold, twelve precious jewels, in 
which were engraved the names of the 
twelve tribes. It was bound on his heart, 
indicating that it was precious to him. 
As a "breastplate of righteousness" it 
covered him. That which condemned 
all imperfect ones was his pleasure— "I 
delight to do thy will, O my God; yea, 
thy law is within my heart."— Psa. 40:8 . 

The breast-plate was two spans long 
and one wide, folded in the middle, i.e., 
a span long and a span wide, double. The 
size, a span, indicated that the Law of 
God is the full measure of a perfect man's 
ability. Jesus, being perfect, was the only 
one who ever kept it fully, while the 
"little flock," his Body, has his righteousness 
imputed to them. 

Its being double, of the same size and 
measure, represents the letter and the 

spirit of the law. The front part contained 
the jewels and was hung by the 
gold chain to the gold clasps of the ephod; 
the under part was fastened to the 
ephod. This latter, tied to the ephod 
(covenant), seems to represent the law in 
letter as presented to fleshly Israel. The 
front part seems to illustrate the spirit 
of the law fulfilled in us, "who walk 
not after the flesh, but after the 
spirit." ( Rom. 8:4 .) The two are really 
ONE when rightly seen, yet the front 
part, only, bears the precious jewels. Pure 
gold being a symbol of divine things, the 
dependence of this part of the Law by a 
gold chain, from the gold clasps, seems to 
teach that the Law is divine; and we 
know that it is by divine strength that we 



walk not after the flesh, but after the 
spirit. It is this phase of the Law which 
bears the "jewels," set in gold, representative 
of the true Israel. "They shall be 
mine in the day that I come to make up 
my jewels." Thus embedded in gold 
(the divine nature) and upheld by the 
golden chain of divine promises, what 
wonder that "the righteousness of the 
Law is fulfilled in us." 

As Aaron stood there clothed in those 
beautiful robes so typically significant, and 
anointed with the holy oil, his head represented 
Jesus— the head of the priesthood, 
and his body represented the Church complete 
in him. How impressive and significant 
a type of the world's High Priest, undefiled, 
and clothed with power and authority 
to carry out Jehovah's covenants! 

We see the BODY again typified individually 
by the under-priests, who wore bonnets 
covering their own heads, to indicate 
that they were not the head of the Priesthood, 
but members of the body. God 
gave Jesus "to be the head over all things 
to the church which is his body." ( Eph. 1:22,23 .) 
It is for this reason that Paul 
insists that a woman's head should be 
covered, as indicating that she is not the 
head; the husband and wife being typical 
of Jesus and his Bride— the Church of 
the first-born. These under-priests were 
robed in linen garments and wore girdles. 
Their robes represented the imputed 
righteousness of Jesus, and their girdles 
showed that they also are servants of 
righteousness. 

As Aaron had the holy oil poured upon 
his head, so our Head, Jesus, was anointed 
with the antitypical oil— the Holy Spirit 
—when he was thirty years of age, 
on the banks of Jordan, at the time of 
his consecration. There he was "anointed 
with the oil of gladness above his 
fellows"— as head over all his joint-heirs. 
A measure of the Spirit is given to every 
man who thus consecrates; but Jehovah 
gave "not the Spirit by measure unto 
him." ( John 3:34 .) John saw and bore 
record that our High Priest was thus 
anointed ( John 1:32 ; Luke 4:1 ), and 
Peter adds his testimony ( Acts 10:38 ), 
"How God anointed Jesus of Nazareth 
with the Holy Spirit and with power." 

The anointing oil was poured only upon 
the head. The under priests were not 



anointed individually. Since they were 
recognized as members of the High 
Priest's body, they received their anointing 
through the head. Hence only those 
who are in Christ Jesus are partakers of 
the anointing which seals all those who 
shall be recognized as the heirs of God's 
promises, joint-heirs with Jesus Christ 
their Lord. 

The oil "ran down even unto the skirts 
of his garments" ( Psa. 133:2 ), thus representing 
how all the members of his 
body are to be partakers of the same 
anointing after their head. "The anointing 
which ye have received of him abideth 
in you." ( 1 John 2:27 .) This oil 
began to reach the body on the day of 
Pentecost, and flows on down through this 
Gospel Age, anointing all who are truly 
baptized into Christ, to be, with their 
Head, kings and priests unto God, and to 
reign a thousand years.— Rev. 20:6 . 

We thus see that Aaron, robed and 
anointed, represented the entire Christ— 
"the seed," in which God is about to 
bless all the families of the earth. But 
let us not forget that we have been viewing 
the Great Deliverer from God's 
standpoint, and with him looking down 
to the time of his manifestation— the dawn 
of the Millennial Day— when all the 
members have come into the body, and 
when the "holy oil" has run down "even 
to the skirts of his garments," anointing 
every member. Then he will begin 
the work of blessing mankind. For the 
glorious reign of this Kingly Priest, we 
constantly pray— "Thy Kingdom come, 
thy will be done on earth." 

R1237 : page 4 

CONSECRATING THE PRIESTHOOD. 

The consecration of the Priesthood 
( Lev. 8:14,33 ,) was typical of the consecration 
of the human nature of Jesus 
and his body, the Church, to the will of 
Jehovah— the obedience of Jesus, even 
unto death, and the obedience of the 
members of his body suffering the same 
with him. The whole body represented 
by Aaron's sons, as well as the Head represented 
personally by Aaron himself, are, 
by the antitypical sacrifices being made 
during the Gospel Age, CONSECRATED for 



their future work as kings and priests, to 

restore and rule and bless mankind. 

When this consecration is made, they 

have given their ALL. But their extremity 

is Jehovah's opportunity; and when 

they have consecrated all they had to destruction, 

and become joint-sacrificers with 

Jesus, their Redeemer, they are begotten 

of God to a new nature— spiritual; and 

not only so, but to the highest order of 

spiritual existence— the divine nature; and 

as such they are owned as spiritual sons of 

God.- Gal. 4:4,7 , and 2 Pet. 1:4 . 

This type shows these two natures: 
the new or divine nature is represented 
in Aaron and his sons, while the human 
nature is represented by a bullock. The 
bullock for the sin offering was brought, 
"and Aaron and his sons laid their hands 
upon the head" of it, thus saying, This 
sacrifice represents us. From that moment, 
all that happened to the bullock 
represents what was to be done to Jesus 
and to his body, the Church, as human 
beings. The bullock is delivered up to 
"the Law" (represented by Moses), to 
meet its demands against mankind in general. 
To meet the demands of the law, 
it must be slain— "And Moses slew it." 
He then applied the blood to the horns 
of the altar. The "finger" of the 

"Law" thus pointed out that the altar of 
earthly sacrifices was acceptable to God 
by reason of the shed blood (the life given), 
and that all who realize the power of 
the altar (horns are symbols of power) 
must recognize first the blood which sanctified 
it. The blood poured at the base 
of the altar shows that through the blood 
of the sacrifice (life given) even the earth 
was purchased back from the curse. See 
Eph. 1:14 : "Unto the redemption of 
the purchased possession." 

And Moses took the bullock, his hide, 
flesh, etc., and burnt them with fire without 
the camp. ( V. 17 .) Thus the humanity 
of the Christ complete— head and 
body— is made "a sin offering," suffering 
the destruction to which the world was 
doomed, and from which, by this sacrifice, 
it shall ultimately be delivered. But while 
their humanity is destroyed, as a vile 
thing in the eyes of the world, as represented 
by the burning of the bullock 
without the camp, God accepts the heart 
devotion which prompts the sacrifice, 



which says, "Lo, I come to do thy will, 
O God;" "I delight to do thy will, O 
my God." This is represented by the 
offering on the altar, of the fat and parts 
of the inward life-producing organism, 
as a "sweet savor" unto the Lord. 

Other features of the same consecration 
are shown by the two rams mentioned in 
verses 1 8 and 22 . The first mentioned is 
the ram for the burnt-offering. Aaron 
and his sons laid their hands upon its 
head, thus indicating that it represented 
them. It was killed; its blood sprinkled 
on the altar; and Moses "cut the ram 
into two pieces, and washed the inwards 
and legs in water" and "burnt the head 
and pieces, and the fat." Thus Jesus and 
his body, the Church, are being presented 
before God on the altar, during the entire 
Gospel Age. The head was laid there 
first, and since then all who are "dead 
with him," and cleansed, as in the type, 
by the washing of water— through the 
Word. Its burning on the altar shows 
how God accepts this sacrifice. It is "a 
sweet-smelling savor." 

The second ram, "the ram of consecration," 
shows what effect the sacrifice 
will have upon us, as the first showed how 
God received it. Aaron and his sons laid 
their hands upon its head— it represented 
them. And Moses slew it and took its 
blood (consecrated life) and put it upon 
each separately, thus showing that our 
consecration is an individual work. And 
he put it upon the tip of the right ear, 
and upon the thumb of the right hand, 
and upon the great toe of the right foot. 
Thus by our consecration we are enabled 
to have the "hearing of faith," and to appreciate 
God's promises as none but the 
consecrated can. Our hands are consecrated, 
so that whatsoever our hands find 
to do, we do it with our might as unto the 
Lord. Our feet are consecrated, so that 
henceforth we "walk not as other Gentiles," 
but "walk in newness of life," 

"walk by faith," "walk in the spirit," 

"walk in the light," and even "as ye 
received Christ, so walk in him."— 
Vs. 23,24 . 

The choice portions of the ram, its 
"inwards" and "fat," representing our 
best powers, were taken in the hands of 
the priests and waved; passed to and fro, 
before the Lord, representing the fact that 



a consecrated offering is not given to 
the Lord for a moment, a day, or a year, 
but that continually we keep our affections 
and powers uplifted before our 
Father, never ceasing until accepted of 
him as having finished our course. And 
Moses took them off their hands, God's 
acceptance being shown by fire. So we 
may not lay down or cease to offer our 
every power in God's service while we 
have them, and until all are consumed in 
his service. When the love ("fat") of 
our inmost being is laid upon the altar, it 
helps to increase the fire of God's acceptance. 
The more love there is connected 
with our consecration to God, the 
more quickly will it be accepted by him. 

Upon this "waive offering," while in 
their hands, were laid three cakes from a 
basketful. This offering was laid by Moses 
upon the hands of both the High Priest 
and the under priests. 

The first unleavened cake represented 
the actual purity of Jesus as a man, and 
the imputed purity of the Church as men, 
as attested by the Law (Moses). The 
second unleavened cake, mingled with oil, 
represented the indwelling spirit of God 
— sanctification. The third, a wafer, was 
mingled with honey, and represented our 
faith in the exceeding sweet and precious 
promises of glory, honor and immortality. 

Without these elements, it is impossible 
for our consecration to be complete, 
and hence acceptable, viz., Justification 
(purity), Sanctification by the Spirit 
through the belief of the truth, and faith 
in the promised Glorification. This consecration 
is in progress during the entire 
Gospel Age. 

The anointing oil mingled with the 
blood of consecration was sprinkled over 
them ( vs. 30 ), showing how we may know 
that our consecration is accepted— the 
Holy Spirit of God (the oil) blending 
with and witnessing to the spirit of sacrifice 
in the consecrated man (the blood), 
that he is a son of God.— Rom. 8:16 . 

The boiling of the flesh of consecration 
( vs. 3 1 ) was no part of the sacrifice; it 
was merely the preparing of the portion 
which they ate. It was all to be disposed 
of ( v. 32 ), showing how we are to be entirely 
consecrated and none of our time 
or powers wasted. 

The seven days of consecration ( vs. 33 and 35 ) 



show again that we are consecrated 

to God's service, not a part of our 

time only, but all of it. Seven is a complete 

number in Scripture, and signifies 

all, or the whole of whatever it is applied 

to— ("Seven Seals," "Trumpets," 

"Plagues," etc.). Verse 36 shows the 

completion of the work of consecration. 

There never was a time when it was 
more necessary than now, that all who are 
consecrated as priests should see to it that 
we "be dead with him," and our every 
ability waved before God, that he may 
accept and make use of our talents to his 
glory. Especially is this a matter of interest 
to those who believe that very soon 
all the members of the body will be accepted 
with the Head, a sweet savor to 
God; and that the work of self-sacrifice 
being then finished, the glorious work of 
blessing men and fulfilling the Covenant 
of God will begin. And if we fail to be 
among the priests now, during the time of 
consecration, we cannot expect to be 
of them when they begin their service for 
the people in the Kingdom, when these 
same priests (now despised of men but a 
"sweet savor to God,") shall have the 
title of King added, and with their head, 
Jesus, rule and bless all nations. ( Rev. 20:6 .) 
Do we earnestly desire to be among 
those who will sing to the praise of our 
great High Priest, "Thou hast made us 
unto our God Kings and Priests, and we 
shall reign on the earth"? If so, let us 
be fully consecrated now, for it is only 
"If we suffer with him we shall also reign 
with him."— 2 Tim. 2:12 . 

R1237 : page 4 

THE GREAT "DAY OF ATONEMENT." 
- LEV. 16:3-33 .-- 

In considering these types we must, to 
appreciate them, remember that each is a 
picture, by itself, of one particular part of 
the work of the world's High Priest; and 
so with the various ceremonies of the 
Day of Atonement. To understand it 
clearly, we must realize that while Jesus is 
our (the Church's) High Priest, yet in the 
more full and complete sense he is the 
Head, and we are the members of the 
body, of the world's High Priest, just as 
Aaron was High Priest or chief of the 



under priests, while in a general sense, 
the whole priesthood was one, designed to 
minister for Israel, who typified the world. 

These Levitical pictures primarily referring 
to the Head, when fully considered, 
refer to the body complete. For instance, 
the ceremony of anointing commenced 
with the Head, but the anointing 
applied to all the body during the 
entire Gospel Age, as we have seen. As 
the consecrating of the priesthood includes 
all the members of the body, and 
requires all of the Gospel Age to complete 
it, so also with the sin-offering, or the 
sacrifice of atonement: it commenced 
with the Head, and we the members of 
his body "fill up the measure of the sufferings 
of Christ which are behind." 
And these sufferings require all of the 
Gospel Age to complete them. The Day 
of Atonement, which in the type was but 
a twenty-four hour day, we see then in 
the antitype to be the entire Gospel Age. 
And with its close the sacrificing ceases 
and the glory and blessing commence, 
and the great High Priest of the world 
(Jesus and his bride, made ONE, Head 
and members complete), shall stand forth 
crowned a King and Priest after the 
Melchizedek order: King of Peace— a 
Priest upon his throne. 

There he will stand before the world 
(manifest, recognized but unseen by natural 
sight), not only as King and Priest, but 
also as the great Prophet— "A prophet 
shall the Lord your God raise up unto you 
of your brethren, like unto me [Moses]; 
every soul which will not hear that 
prophet shall be destroyed from among 
the people." When brought to perfect 
knowledge and ability, perfect obedience 
will be required, and all who will not 
render it will be cut off from life— the 
second death.— Acts 3:22,23 . 

In the end of the Jewish Age, Jesus 
offered himself individually to Israel as 
prophet, priest and king, typical or illustrative 
of the whole Body. As prophet, 
he taught them; as priest, "he offered up 
himself" ( Heb. 7:27 ); and as king he 
rode into their city at the close of his 
ministry. But they did not receive him 
in any of these offices. During the 
Gospel Age, his church or body has acknowledged 
him as "a teacher sent from 
God"— the great Prophet; as the "High 



Priest of our profession;" and as the 
rightful King. The Word of God teaches, 
however, that it is not by the Church 
only that he is accepted, but that he (together 
with his Body, the church) shall be 
the Prophet for the people, the Priest for 
all the people, and the King over all 
people, nations and tongues; "Lord of 
all," Priest of all, and Prophet or teacher 
of all. 

In the type of the Priests' consecration, 
we saw Aaron and his sons representing 
Jesus and his body as "new creatures," 
and a bullock representing their humanity; 
but in the type now to be considered, 
we find Aaron alone representing the entire 
Anointed One (head and body); and 
two different sacrifices, a bullock and a 
goat, are here used to represent the separateness, 
yet similarity in suffering, of the 
Body and its Head, as the "sin-offering." 
The bullock represented Jesus at 
the age of thirty years-the PERFECT MAN 
who gave himself and died on our behalf. 
The High Priest, as we have already seen, 
represented the "new" nature of Jesus, 
the anointed head, and also all whom 
God foreknew as members of his body. 
The distinction which is here made between 
the human and the "new creature" 
should be clearly understood and remembered. 
(See MILLENNIAL DAWN, Vol. 
I., Chap. X., and Vol. II., page 126.) 
"The man Christ Jesus, who gave himself" 
at thirty years of age, was he who 
was previously rich (of a higher nature), 
but who for our sakes became poor; that 
is, became a man, that he might give the 
ransom for men— a perfect man's life.— 

1 Cor. 15:21 . 

Since the penalty of man's sin was 
death, he must become a man, be "made 
flesh," or he never could redeem man. 
A man had sinned, and the penalty was 
death, and if Jesus would pay the penalty 
he must be of the same nature (but undefiled, 
separate from sin), and die, that 
mankind might in due time be liberated 
from death. To do this, the man Jesus 
made sacrifice "of all that he had" — 
glory as a perfect man, honor as a perfect 
man could claim it, and finally life as a 
perfect man. And this was all he had (except 
God's promise of a new nature and 
the hope which the promise generated), 
since he had exchanged his spiritual being 



or existence for the human which he made 
"a sin-offering" and which was typified 
by the bullock. 

But since to be our ransom his humanity 
must take our place in death, that 
humanity can never again be restored. 
If it were, we, the redeemed, would again 

R1237 : page 5 

come under the condemnation of death. 
But, thanks be to God, it remains a sacrifice 
forever, that we may be forever free from 
Adamic guilt and death. If, then, the 
Father would ever confer upon Jesus any 
honor, glory or life as a reward for his 
obedience even unto death, it must be a 
glory, honor and life on some other plane 
of being than the human, so as not to interfere 
with our ransom-price. 

Such was the promise of Jehovah to 
him, viz.: that he would highly exalt him 
above the human plane, and above his 
pre-human condition; above all angels, 
principalities and powers, to his own right 
hand (condition of chief favor, next to 
Jehovah), and make him a partaker of immortality 
—the divine nature. For these 
and other joys set before him, Jesus endured 
the cross, despising the shame, and is set 
down at the right hand of the Majesty on 
high.-Heb. 1:3 . 

The new nature which was received instead 
of the human, and as a reward for 
its sacrifice, is what is here typified by the 
Priest. While it is true that the sacrifice 
of the human was not finished until the 
cross, and that the divine nature was not 
fully received until the resurrection, three 
days later, yet, in God's reckoning— and 
as shown in this type— the death of Jesus 
(the bullock) was complete when Jesus 
presented himself a living sacrifice at 
baptism. There he reckoned himself 
dead —dead to all human aims or hopes 
of human glory, honor or life, in the 
same sense that we are exhorted to reckon 
ourselves dead indeed to the world, 
but alive as new creatures unto God.— 
Rom. 6:11 . 

This acceptance of Jesus by Jehovah at 
the time of consecration, as though dead 
indeed, was indicated by the anointing 
with the Holy Spirit— the earnest or guaranty 
of what he should receive when 
death had actually taken place. 



Thus considered, we see that the death 
of the bullock typified the offering by 
Jesus of himself, when he consecrated 
himself. This is in harmony with Paul's 
statement, that when Jesus consecrated, 
saying— "Lo, I come [as in the volume 
of the Scriptures it is written of me] to 
do thy will, O God"— to die, and redeem 
many— there he took away the first [i.e. 
set aside the typical sacrifices] that he 
might establish [or fulfil] the real sacrifice 
for sin. ( Heb. 10:7,9,14 .) Yes, 
there the slaying of the bullock occurred, 
and the three years of Jesus' ministry 
showed that all human will was dead, and 
the body reckoned so, from the moment 
of consecration. 

Jesus, the Anointed, filled with the Spirit, 
was the new, divine creature (though not 
perfected as divine— until the resurrection); 
and that relationship he always claimed, 
saying, The works that I do are not mine 
[as a man] but the Father that dwelleth 
in me, he doeth the works; the word 
which ye hear is not mine, but the Father's 
which sent me. ( John 14:10,24 .) 
Not my will [as a man] but thine [Father 
—the divine] be done [in and to this 
earthen vessel consecrated to death].— 
Mark 15:36 . 

When the bullock was slain [when Jesus 
consecrated], the work was done in 
"the Court," which we have seen typified 
the plane of human perfection or justification, 
the condition of faith in and 
harmony with God, the highest attainment 
of the flesh. Jesus was in this condition, 
a perfect man, when he offered himself 
(the bullock in the type) to God. 

Bearing in mind these distinctions, let 
us examine carefully the work of the typical 
Atonement Day, that we may more 
clearly understand the reality. Aaron 
was washed, in order to fitly represent the 
sinlessness of the "new creature." ("No 
one who has been begotten by God practices 
sin; because his seed abides in him, 
and he cannot sin, because he has been 
begotten by God."— 1 John 3:9 .— Diaglott.) 
The new nature cannot sin, and it 
keeps a constant watch over the old nature, 
reckoned dead, lest it come to life 
again. Aaron was clothed for the service 
of the Day of Atonement, not in his 
usual garments of glory and beauty, but 
in garments of sacrifice, with the "linen 



garments," emblems of purity— the righteousness 

of saints. The robe of linen 

was an earnest of the glorious robe to 

follow; the "linen girdle" represented 

him as a servant, though not so powerful 

as when at the close of the Day of Atonement 

he should be girdled with the "curious 

girdle" of the ephod; the mitre of 

linen, being the same as that belonging to 

the glorious apparel, proclaims his perfect 

righteousness now, as then. 

So the High Priest, the divine-minded, 
spirit-begotten one, though not yet born 
of the Spirit, was ready and able to accomplish 
the sacrifice of the atonement, 
and proceeded to do it as typified in Aaron. 
"Thus shall Aaron come into the Holy 
Place [the Most Holy] with a young bullock 
for a sin-offering and a ram for a 
burnt-offering. And Aaron shall offer 
his bullock of the sin-offering which is for 
[represents] himself, and make an atonement 
for himself [the members of his body 
—the under priests] and for his house 
[all believers, the entire "household of 
faith"— the Levites]. And he shall kill 
the bullock of the sin-offering which is for 
[represents] himself. And he shall take 
a censer full of burning coals of fire from 
off the altar before the Lord, and his 
hands full of sweet incense beaten small 
[powdered], and bring it within the vail 
[the first vail or "door"]. And he shall 
put the incense upon the fire before the 
Lord [the censer of coals of fire was set 
into the top of the golden altar in the 
"Holy," and the incense crumbled over 
it, gradually, yielded a smoke of sweet 
perfume], that the cloud of the incense 
[penetrating beyond the second vail] may 
cover the mercy-seat that is upon the testimony 
[or which covers the Law], that he 
die not."- Vs. 3,6,11-13 . 

Looking through the type to the antitype, 
let us now, step by step, compare 
the doings of Jesus with the prophetic 
picture. When Jesus had consecrated, he 
immediately took the sacrificed human life 
[blood of the bullock] to present it before 
God as the ransom of ours. But first, 
before entering the "Most Holy" [perfect 
spiritual condition], he must tarry in 
the "Holy" [spirit-begotten condition], 
where the offering of his perfect humanity 
is acceptable— a sweet perfume before 
Jehovah. 



As the High Priest took with him, along 
with the blood, fire from off the altar, 
and his two hands full of sweet incense 
to cause the perfume, so Jesus' fulfilment of 
his vow of consecration, during the three 
and a half years of his ministry, was a 
sweet and acceptable perfume to the Father, 
attesting at once the completeness 
of the consecration and the perfection 
of the sacrifice. The sweet incense 
beaten small represented the perfection 
of the man Jesus. The fire from the 
Brazen Altar represented the trials to 
which he was subject; and when the perfections 
of his being (incense) came in contact 
with the trials of life (fire), he yielded 
perfect obedience to the divine will— a 
sweet perfume. Thus is shown his temptation 
in all points, yet without sin. It 
was all consumed in the fire; so he yielded 
all in obedience. It was his "two 
hands full" which he offered, thus representing 
his full capacity and ability as being 
tested and required and yielded. 

But while Jesus as a "new creature" 
was thus within the "Holy," enjoying 
the light of the golden candlestick, fed 
by the bread of truth, and offering acceptable 
incense to Jehovah, let us look 
out into the "Court," and yet further 
out, beyond the Camp, and see another 
work progressing simultaneously. We 
last saw the bullock dead, in the Court; 
now the fat of it has been placed upon 
the Brazen Altar and with it the kidneys 
and various life-producing organs. They 
are burning furiously, for a bullock has 
much fat. A cloud of smoke, called "a 
sweet savor to God," rises in the sight 
of all who are in the "Court," viz.: 
Levites— believers. 

This represents how Jesus' sacrifice 
appeared to believing men. They saw 
the devotion, the self-sacrifice, the loving 
zeal (fat) ascending to God as a sweet 
and acceptable sacrifice. They well knew 
that with him God was ever well pleased. 
They knew from what they saw in the 
"Court" (in the flesh) that he was acceptable, 
though they could not see the 
sacrifice in its full grandeur and perfection 
as it appeared in Jehovah's sight (in the 
"Holy") a sweet incense on the Golden 
Altar. 

And while these two fires are burning 
—in the "Court" the "fat," and in the 



"Holy" the "incense," and their perfumes 
ascending at the same time, there is 
another fire "outside the camp." There 
the body of flesh is being destroyed. 
( Ver. 27 .) This represents Jesus' work 
as viewed by the world; to them it seemed 
foolish that he should spend his life in 
sacrifice. They saw not the spirit of 
obedience which prompted, as the Father 
saw it; they saw not the loving perfections 
as the believers (in the "Court" condition) 
saw them. No, nor did they see in 
him their ideal hero and leader; they saw 
only those elements of his character which 
condemned him, not being in condition 
to love and admire him. To them he was 
odious— an outcast— despised and rejected; 
and they hid their faces from him, 
as the Israelites turned from the burning 
carcass in the type. 

We see, then, how Jesus' life for three 
and a half years fills all three of these pictures: 
His sacrifice of perfect manhood 
was, in the sight of the world, foolishness 
and detestable; in the sight of believers, 
a sacrifice acceptable to God; in the sight 
of Jehovah, "a sweet incense." They 
all ended at once— at the cross. The 
bullock was entirely disposed of, the incense 
all offered, when Jesus cried, "It is 
finished," and died. Thus the man Christ 
Jesus gave himself a ransom for all. 

The incense from the Golden Altar 
having preceded him and been satisfactory, 
the High Priest passed under the 
second "Vail" into the "Most Holy." 
So with Jesus; having for three and a 
half years offered acceptable incense in the 
Holy, or consecrated condition, he passed 
beyond "the Vail, that is to say, his 
flesh." For three days he was under the 
Vail, in death; then he arose in the perfection 
of the divine nature beyond the 
flesh, "the express image of the Father's 
person." He was "put to death in the 
flesh, but quickened (made alive) in 

spirit," "sown a natural (human) body, 
raised a spiritual body." He was then 
in the "Most Holy" condition, the perfection 
of spiritual being. 

The next step was to present the blood 
( ver. 14 )— the evidence of the redemption 
—for "ye were redeemed... with 
the precious blood (sacrificed life) of 
Christ." ( 1 Pet. 1:19 .) This going into 
the presence of the Mercy Seat and 



sprinkling or presenting the blood was 
evidently fulfilled by Jesus when he, after 
forty days, ascended up on high, "there 
to appear in the presence of God FOR US," 
presenting on our behalf, and as the price 
of our redemption, the value and merit 
of the sacrifice just finished. 

We now leave the High Priest before 
the "mercy seat" while we go out to 
"the court" to witness another work. 
We quote: "And he shall take of the 
congregation of the children of Israel 
two kids of the goats for a sin-offering. 
And he shall take the two goats and present 
them before the Lord at the door 
of the Tabernacle. And Aaron shall cast 
lots upon the two goats; one lot for the 
Lord and the other for the scape-goat. 
And Aaron shall bring the goat upon 
which the Lord's lot fell and offer him 
for a sin-offering. But the goat on which 
the lot fell to be the scape-goat shall be 
presented alive before the Lord to make 
an atonement with him, to let him go for 
a scape-goat into the wilderness."— 
Vs. 5-10. 

These two goats, taken from Israel and 
brought into the "Court," typified or 
represented all who, coming from the 
world and accepting of Jesus' redemption, 
consecrate their lives to God's 
service. First taken from the "Camp" 
or world condition, they are brought into 
the "Court" or justified condition. 
There they present themselves before the 
Lord (represented by the goats at the door 
of the Tabernacle), desiring to become 
dead with Christ as human beings, and to 
enter the heavenly or spiritual condition 
as Jesus did; first, the spiritual mind, and 
secondly, the spiritual body— the "Holy" 
and the "Most Holy." 

But as not all who say, Lord! Lord! 
shall enter the Kingdom, so, too, some of 
those who say, "Lord, here I consecrate 
my all," promise more than they ever 
perform. They know not what they 
promise or what it costs of denial of self, 
to take up the cross daily and follow the 
bullock —to "go to him without the camp 
[to the utter disregard and destruction of 
the human hopes, etc.], bearing the reproach 
with him." ( Heb. 13:13 .) In 
this type, both classes of those who covenant 
to become dead with Christ are represented: 
those who do really follow in 



his footsteps as he hath set us an example, 
and those who, "through fear of [this] 
death, are all their lifetime subject to 
bondage." ( Heb. 2:15 .) The first class 
is the "Lord's goat," the second is 
the "scape-goat." Both of these classes 
[goats], as we shall see, will have a part in 
the atonement work; in bringing the world 
into complete harmony with God and his 
Law, when this "Day of Atonement," 
the Gospel Age, is ended. But only the 
first class ("the Lord's goat"), who follow 
the Leader, are a part of the 

"sin-offering." 

The casting of lots to see which goat 
would be the "Lord's" and which the 
"scapegoat" indicates that God has no 
choice as to which of them shall win the 
prize. It shows that God does not arbitrarily 
select which of the consecrated 
shall become partakers of the divine 
nature and joint-heirs with Christ our 
Lord. Every believer who presents himself 
is acceptable, and he who keeps his 
covenant and performs the sacrifice is represented 
in the "Lord's goat." Those 
who draw back are represented in the 
"scapegoat." 

To return to the High Priest: After 
having sprinkled the "mercy seat" [literally, 

R1237 : page 6 

the Propitiatory, or place of satisfaction] 
with the blood of the bullock 
seven times (perfectly), "Then shall he 
kill the goat of the sin-offering, that is 
for the people, and bring his blood within 
the Vail, and do with that blood as he did 
with the blood of the bullock, and sprinkle 
it upon the Mercy Seat and before the 
Mercy Seat." ( Vss. 14,15 .) In a word, 
all that was done with the bullock was repeated 
with the "Lord's goat." It was 
killed by the same High Priest; its blood 
was sprinkled just the same; its fat, etc., 
burned on the altar in the Court also. 
[It is worthy of notice that a prime bullock 
is always very fat, while a goat is a 
very lean animal. So Jesus, as represented 
by the bullock, had a great abundance of 
the fat of zeal and love, for his sacrifice, 
while his followers, represented by the 
goat, are lean in comparison.] The body 
of the "Lord's goat" was burned in like 
manner as that of the bullock— "outside 



the camp." 

Paul explains that only those animals 
which were sin-offerings were burnt outside 
the camp. And then he adds, "Let 
us go to him without the camp, bearing 
the reproach with him." ( Heb. 13:11,12 .) 
Thus is furnished us unquestionable 
evidence not only that the followers 
of Jesus are represented by this "Lord's 
goat," but also that their sacrifice, reckoned 
in with that of their Head, Jesus, 
constitutes part of the sin-offering. "The 
reproaches of them that reproached thee 
are fallen upon me."— Psa. 69:9 . 

The "Lord's goat" represented all of 
the Lord's "little flock" of faithful followers. 
They are all alike; they all come 
by the same "narrow way;" so what is 
true of the company as a whole, is true of 
each one in it. Therefore the "Lord's 
goat" typifies each one and his sacrifice, 
except that the whole must be complete 
and the sacrifice of all ended, before the 
"blood" of the goat (representative of 
the entire Body of Christ) will be presented 
on the Mercy Seat. 

The blood sprinkled on and before the 
Mercy Seat was in the design of a cross, 
with the top or head of the cross on the 
Mercy Seat. This is shown by the description: 
"He shall sprinkle it with his 
finger upon the Mercy Seat eastward (toward 
the "Vail") and before (across, in 
front of) the Mercy Seat." This is the 
full end of the sin-offerings for the sins 
of the world. The bullock, as we have 
seen, was the sin-offering for the "household 
of faith" (the under-priests and Levites), 
and the goat was the sin-offering 
"for the people," Israel— type of all the 
world who desire to be God's people. 

Thus we see that this entire Gospel Age 
is an age of suffering and death, to those 
who sacrifice the human nature in order to 
become partakers of the divine. Just as 
soon as the sacrifice of Jesus on behalf of 
his "body" and "house" was complete 
and presented before the Father, came the 
evidence of his acceptance in the Pentecostal 
baptism. And his anointing (symbolized 
by the oil), which came upon the 
church, continues ever since on all the 
living members of the High Priest's body. 
This impartation of the divine mind to 
those consecrated ones was the energy in 
them which killed each, as the "Lord's 



goat." This coming of the Holy Spirit, 
the Lord's power or "hand," at Pentecost, 
is shown in the type ( vs. 15 ) by the High 
Priest coming to the door of the Tabernacle 
and laying his hands upon the 
"Lord's goat" and killing it. Just as the 
Spirit of the Father enabled Jesus to sacrifice 
himself, represented by the killing of the 
bullock, so it is the same spirit, the Spirit, 
power or influence of God, through 
Christ, the spirit or influence of the truth, 
upon the Lord's goat class, which enables 
them to crucify themselves as men— to 
kill the goat— in hope of the promised 
glory, honor and immortality of the divine 
nature. 

It was thus, for instance, that Paul, 
when possessed of this spirit of the Leader 
and Head, could reckon all things but 
loss and dross that he might win [a membership 
in] Christ and be found in him. 
Inspired by this hope and spirit he could 
say: "I [the new creature] live, yet not 
I" [the old creature represented in the 
consecrated goat]; it is being consumed 
with the reproach and contempt of the 
world outside the camp. Paul's earthly 
affections and powers had all been presented 
to God, a living sacrifice; thereafter 
it was Christ living in him, the hope 
of glory— Christ's mind, crucifying and 
keeping under the depraved but justified 
human nature and its will. 

While actually in the world, he was not 
of it; and to such an extent was this true 
that he could say: "The life which I 
now live, I live by the faith of the Son 
of God." Yes, by faith he had become 
a partaker of the divine nature, and was 
in the "Holy," feeding on the "holy 
bread," and enlightened continually 
by the light from the "Golden Candlestick." 
Thus furnished with knowledge 
and strength, he was able to offer "incense" 
acceptable to God through Jesus 
Christ: i.e., Paul's sacrifice, because of 
Jesus' merit imputed to it, was acceptable 
to God. Thus he kept the goat nature 
always sacrificed. So, too, the same 
thing has been done by the other members 
of this "Lord's goat" company, 
though none have been so widely known. 
Paul's sacrifice sent up a very rich perfume; 
his was a sacrifice of very sweet 
odor to God, yet like ours was acceptable 
to God, not on account of its own value, 



but because of being offered upon and partaking 
of the merit of Christ the Redeemer, 
the Golden Altar. 

As the goat filled up that which was 
behind of the sin-offering, completing 
the sacrifice begun by the bullock, so does 
the "little flock," following after Jesus, 
"fill up that which is behind of the afflictions 
of Christ." (Col. 1:24.) Not 
that our sacrifices are really valuable, as 
was our Lord's, for he alone was perfect 
and suitable for a ransom, for a sin-offering; 
the acceptableness of our offerings is 
through his merit first imputed to us, justifying 
us, and then through the grace 
which permits us to offer our justified 
selves in with our Lord's perfect sacrifice, 
that we may share also in his future work 
of blessing all with restitution. 

The hour must some time come when 
the sacrifice of the last members of this 
"Lord's goat" will be consumed and 
the sin-offering forever ended. That we 
are now in the close of the "Day of 
Atonement," and that the last members 
of the Lord's goat are now on the altar, 
we firmly believe from evidences elsewhere 
given. Soon the last members of His 
Body shall pass beyond the second Vail- 
beyond the flesh— into the perfection of 
the divine nature, already commenced in 
the new mind or will which controls these 
mortal bodies. The passing of the second 
Vail means to the body what it meant 
to the head; it means, in the presenting 
of the blood of the goat, what it 
meant in the presenting of the blood of 
the bullock. The body of the Priest 
passing the second Vail, bearing the blood 
of the goat, represents the passing of the 
Body of Christ entirely beyond human 
conditions into the perfection of the divine 
nature, when we shall be like Christ 
Jesus who now is "the express image of the 
Father's person." O blessed hope! "I 
shall be satisfied when I awake in thy likeness," 
was spoken prophetically for Jesus; 
and how sublime the promise that "we 
shall be like him." If we may but win 
this prize for which we run, then- 
Perish every fond ambition, 

All we've sought of earth or known; 
Yet how rich is our condition, 

Heavenly prospects now we own. 
The Most Holy reached, the evidence 
of the sacrifice of the BODY for the people 



will be presented, as typified by the blood 
of the goat sprinkled on the Mercy Seat. 
When presented it will be accepted for 
"the people," as was that of our glorious 
Leader accepted for himself [his body] 
and house [the household of faith]. Thus 
the reconciling work will be accomplished; 
sin and condemnation will be fully 
covered for all, and the great work of giving 
to the world the grand results of that 
atonement will speedily follow its completion; 
just as the blessing of Pentecost 
upon the "body" and "household" 
speedily followed the acceptance of Jesus' 
sacrifice after he passed beyond the Vail 
of flesh and presented our ransom-sacrifice 
before God. The sprinkling of all 
things with the blood shows that the 
"blood" is full satisfaction, and also indicates 
that the work with the scape-goat, 
which followed, was not part of the sin-offering 
and was not needful to complete 
the "reconciling." Hence in it we must 
see some other object and significance. 

THE SCAPE-GOAT. 

"And when he had made an end of 
reconciling the Holy ["Most Holy"] 
and the Tabernacle of the congregation 
[the "Holy"] and the Altar [in the 
"Court"] he shall bring the live goat: 
and Aaron shall lay both his hands upon 
the head of the live goat [scape-goat] and 
confess over him all the iniquities of 
the children of Israel [typical of the 
world], and all their transgressions in all 
their sins, putting them upon the head of 
the goat, and shall send him away by the 
hand of a fit man [any one convenient] 
into the wilderness."— Vs. 20-22 . 

As before expressed, we understand that 
this "scape-goat" which was presented 
for sacrifice with the other, but failed to 
sacrifice, and to walk in the steps of the 
bullock, represents a very large class of 
God's children who have made the covenant 
to become dead to the world, and to 
sacrifice their justified human nature, but 
who fail to actually do so. 

While this "scape-goat" class has existed 
throughout this Gospel Age, the one 
goat and the work done with it, at the 
close of the "Day of Atonement," is 
representative in a general sense of the 
dealing with each individual of that company 



during the age, though it specially 
illustrates this class in the end of the age 
of sacrifice. 

Let us look first at God's proposed 
dealing with members of this company 
who will be living when the work of sin-offering 
is complete— the last members of 
the scape-goat company— and then see 
how it will apply to the preceding members 
of the same class. 

Let us remind you that we are now 
dealing with things future, after the "sin-offering.' 
The Lord's goat is not yet 
wholly consumed, consequently the "little 
flock," represented by the body of the 
Priest, has not yet gone beyond the second 
"Vail" into the condition of spirit 
perfection; and the special work with the 
living "scape-goat" is after this. 

Other Scriptures ( Rev. 7:9,13-17 and 

1 Cor. 3:15 ) show us that there will be a 
"great company" who during this age 
have entered the race for the grand prize 
of joint-heirship with Jesus, who fail to 
"so run" as to obtain it; and that they, 
though "castaways" as regards the prize 
( 1 Cor. 9:27 ), are nevertheless objects of 
the Lord's affection and love, who, by his 
providences in the circumstances of life, 
will cause them to come through "great 
tribulation," thus accomplishing for them 

"the destruction of the flesh, that the 
spirit may be saved in the day of the Lord 
Jesus." ( 1 Cor. 5:5 .) Notice, they consecrated 
their justified human life, and 
God accepted of the consecration and 
reckoned them, according to their covenant, 
dead as human beings and alive as 
new —spiritual— creatures. But, by their 
failure to carry out the contract, they are 
cut off from the Priesthood, from membership 
in the Body of Christ— "Every 
branch in me that beareth not fruit, he 
taketh it away."— John 15:2 . 

These are in a pitiable condition: they 
have failed to win the prize, therefore cannot 
have the divine nature; nor can they 
have restitution to perfect humanity with 
the world, for in their consecration, all 
human rights and privileges were exchanged 
for divine hopes— for the opportunity 
to run for the divine nature. But 
though not faithful and not overcomers, 
the Lord loves them, and will deliver 
those who through fear of death (fear of 
contempt— fear of the reproach borne by 



the bullock and goat, beyond the Camp 
—in the Wilderness, the separated, or 
dead condition) were all their life time 
subject to bondage— bondage of fear of 
men and men's traditions and opinions 
which always bring a snare, and keep back 
from full obedience to God— even unto 
death.- Heb. 2:15 . 

Through the favor of the High Priest, 
this great company are to go into "great 
tribulations" and have the flesh destroyed. 
This will not make of them "overcomers" 
nor give them membership in 
the Body-the Bride of Christ. It will 
not give them a place on the throne as 
Kings and Priests, but a position "before 
the throne," as perfect spiritual 
beings, though not of the highest order 
of the spiritual— the divine; not possessed 
of the Crown of life, Immortality, 
yet "like unto the angels." These shall 
serve God in his Temple, though they will 
not be members of that symbolic Temple 
which is the Christ.- Rev. 7:14,15 . 

This class will be sent to the Wilderness 
condition of separation from the world, 
forced thither by "the man of opportunity" 
—adverse circumstances— there to be 
buffeted by adversity until they learn the 
vanity, deceitfulness and utter worthlessness 
of the world's approval, and until 
all human hopes and ambitions die, and 
they are ready to say, God's will, not 
mine, be done. The world is ever ready 
to scorn and cast out the chastened and 
afflicted ones, though they earnestly covet 
its deceiving smile and its empty honors. 
The body of the scape-goat was not 

burned in the wilderness; only sin-offerings 
(the bullock and the Lord's goat) 
were burned. ( Heb. 13:11 .) The burning 
of the sin-offering represented the 
steady, continuous submission of that class 
to the fiery ordeal of suffering— "faithful 
(willing sacrifices) unto death." Both 
classes suffer even unto death of the human 
will and body; but the first class die 
willingly; they are destroyed by continual 
crucifying of the flesh, as shown in 
the symbol by fire burning continuously 
until there is nothing more to burn. The 
second class is simply sent to the wilderness 
and there left to die unwillingly. Their 
love of the world's approval perishes with 

R1237 : page 7 



the world's neglect and scorn and reproach; 
and their spiritual nature ripens 
and blooms into life. 

Not only will this be true markedly 
with the last members of this scape-goat 
class shortly, but the same has been fulfilled 
to some extent all along; for there 
has always been a class, and a large one, 
which yielded to death only by compulsion; 
which, instead of willingly sacrificing, 
suffered "destruction of the flesh." 
( 1 Cor. 5:5 .) The classes represented by 
both goats have been developing side by 
side throughout the age. 

When the "little flock" have all gone 
beyond the Vail, the hand of the Lord 
will set free those bound ones, "who, 
through fear of death [to the world], are 
all their lifetime subject to bondage," by 
overthrowing the many theories, creeds 
and traditions of men and great nominal 
church organizations, in and to and by 
which they are held and hindered from 
hearing and obeying the Lord's voice. 

Forced into freedom by "Babylon's" 
fall, while realizing that the great prize 
has been lost, they will then hear the 
High Priest's voice and find themselves 
forced into the Wilderness condition 
of separation and flesh destruction. At 
no other time, perhaps, have there been so 
many consecrated ones bound as at present; 
but through all the age there have 
been some. 

All the consecrated ones, of both classes, 
pass through great trials and afflictions, 
yet by one class they are esteemed 
light afflictions, taken joyfully, which they 
rejoice to be accounted worthy to suffer. 
Theirs is a willing sacrifice, like that of 
the Head. To the other class, they are 
burdensome, great afflictions, almost without 
joy— an enforced destruction of the 
flesh. And proportionately different are 
their positions and rewards at the end of 
the race. 

THE BURNT OFFERING. 

"And Aaron shall come into the Tabernacle 
of the congregation [the "Holy"] 
and shall put off the linen garments which 
he put on when he went into the Holy 
place [the "Most Holy"] and he shall 
leave them there; and he shall wash his 



flesh with water in the holy place [the 

"Court"] and put on his [usual] garments 

[the garments of glory and beauty] 

and come forth and offer his Burnt-offering 

and the Burnt-offering of the people, 

and make [another illustration] an atonement 

for himself [the body— the church 

—the "little flock"] and for the people. 

- Vss. 23 and 24 . 

The burnt-offering consisted of two 
rams ( Vss. 3 and 5 .): one representing 
the bullock and the other the Lord's 
goat. These, being alike, show the harmony 
and oneness of the sacrifices made 
by Jesus and his footstep-followers; that 
in God's sight they are all one sacrifice. 
"For both he that sanctifieth [Jesus] and 
they who are sanctified [the little flock] 
are all one; for which cause he is 
not ashamed to call them brethren."— 

Heb. 2:11 . 

This is further shown in the treatment 
of each of these sacrifices. The rams of 
"burnt-offering" were cut in pieces and 
washed and the pieces laid unto the head 
upon the altar and burned, making sweet 
perfume— a burnt-offering of sweet savor 
unto Jehovah. Since both rams were thus 
treated, it shows that in Jehovah's estimation 
they are all parts of one sacrifice; 
the members joined to the head, acceptable 
as a whole, as the atonement for the 
sins of the world— thus satisfying the 
claims of justice on behalf of the whole 
world of sinners. As the sin-offerings 
illustrate the necessary crucifixion and 
death of the Redeemer, so the burnt-offering 
following illustrates God's manifested 
acceptance of the same sacrifice. So 
let us not forget that God does not manifest 

his acceptance of the "better sacrifices" 
than bulls and goats, until that 
sin-offering is complete and the true High 
Priest is robed in the honor and glory of 
his office, represented in the change of 
garments. During the time of making 
the sin-offering he wore only the white 
linen garments; afterward (and usually) 
he wore the glorious garments illustrative 
of the honor and glory conferred on him. 
During the Gospel age the sin-offerings 
progress and no honor is bestowed upon 
the priests, but at its close comes the outward 
manifestation of God's approval 
and the acceptance of it in the putting of 
glory and honor upon the priests who 



made the sacrifice, and in the blessing of 

the people for whose sins they atoned. 

The burnt-offering must be burned on 
the altar in the "Court," thus teaching 
that God will manifest his acceptance of 
the sacrifice of the whole body (head and 
pieces or members) in the sight of all in 
the "Court" condition, viz.: to all believers. 
But before this manifestation to 
believers, of God's acceptance of the 
work, is accomplished, the "scape-goat 
company" are sent away, and the robes 
of the Priest changed. As the white robes 
worn throughout the work of sacrifice 

covered the body and represented the justification 
of the body, their purity in God's 
sight through Christ, so now the garments 
of glory and beauty represent the glories 
of position and work in the future, after 
the new creatures have been perfected, 
after they have gone beyond the "Vail." 
The washing with water seems to show 
that though the white garments are laid 
aside, the body now clothed in majesty 
of power is still pure and that the sins of 
the people for which atonement had been 
made do not attach to or contaminate the 
purity of the priest. Thus ends this type 
of the development of the priesthood and 
the satisfaction for the world's sins. 

We tarry to glance at a few verses of 
this chapter ( Lev. 16 ) not directly connected 
with the narrative. 

Vs. 17 . "There shall be no man in the 
tabernacle of the congregation when he 
goeth in to make an atonement in the 
holy place [the "Most Holy"] until he 
come out, and have made an atonement 
for himself, and for his household, and for 
all the congregation of Israel." This 
limitation applies only to this special day, 
for the Apostle says— "The priests went 
always into the first tabernacle [the 
"Holy"] accomplishing the service, but 
into the second [tabernacle— the "Most 
Holy"] went the high priest alone, once 
every year" [on this "Day of Atonement," 
which was repeated annually]. 
- Heb. 9:7 . 

The privileges of the Tabernacle are 
only for those who are priests— members 
of the body of the Head Priest— so that 
whether as now, in the first of these heavenly 
conditions (spiritual minded, new 
creatures in Christ Jesus), or whether as 
we hope to be soon, in the second or perfected 



spiritual condition, it will in 
either or both cases be because we are in 
Christ Jesus, new creatures— no longer 
men. "For ye are not in the flesh [human], 
but in the spirit [spiritual, new 
creatures], if so be that the Spirit of God 
dwell in you."— Rom. 8:9 . 

Vs. 28 . "And he that burneth them 
[the bullock and the goat of sin-offering] 
shall wash his clothes, and bathe his flesh 
in water, and afterward he shall come into 
the camp." This seems to teach that 
those principally instrumental in reproaching, 
reviling and destroying the humanity 
both of Jesus [the bullock] and his 
"little flock" [the goat] will have no 

special punishment for it, because they 
did it ignorantly— at the same time accomplishing 
God's plan. "Father, forgive 
them, they know not what they do," 
was a truthful prayer and from one whom 
the Father heard always. They may wash 
and be clean and come into the camp— 
i.e. into the same condition as the remainder 
of the world, all of whom are sinners, 
and all of whom are ransomed from 
Adamic depravity and death. 

Vs. 26 . "And he that let go the goat for 
the scape-goat shall wash his clothes and 
bathe his flesh in water, and afterward 
come into the camp." This teaches the 
same lesson relative to those who shall be 
instrumental in bringing the trouble, and 
consequent destruction of the flesh, upon 
the "great company," represented by 
the scape-goat. 

THE BLESSINGS FOLLOWING THE 
"DAY OF ATONEMENT" 
SACRIFICE. 

In the type the "Day of Atonement" 
thus ended; and, typically cleansed from 
sin, Israel was reckoned no longer defiled 
and separated from God, but now made 
at-one with God. Justice no longer 
condemned, but bade them realize God's 
reconciled presence in their midst, to bless 
and protect and direct into the Canaan 
of rest and peace. 

In the Antitype, the "Day of Atonement" 
is this Gospel Age, during which 
Jesus and his body, the Church (through 
his redemption and favor), make sacrifice 
to justice, in full satisfaction of the 
Adamic sin. When the work of reconciliation 



is complete, God will recognize 
mankind and place his sanctuary among 
men. Then will be fulfilled that which 
was written: "The Tabernacle of God 
[the glorified Church] is with men, and 
he will dwell with them, and they shall be 
[become] his people, and God himself 
shall be with them and be their God. 
And God shall wipe away all tears from 
their eyes; and there shall be no more 
death, neither sorrow, nor crying, neither 
shall there be any more pain, for the 
former things [the reign of Satan, sin and 
death] are passed away. And he that sat 
upon the throne said, Behold, I make all 
things new."— Rev. 21:3-5 . 

But while all these blessings shall result 
from the establishment of God's residence, 
or sanctuary, among men ["I will 
make the place of my feet glorious;"— 
"earth is my footstool"], yet its blessing 
will be a gradual work, requiring the Millennial 
Age for its full accomplishment; 
i.e., death, pain, and tears will be in 
process of destruction (wiping away), but 
not completed until the end of the Millennial 
Age. 

The gradual process by which man will 
be brought into perfection of being and 
fulness of harmony with Jehovah is well 
illustrated in the typical sacrifices of 
Israel, made after the Day of Atonement, 
the antitypes of which will be fulfilled 
during the next age. 

To rightly divide and understand these 
typical sacrifices, it must be recognized 
that the present Gospel Age is the Day of 
Atonement toward God for the general 
sin of mankind; and that all sacrifices 
coming after the Day of Atonement in 
the type, represent fulfilments or antitypes 
due after the Gospel Age is ended— during 
the Millennial Age— when the world 
of sinners may become reconciled to, or 
at-one with, God. 

Thus we may see that at-one-ment has 
two parts— first, Justice at-one with, and 
not any longer condemning and destroying, 
Adam and his children on account of 
his sin; and secondly, the sinner being 
brought to at-one-ment with God's righteous 
laws, recognizing them and obeying 
them. The first of these phases of at-one-ment, 
or reconciliation, is brought about 
entirely by the Priest's sacrifice in the 

"Day of Atonement" sacrifices. * 



The other— the reconciling of the world 
to God, or the bringing of them into full 
at-one-ment and harmony with God, will 
be accomplished during the next age by 
the "Royal Priesthood," who, typified 
by Moses, will be the Great Prophet whom 
the Lord will raise up to teach and to 
govern the people, and if they will not 
give heed to him, they shall be cut off from 
life— die the second death.— Acts 3:23 . 

Be it clearly seen that though the saints, 
the followers of Jesus, are permitted as represented 
in the Lord's goat to share in and 
be members of the sin-offering on behalf 
of the world, it is not because of their 
being by nature purer or better than the 
world; for the entire race of Adam was condemned 
in him; and of them "there is 
none righteous, no, not one" ( Rom. 3:10 ), 
and none could give a ransom for his 
brother.- Psa. 4:97 . 

They share in the sacrifice for sins as a 
favor, in order that by so doing they may 
share with Jesus the promised divine 
nature and be his companions and joint-heirs. 
To permit and enable them to 
offer themselves acceptable sacrifices, 
the benefits of Jesus' death were applied 
to these first, justifying or cleansing them. 
Thus it is his death that blesses the world 
through his body, the Church. 



*The sacrifices relative to the consecration of 
the priests, and parts of two types yet to be 
considered, we regard, of course, as being the same 

sacrifices as those above mentioned as taking 
place on the Day of Atonement— they all being 
merely different views or pictures of the same 
sacrifices. 



R1237 : page 7 

EXTRACTS FROM INTERESTING LETTERS. 

Iowa. 
DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I have been 
thinking that perhaps I ought to be better 
known to you, and that I have not the 
advantage of that spiritual sympathy which 
so builds up the brethren who neglect 
not the assembling of themselves together, 
which bodily assembling has now, to some 



of us, to be substituted by letters. I saw 
you and heard you at the meeting in 
April, and perhaps you will recall me 
personally. I had then many, many things 
I wanted to talk with you about, but I found 
it impossible to wait over until you would 
have leisure. But how I was blessed and 
strengthened by that meeting ! I have been 
a careful reader of the WATCH TOWER and 
both volumes of "DAWN," and the spirit 
of that assembly and the inspiration of the 
meeting— the seeing, for the first time, 
faces of men and women who believe as I 
do and whose hope was also my hope— was 
indeed blessed. I know that you are very 
busy with that which the Master has intrusted 
to your hand, and I write this 
letter, knowing that occasional words of 
sympathy and love are encouraging, and 
that a word from me may help to build 
you up. I cannot tell you now what the 
words have done for me, which the Master 
has spoken by you through the TOWER 
and DAWN. For several years I was in 
the pastorate of the M.E. Church and a 
member of the Upper Iowa Conference. 
The study of the Bible took Methodism 
out of me long before I knew of your writings. 
I associated a few months with the 
Campbellites; but they were not the people 
my heart yearned for, and their doctrines 
and practices were out of harmony 
with THE WORD. I turned my attention 
to the Plymouth Brethren— read 
their literature, but they are the worst 
"hide-bound" of any, though they do 
have some truth and are zealous for the 
atonement. 

To one looking at me from the outside 
only, I would seem to be a wanderer, having 

R1237 : page 8 

had little stability, having had no 

fixed home since leaving the M.E. Church. 

But God knows differently, and I am 

persuaded that you also can understand 

how that a man whose daily prayer was, 

"O! send out thy light and thy truth, 

and let them lead me," would become 

very peculiar in the eyes of those who 

are asleep in Zion. I have had some extremely 

painful experiences which would 

not have fallen upon me had I remained 

a pastor in the Church. But I am comforted 

as was our brother Paul, that these 



light afflictions work out for us a far 
more exceeding and eternal weight of 
glory. And since I have learned to walk 
in the light as he is in the light, I have 
also grasped the meaning of Phil. 4:7 , 
THE PEACE OF GOD. 

I have seven children, none of them yet 
self-supporting, and as my salary stopped 
when I stopped preaching for the people, I 
have had enough to do to feed and clothe 
them. I have earnestly desired to be at work 
wholly in the Gospel, but the care of 
my family has tied me to my business, 
but my heart was all the time with the 
Lord. 

Religiously I am alone, excepting the 
sympathy of wife and children, and the 
Lord is good to us in our little family 
Bible readings every morning. 

R1238 : page 8 

If you are very busy do not stop to 
answer this letter, only do not forget a friend 
of all those who love the Lord in deed and 
in truth. Your brother in faith and hope, 
J. H. GILRUTH. 

page 8 

Indiana. 

DEAR SISTER RUSSELL:-Although it 
has been quite a long time since the meeting 
at Allegheny, which all enjoyed so 
much, I thought you might be pleased to 
know of the blessed effect of that meeting 
upon some who were not there. My 
husband came home so full of the Holy 
Spirit that I immediately realized my 
need of a deeper work in my heart. He, 
through the Holy Spirit, brought me to 
see what a blessed privilege I had of 
making a complete consecration, and 
strange as it may be, I have been until 
now trying to feel the evidence that I was 
accepted. I did not receive the evidence as 
long as I was expecting it, but just as I determined 
to stand on his promises without a 
sensible evidence, then the peace that passeth 
all understanding filled my soul, and he 
has made me to rejoice in his mighty love. 

These words express my feelings— 
"Oh! bliss of the purified, 
Bliss of the free, 

I plunge in the crimson tide 
Opened for me." 



My prayers are ever with you, and all 
the Lord's children. Oh! how sweet it 
is to feel his presence and protecting 
care. I am so glad that the messengers 
ever found us, and now I feel like carrying 
the glad tidings to some others of the 
Lord's children who are still in Egyptian 
darkness. 

I know that you will rejoice with me 
in my new-found treasure. 

Your Sister in His service, Mrs. N. OWEN. 

New York. 
DEAR BROTHER AND SISTER RUSSELL: 

—Indeed it is a pleasant surprise that 
our blessed Lord has helped you to 
prepare a volume of poems and hymns for 
us hungering souls, and I have so much 
wanted something of the kind from you, 
but when I was writing I could not think 
to ask it. Praise the Lord, his guidance 
is so wonderful, faithful and plain. 

The bit of history entitled Harvest 
Gathering and Sifting is very interesting 
and satisfactory to me; 'tis no offence, 
but with thankfulness I read and re-read. 
May the Lord continue his help in the 
glorious work to his willing and obedient 
servants. 

I enclose one dollar, for which please 
send me one hymn book, one hundred 
envelopes and one volume of paper bound 
DAWN, Vol. I., and I will be thankful. 
Mrs. A. H. TEFFT. 

Indiana. 

DEAR WATCH TOWERr-Enclosed please 
find $1.50 for ten volumes of MILLENNIAL 
DAWN. Every one wants both volumes, 
and the third also as soon as it is out. 
All that I have sold to thus far want the 
third volume— some of those that have already 
read the first and second are quite 
impatient for the third. I am not able to 
canvass for MILLENNIAL DAWN, but will 
recommend and sell it as I have opportunity. 
I send enclosed a letter from a 
friend, which speaks for itself. Please 
send the books in paper cover without 
delay. Mrs. H. B. LUCAS. 

[The letter referred to will be interesting 
to you all, hence we give it below.] 

MY DEAR FRIEND: -I have read and I 
am now re-reading "MILLENNIAL DAWN." 
It is not my own book, I borrowed it from 
a party who got it through you. I now 



want it for myself, for it is a "book to 
keep," to study and ponder. I have 
studied the Bible more or less from childhood, 
and many things of course were very 
plain; but many more very much hidden 
in mystery. This book is indeed a "helping 
hand." The Bible opens up grandly 
in the light of unfolding prophecy. I 
never felt such a grand sweep of happiness 
and perfect peace enwrap my whole 
being as while I have been reading this 
author's ideas. They seem sound. I am 
going through more slowly this time, with 
the Bible in my hand. The first time I 
was too much entranced to stop to hunt 
quotations. I rushed on and on at full 
gallop. Once the book fell on my lap 
and while the tears were actually drenching 
my face, I began singing the blessed 
old hymn, 
"All hail the power of Jesus' name, 
Let angels prostrate fall! 

Bring forth the royal diadem, 
And crown him Lord of all." 

Blessing and glory and honor and praise 
belong to him forever. I am living in a 
new world; even old things have become 
new. I never doubted God's love, nor 
wavered in my faith, but I went on blindly, 
as it were, believing all would come 
out right. But the view I have now is so 
much broader and grander and fuller of 
love than I could ever see before. I 
thought for many years that we were near 
the end of the gospel age, but I counted 
differently and made it farther off than 
this author. Surely, the "dawning" is 
very near, if we are not actually in it. I 
would love to talk with you of these things. 
Can't you come up and spend a few days? 
We can have all the time to talk. I want 
a copy of these books and the third volume 
too. Can you give me any information, 
or can you get it for me? Are you 
agent for them? I must have them! 

How full of sweet comfort is the Bible! 
Come up and let us talk over all these 
grand and glorious things. RHODA. 

Georgia. 
TOWER PUBLISHING CO.:-Mr. C. K. L., 

a friend of mine, came into my office and 

said that no money could pay for the 

benefit he had received from the truth contained 

in the DAWN, Vol. I., and handed 

me $20.00 which I inclose herein, and 



requested me to purchase DAWNS and 
distribute them. Please send me the 
DAWNS, Vol. I., to that amount, including 
two or three of Vol. II. 
Yours fraternally, F. T. LOCKHART. 

New York. 

DEAR BROTHER AND SISTER RUSSELL: 
—I cannot refrain from writing you— 
your articles in the last TOWER: "Perils 
Among False Brethren," "Harvest Gathering 
and Sittings" and "Sifting the 
Wheat," were so very helpful and timely 
to me and also to others, I desire you to 
know how highly they are appreciated. 

You perhaps know that Brother 

has, at times, had his faith in the ransom 
nearly shipwrecked by Mr. Adams' theories, 
but now he is satisfied, and says he 
will work harder for the Master than he 
has ever before in spreading the truth. 

Your plain, pointed history was very 
helpful. I have read the articles referred 
to in the May TOWER three times and see 
very plainly the leading of the Divine 
Master. I did not before understand the 
travail that gave birth to "Tabernacle and 
its Teachings." As soon as I studied it, 
I was sure its origin was divine. So this 
was the key that opened up all the dark 
things, the hidden things, in the day of 
the Lord's preparation. May God still 
keep you where he can use you for his 
work— his great work. May self be crucified, 
and only Christ appear. 

Many will yet fall. One other we had supposed 
to be with us has gone back to man's 
inherent immortality. Who shall be able to 
stand? I desire to work along with you, 
helping, never hindering, in the great 
harvest work, now calling for every willing 
hand. 

Brother is much pleased with the 

May TOWER. Though in poor health he 
is faithfully doing what he can in the 
harvest work. He lives for one object. 
I sometimes think his work is nearly done. 

I will send you five dollars to help in 
publishing the third volume of DAWN. 

Sincerely yours in the Master, 
MRS. J. H. PATTERSON. 

R1238 : page 8 

Pennsylvania. 
DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-For the 



enclosed have the kindness to mail to my 
address one copy each of the first and 
second volumes of MILLENNIAL DAWN. 
These are "perilous times"— the "sifting" 
process continues and it is our desire 
to walk in the light, God helping us. 

There are only three of us here who are 
striving to enter in at the straight gate, and 
we are regarded as "peculiar" among 
the professed church people. Pray for us, 
that our running may not be in vain. Will 
you kindly mail a copy of the May number 
of the TOWER, prominently marking 
the article: "Harvest Gathering and Sittings" 

to Mr. . This man, once in the 

way, may possibly not have gone so far 
back as to reach "outer darkness." 

May God bless you in your good work 
and reward you in due season. 

Yours in the name of the Master, 
E. C. REMMEL. 

page 8 

Oregon. 
DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-The Bibles 
and Testaments came, and we are very 
thankful to have them. It is wonderful 
how our Heavenly Father answers prayer. 
We were badly served by the American 
Bible Society, while at Walla Walla. We 
could have supplied many DAWN readers 
there with Bibles, and attempted to negotiate 
with that concern to supply the 
demand, not expecting any remuneration 
for our trouble. Would they do this? 
No, it would seem as though they preferred 
that those people be without the bread of 
life, than to fill any orders for us, because, 
they said, "You are going over the country 
selling the book, MILLENNIAL DAWN." Did 
we drop the matter here? No; we did 
just as we have learned to do with all 
other things— we took it to the Lord in 
prayer. And shortly we received the 
sample from you with prices so very cheap 
for such beautiful Bibles and Testaments. 
We praise his holy name, and are thankful 
for such a wonderful manifestation of 
God's mercy, love and readiness in giving 
us whatsoever we ask. Enclosed you 
will find money order and a small order 
for books. Yours with greeting to all in 
Christ the Lord, H. H. HYATT. 

Wisconsin. 



MY DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-Many 
thanks for your warning that although 
"the morning cometh"— "also the night" 
or what may be called the increased darkness 
preceding the morning. "It is always 
darkest just before day." As an 
evidence of the darkness— a would-be 
repetition of the dark ages— the following 
clipping from a paper dated May 3 1st, 
1890, is a very fair illustration:— 

"Bishop O'Farrell, of New Jersey, has 
announced in the churches of his diocese 
that he will not confirm any children who 
attend the public schools unless their 
parents can show good reasons for not 
sending them to the parochial schools." 

With the political aspects, so incongruous, 
we have nothing to do. Apparently 
the Church and State will again be 
united, with the beautiful mother and 
her obedient and no longer protesting 
beautiful daughters at the head. 

Let us now work while it is called to-day, 
for soon the night cometh (when the above 
prediction is verified) in which no man 
can work. Human agencies will then be 
unavailing and it will require the power 
of our Lord and his saints, no longer 
men, but spiritual beings, to do the work 
required. 

Yours in Christ, W. M. WRIGHT. 

Virginia. 
TOWER TRACT SOCIETY, DEAR SIRS:- 

Nearly a year ago a little pink tract came 
into my possession some way, I have forgotten 
how. The title, "Calamities, and 
why God permits them," attracted my 
attention, as it was only a short time after 
the Johnstown calamity. I have always 
been a skeptic from childhood, and no 
amount of praying and trying to believe 
did me any good. Even when called 
on to die, as I supposed, I could not believe. 
Or perhaps I really believed, but 
could not get that peace described by 
Christians as so glorious. I have invested 
in all the books which I thought might 
cure me. I could not help but believe in 
evolution, to the exclusion of revelation, 
or even of divinity. Well, I laid the little 
pink tract on my table, thinking I would 
read it the first time I had time. I picked 
it up several times, but did not become 
interested enough to read it; but every 
time I overhauled my table and straightened 



up books and papers, etc., I found 
the little tract. How it always got back 
there I cannot tell, for I thought a dozen 
times that I had disposed of it. To-night 
I saw it on the table again. I opened it, 
got interested and found something I had 
never found before. Well, I cannot describe 
it, but I want to know more of Christ. 
Please send me the "Plan of the Ages," 
in paper. Would be glad if you would 
send me some more tracts of the kind I 
need. I will read and hand to others. 
Respectfully, J. M. P . 

England. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-Your letter 
came duly to hand, also the 100 DAWNS, 
Vol. I. My friend informs me from 
Sheffield that he has received the 50 
DAWNS ordered, also. I should be glad if 
you would send me as soon as you can the 
remainder of the order, as I am out of 
the tracts, Protestants, Awake! The Lord 
willing, I purpose spending a week about 
the middle of next month at Keswick 
Holiness Convention. Many thousands 
of earnest Christians from all parts of 
Great Britain attend it, and I thought it 
would be a good opportunity for scattering 
some "Hail" and also selling DAWN. 
I was up there a few weeks ago and arranged 
with a bookseller to sell them for 
me and gave him one to read himself. So 
I enclose you L2 for 40 copies of Vol. I. 
and 20 copies of Vol. II.— colporteur rate, 
and I should be glad if you would for the 
remainder put in 2000 Arp Slips. I will 
get a small slip printed by this bookseller 
with his name and address and a few 
words of recommendation, and I may have 
a few large posters printed, and I trust by 
these means to sell a good many. I will 
take a lot more with me, to be ready 
should they sell well. The tracts, Protestants, 
Awake! kindly include, as they 
would do well to circulate freely with the 
Arp Slips. 

I see by the May TOWER that you, like 
all God's saints, have had to buy the 
truth and pay for it. Well, praise the 
Lord! having paid the price we know 
some little of its value. But hallelujah! 
it is cheap at any price. Our experience 
during the past few years has been on the 
same lines. And all who love and serve 
God will have tribulation in this age; but 



they that know God put their trust in 
him. I have had to part from some of 
my former dearest friends, or rather they 
have taken themselves off and shun me as 
a heretic. But we can pray for them like 
our blessed Master who said, "Father, 
forgive them, for they know not what they 
do." It has comforted me a good deal, 
since I have seen that with spiritual Israel, 
like fleshly Israel, "blindness in part hath 
happened to them." So I bear with them, 
knowing that the trial of my faith is precious 
in his sight; and by his grace I mean 
to run the race which he has set before us, 
following the footsteps of our blessed 
Redeemer. 

We have a good number of true, earnest 
saints around us who know the truth 
and have been set free, and are spreading 
the seed of truth wherever they go, and 
God is blessing us. 

My wife and sister-in-law, with the 
saints assembled here, join in warmest 
Christian love to yourself and dear wife 
and the saints that with you are looking 
for that blessed hope, the glorious revelation 
of our Savior, Jesus Christ. May 
God abundantly bless you. 

Ever yours, CHARLES W. ELAM. 


