Counteracting False Accusations in France
JEHOVAH’S WITNESSES in France were recently the target of a barrage of false accusations. Seizing upon tragic events involving religious cults in Europe and Japan, the media spread distorted information about the Witnesses. They were wrongly portrayed as one of the largest and most dangerous cults.
In an effort to set matters straight, Jehovah’s Witnesses published a tract that answered such questions as these: Who are Jehovah’s Witnesses? Are they Christians? Do they accept medical care? Why do they go from door to door? How is their work financed? How do Jehovah’s Witnesses benefit the community?
The informative tract in the French language was entitled Jehovah’s Witnesses—What You Need to Know. In order to leave the tract with as many people as possible, a campaign was organized. From May 13 to June 9, 1996, more than nine million copies were distributed.
This tract impressed many, including public officials. “The criticism leveled at Jehovah’s Witnesses fills me with indignation,” wrote a regional councilman after reading the tract. “Time and again I have come to appreciate the benevolent and unselfish character of your work.” In response to the tract, a member of the European Parliament wrote: “The majority of the people know very well how to tell the difference between the group of Christians of which you are a part and the cults.”
In Brittany a Witness presented the tract to a priest, who readily accepted it. “I commend you for what you are doing,” the priest said. He then added: “I encourage my parishioners to let you into their homes and to offer you a cup of coffee. You can even tell those you meet that you have been to my home. I also want to tell you that I appreciate reading your publications.”
After receiving the tract, a Protestant man in Alsace wrote to the Watch Tower Society requesting a Bible study. “Having lost all confidence in my parish,” he wrote, “I’m looking forward to a new start spiritually.” Despite the false charges that are at times leveled against them, Jehovah’s Witnesses in France—indeed, in all parts of the world—continue helping people to come to an accurate knowledge of God’s purposes, as set forth in the Bible.—2 Timothy 3:16, 17.

