Faith in God—Should It Call for a Miracle?
ALBERT was in his early 20’s when he began searching for God. He tried a number of religions but remained dissatisfied. Reading parts of the Bible, he learned how God dealt with such individuals as Noah, Abraham, Sarah, and Moses. Albert found himself drawn to the God of the Bible. Could he, however, be sure that God really exists?
One evening Albert drove to an isolated place where he prayed, “Please God, give me a sign—anything to prove that you exist.” Albert waited and waited. He recalls that when nothing happened, his expectation “turned to disappointment, to emptiness, to anger.”
Like Albert, many feel that they have searched for God in vain. They may be confused by the sermons of clergymen or disillusioned by the salesmanship of television evangelizers. Struck by the hypocrisy evident among many of their neighbors, some are not sure what to believe. Yet, King David of ancient Israel assured his son Solomon: “If you search for [God], he will let himself be found by you.”—1 Chronicles 28:9.
Well, then, how does God reveal himself? Should you expect a sign—some supernatural experience that will prove to you that God exists? According to a recent poll reported in Time magazine, more than two thirds of Americans believe in miracles. The article also noted that “the fastest-growing churches in America are the Charismatic and Pentecostal congregations whose worship revolves around ‘signs and wonders.’”
Should it really take “signs and wonders” to believe in God? He has used miracles in times past. To illustrate: Saul of Tarsus, who was persecuting the followers of God’s Son, Jesus Christ, had an extraordinary experience on the road from Jerusalem to Damascus. This miraculous encounter with the resurrected Jesus led to Saul’s conversion. (Acts 9:1-22) Thus a former persecutor became the apostle Paul—one of the foremost advocates of Christianity!
But do miracles always evoke such a favorable response? Is genuine faith in God dependent upon one’s having some miraculous experience?
[Picture on page 3]
God’s Son miraculously spoke to Saul of Tarsus. Should you expect a miracle?

