Where Can True Happiness Be Found?
MANY people feel that happiness can be found by acquiring material possessions. How about you? While material things can certainly contribute to our happiness, they do not ensure it; nor do physical comforts build faith or fill spiritual needs.
In his Sermon on the Mount, Jesus Christ said: “Happy are those conscious of their spiritual need, since the kingdom of the heavens belongs to them.” (Matthew 5:3) Jesus also said: “Guard against every sort of covetousness, because even when a person has an abundance his life does not result from the things he possesses.”—Luke 12:15.
Many seek happiness by engaging in illicit sex and other “works of the flesh.” (Galatians 5:19-21) However, yielding to sensual pleasures does not bring true and lasting happiness. In fact, those practicing such things will not inherit God’s Kingdom.—1 Corinthians 6:9, 10.
Others turn inward in their quest for happiness by trying to build up their own self-worth. Libraries and bookstores are filled with self-help books, but such publications have not brought people lasting happiness. So, then, where can we find real happiness?
To be truly happy, we must recognize our inborn spiritual need. Jesus said: “Happy are those conscious of their spiritual need.” Of course, it would do us little good to comprehend this need and then fail to do anything about it. To illustrate: What would happen to a marathon runner who after the race failed to respond to his body’s craving for water? Would he not soon face dehydration and other serious consequences? Likewise, if we fail to respond to our need for spiritual nourishment, we will eventually wither spiritually. This will lead to loss of joy and happiness.
Jesus fully recognized his spiritual need, regularly studying and meditating on God’s Word. He could locate and read sections of the Holy Scriptures with ease, and he taught others to do the same. (Luke 4:16-21; compare Ephesians 4:20, 21.) Jesus also likened the doing of his heavenly Father’s will to food. Doing God’s will brought him much happiness.—John 4:34.
Yes, true happiness cannot be obtained by acquiring material things; nor does happiness result from catering to the fallen flesh. True happiness is a condition of the heart, based on genuine faith and a good relationship with Jehovah God. Appropriately, then, the psalmist David sang: “Happy is the people whose God is Jehovah.”—Psalm 144:15b.
[Picture on page 23]
Faith and a good relationship with God will bring you true happiness

