





3 Help to Cope With Problems

There are problems that for now can neither be avoided nor resolved. For example, if you have lost a loved one in death or if you face a chronic illness, you may have no choice but to find ways to cope with your pain. Can the Bible help in such dire situations?



CHRONIC ILLNESS

Rose says: “I have a genetic disorder that causes me severe and constant pain. My quality of life has plummeted.” One of her greatest concerns was that she was sometimes unable to focus her mind on her study of the Bible and spiritual matters. But she was greatly helped by Jesus’ words recorded at Matthew 19:26: “With God all things are possible.” Rose learned that there is more than one way to study. Because her pain made reading nearly impossible at times, she began listening to recordings of the Bible and Bible literature.a “Without those options,” she says, “I don’t know how I would have maintained my spirituality.”
When Rose is saddened over being unable to do what she once could, she finds comfort in the words recorded at 2 Corinthians 8:12: “If the readiness is there first, it is especially acceptable according to what a person has, not according to what a person does not have.” Those words remind Rose that God is pleased with what she does, because she does all that she can within her limitations.



GRIEF

Delphine, mentioned earlier, recalls: “After my 18-year-old daughter died, the pain was so great that I did not believe that I would be able to continue living. Nothing would be the same.” She found great comfort, though, in the words of Psalm 94:19, wherein the psalmist said to God: “When anxieties overwhelmed me, you comforted and soothed me.” She says, “I prayed to Jehovah to help me find things to do that would help me soothe the pain.”
She threw herself into meaningful volunteer work. In time, she came to liken herself to a child’s crayon​—even the broken ones are still useful for coloring. Similarly, though she felt broken, she learned that she could still help others. She recalls: “I suddenly found that when I used Bible principles and Scriptural ways of thinking to comfort my students, that was Jehovah’s way of soothing and comforting me.” She made a list of Bible characters who went through periods of intense grief. “Without exception,” she found, “they were all people of prayer.” She also learned that “there can be no answers if your Bible is closed.”
Studying the Bible has taught Delphine something else​—to focus on the future, not the past. The hope mentioned at Acts 24:15 comforts her: “There is going to be a resurrection of both the righteous and the unrighteous.” How sure is she that Jehovah will resurrect her daughter? Let Delphine answer: “I see my daughter in the future. Our next ‘date’ is already scheduled, as if it were on my Father’s calendar. I see us together in our garden as clearly as I saw and loved her the day she was born.”



Many such recordings are available on the website jw.org.

The Bible can help you find comfort even in the darkest times

HOW CAN GOD HELP US?
The Bible’s answer is clear. It states: “Jehovah is near to all those calling on him, to all who call on him in truth. He satisfies the desire of those who fear him; he hears their cry for help, and he rescues them.” (Psalm 145:18, 19) Is that not heartwarming? How, though, will God answer the prayers of people who sincerely look to him for guidance?
BY GIVING US STRENGTH:
Problems can often discourage and drain us​—physically, emotionally, and spiritually. (Proverbs 24:10) But Jehovah “gives power to the tired one and full might to those lacking strength.” (Isaiah 40:29) The apostle Paul, who endured serious trials, said: “For all things I have the strength through the one who gives me power.” (Philippians 4:13) Paul was empowered by God’s holy spirit. You too can ask God to give you holy spirit.​—Luke 11:13.
BY GIVING US WISDOM:
What if you need help to understand and apply the Bible’s counsel? The disciple James writes: “If any one of you is lacking in wisdom, let him keep asking God, for he gives generously to all and without reproaching, and it will be given him.” (James 1:5) You can work in harmony with your prayers by reading the Bible and applying its teachings. (James 1:23-25) As you do, you will learn firsthand how wise its counsel is.
BY GIVING US PEACE:
Even when you suffer deep anxiety, Jehovah can help you to feel calm. His Word says: “Do not be anxious over anything, but in everything by prayer and supplication along with thanksgiving, let your petitions be made known to God; and the peace of God that surpasses all understanding will guard your hearts and your mental powers by means of Christ Jesus.” (Philippians 4:6, 7) Why not ask Jehovah to grant you peace?
What, though, if your problems are not quickly resolved? Do not conclude that God has forsaken you. Even if your problems persist, God can give you the courage and strength to endure. (1 Corinthians 10:13) The Bible also promises that the time will come when our problems will be resolved permanently!


