A Cavalry Charge That Involves You
1, 2. How are God’s servants today involved in the fulfillment of the prophetic vision recorded at Revelation 9:13-19?
1 “The sixth angel blew his trumpet.” Following that, “armies of cavalry” numbering “two myriads of myriads” thunder forth. This is no ordinary military force. “The heads of the horses [are] as heads of lions.” Fire, smoke, and sulfur spew forth from their mouths, and their “tails are like serpents.” This symbolic cavalry charge leaves devastation in its wake. (Rev. 9:13-19) Do you know how you are involved in the fulfillment of this striking prophetic vision?
2 The anointed remnant and their companions, the other sheep, unitedly make known God’s judgments. This results in the complete exposure of Christendom’s spiritually dead condition. Let us examine two elements of the prophetic vision that highlight why the ministry of God’s servants is so effective.
 3. What training have you received to speak God’s message effectively?
3 Trained and Equipped to Deliver God’s Message: By means of the Theocratic Ministry School and other congregation meetings, God’s ministers have been trained to speak God’s message with authority. In imitation of Jesus and his disciples, they go forth to search out deserving ones, preaching wherever people can be found. (Matt. 10:11; Mark 1:16; Luke 4:15; Acts 20:18-20) How effective this Biblical method of preaching has proved to be!
 4. What equipment is available to many publishers to enable them to carry out their work?
4 Billions of Bibles, books, brochures, and magazines have been distributed by Christian ministers in carrying out the divine preaching commission. These publications have been provided in nearly 400 languages, covering a wide variety of subjects and using approaches that appeal to various kinds of people. Are you making effective use of these instruments?
5, 6. What indicates that Jehovah’s people have heavenly backing?
5 Heavenly Direction and Support: The prophetic vision also makes clear that the activity represented by the symbolic cavalry charge has divine backing. (Rev. 9:13-15) The global preaching work is accomplished, not through human wisdom or power, but by means of God’s spirit. (Zech. 4:6) Jehovah is using the angels to direct this work. (Rev. 14:6) Thus, along with the efforts of his human Witnesses, Jehovah provides heavenly support to draw meek ones to himself.​—John 6:45, 65.
6 Trained, well equipped to deliver God’s message, and working under angelic direction, Jehovah’s people are an irresistible force. Let us continue to play our part in the fulfillment of this thrilling prophetic vision.

