“Love Jehovah, All You Loyal Ones”
Jesus’ Death to Be Commemorated on April 4
1 Years ago, when Ukraine was under Communist rule, the authorities watched the brothers closely​—especially when the day of the Lord’s Evening Meal approached—​because they hoped to discover their meeting place. This was always a problem, since the authorities knew the approximate date of the commemoration. What could the brothers do? One sister’s home had a flooded basement. Since the authorities would not expect people to gather there, the brothers built a platform above the knee-deep water. Although they had to sit crouched on the platform under a low ceiling, nobody disturbed them as the congregation joyfully observed the Memorial.
2 The determination of our Ukrainian brothers to obey the command to commemorate Jesus’ death was a marvelous demonstration of their love for God. (Luke 22:19; 1 John 5:3) Whenever we are facing obstacles in our lives, may we draw encouragement from such examples and be determined to be present to observe the Lord’s Evening Meal on April 4. By so doing, we show that we share the sentiments of the psalmist who sang: “O love Jehovah, all you loyal ones of his.”​—Ps. 31:23.
3 Help Others Grow in Love for God: Love for God also moves us to invite others to observe the commemoration with us. The February Our Kingdom Ministry insert encouraged each of us to make a list of those we plan to invite to the Memorial. Are you diligently following through in extending an invitation to each person on your list? Take time to explain the significance of the occasion to them. A kindly reminder of the day and time of the Memorial and, if appropriate, an offer to accompany them may encourage them to attend.
4 At the observance, make a special effort to greet those who have accepted our invitation, and make them feel welcome. How can you help them to grow in their love for Jehovah? Make yourself available to answer their questions. Be alert to offer a Bible study if appropriate. Invite them to attend our weekly congregation meetings. Especially will elders want to give attention to inactive Christians who are present. They can arrange to visit such ones and encourage them to resume their activity, perhaps building on the thoughts presented in the Memorial discourse.​—Rom. 5:6-8.
5 Deepening Our Own Love for Jehovah: Reflecting on the gift of the ransom can deepen our love for Jehovah and his Son. (2 Cor. 5:14, 15) One long-time Memorial attender said: “We look forward to the Memorial. It becomes more special each year. I remember standing in the funeral home 20 years ago, looking at my dear dad and coming to a true heartfelt appreciation for the ransom. It had been an academic subject before that. Oh, I knew all the scriptures and how to explain them! But only when I felt the cold reality of death did my heart fairly leap with joy over what will be accomplished for us by means of that precious ransom.”​—John 5:28, 29.
6 As the date of this year’s observance approaches, take time to prepare your heart for the occasion. (2 Chron. 19:3) Meditate on the special Memorial Bible reading, which is outlined in Examining the Scriptures Daily​—2004 and on the 2004 Calendar. Some enjoy reviewing chapters 112-16 in the Greatest Man book during their family study. Others do additional research using other study aids provided through the faithful and discreet slave class. (Matt. 24:45-47) All of us can make the gift of the ransom a matter of heartfelt prayer. (Ps. 50:14, 23) Yes, during this Memorial season, may we continually reflect on Jehovah’s love for us and seek ways to demonstrate our love for him.​—Mark 12:30; 1 John 4:10.

