From Our Readers
HEALING BURNS
Our two-year-old daughter burned her foot very badly several days ago. We immediately treated it with ice water and snow and after three hours of cooling only a wide red band remained, which, however, caused no pain, and which in the meantime has also disappeared. We learned about this method of treating burns from an issue of “Awake!”, which has been placed in our bookcase among our doctor books and assigned a place of honor. Thank you very much.
P. O., Germany
We followed advice regarding treating burns published in your magazine, as to the use of cold water and then honey. A pot of boiling water had been spilled on the chest, shoulder and arm of one of my neighbor’s twin boys. A half hour after we began applying the treatment he felt no more pain and after two days the skin was healed and there were no scars. During my years of experience as a nurse, I have seen cases where this type of scalding kept children in the hospital many weeks with intense pain and the need for skin grafting. Thank you for this good information.
J. M. (R.N.), California
THE UNFORGIVING SLAVE
I want to express my appreciation for the illustrated story about ‘the unforgiving slave.’ My ten-year-old son got the point of the lesson, and that’s what we want to do, reach their hearts. Please continue this excellent way of teaching all of us.
R. S., California
BIBLE AUTHENTICITY
I have read your article entitled “The Future Can Be Foretold!” and the section entitled “Conquerors Identified by Name,” which refers to Isaiah 43:14; 44:28 and Isa 45:1. Why did you not tell your readers that all scholars today, except those attached to strongholds of fundamentalism, on internal evidence, attribute Isaiah chapters 40-55 to “Second Isaiah” who lived later?
M. M., Japan
We have at times published this information along with our reasons for not accepting this view. Detailed information on this subject can be found on page 845 of the book “Aid to Bible Understanding,” published by Watchtower Bible and Tract Society of New York, Inc.​—ED.
JONAH​—A FISH STORY?
I want to express my appreciation for the way you handled the subject of Jonah and the Whale.
Anonymous
We have been using “Jonah​—A Fish Story?” as a way to conduct Bible studies involving all our kids, each reading a part. We are finding that kids, usually unresponsive, are enjoying this kind of family fun.
N. D., Oregon
My three older children, ages 14, 12 and 10, read it (Jonah​—A Fish Story?) like a play. It took only 20 minutes and they learned more than I could have tried to explain in an hour. They thoroughly enjoyed it!
E. F., Washington

