Do We Need the Bible?
OXANA, a young Russian woman, was delighted when she spotted a Bible offered by a pavement bookseller in Moscow. Her companion, John, who came from a country where Bibles were freely available, was impressed with Oxana’s enthusiasm. “I​—an atheist—​wanted to buy it for her,” he admits. Although Oxana initially objected, she eventually accepted John’s gift.
Many, like Oxana, have an overwhelming desire to possess the Bible. This is especially true in countries where it has been suppressed for many years. The publishers of this magazine, for example, are working hard to keep pace with the demand for Bibles in the former Soviet republics, as well as in other parts of the world. For the first time, many people in these areas have an opportunity to make a proper examination of the Bible​—and a great number are attracted by its powerful message.
Critics and Doubters
At the other end of the spectrum, notably in northern Europe, the Bible has been relegated to collecting dust on the bookshelf. “Dead history!” some say, adding, “It was written for another age. It has nothing to do with modern man.” Even prominent clergymen have made public statements that discredit the Bible. Anglican archbishop Desmond Tutu is reported in The Star, a South African newspaper, as having said: “There are parts of the Bible which have no permanent worth.” Statements such as these have caused many to wonder just how seriously they should take the Bible.
A Need for Guidance
Critics and believers alike must admit that, more than ever, the world needs solutions that work. “Unless man quickly learns to control the rate of change in his personal affairs as well as in society at large,” wrote Alvin Toffler in his book Future Shock, “we are doomed to a massive . . . breakdown.” That warning was issued more than 20 years ago. The breakdown Toffler spoke about appears to be happening right now.
As this century draws to a close, technological developments and human philosophies have failed to produce world stability. Recent hopes for a new world order have given way to disillusionment, and the lives of many have been reduced to a daily struggle for survival.
Statistics show that the economic division between rich and poor has become a chasm. A recent study indicates that 82.7 percent of the world’s wealth is concentrated in the hands of only 20 percent of its population. Is it any wonder that war, famine, disease, riots, and anarchy are rife in many countries? The pressure to cope with the deteriorating quality of life is causing great stress on people’s emotions. As a result, even the most basic unit of society, the family, is suffering decay.
Although many, like Toffler, suggest that it is man’s responsibility to “search out totally new ways to anchor himself,” the evidence proves that humans are incapable of providing their own solutions.
The Only Alternative
The Holy Bible, the writing of which started about 3,500 years ago, has not changed over the centuries. Its principles remain constant. For example, the words of Jeremiah 10:23 have been shown to be true today more than ever before: “To earthling man his way does not belong. It does not belong to man who is walking even to direct his step.” If humans are unable to plot their course, who can? The Bible points to the only true Source of direction: “I, Jehovah, am your God, the One teaching you to benefit yourself, the One causing you to tread in the way in which you should walk.”​—Isaiah 48:17.
Through the pages of the Bible, Jehovah God teaches us to help ourselves. They are filled with advice that shows us the way in which we should walk. Its counsel is as relevant today as the day it was penned. The following article will examine the practicality of the Bible for our modern age. In a variety of matters, ranging from health to wealth, family life, and personal behavior, you will be able to see that the Bible is indeed a rock of stability in the shifting sands of today’s world.
[Picture on page 4]
The Bible is an anchor of stability in today’s turbulent world

