Kingdom Proclaimers Report
Honesty Recommends Our Ministry
HONESTY is a basic requirement for Christians. The apostle Paul wrote at Hebrews 13:18: “We trust we have an honest conscience, as we wish to conduct ourselves honestly in all things.” Our practicing honesty ‘adorns the teaching of our Savior, God, in all things.’ (Titus 2:10) The honesty, as well as the Kingdom preaching, of two Christians in the South Pacific kingdom of Tonga is giving a powerful witness. The Watch Tower Society’s branch office in Western Samoa relates:
“For years a Witness couple spoke about God’s Kingdom to the people in the four villages on their island but without visible results. Then, while her husband was ill, the wife had to care for their plantation and cut and dry the copra, their only source of income. When the time came for the copra to be checked by the buyers, someone else’s bag had got mixed up with her five bags. The villagers urged her to keep the extra bag and to view it as a blessing from God. The sister, though, declined and, even when paid for six bags, would accept only the amount rightly due her. Her honesty was noticed.
“Later, when the husband was to make a trip to another island, the storekeeper asked him to buy some items for him. The Witness did as requested and returned the change to the man. The man was amazed. He said that it was the first time anyone had returned the change. Others he had asked to buy things always kept the change. Another time, when the Witness needed something from this man’s store, the man gave him the key to the store, instructing him to take what he needed and leave payment in the store. Others present asked the storekeeper why he would give the store key to the Witness and not to them. The owner explained that the Witness was the only one in the village whom he could trust.
“The fine conduct of this couple is being discussed among the villagers. The Witnesses are known for their honesty, their neutral stand on politics, and their witnessing about God’s Kingdom, which shows the difference between the beliefs of the villagers and the teachings of the Bible. Now when questions arise regarding the Bible, the people often approach the Witnesses for answers. The husband has even got out of bed at night, gone to a village meeting, and answered questions that had been raised on a Bible subject. When attending funerals in the village, he has often been requested to show what the Bible says about death, and his comments have been accepted.”
So the honesty of this Witness couple and their Kingdom preaching are giving a good witness on this lovely South Pacific island. They hope that others will study the Bible and take their stand for the truth. If they do, Jehovah God will surely bless them.​—John 8:32.

