The Bible​—A Practical Guide for Modern Man
“All scripture is inspired by God and can profitably be used . . . for guiding people’s lives.”​—2 Timothy 3:16, “The Jerusalem Bible.”
THIS scripture explains the very essence of why the Bible is practical for our day. It is inspired of God. Since God created us, no one knows more about our bodies, minds, feelings, and needs than he does. Israelite king David once said of Jehovah God: “Your eyes saw even the embryo of me, and in your book all its parts were down in writing.” (Psalm 139:16) If our Creator knows so much about us, then logically his counsel and advice about how we can be happy and successful in life must surely be worth investigating.
Experience has shown that Bible principles are both practical and realistic for our day. They are also specific. Following are four examples that illustrate the everyday practicality of the Bible.
Human Relationships and Personal Behavior: The Bible promotes a good code of personal ethics that can lead to healthy, successful relationships with others. For example, the nation of Israel was commanded: “You must not take vengeance nor have a grudge . . . and you must love your fellow as yourself.” (Leviticus 19:18) Although we are not subject to Israelite law, following its Biblical principles can help us be at peace with our fellowman. Imagine, for example, how many problems could be solved if everyone tried to cultivate the spiritual qualities found at Galatians 5:22, 23: “The fruitage of the spirit is love, joy, peace, long-suffering, kindness, goodness, faith, mildness, self-control. Against such things there is no law.”​—Compare Romans 8:5, 6.
Unfortunately, when the pressures of life mount, tension and friction often arise. In such situations, applying the cautionary words found at Proverbs 29:11 could save us much trouble. “All his spirit is what a stupid one lets out, but he that is wise keeps it calm to the last.”​—Compare Proverbs 15:1; Matthew 7:12; Colossians 3:12-14.
Good advice​—but does it work in real life? Take the case of a man in France who had a serious problem with his temper. Countless times he would end up in trouble, even in prison, for becoming involved in brawls. His being an expert boxer did not help matters either. On one occasion a quarrel broke out between this man and his father. The next thing he knew, he had floored his father with one blow. A bitter rift in their relationship ensued.
In the meantime, this man came in contact with Jehovah’s Witnesses and started learning Bible principles. This moved him to take a serious look at the way he was conducting himself toward others. With much effort his personal behavior began to change, and he became more peaceable. Then one day the man returned to his father to make peace. His father was so impressed by the changes his son had made that their relationship was restored.
This is one of many examples that bear testimony to the truth of the words of the apostle Paul: “For the word of God is alive and exerts power and is sharper than any two-edged sword . . . and is able to discern thoughts and intentions of the heart.”​—Hebrews 4:12.
Family Life: Is your family happy? Many families are not. “That family life as an institution is threatened is now certain,” comments The Natal Witness, a South African newspaper, adding that “today’s children are being born into a social revolution.”
The Bible, however, is brimming with practical advice designed to help families succeed even when problems arise. Concerning the role of husbands, for example, the Bible says: “Husbands ought to be loving their wives as their own bodies.” When the husband fulfills this requirement, it is a pleasure for his wife to reciprocate by having “deep respect for her husband.” (Ephesians 5:25-29, 33) The relationship between parents and children is commented on in Ephesians 6:4: “And you, fathers, do not be irritating your children, but go on bringing them up in the discipline and mental-regulating of Jehovah.” This, in turn, creates a family atmosphere that makes it easier for children to follow the Bible’s command and be obedient to their parents.​—Ephesians 6:1.
The preceding is a mere sampling of the Bible’s commentary on family life. By responding to God’s guidance, many have found success and enjoy happiness in the home. Edward, a father of two, explains the benefits he enjoyed by applying Bible principles. “My marriage was breaking up,” he recalls. “I had no time to have a meaningful relationship with my children. The only thing that brought us together was our applying what the Bible has to say about family life.”​—Proverbs 13:24; 24:3; Colossians 3:18-21; 1 Peter 3:1-7.
Mental, Physical, and Emotional Health: Research has shown that, to a degree, a person’s physical health is connected with the state of his mental and emotional health. “Common signs of stress,” says The World Book Encyclopedia, “include an increased heart rate, higher blood pressure, muscle tension, mental depression, and an inability to concentrate.” Some believe, however, that simulating violent actions is a way to relieve stress. “Boxing can be a great stress-beater,” claims a South African newspaper, The Star. It quotes the words of fitness consultant Jannie Claasens: “If a woman has had a highly frustrating day, she can take out her tension by beating up a bag.”
Would it not be far better, though, to learn to manage the root cause of frustration? In the journal Stress​—The Modern Scourge, Dr. Michael Slutzkin says that “recognition of stress . . . is important, because many of the causes are remediable.” He adds that “stress management . . . may even foster the healing process in a variety of conditions.”
The Bible explains a very effective way in which stress can be managed: “Do not be anxious over anything, but in everything . . . let your petitions be made known to God; and the peace of God that excels all thought will guard your hearts and your mental powers by means of Christ Jesus.” (Philippians 4:6, 7) Controlling stress in this way has many advantages​—even physically. One Bible proverb puts it this way: “A calm heart is the life of the fleshly organism.” (Proverbs 14:30) Another proverb states: “A heart that is joyful does good as a curer, but a spirit that is stricken makes the bones dry.”​—Proverbs 17:22.
In a bid to escape stress and pressure, many rely on tobacco, alcohol, drugs. The damage such addiction causes is well documented. Yet, the Bible has always advocated keeping clean from “every defilement of flesh.” (2 Corinthians 7:1; compare Proverbs 23:29-35.) Surely, avoiding such hurtful practices is a practical safeguard in today’s world.
Work, Money, and Honesty: Laziness never pays. “Because of winter the lazy one will not plow; he will be begging in reaping time, but there will be nothing,” says Proverbs 20:4. Hard work, on the other hand, does pay off. “Let the stealer steal no more,” states Ephesians 4:28. This scripture adds that it is far better for one to engage in “hard work, doing with his hands what is good work, that he may have something to distribute to someone in need.”​—Compare Proverbs 13:4.
Did you know that Bible principles can be applied even to relationships in the workplace? Workers, like the “slaves” of Bible times, do well to “be obedient in everything to those who are [their] masters in a fleshly sense.” Bosses, or “masters,” on the other hand, should “keep dealing out what is righteous and what is fair” to their employees.​—Colossians 3:22-24; 4:1; compare 1 Peter 2:18-20.
Much is said in the Bible about honest business practices. Although sadly lacking today, honesty is often recognized and appreciated as a desirable quality. This is what the Bible emphasizes. Jesus once said: “The person faithful in what is least is faithful also in much, and the person unrighteous in what is least is unrighteous also in much.”​—Luke 16:10; compare Proverbs 20:10; 22:22, 23; Luke 6:31.
In one African country, the diamond industry was the scene of much stealing and corruption. It was decided to put a different person in charge. The government ministers were asked to submit names of those who they thought would be suitable for the position. When the cabinet met to decide, the names were eliminated one by one, mainly for corruption. Finally, they came to the last name on the list​—the president’s candidate.
“But he is not a member of the party!” objected one minister.
The president replied that this was not a political position.
“He is one of Jehovah’s Witnesses,” stated another.
“And that is why he gets the job,” said the president. He then added: “We know they are honest, and this is the kind of person we need. We know we can trust him.”
Yes, those who apply Bible principles often find that this is to their advantage even in today’s world.
Treasure Up Practical Wisdom
We have considered only a small sampling of what it means to “find the very knowledge of God.” (Proverbs 2:1-9) A wealth of relevant, practical advice is found in the Bible. Principles related to cleanliness, industriousness, communication, sex, divorce, the paying of taxes, dealing with personality differences, and coping with poverty are just some of the aspects of life touched on by the Bible. Millions will testify that the difference between success and failure in their lives has depended on the degree to which they have applied Bible principles.
While the immediate practicality of the Bible is guaranteed, it also holds out many long-term benefits. For example, the Bible promises that the root causes of pain and suffering in today’s world will soon be rectified by divine intervention.​—Daniel 2:44; 2 Peter 3:11-13; Revelation 21:1-5.
Therefore, we encourage you to learn as much as you can about the Bible. If you do not have a copy, be sure to get one. The publishers of this magazine will gladly assist you. Just as many others have benefited by applying the practical suggestions from the Bible, you too can be helped to appreciate the value of God’s Word, both now and in the future.
[Picture on page 7]
The Bible is a practical guide for making family life happy

