Announcements
● Literature offer for February: Watchtower subscription for a contribution of $4.00. Where subscription is not obtained, two magazines and a copy of the brochure The Government That Will Bring Paradise will be offered for a contribution of 70¢. March: Any of the older 192-page books listed in the January Our Kingdom Ministry for a contribution of 50¢ each. If you have Look! booklets, place them during March. April and May: True Peace and Security​—How Can You Find It? for a contribution of $1.00.
● On Saturday, May 3, the Brooklyn Bethel home and factory and Watchtower Farms buildings will be closed for spring cleaning, so there will be no arrangements for tours or to pick up literature on that day.
● Since the Memorial celebration falls on a Monday this year, most congregations may not need to make adjustments in their regular meeting schedule for the week. If it is considered necessary to cancel a meeting, it should be the Congregation Book Study, scheduling half of the material the week prior to the Memorial and half the week following the Memorial.
● The large-print edition of The Watchtower is now available in French. For directions on how to order, see Announcements in September 1985 Our Kingdom Ministry.
● New Publications Available:
God’s Kingdom of a Thousand Years Has Approached​—Greek
Reasoning From the Scriptures​—Dutch, Japanese
The Government That Will Bring Paradise​—Afrikaans, Cebuano, Cibemba, Croatian, Hungarian, Sepedi, Solomon Islands Pidgin, Tagalog, Thai, Tsonga, Venda, Xhosa, Zulu
● New Cassette Recordings Available:
Job (set of two; congregation and public: $3.00; pioneers: $2.50)​—English
Acts of Apostles (set of three; congregation and public: $4.50; pioneers: $3.75)​—Dutch
Exodus (set of three; congregation and public: $4.50; pioneers: $3.75)​—French
Leviticus (set of two; congregation and public: $3.00; pioneers: $2.50)​—French
Numbers (set of three; congregation and public: $4.50; pioneers: $3.75)​—French
Exodus (set of four; congregation and public: $6.00; pioneers: $5.00)​—Japanese
Psalms (set of six; congregation and public: $9.00; pioneers: $7.50)​—Japanese

