Be Sure to Call Back
1 Last year 9,021,009 Bibles, books, and booklets were placed in the United States. Millions of copies of The Watchtower and Awake! were distributed. This enormous distribution of literature brings the responsibility of calling back on interested people to help them become disciples.​—Matt. 28:19, 20.
2 Commendably, this responsibility is being taken seriously. Last year we made a total of 47,204,243 return visits and conducted, on the average, 447,298 home Bible studies each month. Jehovah added his blessing, and 34,348 were baptized. How very happy we are to be involved in the fulfillment of Jehovah’s promise to speed up the work.​—Isa. 60:22.
3 Perhaps some are not making return visits regularly. Still others are not yet conducting a home Bible study. If you physically and circumstantially can, are you? If not, would you not really like to expand your ministry beyond the initial placing of literature from house to house? What can you do to reach out, making effective return visits and conducting Bible studies?
4 First of all, develop a positive attitude, trusting that Jehovah will bless your efforts. Most likely you learned the truth because someone cultivated the initial interest you showed and conducted a Bible study with you. It is only natural that appreciation for what you have received should be expressed in your endeavors to help someone else in a similar manner.​—Rev. 22:17.
BE POSITIVE
5 Of course, there are problems to be overcome. It may require extra effort to arrange with others to make return visits in the evening when you are more likely to find people home. Strong religious prejudices may need to be broken down. You may find people who enjoy our literature but hesitate to study because of opposition or ridicule. If you live in a high-crime area, it may require extra caution. You may have to overcome the fear some people have of strangers. These challenges can be overcome. Others who have been successful can help you to face them skillfully.
6 Do not allow a reluctance to take on responsibility or a feeling of inadequacy hold you back from enjoying the return visit and Bible study work. Trust in Jehovah and pray for his spirit to help you. Keep a good house-to-house record of all literature placements and other interest that is shown. Call back soon. Learn to use the Reasoning book in answering Bible questions. Seek assistance from experienced publishers.
7 As you faithfully call back on interested persons and share in conducting Bible studies, your joy will abound. Perhaps some you help will be included among those counted as new disciples during the 1986 service year and will become your “letters of recommendation” in the ministry.​—2 Cor. 3:1-3.

