Continue Offering Watchtower Subscriptions
The Watchtower Permanently in Four Colors!
1 All of us rejoiced to see the lovely four-color covers on the January 1 Watchtower and the following issues. Yes, this is now a permanent feature! So, let us zealously recommend to all persons who show interest that they read all of the year’s 24 issues of these colorful magazines. The subscription is still only $4.00!
REACH AS MANY AS POSSIBLE
2 What can you do to reach as many as possible with the subscription offer in February? One thing is to prepare a list of those you can visit, such as former Bible students, relatives, workmates, neighbors, schoolmates, and teachers. Last month you perhaps left individual magazines with some who were busy at the time you called. Or someone may have shown interest in a particular issue. Return and offer the subscription this month. These people are already acquainted with you and may be open to further discussion. If they have already enjoyed one issue of the magazine, their interest may be aroused to obtain it regularly by subscribing. During February, make a special effort to call on these individuals.
3 The Topic for Conversation “What Does the Future Hold for You?” helps us to think about our own future. In discussing this topic with a householder, help him to picture what the future can hold for him. This may motivate him to think seriously on the subject and encourage him to look for answers about the future. How can the Topic for Conversation be used to present the subscription in an effective manner?
PREPARE A PRESENTATION
4 The Reasoning book provides some helpful material under the subheading “Future/​Security” on page 11. The first suggestion may effectively be adapted to introduce the current Topic for Conversation. You could say: “Good morning. How are you? . . . We are sharing with our neighbors a positive view of the future. Do you find that some situations make it hard to be positive? . . . I have found the Bible very helpful in this respect. At Revelation 1:1, the Bible shows that God is the one who reveals what the future holds for man. [Read.] While men are uncertain as to what will take place in the future, there is no uncertainty with God. At Revelation 21:3, 4, his Word says clearly concerning the future: [Read scripture.] Does that sound good to you? . . . ” Then offer the subscription, highlighting a specific point of interest in the current issue.
5 What if the householder is busy? You may be able to feature a particular article in the magazine by saying, “We have something brief for those who are busy.” And then the first article of the February 15 issue of The Watchtower might be presented: “Many people today see the future of man as gloomy and without hope. Some have even linked the Biblical apocalypse, or Armageddon, to human extinction, thus stirring fear in the heart of their fellowman. However, the article ‘Apocalypse​—What Is It?’ clearly defines what the Biblical apocalypse really is. I feel confident that you will be encouraged by reading The Watchtower. We are offering a year’s subscription of 24 issues for a contribution of $4.00.”
6 Before beginning field service each day, we pray to Jehovah for his direction. We can be confident that he will direct our steps. With Jehovah blessing our work, we should not hold back in offering the subscription at every opportunity. Remember, The Watchtower and Awake! present lifesaving information from God’s Word. (Zeph. 2:2, 3) May we carry out Jehovah’s work with zeal, looking to him to direct and bless us.

