Meetings to Help Us Make Disciples
WEEK STARTING FEBRUARY 2
Song 71
12 min: Appropriate Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry and local announcements. Demonstrate magazine presentation featuring the February 8 issue of Awake! Encourage all to share in magazine work on the second Saturday of February.
18 min: “Continue Offering Watchtower Subscriptions.” Question-and-answer consideration with demonstration. When discussing paragraph 2, ask for expressions and/​or experiences with regard to offering subscriptions to people who already know we are Jehovah’s Witnesses. While discussing paragraph 3, ask why the Topic for Conversation is appropriate. Have experienced, well-prepared publisher demonstrate use of Topic for Conversation and subscription offer featuring the February 15 issue of The Watchtower. As time permits, ask audience why presentation should be effective. Encourage all to learn, rehearse, and use Topic for Conversation. Be positive in presenting the subscription offer. Be sure to carry subscription slips at all times. It may be that Jehovah’s spirit will move householder to subscribe. When subscription is not taken or the householder is busy, the two magazines and a copy of the brochure The Government That Will Bring Paradise may be offered for a contribution of 70¢.
15 min: Reasoning From the Scriptures. Audience discussion of “Prophecy,” pages 295-7.
(3 min.) Chairman: Define prophecy and give examples of Bible prophecies already fulfilled.
(12 min.) Audience discussion. What Bible prophecies are yet to be fulfilled? (Highlight Revelation 21:3, 4.) Why are Christians keenly interested in this prophecy as well as others? This section of the Reasoning book can be beneficial as we use the Topic for Conversation. Request all to bring Reasoning book with them to the Service Meeting next week. Encourage all to share in the house-to-house preaching work this weekend.
Song 187 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING FEBRUARY 9
Song 46
10 min: Local announcements. Accounts report. Theocratic News.
20 min: “Showing Appreciation for the Pioneer Service.” Question-and-answer coverage followed by five-minute interview of regular or auxiliary pioneers who have been helped by family members (or others) to share in the pioneer work. How have they been helped? What has been encouraging and strengthening to them? What have they done personally to strengthen their own determination to continue in the pioneer service and make a success of it with Jehovah’s help? In conclusion, encourage all who can to serve as auxiliary pioneers in March (which has five weekends) and April.
15 min: “Presenting the Good News​—Using the Reasoning Book.” Questions and answers. Demonstrate suggestions in paragraphs 3 and 4. Choose those appropriate to your territory. These demonstrations should be brief and well prepared. After each demonstration, have audience comment on why material from book will be effective in local territory.
Song 34 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING FEBRUARY 16
Song 5
13 min: Local announcements. Ask audience which article they would feature in presenting the February 22 issue of Awake! and why. Then have effective publisher demonstrate 60-second house-to-house presentation featuring this issue of Awake! Ask audience why they believe presentation was effective. Encourage all to share in magazine work on the fourth Saturday of the month.
15 min: Local needs. Or talk based on article “How True Faith Can Help You” in October 15, 1985, issue of The Watchtower.
17 min: “Be Sure to Call Back.” Questions and answers with local application. When discussing paragraphs 5 and 6, consider local situations and offer practical suggestions and encouragement.
Song 30 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING FEBRUARY 23
Song 196
15 min: Local announcements. Review plans for Memorial celebration. Comment on how interested ones can be encouraged to attend. Encourage brothers to start inviting interested ones now. Cover article “Help Others to Find True Peace and Security” by questions and answers. We will be offering the True Peace book in April.
15 min: “School and Jehovah’s Witnesses​—Are You Using It?” Talk based on article in October 1, 1985, issue of The Watchtower. Include expressions from parents and youths in local congregation who have had good success in using the brochure.
15 min: The Offer for March. Display to congregation the older 192-page books on hand in literature department. Encourage brothers to feature book(s) that congregation has in large supply for special 50¢ offer. Ask two or three pioneers or other experienced publishers how they will present book. Call on prepared publisher for brief demonstration. Place Look! booklet where no books can be placed. Studies can be started in that booklet. If out of stock, use another booklet. Encourage all to share in field service the first Sunday of March.
Song 32 and concluding prayer.

