Presenting the Good News​—Using the Reasoning Book
1 Each one of us desires to ‘handle the word of truth aright.’ (2 Tim. 2:15) That Word is “the sword of the spirit,” which in the hands of Jehovah’s people can overturn strong, lofty reasonings. (Eph. 6:17; 2 Cor. 10:4, 5) In our efforts to help people, what a valuable tool we have in the Reasoning book!
2 We have many opportunities to use the practical suggestions in the Reasoning book. Not only are there the fine introductions presented on pages 9-15, but on subsequent pages there are excellent suggestions to help us answer sincere questions and deal with potential conversation stoppers. Which of these have you found useful in continuing a conversation about the future?
3 The current magazines on the apocalypse may prompt questions from the householder. If appropriate, you may be able to continue the conversation using points in the Reasoning book under such headings as “Armageddon,” “Government,” “Kingdom,” or “Last Days.” Or if someone says, “These things won’t happen in my lifetime,” turn to page 233, where it says: “But it is going to come in someone’s lifetime, isn’t it? . . . Would anyone be able to know that his generation was the one to see it? Jesus’ own apostles wanted to know that, and the answer he gave them is very significant for us today.” (Luke 21:29-32) Or you may wish to use the information on page 234 or page 242. Your brief, satisfying comments may pave the way for a return visit. What a storehouse of information is available to us!
4 Some persons might express doubt that God is going to do anything to change matters. We could reason with them, using the points under “Wickedness” on pages 430 and 431. Then direct their attention to the article “Apocalypse​—When?” in the February 15 Watchtower (which shows that survivors of the generation of 1914 will live to experience the foretold apocalypse) or the closing paragraphs of that article under the subheading “Apocalypse​—Prelude to Paradise.”
5 Good experiences are being enjoyed by those who are using the Reasoning book. While doing street work, one brother engaged a passerby in conversation. The man asked questions, some in an argumentative way. After answering a number of the man’s questions, the brother decided to make use of the Reasoning book. He simply read from the appropriate section, offering an occasional “That’s interesting, isn’t it?” The man’s attitude changed immediately. Seeing the facts in print made the difference. Before leaving, he even asked where our meetings are being held. All of this took place on a busy street.
6 Our use of the Reasoning book may bring similar good results. Acquaint yourself with its contents. Use it in the field. Endeavor to be ‘ready to make a defense before everyone that demands a reason for your hope.’​—1 Pet. 3:15.

