Showing Appreciation for the Pioneer Service
1 Jesus encouraged his disciples to “beg the Master of the harvest to send out workers into his harvest.” (Matt. 9:37, 38) Some are showing appreciation for this need by doing more in the witness work. In the United States during the 1985 service year, an average of 38,489 reported as auxiliary pioneers each month. The peak month was April when 100,145 shared. Over 44,000 are now serving as regular pioneers. Each month, more continue to join the pioneer ranks and are experiencing the benefits and blessings that come with such increased activity.
2 What are some of the blessings that come to those who can increase their share in the ministry so as to pioneer? Daily thinking and talking about God’s Word is in itself an outstanding benefit. Increasing their time in field service to some 90 hours each month generally results in contacting more interested persons, placing more literature, making more return visits, and starting more home Bible studies. This means more spiritual giving, helping more people to learn the truth and become disciples of Jesus Christ. Sharing in the pioneer service also brings the blessing of increased happiness.​—Acts 20:35.
ENCOURAGE PIONEERS
3 Not everyone is able to pioneer, but all of us should show appreciation for the pioneer service and encourage and support those who have taken up this vital work. How can this be done? We can arrange to work with pioneers in the house-to-house ministry and offer to go with them on return visits. Pioneers often have no one to work with in the afternoons. Can you fit afternoon witnessing into your schedule so as to work with the pioneers?
4 Encouragement and moral support are important. One traveling overseer reported that not all have been encouraging in their comments to pioneers. We should highly value the importance of pioneering and show appreciation for the effort put forth by those who are able to adjust their affairs to have a share in it. All of us should continue to strengthen our own love for the field ministry and the pioneer service.
5 Those already in the pioneer service can continue to show they truly prize their privilege by ‘exerting themselves vigorously’ in Jehovah’s work. (Luke 13:24) There is the hour requirement to meet. Sacrifices of a personal nature must often be made in order to continue in the work. (Heb. 13:15) There is a need to keep up with the spiritual food supplied by the faithful and discreet slave so as to stay spiritually strong. All of this requires considerable effort and good planning, as successful pioneers can testify.
6 The apostle Paul stated: “All creation keeps on groaning together and being in pain.” Today, this groaning is reaching a climax. (Rom. 8:22; 2 Tim. 3:1) But some of these people are eager to hear the Kingdom message. Out of concern for their welfare, and in view of the lateness of the time, all of Jehovah’s people who can make room for it should give serious thought to entering the pioneer service. Can you do that? March has five full weekends, allowing greater opportunity to meet the requirement of auxiliary pioneer hours. If you can arrange to auxiliary pioneer in March and April, it will give you a good taste of what pioneering is really like, and you will experience Jehovah’s increased blessing upon your endeavors.​—Ps. 34:8.
7 When we put Kingdom interests first and, to the best of our ability, have a regular and full share in the field ministry, we are showing our appreciation for Jehovah’s work, including the pioneer service.

