How to Buy Out the Opportune Time
1 Having plenty to do in Jehovah’s service keeps us busy! (1 Cor. 15:58) We recognize the need to study personally and as a family, to read the Bible daily, to prepare for and attend congregation meetings, and to share regularly in the field ministry. Overseers have shepherding responsibilities, and they care for other congregation duties. Some have weighty family responsibilities or a variety of obligations to others. To get everything done properly, everyone needs balance and good personal organization.
2 Set Priorities: Success in ‘buying out the opportune time for ourselves’ depends on our discernment and good judgment. (Eph. 5:15, 16) We must determine what “the more important things” are and put them at the top of our list of priorities. (Phil. 1:10) One couple described their theocratic household in this way: “We fill our lives with the truth . . . The truth is not part of our life, it is our life. Everything else revolves around it.” Putting Jehovah’s worship and service first in one’s life is essential.
3 Identify Time Wasters: There are 168 hours in a week, and we need to make wise use of our available time. To have enough time for theocratic activities, we need to identify and minimize time wasters. One survey revealed that the average adult in the United States spends more than 30 hours a week watching TV! For others, much time is consumed reading worldly literature. Some may find that they devote an inordinate amount of time to social activities, hobbies, recreation, or some sort of computer activity. We may need to take a close look at our daily routine to see how we might better use our time. Wisdom requires that we set limits on how much time we allow for nonessential activities.
4 Develop a Good Routine: Whatever our personal circumstances, each of us can buy out time for spiritual pursuits. Some have found that getting a little earlier start each day helps them accomplish more. If we spend much time commuting to work or waiting for others, we might use some of that time for Bible reading, preparing for meetings, or listening to material provided by the Society on audiocassettes. Families benefit greatly by setting aside a regular, specific time to study together. If each family member is punctual when coming to the family study, it gives everyone some extra time.
5 With each passing day, we should become more keenly aware that “the time left is reduced.” (1 Cor. 7:29) Our lives depend on how we use the precious time that remains. We will be blessed if we buy out the opportune time so that we can keep Kingdom interests in first place!—Matt. 6:33.

