Prepare Your Own Magazine Presentation
1 We appreciate the Watchtower and Awake! magazines for their timely and informative articles, which cover everything from world issues to “the deep things of God.” (1 Cor. 2:10) All of us recall many new and upbuilding things we have read in these journals, which Jehovah is using in progressively revealing the truth. (Prov. 4:18) We want to be eager to distribute them as widely as possible.
2 Analyze Your Territory: What type of people live in your area? If their pace of life is fast, you may need to prepare a presentation that is brief and to the point. If you have territory where the pace of life is less hurried, you may be able to say more. If most householders work during the day, you may have better success calling at their homes in the late afternoon or early evening. You might contact some in the daytime through street witnessing or working from store to store. Some publishers get good results by approaching people informally in parking lots and city parks.
3 Acquaint Yourself With the Magazines: Read each issue as soon as you receive it. Select the articles that you feel might appeal to the people in your territory. What subjects concern them? Look for a specific point that you can quote from the article you plan to feature. Think of a question that you can raise to stimulate interest. Pick out a timely scripture to read to the householder if you get the opportunity to do so. Think about what you might say to mention the donation arrangement and how you could lay the groundwork for a return visit.
4 Prepare Your Opening Words: Carefully choose the words you plan on using to introduce yourself and to start a conversation. Some have found success with this opening comment: “I’ve read a fascinating article in this magazine, and I want to share it with others.” Many open with a question that focuses on the talking point they plan to use. For example:
5 If highlighting an article on the prevalence of crime, you could ask:
▪ “What will it take for us to be able to sleep at night without fear of being robbed or harmed?” Explain that you have some information about a remedy for this problem. The remedy will soon eliminate every other kind of social disorder as well. Refer to something in the magazine that offers such a hope. When you call back, you can draw the householder’s attention to chapter 1 of the Knowledge book.
6 When offering an article on family life, you might say this:
▪ “Most parents find it a real challenge to raise a family these days. Many books have been written on the subject, but even the experts don’t agree. Is there anyone who can provide reliable guidance?” Share a specific comment from the magazine that demonstrates the wise counsel found in the Bible. When you make the return visit, discuss the Scriptural thoughts on rearing children covered in the Knowledge book, pages 145-8.
7 In featuring an article on a social problem, you could say:
▪ “Many people feel under pressure because of the stressful times in which we live. Do you think God intended that we live this way?” Point to an article that shows how to cope with today’s problems or that gives reasons to look forward to a future that will be free from anxiety. On your next visit, discuss the illustration and caption on pages 4-5 of the Knowledge book, and then lead right into a home Bible study.
8 Adapt to the Householder: You will meet people having different interests and backgrounds. Prepare a basic presentation that you can adjust for each householder. Have in mind how you might adapt what you say to a man, a woman, an older person, or a youth. There are no rigid rules about what you must say. Use whatever is comfortable for you and gets results. However, be enthusiastic, speak from the heart, and be a good listener. Those who are “rightly disposed” will sense your sincerity and will respond favorably.—Acts 13:48.
9 Assist One Another: By sharing ideas with one another, we learn new ways to express ourselves. Practicing our presentations together gives us experience and confidence. (Pr. 27:17) If you rehearse what you are going to say, you will feel more at ease at the door. It is vital that parents take the time to help their children prepare, listen as they practice their presentation, and offer suggestions for improvement. New ones can benefit by working with more experienced publishers.
10 Preparing your own magazine presentation need not be difficult. It is simply a matter of getting something specific in mind to say and then expressing it in an appealing manner. With initiative and forethought, you can work up a fine presentation that will get a good response.
11 Magazine distribution is one of the primary ways we spread the Kingdom message worldwide. If you can get The Watchtower and Awake! into the hands of sincere people, the magazines can speak for themselves. Always remember their value and how their message can save lives. This kind of ‘doing good and sharing of things with others’ is what pleases Jehovah very much.—Heb. 13:16.

