Publishing Good News of Something Better
1 For 117 years The Watchtower has served as a defender of Bible truth. Currently, 18,950,000 copies of each issue are printed in 125 languages. Awake! too has long advocated God’s Word, and it now has a circulation of 15,730,000 copies in 80 languages.—Compare Colossians 1:23.
2 Magazines Fill a Spiritual Need: The Watchtower and Awake! have benefited millions of honesthearted people by helping to fill their spiritual need. Faith-building articles are published. For example, in The Watchtower of February 1, 1996, we studied material dealing with the need to trust in Jehovah and his Word. The March 1, 1996, issue of The Watchtower encouraged us to keep busy in Jehovah’s service and to keep in expectation of him. How stimulating the detailed discussion of Zephaniah’s prophecy was! Then there was the faith-strengthening discussion of Christian loyalty in The Watchtower of March 15, 1996. The May 15, 1996, issue emphasized the value of reading and studying God’s Word on a regular basis. These articles have served to deepen our understanding of God’s Word, and our appreciation for his Kingdom has been enhanced.
3 In addition, these magazines contain timely, practical articles on godly conduct, Christian morals, and other subjects of vital importance. They come to grips with the real issues affecting our lives. As a result, we enjoy a superior quality of life now while we await the fulfillment of God’s promises of something even better in the future.—Isa. 48:17; 1 Tim. 6:19.
4 A brief review of what is stated on page 4 of each issue of Awake! gives us good reason for recommending this magazine as excellent reading material for people everywhere, young and old alike. There it states: “Awake! is for the enlightenment of the entire family. It shows how to cope with today’s problems. It reports the news, tells about people in many lands, examines religion and science. But it does more. It probes beneath the surface and points to the real meaning behind current events, yet it always stays politically neutral and does not exalt one race above another. Most important, this magazine builds confidence in the Creator’s promise of a peaceful and secure new world that is about to replace the present wicked, lawless system of things.”
5 Share the Magazines With Others: Be liberal in distributing The Watchtower and Awake! (Compare 1 Timothy 6:18.) Have copies available so that you can offer them to anyone you happen to meet. (Eccl. 11:6) All of us, including young and new publishers, can have a full share in distributing magazines this month by using brief presentations based on the timely articles featured in the current issues. Become well acquainted with their contents, and offer them with sincerity and conviction.
6 The Watchtower and Awake! contain information that every person needs. Distributing them is one of the best ways we can help others to learn the good news that something better is soon to come!

