Question Box
▪ How long should a formal Bible study be conducted with an individual in the Knowledge book?
Jehovah is blessing his organization today. We see evidence of this each year as thousands of new ones take a stand for the truth. The Knowledge book is proving to be an effective tool in accomplishing this. The January 15, 1996, issue of The Watchtower pointed out that this book is designed to help a Bible student make spiritual progress rather quickly, perhaps to the point of baptism within a few months.
For this reason, the same Watchtower, page 17, advised: “After an individual has completed his Bible study in the Knowledge book and has been baptized, it may not be necessary to conduct a formal study with him in a second book.”
What about a person who does not get baptized after completing the Knowledge book? The June 1996 Our Kingdom Ministry, page 6, paragraph 23, reminded us of the point made in The Watchtower about not studying additional books with the same student after completing the Knowledge book. Does this mean that we are not interested in helping a Bible student beyond this point? No. We want people to receive a basic knowledge of the truth. Yet, it is expected that within a relatively short period of time, an effective teacher will be able to assist a sincere average student to acquire sufficient knowledge to make an intelligent decision to serve Jehovah. It may be that because of their personal circumstances, some Bible students will even desire to study more than once a week.
Admittedly, some students will progress more slowly than others. But if after studying the Knowledge book, which may have taken longer than would normally be the case, the person has not decided that he wants to become associated with the congregation, the publisher would do well to discuss the situation with one of the elders on the Congregation Service Committee. If extenuating or unusual circumstances are involved, some further help may be warranted. This is in harmony with the principle of what is stated in paragraphs 11 and 12 on page 17 of the January 15, 1996, Watchtower.
Appreciation for taking in even a basic knowledge of the truth should motivate the student to attend Christian meetings. This could lead the student to giving some clear evidence of his desire to serve Jehovah. If such spiritual appreciation is not evident after the study in the Knowledge book has been conducted for an extended period, it may be advisable to discontinue the study.

