Service Meetings for October
Week Starting October 7
Song 47
10 min: Local announcements. Selected Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry. Comment on July field service report for the country and the local congregation.
15 min: Question Box. Service overseer or other qualified elder discusses information with audience.
20 min: “Prepare Your Own Magazine Presentation.” (Paragraphs 1-7) Ask questions on paragraphs 1-4, and then have two or three brief demonstrations to show how current magazines may be offered, using the suggestions in paragraphs 5-7. Include comments from March 1, 1987, Watchtower, page 17, paragraphs 8-9.
Song 222 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting October 14
Song 39
10 min: Local announcements. Accounts report.
15 min: “Publishing Good News of Something Better.” Questions and answers. Point out some of the history-making articles that have appeared in The Watchtower.—See The Watchtower of March 1, 1987, page 13.
20 min: “Prepare Your Own Magazine Presentation.” (Paragraphs 8-11) Questions and answers. Include comments on the four suggestions in the January 1, 1994, Watchtower, pages 24-5, paragraphs 18-21. Using the October issues of the magazines, show how to prepare a presentation: (1) Select an article that will likely attract interest in your territory, (2) look for an interesting point to feature, (3) formulate a question that could be used to draw attention to that point, (4) pick out a scripture to read if given the opportunity, and (5) prepare your opening words and what you will say about the magazine so that you will encourage the householder to accept it. Have two or three capable publishers each demonstrate a presentation. Include a youth who will demonstrate a simple magazine offer. They should mention that donations are accepted for our worldwide work.
Song 82 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting October 21
Song 169
15 min: Local announcements. Explain how to start a magazine route: (1) Record each placement and the article that was featured, (2) arrange to return with the next issues, and (3) set aside a specific time in your weekly service schedule to make these calls. Offer six-month subscriptions where you find interest, and remember to report each magazine route call as a return visit.
15 min: “Work Your Territory Thoroughly.” Discuss article and what the local arrangements are for working businesses. Invite audience to relate encouraging experiences they enjoyed when they worked the stores included in their territory.
15 min: Local needs. Or a talk by an elder on the article “Maintain Your Confidence Firm to the End,” from the May 1, 1996, Watchtower, pages 21-4.
Song 12 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting October 28
Song 27
10 min: Local announcements. With several worldly holidays coming up in November and December, perhaps allowing time off from secular work and school, encourage all to think about the possibility of enrolling as auxiliary pioneers. Urge all to turn in October field service reports this weekend.
20 min: “How to Buy Out the Opportune Time.” Questions and answers. Include comments from December 1, 1989, Watchtower, pages 16-17, paragraphs 7-11.
15 min: Review Literature Offer for November. The Knowledge book will be offered, and a special effort will be made to follow up on all placements, with a view to starting home Bible studies. Two or three capable publishers discuss the value of the book and how it can be used. The information it contains touches the lives of people in every walk of life. It covers the fundamental Bible subjects and principles new ones need to understand before they get baptized. If we keep the study moving at a good pace, the student can make rapid progress. Discuss and demonstrate how to start a study by using the direct approach: Review picture and caption on pages 4-5; explain our study method; briefly discuss the first five paragraphs in chapter 1; make an appointment to return later and continue the discussion, answering the question, Is everlasting life only a dream? Emphasize the joy that comes with the privilege of conducting a home Bible study.
Song 162 and concluding prayer.

