Cooperate as a Flock with Servant Leadership
WHAT many responsibilities fall to the shepherds comprising the servant leadership in the congregations of God’s people! These shepherds have the obligation of taking the lead in the field ministry, of setting a fine example in conduct and in caring for their families; and they have the obligation to feed and protect the flock of God.​—1 Pet. 5:2, 3.
For both shepherds and “sheep” to be truly happy, not only must the servants properly discharge their duties, but the individual “sheep” of the congregational flock must fully cooperate. They must heed the counsel of the apostle Paul: “Be obedient to those who are taking the lead among you and be submissive, for they are keeping watch over your souls as those who will render an account.” In so doing you are showing regard for the Great Shepherd, Jesus Christ, who said in regard to his followers’ response to him: “The sheep listen to his voice.”​—Heb. 13:17, 20; John 10:3.a
How can you fully cooperate with the servant leadership? By being thoughtful, alert and ready to do your part. For example, there is the simple matter of coming to meetings on time, also preparing for meetings in advance and then giving others the benefit of your preparation by freely speaking up as opportunity affords. Willingness to cooperate is also shown by engaging regularly in the field ministry and reporting promptly. Nor to be overlooked is contributing financially to the upkeep of the Kingdom Hall, as well as helping to keep it clean.​—Heb. 13:7.
Then there is the opportunity to cooperate in the matter of assignments for parts on the program for the various meetings, the theocratic ministry school, service meetings and others. When scheduled to have a part, are you always on hand or do you fail to show up at times? Do you do your best to make your part on the program interesting and upbuilding?​—1 Tim. 4:13-16.
There is also the matter of your conduct. Do you cooperate with the servant leadership by never giving them concern because of being careless about your morals? Since the servants have the obligation to give personal attention to the spiritually weak, immature or sick, as well as those physically incapacitated, do you cooperate by doing your part to aid and comfort these needy ones?​—Rom. 15:1, 2.
An occasion in which there especially is a golden opportunity for all the flock to cooperate with the servant leadership is when the Watch Tower Society’s traveling representative, the circuit servant, visits the congregation. Do you give him full cooperation? Do you volunteer to work with him in the field? Do you volunteer to extend to him Christian hospitality? Do you attend all the meetings?​—1 Pet. 4:9.
Love, as well as empathy, will enable you to do these things. In all such ways the individual members of the congregational flocks can cooperate with servant leadership, to Jehovah’s praise and to the mutual happiness of all.
[Footnotes]
For details see The Watchtower, March 1, May 1, 1966.

