Do You Remember?
How carefully have you read recent issues of The Watchtower? Do you recall these outstanding points?
●If someone gets involved in an act of serious sin, why should he seek mature Christian help?
Primarily because the Bible wisely counsels him to do so. Additionally, if he fails to do this he may become irreformable or may, out of fear of being discovered, draw away from Jehovah’s organization.​—Pp. 540, 541.a
● What type of sins definitely ought to be brought to the attention of the congregation committee, even though some counsel has already been given by another mature Christian brother?
Any sin of the type mentioned at 1 Corinthians 5:11, if it has been committed repeatedly. Sexual immorality involving other persons, whether committed by adults or baptized minors, even if committed only once. Any serious sin that has become public knowledge.​—P. 541.
● Who were foreshadowed by the ancient patriarch Job?
As his name showed, Job was an “object of hostility.” Jesus Christ, the Greater Job, became the object of hostility from religious groups in his day. The modern-day remnant of spiritual Israel, because of their integrity to God, have come under similar reproach from religious enemies.​—Pp. 553, 554.
● In the modern-day fulfillment, who are pictured by Job’s three false comforters?
The religious clergy and leaders of Christendom who have misrepresented and opposed God’s servants.​—P. 557.
● Who bears the primary responsibility for making decisions as to activity in which minors may or may not engage?
God has assigned that responsibility to the father; if there is no father in the home, then the mother bears that load. Of course, what God’s Word says about right conduct should always be followed.​—P. 573.
● What fine results can come about when a Christian endures under persecution?
It can strengthen the individual spiritually, be a source of strength to fellow believers and serve to honor Jehovah’s name.​—Pp. 598, 599.
● What has God’s kingdom been doing since 1914?
It has taken action against its heavenly enemies, resulting in Satan’s ouster from heaven; it has caused worldwide proclamation of its installation to be made and protected the anointed ambassadors making that proclamation; it has gathered willing subjects who have joined in preaching the good news of the Kingdom.​—Pp. 620-625.
● What are the precious fire-resistant materials with which Jehovah’s witnesses endeavor to build true Christians?
They are godly qualities such as spiritual discernment, devotion to Bible principles, respect for Jehovah’s laws, and fearless willingness to witness about the Messianic kingdom.​—P. 661.
● What “truth” is it that Jesus meant when he said, “The truth will set you free,” and in what way could people be free?
It is not truth in general, but it is the truth that comes from Jehovah through Jesus. The freedom he spoke about was freedom from sin and death.​—Pp. 716, 717.
● What did Isaiah want to know when he asked, “How long, O Jehovah?”
He was not asking as to how long he must preach, but, rather, how long Jehovah would permit the bad spiritual condition of Israel to continue. The answer was, “Until the cities actually crash in ruins.”​—Pp. 750, 751.
[Footnotes]
All references are to The Watchtower for 1966.

