Have You Read Your Copy?
“READ my copy of what?” you ask. Why, your copy of Life Everlasting​—in Freedom of the Sons of God! It has been four to six months since most of you in the United States, Canada and Great Britain received your copies. If you have not already read it, do so now.
Why? Well, if you do not, you are missing out on a spiritual treasure. That Bible-study aid contains a wealth of Scriptural information designed to aid you as one of Jehovah’s witnesses both in facing the problems of life and in instructing others. True, in due time it will be a textbook for congregational studies, but do not wait until then to gain this precious information. Get an overall, bird’s-eye view of it, as it were, right away by reading it from cover to cover.
Of course, this book is not only for Jehovah’s witnesses. Are you studying the Bible with one of Jehovah’s witnesses? Then you will want to read it through on the side, so to speak; it will hasten your progress in learning God’s will. Really, reading this book is strongly recommended for all before they dedicate themselves and get baptized.
A WEALTH OF INFORMATION
This new Bible-study aid contains a wealth of information. Typical is the chapter “Heaven’s Way of Ruling the ‘Congregation of God.’” To mention but one point: By reading it carefully you will appreciate that in the Christian congregation epískopos [overseer] and diákonos [ministerial servant] are mutually exclusive terms, whereas presbýteros [older man] can apply to either an epískopos or a diákonos.
In particular have many expressions of appreciation been heard and received for the chapter “The Lord’s Evening Meal​—A Liberation Supper.” For, in addition to treating the subject doctrinally in all its aspects, it makes clearer than it has ever been made before just who should partake of the Memorial emblems and how one can judge with certainty for himself.
In other chapters the book makes clear just what Jesus Christ meant by saying that Christians “are no part of the world,” also what is meant by Paul’s saying that Christians ‘present their bodies to God,’ and how these principles should affect choice of employment and your attitude toward political activities in your community as well as conflicts between nations.​—John 17:16; Rom. 12:1.
Among the many fine points on which new light is shed in this new Bible-study aid is the proper application of 1 Peter 3:21, which reads, in part: “That which corresponds to this is also now saving you, namely, baptism.” What is the baptism to which this refers? What is the salvation? Is it being saved at Armageddon?
Then, again, why is it not correct to say that Jesus’ baptism symbolized his dedication to do his Father’s will? And did Jesus’ going down into the water and coming out of it picture his death and resurrection? If not, why not? Read the book and find out.
But, without a doubt, nothing has created more interest in this textbook than the first chapter with its chart and fine information regarding the 7,000 years of God’s rest day. The observation that 1975 may well mark the beginning of mankind’s great Jubilee has intrigued many.
The question, however, remains: How can you find time to read this fine Bible-study aid? It may be said to be largely a matter of appreciation and organization. Some managed to read the book through on their vacations this past summer. For others the problem may be solved simply by buying out time from watching television for reading the Life Everlasting book. (Eph. 5:15, 16) Or it may be that you can make better use of certain time in your busy schedule. For instance, do you travel to and from work each day by bus, subway or train, or several times a week to and from congregational meetings? Then why not take a pocket-sized edition of Life Everlasting with you and read it?
Or could you and your family spend ten or fifteen minutes right after the evening meal each day reading it? Regarding this, the president of the Watch Tower Society, N. H. Knorr, recently received the following letter:
“My family and I wish to thank you for the wonderful suggestion you gave this summer at our District Assembly in Montreal, concerning reading the Life Everlasting book while still seated at the supper table. This new-found time enabled us to finish the book in two months, giving us a wealth of knowledge, and being more fully equipped for our ministry. We are now using this time reading other publications of the Society, which have been neglected by us in the past. Thank you, Brother Knorr, for having brought this new-found time to our attention​—time which was otherwise idled away.”
Time is precious, use it wisely. If you have a copy of Life Everlasting​—in Freedom of the Sons of God you have a marvelous book in your possession. Time used to give it at least a quick preliminary reading is time well spent. When you come to something new to you, you may want to slow down and make it your own, but do not put off your first reading of the book for lack of time to study it thoroughly. Make time to read it now!

