From Our Readers
Building Self-Respect
I am pleased to thank you for the articles “Why Don’t I Like Myself?” and “How Can I Build My Self-Respect?” (March 22 and April 8, 1983, “Young People Ask . . .”) I am 21 years of age and have problems similar to those mentioned. I can be happy one minute and suddenly I feel depressed. I feel certain that with the help of these articles I will be better able to solve the problems that arise.
L. R. P., Brazil
Reading Romance Novels
Thank you for the wonderful article “Are Romance Novels Harmless Reading?” (November 8, 1983) It’s really easy to become addicted to these novels because they’re just like TV soap operas. As you read more and more novels your senses gradually become dull, and you find you’re accepting wrong things that would have disgusted you before. The novels really can warp your sense of right and wrong. Sometimes I still feel tempted to escape into the fantasy world of romance novels, but now I can turn to this article for additional help to resist.
L. L., Canada
Mental Depression
After being out of work for one month, I became terribly depressed. Then while thumbing through some magazines in the waiting room of a government office my eye caught your magazine on the subject “You Can Fight Depression!” (September 8, 1981) I read through the article and obtained permission to get a Xerox copy of the article to take home to reread. I took note of the most important points applying to me and put the suggestions into practice. Little by little I noticed that my mind was reacting favorably and my depression was subsiding. Today I consider myself practically cured. Thanks to that article, I have been able to regain my emotional balance.
P. I. M., Brazil
Pornography
For several years I was very interested in pornography through erotic films and magazines, even though I felt it was improper. Now that I have read the article “Young People Ask . . . What’s the Harm in Pornography?” (April 22, 1983) I feel that I have just taken an antipornographic drink. I have experienced the painful and pernicious effects mentioned in the article. I don’t have words to express my gratitude for the fine help I have just received.
F. J. M., Brazil
Video Games
Thank you for the article “Young People Ask . . . Are Violent Video Games Really Harmful?” (September 8, 1983) Some of my friends own such video games, so I have been able to play them without it costing me anything. While playing them I was transferred into an isolated dream world where the primitive slogan applied: “Kill or be killed.” Thank you for calling my attention to the predominating disadvantages and harmful results of devices of this kind. Otherwise harmless fun perhaps would have escalated into total addiction.
L. L., Federal Republic of Germany

