What the Lessons Can Teach Us
IF HISTORY seems to repeat itself, could it be that there has been an unseen architect of mankind’s sad history? Do his works reveal the unmistakable stamp of an evil personality? The Bible’s answer is clear.
The Christian apostle Paul identifies this architect of mankind’s unhappy history as “the god of this system of things,” Satan the Devil. (2 Corinthians 4:4) Why, “the whole world is lying in the power of the wicked one”! (1 John 5:19) So it should not be surprising that in history tyranny follows tyranny, for the wicked spirit “world rulers of this darkness” would have it so. (Ephesians 6:12) History, then, should teach us that there can be just one truly satisfying change in government. Tyranny will be a thing of the past only under the rule of God’s Kingdom.
What about Lesson 2, involving religion and politics? It is clear that false religion’s friendship with the world has not offset the moral decay that the apostle Paul gave as a feature of “the last days” of this system. He said that people​—even those professedly devout—​would be “lovers of themselves, lovers of money” and “lovers of pleasures rather than lovers of God.” They would have merely “a form of godly devotion.”​—2 Timothy 3:1-5.
Why have ministers of the world’s religions failed to stem this unspiritual tide? In part, they have been unable to do so because they have always sought to mix religion and politics. This makes them unclean in the eyes of God, and from this we should learn that we must refrain from such involvement if we are to be friends of Jehovah God.​—Revelation 17:1, 2, 5; James 4:4; John 15:19.
Additionally, material prosperity has not made those enjoying it truly happy. Materialism is also being used by Satan and his demons to draw people away from serving God. (Mark 4:19) This history lesson should teach us that genuine happiness comes from awareness of our spiritual need and our doing something to satisfy it.
Finally, a study of history in the light of the Bible should convince us that human betterment can never be achieved apart from God. Of course, imperfect humans cannot make the needed world changes. But this does not mean that our lot is hopeless. No, indeed, for God has promised something better.
“New Heavens and a New Earth”
Jehovah God’s purpose for our planet Earth is not destruction in some nuclear holocaust. Rather, he will rid the earth of the unjust oppressive system upon it that promotes unhappiness. (Ecclesiastes 1:4; Isaiah 45:18) After God’s intervention through Jesus Christ comes the abyssing of Satan and his demons. (Revelation 19:11–20:3) That old architect of history will be out of a job! Then will come the blessing of a New Order entrusted to Jehovah’s master architect, Jesus Christ. Through Jesus’ righteous rule the promise of Psalm 37:11 will come to pass, for then “the meek ones themselves will possess the earth, and they will indeed find their exquisite delight in the abundance of peace.” What a marvelous day for the human race!
Perhaps of lessons not learned from history, the greatest of all is that Satan has been the ruler of the world. But that will change when Jesus wins the victory over him in vindication of Jehovah God’s name and sovereignty. Sad human history then will no longer repeat itself, for the Bible promises: “There are new heavens and a new earth that we are awaiting according to [God’s] promise, and in these righteousness is to dwell.” (2 Peter 3:13) The former things will not be repeated, nor even be called to mind, but will pass away. (Isaiah 65:17; Revelation 21:4) Nothing will ever threaten the peace and tranquillity of mankind in that New Order promised by the One whose purpose does not fail.

