An Earth Free of Land Mines
WHO can solve the problem of land mines? As we have seen, human efforts cannot root out hatred, bigotry, and greed. Students of the Bible, however, realize that the Creator can bring a lasting solution. But how will he do so?
Establishing a Peaceful Society
Wars are fought by people, not by weapons. If we want to see peace, therefore, the hatred that divides mankind into racial, tribal, and national groups must be done away with. God promises to do this by means of his Kingdom, for which millions throughout the world have been taught to pray.—Matthew 6:9, 10.
The Bible speaks of Jehovah as “the God who gives peace.” (Romans 15:33) The peace that God offers is not based upon bans and treaties, nor is it founded upon fear of reprisals from a well-armed enemy nation. On the contrary, God-given peace involves changes in the way people think and in the attitudes that they hold toward fellow humans.
Jehovah God will educate meek ones in his ways of peace. (Psalm 25:9) His Word, the Bible, promises a time when all those alive “will be persons taught by Jehovah, and the peace of your sons will be abundant.” (Isaiah 54:13) To an extent, this is already taking place. Worldwide, Jehovah’s Witnesses are known for promoting peace among people of even the most diverse backgrounds. People who are taught the lofty principles of the Bible strive to live in unity regardless of issues that would otherwise divide them. Bible education changes their entire outlook from one of hatred to one of love.—John 13:34, 35; 1 Corinthians 13:4-8.
Besides education, the need for global collaboration has long been regarded as a key element in the elimination of weapons. For example, the International Committee of the Red Cross recommends that the international community unitedly promote preventative and curative measures in dealing with the threat of land mines.
Jehovah promises to do far more. The prophet Daniel foretold: “The God of heaven will set up a kingdom that will never be brought to ruin. . . . It will crush and put an end to all these [existing] kingdoms, and it itself will stand to times indefinite.”—Daniel 2:44.
God’s Kingdom will accomplish what man cannot. For example, prophetically Psalm 46:9 says: “He [Jehovah] is making wars to cease to the extremity of the earth. The bow he breaks apart and does cut the spear in pieces; the wagons he burns in the fire.” God’s Kingdom will bring about a climate wherein man can truly enjoy peace with his Creator and with his fellowman.—Isaiah 2:4; Zephaniah 3:9; Revelation 21:3, 4; 22:2.
Augusto, mentioned in the introduction to the preceding article, finds comfort in this Bible message. His parents, who are Jehovah’s Witnesses, are helping him to put faith in the marvelous promises of the Bible. (Mark 3:1-5) Of course, at present he must endure the painful effects of the land-mine explosion that maimed him. Nevertheless, Augusto looks forward to the day when God’s promise of a paradise earth will be a reality. “At that time,” foretold the prophet Isaiah, “the eyes of the blind ones will be opened, and . . . the lame one will climb up just as a stag does.”—Isaiah 35:5, 6.
In that coming Paradise, land mines will no more pose a threat to life and limb. Instead, people living in all corners of the globe will reside in security. The prophet Micah described it this way: “They will actually sit, each one under his vine and under his fig tree, and there will be no one making them tremble; for the very mouth of Jehovah of armies has spoken it.”—Micah 4:4.
Would you like to learn more about God’s promises as set forth in his Word, the Bible? Contact Jehovah’s Witnesses locally, or write to the appropriate address listed on page 5 of this magazine.
[Picture on page 8, 9]
Under God’s Kingdom, land mines will no longer pose a threat

