Kingdom News No. 27
What Has Happened to Love?
Suicide ranks as the 2nd or 3rd killer of the young in almost every industrialized country of the world. WHY? One expert: “So many kids who commit suicide feel unloved, unwanted at home.”
Marriage mates often show little real love for each other. One divorce for every two marriages in some countries. A survey shows, ‘Most murderers are husbands, wives, or relatives.’
Loneliness—“The most devastating malady of our time.” Wrote one person: “I’m cut off, sad, just putting in time. I eat alone, walk alone, sleep alone and talk to myself. There isn’t anyone around to hear me.”
DON’T WE ALL NEED LOVE?
◇ “Love is the single most important element in happiness.”—Survey of 100,000 persons.
◇ ‘The sudden loss of love is a significant contributor to heart disease and premature death.’—Medical expert.
What if husbands ‘loved their wives as themselves’?—Ephesians 5:28.
What if parents ‘loved their children and did not irritate them’?—Titus 2:4; Colossians 3:21.
What if everyone ‘loved his neighbor as himself’?—Matthew 22:39.
How much happier we all would be!
BUT WHY SO LITTLE LOVE NOW?
◇ It is a sign of the “last days,” for Jesus Christ said of this time: “The love of the greater number will cool off.”—Matthew 24:12.
◇ “Know this, that in the last days critical times hard to deal with will be here. For men will be lovers of themselves . . . having no natural affection.”—2 Timothy 3:1-5.
Because of today’s lack of love God will soon take action to remove wickedness. But he will preserve everlastingly on the cleansed earth those loving him.—Psalm 145:20.
CAN REAL LOVE BE FOUND TODAY?
It should be. Jesus said, “All will know that you are my disciples, if you have love among yourselves.”—John 13:35.
SO LOVE IDENTIFIES GENUINE CHRISTIANITY.
But who today are noted for having real love?
AN INTERNATIONAL BROTHERHOOD RECOGNIZED AS HAVING LOVE
“If all the world lived by the creed of the Jehovah’s Witnesses there would be an end of bloodshed and hatred and LOVE WOULD REIGN AS KING.”—Sacramento “Union” (USA).
“These Christians do not fight among themselves . . . they have love in their hearts.”—“The African Weekly.”
‘Jehovah’s Witnesses are very, very civilized people. At their assembly, you almost feel as though you were in paradise as the atmosphere is relaxed, peaceful and serene.’—“Journal de Montréal” (Canada).
These comments show that real love exists even today. SEE FOR YOURSELF!—Visit a meeting of Jehovah’s Witnesses. Let them tell you about a new earth where love will prevail.
How can you gain life in such a world?
FIND OUT BY SENDING FOR THESE FREE BOOKLETS
Please send me, postpaid, the free booklets “A Secure Future—How You Can Find It” and “God’s Way Is Love.”

