Are You Really Sure?
HAVE you ever wondered how a person can be sure what kind of worship God approves? There are many persons who feel that no one can be sure. Yet these same persons often believe that if a person is sincere he will be saved. Is that what you believe? Do you think that even though there are many different ‘roads,’ or ways of belief, they all lead to salvation? Or is there a certain way of truth, and can we be sure of whether we are on it or not?​—Matt. 7:13, 14.
Jesus Christ knew that he had the truth. He had been with God in heaven, and was taught directly by the heavenly Father. So he was sure that what he believed was right. But what about Jesus’ apostles?
After about three years of close association with his apostles, Jesus said in prayer to God: “The sayings that you gave me I have given to them, and they have received them and have certainly come to know that I came out as your representative.” The apostles knew that Jesus Christ had come from God. So they were sure of the way of salvation, for Jesus taught them the truth directly.​—John 17:8; 14:6.
Did those who later on accepted these teachings from Jesus’ apostles know for sure whether they had the truth? The historian Luke, who became a follower of the resurrected Jesus, wrote to a friend: “I have traced all things from the start with accuracy . . . that you may know fully the certainty of the things that you have been taught orally.” Do you know with certainty whether you are worshiping God in the way that he approves? Is it possible to find out?​—Luke 1:1-4.
Well, consider: How did Jesus’ apostles know they had the truth? It was because they had received the teachings that Jesus directly heard from Almighty God. And we today have those teachings faithfully preserved for us in the Bible! Jesus’ apostles and their companions wrote them down. But, of course, we cannot know the truth if we do not read what they wrote.
Have you carefully read the Bible yourself? How much of it have you read? Bible reading should not be viewed simply as a religious exercise, or a duty to be fulfilled, but as a means of proving to yourself “the good and acceptable and perfect will of God.”​—Rom. 12:2.
By such a study of the Bible you will come to have God’s mind on matters. You will see what he approves, and what he considers wrong. Surely you want to know the truth!
Therefore it is of interest to set the teachings of Christendom’s churches alongside the Bible to see whether they agree. Such an examination will aid you to test your religion and to make sure of what is truth.​—1 Thess. 5:21.
Christendom’s churches say: Jesus is God; he is part of the Godhead, being a member of a trinity of three persons in one God. The Bible says: “Jehovah our God is ONE Jehovah.” Jesus said: “The Father is greater than I am”; and prayed to his Father, also calling him “my God.”​—Deut. 6:4; John 14:28; Matt. 27:46; John 20:17.
Christendom’s churches say: The human soul is immortal; it cannot die. The Bible says: “The soul that is sinning​—it itself will die.” (Ezek. 18:4) And Jesus spoke of God as being able to destroy the soul.​—Matt. 10:28.
Christendom’s churches say: The wicked will be tormented forever in a hell of fire. The Bible says: “The wages sin pays is death.”​—Rom. 6:23.
By studying the Bible you can get a clear knowledge of the true teachings of God. But what if you find that your religion holds to certain doctrines that are contrary to God’s Word? Or what if you are a member of a church whose leaders endorse the “new morality,” and so approve of adultery, homosexuality, abortion and other practices that God condemns? Clergymen of the Methodist, Episcopalian, Presbyterian and other churches have spoken in favor of this “new morality.”
How should one who desires God’s approval view such churches? Regarding association in religious worship with those who go contrary to his teachings, God says: “What fellowship do righteousness and lawlessness have? Or what sharing does light have with darkness? . . . ‘Therefore get out from among them, and separate yourselves,’ says Jehovah, ‘and quit touching the unclean thing’; ‘and I will take you in.”’ Yes, you are touching the unclean thing if you continue associating with a religious organization that does not adhere to God’s ways.​—2 Cor. 6:14-17.
However, you may feel that even though your church does not follow God’s Word in every respect, it does teach many fine things. But, then, do not even the worst criminals often do many things that are good​—donating to charities, supporting projects for community improvement, and so forth? Yet they are criminals. So, too, a religious organization may appear good​—doing and saying certain things taught in the Bible—​but if it does not believe and faithfully adhere to all the teachings of God’s Word, does God approve of it?
For example, Jesus said concerning his true followers: “They are no part of the world, just as I am no part of the world.” (John 17:16) True worshipers today must be like Jesus, keeping separate from the world. Yet many clergymen, with the support of their church, share in political movements or in supporting political rebellions and demonstrations. As a result, what standing do they have with God? The Bible answers: “Whoever, therefore, wants to be a friend of the world is constituting himself an enemy of God.” (Jas. 4:4) Do you want to share in worship with such persons?
So, do you see how a person can be sure of what is true religion, and how he can know whether he has the truth? It is by learning and believing God’s truth taught in the Bible, and then practicing it. If you are interested in worshiping in the way that God approves, you are welcome to attend meetings of Jehovah’s witnesses at their local Kingdom Hall. There the basis of all discussion is the Bible, and by adhering to its teachings you can be sure you are walking in the way of the truth.

