page 2 

STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES 
"MILLENNIAL DAWN" 
THESE STUDIES ARE RECOMMENDED TO STUDENTS AS VERITABLE "BIBLE KEYS" 
PRICES ARE NET AND BARELY COVER COST OF PRODUCTION, 
WHEN DELIVERED BY COLPORTEURS THE COST AND PRICE ARE INCREASED. 

SERIES I., The Plan of the Ages, gives an outline of the divine plan 
revealed in the Bible, relating to man's redemption and restitution: 
386 pages, in embossed cloth, 25c. (Is. l/2d.). India paper edition, 75c. 
(3s. l-l/2d.). 

This volume has been published as a special issue of our journal— 
at the extremely low price of 5c a copy, in any quantity, postage included. 
(To foreign countries, 9c.) This enables people of slender 
purse to herald far and wide the good tidings in a most helpful form. 

SERIES II., The Time is at Hand, treats of the manner and time of 
the Lord's second coming, considering the Bible Testimony on this 
subject: 370 pages, in embossed cloth 25c. (Is. l/2d.). India paper 
edition, 75c. (3s. l-l/2d.) 

SERIES III., Thy Kingdom Come, considers prophecies which mark 
events connected with the "time of the End," the glorification of the 
Church and the establishment of the Millennial Kingdom; it also contains 
a chapter on the Great Pyramid, showing its corroboration of the 
dates and other teachings of the Bible: 384 pages, in embossed cloth 
25c (Is l/2d.). India paper edition, 75c. (3s. l-l/2d.). 

SERIES IV. The Day of Vengeance, shows that the dissolution of the 
present order if things is in progress, and that all the panaceas offered 
are valueless to avert the predicted end. It marks in these events the 
fulfilment of prophecy, noting specially our Lord's great prophecy of 
Matt. 24, andZech. 14:1-9: 660 pages, in embossed cloth 30c. (Is. 3d.). 
India paper edition, 85c 93s. 6-l/2d.) 

SERIES V., The At-one-ment Between God and Man, treats an all-important 
subject— the hub, the center around which all the features 
of divine grace revolve. Its topic deserves the most careful and 
prayerful consideration on the part of all true Christians: 507 pages, 
in embossed cloth 30c. (Is. 3d.). India paper edition, 85c (3s. 6-l/2d.) 

SERIES VI., The New Creation, deals with the Creative Week, 
Genesis 1 and 2, and with the Church, God's "New Creation." It examines 
the personnel, organization, rites, ceremonies, obligations and 
hopes appertaining to those called and accepted as members of the 
body under the Head: 740 pages, in embossed cloth 30c. (Is. 3d.). 
India paper edition, 85c (3s. 6-l/2d.) 

The above prices include postage. 

IN FULL LEATHER BINDING, gilt edges, the set (6 vols.) $3.00, 
(12s. 6d.), plus postage 60c (Is.). 

MILLENNIAL DAWN is published in foreign languages as follows: 
in German, five vols., in Swedish, Vols. 1, 2, 3 and 5; in Dano-Norwegian, 
three vols., in French, two vols.; in Italian, one vol.; in 
Greek, two vols.; bound in cloth, uniform with English edition, prices 
the same. 

The volumes in English are bound in two styles, MILLENNIAL DAWN 
in green cloth binding and SCRIPTURE STUDIES in maroon cloth. Specify 
which you desire. 



R4301 :page 1 

SEMI-MONTHLY 
VOL. XXX JANUARY 1 NO. 1 
A.D. 1909--A.M. 6037 



CONTENTS 

Views from the Watch Tower 3 

Opening the Doors of Opportunity 3 

The Basis of Our Confidence 3 

"Pay Thy Vows Unto the Most High" 5 

He Ascended Up On High 5 

Wait for the Promise 6 

The Pentecostal Blessing 7 

The Significance of Pentecost 8 

Save Yourselves From This Generation 9 

Joel's Prophecy of Pentecost 10 

The Word Mediator Used Differently 11 

Three Great Covenants 11 

"Help From the Lord" 13 

Berean Studies on the Atonement 15 

page 2 

THIS JOURNAL AND ITS SACRED MISSION 



THIS Journal is one of the prime factors or instruments in the system 
of Bible Instruction, or "Seminary Extension," now being presented in 
all parts of the civilized world by the WATCH TOWER BIBLE & 
TRACT SOCIETY, chartered A.D. 1881, "For the Promotion of Christian 
Knowledge." It not only serves as a class room where Bible Students 
may meet in the study of the divine Word, but also as a channel of 
communication through which they may be reached with announcements of 
the Society's Conventions and of the coming of its traveling representatives 
styled "Pilgrims," and refreshed with reports of its Conventions. 

Our "Berean Lessons" are topical rehearsals or reviews of our Society's 
published "Studies," most entertainingly arranged, and very helpful 
to all who would merit the only honorary degree which the Society accords, 
viz., Verbi Dei Minister (V.D.M.), which translated into English 
is, Minister of the Divine Word. Our treatment of the International S.S. 
Lessons is specially for the older Bible Students and Teachers. By 
some this feature is considered indispensable. 

This Journal stands firmly for the defence of the only true foundation 
of the Christian's hope now being so generally repudiated,— Redemption 
through the precious blood of "the man Christ Jesus who gave himself 
aransom [a corresponding price, a substitute] for all." (I Pet. 1:19; 
I Tim. 2:6.) Building up on this sure foundation the gold, silver 
and precious stones (I Cor. 3:11-15; 2 Pet. 1:5-11) of the Word 
of God, its further mission is to— "Make all see what is the fellowship 
of the mystery which. ..has been hid in God,. ..to the intent 



that now might be made known by the Church the manifold wisdom of 
God"— "which in other ages was not made known unto the sons of men 
as it is now revealed."— Eph. 3:5-9,10. 

It stands free from all parties, sects and creeds of men, while it 
seeks more and more to bring its every utterance into fullest subjection to 
the will of God in Christ, as expressed in the Holy Scriptures. It is thus 
free to declare boldly whatsoever the Lord hath spoken;— according to 
the divine wisdom granted unto us, to understand. Its attitude is not 
dogmatical, but confident; for we know whereof we affirm, treading with 
implicit faith upon the sure promises of God. It is held as a trust, to 
be used only in his service; hence our decisions relative to what may and 
what may not appear in its columns must be according to our judgment 
of his good pleasure, the teaching of his Word, for the upbuilding of his 
people in grace and knowledge. And we not only invite but urge our readers 
to prove all its utterances by the infallible Word to which reference 
is constantly made, to facilitate such testing. 

TO US THE SCRIPTURES CLEARLY TEACH 



That the Church is "the Temple of the Living God"— peculiarly "His 

workmanship;" that its construction has been in progress throughout the 
Gospel age— ever since Christ became the world's Redeemer and 
the chief corner stone of his Temple, through which, when finished, 
God's blessing shall come "to all people," and they find access to 
him.-I Cor. 3:16,17; Eph. 2:20-22; Gen. 28:14; Gal. 3:29. 

That meantime the chiseling, shaping and polishing of consecrated believers 
in Christ's atonement for sin, progresses; and when the last of these 
"living stones," "elect and precious," shall have been made ready, 
the great Master Workman will bring all together in the First Resurrection; 
and the Temple shall be filled with his glory, and be the meeting 
place between God and men throughout the Millennium.— Rev. 15:5-8. 

That the Basis of Hope, for the Church and the World, lies in the fact that 
"Jesus Christ, by the grace of God, tasted death for every man," "a ransom 
for all," and will be "the true light which lighteth every man that 
cometh into the world," "in due time."— Heb. 2:9; Jno. 1:9; I Tim. 2:5,6. 

That the Hope of the Church is that she may be like her Lord, "see him 
as he is," be "partaker of the divine nature," and share his glory as 
hisjoint-heir.-I John 3:2; John 17:24; Rom. 8:17; 2 Pet. 1:4. 

That the present mission of the Church is the perfecting of the saints for 
the future work of service; to develop in herself every grace; to be God's 
witness to the world; and to prepare to be kings and priests in the 
next age. -Eph. 4:12; Matt. 24:14; Rev. 1:6; 20:6. 

That the hope for the World lies in the blessings of knowledge and opportunity 
to be brought to all by Christ's Millennial Kingdom— the restitution 
of all that was lost in Adam, to all the willing and obedient, 
at the hands of their Redeemer and his glorified Church— when all the 
wilfully wicked will be destroyed.— Acts 3:19-23; Isa. 35. 

CHARLES T. RUSSELL, Editor. 



LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
-ADDRESS TO- 



WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-24 EVERSHOLT ST., LONDON, N.W. 
GERMAN BRANCH-MIRKER STR., 45, ELBERFELD. 

AUSTRALASIAN BRANCH-EQUITABLE BLDG., COLLINS ST., MELBOURNE 
PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR AS FOLLOWS:- 

All Bible Students who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity or 
adversity, are unable to pay for this Journal, will be supplied FREE 
if they send a Postal Card each MAY stating their case and requesting 
its continuance. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such 
be on our list continually and in touch with the Studies, etc. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



THIS JOURNAL IS PUBLISHED IN THE 

FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, DANISH AND ITALIAN LANGUAGES. 

SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA 



VOLUNTEER MATTER IN OTHER LANGUAGES 



Volunteer matter is now ready in the following languages: 
French, German, Swedish, Norwegian and Polish. The 
German matter is folded, two quadruple numbers together, 
and needs to be separated. Extra copies of the Polish TOWER 
may be used for distribution; these will not be ready for two 
months. 

We now have a condensed edition of the "Plan of the Ages" 
in Polish, which may be had for ten cents per copy. 

Order as many tracts in any language as you can judiciously 
use— free— before our removal. 

INDIA PAPER "STUDIES" 



Volumes IV and VI out of stock. It will be some time 
before we can secure new supply. Notice will be given when 
they are ready. 

WHEN SENDING POSTAGE STAMPS 



If necessary to make small remittances in stamps kindly 
send 5, 10 or 15 cent values, when possible. We cannot use 
foreign stamps; we must return them for redemption. 

MOTTO CARDS, MISSIONARY ENVELOPES, ETC. 



Order at once what you have need of to save the trouble 
of removing them. THE NEW BIBLES are ready for your 
orders. Back orders are all filled. 



R4303 : page 3 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER 

NEVER before has the prospect for the successful 
spreading of Present Truth had so favorable 
an outlook as that for 1909. Although vast 
preparations are under way for the conversion of the 
heathen, and the Federation of Churches is expecting 
to increase the strength and effectiveness of all the 
Federating Denominations, nevertheless there is a considerable 
element outside, as well as inside, those 
Systems, which is quite dissatisfied. It hungers and 
thirsts for something different, for something more 
than mere church organization, salaried ministers and 
paid choristers. This class feels a desire to get nearer 
to the Lord, rather than to be bound in a denominational 
bundle. It feels that there is an emptiness and 
formality connected with much that is called Christian, 
and that many apparently are drawn nigh to the Lord 
with their lips, while their hearts, their affections, are 
far from him and really fixed upon earthly things, good 
and bad. 

The said class is ready for the Truth, but is in 
danger of falling into Christian Science, Theosophy, 
the Emmanuel Movement, or something of the kind. 
Alas, poor sheep! It is true of them, as the Master expressed 
it of a similar kind at his first advent, that "He 
beheld them as sheep and no shepherd"— needing guidance, 
needing help. We may be sure that the Adversary 
is on the lookout for these and that none the less the 
Good Shepherd cares for them. And surely he expects 
that we, who have already tasted of his grace and obtained 
some knowledge of his plan, will be interested 
also in their welfare, because we have his spirit. We 
may expect that he will use us in reaching these in considerable 
number, because, by his grace, we have the 
only message that can bring them the true blessing of 
grace and peace, through the knowledge of our Lord 



and Saviour and of his perfect work, past and to come. 
OPENING THE DOORS OF OPPORTUNITY 

Our opportunities for the New Year seem to be 
superior to those of any previous year. 

(1) Because the WATCH TOWER readers are more 
than ever awake to their opportunities and responsibilities 
and privileges of service. Our Volunteer force 
is larger and more zealous, we believe, than ever before, 
and our new Volunteer matter is in a new and attractive 
form, which, we believe, will be blessed of the Lord in 
reaching many, both inside and outside of the various 
denominations. We hope to hear from the dear friends 
in every direction promptly, as to what they propose to 
do— how many of these they can and will judiciously 
use. United effort is advantageous. Each one spies 
another, and each one who labors receives a special 
blessing from the Lord in his own heart, besides the 
blessing which he may confer on others as an instrument 
of the Truth. 

THE NEWSPAPER SERMONS 

The publication of the sermons in many newspapers 
has begun, and appearances are that it will continue, 
under the Lord's blessing and guidance, and that thus 
millions of readers will be reached, including many on 
farms, whom we could not hope to reach otherwise. It 
is largely for this department of the work that arrangements 
have been made for the transfer of the WATCH 
TOWER headquarters to Brooklyn, New York. We expect 
to give all of our subscribers in the United States 
and Canada an opportunity for cooperation, in connection 
with this department, some time during the year. 
You will receive a letter indicating how you can cooperate 
advantageously. Meantime be active in other departments 
of the service. Our British friends also may 
have opportunity of sharing in this work later. 

THE BASIS OF OUR CONFIDENCE 

Some of the dear friends are expressing surprise; 
but for several years we have anticipated increasing 
numbers becoming interested in the work. Our expectations 
have been so largely realized that it seems 
proper to rehearse the matter, and to give the reason 
why these openings of Divine providence for the spreading 
of the Truth seem to us to be in fullest harmony 
with what we should expect, from our view-point, concerning 
the Harvest Field. Let us take a hasty re-survey. 
It may enlarge our expectations, and thus 
lead to an increase of energy for others, and thus to an 
increase of our own blessings. 

We still believe that in the year 1881 the special call 
of this Gospel Age ceased as a call. Our understanding 



still is that at that date a sufficient number had made 
consecration to complete the predestinated figure, and 
that God would not permit others to be called, for whom 
there would be no place; that, instead, he arranged that 
others consecrating since that time, should, like the 
servants in the parable, wait for an opportunity to enter 
the vineyard— peradventure it might come, even at the 
eleventh hour. We still understand that all the consecrated 
and accepted ones in 1881 will be subject to testings, 
proving, and that as one will be found unworthy, 
his name will be blotted out and his crown set aside 

R4303 : page 4 

for another, and that thus vacancies have occurred and 
been filled from time to time without a formal call- 
merely the consecrated being admitted to the privileges 
of the service and blessed with the begetting of the 
Spirit and the knowledge of the Truth. 

Looking back to 1881 we find that in the few years 
preceding that date a considerable work of evangelization 
took place— Moody and Sankey and, later, Whittle 
and Bliss revival meetings from 1875 up to 1881. Their 
work appeared to be of a more substantial kind than that 
of revivalists generally since. They made prominent 
Justification by Faith through the merit of the precious 
blood of Christ, and urged a full consecration to the 
Lord, to a degree that has seldom been equaled by 
evangelists. Large numbers professed thorough conversion, 
under their labors, and the depth of their work 
and of its hold upon the people is witnessed by a large 
sale and use of their Gospel hymns. It is our thought 
that the Lord used these men, and through their ministry 
the fore-ordained number was completed at the fore-ordained 
time, 1881. 

A SUPPOSITIONARY CASE 

Let us suppose that in 1881, when the call closed, 
there were altogether 40,000 justified and consecrated 
believers in the precious blood. Some of these had 
been, perhaps, a long time in the way, and their day of 
trial was nearly ended. But if our supposition respecting 
the Moody work be correct, a considerable majority 
of that 40,000 were in 1881 mere babes in Christ, freshly 
accepted of the Lord and subject to the message, testings 
and provings. Seeing the Lord is very patient and 

R4304 : page 4 

long-suffering to usward, it should not surprise us if 
many of those would have from five to twenty-five years 
of testing and proving, before their crowns would be 
declared forfeited. If these suppositions be measurably 
correct, it implies that, as usual, only a little flock 
of the consecrated make their calling and election sure, 



and that the great majority of them have lost their 
crowns and had their names blotted out, as respects a 
share in the Bride Company. 

Taking the whole number as 40,000 and taking the 
overcomers to number one-fourth of these, and counting 
the three-fourths as going into the Great Company, 
it would mean the vacating of 30,000 crowns, and hence, 
mean opportunity for a similar number to enter in to 
possess those crowns. 

A preference would surely be given to the justified 
ones, who, exercising faith in the blood and consecrating 
themselves to the Lord, would be represented by 
the Parable of the Vineyard, as waiting and bidden to 
enter at the eleventh hour, without a specific promise of 
reward. It is our conviction, in harmony with the foregoing, 
that there is now a large number of crowns vacated 
and awaiting new claimants. This is more than 
a groundless surmise, for have we not the fact before 
us that a considerable number have lately come from 
worldliness and sin into the light of Present Truth, into 
the privileges of the Vineyard, and evidencing by their 
fruits of the holy Spirit that they have been begotten of 
the Spirit? Since the Divine methods are unchangeable, 
and since the justified and the children of the justified 
hold first place in the Divine opportunities of this 
Gospel Age, the inference is plain that a large number 
of crowns are now unportioned. And in full accord 
with this is the wider scope being granted for the circulation 
of Present Truth. 

These are our grounds for our great expectations in 
connection with the opening year. Additionally we 
might remark that it is only to be expected that those 
who have come into the light of Present Truth, and who 
have, as it were, been gathered as wheat from the tares, 
should begin to receive their threshing, to separate 
fully and completely the wheat from the chaff. So, then, 
while anticipating great progress for the Truth, we 
must also anticipate sore trials and, perhaps, disappointments, 
in respect to some of whom we had expected 
better things— even joint-heirship in the Kingdom. 

"A THOUSAND SHALL FALL" 

"A thousand shall fall at thy side; ten thousand at 
thy right hand," is the prophetic picture of the testing 
time that is now upon the Church. We see the tens of 
thousands already falling into Higher Criticism, Evolution, 
Theosophy, Christian Science and various other 
delusions. And closer to us, at our side, consecrated 
like ourselves, some are falling. The question seems 
not to be, Who will fall, but, as Scripturally put, "Who 
shall be able to stand?" In the ninety-first Psalm the 
Prophet tells who will stand, namely, Those whose habitation 
is the Lord; those who abide under his shadow; 
those who trust under his wings for protection. The 
picture is that of a mother hen, who, when the hawk is 



about, clucks for her brood, calling them under her 
shadow, under her wings, under her special protection. 
Corresponding to the cluck of the hen in this picture 
seems to be "the Vow," or solemn Resolution to great 
faithfulness of living, in harmony with our original 
vow, in thought, in word and in act. 

As a result of obedience to this warning call, 
numbers of us have been drawn very close to the Lord, 
under the shadow of his protecting care, where no harm 
can come nigh us and only with our eyes shall we see 
what will come upon others, who refuse this refuge- 
others who will stumble in this evil day, and be snared 
and taken by the great Fowler and his demon hosts. 
It is painful to write, or even think of some, who, twenty 
and thirty years ago, were with us heart and hand climbing 
up Zion's Hill, fighting the good fight of faith, laying 
hold upon eternal life, developing the fruits and 
graces of the holy Spirit, and anticipating shortly 
sharing with the Redeemer the glorious work of the 
Kingdom, but who have since become weary or faint 
in their minds, or turned aside to strife or vain-glory. 
It is both our duty and our privilege to do all in our 
power to recover such from the power of the Adversary. 
But after doing all that we can on their behalf, it is not 
for us to question the wisdom and love of God in connection 
with the matter, but rather, with full reliance, 
to know that the Lord is supervising the affairs of all 
who are his sheep, and will not suffer us to come under 
greater temptations and trials than, by his assisting 
grace, we shall be able to withstand. Let us set to our 
seal that the Lord is true, faithful. Whether we or 
others shall fail of gaining the promised prize, it will 
not be the result of Divine negligence or inefficiency, 
but our own. 

While considering this subject we take the opportunity 
to point out that our trials and testings as spirit-begotten 
New Creatures in the Truth will surely be on 
three points: 

(1) Faith. (2) Humility. (3) Love. 

To fail in any of these will mean disaster. To come 
off conquerer in all three of them will mean energy and 
devotion to know and to do the Father's will. The time 
is short. The tests will be severe. But he who is on 
our part is greater than all that be against us and ready 
to render every assistance needful, if our hearts be but 
loyal along the points mentioned; and if not loyal, then 
it would not be the will of God that we should be 

R4304 : page 5 

numbered amongst the Elect, because we would not be 
of the fore-ordained class, "Copies of his Son." 

PAY THY VOWS UNTO THE MOST HIGH 

These thoughts lead us up to the propriety of good 



resolutions, holy vows, and the opening of the year is a 

most excellent opportunity for the beginning of these. 

Whoever is of a really and properly thankful heart 

will feel at this season particularly like saying, with 

the Psalmist, "What shall I render unto the Lord, my 

God, for all his benefits to me?" Then comes the response, 

"I will take the cup of salvation (which is the 

cup of sacrifice), calling upon the name of the Lord (for 

grace to help me). I will pay my vows unto the Most 

High, in the presence of all the people." Those following 

this course, whether they call it a Vow or Resolution, 

and whether they report it to others or keep it 

to themselves instead, have a blessing. But to acknowledge 

and pay the vows in the presence of the 

brethren and sisters of the Lord's family is Divinely indicated 

to be our proper course. And the more fully 

we comply with this arrangement, the more complete, 

we believe, will be our blessing, and the greater our 

progress toward the Heavenly Inheritance. 



R4304 : page 5 

HE ASCENDED UP ON HIGH 

--ACTS 1:1-14.-JANUARY3.- 

Golden Text:— "And it came to pass, while 

he blessed them, he was parted from them, 

and was carried up into heaven."— Luke 24:51. 

THE Sunday-School Committee has arranged lessons 
for 1909 on the expansion of the early Church. 
Accordingly, our lessons for the year will be 
drawn principally from the book styled The Acts of 
the Apostles. St. Luke is the author of this, which 
some have described as the best of all Church histories. 
As the record closes abruptly, before the death of St. 
Paul, it is but reasonably supposed that the Book was 
finished about A.D. 63. The first verse of our lesson 
alludes to his previously written work, the Gospel by 
St. Luke, in which he set forth what Jesus began to do 
and to teach. There is a bare suggestion that the writer 
had in mind that his present treatise related to a continuation 
of our Lord's work by his holy Spirit through 
his apostles and followers. This standpoint of view 
given is a glorious sweep or vista and connects up the 
work which our Lord began at Jordan and finished at 
Calvary, and has since been carrying on by his Spirit 
and through his Church, and will continue to the consummation 
of the Church, which is his Body, and its 
glorification in the Kingdom, and the Kingdom blessing 
then to go forth to the blessing and uplifting of man. 
The small beginning, the trials and triumphs of the 
work, are yet to yield the abundant fruitage expressed 



in the declaration that unto Jesus every knee must bow 
and every tongue confess to the glory of God, the 
Father. And whosoever will not thus bow and confess 
and yield obedience to the Messianic Kingdom, will be 
utterly "destroyed from amongst his people"— in "the 
Second Death." 

"St. Luke, a poet, and more than a poet, tells us 
how the beacon light of Christianity flashed from Jerusalem 
to Antioch— from Antioch to Ephesus, and to 
Troas, and to Philippi— from Philippi to Athens and 
Corinth, until at last it was kindled in the very palace 
and pretorium of the Caesars at imperial Rome. The 
light of the world dawned from the little Judean village 
and brightened in the Galilean hills, and then it seemed 
to set upon Golgotha in the midst of a disastrous 
eclipse. The Book of Acts shows us how, rekindled 
from the embers in the brief space of thirty years, it 
has gleamed over Aegea and over Hadria, and has filled 
Asia and Greece and Italy, with such Light as has never 
shone before on land or sea."— Farrar. 

R4305 : page 5 

This is a beautiful description, yet we need to 
modify it to the extent of remembering that the Son of 
Righteousness did not dawn there, but is only now 
dawning. Our Lord's expression was the truer one, 
namely, that each one of his followers was a lamp or 
candle lighted from his, which must not be put under a 
bushel, but elevated, that the darkness might be dispelled. 
It was the lighting of fresh candles, so to speak, 
that carried the enlightening blessing. God's Word is 
the Lamp for his people, to guide their steps and, as 
they become illuminated, the world is proportionately 
blessed. "Thy Word is a lamp unto my feet, and a light 
unto my path." (Psa. 119:105.) "We have also a more 
sure word of prophecy; whereunto ye do well that ye 
take heed, as unto a light that shineth in a dark place, 
until the day dawn."— 2 Pet. 1:19. 

HE SHOWED HIMSELF ALIVE 

Briefly the historian reminds us of the forty days 
between our Lord's resurrection and his ascension, that 
he showed himself to his apostles and gave them certain 
instructions respecting the holy Spirit; that they should 
wait for its endowment, as the Father's seal of their 
acceptance to membership in the Royal Priesthood and 
to the ministries of the Truth as his ambassadors. All 
of these instructions, etc., were "pertaining to the 
Kingdom of God." This central thought needs to be 
kept in mind. God's Kingdom has been promised— 
that it may overthrow the kingdom of Satan and deliver 
mankind from the bondage of sin and death. Messiah 
was to be the King, and Israel, the seed of Abraham, 
to be his assistants and joint-heirs in that Kingdom 



and its work. Natural Israel had proven unworthy of 
the favor, as God had foretold through the prophets, 
and the privileges taken from them were to be given to 
the remnant of "Israelites indeed," and a sufficient 
number from amongst the Gentiles to complete the 
number Divinely intended and foreordained. Properly, 
therefore, everything said and done, directly or indirectly, 
appertained to the Kingdom. 

As St. Luke, in his Gospel, has set forth the personality 
of Jesus as the Magnet to draw the hopes and 
establish the confidence of the "Israelites indeed," so 
in the Acts he uses it to still point to our Lord as the 
central figure, the Magnet. Indeed, seen from the standpoint 
of the Resurrected, the Glorified One, highly exalted, 
far above principalities and powers, the magnetic 
qualities of the Messianic personality are greatly enhanced. 
While never forgetting his earthly life and 
sacrifices, our hearts and minds look to him now as the 
one who ever liveth, the Head of the Church, the King of 
Glory, waiting for the completion of his Bride, and in 
due time to take possession of earth's dominion, and to 
begin the great work of Restitution. 

It is as important today as ever that we keep before 
our minds the thought of our Lord's personal relationship 
to every feature of his work. If it was his message 
to the early Church to remember his words, "Lo, I am 
with you always, even to the end of the Age," the 

R4305 : page 6 

thought of the Lord's personal presence now in the 
harvest should be still more impressive to us. If he 
kept a supervision or control of all the affairs of his 
people throughout the Age, does not the thought of his 
Second Coming and still more intimate association with 
every little detail of what is planned make us rejoice to 
be more careful, more zealous? To the extent that we 
are able to keep this clearly before our minds, it will 
make us happy in respect to right fighting and right 
doing. For instance, should the Adversary make suggestions 
to us of discontent or dissatisfaction with the 
manner in which things pertaining to the Lord's people 
have been progressing, let us answer him that we know 
he is mistaken, because the Lord himself is present and 
is supervising his work. If at any time matters seem 
to be going contrary to our hopes or expectations, let 
us not think the Lord has neglected the supervision of 
his work and is allowing the Adversary to dash it to 
pieces. On the contrary, let us establish our hearts in 
the fact that the Lord is too wise to err and is as able 
as he is willing to make all things work together for 
good to us and to all the called ones, according to his 
purpose. If tempted to intermeddle with matters that 
the Lord has put into the hands of another, let this 
thought restrain us and counsel us to give closer attention 
to that which the Master has committed to our care, 



and that "To his own Master each servant stands or 
falls," and it is for him to approve or disapprove. It 
is not, therefore, for us to grasp management or control 
or in any degree to force our views upon others, 
but rather to do our part as faithfully as possible, and 
to leave the results to the Lord, realizing his presence 
and his care, his wisdom and his love. 

WAIT FOR THE PROMISE 

The holy Spirit had been promised and must be 
waited for as the realization and beginning of the new 
work, the development of the Christian Church. This 
was pictured to them as a baptism and immersion with 
the holy Spirit, and contrasted with John's baptism or 
immersion in water. This baptism of the holy Spirit 
would represent to them the fact that he died for human 
sin, had been received into the Father's presence and 
had offered of his merit on behalf of those who believed 
in him and accepted him. It would constitute the sign, 
evidently, or mark, not only that their sins were forgiven, 
but that their consecration had been accepted, 
and that they were now adopted into God's family, begotten 
of him as spiritual sons, who, if they would develop 
in harmony with their covenant, in the School of 
Christ, would, in due time, be born of the spirit in the 
resurrection to the divine nature. 

It was while they were with him and being instructed 
in things pertaining to the Kingdom, and regarding 
the necessity for tarrying for the spirit baptism, that 
they asked the Lord an important question: "Lord, wilt 
thou at this time restore again the Kingdom to Israel?" 
But he replied, "It is not for you to know the times or 
seasons, which the Father hath put in his own power," 
or authority. 

The disciples understood well enough that the restoration 
of Israel to a place of influence and power as 
a nation would be an incident of our Lord's great 
triumph in taking the dominion of earth, but they did 
not fully comprehend, for this Gospel Age, has been, 
as it were, a parenthesis, in which the Bride Class has 
been in course of selection from amongst all mankind. 
They perceived that the Master was leaving them and 
were anxious for information, but in substance they 
were told that they could see but one step in advance 
and that they must walk by faith and not by sight. 
Elsewhere we are informed that our Lord told his followers 
that not only no man knew the day and hour 
marking the developments of the Divine Purpose in 
connection with the opening of the new dispensation, 
but neither did the angels in heaven, nor our Lord Jesus; 
that the Father had kept the whole matter in his own 
hands, in his own power. This is better illustrated in 
the symbolism of Revelation, fifth chapter, where the 
Divine Plan is represented as sealed, and given to our 
Lord after his demonstration of his faithfulness at 



Calvary and his ascension to glory. Nothing in the 
statement, however, implies that our Lord and his disciples 
and the angels of heaven would never know of 
the times and seasons. In due time each feature will 
be revealed to those for whom it would be "meat in due 
season," for "To you it is given to know the mystery of 
the Kingdom of God, but to outsiders all these things 
are spoken in parables." 

But while the due time had not come for the apostles 
to understand the particulars of the restitution of Israel, 
etc., other knowledge and other work were awaiting, as 
soon as the Father marked them by the outpouring of 
the holy Spirit. It was not due time then to discuss 
matters that were a long way in advance. The thing 
immediately in hand was their work of witnessing for 
Jesus, of telling out all that they knew about him, that 
others might know and be blessed through their ministries. 
In due time they would not be confined to Jerusalem 
and Judea, but might go to Samaria, yea, and to 
the uttermost parts of the earth; for eventually the 
message would be for every creature. 

The word here rendered witnesses is in the Greek, 
martyres, from which comes our English word martyr, 
signifying those who witness at a cost of suffering or 
death. It may have seemed strange to the apostles that 
the telling of the good tidings would cost them suffering, 
and it may seem still more strange to us today that the 
proclamation of the true Gospel of Christ should bring 
persecution and call for martyrdom. But it is true, and 
the Master explained the reason, saying, "The darkness 
hateth the light." The world in general, including 
Christendom, is more or less under the Adversary's delusions, 
and whoever is faithful in telling the message 
of the Lord in its length and breadth will speedily find 
opposition where least he might have expected it. The 
goodness of God, his love, and the length and breadth 
and height and depth of his Plan of Salvation are so 
foreign to the benighted mind that it induces persecution, 
because the Truth is stranger than the fiction. A 
lesson here for us is that this witnessing is not yet 
finished, and that to meet our Lord's approval as his 
representatives we must be martyrs to one degree or 
another. The more faithful we are, probably the more 
we shall have opportunity for suffering and correspondingly 
will be our share in the eternal weight of glory, 
which God has in reservation for those that thus love 
him and serve him. 

SO COME IN LIKE MANNER 

While speaking our Lord began to ascend and soon 
a cloud had enveloped and hid him from their sight. 
They waited, looking as though expecting him to descend 
again, but instead two angels appeared and said, 
"Why stand ye gazing up into heaven? This same 
Jesus, which is received up from you into heaven shall 



so come in like manner as ye have seen him go into 
heaven." (Acts 1:11.) The statement is not that they 
would see him coming as they saw him go, for surely 
they did not. They died. And not until after he had 

R4306 : page 7 

come again could their awakening, their resurrection, 
take place. Nor did the angels say that any one would 
see him coming. They merely declared a great fact, 
that he would so come, and that his coming would be 
in like manner to his going. Noting this carefully we 
ask ourselves, What will be the manner of his second 
coming? The answer is that as his departure was quiet, 
secret, unknown to the world, known only to his most 
intimate and dear followers, so his second coming will 
be in like manner— not with shouts and voices and 
trumpets, but secretly, quietly, "As a thief in the 
night." 



R4306 : page 7 

THE PENTECOSTAL BLESSING 

-ACTS 2:1-11.-JANUARY 10.- 

Golden Text:— "I will pray the Father, and he shall 
give you another comforter, that he may abide with 
you forever; even the Spirit of Truth."— John 14:17. 

OUR Lord's message to his disciples when leaving 

them was, that they should return from the 

Mount of Olives to Jerusalem and tarry there 

until endued with power from on high. To many the 

ten days of tarrying would be considered a serious waste 

of valuable time. Think of it! One hundred and twenty 

of the Lord's consecrated people idle for ten days— not 

preaching, nor healing, nor engaging in any special religious 

work— neglecting business and money-making, 

and all earthly interests as well. What were they doing? 

The record implies that their special employment 

during those ten days was prayer and supplication to 

God. What did they want? They already were in relationship 

to God through faith, and permitted to pray 

to him as their Father. They already knew of Jesus 

and had already been blessed by him in various ways, 

some of them having been his mouthpieces. Why tarry? 

Why pray? Why not go out at once into the Vineyard 

and labor? If they had been left to guide their own 

steps, doubtless they would have been at work, but they 

were following their Master's Word, remembering the 

testimony, "Obedience is better than sacrifice." They 

knew not what qualifications they needed for their 

future service. They were merely trusting all to their 



Lord and obediently waiting for the promised blessing 
and preparation. 
The necessity for their tarrying was threefold: ~ 

(1) They were incompetent for the work designed 
for them, until empowered for it. 

(2) They could not receive the blessed anointing 
until first the Redeemer has ascended into heaven, 
"There to appear in the presence of God on our behalf," 
on behalf of believers. Members of the fallen race, they 
had already been privileged, like their father Abraham, 

to return to favor with God as his friends, being "Justified 
by faith." They could, as justified ones, address 
him in prayer, "Our Father, which art in heaven." They 
were not enemies at heart, but loyal, even though, to 
use the Apostle's language, they had been "enemies 
through wicked works," through inability to keep perfectly 
the divine law. They were not rebels needing a 
Mediator, but loyal, though imperfect, friends who 
needed a Redeemer and Advocate. Their Redeemer 
testified, "The Father himself loveth you." And again, 
in prayer to the Father respecting them, he said, "Thine 
they were, and thou gavest them me." Still, before 
divine justice could accept them as living sacrifices 
upon the Lord's altar, it was necessary that their 
ransom price should be definitely set over to justice by 
the Redeemer. This was done during the ten days of 
their "waiting for power from on high." The outpouring 
of the holy Spirit evidenced the presentation and 
divine acceptance of the merit of Christ's sacrifice on 
their behalf. This permitted their recognition as New 
Creatures, their begettal to the new spirit nature as 
sons of God, their anointing of the spirit as members 
of the Royal Priesthood. 

(3) These ten days of prayer were necessary also 

to fit and prepare the Lord's disciples for the reception 
of the holy Spirit. The human mind resembles a room, 
the door of which must be opened before treasures can 
be put therein. The door in this picture would symbolize 
the will, which must first give consent to whatever 
enters the mind, the heart, the life. Furthermore a 
room that is already stocked and overcrowded has little 
space wherein to place new valuables— the old must be 
removed that place may be found for the new. Our 
hearts need to be emptied of their earthly hopes, aims 
and ambitions in order to make place for the new riches 
of God's grace. The ten days were probably none too 
long for the testing of the faith and loving obedience 
and zeal for the Lord and his cause, which they had 
undertaken to serve. As they prayed and fasted and 
waited expectantly for the promised blessing from on 
high, doubtless worldly ambitions, hopes and aims dissolved 
and vanished from their hearts, leaving them 
ready for the blessing the Lord intended, and which he 
poured out. 

SOUND OF A MIGHTY WIND 



We are not to understand that a mighty wind blew 
upon the praying and waiting company on Pentecost 
Day, but there was merely a sound which resembled 
that of a mighty wind. It was the more miraculous 
that there was no wind. From the reading of the Greek 
it is inferable that the tongues of fire or blaze of light 
which appeared over the head of each were not split or 
cloven flames, but that the expression, "Cloven tongues 
of fire," implies that a larger flame was first manifest, 
which was cloven or split or divided into these smaller 
flames, which appeared over the head of each. But no 
matter what the particular form of manifestation, its 
object was quickly discerned. It was the promised 
blessing from on high, from the Father's throne, 
through the Son; as St. Peter explained, "As every 
man hath received the gift, even so minister the same 
one to another." (I Pet. 4:10.) We are not to understand 
that the multitude, being of one mind, produced 
this manifestation, but rather that the Lord, by his 
providence, brought them into the condition of full accord, 
preparatory to the giving of this blessing. Similarly 
he says that special blessings may be expected 
when two or three unite in their petition— not that their 
uniting effects anything, but that the Lord is pleased to 
reward the united efforts of his people, and thus to encourage 
them to forsake not the assembling of 
themselves. 

The entire house was filled with a wonderful power, 
and every believer was apparently, as it were, electrified, 
vivified, and they were all filled with this holy 
Spirit, this hallowed influence, and began to speak in 

R4306 : page 8 

foreign tongues under the influence that had come upon 
them. We are not sure now, but it is our opinion that 
this special manifestation was to the eleven apostles 
only, because the subsequent record is that Peter and 
the others of the eleven apostles addressed the multitude 
in these foreign tongues. We know no evidence 
that others of the one hundred and twenty preached in 
the unknown tongues on the occasion, nor that they had 
the power to do so. 

For centuries the Lord's people have been more or 
less in strife respecting the holy Spirit— what it is, etc. 
We will not attempt here an elaboration of the subject, 
but refer our readers to DAWN-STUDIES, Vol. V., Chapters 
8-11, where the subject is treated in great detail. Incidentally 
we merely notice that the holy Spirit is not a 
person, but the spirit, the will, mind, energy, power or 
disposition of a person. It is the Spirit of the Father. 
It is the Spirit of the Son. And it is the spirit of all 
who are in full harmony with these. The masculine 
pronoun is used because our Father and our Lord Jesus 
are both spoken of in the masculine gender and their 



spirit would properly be so referred to. Nothing has 

much more confused the mind of Christendom than the 

unscriptural theory that the holy Spirit is one of three 

gods, equal in power and glory. It is one of the manifestations 

of the one living and true God. He manifested 

himself in Jesus, who was "God manifest in the 

flesh." He manifested himself in this holy influence or 

power at Pentecost and since to those who received the 

begetting or anointing of that holy Spirit, the spirit of 

the Truth, and indirectly to those of the world who discerned 

its operation in the children of Light, and who 

were reproved and rebuked because of being out of 

harmony with the divine will. 

As some erred in speaking of the holy Spirit as a 
"third person," so others err in the opposite direction 
in claiming that there is nothing of the holy Spirit except 
a spirit of the truth. The proper thought, we hold, 
is that the term holy Spirit stands for the divine will 
and divine power and divine truth, exercised how and 
when and where the divine will purposes. The power 
which came upon the waiting disciples was not merely 
a field for the Truth, nor merely a knowledge of the 
truth, nor was it a person that fell upon them, nor 
could we think of a person being divided up and inhabiting 
either eleven apostles or one hundred and 
twenty brethren, or thousands and tens of thousands of 
the Lord's people in all parts of the world. 

R4307 : page 8 

"HE SHALL GIVE YOU ANOTHER" 

Our Golden Text represents the matter in clear 
light and in harmony with all the other Scriptures on 
the subject when it declares that the holy Spirit must 
come from the Father, not from the Son; when it declares 
that the Son would petition the Father to send 
the Spirit; when it declares that this special power or 
spirit of the Father would be another Comforter, instead 
of our Lord Jesus himself, whose going away was 
necessary and expedient. Had our Lord remained as a 
person in the flesh, he would have been hampered by 
the fleshly and earthly conditions, much as we are, because 
he could not be everywhere at once. It was 
preferable or expedient, therefore, that he should personally 
leave his disciples and appear before the Father 
as their Advocate, and thus secure to them the holy 
Spirit, which would not only represent the Father 
and himself, but would also represent all Truth, all 
righteousness, and be a channel for every one that 
needed blessing. 

Following the miraculous sound and the electrical 
influences pervading the room and the manifestation of 
the lights upon their heads, we may be sure a considerable 
degree of holy joy and excitement manifested themselves 
amongst the believers, and this soon spread 



abroad and attracted a large concourse of people 
through curiosity, because it was stated that they were 
"Continually in the temple."— Luke 24:53; Acts 2:46. 

It has been surmised by some that the large upper 
room occupied on this occasion was one of the numerous 
apartments connected with the temple, and that the 
quick gathering of 3,000 people might thus be accounted 
for. It was one of the annual festivals which drew the 
devout Jews, not only from all parts of Palestine, but 
also from neighboring countries. Most of them were 
Jews by birth, but some of them were proselytes or converts 
to Judaism. At first these heard various languages 
spoken and hastily concluded that the speakers were 
intoxicated, but later they discerned that the various 
tongues spoken represented the dialects of various 
people in the vast throng, so that each might hear in 
his own native tongue the message that was being circulated 
respecting Jesus, his death, resurrection, ascension, 
and now this miraculous outpouring of the Father's 
blessing at his hands, to qualify his service, to declare 
his message. 

THE SIGNIFICANCE OF PENTECOST 

The day itself is an important one. According to 
Jewish tradition it was the anniversary of the Law 
Covenant at Mt. Sinai. It therefore by contrast would 
be a reminder of how Christ makes free from the Law 
and admits to the benefits of the original Covenant all 
who approach the Father through him. It was a day 
of free giving to all in need, "According as the Lord 
thy God hath blessed thee." (Deut. 16:10.) Thus the 
Lord's followers dispensed to all who were in readiness 
to receive the blessings granted to them through Jesus. 

The flames of fire beautifully symbolize the light of 
Truth, the enlightenment of the mind, which comes 
through the begetting of the holy Spirit. This power 
divine was remarkably manifested in the eleven apostles, 
for while the multitude still recognized them as "ignorant 
and unlearned men," nevertheless they took 
knowledge of them that they had been with Jesus and 
learned of him; that they had a certain kind of enlightenment 
of mind and heart, which could come from no 
other quarter. And is not this same true of all those 
who have been begotten of the holy Spirit? Only a 
few days ago, in talking to one of the dear friends, a 
carpenter, in respect to the knowledge of the Truth enlightening 
his mind and refreshing his heart, he added, 
"Yes, Brother Russell, and that is not all! Not only 
are my head and heart refreshed with respect to spiritual 
things, but without boasting I can say that the 
Truth has made me brighter and more proficient in 
every way. It gives me a better balance of mind and 
soundness of judgment, even in my trade as a carpenter." 
We believe that this is true in general. Those 
appealed to by the Truth are not more than ordinarily 



bright naturally. Indeed, according to the Scriptures, 
we might infer that they would be below the average, 
for the Apostle declares that not many wise, rich, great 
or learned hath God chosen, but chiefly the mean things 
of this world. Nevertheless it is noticeable that those 
who are deeply interested in Present Truth, who study 
it, who love it, under the guidance and instruction of 
the Lord's Spirit and the various helps which God hath 
provided for our time, are far above the average of their 
fellow-laborers in general intelligence. Indeed, whoever 
has a knowledge of the Truth has an education, 

R4307 : page 9 

whether he has ever taken a college course or not. On 
the contrary, it has recently been noticed that a large 
number of those who enjoy special earthly advantages 
of education gain comparatively little therefrom. For 
instance, note the following clipping from the New York 
World a few days ago. Evangelist E. C. Mercer, himself 
a reformed drunkard, addressing the students of 
the Northwestern University, said:— 

"During the last few years I have been working in 
the Water Street Mission in New York, and I have 
learned that one-third of the men that came there ragged 
and dirty and begging for food were college-bred. 

1 have found them on the Bowery making up beds or 
waiting on tables, and I have even met them in the 
street-cleaning brigades. During February of last year 
more than 400 of them stood in the 'bread line' at our 
mission. Seventy-five per cent, of the prisoners at Sing 
Sing Prison are college-bred men." 

Beyond question "the wisdom that cometh from 
above is first pure, then peaceable, gentle, easy to be 
entreated, full of mercy and good fruits," and is, as the 
Apostle declares, the "spirit of a sound mind."— Jas. 3:17; 

2 Tim. 1:7. 

THE LESSON HERE FOR US 

Although we cannot agree with those who teach 
that repeated Pentecosts and spirit baptisms are to be 
expected and prayed for, we do believe that the Lord's 
people need to come into a similar attitude to that of 
the brethren who were blessed on Pentecost Day, in 
order to enter the favors and privileges which are ours 
through Christ. There was to be but one Pentecost. 
There never will be another, so far as the Church is concerned. 
The holy Spirit which there came to the Church 
has abode with us still, and its blessing is the privilege 
of those consecrated ones whom the Lord accepts and 
adopts into his family. But before anyone is prepared 
to get a proper blessing of the Lord's Spirit, he must 
first have the justification by faith and a heart free 
from the love of sin, and must present his solemn resolution 
to be, to do, to serve the Lord, the Truth, the 



brethren— his vows before he could be in the right attitude 
to receive a blessing and the enlightenment, the 
comfort, the fellowship of God's holy Spirit. Even 
though he be inflamed with desire to serve the Lord, 
the Truth and the brethren, he will do wisely to follow 
the course of the early Church and tarry and study and 
pray— that he may himself be filled with the Spirit, before 
he attempts to act as God's ambassador to others. 
Indeed, no one is authorized, from the Scriptural standpoint, 
to preach the Gospel much or little, except first 
he have received this anointing and authorization of the 
Spirit from above. "The Lord hath anointed me to 
preach the good tidings unto the meek."— Isa. 61:1. 

While opposing the unscriptural view with respect 
to praying for New Pentecosts, let us not lose sight of 
the important fact that until we have received our share 
of the blessing of that first Pentecost, we cannot have 
the perfect peace of God, nor be properly and actively 
and successfully his servants and ambassadors. Would 
that, at the opening of the New Year, all of the Lord's 
people would seek earnestly a larger measure of the 
holy Spirit— watching and praying thereunto, watching 
their words, their thoughts and deeds, the leadings of 
the Lord's providence, the opportunities for his service, 
and praying, "Abandon us not in temptation, but deliver 
us from the evil one." And let us ask him to grant us 
more and more the emptying of worldly ambitions, desires, 
and filling more and more with the mind of 
Christ, the disposition of Christ. Many are finding "the 
VOW" very helpful along these lines, and we still commend 
it to all of the sacrificers in Christ Jesus, as a 
helping hand to keep us watchful and nearer to the 
Lord— under the shadow of the Almighty. 



R4307 : page 9 

SAVE YOURSELVES FROM THIS GENERATION 

-ACTS 2:32-42.-JANUARY 17.- 

Golden Text:— "They continued steadfast in the Apostles' 
doctrine, and fellowship, and in prayer."— Acts 2:42. 

LESS than two months had elapsed since the Apostle 
Peter denied his Lord with cursing. But today's 
lesson shows him the leader of the 
apostles and the special mouthpiece of the Lord in the 
opening work of the New Dispensation at Pentecost. 
How marvelous is the change from weakness to strength, 
which may come to those who are rightly exercised by 
life's experiences, as he was! His very stumbling 
strengthened his character, by arousing him to the 
necessity of taking the right stand at any cost. Each 
of God's children should learn this lesson— and should 



be helped by his defeats, as well as by his victories. 

R4308 : page 9 

One of the Apostle's promises is to this effect— that "all 
things shall work together for good to those who love 
the Lord" with loyal hearts. 

St. Peter preached a most direct sermon, taking for 
his text the miraculous events of Pentecost, which had 
drawn the crowd together. He had no apologies to 
make, but declared himself and his brethren disciples 
of Jesus the Messiah. Jesus' claim to the office had been 
abundantly demonstrated by his mighty works and 
words, "Never man spake like this man." Did they 
query if this were not the same Jesus that had been 
crucified, less than two months before? The query was 
answered most pointedly. Yes, with wicked hands you 
crucified and slew the Lord of glory. Did they ask how 
could a Messiah thus ignominiously suffer and how 
could a dead Messiah be of any use— of whom they 
preached? The Apostle's answer was a ready one, that 
it pleased God that a suffering Saviour should be provided 
and that his death should be the redemption price 
for Adam and his race; and on this account forgiveness 
of sins might now be preached. Proceeding he declared 
that our Lord was not a dead Messiah, but a living one, 
for, although put to death in the flesh, God had raised 
him from the dead, and that his disciples were witnesses 
of the fact, and of his ascension. 

The account given us is a meager one, but we can 
imagine the Apostle saying, "Let me prove to you from 
the prophets, whom you acknowledge, that these very 
things were foretold of the Messiah, Jesus; for instance, 
the most remarkable thing of all, his Resurrection. 
Did not the Prophet David foretell of the same, 'Thou 
wilt not leave my soul in hell (sheol, hades the grave); 
neither wilt thou suffer thine Holy One to see corruption'! 
This, "said Peter," was not true of the Prophet 
David. He died. His soul was not saved from sheol. 
He still awaits resurrection. But all of this was apparently 
true of Messiah, whom David, in the figure, represented. 
Christ's soul was not left in hades. God 
raised him from the dead the third day. Now he is 
highly exalted— a Prince and mighty Saviour, able to 
save you, able to save all who come to him; for the 
Father hath highly exalted him, that he might be the 

R4308 : page 10 

Saviour of you and of the world, not only as respects 
spiritual interests, but our temporal interests as well." 

JOEL'S PROPHECY OF PENTECOST 

Proceeding, the Apostle quoted Joel's prophecy and 
showed that a portion of it foretold the Pentecostal 



blessing. He was not led of the spirit to show that 
there were two parts to that prophecy, and that only 
one part was fulfilled at that time, and that the other 
part was to be fulfilled afterward. "I will pour out my 
spirit upon all flesh" will be fulfilled in the future, after 
the second coming of Christ. That was not yet "meat 
in due season." However, the quotation was sufficient 
for its intended purpose. His hearers were pricked to 
the heart— cut to the heart. They felt terribly, as they 
thought how true were his words, and how apt his 
Scripture quotation. They saw themselves as members 
of their nation red-handed murderers of the Messiah, 
for whom they had been looking for centuries. 
The great trouble which would certainly come upon 
their nation, and to which their prophets referred, they 
saw would be a reasonable penalty for their great sin. 
What must they do? 

Contrition and repentance must necessarily precede 
any thoroughgoing reformation of character— then 
or now. If, therefore, any one shall read these words 
and realize that he himself has been living carelessly, as 
respects his blessings of God and his faithfulness to the 
Truth, it is well that he should awaken from his lethargy 
with a start, knowing assuredly that the end of that 
way will not have the divine approval. Such should cry 
out to the Lord for help from the weaknesses of his own 
nature, and from the delusions and snares of the 
Adversary; peradventure he may be delivered. In 
answer to their query the Apostle declared most 
graciously, "Brethren, I wot that through ignorance ye 
did it, as did also your rulers." For if they had known, 
they would never have crucified the Lord of glory. The 
matter is bad enough. The guilt is great as it is; but 
surely the Lord knows that those poor men who cried 
"Crucify him!" and those who helped to do it were, to 
a large degree, under the influence of our great Adversary, 
through ignorance and superstition and blindness, 
into which he had led them. Doubtless the number of 
those who have sinned wilfully against clear light and 
knowledge and opportunity, on the contrary, is small, 
especially if we exclude those sins attributable to weaknesses 
through the heredity of sin. 

THE GOSPEL OF MERCY 

The Pentecostal message was a Gospel of mercy, of 
forgiveness, of sympathy, even for those who had 
crucified the Lord. Like the other sermons of this 
Apostle, and like the sermons of all the apostles, this 
sermon contained not one suggestion of eternal torment, 
but was full of mercy and grace— "speaking peace 
through Jesus Christ our Lord." The result was that 
three thousand were prompt to accept Jesus as the 
Messiah. They were convinced by their reason and 
by the evidences presented in the sermon by the 
Apostle and others of the brethren; thus they complied 



with the advice of the Apostle. Temporarily their sins 
were covered by the merit of the Lord's sacrifice, but 
for the full blotting out of those sins, they, with others, 
must wait for the second coming and the resurrection. 
The new bodies of all the faithful in Christ will be without 
spot or blemish. All sin will have been blotted out. 
Thus, as the Apostle Paul says, "It is sown in weakness; 
it is raised in power; it is sown a natural body; it is 
raised a spiritual body."— I Cor. 15:43,44. 

St. Peter's message to them was, "Repent ye therefore, 
and be baptized, every one of you, in the name of 
Jesus Christ, for the remission of sins, and ye shall 
receive the gift of the holy Spirit; for the promise is 
unto you and to your children, and to all that are afar 
off, even as many as the Lord your God shall call." 

Christ's sacrifice for sins was not intended to justify 
people living in sin, but to justify those who, renouncing 
sin, sought to live separate from it and to 
come into harmony with God. This is still our message. 
No one has a right to alter or amend it in any degree. 
The divine law condemns sin in the flesh still. The 
divine provision for the covering of the sins of those 
who believe in Jesus applies only to such as seek to 
put away sin, and to strive for righteousness. For such 
alone are all the divine arrangements and blessings. 
Baptism for the "remission of sins" was to the Jew only, 
to those who had already been baptized into Moses in 
the sea and the cloud. The sins thus figuratively 
washed away did not include original sin, with its 
death penalty, but merely minor transgressions against 
the Mosaic Law on the part of the Covenant of the 
people. The symbolic washing represented a return to 
loyalty, to obedience to God, to the extent of their ability, 
so far as their hearts were concerned. Thus coming 
into accord with Moses, the typical Messiah, they would 
be by faith transferred to his antitype, Christ. 

This washing or cleansing of the Jews, preparatory 
to their acceptance in Christ, continued until the middle 
wall of partition was broken down between Jew 
and Gentile, until the natural branches, those who did 
not receive fellowship in the Body of Christ, were 
broken off. Since then, baptism for the remission of 
sins, John's baptism, is entirely wrong, according to 
the Scriptures. (For details on this see DAWN-STUDIES, 
Vol. VI., Chapter 10.) 

The Apostle pointed out that the promise of the 
great blessing through Messiah belonged to Israel according 
to the flesh, and that those promises had not 
yet lost their vitality— had not yet lapsed. Hence it 
was for them and their children, as well as for all 
mankind, 

"EVEN AS MANY AS YOUR GOD SHALL CALL" 

Everywhere the Scriptures remind us that no man 
taketh this honor to himself— the honor of being a 



member of the Body of Christ, the honor of being a 
member of the Royal Priesthood, etc. Only those called 
of God, drawn by the Father, can now come unto the 
Son and receive all of these blessings. This remains 
true to this day. The pity is that even some of those who 
have received and accepted the call are not sufficiently 
awake to rightly receive it. Our lesson assures us that 
this is but a small portion of the population. With 
many other words St. Peter exhorted and testified, saying, 
"Save yourself from this untoward generation." 
How successful was this message which was backed by 
the holy Spirit may be readily seen from the statement 
that three thousand gladly received the message and 
were baptized and continued steadfast in this teaching, 
and in fellowship and prayers. 

"SAVE YOURSELF FROM THIS GENERATION" 

Again we are in a Harvest Time. The Harvest 
Time of this Gospel Age is now in progress, as then 
was the Harvest of the Jewish Age. Now, as then, there 
are tests and stones of stumbling, purposely permitted 
of the Father for our proving, testing, development. 
Not the Head of the Body is now to be crucified, but the 
members— especially the feet of the Body of Christ, yet 

R4308 : page 1 1 

upon the earth. The great Adversary has blinded in a 
most marvelous manner some, of whom better things 
might have been expected. Our Lord's words are proving 
true— that his message would cause a measure of 
strife, which would thus reveal, manifest, those who are 
of a wrong spirit, but indirectly bring blessings to the 
faithful, who are willing to suffer with him and to lay 
down their lives for the brethren. The persecutors 
number amongst them some of the great and noble and 
religiously prominent of the world. What is our attitude? 
Are we sympathizing with this condition of 

R4309 : page 1 1 

things, or are we standing loyally, firmly for the Truth, 
the Lord? 

As it was then, in the Lord's providence, that he 
drew the attention of those in a wrong attitude to the 
true conditions of things, that they might recover 
themselves from the snare of the Adversary, so he is 
now doing here. He is willing and able to expose the 
wrong doing, and to call the attention of the honest-hearted 
to the true situation. It then remains with 
themselves, as free agents, either to continue to endorse 
the wrong, or to stand out distinctly for the right. 
The Scriptures clearly indicate that the present generation 
is an untoward one— one that is unfavorable to 
righteousness. The Scriptures give delineations of the 



selfish spirit of our day, the loveless spirit, with its 
anger, malice, hatred, envy, strife, backbiting and 
slandering tendencies, and they tell us to what these 
will ultimately lead— to the great time of trouble, with 
which this Age will end. 

What should we do? The Apostle Peter's words 
are appropriate: "Save yourselves." Do not wait to 
try to save Christendom. Let each one of us get his 
own heart right with God. It is an individual matter— 
who will stand and who will fall. According to the 
Scriptures and according to Israel as a type, the many 
will fall to the few who will remain standing. To save 
ourselves, we must take prompt, energetic action. Our 
repentance must be full. Our turning from the wrong 
ways must be positive. The promises are unto you and 
to your children, and to many afar off. 



R4309 :page 11 

THE WORD MEDIATOR USED DIFFERENTLY 

YOUR attention is called to our use of the word Mediator 

in the seventh line of the article, "Homing the 

Ark," page 308, October 15th issue. We there speak 

of the "officiating priest who acted as the mediator between 

God and the nation." It would have been better had we 

used a different word on this occasion; for instance, Advocate. 

Strictly speaking the Law Covenant constituted the 

bond of union between God and natural Israel, and Moses 

was the Mediator of that Covenant. The priest, strictly speaking, 

was not the Mediator, but, under the terms of the Law 

Covenant, which Moses mediated, the officiating priest was 

the Advocate, friend and representative of the Israelites before 

the bar of Divine Justice. 

This well illustrates the too careless manner in which 
we, and nearly all Christians, have been accustomed to use 
this word Mediator. For instance, repeatedly in DAWN-STUDIES, 
Vol. V., we refer to our Lord as the "Mediator of the Atonement." 
This is entirely correct, if judged by the ordinary 
standards of our language as generally used by us all. Of 
late, however, this Journal has endeavored to draw the attention 
of the Lord's people to the fact that the Bible uses the 
word Mediator in a restricted sense and has urged that all 
Bible Students endeavor to take the Bible viewpoint only 
and to use the word Mediator from that standpoint alone. 

The correction above made shows how difficult it is for 
any of us to rid himself of a habit. The use of the word 
Mediator in the Scriptures is restricted to the mediating of 
Covenants between God and man. The assumption is that 
God, being holy and unwilling to sanction sin in any degree, 
not only condemned it in father Adam and his race, but cut 
off all fellowship with the sinners, whom Justice had condemned 
to death. Nevertheless, God in mercy had already 
purposed a reconciliation between himself and such of the 



human race as might desire fellowship with him on a basis 
of righteousness. 

THREE GREAT COVENANTS 

The Divine purpose was outlined in three great Covenants. 
The first, or all-comprehensive one, was made with 
Abraham. The second, or Law Covenant, was made with 
Israel at Mount Sinai. It did not abrogate or set aside the 
first Covenant, but was merely an addition to it, which curtailed 
in a measure richer blessings, so far as Israelites were 
concerned. Their Law Covenant, which they thought to be 
unto life, they found to the contrary condemned them to 
death as unworthy of life. God allegorically illustrates these 
two Covenants by Abraham's two wives, as St. Paul explains 
in Galatians 4. The original Covenant was represented by 
Sarah, Abraham's wife; while the Law Covenant was represented 
by Hagar, a bond-servant, and not the married wife. 
As Sarah was barren for a long time, so God's Covenant with 
Abraham was barren. The Law Covenant of bondage, represented 
by Hagar, brought forth first the Jewish Nation, represented 
in the allegory by Ishmael, who could not, however, 
be heir of the original Covenant. As by and by Hagar 
and her son were punished for pride and controversy, and 
cast off, so the Jewish nation, developed under the Law Covenant, 
was cast off from Divine favor, as represented by the 
Master's words, "Your house is left unto you desolate." 

As Sarah was long barren, until after Hagar's son was 
born, and became persecutor, so the Abrahamic Covenant, 
which was to produce the Messiah, was long barren. That 
Sarah Covenant has meantime produced the Lord Jesus and 
the various members of his Body, who have already passed 
into glory. "The Seed of Abraham," "The Seed of Promise," 
will be fully born shortly now, when the last member of the 
Elect Church, which is the Body of the Messiah, shall have 
stood the tests and been received beyond the veil, completing 
the First Resurrection of "Christ the First Fruits." Let 
us make no mistake on this point, but hear the Apostle's 
words, "We, brethren, as Isaac was, are the children of 
promise," the promised Seed through whom, with our Lord 
and Head, God will "bless all the families of the earth."— 
Gal. 3:29. 

A NEW COVENANT-KETURAH 

Keep the matter clear before your mind and note that 
thus far there have been only two Covenants, the old, or 
original one, and the Law Covenant, which was added four 
hundred and thirty years afterward.— Gal. 3:17. 

There have been just two classes developed under these, 
natural Israel and spiritual Israel. But the allegory continues: 
"For Sarah died" and Abraham took another wife, 
Keturah, which represented another Covenant, called in the 

R4309 :page 12 



Scriptures the New Covenant. Abraham had many children 
by Keturah, typifying the many children of God by the New 
Covenant during the Millennium, but none of them as an 
heir. As it is written, "All that he hath, he hath given unto 
Isaac." The children of Keturah, therefore, received their 
blessing through Isaac, and represent the restitution class of 
the Millennium, who will be blest by the antitypical Isaac, 
namely, The Christ. Two matters should be borne in mind 
here: First, Keturah did not become a wife, or Covenant, 
until after Isaac's marriage, which typified the marriage or 
union between Christ and the Church in the end of this age. 
Second, Abraham did not marry Keturah until Sarah was 
dead. In other words, this New Covenant typified by Keturah 
does not become a wife or Covenant, until after the 
original Covenant, represented by Sarah, shall have brought 
forth the Seed, the Messiah, through which the children of 
Keturah, the subjects of the New Covenant, are to receive 
their blessing. It should be evident, then, to all that the 
Messiah, the Christ, Head and Body, is not the offspring of 
the New Covenant, Keturah, but the offspring of the old, the 
original Covenant— Sarah. 

The first mention of the New Covenant (Jer. 31:31) was 
prophetic— a declaration to the Jews that God intended to 
give them a better Covenant than the Law Covenant, which 
they had found a bondage and unto death. That the New 
Covenant promises did not refer to the original one represented 
by Sarah is evident, not only by the fact that it is 
called a new one, but also by the fact that it was to bring 
them earthly riches, blessings, Restitution, etc., whereas the 
original Covenant was to bring forth a Spiritual Seed. 

The promise of the New Covenant is, "I will take away 
the stony heart out of your flesh and will give you a heart of 
flesh, and your sins and iniquities will I remember no more." 
This will be grand for Israel and subsequently for the 
world of mankind. It will mean for them Restitution and 
will operate throughout the Millennial Age, by the close of 
which stony hearts will be no more; but mankind will have 
been uplifted out of sin and death conditions back to the 
full perfection of manhood, the image of God in the flesh, 
with a heart of sympathy and love and kindness, a heart of 
flesh. 

Another distinction between our Covenant, the original 
one, and the other two, is that both the Law Covenant and 
the New Covenant have Mediators, while our Covenant, the 
original one, had no Mediator— needed none. 

St. Paul points out that Moses was the Mediator of the 
Law Covenant and that there was no Mediator necessary in 
the original, or Sarah Covenant. (Gal. 3:19,20.) The New 
Covenant, however, is to have a Mediator; as the Scriptures 
distinctly declare, "Christ is the Mediator of the New Covenant." 
(Heb. 9:15; 12:24.) This New Covenant is contrasted 
with the Law Covenant, and Christ, the Mediator of the New 
Covenant, is contrasted with Moses, the Mediator of the Law 
Covenant, showing that the New Covenant is better than 
the Law Covenant, because it has the better Mediator (Heb. 8:6), 
and that it supplants the Law Covenant; but is not 



better than the original or Sarah Covenant. 

Before we discerned the Scriptural teaching of the "Plan 
of the Ages," showing the Law Age, the Gospel Age and the 

R4310 :page 12 

Millennial Age, and their several works, we knew no future 
place to apply the promises respecting the New Covenant, 
and hence, in common with others, we applied them to ourselves 
and this Gospel Age, entirely overlooking the various 
Scriptures to the contrary. It was very inconsistent for us 
to quote in one breath the Apostle's statement that we are 
members of the Isaac Seed, the children of the old, original 
Covenant, and then in the next breath to class ourselves as 
beneficiaries of the New Covenant. The difficulty all along 
was our failure to clearly discern the "mystery hidden from 
past ages and dispensations, but now revealed unto the 
saints."— Col. 1:26. 

Had we studied the Lord's Word in a more saintly 
fashion, we might the sooner have gotten rid of the errors of 
the Dark Ages and have apprehended afresh the Apostolic 
teaching, namely, that the "Mystery" is that the Church, selected 
from both Jews and Gentiles to be the Body of Christ, 
are joint-heirs with him in the Abrahamic Covenant and in 
his entire inheritance. Only those who discern the truth of 
this, which is still a "Mystery" with the world and the nominal 
Church, are prepared to understand the "Divine Plan of 
the Ages" as a whole. 

THE BLOOD OF THE NEW COVENANT 

When our Lord set before his disciples the first Memorial 
Supper he declared of the cup, "This is the blood of the 
New Testament, shed for many for the remission of sins." 
Notice that the blood of the New Covenant was shed for the 
many, the world of mankind; but only a few, the "little flock," 
the disciples, "the Body of Christ," were invited to drink of 
it, to participate with him in that cup. For 1800 years that 
cup has been passed to all of the consecrated. Those who 
have refused to drink of it have their names blotted out from 
the roll of the Elect, the Bride Class, the Royal Priesthood. 
Those who drink of it have the promise that they shall share 
with their Lord and Head in all of his great work as the 
Seed of Abraham. Thus our Lord said to his disciples who 
asked to sit on his Throne, "Are ye able to drink of the cup 
that I drink of, and be baptized with the baptism that I am 
baptized with?" (Mark 10:38.) Will you carry out fully 
the covenant of consecration to death which you made and 
on account of which you are reckoned as members of my 
Body? If this is your will, I will test you, to make your 
calling and election sure. 

Those to whom it is given to know the "Mystery" of the 
Kingdom of God (and no others) may see that this entire 
Gospel Age, from the time of our Lord's baptism at Jordan 
to the present time and to the completion of the Church, is 
the one great Day of Atonement, the one great Day of High 



Calling to the Kingdom, the one great Day of sharing the 
Sufferings of Christ, that we may have part also in his glory 
to follow. 

All of our work, therefore, is merely the "filling up of 
that which is behind of the afflictions of Christ." (Col. 1:24.) 
When all of those afflictions shall have been filled up, the 
glorious work of the Millennial Age will follow. That work 
comes under the New Covenant, Israel being first to participate 
and subsequently all nations. The world in the next 
age will not be blessed under our Sarah Covenant, the Seed 
of which is spiritual— no more than we are now blessed 
under the Keturah Covenant, the New Covenant, whose seed 
is natural, earthly. 

When our Lord said, "This cup is the blood of the New 
Covenant," we should understand that, primarily the cup is 
his, and secondarily it is ours, who are his Body, sharing it 
and drinking it with him. There will be none of it left for 
others to drink of afterwards, for his command is, "Drink ye 
all of it." It was, therefore, primarily, our Lord's blood or 

R4310 :page 13 

death which was necessary to the sealing of the New Covenant, 
but by Divine arrangement the blood or death of his 
Church is also made necessary. Hence the New Covenant 
cannot be sealed, finished, made operative, until all the 
"members of the Body" shall have died, when the Great 
High Priest's "better sacrifice" shall be finished. It is, therefore, 
quite proper that our Lord's death or blood should be 
mentioned as the blood of the New Covenant, even though it 
be not applied until all the members of his Body shall have 
been sacrificed by him. Then he will apply all the blood, 
all the sacrifice, all the death merit, as his own on behalf of 
the world and seal the Covenant with God on behalf of men. 
After having sealed the Covenant with the Father, Christ with 
his Church will at once enter upon the great work of reconciling 
the world, restoring the world to harmony with the 
Father. 

In this connection notice that only the sins of the Church 
have yet been cancelled; for, although our Lord's death contained 
quite sufficient merit for the sins of the whole world, 
that merit has not yet been applied to any but believers. 
Hence we read that our Lord ascended up on high, there to 
"appear in the presence of God for us"— believers. It is because 
he did not apply the merit of his sacrifice to unbelievers 
that we read that the "whole world lieth in the wicked 
one." This is in full accord with these Day-of-Atonement 
sacrifices for sins; the first for the household of faith, the 
Church, the Royal Priesthood, and the second for all the 
people, representing mankind in general, the world. Let no 
one get the misapprehension that the Church does any offering 
to God. We, according to the flesh, are dead, and as 
New Creatures only are we members of the High Priest's 
Body. It is the High Priest who does all the offering, and 
of that Priest the Head represents the entire Body. "We have 
an Advocate with the Father." 



Bear in mind that our Covenant, the original one, had 
no Mediator. It needed none, because it did not attempt 
harmonizing rebels with the Divine Covenant, as the New 
Covenant proposes to do. The "world, lying in the wicked 
one," as declared in the lines of the parable, "We will not 
have this man to reign over us," will need strong restraints 
and coercions and stripes during the Millennium to force 
them to obedience. As it is written, "Every knee shall bow, 
and every tongue confess," this being merely a preliminary, 
to the intent that the reign of righteousness may be inaugurated, 
so that all may taste of the blessings of the Divine 
government; so that as many as will may come into harmony 
with it. A Mediator is necessary, and the Messiah, Head and 
Members, will be that Mediator in whose hands of control 
the entire world will be placed during the Millennium, so 
that even the willing and obedient will not be directly introduced 
to the Father until the end of that Mediatorial 
reign. 

But how different now! As soon as our eyes discerned 
"The Lamb of God, which taketh away the sin of the world," 
and as soon as our ears heard the message of God's love, we 
needed no compulsion. On the contrary, it was the Father 
himself who drew us to Christ, and, accepting Christ and 
being justified by faith in his blood, we are at once introduced 
to the Father by him and exhorted to present our 
bodies to the Father. So doing, these sacrifices were accepted 
in the Beloved, and we were begotten of the holy Spirit, 
and at once become children of God, joint-heirs with Jesus 
Christ our Lord to an inheritance incorruptible. 

It is these New Creatures whom God has accepted that 
need no Mediator. We did need the blood of the Everlasting 
Covenant, and we still need an Advocate with the Father, 
because of our unwilling weaknesses of the flesh. Let us 
continually rejoice with our Redeemer and Advocate, without 
whom we can do nothing, and let us rejoice that in the Lord's 
provision the Man Christ Jesus, the Mediator between God 
and men (the world), has associated us with himself as his 
members, to be participants with him in his great work of 
reconciling the world. Let us rejoice that the Lord has made 
us "able ministers of the New Covenant," that we with our 
Lord may now be permitted to minister or serve, to the laying 
down of our lives and thus be prepared to be ministers 
or servants of that New Covenant to the world in general at 
the Second Coming of our Lord. 

Then will come the antitype of Moses— inauguration of 
the Law Covenant. Moses came down from the Mount in the 
Lord's presence with a vail over his face, and sprinkled of 
the blood upon all the people. So we, having been changed 
to the glorious plane of spirit beings, shall be vailed from 
human sight, and, operating through the ancient worthies 
and others, we shall show to all men, the whole world, the 
fact that Divine Justice has been satisfied, and we shall 
sprinkle them, cleanse them, justify them and bring them 
into harmony with the Lord during the Millennium. 



R4311 :page 13 

"HELP FROM THE LORD" 

OUR year text for 1909 is, "MY HELP COMETH FROM 

THE LORD." (Psa. 121:2.) We have just received 

a large importation of most beautiful cards bearing 

this text and supplemented with a Calendar, the top leaf of 

which records "The Vow," which can be torn off by those 

who so prefer. The cards are dark green, with a velvet 

finish, embellished with a spray of pansies. The white letters 

of the text embossed upon the velvety ground stand out 

beautifully. We have filled all orders to date, but still have 

a good supply. The usual price of such cards is 35 cents, 

postpaid; our price is 15 cents, by reason of getting amounts 

in so large a quantity and supplying them to our readers at 

cost price. We trust that this beautiful text will be very impressive 

and helpful to all of us throughout the year. It is 

full of meaning, from whatever standpoint considered. If we 

mistake not, the Lord's dear people never needed help more 

than at the present time. The difficulty with some, however, 

is that they do not realize their need. "When they are strong, 

then they are weak." "Let him that thinketh he standeth, 

take heed lest he fall." "Let us fear, lest a promise being 

left of entering into his rest, any of you should seem to come 

short of it."--Heb. 4:1. 

The text reminds us further that those who need help 
and who realize it should look to the Lord for it— not relying 
upon their own strength or wisdom nor upon the assistance 
of their fellows. We are not to despise assistance from 
any quarter, but our chief reason for receiving any assistance 
should be our conviction that it has come from the Lord, 
whether through the ear or through the eye and the printed 
page or however. We are to remember that we are contending 
against a great Adversary and wily foe, and that we are 
not sufficient of ourselves to conquer, but that our only hope 
is in abiding in the Lord's love, by seeking to do those things 
which are pleasing to him and heeding the counsel of his 
Word and the leadings of his providence. A little carelessness 
along these lines, and the Adversary might readily entrap 
us and ensnare us and then lead us captive at his will. 
Ah, yes ! we have the assurance of the Lord that there is but 
one place of safety at this time— into which more and more 
deeply we penetrate day by day. This place of safety is 
under the shadow of the Almighty, which figuratively signifies 
very close to the Lord. "No harm can come nigh that 
dwelling place," so far as the New Creature is concerned. 
Trials, tribulations, slanders may be exercised against us 

R4311 :page 14 

according to the flesh, but these cannot harm us as New 
Creatures, nor even disturb our peace of soul, while we are 
close to the Lord. 



WE ARE NOT IGNORANT OF SATAN'S DEVICES 

Recently we called attention to the fact that the evil 
spirits, the fallen angels, are to be permitted special liberties 
in this "evil day"; and that we might expect from them intrusions 
and deceptions from materializations. But while 
guarding that point we omitted to note another, perhaps 
equally dangerous, or more so, because more subtle. This 
we must consider now. Undoubtedly the fallen angels have 
had more or less power throughout the past, not merely to 
obsess or physically possess those who yield their wills, but 
power to measurably influence the minds of those who would 
resist them, and always by putting darkness for light. As 
a notable illustration of this, remember Judas, who, after 
brooding over the fact that our Lord's cause was not bringing 
him great honor and wealth, premeditated shaking matters 
up, incidentally gaining thirty pieces of silver and arousing 
our Lord to practically assert himself and take a stand, 
in harmony with his power. 

It was after this brooding that he was still further 
offended, while he ate at the Lord's table and said, "Is it I?" 
And when the Lord had intimated that it was he who would 
betray him, he became more determined to do so. We read, 
"Satan entered into him." His does not seem to be the case 
of obsession, but rather of domination of the mind. Satan, 
who had been striving to gain control, got the mastery when 
Judas was angry with the Lord's reference to him as a traitor. 

Our thought is that the evil spirits have been restrained 
in considerable measure from intruding upon the minds of 
men. Otherwise the world would have become Bedlam long 
ago. But our thought now is that their liberties with the 
saints will be increased, with a view to the closing test or 
decision in respect to character, which is now due. "Judgment 
must begin at the house of God," but it is to extend in 
this hour of temptation or trial to "all them that dwell upon 
the face of the whole earth." That which will begin with 
the Church will end with the world, producing the most 
awful state of affairs imaginable, "A time of trouble such as 
never was since there was a nation." (Dan. 12:1.) This 
power of intrusion will contain, we believe, evil suggestions, 
promoting slanders and back-biting and temporarily, at least, 
derange the judgment and lead to violences of various kinds, 
of which the same person, under other circumstances and 
conditions would not have thought. In a word, the difficulty 
will be a dementia of passion, strife, hatred and unreason. 

We see evidences along this line at the present time and 
it is our duty to sound the warning for the benefit of those 
not already so twisted as to be unable to appreciate the situation. 
Such manifestations of evil spirits— malice, hatred, 
envy, strife, evil-speaking, back-biting, slanders, etc., circle 
around the VOW and those who have taken it, with violence 
and opposition for which we cannot otherwise account. Those 
under this influence seem impervious to argument, to reason, 
but open to every imaginable suggestion of evil. They seem 
to lose entirely the spirit of love, the spirit of Truth, the 
spirit of a sound mind. At first we were dazed by such conditions, 



affecting some whom we had highly esteemed, but at 
last the solution above stated has come. In the light of it 
the whole situation is clear. It bids us have sympathy for 
the deluded ones and be on guard for ourselves. 

To illustrate: One dear Brother, to whose violent letter 
of opposition we adverted in our issue of October 15, afterwards 
came dangerously near a mental collapse, in connection 
with which he received spirit messages by raps, yet 
was so off guard that it did not occur to him to question the 
source. His mind, though previously humble, was led to 
aspire to the management of the WATCH TOWER, and he found 
types and evidences in the Bible which led him to assume 
that God purposed a change in the management of the 
Harvest Work. It was under the influence of this erroneous 
sentiment that this dear Brother, whom we have dearly loved, 
and still love, wrote us a terribly bitter letter, for which he 
has since apologized in most kindly terms. He now freely 
acknowledges that he was under demoniacal influence and 
inspiration. He has recovered his balance; praise the Lord! 
But we regret that he has not yet taken the VOW or RESOLUTION 
to God; that he apparently does not yet see that it was 
this very item by which the Adversary gained an entrance to 
his mind. Ah! if the dear Brother had taken the VOW, how 
it would have proved a power of the Lord for his protection, 
along the very lines of his besetment:— 

(1) Desiring God's rule more and more in his own heart, 
he would have asked God to keep him humble and in fear 
lest he should attempt to grasp something which the Lord 
had not put into his hands. 

(2) Would not the Resolution to more carefully than 
ever, if possible, guard every thought and word and deed 
have helped this dear Brother to avoid every high imagination 
and have kept him from saying with his tongue and 

writing with his pen the acrimonious words which he has 
since retracted? 

(3) Would not the declaration of the VOW to remember 
daily the harvest laborers and to consider his own privileges 
in the harvest work have helped this dear brother, by filling 
his mind and hands with the work the Lord had already 
committed to him, and thus have kept him from hankering 
after, and endeavoring to grasp, what the Lord had not committed 
to him? 

(4) Would not the Resolution to be on guard against 
Spiritism and Occultism in every form have warned the 
brother against the spirit-rappings, visions, etc., which almost 
worked his ruin? We believe that it surely would have done 
so and we are hoping yet that the Brother will heartily put 
himself under that VOW to the Lord— whether calling it a 
VOW or a RESOLUTION. 

Dear brethren, we cannot express to you our deep love 
for you all, and interest in your welfare, nor can we express 
our sorrow that our endeavor to help you by suggesting the 
VOW, or RESOLUTION, to the Lord should be so unkindly received 
by some, and awaken in them such opposition and 
animosity. The more often we read the VOW, the less do we 
see in it to cause offense to any sound-headed or sound-hearted 



brother or sister— the less do we see that any one 
could reasonably oppose, unless his judgment were misguided 
by the evil spirits, as in the case above cited. We are not, 
by any means, condemning those who have not taken the 
VOW. That is a matter of their own business. And if otherwise 
they are children of God and manifest his spirit, we 
should recognize and treat them and love them in every 
sense of the word as brethren. If they do not yet see the 
importance of this safeguard, we believe that they will see it 
later. Our urgency on this subject is similar to that of the 
Apostle, when he says, "I beseech you therefore, brethren, 
by the mercies of God, that ye present your bodies a living 
sacrifice, holy acceptable to God, which is your reasonable 

R4312:page 14 

service." (Rom. 12:1.) And "Make straight paths for your 
feet, lest that which is lame be turned out of the way." 

After what we have witnessed of the power of evil operating 
in the minds of some and producing characteristics 
which the Apostle denominates "Works of the flesh and the 
devil," we can scarcely be surprised at anything which the 
Adversary might accomplish along these lines. But while 
we fear lest we should come under any such influence ourselves, 
and while we watch and pray lest we enter into 
temptation, we should not be cast down, nor hindered in any 
measure or degree, in respect to the service of our King. He 

R4312:page 15 

is able and willing to keep in perfect peace those who are 
trusting him, those who are following his leadings and coming 
close to him, even "under the shadow of the Almighty." 
The VOW has helped many to take this stand, thank God! 
And in proportion as it is taken, we believe that it will still 
further help, not only those who have taken it, but also those 
who have not taken it, but have heard and appreciate, in a 
measure, its warning voice. The words of the Apostle, "Who 
shall be able to stand in that evil day," never seemed more 
full of meaning to us than now, and never have we felt more 
than now our need of every piece of the Divine armor, and 
of every cord at our disposal to bind the sacrifice securely 
to the altar. 

So then, while still expecting the attacks of the Adversary 
along the lines of materialization, hypnotism and occultism 
in general, we perceive that from inoculation of our minds 
with evil surmisings, saints have probably the most to dread. 
An important question is, How can we be on guard against 
this insidious snare? The reply is, By keeping very close to 
the Lord. Apparently the least deviation from the principles 
of righteousness in our thoughts, the least violation of justice 
or love in our thoughts, would open the way for the enemy to 
inject poison, leaven, malice, envy, hatred and strife. 

We still urge the VOW as a great help in this time of 
stress, and one that you will appreciate more and more as 
you discern how the Lord is using it for your blessing and 



protection. But if, for fear that you cannot keep it, or for 
any other reason, you fail to take it, we counsel that you at 
least have its various provisions in mind, and seek to shape 
all of your various affairs day by day along those lines. But 
do not forget that our help comes from the Lord and that the 
VOW is of assistance to us only as it helps us to approach 
near to him, and to abide in his love, and in harmony with 
his divine Word, in thought, in word, in deed. 



page 15 

BEREAN STUDIES ON THE ATONEMENT 

THE TEXT-BOOK USED FOR THIS COURSE 
IS SCRIPTURE STUDIES, SERIES V. (E)* 

Questions on Study V.— The Channel of the Atonement. 

FEBRUARY 7 

(10) Is the term holy Ghost the same in meaning as 
holy Spirit? Why the two translations? Which is 
preferable? Cite standard authorities on the subject. 
P. 168, par. 2. 

(11) What authority is there for speaking of the 
holy Spirit as a separate person from the Father and 
the Son— the "third person" of the Trinity? Cite 
Scriptures showing that it signifies, not a person, but 
the spirit of a person. P. 169, par. 1. 

(12) When the pronouns he, whom, him and his 

are used in respect to the holy Spirit, what is the signification? 
Does this teach or imply personality? P. 170, par. 1,2. 

(13) Do other translations use the same terms? 
Cite some illustrations where the same Greek word is 
rendered in the feminine and others in which it is 
rendered in the neuter gender. P. 170, par. 2,3; Pp. 171, 
172. 

(14) What is the meaning of the term holy Spirit, 
as used in the Scriptures? What qualities or powers 
are represented by the term? Give illustrations of the 
use of the Hebrew word ruach and the Greek word 
pneuma. Pp. 173, 174. 

(15) What sense attaches to the word spirit, when 
we say that God is a spirit? P. 174, last par. 

(16) What is signified by the statement that "the 
spirit moved on the face of the waters," in the account 
of creation? (Gen. 1:2.) Was this an intelligent moving? 
P. 175, par. 1. 

FEBRUARY 14 

(17) The Apostle says that "Holy men of old spoke 
and wrote as they were moved of the holy Spirit." In 
what sense did it move them? P. 175, par. 3. 

(18) Give an illustration of the spirit of God working 



in the hearts of cunning craftsmen and explain the 
nature of the operation. P. 175, par. 2. 

(19) When the Lord put his spirit upon Moses and 
subsequently upon the elders of Israel, what did it signify? 
What was its operation? Is there anything to 

indicate that it was a person that was distributed 
amongst them? P. 176, par. 1. 

(20) Was the holy Spirit manifested in the same 
manner before Pentecost as subsequently? Cite some 
Scriptures in proof of the answer. P. 176, par. 2. 

(21) In what sense was the holy Spirit granted at 
Pentecost different from any previous presentation? 
To whom and for what purpose was it granted? P. 177, 
par. 1. 

(22) In what respect does this manifestation differ 
from the previous manifestations of the Spirit? Give 
Scriptural citation in proving answer. P. 177, par. 2; 
P. 178, par. 1. 

(23) Does the holy Spirit as it now operates in the 
Church always manifest itself in the same manner? 
Demonstrate the answer from the Scriptures. P. 178, 
par. 1. 

(24) Is there a difference between the holy Spirit 
and the gifts of the Spirit, and what relationship do 
they bear to each other? Give Scriptural quotations 
proving the answer. P. 179, par. 1. 

FEBRUARY 21 

(25) Were the gifts of the Spirit such as would 
vanish away? Does this signify that the Spirit would 
cease to operate, or that thereafter it would be differently 
manifested? P. 179, par. 2. 

(26) Is there a difference between the gifts of the 

Spirit, which were miraculous, and the personally developed 
fruits of the spirit? Explain the difference 
with Scriptural references. P. 180, par. 1. 

(27) What are the fruits of the Spirit and how do 
they differ from its gifts? P. 180, par. 2. 

(28) Explain the different manifestations of the 
Spirit and the different objects served. P. 181, par. 1. 

(29) Is the term, Spirit of God, sometimes used in 
a similar manner as we use the expression, spirit of 
man, or mind of man? Give some instances. P. 182. 

(30) Give three senses in which the term Spirit of 
God may be understood, and some illustrations. P. 183. 

FEBRUARY 28 

(3 1) The Spirit of God is said to be given sometimes 
in measure and again without measure. What 

do these statements imply? Could they be applied to 
a person or only to the spirit of a person? P. 184, par. 1. 

(32) Can any but consecrated believers receive the 
holy Spirit at all? And how may these increase their 
measure? P. 185, par. 1. 



(33) Quote a number of uses of the word spirit and 
explain, if possible, how these could possibly be used 
in reference to a person— spirit of truth, spirit of the 
Father, etc. P. 186, par. 1. 

(34) If the Spirit of the Father means another God, 
how should we understand the words spirit of the world, 
spirit of error, spirit of Satan, etc.? P. 186, par. 2. 

(35) What is meant by the term Spirit of Anti-Christ 
and how should we be on guard against it? P. 187, 
par. 1. 

(36) Do the holy and unholy influences or spirits 
at work in the world imply that there is no personal 
God or no personal Satan? P. 187, par. 2. 



*Five years ago DAWN-STUDIES, VOL. V., was reset, and 
unfortunately the type was not exactly same size as before; and 
hence page for page they differ. The references given in these 
Berean Studies apply to the present edition, a copy of which 
postpaid will cost you but 30c. But keep your old edition, for 
unfortunately the new Bible Helps refer to its pages. 



page 16 



STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES 
PUBLIC MINISTRIES OF THE TRUTH 
UNDER THE AUSPICES OF THE 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY 



THESE SERVICES ARE WITHOUT CHARGE, AND NO COLLECTIONS 

ARE TAKEN UP. THE CLASS AT EACH PLACE 

GENERALLY PROVIDE THE MEETING PLACES AND ARE 

PLEASED TO ENTERTAIN THE LORD'S SERVANTS 

(AND NOTHING UNUSUAL OR ELABORATE IS EXPECTED). 

AT LEAST ONE BEREAN LESSON IS 

PROVIDED FOR EACH APPOINTMENT. 



BIBLE STUDENTS' SOUTHERN CONVENTION 
JACKSONVILLE, FLA., FEBRUARY 12-16, 1909 



Ask for receipt on "Certificate Plan" when purchasing your 
one-way ticket; account, Bible Students' Convention. 

All sessions will be held in Board of Trade Auditorium on 
Main Street. 

Lodging at 50 cents and up, per night; meals, 25 cents 
and up. 

The surrounding territory and immediately adjacent states 



are expected to furnish most of the attendance, though some 
from more distant parts will be present also. 

Pilgrim brethren will be present, including also Brother 
Russell. 

Come all who can, and let those who cannot join us there 
in person join in spirit and in prayers, and thus participate 
in the showers of refreshing which the Lord will surely pour 
upon us. 

ONE-DAY LOCAL CONVENTIONS ADDRESSED BY THE 
EDITOR OF THIS JOURNAL AS FOLLOWS: 

PITTSBURG (N.S.), PA., JANUARY 3 

Session for the public at 3:00 p.m. in Allegheny Carnegie 
Hall, corner Ohio and Federal Sts. Visiting friends heartily 
welcomed. Baptismal services at 10:30 a.m. for those desiring 
same and notifying thereof, at Bible House Chapel, 610 Arch 
Street. 

CUMBERLAND, MD., JANUARY 10 

Morning session for Rally, Praise and Testimony at 1 1:00 
o'clock, at 21 South George St. Afternoon session for the 
public in Maryland Theatre, North Mechanic Street, at 3:00 
o'clock. Subject, "Where are the Dead?" Evening meeting 
for the interested at 7:30. Visiting friends will be made very 
welcome. 

MIDDLETOWN, CONN., JANUARY 17 

All sessions in the Middlesex Opera House. Morning 
meeting for praise and testimony at 1 1:00 o'clock. Afternoon 
meeting for the public at 3:00 o'clock. Subject, "Where are 
the Dead?" Meeting for the specially interested at 7:30 p.m. 
Visiting friends cordially welcomed. 

CLEVELAND, OHIO, JANUARY 24 

BROOKLYN, N. Y., JANUARY 3 1 



page 17 



SEMI-MONTHLY 
VOL. XXX JANUARY 15 NO. 2 
A.D. 1909-A.M. 6037 



CONTENTS 

The Nashville Convention 19 

Removal of the Society's Headquarters 19 

Brother Russell Re-elected Pastor 19 



Greater Works Shall Ye Do 20 

The Emmanuel Movement 20 

Reports for 1908 from the Foreign Branches 22 

Turning the World Upside Down 24 

We Cannot but Speak the Things 25 

Brotherhood in the Anointed One 25 

Satan Filled Thy Heart 26 

The Three Great Covenants 27 

I. Grace-II. Law-Ill. Works 27 

The Oath-Bound Covenant Sure 28 

Abraham's Two Seeds 29 

The Blood of the Everlasting Covenant 30 

page 18 

1909-MOTTO CALENDARS- 1909 



We expected that we had placed a large order for these 
calendars, when we ordered five thousand, but we had not 
much more than one-half enough. We cabled another order 
and hope to be able to fill all orders by February 1st. They 
are beautiful, very cheap, and much appreciated. 

R4310 :page 18 

THE NEW BIBLES WITH HELPS 



We did our best to fill all orders for the new Bibles by 
Christmas time, and believe that we got them all filled before 
the New Year opened. Any order not yet filled kindly report 
to us at once, giving date, and put full particulars respecting 
number, price and the form in which the money was sent. 
So far as we have heard, the dear friends are delighted with 

page 18 

this work. 

A TRACT FOR SEVENTH-DAY ADVENTISTS 



Order as many of these as you can use judiciously, one 
for each of your S.D.A. friends and neighbors. It will do 
them good and prepare them for the light on other subjects. 

R4302 : page 18 

TRACTS, ENVELOPES, WITHDRAWAL LETTERS, ETC. 



Any of these you may wish to order soon, please order at 
once, so that we need not pack, ship and unpack them. Besides, 
our moving will interrupt shipments for about two 
weeks. 

If you ordered Bibles or tracts and did not get them by 
mail inquire at the express office for them. 

HYMNS OF DAWN WITHOUT MUSIC 



We will shortly have a very cheap edition of our "Hymns" 
without music for Conventions, etc. 

Some time ago when recommending that we sing the same 
"Hymns of Dawn" (Phil. 3:16), we remarked about the cost 
of the preparation, copyrights, etc. Inadvertently our words 
seemed to include the 5c "Songs"; but of course we did not 
mean that they had cost you much or us anything, for they 
were not our publication. We no longer handle "Songs." 

BALANCES TO THE TRACT FUND 



We have concluded that any balance of money after filling 
orders shall be placed in the Tract Fund unless you 
otherwise direct. 

page 18 

THE POLISH TRACTS ARE NOT READY 
R4302:page 18 

RENEWALS OF "DISPATCH" AND "WORLD" 



We have arranged for Dispatch subscriptions covering 
Monday issue only at a very special rate, clubbed with the 
WATCH TOWER, both for $1.50. If you have already sent in 
your TOWER subscription, you may still avail yourself of this 
privilege by remitting the difference. We have made a similar 
arrangement with the Toronto World, for the benefit of 
our Canadian friends. 

OTHER PAPERS at same price are: Cincinnati Enquirer, 
Ft. Wayne News, Chattanooga News and The Atlanta Journal. 

LETTERS TO NEWSPAPER EDITORS 



Friends writing should mention their interest in the 
"People's Pulpit Sermons" or the "Brooklyn Tabernacle Sermons" 
or "Pastor Russell's Sermons," and not so state themselves 
as though any and all sermons interested them. Brother 



Russell prefers that his name be less and less used. Hence 
some sixty papers are publishing them without his name. 
Others prefer to use his name and no objection is offered so 
long as the improper title Reverend is not used. 

SEPARATE BIBLE HELPS 



These are ready in the leather-bound India-paper edition, 
price $1.25 postpaid. But we advise the Bible and 
Helps. The cheaper editions of the Helps on cheaper paper 
are not ready yet. 

A BARGAIN WHILE THEY LAST 



We remind you of the two beautiful motto-cards by our 
own designers: (1) Sister Seibert's "In Due Time" with the 
Chestnut bough; and (2) Sister Darlington's Restitution design. 
We have a large lot of these, and rather than move 
them to Brooklyn, we will sacrifice them at but little more 
than custom's duty and freight and express charges, as follows: 

2 of each (4) for 25 cents, postpaid. 

10 of each (20) for $1.00, postpaid. 

100 of each (200) for $6.00, collect. 

OUR ADDRESS STILL THE SAME 



It will take considerable time to get our arrangements 
perfected and stuff removed to Brooklyn. Address us at 
Allegheny, as usual, until contrary notice appears in these 
columns. 



R4312:page 19 

THE NASHVILLE CONVENTION 

AS WE expected, quite a number of the dear 
friends who attended the Nashville Convention, 
declared at its conclusion that it was the 
very best of all. So long as we are growing in grace, 
it must be true that a meeting of those of like precious 
faith for the discussion of our Father's Word must 
bring blessings increasingly precious as we increase 
in grace and knowledge. This being so, each day, 
each month, each year should be our best, our happiest, 
the one of our closest fellowship with the Lord. 
Blessed are those who, abiding under the shadow of 
the Almighty, are thus progressing from grace to 
grace, from glory to glory, and preparing for the final 



"change," when they shall see his face and hear the 
Master's "Well done." 

The Convention was a success. We had not expected 
more than one hundred in attendance, but 
found three hundred to three hundred and fifty. Pilgrim 
Wise served as chairman, and, with Pilgrims 
Sullivan, Rutherford, Johnson, Harrison, W. H. Bundy, 
F. H. Robison, J. A. Parker and C. T. Russell, shared 
in the addresses of the first four days. On Tuesday, 
December 29, thirty symbolized their consecration by 
water baptism, and that same evening we had our love 
feast, which, as usual, is a most delightful occasion. 
Following this a number were obliged to leave, but a 
larger number remained and had a delightful season 
of fellowship the next day, a large number of brethren 
being heard from in a symposium of Love. 

There were about one hundred Colporteurs in attendance, 
and a splendid, representative company they 



R4312:page 19 

REMOVAL OF THE SOCIETY'S HEADQUARTERS 

QUITE keenly do the dear friends of the Allegheny-Pittsburg 
Church seem to feel the near departure 
of the Bible House family; yet, philosophically, 
they have agreed with us that the Lord is 
abundantly able to care for the interests of his people 
everywhere, and quite likely he is giving them, in this 
experience, a special blessing, throwing upon them a 
greater weight of responsibility in spiritual matters. 

On the Wednesday night before Christmas, wholly 
without our knowledge, they had prepared for a special 
union meeting in the Bible House Chapel, and requested 
Brother Russell to come in and say a few words. On 
his arrival an appointed speaker, in well chosen terms, 
expressed the love of the Congregation for their Pastor 
and informed us that, desiring to make a tangible expression 
of their love, they had selected a fine velvet 
rug, a fine mahogany desk, a handsome chair, besides 
a small table and letter-holder. The offering for these 
gifts had far exceeded the expectations, so that $138 
remained, which they requested should be also used in 
some manner in connection with the outfitting of 
Brother Russell's Study in the new Brooklyn home. 
We accepted these tokens of love with heartfelt appreciation, 
and told the dear friends that only our conviction 
that the removal is in the Lord's provision and implies 
a forward step in his work, would enable us to 
leave cheerfully the numerous loved ones with whom we 
had been associated for more than thirty years, as 
Pastor of the Congregation. 



BROTHER RUSSELL RE-ELECTED PASTOR 

Two Sundays in advance announcement was made 
that on the last night of the year 1908 a general meeting 
would be held, at which the Congregation would expect 
to elect those who would serve it during the ensuing 
year. The Bible House Chapel was crowded, though 
it had been expressly stipulated that only those professing 
full consecration were invited. A solemn hush 
was upon the audience while Brother Russell briefly 
narrated some of the incidents connected with his 
Pastorate of the Congregation for more than thirty 
years. He mentioned by name some of those present 
who had been faithful supporters of the Truth during 
all of that period. Still larger numbers dated their 
affiliation with the Truth for twenty, fifteen, ten, five, 
and then down to one year. He remarked that he had 
not done for them, either collectively or individually, 
all that he would have liked to do, but assured them 
that he had served their interests in every manner to 
the best of his ability. He further declared that, to the 
best of his knowledge and belief, he had never done injury 
to any of them— in deed, in word, or in thought. 
In vacating the pulpit it caused him great gratification 
that these things were so. In concluding he requested 
that, if there were any present who felt that in any 
sense or degree, at any time or place, he had ever done 
them injury, in act or word, he hoped they would speak 
out, that he might know about it, and have opportunity 
for apology. There being no response to the invitation, 
he assured them that, not only had he not injured them 
in word or act, but even in his thoughts they were 
cherished, loved, yearned for and prayed for. 

Before leaving the platform, Brother Russell remarked 
that Pilgrim Brother Rutherford was present 
and would doubtless make an excellent Chairman for 
the business meeting called for the election of the 
Church's servants for 1909. He said that, unless some 
objection were made, it would be considered that 
Brother Rutherford was unanimously approved as 
Chairman of the session. Silence gives consent, so 
Brother Rutherford stepped to the platform, Brother 
Russell stepping down and taking his seat with the 
friends. 

R4312:page20 

A vote of thanks for the Pastor and Elders who 
had served during the year was proposed, seconded 
and passed unanimously. The object of the meeting 
was stated by the Chairman, and a motion was declared 
to be in order. Brother Dr. Spill at once arose 
and proposed that Brother Russell be reelected Pastor 
of the congregation for the year 1909. He urged that, 
even though rarely present with the Ecclesia, his election 
as Pastor would insure to the Church, possibly, a 



still greater watch care and make him more free to give 
advice in its affairs and interests. He declared that 
many congregations were in the habit of thus electing 
Brother Russell as Pastor, not only as an expression of 
their love and confidence, but also as an assurance to 

R4313 : page 20 

him of their desire for his special oversight of their interests, 

and with a view to making him feel the more 

at home with them at any time he could be present. 

Several brethren seconded the motion. Brother Russell 

arose, thanked the mover and seconders, but assured 

the dear friends that they would always have his 

love, best wishes and assistance everyway irrespective 

of his election, as suggested. He wished them to understand 

that he could not hope to be with them frequently 

in the future. He was glad even that for nearly 

two years he had addressed them only once a month, 

or less frequently, because it made the coming separation 

easier for all concerned. He did not wish anyone 

to vote on the motion with the thought that it would 

bring him to Pittsburg often, for he must attend to the 

interests of the general work. He remarked also that 

he could not think of accepting such an election, unless 

it were practically unanimous. The vote was taken 

and declared to be unanimously carried. 

At Brother Russell's suggestion the Bible House 
family declined to vote at this election, because, not expecting 
to remain long, it would not be appropriate 
for them to express a choice. Chairman Rutherford 
remarked this and then added that, since the local 
congregation voted unanimously, there could be no 
objection now to taking another vote which would include 
the Bible House family, and show their love also 
for Brother Russell. The motion was put and carried 
unanimously, the Bible House family voting. 

Following the custom of previous years, Brother 
Russell suggested the names of some who he believed 
would make faithful servants of the Church- 
Elders, Deacons and Deaconesses. He remarked that 
these were mere suggestions, any or all of them subject 
to rejection. He would not even nominate them, 
but merely suggested and left the congregation to 
make its own nominations. Brother Russell's suggestions 
were nominated and chosen— unanimously elected 
by the congregation. Altogether the occasion was 
an enjoyable one. Following the election a prayer, 
praise and testimony meeting was opened which lasted 
until after mid-night. Some of the dear friends remarked 
afterwards on the earnestness and unction of 
this Watch Night meeting. 



R4313 : page 20 



GREATER WORKS SHALL YE DO 

--ACTS 3: 1-16. -JANUARY 24.- 

Golden Text:— "His name through faith in his 
name hath made this man strong, whom ye see 
and know."— Acts 3:16. 

OUR lesson tells of one of the prominent miracles 
granted of the Lord at the beginning of this age. 
Peter and John were God's instruments in effecting 
an instantaneous faith cure. A man deformed from 
birth and unable to walk was made whole. The only 
power exercised was the power of faith on the part of 
the apostles, for the man healed, so far as we know, 
had no knowledge of Jesus, nor that the apostles were 
his representatives. Nor should we understand the 
apostolic command, "Look upon us," to mean the exercise 
by them of any hypnotic influence. Quite to the 
contrary, the power by which they healed was the same 
by which their Master had performed healings during 
the three and a half years of his ministry. The testimony 
in a nutshell is, "Silver and gold have I none, but 
such as I have, that give I thee. In the name of Jesus 
Christ of Nazareth rise up and walk, and he took him 
by the right hand, and lifted him up; and immediately 
his feet and ankle-bones received strength."— Acts 3:7. 

THE DESIRE FOR HEALING 

Perhaps there was never a time in the world's history 
when humanity manifested more desire for physical 
healing than today. Nor can we blame the poor, groaning 
creation for desiring relief. It is with regret, however, 
that we note that our Lord's comment to the 5,000 
whom he fed miraculously with bread and fish is still 
considerably applicable. He told them that they sought 
him because they had eaten of the free luncheon and 
not because of their love of the truths which he was 
preaching. He also told them to "Labor not for the 
meat which perisheth, but for that meat which endureth 
unto everlasting life, which the Son of man shall give 
unto you, for him hath the Father sealed."— John 6:27. 

So today we could wish that the hungry and thirsty 
were for the real relief which God hath provided and 
which all of us need— relief from sin and death. In a 
word, we could wish that there were a greater appreciation 
of soul sickness from sin and that there is but the 
one Good Physician, who is able to heal this malady 
and through whose ministry we may be healed. Note 
the fact that some of the strong delusions are supported 
by their claim to relieve physical pain. This is the 
claim of Spiritism— that disease can be relieved through 
mediumistic powers, under another's control. It is the 
claim of the Mormons that they can heal diseases 



miraculously. This is the claim of Christian Science, 
Mind Cure, Faith Cure people, Divine Healers, etc. 
Some of these names are used merely as a cover and 
pretense, while by others they are used with full faith 
that they are of some supernatural origin. The attitude 
of the public seems to be Give us healing. Give us relief 
from our aches and pains. If it is of God, we are 
glad. If it is of the Adversary, as you claim, we still 
take it, even though we know it to be in opposition to 
the Divine will. 

Such great inroads have been made in the churches 
of all denominations by these mind cures, hypnotic 
cures, that ministers of all denominations are perplexed 
what to do. The dominant idea with many of them is— 
our organization must be maintained at any cost. As 
a business man would purchase any kind of goods that 
would sell, so must the churches, they think, supply to 
the public whatever it demands; otherwise the congregation 
would diminish, the minister's salary would not 
be collected, and the whole denomination would fall to 
pieces. The ministers, therefore, feel that for self-preservation, 
and for the preservation of the organization 
they represent, they must meet the public demand, just 
as a theater manager feels that he must meet the public 
demand. 

THE EMMANUEL MOVEMENT 

At this opportune moment, when ministers are in 
perplexity and congregations are demanding physical 
healing, and particularly implying that they will not 
serve a God who will permit them to have afflictions 
and to be touched with a feeling of the infirmities of the 
race, the Emmanuel movement steps to the front. At 
one bound it has leaped into general favor, because it 
avoids much of the absurdity of Christian Science, 
which implies that there is no sickness, no pain, no 
death. The Emmanuel movement acknowledges the 
ills and seeks to relieve them and, in this respect, is 

R4313 : page 21 

certainly on advanced ground. Started in Boston, after 
more than a year's success, it is being laid before the 
ministers of all denominations. Books are published 
instructing them how they may establish these physical 
healings, instituted in connection with churches of 
all denominations. Special classes have been organized 
in various colleges for the purpose of instructing those 
studying for the ministry how to perform these cures. 
The matter has gone forward with remarkable speed. 
How great will be its proportions within a few years is 
difficult to say. We have no pleasure in merely fault-finding. 
Did we consider these various healings as 
innocent, not to say divine, as some suppose them to be, 
we would be either cooperating with them, or, at least, 



saying nothing against them, even as we decline to discuss 

the various schools of medicine, believing that 

each represents more or less skill helpful to humanity. 

But in these various cures for physical ailments 
now being promoted throughout Christendom, we see 
a great and a serious danger. Seeing this, it is our 
duty to raise a general voice to those who have an ear 
to hear the message. Our protest is that these are none 
such miracles as were wrought by our Lord and his 
apostles. True, there is a measure of similarity, just 
as some of the electric arc lights of our day closely resemble 
the sunlight. To our understanding, many of 
those identified with the various schemes of mind 
healing, faith healing, Christian Science, Hypnotism, 
etc., are well-meaning, thoroughly conscientious; and 
thoroughly deluded. To our understanding their cures 
are not by divine power, but by that of the Adversary, 
whom the Lord is permitting to use these means of 
attracting the Lord's people and the world away from 
the spiritual things and their necessity; also from the 
spiritual healing. We are well aware that in thus 
writing we are putting ourselves on the unpopular side, 
yet our duty is to the Lord and to the Truth and to 
those who have ears to hear and who desire to hear the 
message of the Lord. 

HYPNOTISM TINCTURES ALL DECEPTION 

Do not misunderstand us. We do not dispute that 
cures are accomplished, nor that some of the proceedings 
and theories are legitimate enough. What we do 
claim is that the Truth and rationality connected with 
these systems are the sugar-coating which covers the 
poison. The poison connected with all of them is the 
poison of the Adversary, the power of the fallen angels 
exercised in its most subtle form, namely, mental suggestion 
—hypnotism. This rational sugar-coating consists 
in the extending of kindly sympathy to the 
bereaved: in the recognition of the fact that fear is one 
of the most potent causes of human trouble and that 

R4314:page21 

faith in the Lord, or in a devil, for that matter, has the 
effect of resting the mind, relieving the nervous tension, 
and thus facilitating the eradication of pain. The 
doctrine of "Peace, troubled soul!" is certainly a good 
and wise one, particularly when based upon a Scriptural 
faith in Jesus as our ever-present help in every hour 
of need and when it promotes loyalty and obedience to 
him. This spirit of restfulness and "peace with God," 
if built upon false doctrines and erroneous suggestions 
and hypnotic influences, but hinders the soul from a 
proper approach to the Life-Giver and opens the way 
for the attacks of the Adversary. 
As Christian Science and Mind Cure pervert reason 



and thus destroy the power of reasoning logically, so 
Hypnotism undermines the will, weakens it, and prepares 
the way for further intrusions from the fallen 
spirits. To our understanding, Christendom is thus 
permitting an undermining of faith and will power, and 
is preparing for the great day of trouble with which 
this age will in a few years close— a trouble which will 
result largely from the intrusion of the evil spirits into 
human affairs, through the entanglement of human 
wills, weakened by Hypnotism. We warn all to be on 
guard against these modern miracle-workers and we 
call attention to the fact that their operation is entirely 
different from anything recorded in the Scriptures. 

THE CHURCH'S MIRACULOUS ESTABLISHMENT 

There is a reason for the miracles wrought by our 
Lord and his disciples. They were for the establishment 
of the Church— as a testimony to the Lord. Without 
them Christianity would not have grown as rapidly 
as it did. These miracles ceased as the Church secured 
an established footing. The miraculous gifts of the 
spirit, healing, etc., were supplanted by the spiritual 
gifts, or fruitage of holy living. As the Apostle declares, 
Whether there be miraculous tongues, they shall 
cease, and so with all the other gifts, including healing. 
The physical healing was supplanted by the spiritual 
healing. Thus our Lord's words were fulfilled, "Greater 
works than these shall ye do, because I go to my Father." 
What intelligent Christian who has experienced the 
opening of the eyes of his understanding will dispute 
the fact that he has received a far more valuable gift 
than that of the opening of his natural eyes? Who 
that is deaf, but has the ears of his understanding 
opened to spiritual matters, would not claim that he 
had a greater blessing than a restoration of physical 
healing? Who that has eaten of the Bread that came 
down from heaven and received spiritual strength, does 
not realize that his blessing is far beyond that enjoyed 
by those whom Jesus fed with the five barley loaves 
and the three small fishes? 

Who that has realized the healing of the soul does 
not realize that the healing of his heart affections is of 
much more value to him than the healing of any earthly 
disease? Who that was born in sin and shapen in iniquity 
and who has realized the forgiveness of his sins and 
has received grace whereby he may walk in the footsteps 
of Jesus, does not appreciate this as a greater 
miracle than the one recorded in our lesson? Ah! but 
some will say, "Let us have both the spiritual and the 
physical healing. Did not Jesus give both, and should 
not we expect both?" 

We reply that Jesus did not give both, but merely 
the physical. Not until he had finished his sacrifice 
and had ascended up on high, there to appear in the 
presence of God for us, could any of us receive of the 



holy Spirit. And not until then could any understand 
the spiritual things, the deep things of God. It is for 
this reason that our Lord's sermons were generally 
limited to earthly things. He said, "If I have told you 
of earthly things and ye believe not, how shall ye believe 
if I tell you of heavenly things?" (John 3:12.) 
Again he said, "I have many things yet to say unto you, 
but ye cannot bear them now. Howbeit when he, the 
Spirit of Truth, is come, he will guide you into all truth; 
for he shall not speak of himself; but whatsoever he 
shall hear, that shall he speak; and he will show you 
things to come." (John 16:12,13.) The Apostle tells 
us that "The natural man receiveth not the things of 
the Spirit of God; for they are foolishness unto him; 
neither can he know them, because they are spiritually 
discerned. ...But God hath revealed them unto us by 
his Spirit. "--I Cor. 2:14,10. 

OUR LORD'S MOUTHPIECES 

It is for this reason that we find some of the most 
helpful spiritual instructions in the writings of the 
apostles, without which we should not be able to get 
so large a measure of spiritual nutriment from our 
Lord's utterances, which were in parables and dark 
sayings, thus reserved for the future use of the saints. 

Under the picture of the Church at Laodicea, the 
Lord pictures to us the last stage of the Gospel Church. 
He represents it as saying, "I am rich, increased in 
goods, and have need of nothing." Nominal Christendom 
has been disposed to boast of its riches in scholarship 
and property and intelligence and influence, and 
its high moral standing. The one thing it has coveted 
is the healing power, and now it is grasping this, to 
its further injury, to the increase of its pride and boastfulness 
and to the bringing of itself still more fully 
under the powers of darkness. 

Notice how different is the Lord's view of the 
Laodicean Church, from that which it entertains of 

R4314:page22 

itself. He says, "Thou knowest not that thou art 
wretched and miserable and poor and blind and naked; 
I counsel thee to buy of me gold tried in the fire, that 
thou mayest be rich; and white raiment, that thou 
mayest be clothed, and that the shame of thy nakedness 
do not appear; and eye-salve to anoint thine eyes, 
that thou mayest see."— Rev. 3:17,18. 

It is for us to take the Lord's viewpoint, to see what 
constitutes the true riches, the true source of happiness 
and joy in the Lord. It is for us to have our eyes 
opened, and not to be deceived by our Great Adversary 
in this time. We remember our Lord's very words on 
this subject; his intimation that at his second advent 
many would boast of their work and power of healing, 



saying, "Lord, Lord, have we not prophesied in thy 
name, and in thy name cast out devils, and in thy name 
done many wonderful works?" (Matt. 7:22.) But our 
Lord said to such, I do not know you. I do not recognize 
you. You have no authority to make yourselves 
my disciples. 

Let us remember, dear friends, that the Lord's 
blessings upon the apostles were not in the nature of 
preservation from sickness or calamity, but the reverse. 
We have records of several of the prominent brethren 
of the Church, but no records of any of them being 
miraculous healers. The healings which were done 
were performed for signs for those about. We have 
records of disasters permitted to come upon our Lord 
and upon the apostles and upon the Church of that 
time— hatred of the world, thwarting of their plans, 
cruel mockings, stripes, in perils of shipwreck, in perils 
among false brethren, hungering, thirsting, etc. If 
God manifested his favor thus to our Lord and the most 
influential members of his Church and their associates, 
what shall we choose for ourselves? If we allow the 
Lord to choose our portion for us, he doubtless will 
give us similar experiences in this time, and glory, 
honor and immortality by and by. If we attempt to 
choose our own way, the Adversary will try to delude 
us and we may be relieved of some physical pains or 
difficulties, which might have been for our eternal welfare. 
Let us choose the better part, pray for the spiritual 
things and labor for them, and accept, as respects our 
earthly affairs, whatsoever our Father sees best! 



R4314:page22 

REPORTS FOR 1908 FROM THE FOREIGN BRANCHES 
OF THE WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY 

THE prosperity of the "Good Tidings" in Great 
Britain is fully attested by the figures given below. 
With the removal of our office to Brooklyn, 
London will be about as near to us as San Francisco. 
The reduced rate of postage between the two countries 
will also tend to centralize the work. We wish we could 
tell the dear friends of Great Britain and everywhere 
the world around how much we love all who are truly 
the Lord's and who give evidence of their control by 
his Spirit. Surely we feel that oceans cannot separate 
us from one another's love, nor make us feel less 
interest than if we lived in one city. While our love is 
the same for brethren of all languages, nevertheless 
we feel able to understand and sympathize most fully 
with those of our own tongue. In a very broad and 
very deep sense, therefore, Great Britain, Canada and 
the United States are one country. National prejudices 
and customs and superstitions may influence us variously, 



according to the flesh; but the more fully we 
understand our Father's Word, and come into fellowship 
with its spirit, the more will every barrier and 
every cause of misunderstanding vanish and enable us 
to see eye to eye. 

The Lord has blessed the Truth in Great Britain 
during 1908 greatly, and it is our belief that there, as 
well as in America, the next two years will be marked 
with marvelous progress in the overthrow of error, in 
the deliverance of God's people from its chains, in the 
spread of the light of the knowledge of God amongst 
his saints. 

R4315 : page 22 

We have promised that, if possible, next Spring we 
will visit Germany and Scandinavia on a "flying trip," 
and we purpose also, if possible, to arrange for a Three-Days' 
Convention in London. If we can accomplish 
these purposes, we will endeavor to have the London 
date May 29-31 (Whitsuntide Holidays), with special 
excursion rates. 

WORK DONE IN GREAT BRITAIN AND IRELAND 



SUMMARY OF THE WORK 

DAWN-STUDIES and MANNAS circulated 46,079 

Booklets, 9,529 

Tracts free (stated in pages) 63,884,400 

Letters received 9,915 

" sentout 8,872 

REPORT OF THE GERMAN BRANCH 



The Truth still progresses slowly in Germany, it 
seems to us, considering the amount of energy and 
money expended there. This, however, does not imply 
that the Germans are less deeply interested in the Truth 
than the English, Scotch, Irish and others. On the 
contrary, at our conventions and by the names of the 
lists, we discern that the brethren of German descent 
hold, perhaps, as prominent a place as any others. The 
fact of the matter seems to be that conditions in 
Germany have driven out from thence to the United 
States many of that nationality who are most susceptible 
to the influences of the Truth, leaving many behind 
proportionately less of this kind. However, who can 
estimate in money value the worth of the Truth, even 
to one child of God? From this standpoint we feel 
greatly encouraged at the progress the Truth has made 
there. Let us seek to estimate the value of the Truth. 



Let us say to ourselves, "What price would purchase it 
from me? For what sum of money would I be willing 
to be placed back again in the darkness of creedal 
systems, ignorance of God and his Plan?" By this 
standard the progress of the Work is great, in proportion 
to the cost: 

SUMMARY OF THE WORK 

DAWNS, Cloth, Vol. 1 3,685 

DAWNS, Cloth, other volumes 1,978 

DAWNS, Vol. 1, TOWER form 1,800 



Total number of copies 7,463 



Booklets 7,362 

Regular issue of German TOWERS used in Europe 27,900 

Extra sample copies of the TOWER sent out 78,900 



Total number of TOWERS 106,800 



Tracts used in Europe 3,506,400 

Total free literature, Tract pages 39,009,000 



Letters and cards received during the year 4,096 

Letters sent out during the year 1,815 

THE WORK IN SWEDEN 



Our representative in Sweden writes:— 

When we look back on the year behind us our 
hearts become filled with the most deep and humble 
gratitude and thankfulness to our loving heavenly 
Father for his overruling care for our good. We have 
indeed seen the most evident proofs that the Lord himself 
is the Leader of his Harvest work, and that he makes 

R4315 : page 23 

all things— yea, even our mistakes— to serve his purposes 
and the interests of his cause. Glory and praise 
be to his holy name! We have not, of course, such large 
figures to show in our reports from this little land as 
you receive from the more important parts of the field, 
but yet we are very thankful for the results we, by the 
Lord's grace, have seen of our united efforts here, and 
pray that his blessing may continually rest upon the 
Harvest work everywhere until all of it is done, and 



that we then may hear his "Well done." 

During the year past we have had the joy of seeing 
some of God's dear children, from the most Northern 
to the Southern part of the country, receive the Harvest 
message, and several of those are already in active 
service to bring the glad tidings to others. Amongst 
these is also one dear brother who, for the sake of the 
Truth, gave up his place as a minister in the Baptist 
Church a few months ago. Here in Orebro our little 
company has increased by nearly fifty brethren and 
sisters during the year. The leaders and preachers in 
the different sects preach against us and warn their 
people against "MILLENNII DAGNING," but still the good 
Shepherd's voice is heard by his sheep, and they 
abandon Babylon, following the voice of him that 
speaketh from heaven. 

We have also very good reasons for believing that 
the work of grace generally has progressed considerably 
in the hearts and lives of the friends of the Truth 
in Sweden. The spiritual appetite, the hunger and 
thirst for the "meat in due season" is great, and love 
toward the Lord and to you, his servant, and to all the 
children of God, is growing rapidly amongst us, as the 
eyes of our understanding get more and more opened. 
About the zeal and interest in the service and spreading 
of the Truth the following figures will show: 

SUMMARY OF THE WORK 

Work accomplished through the Swedish Branch, 
from Dec. 1, 1907, until Dec. 1, 1908 

Copies of DAWN Volumes 5,201 

Various booklets, About Hell, Tabernacle Shadows, etc. 6,288 



Total 11,489 

Number of subscribers on Swedish ZION'S VAKT-TORN. 1,368 
Old sets Swedish TOWER, cloth-bound and unbound... 209 

Bibles sold 60 

Volunteer Tracts and sample TOWERS 309,689 

Expressed in usual form of Tract pages 4,512,624 

Number of Meetings held 556 

Number of miles traveled in preaching tours 16,167 

Letters and cards received 1,829 

Letters and cards sent out 1,281 

Total number of various sendings, by mail and by 
railroad, sent out from this office 11,159 

FINANCIAL SUMMARY, 1908 

Expenditures 

Pilgrim, Convention and other 

meetings kr. 2,338.06 $ 623.48 

For translation, printing, printing 



paper, etc 6,225.86 1,660.23 

Freight and postage 1,310.95 349.59 

Office expenses, rent, light, heat, etc. 3,212.87 856.77 

Total kr.13,087.74 $3,490.07 

Receipts 

Voluntary Donations to Tract Fund... kr. 5,050.62 $1,346.83 

Swedish TOWER subscriptions 1,880.43 501.45 

Books sold, etc 5,813.29 1,550.22 

Total kr.12,744.34 $3,398.50 

Deficit, 1908 343.40 91.57 

Total kr.13,087.74 $3,490.07 

REPORT OF THE JAMAICA BRANCH FOR 1908 



The Society's representative writes:— 

All our efforts during the past twelve months have 
been signally blessed of the Lord, and we are pleased 
to report an increase in all branches of the work. 

Our joy is not confined to the expansion in the various 
departments of the Harvest work under our supervision, 
but we also rejoice to note that the friends within 
the range of our observation are growing in the 
knowledge and spirit of the Truth. 

Chief among the things that have ministered to this 
end, we cite to you the Pilgrim service, in which eight 
brethren gave either the whole or a part of their time. 

Numerous letters which we have received from time 
to time assure us of the blessings that the friends have 
derived from these visits. It seems to us to be the 
Lord's will that this service should not only be continued, 
but that it should be extended wherever possible. 
We are continually praying for the Lord's blessing 
upon those already in this service, and we are daily 
asking our heavenly Father to supply us with more efficient 
laborers for this branch of the Harvest work. 

The number of those newly interested in the Truth 
is growing very rapidly. Especially is this true in 
Kingston, where the seating capacity of our present 
meeting hall is often overtaxed. 

The general convention held recently at Annotto 
Bay was the largest ever held under the auspices of 
the Society in Jamaica. About 350 brethren and friends 
were in attendance and were greatly blessed by partaking 
of the spiritual feast which the Lord spread before 
us. 

Our TOWER list for the year shows very little increase. 
We have reported the names of quite a number of new 
subscribers, but the gain in this way has been almost 
offset by the new postal regulations, which compelled 



us to drop many names from our lists. The erasures 
of these names has resulted favorably, however, for it 
has shown us just who the truly interested ones are, 
besides saving us the postage for mailing TOWERS to 
those who do not appreciate them. 

We start the new year with bright prospects before 
us, and we pledge our faithful services to the Lord and 
to the Society, to do with our might whatever our hands 
may find to do in laying down our lives for the brethren. 

We pray for you and ask your prayers on our behalf, 
that we may remain steadfast, immovable, always 
abounding in the work of the Lord, even unto death. 

R4316 : page 23 

We have also received a report of the work done in 
the Panama Canal Zone. Bro. Isaiah Richards has put 
out about one thousand volumes during the year. There 
are also a few interested friends in Colon with whom he 
meets from time to time. 

SUMMARY OF THE WORK 

Number of Pilgrims 8 

Number of Pilgrim visits 48 

Number of Public Meetings held 34 

Number of Private Meetings held 472 

Number of Miles traveled 6,687 



Number of Regular Colporteurs 26 



Total output of DAWN-STUDIES 4,272 

Total output of Booklets 2,949 



Total 7,221 



Total amount of Tracts distributed. .58,305, or 932,880 pages 



Letters, etc., received 1,476 

Letters, etc., sent out 1,311 



Total 2,787 



FINANCIAL STATEMENT 

L s. d. 
Pilgrim Service 312 18 5 



Freight, etc 21 11 7-1/2 

Sundries, current expenses, &c 207 1 9-1/2 

TotalExpense 541 11 10 

Voluntary Contributions 138 5 9-1/2 

Deficit for 1908 L403 6 1/2 

R4316 : page 24 

THE MESSAGE IN HEATHENDOM 



We regret that our report as respects our effort 
made in China and Japan reads failure. 

In India the Society has four devoted representatives 
whose influence is considerably circumscribed by 
the fact that they are soldiers in the British army. But 
they and we are thankful that the Truth reached them 
and that they are, as Colporteurs, etc., doing what lies in 
their power to lift up the Divine standard. We have no 
report from them respecting the work done the last 
year. 

We are glad to be able to report some progress 
in South Africa. The Lord's blessing has attended the 
work there to a considerable degree, as reported by 
Brother Booth. There are now three Dutch preachers 
interested, who are delivering the message with considerable 
freedom to about eight congregations. And 
there are three black brethren who are preaching the 
Truth to the natives. One of these has gone northward 
about two thousand miles to his home region to carry 
the message. This brother, although young, speaks 
several of the native languages, and writes the English 
quite fluently. The latest report from him is very encouraging 
The natives seem to have open ears for the 
Good Tidings of Great Joy, the message of Restitution. 
They seem also, to some extent, to grasp the heavenly 
calling. 

Altogether we are quite pleased with the work thus 
far accomplished in Africa. Some thirty-four partook 
of the Memorial Supper last year in Cape Town vicinity, 
and it is expected that over one hundred will participate 
next Spring. And, apparently, from the reports, 
the light of Truth is spreading in every direction, and 
with considerable power. A consignment of Dutch 
DAWNS has had just about time to reach South Africa, 
and we may expect a still more favorable report next 
year, we trust. 



R4316 : page 24 

TURNING THE WORLD UPSIDE DOWN 



--ACTS 4:5-20.-JANUARY 31.- 

Golden Text:— "They were all filled with the holy 
Spirit, and they spake the words of God with 
boldness."— Acts 4:31. 

THE healing of the lame man was not a mental 
healing, not a faith cure, but a bona-fide miracle, 
straightening the ankle-bones and giving 
to the ligaments strength never before possessed. The 
miracle served to advertise the new Faith. A great 
crowd gathered from all parts to the temple. Pharisees, 
doctors of divinity and Sadducees, teaching their respective 
theories to inquiring crowds, were left without 
auditors. All attention was given to the cripple and to 
the two men who had effected his cure. The Apostle 
sees the opportunity to preach Christ, the Messiah, and 
to explain that it was he who had been cruelly crucified. 
Apparently the preaching and the discussion went on for 
about two hours, when it was interrupted by the arrest 
of the apostles, St. Peter and St. John. They were 
placed under guard for the night, because it was too 
late for the meeting of the Sanhedrin or Law, which by 
jurisdiction could try a case only in day time. Who 
were the accusers? Surely not the man who was healed, 
nor the common people who witnessed the miracle and 
gave God glory! Who then? Alas! it was the professedly 
most religious, most holy, most pious teachers of 
the people who, beholding what would thus draw away 
from their own teachings, were angry at the apostles, 
the more so that it was charged against them publicly 
that they had really crucified the Messiah a few weeks 
before. 

Alas! for the perversity of human nature. But has 
it not been always so— that the persecutors of the Truth 
have been those who had greatest reason to be its 
servants? Our lesson opens with the account of the 
trial of the apostles before the Sanhedrin Court. 
Caiaphas, the very one who condemned Jesus, was 
present, as were other ecclesiastics. If the apostles 
wondered that the Lord had permitted them to be stopped 
in their preaching and be imprisoned for the night, 
they probably saw when they were before the Sanhedrin 
the good reason for it all. God thus provided that the 
most learned, the most influential, red-handed with the 
blood of Jesus, should be brought face to face with 
the truth of the same. As the apostles answered the 
questions propounded, these clerics must have perceived 
that the Spirit of Christ in his followers was still 
able, not only to perform miracles, but to endow those 
humble fishermen with eloquence and courage to fully 
defend their position and voice the Truth. 

Let us learn this lesson— to look through all of 
life's experiences for the accomplishment of the Divine 
purposes. When we become discouraged with trials or 



difficulties, yet know that we are faithfully serving the 
Lord and in line with the teachings of his Word, we 
should have faith to believe that the end of his dealings 
with us will fully justify every trial and difficulty 
between. 

"God moves in a mysterious way 

His wonders to perform." 

"BY WHAT POWER--IN WHAT NAME?" 

There was no disputing the fact that the lame man, 
known for years to all the frequenters of the temple, had 
been healed. He had been seen jumping, walking and 
praising God. By their questions these clerics would 
give the inference that they believed the curing work 
had been accomplished by Satanic power. The trial 
was evidently to be conducted along this line— to prove 
the apostles emissaries of Satan. But the blessing upon 
St. Peter was in full harmony with the promise that 
when he would be called upon to stand before magistrates 
and princes, language would be given him. From 
his lips poured forth such a stream of argument as 
quite overwhelmed his questioners. He told them in 
whose name his miracles had been performed— in the 
name of the one whom they had crucified some months 
before. He told them in the name of whose power he 
had wrought the miracles, namely, the power of God. 

He properly made no apologies for his Master, nor 
for his having been numbered with the wicked. He 
charged straight home the responsibility of his death 
upon them, and then quoted them from the prophecies, 
"This is the stone which was set at naught by the 
builders, which is become the head of the corner." 
(Acts 4:11.) Neither was there salvation in any other 
than the one that they had crucified as a criminal. 
Astounding boldness, courage, ability! No wonder we 
read that they marveled at the boldness and the courage 
of these apostles, who they perceived were unlearned 
and ignorant men! No wonder that they took knowledge 
that these had been with Jesus and learned of him! 

The same principle still holds good. Whoever the 
Lord may use as his mouthpiece will be endowed with 
corresponding ability to render the service for which 
the Lord has called, if he abide faithful, as did the 
apostles. We need not fear the attitude of the opponents, 
whether in high or low positions, if we are the 
Lord's, devoted to his cause. "He who is for us is more 
than all they that be against us." Why should we not 
have courage? Notice, nevertheless, that while the 
Apostle manifested such courage in speaking of the 
Truth, there was nothing proud, domineering or boastful 
or slanderous in his utterances. He told the Truth 
in a simple manner. Let our course be similar. 

R4317 : page 25 



They soon stopped the speaker. They were not 
anxious to have matters thoroughly opened up. They 
had heard enough. They stood them aside until they 
had conferred. What they were afraid of was the spreading 
of the thing. It was not with them a question of 
right or wrong, of truth or falsity, of God or Satan, but 
the matter of the spread of religious views which would 
nullify their influence. 

Their conclusion was that they could find no fault 
with the matter, but that they would threaten the 
apostles and try to restrain them with fear, so that the 
New Doctrines might not spread and upset their system 
and lower their dignity in the honor of Messiah, and 
weaken the power of the nation. They seemed to fear 
what has already come to pass, namely, that the religion 
of Jesus would excel Judaism in numbers and in 
influence. How remarkable was the influence of Jesus 
and of his twelve apostles ! That spirit of Jesus which 
they discerned in the apostles reminds us of the poet's 
verse:— 

A Persian fable says: One day 

A wanderer found a lump of clay; 

So redolent of sweet perfume, 

Its odors scented all the room. 

"What art thou?" was his quick demand, 

"Art thou some gem from Samarcand, 

Or spikenard, in this rude disguise, 

Or other costly merchandise?" 

"Nay, I am but a lump of clay." 

"Then, whence this wondrous perfume— Say!" 

"Friend, if the secret I disclose, 

I have been dwelling with the rose." 

Sweet parable! And will not those 

Who love to dwell with Sharon's Rose, 

Distil sweet orders all around, 

Though low and mean themselves be found? 

Dear Lord, abide with us, that we 

May draw our perfume fresh from thee. 

Of this thing we may be sure, that, however many 
of the Lord's people are by nature "chiefly the mean 
things of this world and the things that are naught," 
nevertheless if they become copies of God's dear Son, 
they will lose the meanness from their hearts and instead 
will be partakers of his grace, his spirit, his 
holiness. 

"WE CANNOT BUT SPEAK THE THINGS" 

When recalled before the Sanhedrin and told that 
the decision was that they should be discharged, but 
that they should be cautioned, warned, threatened, that 
they should not preach any more in the name of Jesus, 
the apostles modestly, courteously, but very boldly 
said, Whether your attack be right or not, we must follow 
our own conscience; "We cannot but speak the 



things we have heard." How very proper this reply! 
Yet how much courage it must have required for men 
without any education and without much wisdom to 
have to stand before magistrates and those of high 
estate! Why could they not refrain from preaching! 
Why would not the apostle's words apply to them, "Be 
subject to the powers that be." The answer is that 
while we are to be subject to earthly powers, as respects 
earthly things, we have a still higher responsibility in 
respect to the spiritual, the heavenly things. Our 
heavenly Father prepared the way for the Gospel by the 
sending of his Son. And our Lord said to his apostles, 
"Go ye into all the world, and preach the Gospel to 
every creature."— Mark 16:15. 

So long, therefore, as the apostles could reasonably, 
properly find hearers for their Master's Word, they 
preached it. And so it must be with us. We must not 
be intimidated. While obedient to the powers that be 
respecting every earthly way, we, like the apostles, 
cannot but speak the things which we have seen and 
heard. To keep the message secret, to put our light 
under a bushel, would mean our own failure to progress, 
the dwarfing of our New Nature, and ultimately disobedience 
to our Master; and obedience to earthly powers 
along this line would mean to us failure as respects a 
place with Jesus in his throne. It is overcomers whom 
the Lord is now seeking! There could be no overcoming 
if there were no trials, and tests, and character 
development. 

Let us, then, while obedient to every earthly law 
and regulation, feel perfectly free to do the Lord's will 
in every matter, even the smallest, even to the extent 
of bringing upon ourselves the disapprobation of the 
world and the worldly, even though it bring us stripes, 
imprisonment. We have not the crown yet, but the 
cross, and whatever will help us to take it up and bear 
it faithfully will be a cause for thanksgiving. 



R4317 : page 25 

BROTHERHOOD IN THE ANOINTED ONE 

~ACTS4:32;5:11.~FEBRUARY7.~ 

Golden Text:— "Lying lips are an abomination to the Lord, 
but they that deal truly are his delight."— Pro v. 12:22. 

THIS lesson brings before our minds in sharp contrast 

a true and a false brotherhood in the Church. 

A shining example of the true was Barnabas, 

while Ananias and Sapphira were conspicuous illustrations 

of the false. The five hundred brethren who had 

become believers during our Lord's ministry, and who 

were thus prepared in advance for the Pentecostal blessing, 



were added to abundantly by the thousands converted 
on the day of Pentecost. As a whole, they were 
a very choice class. Only the children of the light, 
"Israelites indeed," stood loyally with the Redeemer 
during his trials and revilings. And a similar class of 
"Israelites indeed" proved amenable to the lessons and 
demonstrations and preaching of Pentecost Day. These 
were devout men, out of all the country around Judea, 
who were visiting Jerusalem at the time, attending a 
religious festival, in compliance with the demands of 
the Law. 

"SATAN CAME ALSO" 

With such a flood of popularity as came to the 
Church at Pentecost, it was only to be expected that 
some would be carried in by the excitement and the 
miracles and the favor of the Lord who were not 
"Israelites indeed." But the latter evidently were few 
comparatively. Amongst the true, there was the fervor, 
the love, the fellowship of kindred minds. They realized 
themselves children of God, and brethren of the 
Lord Jesus Christ, and of each other. The experience 
was a new one, and the holy Spirit ruling in their hearts 
their sympathies flowed together in one common stream. 
Were some of them poor or crippled, lowly or sad, the 
others took delight in ministering to their comfort. 
They were brethren in the fullest, deepest sense. How 
blessed this relationship none can really know, except 
those who have experienced it. 

How few have experienced this mutual love in this 
our day! The mixture of the spirit of worldliness has 
so diluted the spirit of the Master in the hearts of the 
majority that true, brotherly love is but little understood. 
Nowhere probably in the world is the spirit of 
the brotherhood of the early Church more manifest today 
than amongst the gathering of the WATCH TOWER 
readers, in general conventions, or in lesser gatherings. 
It is beautiful indeed, heart-refreshing, to note the 
loving interest manifested one toward another. It 
evidences our return to the simplicity which is in 
Christ, and to the fellowship of his Spirit. Let us be 
glad for this. Let us cultivate this proper spirit, that 
the love of God and the love of the brethren may be 
more and more shed abroad in our hearts. 

R4317 : page 26 

COMMUNISM IN THE EARLY CHURCH 

Selfishness is buried under love; or rather, temporarily, 
it is filled, for selfishness is the spirit of the 
world and of the Adversary, while love is the Spirit of 
God, the holy Spirit. We are not supposing that in 
their fervency and in their comparative ignorance of 
their own weaknesses and of the weaknesses of each 



other, the early followers of the Lord started the 
Communistic arrangement. Putting all their property 
and wealth together, they shared it as each had need. 
The lesson ultimately was a good one: (1) It showed 
both them and us what should, by right, be the spirit 
of all who love the Lord and are begotten by his holy 
Spirit to the New Nature, as members of the Body of 
Christ, his brethren, God's people. All of the poor in 
heart should still feel longings for such a condition of 
mutual helpfulness. However, this lesson learned, 
another was needed, namely, that the Lord's people, 
with the best of intentions in their hearts, are so differently 
organized physically— fallen in such different 
directions— that it is not practical, not feasible, for them 
to attempt to live together along Communistic lines. 
While giving each other credit for purity of heart and 
honesty of motives, the Lord's people learn that in their 
flesh dwelleth no perfection, and, likewise, none in the 
flesh of their brethren. Hence, with the same love in 
our hearts, the one for the other, we have learned that 
it is better to allow each other full freedom and full 
responsibility as respects the management of earthly 
affairs, and that this is the condition in which each can 
be happiest, and in which each can make greatest progress 
and learn best the needed lessons of preparation 
for the Millennial Kingdom and its services. 

The early Church learned this lesson speedily. Its 
Communism did not last long. First of all the 
apostles found that, notwithstanding the confidence of 

R4318 : page 26 

the Church in them as spiritual and able ministers of 

the Gospel, and specially sent of the Lord, there were 

murmurings against them, because some thought that 

their interests were not so well served from the general 

fund as those of others. This led to the giving over of 

the management to the deacons, and ultimately the 

entire project fell to pieces. It taught a lesson profitable 

to the Lord's Church from that same to the present 

time. That lesson is that it is possible to have Communism 

in heaven, or on earth amongst perfect men, 

but not feasible to have it amongst those who are imperfect, 

and whose tastes and appetites, experiences, 

etc., are diverse. This is our answer to the dear friends 

who occasionally urge the expediency of Socialistic and 

Communistic arrangements at the present time. 

We assure them, first, that the project is not feasible, 
because, however sympathetic and loyal our hearts 
are one to the other, our mortal bodies and their tastes 
cannot be kept in full harmony. And discord becomes 
the more serious, the more close the contact and unlimited 
the time. Furthermore, as the Lord raised up 
the great persecution which scattered the Church and 
its Communism and sent them everywhere as solitary 
witnesses for the Truth, so, we believe, it will be here. 



The Lord wills that his people shall be scattered 
throughout the world, in order that they may the better 
let their lights shine in the midst of the earthly darkness, 
bearing witness to the Truth. 

BARNABAS--SON OF CONSOLATION 

The description given us in the lesson beautifully 
illustrates the spirit of full consecration to the Lord— 
a full love and generosity towards all the brethren and 
a full confidence in the apostles as the Lord's representatives. 
Their wealth was brought and laid at the 
apostles' feet. Amongst others who did thus was 
Joseph, the uncle of John Mark, supposedly a member 
of a wealthy family, residing in the Mount of Olives, 
in the house the garden of which was our Lord's Gethsemane. 
He now had become an earnest follower of the 
Nazarene. He sold a field which he possessed and 
brought the proceeds to the apostles' feet. He was 
evidently a man of great sympathy and beautiful character, 
as is evidenced by the surname given him in the 
early Church, namely Barnabas. The word signifies, 
"Son of a consoling message," or, more briefly, "Son of 
consolation." Thank God the same spirit is yet to be 
found amongst his people. Some of them are sons and 
some of them are daughters of consolation, especially 
to his other sons and daughters— sympathetic, loving, 
kind, helpful. 

Barnabas was a Levite, and hence was trained with 
a view to the work of a teacher, instructor amongst his 
people. Tradition has it that he became acquainted 
with Saul of Tarsus in the Gamaliel school. However, 
the bonds of union between the two, which subsequently 
took them forth as messengers of the good tidings, 
was not the earthly tie, but the spiritual one. So with 
us. The more we possess of the spirit of holiness, devotion 
to God, to righteousness, the spirit of love and 
devotion to the brethren, the more may we be sons of 
consolation, pouring forth upon all with whom we have 
contact the unction from the "Holy One," the anointing, 
the perfume of love. 

Barnabas is set before us in the lesson as a sample 
of the spirit of proper fellowship and brotherhood in the 
early Church, and the consolation resulting. Let it be 
so with us. Let us each strive to be worthy of this 
name— Barnabas— in our home relationship, and especially 
in the Church of Christ. Let us see to it that 
we are not strife-breeders, but peacemakers. Let us 
remember the words of inspiration, "Mark them that 
cause divisions amongst you, and avoid them"— reprove 
them by avoiding them. Show them that you do not 
sympathize with such a strifeful, unholy spirit. We are 
not to smite them, nor to speak evil of them, nor to revile 
them in turn again, but simply to give our attention 
and smiles and cheering words to others, to such 
as manifest more of the Lord's Spirit. To those who 



can be helped at all, such a course will be very helpful, 
far more so than fellowshiping with them, which might, 
indeed, encourage them to feel that they had the approval 
of the pure in heart and noble in mind. We are 
to distinguish between such an avoidance and such a 
fellowship and the appointment to honorable positions 
in the Church as one thing, and the still different matter 
of disfellowshiping and cutting off from the Body of 
Christ, the Church. The latter can be properly done 
only according to the rules prescribed by our Master in 
Matt. 18:15-17. 

"SATAN FILLED THY HEART" 

Now we come to the other side of the lesson. In 
Ananias and Sapphira, his wife, we have an illustration 
of a deceitful, hypocritical spirit, displeasing to God, 
and to all the right-minded of his children. These desired 
and appreciated the general spirit of the Church, 
and wished to share in it, but wished to keep back a 
part of the price. As St. Peter pointed out they had a 
perfect right to do this, and might have kept it all, but 
they had no right to lie about it, to pretend that they 
were making a full consecration of everything, when 
the case was otherwise. Therein consisted their fault. 
They might indeed have deceived their fellow-creatures 
of the Church, but they could not deceive the Lord. 
St. Peter, under the power of the holy Spirit, and 
possessing the gift of discerning the spirits, was made 
acquainted with the situation, and, acting under Divine 
guidance, he reproved them in the name of the Lord, 
and the result was their death, as recorded. 

Although we are not of those who believe that they 
went to eternal torment, it might seem to us strange 
that the Lord's providence would not grant them instruction 
on the subject, rather than permit their destruction. 
We may safely assume that the imposing of 
a summary death sentence upon them was with a view 
of giving a general lesson to the Church, not only of 
that day, but ever since. It would not at all surprise 

R4318 : page 27 

us if Ananias and Sapphira would have some portion of 
God's Great Plan in the future, when they may learn 
the error of their course and mend their way and learn 
righteousness. It would appear as though they had 
share with the Church in the various blessings thus far 
enjoyed. We doubt, however, if they were spirit-begotten 
ones, and hence amenable to the Second Death. 
However, we may be sure that when all the secrets are 
unfolded, the wisdom, love, justice and power of our 
God, in connection with this and every other obscure 
dealing of his, will be made fully manifest. 

The lesson brought great fear to the whole Church; 
not the fear which has torment, not the fear which 



comes from lack of faith, but the proper kind of fear, 
the fear of reverence, the fear of trifling, of offending 
our gracious Father and Lord, from whom we have 
already received so many blessings and from whom we 
are expecting to receive the crowning blessings of glory, 
honor and immortality. This was the fear to which the 
Apostle referred, admonishing that we should all have, 
saying, "Let us fear, lest a promise being made us of 
entering into his rest, any should seem to come short 
of it." 

Our Golden Text points us to God's abomination of 
lying lips and his delight in the Truth. The principle 
of Truth is honesty, and it effects not only our words, 
but all of the conduct of life; yea, and also our thoughts. 
Hypocrisy is deceit of action. To deceive another is 
lying in one of its most unworthy forms. And, as the 
mainspring of life is in the heart, and "out of the 
abundance of the heart the mouth speaketh," and the 
conduct of life is arranged, we may see that a deceitful 
heart and a deceitful mind are most dangerous things 
in the world. How jealously, therefore, God's people 
should guard their thoughts— in respect to God, in respect 
to the world, in respect to every word and act, to 
the intent that no injustice is permitted, no falsehood 
is recognized. Such are the pure in heart. Such are 
the saints. Such will see God and be joint-heirs with 
their Lord. How diligently, then, we should watch our 
hearts, our thoughts, that they be honest, true, truthful, 
in every sense and particular! 



R4318 : page 27 

THE THREE GREAT COVENANTS 

CHRISTENDOM in general recognizes only two Covenants, 

the Old or Law Covenant, with Moses as its 

mediator, and the New Covenant, with Christ as its 

Mediator. Christendom may be said to know nothing whatever 

about the Abrahamic Covenant. When rarely they recognize 

the Abrahamic Covenant at all, or enter it into their 

calculations, they identify it with the New Covenant. We all 

inherited this general line of thought through Sunday-School 

sermons, commentaries, etc. It is not strange, therefore, that 

we all had this confused conception of this subject. Gradually, 

as a part of the light due to the Church in the end of 

this age, we got to see that there are three Covenants, instead 

of two, as we first supposed. We got to see that the Abrahamic 

Covenant, the original one, is the grandest and best 

of the three, and that from it the other two proceeded. This 

light upon the Divine purpose we began to set forth in the 

WATCH TOWER in 1880, and later elaborated the same thought 

in the Tabernacle Shadows of Better Sacrifices. In the 

latter we set forth that these Covenants are represented in 

the garments of the High Priest, in the ephod of two parts, 



with its shoulder-clasps and jeweled breast plate. However, 
we did not discern so sharply as we now do the clear-cut 
distinctions between those three Covenants. And is not this 

R4319 : page 27 

in full accord with the Lord's general dealing with us and 
with all people throughout the age? Is it not his proposition 
that the "Path of the just shall shine more and more 
unto the perfect day"? We believe that it is. 

GROWING IN GRACE AND KNOWLEDGE 

What we now see still more distinctly it is our duty and 
privilege to lay before the Household of Faith. We remind 
you, however, that as it took some of us quite a while to get 
a proper focus upon the Abrahamic Covenant, it may now 
take some of us a considerable time to still further differentiate 
between the Abrahamic Covenant and the New Covenant. 
Remember also that a clear understanding of every detail of 
God's Plan, while desirable, is not necessarily essential to our 
blessing thereunder. For instance, we believed in the precious 
blood of Christ and were justified thereby freely from 
all things, when we did not at all understand the philosophy 
of the Atonement— even as the majority of Christian people 
do not understand it now. The increasing knowledge did 
not bring increasing justification, but it did bring increased 
appreciation and love and devotion and opportunity for 
greater harmony with the Divine purposes better understood. 

I.-GRACE. II.-LAW. III.-WORKS 

St. Paul pointed out to us most distinctly that the original 
Covenant made with an oath to Abraham was in every 
way the superior one and that it, being a one-sided Covenant, 
an unconditional promise, has no mediator. St. Paul tells 
us that the Law Covenant was "added" to the Abrahamic 
Covenant in God's dealing with the nation of Israel. It is 
called a Law Covenant because the benefits of that Covenant 
were offered only to those who would keep the Law in all 
its requirements— inviolate. He calls it the Hagar Covenant, 
because it was a bondage and because its offspring, the 
Jewish nation, could not inherit the promised blessings and 
privileges. He tells us that it made nothing perfect, brought 
nothing to perfection. Although faith had a place and the 
grace of God had some manifestation towards Israel, yet 
neither faith nor grace affected their Covenant, which was 
hard and fast and demanded obedience to the works of the 
Law— "He that doeth these things shall live by them." 
Since none could do perfectly, that Covenant of works brought 
only condemnation of their imperfect works. It had a mediator, 
Moses, but he was unable to accomplish anything for 
the people, because of their imperfection through heredity. 
We properly call this the Law Covenant. 

The Apostle points that as Hagar's child was born before 
Isaac, who represented The Christ, Head and Body, "The 



New Creation," so the nation of Israel, Moses and all the 
people baptized into him in the sea and in the cloud, "The 
house of servants," would be developed before Spiritual Israel, 
the New Creation— Christ and all the members of the house 
of sons of spirit-begetting. 

As the Covenant of Grace (Sarah) existed before the 
Law Covenant was added to it, so it continued to exist after 
the Law Covenant was set aside as a Covenant, its prize of 
life eternal having been won by "the man Christ Jesus, who 
gave himself a Ransom for all." So, then, the Covenant of 
Grace (Sarah), which preceded the Law Covenant (Hagar) 
four hundred and thirty years, continued alive during the 
whole period of the Law Covenant, but without children, and 
then brought forth the Head of the Seed, Jesus. The Law 
Covenant was then cast aside— "Cast out the bond-woman and 
her son; for the son of the bond-woman shall not be heir 
with the son of the free-woman"— The Christ, the Heir of the 
original promise, now being developed. From the Scriptural 
standpoint the Resurrection is the birth; as, for instance, our 
Lord is the "First-Born from the dead, the First-Born amongst 
many brethren," and "his brethren," "his members," "his 
Bride" (three different names for the "elect" Church), must 
all be brought forth from the dead, all be "changed" to spirit 
condition before the Seed of Abraham will be complete. 

R4319 : page 28 

"IF YE BE CHRIST'S, THEN ARE YE ABRAHAM'S SEED 
AND HEIRS. "-GAL. 3:29 

This is the Mystery— the selection of the Church as the 
Bride of Christ during this Gospel Age, to be sharers with 
their Redeemer in the sufferings of this present time, and 
also in the glory that shall follow. Hence the Apostle was 
very solicitous that he might have share in "His Resurrection," 
The Christ Resurrection, "The First Resurrection." Not until 
that "First Resurrection" is finished will the Seed of 
the Sarah Covenant be fully born. This is quite in accord 
with the prophetic statement, "Shall I bring to the birth (deliver 
the Head), and not cause to come forth (the Body)." 
(Isa. 66:9.) The intimation is that so surely as Jesus, the 
Head of the Body, was brought forth in the Resurrection, 
born from the dead, so surely will all the members of his 
Body share with him his glorious "change" from mortality to 
immortality, from earthly to heavenly nature. 

What about the Jews under the Law (Hagar) Covenant? 
Were they on that account cut off from the very privileges 
and blessings which they so desired— of being Abraham's 
Seed and heirs according to the promise? We answer, Yes. 
The Apostle shows that the children of the bond-woman 
could not be heirs with the children of the free-woman. 
How, then, did the apostles and others, who were of Israel 
according to the flesh, come into relationship with Christ and 
the Sarah Covenant (of grace)? The Apostle tells us that 
as a human marriage is dissolved by the death of one of the 
parties, so those of the Jews who could recognize by faith 



that Christ's death had fulfilled the terms of the Law Covenant 
could realize that that Covenant was dead, and hence, 
that they were freed from it and could become married to 
another— united to Christ. On the contrary any Jew who 
does not recognize that Christ, by his death, has "made an 
end of the Law, nailing it to his cross," and who still continues 
to believe in that Covenant, is as firmly bound thereby 
as though the Covenant were still alive; just as a woman 
whose husband was really dead, but she thought him alive, 
could not conscientiously marry another. 

"WHEN I SHALL TAKE AWAY THEIR SINS" 

The Apostle explains that all of that nation who lacked 
proper faith in Christ were cast off, "blinded," not forever, 
but until the completion of the House of Sons, the New 
Creation, the spirit members of the spiritual Body of spiritual 
Israel— The Christ. Ah! but, says one, if they be cast 
off, "blinded," until the elect Church is complete, then they 
can have no part in it; and, being under the conditions of 
the Hagar (Law) Covenant, will they not be in an unsatisfactory 
state, under a New Covenant? And according to this 
evidence, did not God rather deceive the nation of Israel, 
when he entered into the Law Covenant with them at Sinai, 
knowing that they could not keep it, and could not get life 
under it, and yet permitting them, so supposing, to put themselves 
under that bondage? Are not the Lord's ways just 
and equal? 

Yes, we answer, and the full scope of the Divine purpose 
when seen is glorious in its harmony. The difficulty in the 
past has been that we have seen as through an obscured 
glass, and not face to face. Now we perceive that God intends 
to recognize two seeds of Abraham, the one heavenly, 
like unto the stars of heaven; the other earthly, like unto 
the sands of the seashore. The attempt of the Law Covenant 
to bring forth the natural seed first was abortive— a failure. 
First must come the spiritual Christ, Head and Body, partaker 
of the divine nature, heir of all things. Then God's 
favor will return to natural Israel. But since the Law Covenant 
completed its purpose and was demonstrated to be unavailable 
for them, because of the weaknesses of the flesh, 
God purposes to make with that nation, and with that nation 
alone, a New Covenant. Not a single statement of Scripture 
identifies the New Covenant with the Gentiles. On the contrary, 
it is Israel's New Covenant given to displace the Old 
or Law Covenant. Let us note well that the great mass of 
the early Church were Hebrews and that the Apostle's references 
to the New Covenant are almost exclusively in his 
epistle to the Hebrews. One exception is in Rom. 1 1:27, where 
the Apostle, although addressing Christians of Gentile birth, 
tells them that natural Israel was cast off for their sakes, 
but is still beloved for the fathers' sake, and is again to have 
Divine favor, under a special Covenant. The other (2 Cor. 3:6) 
refers to the royal priesthood as able (qualified) servants of 
the New Covenant— dying with Christ for its sealing.— Mai. 3:1. 

The more closely we investigate the New Covenant, the 



more we must be convinced of this fact— that it belongs to 
Israel alone, including the two nations into which they 
divided at the death of Solomon— Israel and Judah. Note 
the statement of the Prophet, "Behold the days will come, 
saith the Lord, when I will make a New Covenant with the 
house of Israel and with the house of Judah, not according 
to the Covenant [the Law Covenant] which I made with 
them when I took them by the hand and led them out of the 
land of Egypt." The Apostle, endeavoring to prove to the 
Jews that they could gain nothing under the Law Covenant, 
points out this prophecy, and tells them that the fact that 
God speaks of this as a New Covenant implies that a preceding 
[Law] Covenant had become old, valueless, and was 
preparing to pass away— "In that he saith, a New Covenant, 
he hath made the first old; now that which decayeth and 
waxeth old is ready to vanish away."— Heb. 8:13. 

THE OATH-BOUND COVENANT SURE-HEB. 6:17-20 

The New Covenant is to take the place of the old and 
unsatisfactory one. There were two old Covenants, the Grace, 
or Sarah Covenant, and the Law, or Hagar Covenant. Which 
did the Apostle mean had grown old, valueless, and would 
pass away and give place to the New Covenant? Surely 
there can be no doubt or misunderstanding on this point. 

R4320 : page 28 

He meant the Law Covenant, for he says so. He did not 

mean the original Grace or Sarah Covenant, for he points out 

that our claim to relationship to God is under that original 

Covenant, as members of the Body of Christ, members of 

the Bride of Christ, Joint-Heirs with him. Our Lord 

Jesus, by his obedience, became heir of all, heir of the original 

Covenant and heir also of the Law Covenant. Of the 

people there was none with him, neither Jews nor Gentiles. 

But by the grace of God there was provision made, as we 

have seen, that any Jew, seeing that the Law Covenant was 

dead, nailed to the cross, might become betrothed to Christ. 

They did not need to wait for the New Covenant, the provisions 

of which apply only to those on the earthly plane. Instead, 

by a faith justification and a consecration unto death, 

they were counted worthy of begetting to the new nature— betrothal 

to Christ. And similarly Gentiles, favored of God by 

the hearing ear and seeing eye of faith, were subsequently 

privileged to go through the same process, except that they 

did not need to reckon themselves dead to the Law Covenant, 

because they never were under it. Otherwise, recognizing 

Christ's death as the blood of the original Covenant, typified 

by Abraham's offering up his son, these also were reckoned 

justified and, presenting their justified bodies to the Lord as 

sacrifices, they were begotten of the same holy Spirit as the 

Jews, to be fellow-members of the same Body— the Body of 

Christ. 

We come now to the other part of the question: What 
provision has God made for those Jews who bound themselves 



under the Law Covenant, from Moses' day down to the first 
advent; and for those who since then have not discerned the 
death of the Law Covenant and who will not be made aware 
of it until after the spiritual Seed shall have been completed 
and glorified? If they have not lost all share and privileges 
in connection with God's special mercies, where do they come 
in? We answer that Abraham, Isaac, Jacob and others before 

R4320 : page 29 

the Law Covenant were not bound by it, yet were not in 
the fullest sense justified to life until the Abrahamic Covenant 
had been established at Calvary. Their faith, then, entitled 
them to a share in the merits of that sacrifice. Likewise 
throughout the period of the Law Covenant, before it was 
annulled at the cross, there were Ancient Worthies who lived 
above the masses of their time, and who, although bound by 
the Law, had above it a living faith in the original Oath-Bound 
(Sarah) Covenant of Grace. These in the Divine 
records were entitled to their share of that grace, as soon as 
the merit of Calvary's sacrifice had been presented on behalf 
of believers, when Jesus "ascended up on high, there to appear 
in the presence of God on our behalf." Although they 
lived while the Law Covenant was alive, they foresaw its 
death and trusted not in it, but in the superior Covenant of 
Grace. Hence these in due time will come forth to a life 
resurrection, not because of their relationship to the Law 
Covenant, under which they lived, nor because of their relationship 
to the New Covenant, of which some of them knew 
nothing, but because of their relationship to and faith in the 
original (Sarah) Covenant of Grace. 

Thus the Scriptures account for the faithful ones of the 
past under the Covenant of Grace. But what now shall we 
say respecting those earthly Israelites, who lived not on that 
higher plane of faith, but of whom the Apostle says, "Our 
twelve tribes instantly serving God day and night hope to 
come" unto this promise. (Acts 26:7.) Were they all deceived? 
Will they get those special blessings? 

GOD'S GIFTS AND CALLINGS SURE.--ROM. 11:29-32 

Nay, we answer, the gifts and calling of God are things 
not to be repented of. He who knew the end from the beginning 
knew exactly what Israel would be and do, and was 
not disappointed, and all of the plans and promises to that 
nation were made from the standpoint of this knowledge. 
Although the chief feature of the Sarah Covenant was secured 
by our Lord Jesus as a trophy of his victory over sin and 
death, and although he laid down his human nature completely 
to this end, nevertheless the Divine arrangement is 
such that the blood of Christ, the merit of his sacrifice of 
earthly things, must accrue to the benefit of the natural seed 
of Abraham, because it all goes to seal the New Covenant, 
which belongs exclusively to fleshly Israel. The opportunity 
granted to both the Jews and Gentiles to become Joint-Heirs 
with the Redeemer was based upon their offering themselves 



to him in sacrifice, and his acceptance of their offerings 

as his own— his sacrificing them throughout this age as 

his own flesh— and God's acceptance of them as New 

Creatures, begotten of the Spirit, as brethren of Christ, or the 

betrothed of Christ, or members of his Body. Only by thus 

sharing with our Lord, drinking his cup, being baptized into 

his baptism of death, surrendering all into his hand, can we 

have fellowship with him in his sufferings; and his death (including 

ours) seals the New Covenant in his blood, of which 

he said, "Drink ye all of it." In his cup we are partakers, 

joint-sacrificers.— 1 Cor. 10:16. 

Thus while natural Israel had been counted enemies 
for our sakes, for the Gospel's sake, our only opportunity for 
gaining the great prize is in connection with the sealing of 
a New Covenant between God and Israel. How beautifully 
the features of the Divine program balance! Their loss was 
our gain, and our gain through sacrifice becomes their gain; 
and, altogether, the Lord will be glorified! 

As already shown, the New Covenant will not be sealed, 
ratified, until the sacrifices of The Christ shall have been 
finished. And the finishing of these sacrifices closes the work 
of this great Day of Sacrifice and Atonement. With the 
second presentation of the blood of Atonement in the Most 
Holy, at the end of this age, the New Covenant with Israel 
will be sealed, and the blessing of the Lord will begin to 
Israel, "For this is my Covenant with them, when I shall take 
away their sins."— Rom. 11:27. 

ABRAHAM'S TWO SEEDS 

Not only did the original promise indicate two seeds of 
Abraham— one as the stars of heaven, and the other as the 
sands of the sea— but St. Paul elaborates this thought, saying 
of the promise, "It is of faith, that it might be by grace, 
to the end that the promise might be sure to all the seed; 
not to that only which is of the Law, but to that also which 
is of the faith of Abraham, who is the father of us all (including 
you who are Romans); as it is written, I have made 
thee a father of many nations." We have seen how Abraham, 
as a type of God, is the father of the spiritual Seed 
and how through Christ, by the provision of the New 
Covenant, the Jewish nation, dead under the Law Covenant, 
is to be regenerated by The Christ, the Mediator of the New 
Covenant; and that this regeneration will commence at the 
close of this Gospel Age and the opening of the Millennial 
Age. But these are only two— "the (Church) holy nation," 
and the (Jewish) chosen nation. How do all nations come in? 
It will not do to say the Body of Christ, the Bride class, fulfils 
this prophecy, because, although they were taken out of the 
nations, they are not all nations, and do not even represent 
all nations. Each first died to his earthly estate and nationality, 
before he was begotten of the holy Spirit to be a member 
of the holy nation, the New Creation. 

The Scriptures distinctly show that Christ and his 
Church, spirit beings, must constitute the Kingdom class, but 
they also show that the Ancient Worthies, and through them 



the nation of Israel under the New Covenant, will become 
the representatives of the heavenly Kingdom amongst men. 
It will be with these that the blessing of the Lord in the 
Millennial morning will begin. Thus we read of Jacob's 
trouble, that he shall be saved out of it and that the Lord will 
restore their judges as at the first, and their law-givers as at 
the beginning— the Ancient Worthies resurrected on the 
earthly plane. (Jer. 30:7; Zech. 12:7.) The New Covenant will 
be the Law Covenant over again, only that it will have the 
better Mediator— The Christ, Head and Body, who will be 
able to make allowances for the imperfections of Israel's 
heredity. The sins of the past will all be forgiven, their 
physical blemishes waiting for restitution. They will be dealt 
with according to what they are, allowances being made in 
each individual case, and each will be required to heed the 
voice of the antitypical Moses. "And it shall come to pass 
that every soul which will not heed that Prophet, shall be 
utterly destroyed from amongst the people."— Acts 3:23. 

HOPE FOR THE MANY NATIONS 

Since God's favors are thus marked out for the heavenly 
and the earthly Seeds of Abraham— the earthly through the 
heavenly— it follows that the blessing of the other nations 
will come about through their affiliation with these. In other 
words, we may understand that the Divine Government established 
in Israel in the hands of the Ancient Worthies will be 
the center of Divine favor, and the people of other nationalities 
must come to this center for their supplies of truth and 
grace. Thus the Prophet represents the matter, saying, "Many 
nations shall go and say, Come and let us go up to the 
mountain (Kingdom) of the Lord, and to the house of the 
God of Jacob; and he will teach us of his ways, and we will 
walk in his paths; for the Law shall go forth from Mount 
Zion (the spiritual Kingdom) and the Word of the Lord from 
Jerusalem (the center of the earthly Kingdom)."— Micah 4:2. 

As thus all nations, peoples, kindreds and tongues shall 
be brought gradually to an appreciation of the Divine Plan; 
they shall all be blessed with Restitution privileges and opportunities 
and with an enlightenment from the rays of the Sun 
of Righteousness, which then through the appointed channels 
will be flooding all the earth. Thus will the original Covenant 

R4321 : page 30 

have its amplified fulfilment; first, in The Christ, the 
spiritual Israel; secondly, under the New Covenant with 
Israel after the flesh; and through these bless all the families 
of the earth, so that all the willing and obedient may gradually 
attain to the standards of the children of God and be 
possessed of the "liberties of the sons of God"— freedom 
from sin, sorrow, pain and death. As the old Law Covenant 
was with Israel only, so the New (Law) Covenant will be 
with Israel only. Other nations will share it by becoming 
Israelites, "Proselytes of the gate," not under the old but 
under the New Covenant. (Ezek. 16:60,61.) "He that hath an 



ear to hear, let him hear." 

"Know your calling." Let us who have accepted the Divine 
call in Christ bear in mind that, according to the Apostle's 
declaration, we are the children of the Sarah Covenant. We 
are the Bride of Isaac, and his Joint-Heirs, of whom it is 
written, "If ye be Christ's, then are ye Abraham's Seed and 
heirs according to the promise." Our only relationship to 
the New Covenant is that the Father drew us to Jesus and 
Jesus covered us with his robe of righteousness and thus 
made it possible for us to be called to joint-fellowship with 
himself in the "better sacrifices," participation in the "cup" 
of suffering and death— "the blood of the New Covenant"— 
for the sealing of the New Covenant for Israel, under which 
all the families of the earth will get a blessing. Thus in 
the divine purpose our Lord's death or blood justified the 
Church and (with the Church's) will seal the New Covenant 
for Israel and through Israel will become effective to all of 
Adam's race. "As all in Adam die, even so all in Christ 
shall be made alive— every man in his own order." 

The Church comes into Christ as his Members or Body 
or Bride. Israel will come into The Christ family as children. 
"Instead of thy fathers shall be thy children." And this 
same privilege shall extend to all— to become regenerated 
"in the regeneration" when we shall sit with him on his 
throne. 

THE EVERLASTING COVENANT 

Both the Abrahamic Covenant and the New Covenant 
are Scripturally styled "The Everlasting Covenant," in contrast 
with the Law Covenant, which passed away, a failure 
because of its "unprofitableness." (Heb. 7:18.) The one is 
perpetuated in the other, even as the spiritual Seed (spiritual 
Israel) will rule and bless through the earthly Seed (fleshly 
Israel). Note the Scripture testimony that the original Grace 
(or Sarah) Covenant is everlasting. (Gen. 17:7,13,19; 2 Sam. 23:5; 
Psa. 105:8-10.) Note other Scriptures which apply the 
same term prophetically to the New Covenant. (Jer. 32:40; 
31:31,32; Ezk. 16:60.) Note carefully the context in each instance, 
that the reference is to the Millennium. 

THE BLOOD OF THE EVERLASTING COVENANT 

The blood of the Everlasting Covenant is the "blood of 
Jesus," his sacrifice, through the merit of which believers 
are now "justified by faith" under the Grace or Sarah Covenant 
(not by the New Covenant which does not yet exist and 
which is to be made only with Israel). And the blood 
or sacrifice of Jesus is "the blood of the New Covenant," yet 
to be established with Fleshly Israel, just the same only that 
by the Father's good pleasure Jesus is now accepting the "little 
flock" as his members and counting their sacrifice or blood 
as a part of his own. 

Note how this is set forth in Isaiah 55:1-3. Here believers 
of this Gospel Age are described as those who hunger 
and thirst after righteousness. Under the Father's drawing 



they come to Jesus now. They are not of those who, blind 
and deaf under Satan's power, love darkness rather than 
light and will need the Kingdom regulations and corrections 
to make them bow and confess, under the New Covenant 
arrangement with Israel and indirectly with all nations. 

To these hungry, thirsty, seeing, hearing, believers the 
Lord offers the "fatness" or cream of the Everlasting Covenant, 
saying, Obey and your soul shall live and I will give 
unto you the sure or promised mercies of David. David means 
beloved and is another name for the Redeemer, the antitypical 
King of Israel by Divine appointment. 

This prophecy evidently, therefore, is the prophecy of 
the call of this Gospel Age to share with Jesus the glory, 
honor and immortality of the Kingdom. Note the context, 
"A nation that thou knowest not shalt thou call, and a nation 
that knew thee not shall run unto thee." (V. 5.) Unquestionably 
this is the Church— Spiritual Israel, "a holy nation," 
a peculiar people, chosen out of all nations to the heavenly 
Kingdom of the Millennium. 

Note the description of Christ Jesus and his "Body" in 
Isaiah 42:1-7. Note that Messiah is "given" for [sacrificed 
in the interest of] a Covenant to the people (Israel) and for 
a light to the nations or heathen, to enable them all to come 
in that light under the blessings of Israel's New Covenant. 

Come now to Hebrews 13:20, "Now the God of peace 
who brought again from the dead the Great Shepherd of the 
sheep (Jesus), through the blood of the Everlasting Covenant 
make you perfect." Does this refer to our justification 
from Adamic guilt and reconciliation to God? Not at all. 
The Father will have nothing to do with us (except to "draw" 
us to Jesus for justification and consecration) until after our 
justification. Then his mighty power which brought our 
Great Shepherd from the tomb to glory and immortality begins 
to mightily "work in us to will and to do his good 
pleasure." (Phil. 2:13.) If we abide in his love he will perfect 
us as New Creatures by the privileges granted us of 
sharing in the sufferings of Christ— participating in the 
shedding of the blood of the Everlasting Covenant, which 
as the New Covenant will bring blessings to Israel and then 
to the world. The Greek word here rendered "perfect you" 
signifies "knit you together," that is, make you completely 
one with the Shepherd as his "members" both in sufferings 
and in glory to follow. 

Note also that in Hebrews 10:29 it is the blood of the 
Covenant that sanctified and not the blood that justified that, 
sinned against, merits the Second Death. We were justified 
by faith in the blood of Jesus. We were sanctified by our 
consecration to drink of his cup— the blood of the New Covenant. 
Only those who have gone on to this second degree 
and presented themselves as sacrificers (Romans 12:1) and 
have been accepted or sanctified by the begetting of the holy 
Spirit, as members of the "Body" of Christ and sons of the 
Highest, can commit the sin unto death. "If any man [thus 
presented and sanctified] draw back my soul shall have no 
pleasure in him. But we are not of those who draw back 
unto perdition"— Second Death.— Heb. 10:39. 



Let us now briefly refer to all the Scriptures which 
mention the New Covenant, that we may note their full harmony 
with the foregoing. We have already examined the 
one statement connected with our text and see that it applies 
to the closing of this age— a shaking of the nations and 
everything out of harmony with God, preparatory to the 
establishment of the Kingdom, as the foundation of the New 
Covenant blessings to the world during the Millennium. 
There are just eight other texts in the New Testament which 
refer to the New Covenant: 

(1) "For this cause he is made Mediator of a better 
Covenant [not better than the Grace or Sarah Covenant, but 
better than the Law Covenant], which was established upon 
better promises." (Heb. 8:6.) Our Lord Jesus had already 
begun the work necessary to his fulfilling this office of Mediator 
of the New Covenant. He had laid the foundation, but 

he had not yet accepted to himself all the members the 
Father intended and foreknew and predestinated. We notice 
from the context that the contrast still is between the Law 

R4321 : page 31 

Covenant and its Mediator Moses, and the New Covenant, 
superior because of its better Mediator, the Messiah. Moses 
could offer only imperfect sacrifices, but Christ, by antitypical 
sacrifices of the bullock and goat (himself and his Body), 
makes satisfaction for the sins of the whole world, and prepares 
to mediate the New Covenant, which God has promised 
shall be his channel for blessing Israel and the world. 

(2) In the succeeding verse (8) the Apostle supports 

his argument by a quotation from the Old Testament promise 
to Israel of a New Covenant, saying, "Behold, the days come, 
saith the Lord, when I will make a New Covenant with the 
house of Israel and with the house of Judah." Clearly this 
does not refer to Spiritual Israel. 

(3) Neither does the next reference to the New Covenant, 
which is a part of the same quotation from Jer. 3 1:3 1, 
refer to Spiritual Israel— "Not according to the Covenant 
that I made with their fathers. ..For this is the Covenant 
that I will make with the house of Israel after those days, 
saith the Lord; I will put my laws into their mind, and 
write them in their hearts; and I will be to them a God, and 
they shall be to me a people."— Heb. 8:8-10. 

The days referred to in the above are "after" the 
days of this Gospel Age. The Apostle goes on to say, "And 
they shall not teach every man his neighbor and every man 
his brother, saying, Know the Lord; for all shall know me 
from the least to the greatest, and I will be merciful to their 
unrighteousness, and their sins and iniquities will I remember 
no more." This is a description of what will take place 
during the Millennium, and not a description of what we see 
about us today. God has not yet put his laws into the hearts 
of the house of Israel, and they are not his people, as he 
states they will be at the proper time in the end of this age 
when the New Covenant becomes operative. Compare 
Acts 15:15. 



(4) "In that he saith, a New Covenant, he hath made 
the first old. Now that which decayeth and waxeth old is 
ready to vanish away." Notice that the Apostle is not saying 
one word about the New Covenant being for the Church 

of Christ. His readers understood very well that they came 

R4322:page31 

in under the Sarah Covenant. But certain Judaizing teachers 
insisted that they must be under the Hagar Covenant, as 
well as under the Sarah Covenant. And this is what the 
Apostle is disputing. He is making clear that the (Hagar) 
Law Covenant would not continue, but perish, and that, in 
God's due time, he would provide a New Covenant to take 
its place with Israel. 

(5) It was necessary that Jews be redeemed from the 
"dead works" of the old Law Covenant and that a New one 
be made for them by Christ— Head and members. The old 
one was sealed by the blood of bulls and goats, but the New 
one by "better sacrifices." Antitypically the blood of the 
bullock has been offered, and soon that of the goat will be 
presented. -Heb. 9:14-23. 

(6) "This is the Covenant that I will make with them 
after those days, saith the Lord, I will put my laws into their 
hearts and in their minds will I write them; and their sins 

and iniquities will I remember no more. Now, where remission 
of sins is, there is no more offering for sin." (Heb. 10:16-18.) 
The Apostle is arguing along general lines. He 
would have his hearers understand that when an acceptable 
sacrifice has been offered to God for sins, the transaction is 
a closed one, and the sacrifice needs no repetition. He shows 
that this will be so in the future for the world. When the 
"better sacrifices," sealing the New Covenant, shall have 
been offered to God by our Redeemer, and accepted by him, 
it will mean the cancellation of all condemnation. On the 
strength of this work for the future the Apostle urges that 
we, the Body of Christ, whose sins have been atoned for by 
our Lord, the first sacrifice of the Day of Atonement (in the 
type the bullock), may count that our sins are completely 
cancelled, and will be remembered against us no more. "For 
by one offering he (Christ) hath perfected forever them that 
are sanctified": all justified by faith, who proceed to full 
consecration and sanctification. If numbered amongst the 
sanctified, we may know that our sins are completely obliterated 
from the Divine record, so far as justice is concerned, 
and that we have entered upon a new record as New Creatures 
and will be held accountable only for trespasses against our 
covenant to the Lord, our vow— by which we became members 
of the Christ, the Seed of Abraham, and heirs of the 
great (Sarah) Covenant of Grace. 

(7) "For this is my Covenant to them, when I shall 
take away their sins. As concerning the Gospel they are 
enemies for your sakes; but as touching the elect, they are 
beloved for the fathers' sake." (Rom. 1 1:27,28.) There is 

no room to doubt that the Apostle here is referring to Israel's 
Covenant, the New Covenant, which God will make with them 



after this Gospel Day. The Apostle says the Covenant will 
be made when, or at the time that the Lord will "take away 
their sins." That time has not yet come. Israel is still under 
Divine condemnation, though we are now privileged to speak 
comfortably unto them and to assure them that the time for 
their deliverance is nigh, the time when the Mediator of the 
New Covenant will have taken on the last members of the 
spirit Body, the Gospel Church, "changed" by the power of 
the First Resurrection; the time when he will mediate that 
New Covenant, satisfy the demands of Divine justice on behalf 
of the world, as he already has satisfied it on behalf of 
the Church. Then he will become, as previously intended 
and declared, the great Mediator of the New Covenant between 
God and mankind in general— the Church being the 
exception, under the Covenant of Grace. Then will he begin 
his Millennial Kingdom: "For he must reign until he shall 
have put all enemies under his feet, and the last enemy that 
shall be destroyed is death." Then all who drank of his 
"cup," the blood [sacrifice] of the New Covenant, as members 
of the Spiritual Seed, will reign with him.— Gal. 3:29. 

(8) "But ye are approached unto Mt. Zion,...to 
the New Jerusalem,...to the general assembly and Church 
of the Firstborns, ...and to Jesus, the Mediator of the 
New Covenant and to the blood of sprinkling." (Heb. 12:24.) 
Here spiritual Israel is pictured as an army marching and 
the things at the farther end are seen and to be reached. 
Jesus reached the end of the way long ago, but the Church 
of Firstborns is not there yet. Jesus is the Mediator, but he 
has accepted the Church as his Bride, his Body, and waits 
for her arrival. The picture shows that the New Law Covenant 
will be established as the old Law Covenant was, only 
on a higher plane and through a greater Mediator and by 
better sacrifices.— Acts 3:23. 

Not one of these references to the New Covenant makes 
the slightest suggestion that it is applicable to the Church. 
A reference to the original prophecy from which the Apostle 
quotes shows that it could not apply to the Church, for we 
there read that the Lord "will take away their stony hearts 
out of their flesh, and give them an heart of flesh." This is 
exactly the Restitution Work which will begin with Israel 
and extend to all the families of the earth, but it is not at 
all the work of this Gospel Age, which is far higher. The 
Lord does not give the "little flock" hearts of flesh, but, justified 
by faith, allows them to sacrifice the flesh, and begets 
them to a new nature, the glorious Seed of Abraham, through 
which all the families of the earth shall be blessed, by the 
inauguration of the New Covenant, sealed, made operative 
by the merit of the blood of Christ. 



page 32 

PUBLIC MINISTRIES OF THE TRUTH 



BIBLE STUDENTS' SOUTHERN CONVENTION 
JACKSONVILLE, FLA., FEBRUARY 12-16, 1909 



Ask for receipt on "Certificate Plan" when purchasing your 
one-way ticket; account Bible Students' Convention. 

All sessions will be held in Board of Trade Auditorium on 
Main street. 

Lodging at 50 cents and up, per night; meals, 25 cents 
and up. 

The surrounding territory and immediately adjacent states 
are expected to furnish most of the attendance, though some 
from more distant parts will be present also. 

Pilgrim brethren will be present, including also Brother 
Russell. 

Come all who can, and let those who cannot join us there 
in person join in spirit and in prayers, and thus participate 
in the showers of refreshing which the Lord will surely pour 
upon us. 

ONE-DAY LOCAL CONVENTIONS ADDRESSED BY THE 
EDITOR OF THIS JOURNAL AS FOLLOWS: 

CLEVELAND, OHIO, JANUARY 24 

Morning session for Rally, Praise and Testimony at 10:30 
in Pythian Temple, Huron Road, near Prospect Avenue and 
W. 9th Street; Euclid, Cedar and Central, Denison cars pass 
this hall. 

Afternoon meeting for Public at 3:00 o'clock, in the Hippodrome. 
Subject, "Where are the Dead?" 

Evening meeting for the interested in Pythian Temple at 
7:30 o'clock, preceded by a half-hour's song service. 

Friends from outside are cordially invited to participate. 
Any finding it necessary to spend the night in Cleveland will 
be gladly entertained. Address communications to Bro. 
Wm. Koch, 6909 Cedar Ave. 

BROOKLYN, N.Y., JAN. 31 and FEB. 7 

Morning session for Prayer, Praise and Testimony at 11:00 
o'clock. Discourse by Brother Russell at 3:00 p.m. Evening 
meeting for the interested at 7:30 o'clock. This will be a 
Question Meeting. Visiting friends cordially welcomed. 

This program for both dates. All meetings will be held 
in the Brooklyn Tabernacle, No. 13-17 Hicks street. Convenient 
to all cars and ferries— close to the old bridge terminus. 

BROOKLYN, N.Y., FEBRUARY 21 



page 34 

STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES 
"MILLENNIAL DAWN" 
THESE STUDIES ARE RECOMMENDED TO STUDENTS AS VERITABLE "BIBLE KEYS" 
PRICES ARE NET AND BARELY COVER COST OF PRODUCTION, 
WHEN DELIVERED BY COLPORTEURS THE COST AND PRICE ARE INCREASED. 

SERIES I., The Plan of the Ages, gives an outline of the divine plan 
revealed in the Bible, relating to man's redemption and restitution: 
386 pages, in embossed cloth, 25c. (Is. l/2d.). India paper edition, 75c. 
(3s. l-l/2d.). 

This volume has been published as a special issue of our journal— 
at the extremely low price of 5c a copy, in any quantity, postage included. 
(To foreign countries, 9c.) This enables people of slender 
purse to herald far and wide the good tidings in a most helpful form. 

SERIES II., The Time is at Hand, treats of the manner and time of 
the Lord's second coming, considering the Bible Testimony on this 
subject: 370 pages, in embossed cloth 25c. (Is. l/2d.). India paper 
edition, 75c. (3s. l-l/2d.) 

SERIES III., Thy Kingdom Come, considers prophecies which mark 
events connected with the "time of the End," the glorification of the 
Church and the establishment of the Millennial Kingdom; it also contains 
a chapter on the Great Pyramid, showing its corroboration of the 
dates and other teachings of the Bible: 384 pages, in embossed cloth 
25c (Is l/2d.). India paper edition, 75c. (3s. l-l/2d.). 

SERIES IV. The Day of Vengeance, shows that the dissolution of the 
present order if things is in progress, and that all the panaceas offered 
are valueless to avert the predicted end. It marks in these events the 
fulfilment of prophecy, noting specially our Lord's great prophecy of 
Matt. 24, andZech. 14:1-9: 660 pages, in embossed cloth 30c. (Is. 3d.). 
India paper edition, 85c (3s. 6-l/2d.) 

SERIES V., The At-one-ment Between God and Man, treats an all-important 
subject— the hub, the center around which all the features 
of divine grace revolve. Its topic deserves the most careful and 
prayerful consideration on the part of all true Christians: 507 pages, 
in embossed cloth 30c. (Is. 3d.). India paper edition, 85c (3s. 6-l/2d.) 

SERIES VI., The New Creation, deals with the Creative Week, 
Genesis 1 and 2, and with the Church, God's "New Creation." It examines 
the personnel, organization, rites, ceremonies, obligations and 
hopes appertaining to those called and accepted as members of the 
body under the Head: 740 pages, in embossed cloth 30c. (Is. 3d.). 
India paper edition, 85c (3s. 6-l/2d.) 

The above prices include postage. 

IN FULL LEATHER BINDING, gilt edges, the set (6 vols.) $3.00, 
(12s. 6d.), plus postage 60c (Is.). 

MILLENNIAL DAWN is published in foreign languages as follows: 
in German, five vols., in Swedish, Vols. 1, 2, 3 and 5; in Dano-Norwegian, 
three vols., in French, two vols.; in Italian, one vol.; in 
Greek, two vols.; bound in cloth, uniform with English edition, prices 
the same. 

The volumes in English are bound in two styles, MILLENNIAL DAWN 
in green cloth binding and SCRIPTURE STUDIES in maroon cloth. Specify 
which you desire. 



page 33 



SEMI-MONTHLY 
VOL. XXX FEBRUARY 1 NO. 3 
A.D. 1909--A.M. 6037 



CONTENTS 

Views from the Watch Tower 35 

The Task of Converting England to Christianity 35 

England's Rich Called Robbers 36 

Japanized Christianity 36 

Jewish Prospects 37 

New Hopes for Zionists 37 

"Fighting Against God" 38 

"Bring This Man's Blood Upon Us" 39 

Led Away by the Error of the Wicked 39 

Anger, Malice, Strife— Every Evil Work 40 

The First Christian Martyr 42 

"Gnashed on Him With Their Teeth" 43 

"Thy Money Perish With Thee" 44 

Ancient Worthies Under Faith Covenant 45 

Berean Studies on the Atonement 47 

page 34 



LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-24 EVERSHOLT ST., LONDON, N.W. 
GERMAN BRANCH-MIRKER STR., 45, ELBERFELD. 

AUSTRALASIAN BRANCH-EQUITABLE BLDG., COLLINS ST., MELBOURNE 
PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR AS FOLLOWS:- 

All Bible Students who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity or 
adversity, are unable to pay for this Journal, will be supplied FREE 
if they send a Postal Card each MAY stating their case and requesting 
its continuance. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such 
be on our list continually and in touch with the Studies, etc. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



THIS JOURNAL IS PUBLISHED IN THE 

FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, DANISH AND ITALIAN LANGUAGES. 

SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA 



THE SERMONS TO CANADIANS AND OTHERS 

If some of our Canadian friends receive the Toronto World 
and other friends the Pittsburg Dispatch sermon issue let them 
not be surprised. A friend has paid for several six -months 
subscriptions. If you prefer to pay for them send us 50 cents 
each, but otherwise please accept them as a gift. 

MOTTOES AND VOW CALENDARS 

We still have a choice assortment of newest mottoes. In 
a few days we will have a new supply of 1909 Calendars with 
or without the Vow; very choice at 15 cents; 2 for 25 cents. 

NEW BIBLE NO. 1928 ALL GONE 

Orders already on hand will exhaust our supply. We still 
have Nos. 1918, 1938, 1948. For prices and samples of type 
see TOWER of November 1, 1908. 

THE MEMORIAL SUPPER 

The anniversary date for the celebration of the Memorial 
Supper this year will be Sunday, April 4, after six o'clock p.m. 

MENTION THE WATCH TOWER 

When writing to the journals publishing Brother Russell's 
sermons (of which there are now more than seventy), telling 
them of your appreciation of those sermons, mention THE 
WATCH TOWER, of which he is editor, and that you get the 
two papers on a clubbing list. Thus interested readers may 
become WATCH TOWER readers, etc. 



R4322 : page 35 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER 

WHEN our friends of various denominations solicit 

funds for missionary efforts they exhibit a chart 

showing the heathen world in black and the Christian 

nations in white and remind us that of the 90,000 

human beings dying every twenty-four hours, three-fourths 

are heathen going down into hopeless despair, eternal torment 



being understood, though not directly expressed. We concede 
to them that the heathen are not fit for heaven and that since 
only the saintly, perfected in intention and character, however 
imperfect in works, will enter the heavenly state, these heathen 
certainly will not be received there. But we remind them also 
that the same is true of the vast majority of people in Christian 
lands. If readiness for heaven signifies saintliness of 
character and holiness of will, surely but a fragment of the 
race, a "little flock," is ready for it. If, as is claimed, eternal 
torment is the only alternative, then surely the creation of our 
world, the creation of the human family, was a serious error, 
for the entering into heaven of only one in 10,000 would be 
far too expensive a proposition to be approved by either justice 
or wisdom or love. 

When our friends endeavor to stimulate their flagging zeal 
and to hope for the speedy conversion of the world, they point 
to the figures 400,000,000 as representing Christians and tell us 
that they are about to "storm the heathen world for Jesus." 
We admire their zeal; we appreciate their earnestness. We 
love them for their love of the Lord and humanity; but we point 
out to them that while it is true that there are twice as many 
Christians in heathen lands as there were centuries ago, it is 
also true that there are twice as many heathen as a century 
ago. There were 600,000,000 heathen in 1800 A.D. and 120,000,000 
in 1900 A.D. We ask them how long it would require 
at this rate to convert the world to Christianity and point them 
to the better hope, the Bible hope of the second coming of our 
Lord and his establishment of the heavenly Kingdom, his 
binding of Satan and his reign with his Elect Church for a 
thousand years, for the uplifting of Adam and his race out 
of mental, moral and physical degradation and death. We 
point them to the fact that this fall, this degradation, this 
dying, was the result of Adam's Sin, that our Lord Jesus 
was made flesh that he, "by the grace of God, should taste 
death for every man." 

We assure them that according to the Scriptures, the redemption 
of all accomplished by Jesus, who was the ransom 
price, was paid at Calvary, and that an opportunity for deliverance 
from the power of sin and death was thus guaranteed. 
We assure them that it is to this end that God, during this 
Gospel Age, has been selecting a "little flock," the Church; 
that as the Body of Christ these might be with him in his 
Kingdom and share his glorious work of uplifting mankind. 

Alas! how few have the ear to hear this message. (Acts 3:19-21.) 
Instead they seem to be angry with us that we point 
out to them the futility of their hopes and the more rational, 
the more Scriptural hope set before us in the Gospel. The reason 
for this seems to be a reverence for Churchianity and worship 
of the creeds and hopes which have come down to us 
from the Dark Ages. 

They tell us that the accumulated experiences of the past 
will now enable them to almost work miracles upon the 
heathen and that if they can but collect money enough, the 
thing shall be promptly done. Missionary movements are now 
going on throughout the United States, Canada and Great 
Britain amongst the college students, laymen and others. Great 



things are promised, of money and ambitious hearts. 

But again we point out the futility of all this. They can 
never convert the heathen. We are not opposed to missions. 
God forbid! We are glad that noble men and women self-sacrificingly 
take up the work of teaching civilization in 

R4323 : page 35 

heathen lands. It is well that heathen children should be 
taught to spell and read and sew; to sit on chairs and to wear 
clothing more corresponding to the Western styles. It is well 
that similar lessons, so far as possible, should be taught to the 
parents of those children also. It is well that they be taught 
with the Bibles also. Let us not mistake. Civilization is not 
Christianization, as many are disposed to force themselves to 
believe. If all of the heathen sat upon chairs, instead of on the 
ground, and ate with knives and forks, instead of their fingers, 
they would thereby be in a measure civilized. But this would 
not Christianize them, even though they were helped to the 
civilized methods by the most earnest Christians. 

We are not disputing, however, that there are probably 
some genuine conversions amongst the heathen. We are merely 
controverting the thought of the possibility of Christianizing 
the world. Sometimes a more nearly correct view of the true 
situation of affairs finds expression through the lips of prominent 
clergymen. For instance, the following quoted from the 
Manchester, England, Dispatch, says:— 

THE TASK OF CONVERTING ENGLAND TO 
CHRISTIANITY 



According to Canon Alexander, of Gloucester, "the 
Church of England is still at the beginning of the long task of 
the conversion of the English people to Christianity. What is 
the result?" he asks. "If we step out for a moment from the 
whirl of machinery, and look frankly at what is being done, 
we cannot but feel the inadequate results. Is the spiritual outlook 
all we dreamed of, all we hoped for? 

"Look at this city and give your answer. Is it not a terrible 
phenomenon that confronts us to-day— that of a highly 
organized Church in the midst of a population which is still 
largely Pagan, face to face with a growing democracy on 
which no doubt the Christian spirit has left a very decided 
mark, but which, nevertheless, still stands for the most part, 
outside our gates? Is it not a fact that the Church of England 
is still at the beginning of the long task of the conversion of 
the English people to Christianity, and for this task is it not 
power we need?" 

But even Canon Alexander has too large a conception of 
the Church in one sense and too narrow a one in another 
sense. He thinks of the Episcopal Church and its 
regular attendants. And to him the pagans of England 
are those who attend no Church services. We 
hold, however, that the Scriptural lines are different; that the 



true Church is composed of those who through faith and consecration 

R4323 : page 36 

are in hearty loyalty to the Lord and his Word, 
whether they attend church services or not. Tested by this 
standard we hold that there are very few in the Church of 
England who belong to the Lord's Church, which the Apostle 
designates, "The Church of the First-Borns, whose names 
are written in heaven." Very few, either inside or outside of 
the Episcopal Church, will profess to be members of this 
Church, if the requirements are clearly before their minds, 
as Jesus and the apostles stated them. 

Our Lord said, "He that would be my disciple must take 
up his cross and follow me;" and Paul said, "Whosoever 
will live godly shall suffer persecution." The Apostle said 
that the Divine will is accomplished only in "those who 
walk not after the flesh, but after the spirit." 

ENGLAND'S RICH CALLED ROBBERS 



The Hon. Lloyd George startled the entire British nation 
by the most radical speech delivered by any cabinet officer for 
many years. We quote from the speech as follows:— 

"The day will come, and it is not distant, when England 
will shudder at its toleration of this state of things when it 
was rolling in wealth. I say again that apart from its humanity 
and its essential injustice, it is guilty of robbery and 
confiscation of what is the workman's share of the riches of 
the land. I have heard some foolish mutterings that much 
recognition of this fact in legislation may drive capital away. 
There is nothing capital need fear so much as the despair of 
the multitude. I should like to know where it will flee, for, 
judging by the unmistakable symptoms of the times, there will 
soon be no civilized land in the world where proper provision 
for the aged, the broken and the unfortunate among those who 
toil, will not be regarded as the first charge upon the wealthy 
of the land. 

"There is a good deal of nonsense talked about capital. 
You would imagine that if capital is offended it will immediately 
shake the dust of this country off its feet and go to 
other lands where there are no agitators, no radicals, no socialists. 
The fact of the matter is, the greatest capitalist of 
this country is nature. England's natural resources have made 
England rich. You would imagine from the vain and furious 
talk of peers and their apologists that England's rich natural 
resources were brought here at the time of the Norman conquest 
by the ancestors of our great landlords; that they were 
placed in convenient spots by those dukes and earls and barons 
after they had stolen the common lands from the people." 

Since the foregoing, Lord Asquith, premier, declares 
that the government was prepared to set aside a fund, $1,500,000, 
to help the unemployed, and the admiralty has given out 
orders for the construction of nine torpedo-boat destroyers 



and five unarmored cruisers, to cost a total of $12,500,000, two 
months earlier than originally had been intended. 

The premier also made a bid for recruits, saying that the 
war office was ready to take on 24,000 men for winter training 
in the special reserves. 

We remind our readers that we have already pointed out 
that the standing armies of Europe, although very expensive, 
have constituted a safety-valve by taking large numbers of 
men out of competition in employment. The British Premier 
was acting along this line in proposing an increase of British 
recruits. 

Attending a congress of bishops of the Church of England 
at Manchester was the Lord Bishop of Perth, who preached 
at St. Philip's church, Salford, on "Social Problems." He said: 

"There never was an age when men and women were so 
faced with social inequality. The workers are organized and 
demanding a fairer share of this world's goods, the product 
of their labor. 

"There are thousands whose only thoughts are for sport, 
thousands whose only thoughts are for pleasure, and thousands 
who think of nothing but their own salvation, by giving of 
their superfluity to the poor. What interest do they take in 
the social crisis? Millions of otherwise good people are not 
taking the trouble to see the distress. For these some day 
there may be a rude awakening. 

"The present system cannot go on. The poor do not want 
charity. They want the right to live a full and a free life. To 
imagine that all is right, and that the present agitation will 
pass away, is to be absolutely blind to the signs of the times. 
To see men wasting their time and fighting over trifles is 
enough to make angels weep. Christians might proclaim a 
truce for a few years to help put an end to the present 
distress." 

He had no remedy to offer for the present social state, 
but he thought it would come, as all other great changes, gradually, 
almost imperceptibly. 

SPIRIT OF THE WORLD CREEPING IN 



Attending the same conference was the Bishop of Durham. 
His discourse is thus reported in an English journal: — 

"They saw going on before their eyes a disintegration of 
godly customs and the admission into the Church of the fatal 
spirit of the world. They saw gaps and ruinous places in our 
social and industrial system, just now made mournfully conspicuous 
by a wide and complicated depression in the world 
of commerce, and by a civil war of class against class. This 
was the woeful phenomenon of unemployment." 

In conclusion, his Lordship, after pointing out that English 
towns looked miserable, and that Lancashire must have 
been a lovely place until man spoiled it, said that, so long as 
the rich lived in luxury, so long would the poor live in poverty. 
He hoped the discussions this week would show churchmen 
the importance and gravity of the situation, and that they 



would all return and do what they could in their own sphere 
to help the toiling millions. 

The entrance of the procession into the Cathedral was 
an imposing and impressive spectacle. The Lord Mayor and 
members of the corporation took their places in the Council 
pews on the left of the main porch, the visiting mayors of the 
boroughs in the diocese taking those on the opposite side of the 
aisle. 

BLINDED AS TO THE CAUSES 



At the same conference Prof. Burkitt, of Cambridge College, 
spoke against the infallibility of the Bible along the lines 
of Evolution and Higher Criticism. Probably none of the 
learned Lord Bishops, whom as one of the teachers of the 
clergy he addressed realized that the false doctrine which he 
enunciated is responsible for the spirit of the world amongst 
the prosperous members of the Church and for the discontent 
amongst the poorer. The Word of God cannot be set aside 
with impunity. The baneful results are being manifested 
throughout the civilized world. The professor said:— 

"Can we accept St. Paul's doctrine of sin and death, a 
doctrine so closely bound up with a belief in the story of Eden 
and the forbidden fruit? You know we can do nothing of the 
kind. St. Paul, relying on the Book of Genesis, assumes that 
through Adam sin entered into the world, and death through 
sin. 

"We have learned from the open book of nature a very 
different story. We have learned that countless generations 
of living creatures had lived and died before man appeared. 
For us the story of Adam and Eve belongs to Asiatic 
folklore." 

R4324 : page 36 

JAPANIZED CHRISTIANITY 



A Japanese writer has the following to say respecting 
Japanese Christianity:— 

"The period 1877-87 was marked by movements opposed 
to independence; everywhere there were attempts at fusion 
with American and English churches. ...Students felt such 
confidence in their foreign teachers that they scrupulously observed 
the restrictions imposed by them as to smoking, sake 
drinking, amusements, and Sunday observance, to such a degree 
that they considered the least infraction of these rules 
as a sin. 

"During the period 1887-97 the traditional theology and 
the Puritan morality began to be shaken." 

The writer in the Tokyo Mainichi says:— 

"Up to 1887, thanks to the prevailing infatuation for 
Western things, the evangelists enjoyed unquestioned authority. 



But at this time the Darwinian doctrines began to spread 
in Japan, and Christianity began to be denounced as unscientific. 
It was a period of lectures and ardent discussions between 
missionaries and students, and, notwithstanding the 
best efforts, the reading of Darwin, Spencer and Mill shook 
the old beliefs of many. Other relaxing influences contributed 
to this result. Unitarian missionaries arrived from America; 
the new German theology took root in Japan; many 
young pastors, returning from their studies in Europe and 
America, spread the disquieting news that the old doctrines 
were felt to be outworn and that most professing Christians 
were by no means so strict as to smoking, drinking and Sabbath 
observance as they were expected to be in Japan. It was 
generally felt that a revision of doctrine was necessary, in 

R4324 : page 37 

order to try to settle what and how much it was desirable or 
possible to believe. At the same time, dissensions among the 
already numerous Christian sects represented in Japan were 
on the increase. All these motives worked together to 
strengthen the desire for independence on the part of the 
Japanese." 

In a letter to the London Guardian, the Church of England 
Bishop of Southern Tokyo says:— 

"Before long the foreign missionaries will be obliged to 
remit all their powers into the hands of the independent Japanese 
pastors and to retire from the country. There would 
then remain only a few as professors of theology. As long 
as the present state of things continues, there are not likely 
to be great changes in the doctrines, constitutions or ceremonies 
of the churches. But once the foreign influence is 
finally eliminated, we may expect a series of profound 
changes, and an elaboration of doctrines tending to fuse the 
ideas of the Orient and Occident." 

THE PAPACY HAVING MORE TROUBLE 



Apparently the spirit of evil is becoming singularly restless 
in the Latin American republics to the south of us. In 
Ecuador the Church is again entering upon an hour of persecution; 
in Argentina the socialists and anarchists are breathing 
future disaster; in Uruguay, Congress has passed an obnoxious 
divorce bill and is now attempting to close all the religious 
schools; in Catholic Chile there is incessant agitation against 
the alleged "autocracy of the hierarchy," and in Guatemala the 
Church stands shorn of most of her rights. Now the current 
Literary Digest thus throws a little additional light upon a 
matter of which we had heard something before:— 

"The Mexican government, apparently inspired by the example 
of France, has issued a notification to the local authorities 
throughout the country to make inventories of the 
property of the Church and report the same to the head of the 
republic. In addition to this, the Bishops and other clergy of 



Mexico have been warned 'to see that no property of any description 
is alienated or disposed of, because the government 
claims it is the property of the Republic of Mexico and it 
must be conserved and duly cared for in the name of the 
republic' We read further:— 

"The peremptory tone assumed by the government has, it is 
said, caused some perturbation at the Vatican, which, however, 
during hundreds of years, has become accustomed to such claims, 
but among the Mexican clergy there is consternation, for, better 
than the Vatican, do the clergy of Mexico understand 
the temper of the government. Of course, it is expected that 
the Church will protest as vigorously as possible, and, viewing 
the situation in the light of recent experience in France, it is 
possible that the protests may have some effect, for in France, 
in spite of the utmost endeavor, the victory over the Church 
was only partial, and it is claimed that the Gallic Church is 
stronger today than before its separation from the State. 

"The claim of the Mexican government is, however, more 
radical than that of France, a rather surprising fact, because 
a belief prevails that, in Mexico, Church and State were on 
friendlier relations than in most of the Spanish-American republics." 
—Syracuse Catholic Sun. 

BOSTON PASTORS' UNION 



A dispatch from Boston is being widely published, narrating 
that the ministers there propose a union. Rev. Johnson 
is quoted thus:— 

"The conditions among ministers here in Boston are such 
that something has got to be done. A number of my friends 
in this city are actually preparing to leave the ministry. They 
have bought little farms in New England, to which they will 
retire because they simply cannot live on their salaries. The 
situation is grave. We are going to form a union along the 
same practical and closely drawn lines as the great unions of 
labor. The proposed union would arbitrate not only as to 
salaries, but a number of other questions would be under its 
control." 

When St. Paul was in similar straits he went to tent-making. 
Under the Lord's providence that was one of the "all 
things" that worked for his good. We recommend the proposition 
to the Boston preachers and others as spiritually wholesome 
and spiritually beneficial. If each minister supported 
himself outside his ministerial labors, he would feel perfectly 
free to tell his congregation the truth, to give them the benefit 
of his long years of education. Under present conditions not 
many of them have the courage to do this; or, as many have 
remarked, "My bread is not buttered on that side;" or, according 
to the Scriptural presentation, they look "every one to his 
own quarter," own interest, his own denomination.— Isa. 47:15. 

"MOTHER AND DAUGHTER" MORE RECONCILED 



The Catholic fathers of the district of Clarksdale, Miss., 
are conducting a mission to Catholics and non-Catholics at 
Tutwiler, Miss. One of the most unique features of the mission, 
aside from its being the first ever given at that place, is 
that the sermons are delivered from the Methodist church pulpit. 
—Exchange. 

A DANGEROUS AND FORMIDABLE GUN 



A gun on a new principle has been invented. Noiseless, it 
is all the more dangerous. Unlike a gun in shape it will not 
be easy to detect. Cheap and simple of construction it may 
prove a terrible weapon for anarchists. The Waterbury American 
says of it:— 

The gun is noiseless, and is fired without powder. And 
this is not all. Mr. Patten asserts that the gun can discharge 
bullets faster than they can be loaded into its magazine, and 
that the loading speed is therefore practically the only limit 
to the number of shots that can be fired. He maintains that 
50,000 shots a minute can be discharged from this new weapon, 
and adds that he'll demonstrate this when he gets a full-sized 
one in commission. 

The gun is fired by centrifugal force. All there is to it is 
a big wheel with a crank for revolving it. In the 10-inch 
model this can be turned by hand. A motor of 50-horse power 
would be required to turn the six-foot model Mr. Patten hopes 
to build. 

The bullets— not shells such as are used in other guns, but 
simply balls of lead or steel— are poured into the gun. The 
operator revolves the wheel, and the bullets begin to pour out 
in a steady stream. They fly so fast that they have the appearance 
of one long, leaden ribbon, and if the gun were revolved 
on its base the stream of lead would sweep around in 
an arc which would mow down anything in front of it. 

A six-foot gun is the largest Mr. Patten hopes to build. 
It is to cost $800, and will weigh only 500 pounds, according to 
Mr. Patten, yet it will be able to shoot 50,000 half-inch steel 
bullets a minute, and kill at 2,000 feet. It is Mr. Patten's idea 
to mount such a gun on an automobile, the motor of which 
could be used to operate the gun. 

JEWISH PROSPECTS 



The following report comes from Constantinople relative 
to the employment of Jews as government officials:— 

"The new Turkish government is at present engaged 
in compiling a list of such Jews as would first come under 
consideration for government service. Since there is need 
at the present time of a great number of educated and intelligent 
officials, it is hoped to find among the Jews an array of 
such judicious and discreet characters as would meet the demands 



of the new era. Just how attentive the government is 
to the national and religious interests is shown by the fact 
that out of deference to the Christian Minister of Cabinet, 
there is no session either on Friday, which is the Mohammedan 
holiday, or on Sunday." 

NEW HOPES FOR ZIONISTS 



The upset in Turkey, with the resulting prospect of constitutional 
government, religious freedom, and equal rights to 
all races, has opened a new prospect to Zionism. Heretofore 
purchase and ownership of land in the Turkish empire has been 
denied Jews, but now, according to a London dispatch in the 
New York Sun, secret land purchases made by Jews in Palestine, 
notwithstanding the prohibition, are being declared, and 
a Jewish syndicate is said to be negotiating for a large part of 
the Sultan's private domain, now in the market, and comprising 
the whole length of the Jordan valley from Tiberias to the 
Dead Sea. Given a free hand in Palestine, to buy and possess 
what is purchasable, and to live and work under fair laws, 
Jewish capital and energy may accomplish very interesting 
things.— Exchange. 



R4325 : page 38 

"FIGHTING AGAINST GOD" 

-ACTS 5:17-42.-FEBRUARY 14.- 

Golden Text:— "Blessed are they which are persecuted 
for righteousness sake, for theirs is the 
Kingdom of heaven."— Matt. 5:10. 

"WHOM the Lord loveth he chasteneth," is a 

doctrine peculiar to Christianity. Until the 

principles of Divine government are somewhat 

understood, it seems absurd to claim that 

Christians are the special objects of Divine love and 

care and, at the same time, to admit that generally 

they have a larger proportion of trials, difficulties, persecutions, 

etc., than others. The philosophy of this is 

the interpretation of the Divine Plan of the Ages. From 

no other standpoint can the matter be reasonably understood 

in all its details. From any other standpoint the 

question would arise, Why not have made mankind perfect 

and have preserved him from undue temptations 

and have granted him enlightenment that he might 

always choose the good and refuse the evil? Why 

not have protected those loyal to the Lord and 

thus have published the Truth, its Author and its servants? 

Why not have overwhelmed the evil, instead of 

allowing the evil in so many ways to vanquish the good 



—as at the cross, and in all of life's experiences? 

"SO IT SEEMED GOOD IN THY SIGHT" 

The philosophy of why God permitted the evil to 
triumph now, as beautifully stated in the SCRIPTURE 
STUDIES, Vol. I ("The Plan of the Ages"), we can but 
briefly suggest here. The permission of evil is but one 
feature in the Divine program, according to which our 
Creator purposes that all of his intelligent subjects 
shall be free moral agents, and that each of them, angels 
and men, shall be fully tested in respect to their love 
and loyalty to him and to the principles of righteousness, 
which he personifies. Additionally we have the 
special development and testing of character, having 
been invited to be Joint-Heirs with Jesus in the Millennial 
Kingdom and properly required to be "more than 
conquerors"— loyal in the very highest degree, in 
thought and word and deed. The testing of such for 
so high a position in the Divine purpose justifies most 
crucial tests. When it is perceived that this Gospel 
Age is the period for the selection of this Royal Priesthood 
for the spiritual plane, and that the Jewish Age 
was the period for the selection of the earthly representatives 
of the Kingdom, it can be seen at a glance 
why the way of the called, chosen, faithful, elect, has 
been made so narrow; why so few have found it and 
why still fewer have had the faith and courage and 
patience to walk therein to the end of life's journey. 

OPEN THE PRISON-DOORS 

Our lesson is a sequel to the preceding one, which 
tells of the healing of the lame man in the temple by 
Peter and John, and of the wonderful opportunity thus 
afforded the disciples to preach the Gospel to the people 
and to the rulers. The result of their hearing before 
the officers was their commitment to prison for a further 
hearing on the next day, since it was contrary to the 
Jewish Law that the trial should proceed after dark. 
Verse 17 in brief space tells us that the high priest, 
Annas, was a Sadducee, which signifies that they were 
agnostics and higher critics, who believed nothing respecting 
the Divine Revelation, nothing of a future life 
by resurrection, or otherwise. Josephus informs us 
that most of the upper class of his day were skeptics, 
Sadducees, though the mass of the people were Pharisees. 
It will thus be seen that there is a close correspondency 
between the ecclesiastical conditions in the 
end of the Jewish Age and those which now prevail in 
the end of this age. Today, both in pulpit and pew, the 
more learned from a human standpoint have very slight 
belief in anything beyond the present life. Their faith 
has gradually given way under the attacks of Higher 
Critics and Evolution, because already undermined by 
the errors of the dark ages, prominently the teaching 



that nearly everybody is enroute to eternal torment, 
either because of Divine inability to prevent it or because 
of Divine foreordination to that effect. 

The teachings of the apostles reflected specially 
against the Sadducees, because the basis of it was the 
declaration that Christ had risen from the dead; and 
secondly, because this very high priest and his associates 
had been leaders in the conspiracy which led to 
our Lord's crucifixion. Our text says that they were 
"filled with indignation" (revised version, "jealousy.") 
The Greek word seems to signify that they were hot 
with indignation, and anxious to have them convicted 
before the Sanhedrin and disposed of. Under these circumstances 
they were sent to prison. 

During the night, however, the angel of the Lord 
led them forth miraculously while the keepers of the 
prison slept, and bade them go to the temple and speak 
to the people all the words of this life. Thus did God intersperse 
evidences of his Divine care and protection 
with other experiences which seem to be contrary, and 
thus were the apostles and the early Church and we, 
who read the account, strengthened and encouraged 
to have good confidence in the Lord; that greater is he 
who is on our part than all they that be against us, and 
that even the adverse experiences are of Divine permission. 
As our Lord said to Pilate, "Thou couldst 
have no power at all against me, except it were permitted 
of my Father." 

Note the expression of the angel's message (v. 20), 
"All the words of this life." There is a sermon for us 
in those few words. They remind us that our message 
consists of "wonderful words of life"— life from the 
dead, secured for us and ultimately for all, through the 
death of the Redeemer, and through his resurrection, 
and to be actually brought to us and to all at his second 
advent. The words remind us also that we who believe 
do now, by faith, enter into this newness of life— the 
resurrection life, in a figurative sense, and that our 
resurrection, our life, if we are faithful, will come to us 
as our final "change," in a moment, in the twinkling of 
an eye. 

TEACHING THE PEOPLE 

Obedient to God's message, the apostles went early 
to the temple, and began, as before, to teach the people, 
to explain to them the Old Testament Scriptures and 
types, which foretold that Messiah should first suffer 
before he would enter into his glory, and they identified 
him as the Messiah. They explained his sacrificial 
death, his resurrection and his sending forth upon believers 
his holy Spirit, and that this also was foretold 
in the prophecies. They pointed out that the Gospel 
message was for the selection of the faithful "Israelites 
indeed" to be Messiah's Bride and Joint-Heir in his 
Kingdom later to be established for the blessing of 



Israel and all the nations of the world. This message 
still has an attraction for the common people, and 
would have also for the more educated had not their 
philosophies and traditions turned their hearts away 
from the simplicity of faith in the Lord's Second Coming 
and Kingdom to a belief that they themselves, without 
the Lord, are to convert the world— by which they 
mean civilization. 

R4325 : page 39 

Meantime the Sanhedrin, or senate, met at the appointed 
hour, but the officers sent to bring the prisoners 
found them not— though the prison was every way secured 
—until it was learned that they were teaching in 
the temple and evidently having considerable influence 
with the people; so the officers wisely arrested them 
quietly, for fear they should create an uproar and be 
themselves the sufferers. 

"BRING THIS MAN'S BLOOD UPON US" 

The Sanhedrin acted as the court, the high priest 
as the prosecutor. Thus, inquiring of the apostles if 
they were not violating strict orders already given them 
respecting preaching in the name of the Crucified One, 
they claimed that he had risen from the dead; that he 
was Messiah, etc. Not waiting for an answer, the high 
priest proceeded to show the Sanhedrin the logical effect 
of their being permitted to continue this teaching— 
they were filling Jerusalem with their teaching, bringing 
upon them (the high priest and the Sanhedrin, 
which had condemned Jesus) this man's blood— that 
is to say, responsibility for his unjust death. This 
shows that they appreciated the position, and that the 
apostles also appreciated it and had told the truth on 
the subject unsparingly. 

The answer of the Apostle Peter and others is given 
in brief form, but is a model answer in every sense of 
the word. Not rudely, yet forcefully and logically, they 
set forth seven points: 

(1) That, uncontrovertibly, where the command of 
God and the command of men conflict, the Divine 
authority must be recognized as supreme. 

(2) That they were loyal to the God of their fathers, 
whose power in the resurrection of Jesus was being 
attested. 

(3) That it was true that Jewish rulers were responsible 
for Jesus' death. 

(4) That God has honored him, raised him from the 
dead and taken him to heaven. 

(5) That he was the Prince and Saviour of Divine 
appointment. 

(6) That they were not preaching vengeance, but 
mercy— not penalty for the crucifixion, but forgiveness 
of sins to all Israel, on condition of repentance. 



(7) That they personally were witnesses, and that 
the power of the holy Spirit in them and in all believers 
corroborated these facts. 

This is a wonderful testimony, and no doubt the 
experiences of the apostles in being delivered from the 
prison on the previous night helped to give them the 
courage so necessary at this moment. No doubt also 
the knowledge of that incident, coming to Gamaliel, led 
him to offer the moderate advice which the Sanhedrin 

R4326 : page 39 

followed. He advised them, "Take heed what ye do to 
these men. If this teaching be of God, ye cannot overthrow 
it. If it be of men, it will come to naught." The 
result was that the apostles were again charged not to 
preach in the name of Jesus, and, by way of showing 
the authority of the Court, it was ordered that they be 
whipped, scourged. The apostles, realizing the power 
of the Lord, endured the chastening with thanksgiving 
that they were accounted worthy to suffer for the name 
of Jesus. Thus the Lord blessed them in their hearts 
with his peace and grace, while he did not shield them 
from the scourging. In this, also, we learn a lesson 
respecting Divine providences. 

FOR THEIRS IS THE KINGDOM 

Our Golden Text applies the general principle enunciated 
by our Lord, "Through much tribulation shall ye 
enter the Kingdom." This is not because Divine power 
is not able to shield us from the tribulations, nor because 
our Lord is not interested in our welfare, but, 
quite the contrary, because, according to Divine tests 
placed upon the Church, the New Nature can be developed, 
educated, crystallized, only through the tests 
and trials it will endure through its earthly members in 
the flesh, through loyalty to the Lord. These testings 
will come along various lines— faith, obedience, endurance, 
love, etc. And it is only to the overcomers that 
the reward is promised. But, thank God, grace to 
help in time of need is promised us. If our hearts are 
loyal and we do our best, the Lord will see to the 
remainder. 

The Golden Text reminds us that we are to expect 
persecution, and Bible history shows us that these are 
to be expected from the church, as much or more than 
from the world. Indeed, when our Lord speaks of the 
world, he evidently refers to "Churchianity." He says, 
"Marvel not if the world hate you. Ye know that it 
hated me before it hated you." The world that hated 
Jesus and crucified him was the Jewish world, or nominal 
Israel; and the world from which we may look for 
persecution, similarly, would be the so-called Christian 
world— Christendom. Not only so, but sometimes the 
persecution comes from those who once were brethren 



in the Truth— those who once dipped with us in the dish 
of Divine nourishments at the table of the Lord. The 
trial is all the more severe when it comes from this 
quarter. Yet was it not so with our Lord, and does it 
not seem to have cut him to the quick that Judas kissed 
him at the very moment that he betrayed him? 

But as none of these things moved the Master away 
from confidence in the Divine providence shaping affairs 
in the interest of the Church, and as he returned not 
railing for railing, neither must we. And such experiences 
rightly received will no doubt make us more and 
more copies of his dear Son. 

Our Lord declares that the blessing for persecution 
endured is for righteousness' sake, and the Apostle, in 
line with this, declared, "Let none of you suffer for 
evil-doing, nor as a busybody in other men's matters." 
This, of course, will not hinder us from being misrepresented 
and charged with evil-doing, even as our Lord 
himself was so charged. Was he not crucified under 
the charge of blasphemy, which, in his day, was 
esteemed to be the worst of all offenses? Similarly in 
our day we must not think it strange if the Adversary 
shall seek to misrepresent the facts and put light for 
darkness and darkness for light. It is for each of us 
to preserve a conscience void of offense towards God 
and men, that, like the Apostle of old, we may be able 
to call upon all men everywhere to witness whether or 
not we have coveted their silver or their gold, or done 
aught to their injury, or left undone any good toward 
them that was within our power. 

In this connection let us remember also that the 
decision in each of our cases is with God. As St. Paul 
declares, "It is a light thing that I should be judged of 
you or of any man. Yea, I judge not mine own self, but 
he that judgeth me is the Lord." 



R4326 : page 39 

LED AWAY BY THE ERROR OF THE WICKED 

"HE that saith he is in the light and hateth his 

brother, is in darkness even until now. He 

that loveth his brother abideth in the light, 

and there is none occasion of stumbling in him. But 

he that hateth his brother is in darkness, and walketh 

in the darkness, and knoweth not whither he goeth, because 

that darkness hath blinded his eyes."— 

I John 2:9-11. 

R4326 : page 40 

"Ye therefore, beloved, seeing ye know these things 
before, beware lest ye also, being led away with the 
error of the wicked, fall from your own steadfastness." 



-2 Pet. 3:17. 

As love is declared to be the distinguishing characteristic 
of all who have the Spirit of Christ, so lack of 
love may be considered the distinguishing characteristic 
denominated the "error of the wicked." 

Our Lord emphasized the fact that supreme love of 
God is the first duty of all his creatures, and love for 
the neighbor as for ourselves a closely allied one. But 
speaking to the Church, to the consecrated, to those 
hoping to be "members of his Body" in glory, he said, 
"A new commandment I give unto you, That ye love 
one another even as I have loved you."— John 13:34. 

We are forced to the opinion that the Lord guided to 
the presentation of "the VOW" for the very purpose of 
making it a trial and test amongst those professing to 
be his disciples and enjoying the light, blessing, privileges 
of Present Truth. Of course, we had never surmised 
that that little Vow, or solemn promise, or resolution 
to God would have had such an effect; nevertheless, 
had we known at the beginning what we now know, 
by our Lord's assisting grace, we would have done nothing 
different from what we did. 

In presenting the matter, we had in view solely the 
assistance of the Lord's dear flock— to help them draw 
nearer to the Lord, who is our refuge and habitation, so 
that in the "evil day," already begun, no harm might 
come nigh them, because safe in that Dwelling-Place. 
We saw the hawk, the Adversary, plotting for the 
stumbling of many, especially of the saints. We did 
what we could for their relief, as kindly and as wisely 
as we knew how, and with prayer to the Lord for the 
wisdom from above. 

ANGER, MALICE, STRIFE-EVERY EVIL WORK 

We well knew that only the fully consecrated could 
be expected to take the Vow and that they would not be 
a majority, even on the select lists of the WATCH TOWER. 
We expected, too, that some of the consecrated might 
hesitate for a time to give up their liberty to so full an 
extent— because some might not see, as we do, the necessity 
for so drastic a Resolution, for so tight a binding 
of the sacrifice to the altar— though this would seem 
to be the demand of our Consecration Vow, if necessary. 

But we surely were surprised by the effect of the 
Vow on some few of the brethren. What they saw in it 
that provoked them to anger, bitterness, hatred, strife, 
evil-speaking, evil surmising, slanders and wolfish backbiting 
we cannot see. 

The effect of the suggestion of the Vow seems to 
have operated on these brethren as an emetic— not that 
they took it, but that even looking at it led them to 
belch forth cruelly, bitterly, slanderously, against it, 
and particularly against us for presenting it. The noble 
esteem in which we held these dear brethren made the 
shock to us all the more severe. According to the 



Scriptures, "Out of the abundance of the heart the 
mouth speaketh." But, in advance, we had no suspicion 
that such ugly, cruel sentiments, such unkind suspicions 
were in their hearts to come out. Evidently the 
Lord, who searcheth the heart, knew just the effect the 
Vow would have, and evidently he guided us unwittingly 
to its presentation, as a part of the testing which he 
wished to bring upon his people at this time. 

Note here that it is not the Vow, nor anything which 
we have written concerning it, that is causing the division 
which is rapidly taking place, and by which a small 
company of those whom we loved (and still love) are 
alienating themselves from us, and, we fear, from the 
Lord, and from the light of Present Truth. Remember, 
that in no sense of the word did we at any time suggest 
that the taking of the Vow should be a test of brotherhood, 
nor of saintship even. We stand by the thought 
which we have already made prominent— that the Lord's 
people are free and that no one has a right to put a yoke 
of bondage upon his brother, either to take the Vow, or 
not to take it. We merely advised the Vow, as we still 
do, just as we advised the original Consecration Vow 
in the language of the Apostle, "I beseech you, brethren, 
present your bodies a living sacrifice."— Rom. 12:1. 

Similarly we urge this as in full accord with the 
spirit of the Lord's Word, and related to our original 
covenant to be dead to sin and self, and to everything 
that would hinder a brother in the narrow way, or hinder 
the progress of our Master's cause; yea, more, that we 
would sacrifice all to assist his cause and to protect and 
assist the brethren. Let it be noticed that the split is 
coming from those who oppose the Vow. They are not 
opposing an attempt to force it upon them, for no such 
attempt has been made. They are opposing this feature 
of Present Truth, trying to hinder others from taking 
the Vow— forcing an issue on the subject and arousing, 
so far as their influence goes, an evil, malicious spirit, 
antagonistic to the Vow and the channel through which 
it came. 

To this end circulars are being printed and scattered 
abroad to poison and to prejudice the minds of all 

R4327 : page 40 

who will come under the influence. As there are but 
two Masters, which are these serving? Our question is 
not, Which do they say they are serving? nor, Which do 
they think they are serving? We say to God's people, 
Judge for yourselves what sort of spirit is this which 
is seeking to cause division amongst the followers of 
Christ, and that is willing to hint "all manner of evil" 
and to surmise and to back-bite? We do not believe 
this is the Spirit of Christ. "By their fruits ye shall 
know them." Are their fruits grapes or thorns? We 
ask these dear brethren to search their own hearts and 
to determine this question. "His servants ye are unto 



whom ye render service." (Rom. 6:16.) We are firmly 
convinced that they are serving the cause of the Adversary 
— ignorantly. We sorrow for them; we pray for 
them. We endeavor to set the matter forth in these 
columns in its true light for the protection of the Lord's 
dear sheep against that evil influence and for the recovery 
of any of those dear brethren who have not yet 
gone so far as to be irrecoverable. We use great plainness 
of speech that, as the Apostle suggested, "We may 
pull them out of the fire."— Jude 23. 

NOT IGNORANT OF HIS DEVICES 

We believe that our common Adversary has had to 
do with the stirring up of this matter and that the Lord 
will evidently overrule it as one of the "all things" for 
the strengthening of those who are truly his. Already 
we are receiving many letters telling of greatly increased 
blessing as a result of this very shaking up. 
Still our hearts yearn over the dear brethren who are 
making shipwreck of their eternal interests in so foolish 
a manner. If they did not wish to take the Vow, they 
had a perfect right to use their own judgment and 
liberty. But why should they hinder others from the 
use of their liberty? Why should they set themselves 
in antagonism and allow such bitterness to develop in 
their hearts, such unbrotherliness, as some of them 
have manifested? 

We can only suppose that our great Adversary has 
been injecting evil into their minds, and that the Lord 
is permitting it, possibly because there was some wrong 
condition of heart there, which neither they nor we previously 

R4327 : page 41 

discerned. But alas! that they do not discern 

their own condition, and go to the Lord and purge 

themselves of the evil thoughts and surmises, and make 

amends and return into fullest fellowship with the Lord 

and with us all. It is not for us to judge their hearts 

and to say what evil was there, perhaps for months or 

for years before the sight of the Vow acted as an emetic. 

It is not for us to judge them, condemn them, for the 

pride and ambition, or the nursing of secret faults. It 

is ours only to note and reprove their present bitterness 

of spirit, which is contrary to the Spirit of the Lord, 

and to apply the Apostle's warning, "Mark them which 

cause divisions amongst you; and avoid them." (Rom. 16:17.) 

We are not to render bitter words for bitter 

words, slander for slander, nor reviling for reviling. 

It is not for us to smite them, either physically or with 

the tongue— nor even in our thoughts, but rather to pity 

them and to pray for them. Avoiding them does not 

mean excommunicating them, nor any other unkindness. 

It merely means what it says— "Avoid them." If 

a brother stumbles into some filth and rejoices in it and 



glories in its stench, and will not permit us to assist 
him out of it, our best plan is to "hold our noses" and 
go our way and avoid him, until he gets cleansed from 
the filth, or at least until he invites us to assist him so 
to do. Our avoidance of him for a time may be the 
very best lesson we could give him of our detestation 
of his attitude, his condition. 

LED INTO SIN AND INTO DARKNESS 

Darkness is a synonym for the condition of those 
in sin— those out of harmony with God; for God is 
Light— "In him is no darkness at all." Where the leading 
away by the Adversary is a doctrinal deflection, it 
may, or it may not, lead to a wrong spirit. We know 
of a great many people whom we believe to be in great 
doctrinal error, who, nevertheless, maintain a spirit of 
kindness. We know of many worldly people who have 
a much keener sense of justice and right, not to mention 
love, than have some who have deflected from the Truth. 
But while doctrinal errors are dangerous, and should 
be avoided, it is still more serious a matter to lose the 
spirit of Love— the holy Spirit. He who loveth not his 
brother loveth not God. He who hateth his brother 
and back-biteth him is not under the control of the 
spirit of God, whatever may have been his professions 
or his past relationship to the Lord and to the Truth. 

So then, of all dangers that beset the pathway of 
those who are seeking glory, honor and immortality, 
none is more dangerous than to be "led astray with the 
error of the wicked" into lovelessness. This is quickly 
followed by antagonism to the truths which should be 
held and thus into antagonism to the God who should 
be served, and to whom the brethren are related, and 
who declares that whatsoever is done against them is 
done against him. Those "led astray with the error of the 
wicked" into a reprobate condition of mind, of heart, 
are sure to get into doctrinal darkness. Hence we must 
not be surprised if some of those who have manifested 
a bitter, loveless spirit, and who have been harrying 
the Lord's flock in a back-biting and wolfish manner 
and endeavoring for some time to stampede the stragglers 
and to corral them for their own purposes should 
become more and more dim and uncertain in respect to 
the Truth and unable to follow the light further. 

The Lord declares that "the path of the just is as 
a shining light, which shineth more and more unto the 
perfect day." But as a right condition of heart is necessary 
in order to get onto this shining path, so a wrong 
condition of heart would surely take us off of the shining 
pathway and into the darkness which so generally prevails 
all about us. This also, we may concede, is a part 
of the Adversary's program of opposition to the Lord 
and the harvest work. 

While greatly rejoicing in the further clearing up of 
the subject of the Covenants, as set forth heretofore in 



these columns and further elaborated in this and recent 
issues, we have, nevertheless, the sorrowful thought 
that it may mean the passing on of the light before 
those who are walking in the light, and the leaving of 
some of our dear ones in a measure of darkness, which 
will increase day by day, as they either turn aside or go 
backward, or even fail to advance— "walking in the 
light." Yet what can we do? We dare not stop. We 
must go on, whither the Captain of our salvation leads. 
Much as we love those who stop, or those who turn 
aside, it is for us to say, "Where he leads I will follow." 
This does not signify that every one of the Lord's followers 
will see this matter of the Covenants immediately, 
in the same clearness and fulness as do we, and as 
we have tried to express it. Indeed, some never see 
great truths with the same clearness as do others, and 
yet are following on, their hearts leading more rapidly 
than their reasoning faculties can follow; nor does it 
signify that we are putting tests upon the flock. The 
Lord has been putting these tests before us, all through 
this harvest time, and leading us from knowledge to 
knowledge and from grace to grace, as we followed his 
leading. 

STRENGTHEN THE BRETHREN 

Already we hear of circulars being sent about which 
oppose the Vow and admonish the friends that Brother 
Russell is endeavoring to lead the Church away from 
the Ransom, away from the precious blood of Christ. 
The argument is that when we say that the New Covenant 
is not in operation yet, but is to be a New (Law) 
Covenant between God and the Jewish nation, which will 
be sealed at the close of this age and be in effect throughout 
the Millennium, to bless Israel, and through Israel 
all the nations— this, we are told, is denying the Ransom, 
denying the blood of Christ. How foolish! We would 
accredit even the babes in Christ with more knowledge 
and a better logic on the subject than this. Surely a 
film or mist of some kind is coming "over the eyes of 
understanding" of the dear brother who presents this 
illogical proposition. It is a fact that Christ died for 
our sins, according to the Scriptures, and that he arose 
from the dead the third day and that he appeared in the 
presence of God for us. Those facts stand, regardless 
of whether they are connected with one Covenant or 
another Covenant or no Covenant. You and I, dear 
reader, believed in the death of Christ as our redemption 
price before we had any knowledge of the 
Covenants. 

We were justified by faith in the precious blood, 
and not by our knowledge or ignorance of the Covenants. 
And this is in harmony with the Apostle's statement 
that we are justified freely through his blood and 
have the remission of our sins. Nor is your justification 
and mine dependant even upon our understanding 



of the philosophy of the Ransom and the Atonement 
based upon it. We were justified by our faith before 
we understood the philosophy, and our justification 
still rests upon our faith and not upon the philosophy. 
But our faith has been made more clear, more substantial 
by the philosophy. Ask yourself the question, 
"Where did I get the philosophy of the Ransom and the 
Atonement, in which I now rejoice?" And, Where did 
the dear brother who sends out this circular letter get 
his knowledge of the Ransom and of the Atonement? 
It all came from God and it has come in this harvest 

R4327 : page 42 

time, because it is God's due time to make it known. 

If there are other publications on the face of the 
earth which present the true philosophy of the Ransom 
and the Atonement, outside of those published by the 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY, we have no 
knowledge of them and would be glad to be informed 
respecting them. If there are any other publications 
on earth which have so clearly and so persistently and 
so logically set forth the value of the precious blood 
and the philosophy of the redemption, we would be glad 
of the fact, and would be pleased to know of them and 
their authors. 

R4328 : page 42 

Be not deceived, dear friends. Such blindness and 
confusion are of the Adversary. Remember that for 
years we have been explaining that we are in the harvest 
time, and must expect the wheat to be threshed and 
winnowed and "sifted like wheat." If now you feel a 
shaking think first for yourself and your own safety. 
Hold fast to what you have already attained, and, 
through the agency of the Vow, or in any other manner 
possible, draw still closer to the Lord. Bind your sacrifice 
to the altar. If some lose their hold and seem 
likely to be shaken out— and these same ones you dearly 
love and of them expected better things, love them still, 
but not with the weakness which encourages them in 
wrong. Rather remember that "faithful are the wounds 
of a friend," and in love reprove them. 

The "shaking" (Heb. 12:27) which is now due to 
take place in the house of God is a part of the same 
which will ultimately extend to the whole world, causing 
a great time of trouble, setting every man's hand 
against his neighbor. The Apostle declares this, assuring 
us that everything that can be shaken will be shaken 
out, so that ultimately, both in the Church and subsequently 
in the world, only "those things which cannot be 
shaken will remain." The same spirit of bitterness and 
wolfish back-biting will ere long reach the world and 
set every man's hand against his neighbor. Under 
another figure the Apostle explains the same situation, 



saying that "Every man's work shall be tried so as by 
fire," and only the developed characters will stand. 
Let us watch and pray and labor for this character 
which will have the Divine approval and be acceptable 
to him forever. Naturally, and properly, these " sittings " 
are severest upon those who have been most favored of 
the Lord. "Who shall be able to stand?" 

A SIMPLE TEST OF "THE VOW" 

If your mind is in any degree agitated by this 
question, we suggest a very simple method whereby 
you may test it, reach a conclusion, and henceforth 
have your mind at rest on this subject. It is this: 
First, ask the Lord for wisdom to know his will, to see 
things from his standpoint; second, take the latest 
statement of the Vow on the New Calendar, or in TOWER, 
and read it item by item, slowly, thoughtfully. At the 
conclusion of each item, think over it carefully and 
judge of its contents by asking yourself two questions 
—Is this in harmony with the teachings of God's Word 
and pleasing to him? Then ask, Would it be pleasing 
to Satan if I should make that Promise, Resolution, 
Vow, to the Lord? and then ask, Would it probably be 
helpful or injurious to me to so resolve? Do this with 
each paragraph. Reach your decision and consider the 
matter settled forever. 

Our opinion is that nearly all the most earnest of 
the consecrated class will conclude that God is well 
pleased with each of those seven provisions and that 
singly and collectively they could do you no harm, but 
might do you much good, besides the influence of the 
action upon others. We believe, also, that your conclusion 
will be that Satan would be very much displeased 
to have you make this fresh loop upon your 
sacrifice, binding it to the altar. If this is your conclusion 
you will, undoubtedly, promptly raise your heart 
to the Lord in prayer, saying, "O Lord, I thank thee 
that in thy providence this Vow has been brought to 
my attention, as an assistance in making straight paths 
for my feet— an assistance to greater carefulness respecting 
my conduct as thy representative amongst 
men. And, now, Lord, I do solemnly promise Thee 
that I will observe all the provisions of this statement, 
to do them to the extent of my ability, relying upon thy 
promised grace to help in every time of need, through 
the merit of my dear Redeemer." 

More than 5,500 of our readers have notified us that 
they have taken the Vow and tell us of special blessing 
and nearness to the Lord since taking it. We know 
of only three who have since turned opponents to it. 
They are quite prominent brethren. We fear they decided 
without proper consideration. As the Scriptures 
say, This is to their shame. (Eccles. 5:4.) Let this be 
a warning to others, not to follow their course, but to 
"sit down first and count the cost." 



R4328 : page 42 

THE FIRST CHRISTIAN MARTYR 

--ACTS 6:8-15; 7:54; 8:3. -FEBRUARY 21.- 

Golden Text:— "And they stoned Stephen calling upon God, 
and saying, Lord Jesus, receive my spirit."— Acts 7:59. 

THE infant Christian Church prospered at Jerusalem. 
Not only was the Lord's blessing upon 
the apostles in their ministries, but upon others 
of the Church also, who, full of love and zeal for the 
Truth, told the good tidings as they had opportunity. 
They had the Gospel message in its purity, and it was 
a pleasure to tell it. They needed not inducements of 
social advancement, financial prosperity, honorable 
titles and good salaries. The message itself incited 
love and devotion, and enkindled a flame of sacred 
love in their hearts which tended to make each believer 
a burning and a shining light, as the Lord himself had 
enjoined. This same condition of things prevails 
again today, since the smoke of the dark ages is being 
washed from the eyes of our understanding, and since 
the dust and must of human tradition are being brushed 
from the Word of the Lord. Now, as then, the Truth 
charms, sanctifies, energizes all who receive it. And 
each, according to his ability, is quickened to its service, 
regardless of cost or time, of energy, of human disapproval 
and ostracism. 

THE ADVERSARY ACTIVE ALSO 

Our great Adversary will usually leave us comparatively 
at ease, if we are not actively engaged as heralds 
of the Truth. Indeed, his policies seem to be to 
minister opiates wherever the Truth is dispensed. He 
prefers that we sleep and dream, rather than that we 
be awake and on the alert, putting our lights upon 
candlesticks, that they may give light to those about 
us. It is not surprising, therefore, that he stirred up 
a great persecution against the early Church, because 
of its activity. We must expect that similarly we will 
draw his fire upon ourselves, in proportion as we patiently 
and faithfully fight the good fight against sin 
and error— darkness. 

Stephen, a young man of prominence who had 

R4328 : page 43 

been chosen a deacon at Jerusalem, was very zealous 
for the Truth. He got into a public discussion, and 
his opponents, finding their arguments inferior to his, 



were angered instead of convinced. This shows their 
insincerity. Had they hungered and thirsted for the 
Truth, they would have been glad to receive it from 
Stephen, or from anybody. Let us beware of such a 
spirit in ourselves, knowing that it is dangerous. In 
this case it led on to murder; not merely the murder 
accomplished when Stephen died, but they were murderers 
in advance, from the Lord's standpoint, because 
hatred of him was in their hearts; "And he that hateth 
his brother is a murderer." They had, however, respect 
to the outward forms of the Law, and sought any pretext 
to justify them in killing their opponent. Had they 
no fear of God! Apparently it is possible for men to 
get into such a condition of heart that they will not only 
speak evil of us and plot mischief against us, but to 
the extent that they can do so will be glad to effect our 
death. This is a part of the murderous spirit, whether 
they stop short of the actual death or not. It went to 
the limit with Stephen and with our Lord, and it may 
do so with us some day. Let us be on the side of the 
martyr rather than on the side of those whose wrong 
condition of heart our Lord explained, saying, "Satan 
hath filled thine heart. " 

Stephen's opponents were crafty. They hired witnesses 
to describe the teachings of Stephen in an unjust 
manner, saying he talked dishonorably of the Law 
and of Moses. Blasphemy in that day was the worst 
of crimes. As a result the people, the Elders, the 
scribes came upon him, seized upon him and brought 
him to the Council, or place of trial. Then the prejudices 
of the people were again appealed to through 
witnesses who perverted the truth, saying that Stephen 
was continually saying things against the holy city 
and temple and the Law and claiming that Jesus would 
destroy the place and change the customs. There was, 
perhaps, considerable truth in this statement, rightly 
understood. But as it was stated it was untrue; and 
so today in traducing us, some may tell partial truths, 
which really are falsehoods. It is weakness of human 
nature to suppose that such misrepresentations are 
excusable. They should remember how impossible it 
is to lie to the holy Spirit, as Ananias and Sapphira 
learned. The lesson to the Lord's faithful is that it is 
far better to be the sufferer under such circumstances 
than to be the one who causes the suffering and who 
must eventually answer for his crime. 

"AS THE FACE OF AN ANGEL" 

There is an inspiration of the heart and an illumination 
of the features which accompanies the presentation 
of the Truth by those who are indwelt by the 
Lord's holy Spirit and who are speaking as his ambassadors. 
Many have noticed this peculiarity amongst 
those who are now rejoicing in what we designate 
"Present Truth." Doubtless this is akin to what is 



mentioned in our lesson respecting Stephen's face- 
that it was bright, happy, radiant "as the face of an 
angel." Ah! Stephen was an angel. An angel is a 
messenger, and if Stephen, by the grace of God, was 
permitted to be the Divine messenger or mouth-piece 
and permitted to convey the "good tidings" to others, 
surely, then, we also are angels in the highest sense 
conceivable. No wonder there is no need since Pentecost 
that the angels should appear in human form! 
The sons of God, indwelt by his Spirit, can be God's 

R4329 : page 43 

mouthpieces in the very highest sense. 

Stephen's sermon is not directly a part of our lesson, 
but indirectly it should be borne in mind. It was 
a comprehensive view of Divine favor in Israel, bringing 
the matter down to date and showing Jesus the 
son of Abraham, according to the flesh, rejected and 
crucified by those who should have received him. This 
was the galling feature of the Gospel amongst the 
Jews— their responsibility as murderers of their Messiah. 
We read that his hearers 

"GNASHED ON HIM WITH THEIR TEETH" 

This signifies chagrin, disappointment, savage 
animosity. We read that they were "cut to the heart." 
Stephen's words were sharp and their force consisted 
not in any angry or bitter denunciation, but in plain, 
simple narration of the Truth. This should be the 
style of all preaching. It is not necessary for us to 
say angry or bitter things. The Truth itself is 
"sharper than any two-edged sword," and needs no 
unkind language, no profanity, no epithets to drive it 
home. Where immoderate and unchristian language 
is considered necessary it is a sure sign that the argument 
is correspondingly weak, and it warns us to beware. 
The Truth itself is mighty, even if spoken by a 
little child. 

Hearing Stephen with impatience, aggravated by 
the fact that his argument was true, they were gnashing 
their teeth with chagrin, because they were unable 
to detect a flaw or excuse for his death. 

Finally, however, when he declared that he saw a 
vision of Christ at the right hand of God (whether he 
actually saw such a vision or merely pictured it before 
his hearers, we do not know), his statement of the 
matter furnished the excuse they had been waiting for, 
and, seizing it, they rushed upon him, crying out in a 
loud voice and stopping their ears, as though to convince 
one another that to willingly hear anything more 
on that line would be a participation in the blasphemy. 
They rushed him out of the city gate and stoned him. 
A young man, Saul, supposedly an officer of the Council, 
being present, gave his sanction by taking charge 



of the outer-garments of those who stoned him to 
death. 

Such a martyrdom is not the style in our day; 
hence none of us will probably suffer death in that form. 
We have more refined forms of persecution. Christian 
people may get themselves into such a wrong attitude 
of heart as to think that they do God service in hurling 
slanders at those who have sought to do them good. 
And indeed who does not know that the blow of slander 
may be even more cruel and even more painful and 
more shameful than the literal stoning? Yet, strange 
to say, there are many who would read the account of 
Stephen's stoning, or Jesus' crucifixion, and who 
would roundly condemn all who took part in either, 
and who, nevertheless, would either unthinkingly or 
under supposition of doing God service engage in the 
worst form of persecution— stoning and crucifying and 
spearing with their tongues. We ask ourselves what 
was the matter with those Jews who thus maltreated 
our Lord and Stephen, and the answer comes back, "Ye 
have not the love of God in your hearts." Similarly we 
must answer in respect to those who in our day persecute 
through slander, vituperation, evil-speaking, 
evil-surmisings, evil-insinuations, etc. 

FATHER, FORGIVE THEM 

Stephen's attitude of heart towards his enemies indicates 
that he had not only received the holy Spirit as 
a gift, but that he had it as a living power, and that its 
fruitage was in his heart. He had only love for his 
enemies. Having done his very best to serve them with 
the Truth, he had prayers for them in return for their 
imprecations and their cruel stones. He prayed, "Lord, 

R4329 : page 44 

lay not this sin to their charge." But it was not for 
Stephen to direct Divine justice as to what should be 
the reward of those who stoned him. We cannot suppose 
that he was attempting to direct the arm of the 
Infinite. We must assume that he was speaking merely 
for himself; that, so far as he himself was concerned, 
he had no desire that they should be punished. This 
beautiful condition of heart should be ours. "Owe no 
man anything but to love one another"— and to desire 
one another's welfare is the application of the Divine 
rule to all the affairs of our lives. 

We read that Saul (afterwards Paul) was amongst 
those who consented to this martyrdom. How strange 
the anomaly— that so many should think right and the 
Divine service that which we know was very reprehensible 
in the sight of God! Seeing such great blindness 
on the part of one who subsequently declared, "I verily 
thought I did God service," should surely cause us to 
be very circumspect, very critical, in respect to our 



thoughts and deeds. We must remember that it is not 
a question of whose servants we claim to be, but, as 
our Lord said, "His servants ye are unto whom ye 
render service." 

THEN STEPHEN FELL ASLEEP 

No suggestion was given that the first Christian 
martyr passed immediately to heaven, and that with 
his expiring breath he became more alive than he ever 
was when he was alive. On the contrary, here as elsewhere 
in the Scriptures, death is pictured as a sleep. 

"Asleep in Jesus, blessed sleep, 

From which none ever wakes to weep." 

How glad we are that this is so! The awakening 
time will be after the close of the reign of sin and 
death; after our Redeemer's Second Advent, when the 
power Divine will be in control, as instead of that of 
the prince of this world. Truly, "Weeping may endure 
for the night," but it ceases with our sleeping, and "joy 
cometh in the morning" of the resurrection.— Psa. 30:5. 

"THEY WERE ALL SCATTERED ABROAD" 

The death of Stephen marked the beginning of an 
epoch of persecution, especially in Jerusalem, where 
for some years peace had prevailed and the message of 
the Gospel found considerable root in the hearts of 
"Israelites indeed." The Lord allowed these new beginners 
to attain a fair degree of development in grace 
and knowledge, and then permitted the persecution 
which scattered them everywhere throughout Judea and 
Samaria. The effect was that, so far from the Truth 
being injured, it was carried to larger numbers, for 
every true disciple is a light-bearer. Saul was one of 
the chief persecutors, apparently. We read that he 
made havoc of the Church, entering every house, and, 
armed with the necessary legal authority, he effected 
the imprisonment of many, and thus led to the scattering 
of others. But in some unaccountable manner this 
persecution seems to have passed by the apostles. The 
Lord probably wished to keep Jerusalem as the center 
for the Apostolic ambassadors of the Truth for a 
season. 

The lesson for us all is faith, courage, zeal, a loyal 
heart, a shining face, love and prayers for our enemies, 
and to see that we learn a lesson from the evil 
course of others, "See that no man render evil in return 
for evil," as the Apostle says. 

The fact that the Jews had not power to put our 
Lord to death, but did have the power to stone Stephen, 
is explained by the fact that stoning to death for blasphemy 
was the Divinely instituted punishment, according 
to the Law. But the Jews, being subject to the 



Romans, were not permitted by them to exercise the 
death penalty. Following the death of our Lord, Pilate 
was ordered to Rome to stand trial on certain charges 
brought against him and thus the Roman power in 
Palestine was somewhat abated, and the Jews, in the 
absence of a dominating force, exercised their own laws. 



R4329 : page 44 

"THY MONEY PERISH WITH THEE" 

--ACTS 8:4-25.-FEBRUARY 28.- 

Golden Text:— "And the people with one accord gave 
heed to those things which Philip spake, hearing and 
seeing the miracles which he did."— Acts 8:6. 

OUR preceding lesson told us of the zeal and faithfulness 
of Deacon Stephen. Today's lesson 
deals with the faithfulness of Deacon Philip, 
who was one of those who fled from Jerusalem under 
the persecution which arose following Stephen's death. 
He went to live in the city of Samaria, and, his earthen 
vessel being filled with the holy Spirit, he was a burning 
and shining light there, and speedily many of the 
Samaritans believed in Christ. The gift of miraculous 
healing and casting out of demons attested that Philip 
was a servant of God, and, as was intended, served to 
draw attention to the message which he delivered. He 
healed the sick, cast out demons, and thus caused great 

joy. 

Simon, the magician of Samaria, had long been a 
spirit medium amongst them, practising witchcraft, 
sorcery, the black art. His power had been recognized, 
and he himself had been free to claim personal greatness 
because of the power of the demons exercised 
through him. But now the power of Christ being 
brought into sharp contrast with the demoniacal power 
and works, the people of Samaria recognized this 
promptly. Many of them made a full surrender to the 
Lord and were baptized. Amongst these was the magician 
himself. Deacon Philip was not the Apostle Philip, 
and hence was unable to confer the gifts of the holy 
Spirit upon others, which was an Apostolic privilege 
exclusively. He therefore sent to Jerusalem, and forthwith 

R4330 : page 44 

Peter and John went to Samaria and laid their 
hands upon the believers, and imparted to them the 
miraculous gifts which were a part of the Lord's provision 
for the Church at that time. Not only for the 
convincing of outsiders, but also for the uplifting of 
each other in their meetings, the gifts of tongues and 



interpretation of tongues were given, serving practically 
as instead of the written Word of God. 

We remember that they were the same John and 
Peter to whom our Lord a few years before had said, 
"Into any city of the Samaritans enter ye not" with the 
Gospel, "for I am not sent, save to the lost sheep of the 
house of Israel." And this is the same John who, with 
his brother James, was refused the privilege of purchasing 
bread for their needs, and asked our Lord, 
"Wilt thou that we command fire to come down to consume 
these men and their city?" We remember our 
Lord's answer, "Ye know not what spirit ye are of. The 
Son of Man came not to destroy men's lives, but to save 
them." 

Now we find John quite willing to join with Peter 
in recognizing the Samaritans as brethren— fellow-members 
of the one Body of Christ; and very willing to confer 
upon them the gifts of the holy Spirit. What a 

R4330 : page 45 

change, and why? Ah! John was seeing things from 
a different standpoint. He was no longer actuated by 
a pride for his Master that would have been willing to 
destroy his enemies, but now, controlled with a spirit 
of love, he realized that the Samaritans and all mankind 
were under the blinding power of the Adversary, and 
he was as anxious to save their lives as he had 
been previously willing that they should be destroyed. 
And is it not so with each one of us? In proportion as 
we have received the Spirit of Christ, we have learned 
what love and sympathy towards fellow creatures really 
mean. We, like the apostles, are drinking of the same 
spirit which controlled our Master. 

But why should the Lord bless Philip's preaching 
at this time, when previously he forbade any preaching 
of the Gospel to the Samaritans? The explanation is 
found in the dispensational change which had meantime 
occurred. "The middle wall of partition between 
Jews and Gentiles had been broken down." It crumbled 
at the end of the seventieth week of Jewish favor, three 
and a half years after the cross, Cornelius being the 
first Gentile convert. This preaching at Samaria was 
probably three years after the conversion of Cornelius. 
The Samaritans claimed a relationship to the Jewish 
Law Covenant, but, as our Lord explained to the woman 
of Samaria, their claim was fraudulent. They were as 
separate from the Covenants and promises of Israel as 
were the other Gentile nations. To this day the Samaritans 
hold to their old traditions and claim to have a 
high priest, but entirely without right or authority. 

As the old Law Covenant given through Moses was 
wholly Jewish, Israelitish, and as the New [Law] Covenant 
to be instituted by Messiah (Head and Body) will 
be wholly Israelitish, and as the original Abrahamic 
(Sarah) Covenant blessed only those who exercised the 



faith of Abraham, it follows that such of the Samaritans 
as came truly into Christ became spiritual Israelites, 
while the others, like all the Gentile nations, will during 
the Millennium have the opportunity of becoming 
naturalized, fleshly Israelites under Israel's New (Law) 
Covenant, as the only means of coming into harmony 
with God. 

"SIMONY" IN OLDEN TIMES AND NOW 

When the sorcerer, Simon Magus, beheld the 
Apostolic power— that by the laying on of the hands of 
the apostles miraculous gifts were imparted to the believers 
—he offered them money, if they would confer 
upon him this Apostolic power. Apparently his mind 
had assented to what he had heard and seen, but his 
heart was not radically changed. He did not appreciate 
the matters in which he had a share as one of the believers. 
It took the Apostle's sharp word to awaken 
him to a realization of the fact that he was now dealing 
with God and holy things, and that his failure to appreciate 
this implied that he was not begotten of the holy 
Spirit. St. Peter said to him, "Thy money perish with 
thee, because thou hast thought to obtain the gift of 
God with money. Thou hast neither part nor lot in this 
matter, for thy heart is not right before God. Repent, 
therefore, of this thy wickedness, and pray the Lord if, 
perchance, the thought of thine heart shall be forgiven 
thee, for I see that thou art in the gall of bitterness and 
the bonds of iniquity." 

It is not for us to judge the heart, although we are 
commanded to judge the outward conduct and to discern 
the difference between the true Vine and its grapes, 
and the thorn-bush and its thorns. Without attempting 
to judge the hearts of any, we suggest to all the 
wisdom of seeing to it that nothing like the spirit of 
Simon Magus gain any control over us. This may be 
a special danger in this our day when the power of 
money is so great. As material things are all moved 
by the lever of wealth, it is not surprising that many 
conclude that the world's conversion is merely a matter 
of dollars and cents, and that those who control the 
money are the real masters of the situation. There 
may indeed be some who pride themselves in their 
money power and who think of it as having authority 
and direction in the work of the Lord. Let such beware 
of "Simony." Let them beware of the Apostle's words, 
"Thy money perish with thee." We are not of those 
who despise money. But it must be recognized as a 
servant of the Lord and of the Truth, and not as a 
master— not as a controlling force. To thus estimate 
it is to dishonor the Lord and to show that we have 
failed to grasp the spirit of his Truth. 

THOSE THINGS WHICH PHILIP SPAKE 



Our Golden Text refers thus to Philip's preaching: 
"He preached Christ." Some dear Christian people 
make the mistake of preaching on sociology, the 
beauties of nature, the things of the world. Others 
continually dabble with errors and errorists. Such 
things may have their time and place in connection with 
the message; but all who would serve the Lord should 
remember that we are commissioned to preach the 
Gospel of Christ only. Christ and his message constitute 
the light which came into our minds— the light 
which we are to let shine for the blessing of others. 
The darkness hateth the light and battles against the 
light; but the light is to keep on shining. Thus said 
our Lord, "Let your light so shine before men that, seeing 
your good works, they may glorify your Father 
which is in heaven." There it is again. The light is 
not merely the message which we bear upon our lips, 
but also the influence which emanates from our daily 
lives. More and more we are convinced that the will 
of the Lord is that his message shall be borne by those 
who are pure of heart. "Be ye clean that bear the message 
of the Lord's house." 



R4330 : page 45 

ANCIENT WORTHIES UNDER FAITH COVENANT 

THE question may arise, Under what Covenant are the 
Ancient Worthies acceptable with God? Since they 
died before Christ and the opportunities of spiritual 
begetting, they were not favored with the high calling to 
membership in the Body of Christ, the elect Church. This 
the Apostle emphasized in Heb. 1 1:39,40. He informs us 
that they "pleased God," but that apart from us, The Christ, 
they shall not be made perfect. In the Divine order the 
Church is to be the first-fruits of God's creatures. "Of his 
own will begat he us with the word of truth, that we should 
be a kind of first-fruits of his creatures." (Jas. 1:18.) Notice 
further that the Apostle's list of these includes Abel and 
Enoch, before the flood, and before even the Abrahamic 
Covenant was made. It also includes some who lived during 
the period of the Law Covenant, and who were therefore 
under it. How, then, should we classify these, as respects 
the three great Covenants, represented by Sarah, Hagar and 
Keturah? 

The matter becomes very simple when we recognize the 
prime distinction between the Abrahamic Covenant and the 
Law Covenant that was added to it. The first was of faith, 
not without works. The second was of works, not without 

R4330 : page 46 

faith. As the Apostle says, the conditions of the Law Covenant 
were, "He that doeth these things shall live by them." 



(Rom. 10:5.) We are also reminded that the Sarah Covenant 

is of faith and not of works, but that where the faith is 

right, the works will "attest" the faith, even though they be 

not perfect; and that if judged by our works we would be 

condemned. The entire Jewish nation failed in the Covenant 

of "works of the Law;" yet a few individuals of that 

nation, rising by their faith superior to that Covenant, 

trusted not to it, but to the original Covenant of 

Mercy, Grace— the Sarah Covenant. These are the Ancient 

Worthies mentioned by the Apostle. He specifies that it was 

by faith they did and endured. According to their works 

they were condemned by the Law Covenant, but according 

to their faith they were acceptable to God, along the lines of 

the Sarah Covenant, even though they could not receive their 

blessing under it, until first the promised Seed should come 

and the blood of that Covenant be shed. Similarly Enoch 

and Abel, because of their faith, were acceptable to God and 

listed with the faithful of the Law Covenant, as in Divine 

favor, and subject to the blessing of the Sarah Covenant, because, 

although they lived before Abraham, they had the 

Abrahamic faith in the sense that, like Abraham, they 

trusted God for the grace which he is willing to bestow upon 

those who love him and seek his favor. 

The New Covenant will really be a New Law Covenant, 
or a New Covenant of works of the Law. The old or first 
Law Covenant was faulty and insufficient for Israel, not because 

R4331 : page 46 

the Divine Law upon which it was based was faulty, 

nor because it was an unreasonable demand, but because 

men were imperfect, "born in sin and shapen in iniquity," 

and already under a death sentence, because of Adam's transgression. 

The Law Covenant had in Moses a faithful mediator, 

loyal both to God and to the Israelites, but he was incapable 

because his own life also was forfeited. God has made 

provision, therefore, that a New Law Covenant take the place 

of the Old, and has provided a new Mediator, who has already 

given his life as a redemption price— Jesus, the Head, and 

the Church, the Body. The finish of the sacrifice is in sight. 

The Head and many of his members have already, as New 

Creatures, passed beyond the vail. Soon the last member of 

the Body will have been thus "changed" and then the blood 

of the New Covenant will be sprinkled on behalf of "the sins 

of all the people"— the people of the Covenant, Israel, with 

an open door for all peoples to become sharers of their New 

Covenant blessings, even as we (Gentiles) are now privileged 

to share the Sarah Covenant blessings which belonged "to the 

Jew first." That sprinkling will be acceptable to God and 

efficacious for the blotting out of the sins of the whole world. 

This is abundantly attested in the Scriptures and in the types 

of these "better sacrifices."— Heb. 9:23. 

Forthwith the Great Prophet, Head and members; the 
Great Priest, Head and members; the Great Judge, Head and 
members; the Great King, Head and members, will begin 
dealing with Israel and through Israel with the world. They 



will rule, bless, instruct and uplift so many as are willing, 
"And it shall come to pass that every soul that will not 
hearken to that Prophet, shall be utterly destroyed from 
among the people." (Acts 3:23.) The New Law Covenant 
will operate exactly as the Old Law Covenant did, except 
that the "better sacrifices" sealing it will be fully efficacious, 
and not need to be repeated from year to year; and 
the power and glory of its Mediator will be superior, and the 
results of his work correspondingly great and lasting. 

This is testified to additionally by the statement of 
Revelation, which pictures the Millennial epoch, with its 
great white throne of justice and mercy, before which all the 
dead, small and great, will stand— for trial; not to see 
whether they were sinners or not, for that is conceded. All 
were sinners. Nor will it be to see whether or not God is 
willing to forgive them, for that is conceded— the sacrifice of 
Christ will then have been accepted as a full "satisfaction 
for the sins of the whole world." Their judgment or trial, 
like ours, will be to determine whether or not they will come 
into fullest harmony with God, and have his blessing of joy 
and eternal life, or, otherwise, be "destroyed from amongst 
the people." They will not be judged according to their faith, 
because they will be under the New Covenant of Law and 
works. As it is written, "They were judged every man according 
to their works."— Rev. 20:13. 

They will be assisted step by step out of imperfection 
of mind and body up to perfection, including perfect works, 
which will be their standard or test. On the contrary the 
Gospel Church and the Ancient Worthies have not been judged 
according to their works, but according to their faith— works 
having been demanded to the extent of ability, as attesting 
faith. We are not helped out of the blemishes of the fallen 
nature, but instantly reckoned as lifted out of them, or as 
having them covered with a mantle of grace. 

Bearing in mind the facts and conclusions above will 
assist us greatly in understanding our subject, the relationship 
of the Covenants to each other and to mankind. The 
original Covenant promised a blessing that should reach all 
mankind— a redemption from the Divine sentence, and an 
opportunity for the return to harmony with God, through 
faith and heart obedience. This promise has in some respects 
already had its fulfilment, as we have seen. God has already 
accepted, yea, been willing to lead or to draw, all who exercised 
faith in him and a hearty desire to live in harmony 
with his will. Already, in this sense of the word, the original 
Covenant operated before the flood, and since the flood, 
and toward Abraham, and toward all of Israel, who had the 
spirit of obedience and faith, and during this Gospel Age has 
operated amongst mankind in all nations and tongues. But 
a comparatively small portion of the race has received the 
blessing, because so small a proportion were in a condition 
to exercise "the faith of Abraham." 

While at first it might appear that the adding of the 
Law Covenant was a disadvantage and similarly that the 
adding of the New Covenant might, in some respects, be a 
disadvantage or a curtailment or abridgment of the original, 



all-comprehensive Grace or Sarah Covenant, yet this is really 
not so. While the Law Covenant did condemn the nation, 
because they did not have the faith, it did bring a blessing 
to many of that nation— many more than were developed in 
other nations, which had no such Law Covenant, with its 
limitations, threatenings, chastisements, etc. The New Covenant 
will be still more successful. It will follow the reign 
of Grace under the Sarah Covenant and be a reign of Law. 
As it is written, "Righteousness shall he lay to the line and 
justice to the plummet, and the hail shall sweep away the 
refuge of misrepresentations."— Isa. 28:17. 

The Redeemer and his followers will no longer be a 
flock of sheep for the slaughter, reviled amongst men, but to 
the contrary, they shall be the kings and priests, clothed with 
glory, honor and immortality, before whom "Every knee shall 
bow and every tongue confess to the glory of God." (Rom. 14:11.) 
The King shall rule in righteousness and princes 

R4331 : page 47 

shall execute judgments in the earth. 

Faith, giving place to sight, the test will be works, according 
to the ability; and everything less than the ability 
will receive stripes and corrections in righteousness. That 
reign of Law and good works will thus be rightly tempered 
to the condition of each individual, and the result, we believe, 
will be marvelous— the bringing of thousands of millions to 
perfection, in harmony with God. So far from the New (Law) 
Covenant being an abridgment of the Abrahamic (Sarah) 
Covenant it will be an extension of it which will make its 
blessings much farther reaching. The original Covenant now 
gathers those who can and will exercise faith and obedience. 
Its usefulness would thus be at an end, were it not for the 
added New (Law) Covenant, which, ignoring the lack of 
faith and obedience, will take hold of the world and, 
by chastisement and instructions, force obedience and 
knowledge and then gradually develop the heart-obedience 
of Abraham in so many of them as possible and destroy the 
others. Thus Abraham, "the father of the faithful," will become 
under the New (Law) Covenant the "father of many 
nations"— a multitude, as the sand of the sea— as well as the 
father of the faithful under the original Sarah Covenant of 
faith and grace. 

Thus we see that the influence of the original Covenant, 
after electing a Faith Seed, both natural and spiritual, will, 
through these by the New (Law) Covenant, bless a far 
greater number than by any other method conceivable. Thus 
again the Lord shows us how much greater are his arrangements 
than any which the human mind could have planned. 
Surely no flesh can glory in his sight. The more we see of 
his plans, his purposes, his methods, the more must we glorify 
him and realize our own nothingness, insignificance! 



page 47 



BEREAN STUDIES ON THE ATONEMENT 

THE TEXT-BOOK USED FOR THIS COURSE 
IS SCRIPTURE STUDIES, SERIES V (E)* 

Questions on Study V.— The Holy Spirit 

MARCH 7 

(37) If it be agreed that the Bible teaches that "God 

is a spirit" and that he is holy, hence a holy Spirit, what 
distinctions should we properly observe as between this 
expression and the other one— God's holy Spirit? 
P. 188. 

(38) Who besides the Creator must by his arrangement 
have the holy Spirit if they would have his approval? 

P. 188, par. 1. 

(39) If Satan is a spirit being, has he also a spirit 

or disposition? and his associates, the demons? P. 188, par. 1. 

(40) What do we know of battlings between these 

two classes of spirit beings— the "holy" and the "unclean"? 
Where is the battle-ground and when did the 
contest begin? P. 189. 

(41) Which contestant gains the victory and why? 
Explain the entire subject. Pp. 190, 191. 

(42) Why the apparent weakness of the right spirit 
and those under its sway? Will it always be thus? 
What say the Scriptures. P. 192. 

MARCH 14 

(43) Does the same principle apply in the individual 
as well as to the Church? How is this matter 
generally understood? P. 193, par. 1,2. 

(44) What is the right spirit which should be renewed 
in us? What kind of a consecration secures the 
begetting of the holy Spirit? Pp. 194, 195. 

(45) What is it to be spiritually minded? And does 
this condition lack perfection and why? P. 195. 

(46) What is the thought behind the word "holy"? 
P. 196, par. 1. 

(47) What shall we think of the "spirit of fear" and 

the "spirit of error"? and how should we get rid of these? 
P. 196, par. 3; P. 197, par. 1. 

(48) What do we know of the "spirit of faith"? "the 
spirit of Truth"? "the spirit of holiness"? Pp. 197, 
198, 199. 

(49) Are all mankind dual beings? That is to say, 
can all be spoken of as having an old mind and a new 
mind or man? If not, why not? Give the proofs of the 
answer. P. 199, par. 2. 

MARCH 21 

(50) What does the Apostle Paul say regarding the 



conflict between the flesh and the spirit in those who 
have been spirit-begotten? P. 200. 

(51) How are the spirit-begotten children of God 
taught of God through the spirit? Give illustrations. 
P. 201. 

(52) How may the spirit-begotten ones know things 
which the natural man cannot appreciate and why? 

P. 202. 

(53) Why is the holy Spirit styled the comforter? 
Give illustrations of the operation of the holy Spirit. 
P. 203. 

(54) Does anything connected with the Scriptural 
use of the term holy Spirit, either directly or indirectly, 
imply another God or that a number of Gods is necessary 
to the work being done or to be done? P. 204, par. 1. 

(55) Does the fact that the personal pronoun he is 
used in referring to the holy Spirit imply personality? 
Explain the matter. P. 204, par. 2. 

MARCH 28 

(56) Through what agency does God supply the 
holy Spirit, the holy disposition? And why is it called 
the spirit of the Truth? P. 204, par. 3. 

(57) What thought is connected with the expression, 

"Be ye filled with the spirit"? And is the filling instantaneous 
or how is it? P. 205, par. 1. 

(58) If "filled" with the spirit is a further filling 
possible? and why? and how? P. 205, par. 1. 

(59) Is knowledge essential to the filling with the 
spirit? Does knowledge always result in a filling with 
the spirit? What rules operate in this matter? 

(60) Is the "Spirit of the Truth" one of the "gifts" 
of the Spirit? Is it one of the "fruits of the spirit"? 
P. 205, par. 3. 

(61) Show how these matters are illustrated by the 
Vine. P. 206. 

(62) Explain the difference between the "fruits" 
and the "gifts" of the holy Spirit? P. 206, par. 2. 

(63) Enumerate some of the "gifts of the Spirit" 
and some of the "fruits of the Spirit." Show why and 
how these matters are as they are. P. 208. 



*Five years ago DAWN-STUDIES, VOL. V., was reset, and 
unfortunately the type was not exactly same size as before; and 
hence page for page they differ. The references given in these 
Berean Studies apply to the present edition, a copy of which 
postpaid will cost you but 30c. But keep your old edition, for 
unfortunately the new Bible Helps refer to its pages. 



page 48 



PUBLIC MINISTRIES OF THE TRUTH 



BIBLE STUDENTS' SOUTHERN CONVENTION 
JACKSONVILLE, FLA., FEBRUARY 12-16, 1909 



Excursion rates on the "Certificate Plan" have not yet been 
granted, but may be ere the date. If not, buy a regular Jacksonville 
Winter Excursion Ticket. 

All sessions will be held in Board of Trade Auditorium on 
Main street. 

Lodging at 50 cents and up, per night; meals, 25 cents 
and up. 

The surrounding territory and immediately adjacent states 
are expected to furnish most of the attendance, though some 
from more distant parts will be present also. 

Pilgrim brethren will be present, including also Brother 
Russell. 

Come all who can, and let those who cannot join us there 
in person join in spirit and in prayers, and thus participate 
in the showers of refreshing which the Lord will surely pour 
upon us. 

ONE-DAY LOCAL CONVENTIONS ADDRESSED BY THE 
EDITOR OF THIS JOURNAL AS FOLLOWS: 

BROOKLYN, N.Y., FEBRUARY 21 

Morning session for Prayer, Praise and Testimony at 1 1:00 
o'clock. Discourse by Brother Russell at 3:00 p.m. Evening 
meeting for the interested at 7:30 o'clock. This will be a 
Question Meeting. Visiting friends cordially welcomed. 

All meetings will be held in the Brooklyn Tabernacle, Nos. 
13-17 Hicks street. Convenient to all cars and ferries— close 
to the old bridge terminus. 

WATERBURY, CONN., FEBRUARY 28 

BROOKLYN, N.Y., MARCH 7 

SCRANTON, PA., MARCH 14 

BROOKLYN, N.Y., MARCH 21 



page 50 

STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES 
"MILLENNIAL DAWN" 
THESE STUDIES ARE RECOMMENDED TO STUDENTS AS VERITABLE "BIBLE KEYS. 
PRICES ARE NET AND BARELY COVER COST OF PRODUCTION. 
WHEN DELIVERED BY COLPORTEURS THE COST AND PRICE ARE INCREASED. 



SERIES I., The Plan of the Ages, gives an outline of the divine plan 
revealed in the Bible, relating to man's redemption and restitution: 
386 pages, in embossed cloth, 25c (IS l/2d). India paper edition, 75c. 
(3s. l-l/2d.). 

This volume has been published as a special issue of our journal— 
at the extremely low price of 5c a copy, in any quantity, postage included. 
(To foreign countries, 9c.) This enables people of slender 
purse to herald far and wide the good tidings in a most helpful form. 

SERIES II., The Time is at Hand, treats of the manner and time of 
the Lord's second coming, considering the Bible Testimony on this 
subject: 370 pages, in embossed cloth 25c. (IS. l/2d.). India paper 
edition, 75c. (3s. l-l/2d.). 

SERIES III., Thy Kingdom Come, considers prophecies which mark 
events connected with the "Time of the End," the glorification of the 
Church and the establishment of the Millennial Kingdom; it also contains 
a chapter on the Great Pyramid, showing its corroboration of the 
dates and other teachings of the Bible; 384 pages, in embossed cloth 
25c (IS. l/2d.). India paper edition, 75c. (3s. l-l/2d.). 

SERIES IV., The Day of Vengeance, shows the dissolution of the 
present order of things is in progress, and that all the panaceas offered 
are valueless to avert the predicted end. It marks in these events the 
fulfilment of prophecy, noting specially our Lord's great prophecy of 
Matt. 24 and Zech. 14:1-9; 660 pages, in embossed cloth 30c. (IS. 3d.). 
India paper edition, 85c (3s. 6-1/2.) 

SERIES V., The At-one-ment Between God and Man, treats an all- 
important subject— the hub, the center around which all the features 
of divine grace revolve. Its topic deserves the most careful and 
prayerful consideration on the part of all true Christians: 507 pages 
in embossed cloth 30c. (IS. 3d.). India paper edition, 85c (3s. 6-l/2d.). 

SERIES VI., The New Creation, deals with the Creative Week, 
Genesis 1 and 2, and with the Church, God's New Creation." It examines 
the personnel, organization, rites, ceremonies, obligations and 
hopes appertaining to those called and accepted as members of the 
body under the Head: 740 pages, in embossed cloth 30c. (IS. 3d.). 
India paper edition, 85c (3s. 6-l/2d.). 

The above prices include postage. 

IN FULL LEATHER BINDING, gilt edges, the set (6 vols.) $3.00, 
(12s. 6d.), plus postage 60c (IS) 

MILLENNIAL DAWN is published in foreign languages as follows: 
in German, five vols., in Swedish, Vols. 1, 2, 3 and 5; in Dano- 
Norwegian, three vols.; in French, two vols.; in Italian, one vol.; in 
Greek, two vols.; bound in cloth, uniform with English edition, prices 
the same. 

The volumes in English are bound in two styles, MILLENNIAL DAWN 
in green cloth binding and SCRIPTURE STUDIES in maroon cloth. Specify 
which you desire. 



page 49 



SEMI-MONTHLY 
VOL. XXX FEBRUARY 15 NO. 4 
A.D. 1909-A.M. 6037 



CONTENTS 

"Able Ministers of the New Covenant" 51 

Not of the Letter, but of the Spirit 52 

"Except Someone Shall Guide Me" 52 

Respecting the Great Mediator 54 

"The Hidden Mystery" 54 

"Full of Good Works and Alms Deeds" 55 

A Beautiful Christian Woman 56 

The Jacksonville (Florida) Convention 57 

Lesson Review 57 

Quarterly Temperance Lesson 58 

"Preserve the Unity of the Spirit" 59 

Some Interesting Letters 60 

"Who Gave Himself a Ransom" 61 

"Mediator Between God and Men" 62 

Questions Re the Covenants 63 

page 50 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
--ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-24 EVERSHOLT ST., LONDON, N.W. 
GERMAN BRANCH-MIRKER STR., 45, ELBERFELD. 

AUSTRALASIAN BRANCH-EQUITABLE BLDG., COLLINS ST., MELBOURNE 
PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR AS FOLLOWS:- 

All Bible Students who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are 
unable to pay for this Journal, will be supplied FREE if they send a Postal Card 
each MAY stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are not only 
willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually and in touch with the 
Studies, etc. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



THIS JOURNAL IS PUBLISHED IN THE 

FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, DANISH AND ITALIAN LANGUAGES. 

SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA 



POSTAGE STAMPS OF LARGE DENOMINATIONS 

If necessary to make small remittances in stamps kindly 
send 5, 10 or 15-cent values, when possible. We cannot use 
foreign stamps; we must return them for redemption. 

R4332 : page 50 

VOLUME SIX IN OTHER LANGUAGES 

The sixth volume in Swedish, WATCH TOWER style, is now 
ready; in cloth binding, at $1.50 per copy. 

Volume six, German, is temporarily out of stock. Will 
have a new supply upon our arrival at Brooklyn. 

page 50 

MOTTO ORDERS NOT YET ALL FILLED 

Orders for the Calendar Mottoes have so far exceeded our 
expectations that our second large consignment has been found 
insufficient to fill orders. We are therefore arranging that all 
remaining orders be filled direct from the printers in England. 

R4332 : page 50 

BROTHER RUSSELL'S THANKS AND APOLOGIES 

Brother Russell desires to thank the dear friends for their 
many, many kind expressions (by cards, letters and telegrams), 
congratulating him on his entering his fifty-eighth year, and 
wishing him showers of divine blessings. These were from 
individuals and from classes or churches— one signed by 122 
of the Philadelphia ecclesia. Brother Russell would gladly 
respond to all letters; but as this would hinder other features 
of the harvest work he asks that you accept the WATCH TOWER 
articles as personal letters. 



R4331 : page 51 

"ABLE MINISTERS OF THE NEW COVENANT" 

-2 COR. 3:6.- 

ST. PAUL says, "Our sufficiency is of God: who also 
hath made us able ministers (servants) of the new 
testament (New Covenant); not of the letter, but 
of the spirit; for the letter killeth, but the spirit giveth life." 
-2 Cor. 3:5,6. 

How could St. Paul and the other apostles be servants 
of a New Covenant, if no such New Covenant is yet in existence? 
A similar question might be raised respecting our 
Lord's statement that his memorial cup represented the blood 



of the New Testament, the New Covenant. The answer to 
these queries is: (1) There will be no blood of or from the 
New Covenant after it has been completed. The blood of the 
New Covenant is the blood prepared in advance of the Covenant, 
wherewith to seal it and make it obligatory— make it 
a Covenant. Our Lord's words respecting the cup were 
uttered before he died. The cup was symbolical and pointed 
forward to his own death. It was offered only to his followers, 
and not to the world. It was shed for them, and was 
the basis for their reconciliation to the Father; but it was to 
be in due time the blood of the New Covenant— the blood 
with which the New Covenant would be sprinkled, sealed, 
made efficacious. It was offered to the Church more than 
eighteen centuries before the time for the sealing of the New 
Covenant, to grant the Church, the overcomers, the privileges 
of participation with Christ in his sacrifice, not only in the 
sense of justification, but also in the sense of sanctification, 
or death with him. 

This St. Paul most distinctly asserts in 1 Cor. 10:16, 
saying, "The cup of blessing, is it not the communion of the 
blood of Christ?" The drinking of that cup symbolizes our 
fellowship in the sufferings of Christ, our common union in 

R4332:page51 

all of the afflictions that came upon him— our death with 
him. By the time all of the members of the Body of Christ 
shall have taken part in this cup, the time will have come 
for the application of the merit of that communion cup, that 
united sacrifice of the Body, with and under the Head sealing 
the New (Law) Covenant with Israel, and, through Israel, 
for the benefit of mankind. When the disciples asked if they 
might not sit in his throne, the one on the right hand and 
the other on his left, he asked, "Are ye able to drink of the 
cup that I drink of?" (Mark 10:38.) All who would sit 
in the throne must drink of the cup. All who will faithfully 
drink of the cup shall sit in the throne as members of the 
Body of Christ— "the Bride, the Lamb's Wife." 

Take an illustration: Suppose the Declaration of Independence 
or some important document were about to be 
signed and sealed. The document itself might be printed 
and while in the process of being signed might be spoken of 
as the covenant, agreement or declaration, although it would 
not be such a document, even after being printed, until duly 
signed and sealed. Similarly the ink might by law be specified 
to be of a certain kind, and the person having charge of 
it might speak of it as the ink used, in the sense that it was 
the ink designed to be used in the signing of that Covenant, 
when the proper time should come. Similarly the person 
designated to be the mediator of that covenant might be so 
spoken of in advance of the signing. Similarly those of his 
suite, who would accompany him as assistants and who 
would need certain preparation before they would engage in 
this service, might be spoken of as the ministers or servants 
of that Covenant, even though it had not yet been signed and 
really made a covenant. 



Thus the Apostle speaks of himself and others as able 
servants of the New Covenant. He does not mean that the 
New Covenant is in effect, in operation, but that in view of 
this New Covenant which God has promised shall ultimately 
be signed and sealed and made effective, he and others, the 
entire Royal Priesthood, are servants of that Covenant, ministering 
or serving its interests and fully qualified of the 
Lord to do so. Of ourselves we have no righteousness, no 
merit, that could be made effective for the sealing of that 
New Covenant with Israel. But, being justified by faith in 
the blood of Christ, we are made able or competent to serve 
the interests of the New Covenant. We serve it by laying 
down our lives as Joint-Heirs with our Redeemer for its sealing, 
and subsequently putting it into operation. 

Our position is that of ambassadors for God, explaining 
to men his mercy and his provision of the New Covenant, 
through which all may be blessed and recovered if they will. 
So many as receive our message with joy and turn from sin 
to follow our Lord may be invited to become members of the 
Body of Christ, the Body of Messiah, the Body of the Mediator, 
the Body of the great Prophet, the Body of the great 
Priest, the Body of the great King of the Millennial Age. So, 
then, we are ministers of the New Covenant in that we are 
laying down our lives in its service, in its interest, although 
it is not yet a Covenant, but merely a promise. We are not 
only laying down our lives, but seeking out fellow-members 

R4332 : page 52 

of the Body of the Anointed One and assisting them in the 
laying down of their lives, under the assurance that these 
better sacrifices will soon be finished and their application 
be made by our glorious Head, and we with him in glory. 

NOT OF THE LETTER, BUT OF THE SPIRIT 

Even with our dealing with the world we can serve them 
to some extent, as servants of the New Covenant, for we can 
make known to them something of its terms, which some of 
them may grasp by faith and others may not. We can explain 
to them that this New Covenant which will go into 
effect evidences Divine mercy and sympathy for mankind. 
We cannot minister to them the letter of the New Covenant, 
because it has not been sealed. We can merely tell them of 
its spirit and endeavor to show to them the import, as respects 
the future, that justice and mercy will be tempered together 
for all. If the New Covenant were sealed now, the conditions 
are not such as would make it a blessing, for Satan is still 
the Prince of this world, sin abounds, and the Kingdom which 
is to bring deliverance has not yet been set up. The New 
Covenant is a Covenant of Law and of Works made possible 
—the same exactly as the Law Covenant, except with a better 
Mediator. If, therefore, the letter of the New (Law) Covenant 
could be enforced now, it would be a great disadvantage 
to all coming under it, and, as the Apostle suggests, it would 
be unto death. Hence it is much better for the world that it 



is not sealed and operative and that we who are connected 
with it as prospective members of its Mediator merely explain 
to the opposing world the spirit of that Covenant, which can 
profit and enlighten and encourage only those who are feeling 
after God, and who have no heart rebellion against him. 

Thus a believer in the Lord Jesus, justified by faith in 
his blood, would have the right to look forward to the Millennial 
Age and the blessed privileges of the New Covenant 
then to be inaugurated. And to the extent that he would 
live in accord with the conditions of that New Covenant, he 
would be the better prepared for the blessed privileges which 
will then be brought to the world. But he could not come 
under the letter of the New Covenant if he chose, for it has 
not yet been sealed. He could merely by faith come under 
its spirit. 

But the special work of these ministers or servants of 
the New (Law) Covenant is to make known to such as are 
interested in a looking forward to the New Covenant and its 
blessing by faith, that God has some better thing for us— 
for the called and chosen and faithful, namely, that by consecration 
unto death, by drinking of his "cup," we may be 
counted in as members of the Body of the Mediator, under 
the higher, the Abrahamic Covenant. "And if ye be Christ's, 
then are ye Abraham's Seed, and heirs according to the 
promise."— Gal. 3:29. 



R4332 : page 52 

"EXCEPT SOME ONE SHALL GUIDE ME" 

-ACTS 8:26-40.-MARCH 1 .- 

Golden Text:— "Search the Scriptures; for in them 
ye think ye have eternal life; and they are they which 
testify of me."— John 5:39. 

THE pith of this lesson is the Divine supervision of 
the Gospel work and use of consecrated talents 
in the unfolding of the Divine Purposes. Deacon 
Philip, whose ministries of the Truth were so abundantly 
blessed of the Lord in Samaria, evidently continued 
humble, so that the Lord could use him further as his 
agent and mouthpiece. The message of the Gospel was 
to be sent into Africa. An Ethiopian eunuch in high 
station under Candace, the Ethiopian Queen, was a 
suitable person to bear the message. For a considerable 
time he had knowledge of the true religion of the 
Jews. Because a eunuch he could not become a Jew 
(Deut. 23:1), except as "a proselyte of the gate"— one 
who adopted the Jewish worship. He had come to 
Jerusalem to worship on one of the holy festivals. 
Under the Lord's providence, the hope of Israel, Messiah, 
was prominent before his mind. He was returning 
to his home in Ethiopia and, after the custom of the 



time, was reading aloud from a scroll. It was Isaiah's 
prophecy, which he had probably purchased at Jerusalem 
at considerable cost. He was puzzled by what he 
read, which seemed to relate to Messiah. Some statements 
implied his great glory, honor, dignity, power, 

R4333 : page 52 

while others seemed to mention him as despised and 
rejected of men— led as a lamb to the slaughter. Many 
other men had read the same passages for centuries 
with similar perplexity. Why? Because the right time 
had not come for them to be understood and God had 
not sent servants or messengers to interpret them. 

"THE SPIRIT SAID UNTO PHILIP, GO!" 

Meantime the Lord, as able as willing to make "all 
things work together for good," directed Deacon Philip 
on a journey which, at the right time, brought him in 
contact with the eunuch's company, for it is entirely 
probable that so notable a man would travel with considerable 
escort besides the driver of his chariot. Philip 
did not expostulate with the messenger sending him. 
He did not urge that he had business matters which required 
his attention, for it was his first business to 
serve the interests of the Kingdom. If the Lord ever 
sends us on a mission and makes it possible for us to 
fulfil it, that should be considered the chief business of 
life for the time, and everything else secondary, inferior. 

Arriving at the appointed place, Philip was on the 
lookout for service. How we wish that all of the Lord's 
people might more and more attain to this attitude of 
heart and mind— a readiness, waiting, looking, to note 
the Divine providences in their affairs and to use them 
wisely, as did Philip ! 

Evidently the chariot had passed Philip and he had 
heard the reading. He knew that this meant that the 
eunuch was a man interested in the Word of God and 
that his mind was centered upon it. He may even have 
surmised that the Lord had directed the eunuch's attention 
to this very part of the Scripture at this very 
moment, so as to make Philip's mission opportune. 
The Spirit of the Lord told Philip to run after the chariot 
and get into communication with the reader. In what 
way the Lord's Spirit thus prompted him we are not informed. 
We may consider, however, that the holy Spirit 
dwelt richly in Philip, quickened his perceptive powers 
to a realization of the opportunities of the moment and 
suggested to him that this was a way in which his 
knowledge of the Lord and his consecrated powers 
might be used in proclaiming the good tidings. So 
each of us should be so full of zeal for the message, so 
full of the desire to assist others into the grace of God, 
that the Spirit of the Lord in us would prompt us to 
speak a word in season. 



Paraphrasing the account we may suppose that 
Philip, running near to the reader in the chariot, called 
out, "Friend, do you understand that which you are 

R4333 : page 53 

reading?" So much depends upon a word in season, 

and the right word! Not only our words, but our tone 

of voice should be considered, when we attempt to represent 

the great King as his ambassadors. Kindness 

and brotherly love should be indicated in our faces and 

by our words, and made a part of the message we deliver. 

The honesty of the eunuch, his readiness for the 
Truth, his humility of mind, are all indicated by his 
reply, "How can I understand, except some one shall 
guide me?" The arrogance which would have given 
Philip a haughty stare would have meant a heart unready 
for the Gospel— unworthy of it. The pride which 
would have said, "I suppose that I understand it as 
well as you do, sir," would have indicated a heart not 
meek enough for the Truth, and to be its servant in 
Africa. A superstitious reverence which would have 
said, "None but the Doctors of the Law are supposed 
to understand these writings," would have meant a 
bounden condition of heart, unready for the message. 
The eunuch's answer was the proper one for a heart in 
the right condition towards God and the Truth. It 
admitted his ignorance of the Prophet's meaning, and 
it admitted the Divine power which would explain the 
seeming contradiction in due time, and it admitted 
that the Lord would probably in his own time and 
way send the interpretation through human instrumentality. 
His invitation to Philip to ride with him 
in his chariot was a further indication of his meekness 
and that he realized that in Philip he had found 
one who, like himself, was deeply interested in the 
Word of the Lord and his promises to Israel. He would 
give Philip a lift on his journey and would, doubtless, 
the while enjoy fellowship with him in holy things. 

Many in our day are hindered from receiving a 
proper knowledge of the Divine Word and Plan through 
a lack of meekness, humbleness of mind, teachableness. 
Some of these have concluded that because the 
Scriptures declare "They shall all be taught of God," 
therefore they should expect angels or angel voices to 
guide them individually in the understanding of the 
Scriptures. Under this error many have been led clairaudiently 
of the evil spirits into various fanaticisms. 
Rather we should give heed to the Lord's Word on this 
subject, and not how all of his true people will be taught 
of him. The Apostle explains how, saying, "And he 
gave some apostles, some prophets and teachers for the 
work of the ministry, for the edifying of the Body of 
Christ." (Eph. 4:11,12.) He who rejects the Lord's 
way evidences the fact that he is not in the right condition 
of heart and hence is not taught of God. 



"SO HE OPENED NOT HIS MOUTH" 

The portion of the prophecy which the eunuch was 
reading referred to Messiah as meekly enduring the 
opposition of sinners against himself, saying all manner 
of evil against him possible, and declaring that in 
this respect he was like a lamb dumb before his 
shearers. And what was true of the Master should be 
increasingly true of all those who are seeking to walk 
in his steps, in proportion as they make progress in the 
good way and become copies of God's dear Son. 

The eunuch further manifested his humility of mind 
by asking Philip's interpretation of this prophecy. Did 
it relate to Isaiah himself or to some one else? We read 
that this opened Philip's mouth to preach unto him 
Jesus as the antitypical Lamb of God, as the one who 
suffered severe humiliations, even unto death, even the 
death of the cross. We can imagine his explanation of 
the prophecy, "His generation, who shall declare? for 
his life is taken from the earth." Philip doubtless explained 
that although our Lord had ceased to be of the 
earth, earthy, and had been resurrected to the spirit 
plane of being and the Divine nature, nevertheless he 
would have a generation, or a posterity. His posterity, 
his children, will be on the earthly plane and will be 
Adam's children, whom he has adopted as his own. In 
due time, under the Millennial Kingdom, he will become 
their Life-Giver or Father, their Regenerator or Deliverer, 
freeing them from the power of the tomb and 
then restoring to full human perfection as his children 
all who will receive and profit by the blessed knowledge 
and opportunities of that time. Thus he will become 
in due time "The everlasting Father" of the redeemed 
and restored race of Adam. We can imagine that his 
preaching of Jesus went still further than this and 
showed the eunuch that before that glorious day of the 
world's regeneration another feature of the Divine Program 
will be called out, namely, the selection of a 
Church to be the members of the glorious Body, under 
the Headship of Jesus— the Body otherwise styled, "The 
Bride, the Lamb's Wife." He doubtless explained to 
the eunuch that this is the message of the present time, 
the message or invitation to become heirs of God and 
Joint-Heirs with Jesus Christ our Lord, and members 
of the great antitypical Messiah, the antitypical Prophet, 
Priest, King and Judge of the world. He doubtless explained 
the two steps necessary as an entrance into this 
grace, this privilege, namely, (1) the abandonment of 
sin and the acceptance of Christ as Redeemer; (2) a 
full consecration of the justified humanity to the service 
of the Lord and of his brethren and of his Truth. 

The eunuch's meek, teachable, honest attitude made 
it easy for him to receive this glorious message in its 
simplicity and beauty. He was already a believer, to 
the extent that he knew. He was already justified by 



his faith in the Redeemer promised. Now that justification 

became actually his, as his mind and heart 

grasped the thought that the Crucified One was the Son 

of God who bought us with his own precious blood. 

He was already devoted to the Lord, so far as he knew 

his will. So now, with clear knowledge directly sent to 

him through Philip, his consecration was revived, renewed, 

enlarged, practically applied. Evidently Philip 

explained to him the New Baptism, not only in the 

sense in which we are baptized into Christ's death, 

but also the appropriateness of symbolizing this by 

water immersion. Note the promptness of the eunuch 

to confess his full submission to the Lord and to symbolize 

this in water immersion. Had he not been in 

ready condition of heart, this, too, would have been put 

off with some excuse. How evident that God had chosen 

in him a suitable vessel to bear his message to the 

Ethiopians— to be a foreign missionary! 

Ancient manuscripts omit verse 37. It evidently 
was added later as a marginal note, as an answer to the 
question of verse 36. Quite probably such words, or 
many more, were used by Philip. Evidently the account 
does not pretend to be a report of all that was said, but 
merely of the leading features of the conversation. The 
eunuch commanded the driver of his chariot to stop. 
Philip and he alighted and he was baptized— immersed. 
And when they were come up out of the water, the 
Spirit of the Lord caught away Philip, that the eunuch 
saw him no more. But the latter went on his way rejoicing 
in the glorious message he had received, which 
"satisfied his longings as nothing else could do." 
Doubtless he talked with his charioteer or others of his 
company and ran by-times of his homeward journey. 
Tradition has it that amongst his converts in Ethiopia 
was a Queen herself. 

R4334 : page 54 

As to how the spirit caught Philip away we may not 
certainly know. But that was the day of miracles and 
doubtless his miraculous transportation would not only 
serve as an encouragement to himself and assurance 
that his service was under the Lord's supervision, but 
his vanishing would give the eunuch additional faith in 
what he had taught him, for it would testify that God 
was with him, and that he was being used as the angels 
had been used previously. 

The general lesson to us is, (1) readiness, alertness, 
to serve the Lord in season and out of season, when 
convenient to ourselves, and when not convenient- 
glad of any opportunity and at any cost to be the ambassadors 
of the King; (2) the necessity for humility 
and promptness of obedience, if we would make progress, 
and either maintain, or attain to usefulness in 
the Lord's service. 



THE GOLDEN TEXT 

As our Golden Text points out, the Lord is revealed 
in the holy Scriptures, and those who would know him 
should seek their information from that quarter. Under 
Divine providence, apostles, prophets and teachers are 
necessary, indispensable. But no words of man are to 
be taken as instead of the Word of God. On the contrary, 
their presentations are to find acceptance only in 
proportion as they are found to be in harmony with the 
Scriptures, and to discern this harmony, the holy Spirit 
is necessary. The Scriptures must be searched, but 
only by coming into a condition of heart harmony and 
teachableness, and then by a full consecration receiving 
the holy Spirit, can we hope to understand the Divine 
message and to obtain therewith the eternal life which 
it promises to those guided and taught of the Lord. 



R4334 : page 54 

RESPECTING THE GREAT MEDIATOR 

IT seems strange how long it requires for an idea to really 
work itself into some of our minds. A brother of apparently 
discerning mind has recently published a little 
pamphlet in which he sets forth that Brother Russell evidently 
believes and teaches that The Christ is composed of many 
members— Jesus the Head and the various overcomers, members 
of his Body; and that through this great Christ God proposes 
to seal the New Covenant and through it to bring blessings 
to Israel and to all the families of the earth. The brother 
states this as something new and wonderful which he has just 
discovered, although he has been a reader of our publications 
for ten years. We are glad that finally the thought has 
broken into his mind. Our belief is, however, that he got this 
thought long ago from our writings, and was in full sympathy 
therewith until his heart got soured. Then spiritual indigestion 
set in, and finally blindness of "the eyes of his understanding" 
has resulted, so that the things which he once saw 
as reasonable and beautiful are no longer so to him. In other 
words, after having come into the light of Present Truth, he 
apparently has gone out of it into the "outer darkness," in 
which he previously was, and in which mankind in general 
still are. Why did the Lord expel him? We cannot surely 
know. We can and do note the fact. And our Lord's words 
indicate what is the probable difficulty. Our Lord assures 
us that "If any man will do his (the Father's) will, he shall 
know of the doctrine." (John 7:17.) The intimation is that 
wrong-heartedness is intimately associated with wrong-headedness, 
as respects doctrine. 

But we cannot judge each other's hearts. We are incapable; 
and, besides, are forbidden. In any event we should 
prefer to think well, rather than ill, of each other's sentiments 
and motives. Our only judgment must be as respects outward 



conduct— whether the thorny disposition or the wolfish 
spirit; or whether, on the other hand, the fruits and graces 
of the true grape Vine are in evidence. Again, ability to see, 
to discern spiritual things, is another evidence the Lord has 
given of those who are in proper relationship to himself. If 
obedience to the Lord and to the Truth brought us into the 
light, disobedience or loss of the Spirit of the Lord undoubtedly 
will lead out of the light into the darkness prevalent all 
about us— not necessarily on every subject, for amongst those 
outside the light of Present Truth, truth and error prevail in 
a mixed and confusing manner. Only to the consecrated is it 
given to "know the mysteries of the Kingdom of God." To 
all outsiders these things are more or less parabolic and dark 
sayings. 

"THE HIDDEN MYSTERY" 

For forty years we have been endeavoring to show to 
those who have the spiritual eyes and the ears of understanding 
that the "hidden mystery" is "Christ in you, the hope of 
glory."-Col. 1:27. 

The Spirit of Christ in you leads now to self-sacrifice, 
self-denial, cross-bearing, etc.— "filling up that which is behind 
of the afflictions of Christ." This is a mystery to the 
Jews, Gentiles and nominal Christians who understand not 
why we should be called to fellowship in Christ's sufferings 
and who make light of our rejoicing that soon we shall be 
made sharers of Christ's glory in the First Resurrection. This 
mystery, hidden from past ages and dispensations, is now 
made known to the saints and none others; and if the saintliness 
be lost, the understanding of the mystery undoubtedly 
goes with it. 

The Apostle explains that the mystery class (Jesus the 
Head, and the Church his Body) are the antitypical Isaac, 
the heirs of the Abrahamic Covenant— the offspring of the 
Sarah Covenant. (Gal. 3:16-29.) The Jews know this not, 
but are still trusting to their Law Covenant, made at Sinai. 
The majority of Christians know not of it, but still think of 
themselves as having once been under the Law Covenant as 
Jews, until, as they think, at our Lord's first advent, he 
sealed the New Covenant with Spiritual Israel. How often 
we sang, "Free from the Law, oh happy condition," and 
"Cursed by the Law and bruised by the fall, Christ hath 
redeemed us, once for all." 

There is an admixture of both truth and error in these 
statements, and we were unable to differentiate until the 
"mystery" began to dissolve. The Truth on the subject is a 
"mystery" to the nominal Christian, even though it be plainly 
stated in the inspired Word, namely, that natural Israel and 
their Covenant have been cast off from Divine favor; that 
Christ Jesus won the prize of the Law Covenant and is the 
Head of the Church, The Christ, the Isaac Seed of the Abrahamic 
Covenant. The members of Christ's "Body" are being 
called and chosen and found faithful during this Gospel Age 
and will be complete with its termination. The sacrifice of 
this antitypical Isaac (Head and Body) yields the blood of 



the New Covenant, which will shortly seal or ratify it and 
make it operative to Israel as a New (Law) Covenant, as instead 
of their Old Law Covenant. It will have an antitypical 
Mediator, instead of Moses, and everlasting blessings, 
instead of temporal ones, and living works of faith and obedience 
as instead of dead ones. We are glad to have assistance 

R4334 : page 55 

from any quarter in setting these things before the 
"household of faith." 

A few points, however, the brother, doubtless unintentionally, 
misrepresents. Our writings clipped from here and 
there, may be made to appear contradictory, just as contradictions 
of the Scriptures are claimed and pointed out by 
those who do not understand them, and are in opposition to 
them. If our presentations be read in their proper connections, 
they will be found to be harmoniously progressive, 
as the Scriptures intimate should be expected, saying, "The 
path of the just is as the shining light, that shineth more and 
more unto the perfect day."— Prov. 4:18. 

The Reformation movement was in the right direction- 
each successive reform attempting to get nearer to the true 
light. The close of the 2300 days of sanctuary cleansing 
(Vol. III., Chap. X) found us free from traditions of Babylon 
and reestablished upon the testimony of Jesus, the apostles 
and the prophets, and following on to know the Lord. But 
freedom from falsities did not mean that all the precious 
things of Divine Truth were properly located and fixed in 
our understandings. Thus, for instance, the New Covenant, 
its sealing and its work are precious facts, not at all erroneous; 
but we had misplaced these facts, following the traditions 
of Babylon. We still have the New Covenant and still 
appreciate its every feature just the same, but perceive that 
it was misplaced; that it is the New (Law) Covenant which 
will be sealed or made effective with the blood of Christ, by 
the merit of Christ's death, at the close of this Gospel Age, 
instead of at its beginning. We now see clearly that the 
Scriptures everywhere teach that the New Covenant is to be 
made "with the House of Israel and the House of Judah," 
and not with Spiritual Israel. We now see that we are under 
the Faith or Grace Covenant, the original or Abrahamic 
Covenant, and not at all under a Covenant of Law and Works, 
such as the Old Law Covenant was, and such as the New 
(Law) Covenant will be. We now see the full force of the 
Apostle's statement, "Now we, brethren, as Isaac was, are the 
children of promise"— the children of the Abrahamic Covenant. 
-Gal. 4:28. 

Jesus was the Head of that Isaac, and the Church the 
members of the Isaac Body. The entire antitypical Isaac, 
"the Seed of Abraham," was represented by the typical Isaac 
and in his sacrifice. It is the blood (sacrifice— death) of 
the entire antitypical Isaac which will seal the New Covenant 

R4335 : page 55 



with Israel, "After those days." (Jer. 31:31.) The fact that 
the antitypical Isaac was to be not only Jesus, but also the 
Church, is the Mystery which the Jews could not comprehend, 
and which Babylon cannot comprehend, and which only "The 
wise shall understand."— Dan. 12:10. 

Our critic is in error in supposing that we claim that 
the Church is any part of the "Passover" sacrifice. We hold, 
on the contrary, that the Passover Lamb found its antitype 
in our Lord alone. This is in harmony with the words, "Christ 
our Passover is sacrificed for us; therefore let us keep the 
feast." (1 Cor. 5:7,8.) The passover Lamb was prepared 
whole, not a bone being broken. It thus represented our 
Lord alone, and not his "members," the Church. On the contrary, 
in one of the atonement day sacrifices, the ram of the 
burnt-offering was cut into pieces, and the parts washed, and 
then laid with the head on the altar, thus representing Christ 
and his members separately, yet unitedly, offered up to God— 
the members under the merit of the Head. 

The passover was not for all the people, but only for 
the first-born. This symbolized, therefore, the work of Christ 
for the Church of this Gospel Age, which is elsewhere designated 
the "Church of the First-Born." Evidently the Church 
has no share in her own deliverance, which is entirely a work 
of grace and love Divine. As the passing over of the first-born 
of Israel led to the making of the Law Covenant with 
Israel at Mt. Sinai, so the passing over of the Church of the 
First-Born during this Gospel Age leads to the inauguration 
of the New Covenant for the blessing of natural Israel and 
the world, Moses, representing The Christ, Head and Body 
(which God is selecting from amongst mankind during this 
Gospel Age) became the Mediator of the Law Covenant. And 
he took the blood of a bullock and a goat and sprinkled the 
book of the Law, representing God or Divine Justice, and 
subsequently sprinkled the people, thus binding God and 
the people by that Covenant. The blood of the antitypical 
bullock (Jesus) and of the antitypical goat, the Church, will 
both together seal the New (Law) Covenant. The antitype 
will soon be here. The raising up of the antitypical Moses, 
the antitypical Mediator, will soon be accomplished. 

As Moses ascended Mt. Sinai and received the Law and 
brought it down to Israel and sealed the Covenant thereupon, 
so the antitypical Moses ere long will have gone into the 
Mount of God, the Kingdom, and soon thereafter will appear 
but under a vail, invisible to mankind, to seal the New Covenant, 
and to put all of its beneficent mercies into operation. 



R4335 : page 55 

"FULL OF GOOD WORKS AND ALMS DEEDS" 

-ACTS 9:31-43.-MARCH 14.- 

Golden Text:— "And Peter said unto him, Aeneas, Jesus 
Christ maketh thee whole; arise and make thy bed. 



And he arose immediately."— Acts 9:34. 

THE opening verse of our lesson informs us that 

after the persecution which scattered the Church 

(following Stephen's death) there came a lull and 

rest time. "So the Church throughout all Judea and 

Galilee and Samaria had peace, being edified; and, 

walking in the fear of the Lord and in the comfort of the 

holy Spirit, was multiplied." How much is here recorded 

in a few words! And how will the principles 

here set forth apply to the Lord's dealing with his 

people today? The Scriptures give us the illustration 

of the Lord's dealings with his people in the words, "As 

an eagle stirreth up her nest." (Deut. 32:1 1.) Thus 

does the Lord at times permit trials, persecutions, etc., 

which outwardly seem to imply the wrecking of most 

precious interests, and sometimes cause surprise to his 

people by the roughness and jarring conditions. Nevertheless, 

under Divine supervision, the stirring up of the 

nest and the throwing of responsibility upon his people 

can be made advantageous to them, strengthening, 

helping them. Then comes a time of rest and opportunity 

for spiritual edification, comfort, growth in grace 

and knowledge. Happy are those who, in the time of 

the stirring up of the nest, are rightly exercised by the 

Lord's providences and taught of him and made more 

and more active in his service— the service of righteousness, 

truth and love. It brings them preparation for 

the period of rest and development. 

But to others who are not rightly exercised by the 
siftings, the shakings, the stirrings up of the nest, the 
experience is different. They are sifted out, alienated, 

R4335 : page 56 

and develop a hard spirit, foreign to the Lord, and out 
of accord with his Word. The one class goes on from 
grace to grace and from strength to strength; the other 
goes back into the outer darkness of the world. Thus, 
as the Apostle says, our message is a "savor of life unto 
life to some, but of death unto death to others."— 
2 Cor. 2:16. 

"THE SAINTS WHICH DWELT AT LYDDA" 

This lesson gives a little insight to the condition of 
things in the early Church. The Truth was sufficiently 
unpopular to keep out the majority of those who love 
this present life and the praise of men more than the 
future life and the Divine approval. The edification, 
the comfort of the holy Spirit, and the walking in the 
fear or reverence of the Lord already mentioned (v. 31), 
is illustrated by the statement of verse 32, that St. Peter 
in his travels came to Lydda, to the saints who dwelt 
there. At that time, under those conditions, to be a 
Christian was to be a saint, a holy person, a sanctified 



or set apart person. And so it should be still. But, 

alas! popularity has brought under the name Christian 

not only wolves in sheep's clothing, but goats and ring-streaked 

and speckled and black sheep, as well as saintly 

ones. We are to remember, however, the declaration, 

"The Lord knoweth them that are his." Therefore, "Let 

every one that nameth the name of Christ depart from 

iniquity"— depart from inequity (injustice) and from 

everything that is unrighteous (2 Tim. 2:19); in other 

words, let them all be saints, "For this is the will of 

God (concerning you), even your sanctification."— 

IThess. 4:3. 

We can, without pride or boastfulness, record that 
the number of saints for whom the light of Present 
Truth has an attraction are saintly, and also that it is 
leading the honest-hearted who receive it into a condition 
of consecration or saintship. The multiplying evidences 
to this effect, borne in upon us day by day and 
year by year, are comforting, strengthening assurances 
of Divine favor accompanying the Divine Word, just as 
we should expect. And more than this: The saintliness 
of heart seems to be increasing in lengths and breadths 
and heights and depths of Christian character. Incidentally, 
we remark, that nothing that has been presented 
in these columns for many years seems to have 
been more helpful to the saintly and those seeking 
saintliness than "the VOW." We doubt if the same 
number of people, able and willing to take that Vow, 
could be found in all the denominations of Christendom. 
We believe that as saintliness progresses amongst our 
readers, our lists of those who have taken this solemn 
Vow, this solemn promise to the Lord in the name and 
strength of Jesus, will continue to increase, and that it 
will mean an increase of spiritual power and Christian 
grace and strength of character to them all. 

At Lydda St. Peter found a palsied man bed-ridden 
for eight years. He was not one of the saints, for miracles 
of healing were rarely, if ever, performed by the 
Lord and the apostles upon believers. If sickness 
comes to those who are of the "household of faith," it is 
to be considered as of Divine permission, with a view 
to correction or to opportunities for growth in grace- 
as amongst the "all things" which shall work together 
for good to those rightly exercised thereby. The instantaneous 
healing of Aeneas was used of the Lord to 
advertise the Truth, after a manner not necessary at 
the present time. We read, "All that dwelt at Lydda 
and Sharon saw and turned to the Lord." The work at 
that time was of setting up the Church, bringing it into 
notice, establishing it, and gathering to it all "Israelites 
indeed" worthy of the Truth, worthy of being saved out 
of their own nation and the blindness and the trouble 
coming upon the same. The work of the present time 
is different. It is a gathering out of the wheat from the 
tares. We walk by faith, not by sight and by miracles. 



"SHE WAS SICK AND DIED" 

St. Peter stopped at Joppa, near to Lydda. There 
one of the saints took sick, but was not healed and died. 
Similarly Jesus healed many of the sick; but he allowed 
his special friend, Lazarus, to be sick and to die, without 
relieving the distress. As subsequently Lazarus 
was awakened from the sleep of death as an evidence 
of divine power and an evidence of Restitution times 
(Acts 3:19-21), so with Tabitha (Greek, Dorcas), she 
died, but, through St. Peter, the Lord awakened her 
from the sleep of death as a miracle and demonstration 
of the Divine power accomplishing the work of the 
Gospel message and making it forceful to the people. 

A BEAUTIFUL CHRISTIAN WOMAN 

Tabitha, in the Syrian language, then and there prevalent, 
signifies beautiful, and its Greek equivalent, which 
carries the same thought of beauty, signifies gazelle; 
the gentleness, the timidity and the bright, sparkling 
eye of the gazelle are the characteristics indicated 

R4336 : page 56 

by the name. We know not if the saintly woman revived 
from death was beautiful of face, but the account justifies 
us in acknowledging her to have been beautiful of 
heart, of character. The statement, "This woman was 
full of good works and alms deeds which she did," tells 
us that she was beautiful in the Lord's sight and in the 
sight of all his saints— provided, of course, that her 
good deeds were prompted by love of heart. For we 
should always remember the Apostle's words, "If I 
should give my body to be burned as a martyr, or if I 
should give all my goods to the poor, yet have not love, 
it would profit me nothing"— it would be without esteem 
in the mind of him who searcheth the heart and to whom 
motives in those of this age are everything. 

We read that "All the widows stood by weeping 
and showing the coats and garments which Dorcas 
made while she was with them." These words remind 
us of our Lord's expression respecting another woman, 
"She has done what she could." Such mourners at the 
death-bed give eloquent testimony to saintship. It is 
not recorded that all of the widows were saints, and 
quite probably some of them were not, for St. Peter put 
them all forth while he prayed. We are to have in mind 
that while the saints are God's peculiar care and should, 
therefore, be likewise the peculiar care of one another, 
nevertheless we have in a broad, general sense, a relationship 
to the entire world of mankind and whensoever 
we will may do them good. The Apostle urges us 
to "Do good unto all men, especially unto them who are 
of the household of faith."— Eph. 6:10. 

The widows of olden times had a peculiarly hard 



lot for various reasons; hence the frequent reference to 
them in the Scriptures as objects of charity. Under 
the civilized arrangements of our time, induced and 
fostered by the spirit of Christianity, good provision is 
made for widows and orphans and thus in some measure 
our opportunities for charity are diminished. Nor is it 
either Scriptural or wise to always pass by the provisions 
of civilization for the care of the poor, the afflicted 
widows and orphans, and to institute private benefactions, 
more expensive, and, in some cases, more 
troublesome, and, in some instances, less advantageous. 
The "saints" should seek upon this, as upon every subject, 
the spirit of a sound mind, which cometh from 
above. There are still, however, opportunities for the 
exercise of benevolence in matters temporal— and especially 
along spiritual lines. Few know of the heavenly 
manna of the Gospel. Few are able to prepare and 
to give to others the Bread that came down from heaven. 
Few are able to help sinners to wash and be clean, and 
to point them to the robe of Christ's righteousness and 
to assist them in putting it on, and to show them how 
it is to be kept "without spot or wrinkle" or any such 
thing. 

Few are ready to counsel others on how to get rid 
of the spots and wrinkles if they do get these upon their 
robes— that the blood of Jesus Christ our Lord cleanseth 
us from all of our errors and misdeeds of ignorance. 
These are the real saints, and they should all be so diligent, 
so zealous, that when their "change" shall come, 
there may be many able and willing to praise God on 
their behalf, many living epistles, to be known and read 
of all men, and changed from knowledge to knowledge 
and from glory to glory, through their active assistance 
as brethren, as saints, as ambassadors for God! 



R4336 : page 57 

THE JACKSONVILLE (FLORIDA) CONVENTION 

VERY enjoyable and profitable to all who were present 

—about one hundred— was the first Convention 

of the year. The attendance from outside 

points was not very large. Florida was specially represented; 

Georgia next. There was a fair sprinkling 

from a number of the Northern States, including Indiana, 

Pennsylvania, New York, Massachusetts and Ohio. 

Commencing February 12th and closing the 16th the time 

was well occupied. Pilgrim Brothers Hall, Wise, Sullivan, 

Bundy, and Brother Moffatt and Brother Russell 

delivered public addresses, besides which a number of 

brethren took part in the symposium on Love on the 

last day. We have not a memoranda of all the names; 

hence think it preferable not to give any of them. The 

number who embraced the opportunity for symbolizing 



their consecration by water baptism was quite large 
for the attendance— twenty-one brethren and seventeen 
sisters. 

The Sunday afternoon meeting in the Opera House, 
of course, was the most largely attended, so far as the 
public were concerned, the house being crowded and 
some standing. The attendance was estimated at 
twelve hundred. 

All seemed agreed that while there is a certain 
amount of enthusiasm engendered at such Conventions 
as that of Put-in-Bay last summer, nevertheless the 
smaller Conventions in other respects have their advantages. 
We heard numerous expressions to the effect 
that this was the very best of all the Conventions; that 
none had ever been more enjoyable, etc. 

On the closing day of the Convention Brother Russell 
was ushered to the platform on a pretext and then 
informed that the Convention, aware of the fact that 
the day was the anniversary of his birth, desired to 
express their love in some substantial manner and, 
concluding that Brother Russell would most enjoy a 
birthday token which he could enjoy with the Bible 
House family, they had shipped to him at Allegheny a 
box of grape fruit, a crate of pineapples and two boxes 
of sweet Florida oranges. He was handed the receipted 
bill and express receipt, accompanied by some very 
comforting words by the Chairman of the meeting in 
the name of the entire Convention. He spoke with a 
great deal of feeling, in which the moist eyes of quite 
a number of the audience showed deep sympathy. 
Brother Russell replied in a few words, thanking the 
dear friends and assuring them of his appreciation of 
their gift, but telling them that, most of all, he appreciated 
the love that prompted it and wished them to 
know that next to the Lord's love and esteem he prized 
the love of the brethren. 

The love feast in the evening was a very inspiring 
occasion. Quite a number of the dear friends were 
moved to tears in connection with the adieus that were 
then given and received amidst expressions of love and 
sympathy and hopes of a future meeting, if not on this 
side of the veil, then in the Kingdom. This closed the 
Convention proper, although a Colporteur meeting was 
arranged for the evening of the 16th, which, no doubt, 
proved both interesting and profitable. 



R4336 : page 57 

LESSON REVIEW 

-MARCH 21.-- 

Golden Text:— "Therefore, they that were scattered abroad 
went everywhere preaching the Word."— Acts 8:4. 



THE lesson for the quarter covered the first ten years 
of the Church's history, dating from our Lord's 
ascension. It is interesting to note the simplicity 
of the Divine arrangement. We find no mention of 
popes, cardinals, archbishops, doctors of divinity or 
reverends. On the contrary even the apostles are recorded 
as "ignorant and unlearned." Indeed, the terms 
evangelist, pastor, teacher, elder, deacon, apostle are 
the only titles recognized in the Church, according to 
the New Testament records. And these terms all signify, 
directly or indirectly, service rather than authority 
or dignity. Notice again that in that period of Divinely 
guided progress of the infant Church, no mention is 
made of fairs, festivals, suppers or shows to raise 
money for salaries or for Church erection; indeed, none 
of these subjects is ever mentioned in the New Testament 
—subjects which today seem to constitute the 
principal feature of "church work." The Church work 
then was "preaching the Word." Does it not appear 
evident that the great change in these particulars has 
not been favorable to spiritual development? 

We congratulate our readers that as associates in 
faith and service we find ourselves peculiarly different 
from the majority of Christian people of today, and 
peculiarly like the early Church in the particulars specified. 
Like them we have no formulated creed aside 
from the Bible. Like them, we have no Church "officers" 
or "rulers." Like them, we give little attention to 
Church edifices, but are content to meet in private 
houses, or in public buildings otherwise used on week 
days, or in synagogues already built and dedicated, if 
they are placed at our disposal, or in "upper rooms." 
Like them our chief business is "preaching the Word" 
—not preaching ourselves, nor human theories and 
traditions, nor Theosophy, nor philosophy, nor Evolution, 
nor "Science falsely so-called," nor even social 
reforms, good as some of them may be. Like them our 
preaching is sometimes in the street-car chariots, to 
Ethiopians or Whites, to rich or poor, to Pharisees and 
Doctors of the Law, and to the poor of every nation and 
tongue and sect and party. Like them we know the 
Truth and the Truth has made us free, and it is our 
pleasure to assist others into the same freedom, from 
ignorance, superstition and the wiles of the Adversary. 

R4337 : page 57 

Like them the hope before us is the Kingdom of 
God's dear Son, and the prospect of a share in that 
Kingdom at the second coming of our Lord. Like them 
we have heard the good tidings of great joy which shall 
be unto all people, and we are glad to sacrifice time, 
energy, strength, money, influence, all, for the privilege 
of being co-workers together with God in the calling of 
the Bride class; in the preparation for the Kingdom of 



God's dear Son. Like them we need no inducements 
of name, fame, salary, honor of men. Like them we 
delight to meet one with the other, and so much the 
more as we see the day drawing near. We need no 
operas, we need no salaried singers, we need no pulpit 
vaudeville to attract us. Like them we were hungering 
and thirsting for the Truth, and, having tasted of the 
good Word of God and been made partakers of the holy 
Spirit, we find that with the strength derived our appetite 
continues to increase, and we desire more and more 
of the Bread which came down from heaven, and of the 
Water of Life. 

True, there are changes, adaptations to our time 
and present conditions. We do not wear turbans nor 
flowing robes nor sandals. We do not journey on 
camels, nor so much afoot, nor in sailing vessels. We 
use the printing press, the mail, the various means of 
rapid transit, etc. We do most of our evangelizing 
through the printed page, the public prints, the Volunteer 
matter, the Colporteur work, etc. Yet these are 
not differences, but adaptations of the same principles 
to our time. 

The work done in Judea during the thirty-seven 
years following our Lord's crucifixion and closing with 
the destruction of Jerusalem, A.D. 70, was a harvesting 
work to that nation. During that time we may be 
sure every grain of "wheat" was separated from the 
chaff and gathered into the garner— the higher or Gospel 
dispensation— into the spirit-begotten condition. That 
Harvest extended beyond Palestine, but even then it 
always applied "to the Jew first," until A.D. 70. 

A similar work, the Harvesting of this age, we 

R4337 : page 58 

understand has been in progress since 1878, and will 
terminate in 1914, with the beginning of a great time of 
trouble upon Christendom, corresponding to and antityping 
the trouble which destroyed the Jewish nation. 
The harvest work there had a radius of but a few 
hundred miles. The harvest of today extends all over 
the civilized world, a circuit of about ten thousand 
miles. Since the reapers are few, how necessary it is 
that the Lord should provide the extraordinary agencies 
which are now at our disposal for the circulation of the 
harvest message— for the gathering of the wheat. May 
we not well say that the Lord times the inventions of 
our day so as to provide for the necessity of this harvest 
work, that every grain of wheat the whole world around 
may be found and gathered into the garner of the high 
dispensation, the heavenly? We believe that the principle 
noted in our Golden Text is still applicable— that 
the Lord does not wish his consecrated people, when 
they come into the light of Present Truth, to congregate 
specially in special cities, States, etc., but rather wills 
that they be scattered abroad, so that everywhere the 



Truth shall be preached and that they shall have the 
inestimable privilege of proclaiming it, serving it, and 
thus being blessed and upbuilt themselves and prepared 
for a share in the glory of the Kingdom. 

Dear brethren, he who was with and guided the 
early Church is with us with equal power. He who 
guided in that harvest time is guiding now, and will 
continue to guide his work to the end. We may have 
experience with similar characters to that of Judas, 
Alexander the coppersmith, Jannes and Jambres. But 
the Lord is able to make all these things work together 
for good to us and through them all to fulfil his gracious 
promises. He may permit persecutions, imprisonments 
or things corresponding on a different plane, but let 
us never doubt the presence and power of our Lord. 

The glorious results will more than compensate the 
trials and difficulties. 

"Faith can firmly trust him, come what may." 



R4337 : page 58 

QUARTERLY TEMPERANCE LESSON 

--PROVERBS 23:29-35.-MARCH 28.- 

Golden Text:— "At last it biteth like a serpent, 
and stingeth like an adder."— Prov. 23:32. 

A VERY encouraging sign of progress in many 

parts of Christendom, our own land being considerably 

in the lead, is the wave of sentiment 

in favor of total abstinence from intoxicating liquors 

and the refusal of the masses to countenance the liquor 

traffic. The one message which the Lord gave to his 

people when he instructed them to preach the Word did 

not include total abstinence, and hence the Lord's consecrated 

people, faithful as priests, may not turn aside 

from their more important message, the calling of the 

Bride class, to urge upon the worldly this excellent but 

temporary and partial reformation. The message to 

the Church, to those called to be of the "elect," is the 

attainment of the spirit of a sound mind, which certainly 

would not permit them to take anything into their 

system which would befuddle their reason. Temperance, 

moderation, sobriety, is the inculcation of the 

Word of God and its spirit upon all who have named 

the name of Christ and proclaimed themselves followers 

of the Lamb. 

The Apostle's words intimate that the consecrated 
are to do good unto all men as they have opportunity, 
especially to the household of faith; and this exhortation 
seems to justify us in occasionally saying just a 
word on the temperance question. It is right that our 



sympathies for temperance and every reformatory 
measure should be distinctly known to friends and foes 
in order that our good may not be evil spoken of by 
those zealous friends who, not understanding the Divine 
program and its "hidden mystery," think it strange that 
we run not with them into larger activities along the 
lines of social uplift and reforms. Having but small 
personal experience along these lines, we think it best 
to present chiefly the words of others on this subject, 
as below: 

The Rev. Dr. Smith's book, Industrial Conflict, says: 

"In England, in three years of plenty in the seventies, 
wages were increased annually $200,000,000. That 
made $600,000,000 for the three years, but $600,000,000 
was just the amount of gold in circulation in Great 
Britain at that time. Did the workingmen by a common 
impulse, fired by a great ambition, save this $200,000,000 
a year? Did they change the savings into gold? Did 
they control the banks and dictate terms to financiers? 

"If these things had been done, the past thirty years 
would have seen a new England, and the whole world 
would have been filled with the songs of the great 
achievements that had at last been wrought by the 
working classes. They would have superannuated the 
aristocracy; they would have swept out age-worn traditions 
and institutions; they would have come into their 
own empire. The working people of England earned 
$200,000,000 extra per annum, and the sad companion 
fact is that the drink bill of England during each of 
those three years increased just $200,000,000. All the 
increase of that bill did not come from the working 
classes, but enough of it came from those classes to 
leave the argument still sound that what is wanted is 
not so much better opportunity as the capacity to make 
wiser use of such opportunities as men have. 

"In the United States we spend about $1,200,000,000 
a year in drink. Would it not be worth while for the 
workingmen of America to take from that drink bill, 
say, $250,000,000 a year, and put it in an industrial fund 
for the development of industrial enterprises owned by 
workingmen, managed by workingmen, and the profits 
of which should be received by workingmen?" 

From Orison Swett Marden, Editor of Success, New 
York City:- 

"My observation of cigarette smokers has confirmed 
my belief that no man or boy who is a victim of the 
cigarette habit can keep himself up to a high mental or 
physical standard. Cigarette smoking leads boys into 
bad company and a demoralizing environment. A New 
York City magistrate says that ninety-nine out of a 
hundred of all the lads charged with crime, from misdemeanors 
to burglary, have had their moral sense 
weakened by the poison of cigarettes.... In fact, the 
moral depravity which follows the cigarette habit is 
appalling. Lying, cheating, impurity, loss of moral 
courage and manhood, a complete dropping of life's 



standards along the line, are its general results." 

The Honorable Ben B. Lindsey, Judge of the Juvenile 
Court, Denver, Colorado, says:— 

"Our lives depend a great deal upon our habits. 
Habits make or unmake men. The boy who starts with 
bad habits is almost sure to be a worthless man. If he 
starts with good habits, he is just as sure to be a good 
man; therefore boyhood is the most important part of 
life. One of the worst habits in boyhood is the cigarette 
habit. Persisted in, it dulls and deadens all the 
finer moral sentiments; it makes a physical and moral 
wreck of any boy. It is sure to lead the victim to other 

R4338 : page 59 

habits just as dangerous and disgusting. Years in the 
Juvenile Court of Denver convince me that it is one of 
the chief evils met in boyhood, and responsible for much 
weakness, misery and crime." 

The Pittsburg Railways Company served this notice 
to its employees:— 

"For the betterment of the service and the safety of 
the public, it will from this date be the policy of this 
company to NOT retain in its employ men who use intoxicating 
liquors or cigarettes or are in the habit of 
gambling. While it is the privilege of each individual 
to eat, drink, and smoke what he pleases, it becomes 
the duty of this management to have in its service only 
men of sober and temperate habits, PHYSICALLY and 
MENTALLY able to perform the duties to which they may 
be assigned." 

The superintendent gave his reasons for issuing 
the order as follows:— 

"It is my aim and intention to pursue this policy 
without abatement, since I have by it proved beyond all 
doubt that it has raised the standard of our men. I have 
been criticised for the stringency of the order, especially 
the prohibition of the use of cigarettes; but on the 
other hand I have the assurance of our division superintendents 
(of which we have twelve), aided by my own 
observations, that persons addicted to the use of cigarettes, 
especially young men, are the most careless in 
their duties and less able to perform them than men 
using liquor in moderation. I may also mention that 
in seventeen years' experience as manager of public 
utility corporations I have had occasion to promote 
many of our men from the rank of conductors and 
motormen to officers, and in no case has a man using 
whiskey come up to the requirements." 



Our chief objections to many of the utterances of 
social reformers is that in their zeal they make of their 
reformation movement an antagonistic Gospel, proclaiming 
that by the methods they are advocating the 



Millennial blessings might all be introduced, regardless 

of Emmanuel and the Kingdom which he is to 

establish, and which the Scriptures declare to be the 

only power under heaven or amongst men authorized 

and capable of bringing in everlasting joy and blessing 

and Paradise restored. Reforms are merely palliative 

at very most; nothing but a change of heart can 

bring the desired condition, and nothing but the establishment 

of Messiah's Kingdom, the overthrow of 

Satan's empire, and the deliverance of the slaves of sin 

and death from ignorance and superstition, etc., can 

bring the permanent blessings needed. 



R4338 : page 59 

"PRESERVE THE UNITY OF THE SPIRIT" 

ST. PAUL'S exhortation that we preserve the 
unity of the spirit in the bond of peace, was 
never more necessary to the Church than now. 
We have already adverted to the fact that a peculiar 
bitterness of spirit and word seems to attach to those 
who oppose the Vow, and we wish to caution those who 
have taken the Vow against any participation in the 
spirit of strife, anger, bitterness. We cannot help what 
others may do or say to us, but we can see to it, each 
for himself, "that no man render evil for evil or railing 
for railing, but contrariwise blessing." 

Some time ago our attention was especially called 
in a variety of ways to the fact that the fallen angels 
are coming into a greater degree of liberty than they 
have had since the flood and their condemnation to 
chains of darkness. All that we said respecting the 
probable materializations, counterfeiting both the dead 
and the living, we still believe, and advise all to be on 
guard against; but we think it not improbable that 
while we were thus looking out for and exposing some 
of the Adversary's wiles, he was getting in his work 
along other lines— stirring up evil surmising, evil 
speaking, insinuations, malice, envy, hatred, strife— 
lovelessness. It is our present thought that the greatest 
danger to the Household of Faith lies along these subtle 
lines. "If any man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is 
none of his." Hence, to whatever extent the Adversary 
may be able to inject into us an evil spirit, and to drive 
out the holy Spirit, to that extent he will be separating, 
alienating us from the Lord. Nor can we wonder that 
our Master would permit such trials to come upon us 
as a people. We have had much advantage every way 
above others— in knowledge, in appreciation of the deep 
things of God, in an opportunity for the development 
of the fruits and graces of the holy Spirit. Having 
preached to others, have we applied to ourselves these 
precious truths and graces, or shall we eventually be 



castaways, because of being merely preachers of the 
Word and not doers of it?— because while preaching 
love for God and for the brethren, this love was not 
allowed to permeate and sanctify all the avenues of our 
hearts, our words, our thoughts, our deeds. We cannot 
complain that the Lord should test us along these lines. 

For years we have been teaching respecting the peculiar 
trials of this hour, and calling attention to the 
statement of the Word that "A thousand shall fall at 
our side." Have we profited by the knowledge, or does 
the fact that some are now falling cause us surprise? 
The question is for each one of us. It is time for drawing 
near to the Captain of our Salvation, and time for 
complete separation from everything that would not 
have his and our Father's hearty approval. We believe 
that the Lord especially brought forward the Vow for 
this very time, and that it is doing a wonderful work 
of purifying in the hearts of God's children, as is 
abundantly evidenced by the letters which we are daily 
receiving and which tell of the showers of blessings 
enjoyed, and nearness to the Lord, as a result of this 
fresh statement of the original consecration. 

We promised to announce from time to time the 
growth of our list of those taking the Vow, and we are 
pleased to mention now that the six thousand mark has 
been reached. In this connection we offer the suggestion 
that everywhere, so far as possible, the Vow be read 
daily, by everyone who has taken it, either publicly at 
the breakfast table for instance; or individually and 
privately. We are assured that there is a blessing in it, 
not only for the Bible House family, but for all. How 
wonderful it seems that without our so thinking of it, 
or intending it, the Lord has used this Vow so that it 
should call into existence a prayer-circle of six thousand 
of his consecrated ones who remember each other daily 
at the throne of grace. 

With the Vow freshly before the mind each morning, 
reminding us of our resolution to guard, if possible, 
every word and every thought still more carefully than 
in the past, is it any wonder if more progress is being 
made in self-control and in the development of the fruits 
and graces of the holy Spirit? Such results are what 
we should expect. And those who have not taken the 
Vow and who realize frequently their shortcomings in 
word and thought and act, and lament over these— is it 
not worth their while to consider the help they would 
gain by this fresh resolution to the Lord, and the increased 
carefulness that it would bring to them? 

We suggest that those who have taken the Vow remember 

R4338 : page 60 

also the dear ones who have not yet taken it, 
soliciting for them the Lord's blessing and guidance, 
and that they be careful in every sense of the word to 
exemplify the Gospel of peace and love and good will 



implied by their Vow, to more carefully than ever, if 
possible, scrutinize their words and thoughts. Let this 
greater carefulness be manifest to those who have not 
taken the Vow, that they may see your better self-control 
and be glad to glorify our Father in heaven. 

While we deprecate anything looking toward a 
division or schism in the Body of Christ, and while we 
believe that there is no ground for a division in connection 
with the Vow, and that no one who has taken 
the Vow has a right to make it a test of fellowship with 
his brethren; nevertheless, we are free to admit that 
with those who oppose the Vow the case is different. 
In opposing it they seem to forfeit a measure of their 
confidence. They are either less wise or less good 
than we thought them to be; for we cannot see how 
either a wise or a good heart could place hindrances 
and opposition in the way of those who by this Vow are 
seeking to bind their sacrifice to the altar. 

As before stated, the test of the Scripturalness or 
unscripturalness of the Vow is a very simple one. Take 
its statements one by one and see whether any Scripture 
can be found in opposition to any of them; then see how 
many Scriptures can be found favoring these very propositions 
either in the word or in spirit. Thus we determine 
that the Vow is Scriptural to the very last degree, 
and unscriptural in no degree. Does someone suggest 
that the taking of the Vow is not demanded in the 
Scriptures? We reply that the taking of the WATCH 
TOWER, the Cincinnati Enquirer, the Dispatch or the 
World is not stipulated in the Scriptures; neither is 
the publication of our tracts and SCRIPTURE-STUDIES 
directly commanded. Is it unscriptural to wear shoes, 
or trousers, or hats, because these are not mentioned 
in the Scriptures? Are they not all thoroughly Scriptural 
if they do not conflict with any of the holy provisions 
and regulations; just as any matter is thoroughly 
legal which does not conflict with any law? We are 
surprised at the weakness of the arguments by which 

R4339 : page 60 

some of the dear friends have confused themselves and 
hindered their reception of a great blessing through the 
taking of the Vow or Resolution to the Lord, that theirs 
shall hereafter be a still closer walk with God. 



R4339 : page 60 

SOME INTERESTING LETTERS 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

We desire to express our appreciation and love to 
you and the dear friends at the Bible House, for your 
devotion to the work so dear to us all. Your sacrificing 



spirit and zeal and devotion to the flock over which the 

Lord has placed you, and your capacity for hard work, 

have been an inspiration to us. Beyond any doubt the 

present Lord has been and is your helper; otherwise 

your poor body would surely sink beneath the heavy 

cross you have to bear. We thank you and express our 

admiration for your courage and boldness in not compromising 

in any matter the Truth, but have always 

given to the household of faith "things both new and 

old." 

In regard to "the Vow," we have been very much 
helped and blessed since we advised you that we have 
subscribed to it; and we have also been very much 
helped since we have seen the Truth in its fuller light, as 
explained by you in the TOWERS, and by some of the 
Pilgrims, in regard to the Covenants and our relation 
thereto. As stated by one brother, Psa. 50:5 and other 
Scriptures intimate that when Jesus sacrificed himself 
he made a covenant with Jehovah, "a covenant by sacrifice." 
Jehovah, on the other hand, had made his part 
of the Covenant with Abraham and not with Jesus, but 
Jesus, by giving his flesh for the life of the world, came 
under the conditions of the Covenant made with Abraham 
2,000 years before. All persons since justified by 
faith in Jesus' work of sacrifice, and having presented 
their justified bodies a living sacrifice, these, together, 
Jesus the Head and the Church his Body, constitute 
that Seed class which shall do the work through whom 
all the families of the earth will be blessed. This Abrahamic 
Covenant, therefore, needs no Mediator, because 
it includes only those who are actually or reckonedly 
perfect. Our dear Lord did not need a Mediator on 
account of being absolutely perfect, and since we have 
been accepted in the Beloved, we do not require a Mediator, 
because we become members of his Body as New 
Creatures— the Seed of Abraham. (Gal. 3:27,29.) God 
deals with the Body during their trial day through Jesus 
the Head, the Advocate. (I John 2:1.) But the poor 
world during their trial day will require a Mediator, 
otherwise Justice would require their execution. This 
office of Mediator is surely one of the hopes set before 
us in the Gospel. 

We feel very humble and thankful to our Master 
that we are permitted to see these grand truths, while 
some others, blessed with larger opportunities, having 
for so many years been associated so closely with yourself 
and received the light and Truth through your 
ministry, are now asking you to accept their resignations 
on account of not being able to see eye to eye with 
you on the Covenants and Vow. I have been given a 
copy of the letter Brother Hennings sent you under 
date of November 22, 1908. The knowledge of these 
facts, dear Brother, has inspired this letter in the hope 
that it may help to comfort you in the assurance of your 
being in the heavenly Father's favor, and we can only 
say, as you have so often said to us through the TOWERS, 



"Let not your heart be troubled, neither let it be afraid"; 
"No weapon formed against thee shall prosper, and 
every tongue that shall rise against thee in judgment, 
thou shalt condemn. This is the heritage of the servants 
of the Lord and their righteousness is of me, saith 
the Lord." 

We pray for you and the Bible House family every 
day many times. And we ask you to remember us in 
your prayers. With much love, 

Yours in the One Hope, J. P. HEMPHILL. 



MY DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

On January first we began the New Testament reading, 
a chapter every evening. It is now looked forward 
to with much eagerness. The doing of this regularly 
is proving a great blessing. Also the reading of twelve 
pages of DAWN daily in the morning. 

After you suggested the twelve pages daily to me at 
Halifax, I went back to Montreal and tried so hard to 
keep it up, but it seemed almost impossible, and I occasionally 
had as many as thirty-six pages for one day. 
Since making the resolution to the Lord to do this it 
has been possible every day thus far. This further 
proves to me the help of resolutions or vows made to 
the Lord. 

I feel that it is as it was with Jesus when he took a 
positive stand and said, "Get thee hence, Satan.... 
Then the devil leaveth him, and behold, angels came and 
ministered unto him."— Matt. 4:10,11. 

Is it not the same with us when we take a positive 
stand on any question— that we then have the special 
help from the Lord along those lines? I have felt it 
so in my own case. 

Endeavoring not to murmur nor complain about 
any condition or experience has been very helpful. It 
many times keeps me from mentioning little things 
which I otherwise might. 

I want to thank you also for the joint-letter in regard 
to our vows. It is a great encouragement and help 
in remembering daily why these vows are made— "to 
promote our spiritual interests and to assist in the 
mortifying of the mortal bodies." 

I thank our Father daily and oftener for the continued 
help received through his dear Servant. 

Your sister through his merit, ETHEL WHITE. 

R4339 : page 61 

BELOVED PASTOR AND BROTHER:- 

My dear husband is so earnest, so eager to do the 
Lord's will whatever the cost may be. Since the taking 
of "Our Precious Vow," as he calls it, the change has 
been something wonderful— a change that must be felt; 
it cannot be described. What that Vow has been and 



is to me I can never tell. I incorporated each section 
so as to make a prayer of the whole, and twice every 
day, if no oftener, I offer that up with my other petitions, 
and the dear Father is hearing me. How could it be 
otherwise? He has promised, and "He is faithful that 
promised." My Consecration Vow seems so infinitely 
more comprehensive since taking this later one emphasizing 
the first, and this bringing it before the Father 
in words makes everything so much clearer and more 
real. I can approach the heavenly Father in a manner 
I never understood before, and realize that he hears and 
will answer. I thank the Lord for the Vow, and you, 
dear brother, as his servant, in bringing it to his people 
—"in due time." 

We sometimes talk of how easy and blessed it would 
be to die; but to live in these evil days how hard it is! 
The closer we come to our heavenly Father, the greater 
the anxiety to be with him. "How can we keep the 
longing back and how suppress the groan?" 

Yet we realize that each passing hour shall, if we 
are faithful, prepare us more for the Kingdom, and we 
are content. But how blessed it will be to have passed 
through the trials, the testings, and to have been found 
"faithful!" Oh it is so hard to live, so hard really to live 
and develop as the Lord would have us grow as New 
Creatures. Will we all who are so far faithful, be able 
to say at the end, "I have finished the work which thou 
gavest me to do"? Pray for us, dear brother, for my 
husband and self, even as we pray for you, that we may 
be always able to say from the heart, "I do always those 
things which please him." 

With much Christian love, your sister in our blessed 
Lord, I. P. W. 

AN OPEN LETTER TO THE HOUSEHOLD OF FAITH 



Love, truth and honesty, and sorrow for sin, constrain 
me to confess my shameful course during my 
opposition to the Vow, and which I now see to be but a 
reiteration of my consecration Vow, more clearly outlined 
in some essential details because of the present 
evil day. 

That expert, Satan, whispered some apparently 
very plausible suggestions against the Vow, and which, 
yielded to, soon led me to look at it from a very prejudiced 
and improper standpoint. Thus I quickly took 
the bait that the suggestion of the Vow was purely of 
and by man to ensnare the simple minded, and was not 
in harmony with the spirit of true Bible teaching. This 
view soon roused my zeal to not touch, taste nor handle 
anything that did not have a direct, pointed "Thus saith 
the Lord" attached to it. Very soon I seemed to lose 
all the spirit of a sound mind and of love, and began to 
back-bite Brother Russell, not only orally, but also by 



writing back-biting letters. In fact, I became a first-rate 
back-biter. I compared Brother Russell to Moses, 
when he said to Israel, "Must I bring water for you?" 
and to David in his prohibited work of numbering the 
Israelites. I likened the presentation of the Vow to the 
claimed inspiration of the Mormon Prophet Smith, 
and the Vow itself to the harmonious sound of a plague 
of frogs. 

Now, Brother Russell, it needs no argument to show 
such thoughts to be the product of a very unsound mind; 

R4340 : page 61 

yes, I must say, the product of a Satanic mind or a mind 
dominated by demons. 

I am sorry for such conduct and want you to publish 
my expression of my sorrow for my sin. I can assure 
you it found me out. Make a heartfelt prayer for 
me that I may be kept from the sin of presumption. 

I take the Vow today (January 25th), my 66th birthday, 
and remain, 

Your penitent brother, ELIAS M. GIBBS. 



R4340 : page 61 

"WHO GAVE HIMSELF A RANSOM" 

"There is one God, and one Mediator between God and 
men, the man Christ Jesus; who gave himself a ransom 
for all, to be testified in due time."— 1 Tim. 2:5,6. 

OUR LORD JESUS gave himself a Ransom (corresponding 
price for all mankind) at the beginning of his 
ministry, at the moment of his consecration. He 
continued that giving throughout his public ministry for 
three and one-half years. He finished the sacrifice of himself, 
the "man Christ Jesus," at Calvary. When the Father 
raised him from the dead, he was the possessor, so to speak, 
of the value of his previous sacrifice, which he was at liberty 
to offer as he pleased. The making of the sacrifice was one 
thing and the applying of its merits was another thing. As, 
for instance: Mr. A is in trouble, requiring $5000 for his relief. 
Mr. B has a property which he can sell for $5000— 
enough to pay A's debt. When he sells the property A's 
debt is not paid, but merely B now has the amount, the 
price, which he can give for A's relief, if he will; and it is 
for him to elect how and when and where it shall be applied. 
Christ gave all that he had in order to purchase the 
world and the treasure which he saw therein— Adam and 
his family, sold under sin and death. When our Lord ascended 
up on high he did something with the merit of his 
sacrifice which brought a blessing to a certain class (the 
household of faith). That he made reconciliation for their 
sins is the Apostolic statement, and the giving of the holy 



Spirit at Pentecost was in demonstration of the fact. But 
it is equally clear that our Lord did not make an application 
of his blood to all mankind, because the holy Spirit did 
not come upon all mankind, nor did any message come to 
them declaring the forgiveness of their sins. 

On the contrary, the subsequent Apostolic declaration 
was that "the whole world lieth in the wicked one," and 
that only the Church, the household of faith, has "escaped 
the condemnation that is upon the world." Furthermore, 
the Apostle's declaration is not that our Lord appeared in 
the presence of God as our Mediator, nor as the world's 
Mediator, but that he appeared in the presence of God as 
OUR Advocate— but not as the world's Advocate. All this is 
very plain, if our minds and hearts are in condition to receive 
it; but of course it will not be clear, and is not to be 
understood nor to be clear under any other circumstances. 

Just what Jesus did when he ascended up on high we 
are not more particularly informed by the Apostle; but he 
pointed us to the types, the Law. Looking there we note 
the various details of the typical atonement day of Israel, 
which foreshadowed: 

(1) The forgiveness of sins for the HOUSEHOLD OF FAITH, 
under the Abrahamic Covenant with believers. 

(2) The subsequent forgiveness of the sins of all the 
remainder of the world by preparing for the sealing of the 
New (Law) Covenant with the blood of Christ. 

This division separating the Gospel Church from the 
world was very distinct in the picture, and also distinct in 
the teachings of our Lord and the apostles. Our Lord said, 

R4340 : page 62 

"They are not of the world, even as I am not of the world." 
(John 17:16.) He ordained them to go and bring forth fruit 
—permanent fruit, everlasting fruitage. The Apostle declares 
of our Lord, "He is a propitiation (satisfaction) for 
our sins (the Church's) and not for ours only, but also for 
the sins of the whole world." (1 John 2:2.) Here again a 
sharp line of distinction is drawn between the "elect" 
Church and its blessing, and the non-elect world and the 
blessing that will come to it in due time. 

Looking into the type again (Leviticus 16) we see that 
there are two separate and distinct sacrifices, and that they 
were not offered to God upon the mercy-seat both at the 
same time:— 

(1) The blood of the bullock was first shed and first 
offered. 

(2) The blood of the goat was subsequently offered. 
Our Lord did not die twice and the two animals did 

not represent him— except as Head and Body. Not only so, 
but the type distinctly tells us that the two offerings of the 
blood upon the mercy-seat were applicable to different 
classes, the first, applied to the tribe of Levi, included the 
priests. The second applied to all the remainder of the 
people of Israel. Will anyone claim that our Lord Jesus 
died twice, first for the antitypical Levites, and second for 



the remainder of mankind? Christ certainly died once for 
all. What, then, is the meaning of these two sacrifices and 
distinctly separate applications and separate acceptances 
and separate blessings? 

We have already answered this question in great detail 
in the little booklet entitled, "Tabernacle Shadows of Better 
Sacrifices," a fresh reading of which we commend to 
you all as an elaboration of the "hidden mystery" of the 
fellowship of the Church, the Royal Priesthood, with Jesus, 
the great High Priest, in the sufferings, the sacrificings of 
this present time, and in the glorious work and blessings of 
the future. Remember, too, that this treatise was first published 
in 1880. We therein show that no man can redeem his 
brother, and that it is because all are sinners, all under death 
sentence. We show also that our Lord's death, represented 
by that of the bullock, applied on behalf of the household 
of faith, justifies them freely from all sin and permits them 
to become "holy and acceptable sacrifices." (Rom. 12:1.) 
We show that the sacrificing was all done by the Lord, that 
our part ends in our presentation of ourselves living sacrifices, 
and that if we maintain this condition of self-denial 
our Lord counts us as New Creatures, members of his Body, 
and our flesh his flesh, and its sufferings and death his sufferings 
and death. 

Thus the sacrifice of Christ, Head and Body, has progressed 
for over eighteen centuries. We believe that the consummation 
is near at hand. When the High Priest shall have 
accepted the last member of his Body, and shall have finished 
the sacrificing, he will apply, beyond the vail, the blood, 
his own blood— the blood of his members— on the mercy-seat, 
on behalf of all the people. Then will be due that 
which the Lord promised through the Prophet Joel— that he 
would pour out his "Spirit upon all flesh," just as at the completion 
and offering of the first sacrifice he poured out his 
"Spirit upon his servants and handmaidens" at Pentecost. 
Who that has spiritual eyesight cannot see this? And if we 
once saw it and it is now becoming dim to any of us, what 
is the remedy? All such should go immediately to the 
great Physician for eyesalve. They should haste in fear lest 
complete blindness and outer darkness overtake them. Fasting, 
prayer and heart-searching and a hearty acceptance of 
the Vow we earnestly recommend. 

Note that it is not our Lord in some pre-human condition 
who gave himself a ransom for all, but the MAN Christ 
Jesus. His is a Ransom for all, in that through his sacrifice 
alone all mankind shall be rescued from the sentence of sin 
and death and given an opportunity to hear and accept the 
good tidings of eternal life. The Ransom is none the less 
for all mankind, because it was first applied to the Church 
and then made applicable to mankind through the Church. 
The water we drink is none the less from the sky because it 
comes to us through pipes and faucets. 

"MEDIATOR BETWEEN GOD AND MEN" 

As already noted, we believe that whenever the word 



mediator is used in the Scriptures it relates to a covenant 
between parties who are alienated. God and the world are 
at enmity. God has condemned the world, because of sin. 
That condemnation still rests upon the world (except that 
small portion of it which has been justified by faith.) The 
"world still lies in the Wicked One"— is still under condemnation. 
A Mediator was necessary— someone to go between 
and reconcile these alienated parties. Our Lord Jesus came 
into the world to be the Saviour of the world as well as the 
Saviour of the Church. The work which Jesus did, his sacrifice, 
was in the Divine program with a view to his becoming 
the Mediator between God and mankind in general— the 
world, sinners. That purpose will be carried out, though it 
has not yet been done. It is proper to speak of our Lord 
Jesus as Mediator and to speak of the New (Law) Covenant 
as though it were already mediated, because the matter is 
fully intimated, foretold, promised, by the Lord, who cannot 
lie, and is in process of accomplishment. God will make 
such a Covenant with the House of Judah and the House of 
Israel after these Gospel days. (Heb. 8:8-10.) He will provide 
a Mediator, who will then, during the Millennium, 
mediate between God and man. It is a part of the Divine 

R4341 : page 62 

program that our Lord Jesus will be that Mediator. It is, 
therefore, proper to speak of him as such now— to speak 
of the things which are not yet as though they were. This 
in no degree contradicts the thought that this Mediator is 
growing day by day— adding members. 

Why should there be any delay? If the man Christ 
Jesus was the Mediator and the plan for a New Covenant 
was unalterably fixed in advance, why should it not be ratified 
at once? We answer again that this was one feature of 
the "Hidden Mystery"— "Christ in you, the hope of glory." 
(Col. 1:26,27.) It is a part of the Divine purpose that Jesus, 
the Mediator of the New Covenant (he whose merit furnishes 
the price and who shortly will apply that price for the sealing 
of the New (Law) Covenant) be the Head of the Church, 
which is his Body— "members in particular of the Body of 
Christ." (1 Cor. 12:27.) In the Divine purpose the antitypical 
Isaac is to include the Church. "Now we, brethren, as Isaac 
was, are the children of the promise"— the children of the 
Faith Covenant. (Gal. 4:28.) Jesus the Mediator, by Divine 
arrangement, accepts members, who must be his joint-sacrificers, 
and by and by be his joint-heirs. 

This Church class is not included in the "men" of our 
text— not included in the world, "Ye are not of the world, 
even as I am not of the world." (John 17:16.) "The world," 
"men," need the great Mediator to reconcile them to God. 
And the New Covenant and the Kingdom which it will inaugurate 
are Divine provisions which shall bring blessings for the 
world, for men, to chasten them, to break their hearts, to cause 
every knee to bow and every tongue to confess to God's glory. 
The Church, as the Bride, not only shares in the sufferings of 
this present time, but also in that glorious work of reconciling 



"men," "the world," to God by the power and forces and influences 
of the Millennial Kingdom. 

The class now accepted by the Lord as separate from 
the world needs not the drastic measures of the Millennium 
to cause them to bow and to confess. They are a special 
class, who, in the midst of sin, love righteousness and hate 
iniquity. They are like their Lord and Redeemer, of whom 
it is written, "Thou hast loved righteousness and hated iniquity; 
therefore God, even thy God, hath anointed thee with 

R4341 : page 63 

the oil of gladness (holy Spirit) above (Head-over) thy fellows." 
-Heb. 1:9. 

WORKS ENEMIES--NOT HEART ENEMIES 

But some one may inquire, Does not the Apostle speak 
of some of the "household of faith" as having once been aliens, 
strangers, foreigners, from the commonwealth of Israel? Yes; 
so was Cornelius all of that as a Gentile, yet he reverenced 
God and gave much alms to the people. But as a Gentile 
he was naturally an alien from Israel's privileges and blessings 
until, so far as the Gentiles were concerned, Christ made 
an end to the Law Covenant, nailed it to his cross, and admitted 
Gentiles to his favor and to the still greater blessings 
of the original Covenant. 

But does not the Apostle say that some who had become 
saints had been liars and abominable persons, "alienated, 
and enemies in their mind by wicked works," and could the 
world be worse than this description? (Col. 1:21.) We answer, 
So far as works are concerned, and the divine standards, Yes, 
"that every mouth may be stopped, and all the world may 
become guilty before God," both Jews and Gentiles. (Rom. 3:19.) 
But such as at heart were not opposed to the light and 
Truth, had a different standing in the Divine estimation. 
Through ignorance and weaknesses they were like the whole 
world, yet in other respects they were very different and 
differently estimated by the Lord. These, because of their 
right-heartedness, were blessed in being drawn to Christ by 
the Father, that they might be justified by faith in the 
precious blood, and that they might be sanctified by a 
knowledge of the Truth, and that thus they might become 
associates in the sufferings of Christ and in his coming glory 
and work. During this age only such are drawn, and only 
such received: "No man can come unto me, except the Father 
which sent me, draw him." (John 6:44.) Of such "elect" St. 
Paul says, "If God be for us who can be against us." "He who 
began a good work in us is able to complete it." These 
needed the blood and could not be justified without the 
Redeemer's sacrifice, but they do not need that he should 
mediate the New (Law) Covenant for them, since they are 
acceptable under the better, the Faith Covenant, made with 
Abraham. 

We see the difference in the present time: Some, under 
the influence of error, are terrified with fear of eternal torment, 



and may live outwardly according to high standards, 

loving sin, but fearing to practice it. When the Truth reaches 

such and their fears are dispelled, they have no special inclination 

toward piety. Others, on the contrary, hearing of 

the Lord's grace and wonderful providences, are drawn, constrained, 

to become followers of Jesus, even at a cost of sacrifice 

and temporal interests. This latter class need no 

mediator to whip them into harmony with the Divine Laws. 

To the extent of their ability they delight to do God's will. 

This faith and its spirit of obedience God counts to them for 

righteousness. These, after justification by faith in his blood, 

are invited to become members of The Christ. A sufficient 

number of these will be found to complete the membership 

of his Body, and to fill up the sufferings of Christ, and to 

constitute the very "elect" members of the Mediator for the 

world— men. 

Let us remember that Moses was the mediator of the 
Law Covenant, which failed, not because of being a poor Law, 
but merely because its mediator was incapable of doing for 
the people all that they needed. God purposes to give to that 
nation, and other nations through them, The Christ, the better 
Mediator under a New Covenant or Agreement, to be sealed 
with his blood— the merit of his sacrifice applied indirectly 
through the Church. Remember how St. Peter, after telling 
about the times of Restitution to be inaugurated at the 
Second Coming of Jesus, says, "For verily Moses said unto the 
fathers, A Prophet shall the Lord your God raise up unto 
you from amongst your brethren like unto me." (Acts 3:22.) 
The Prophet like unto Moses began to be raised up in the 
person of our Lord Jesus, the Head. The raising up process 
has continued throughout this age, and shortly will be completed. 
That antitypical Moses, Christ and the Church, Head 
and Body, is to mediate the New Covenant so long promised 
between God and Israel. That the Apostle is not speaking 
of anything yet accomplished is evident from the context, 
"It shall come to pass that the soul that will not obey that 
Prophet shall be utterly destroyed from amongst the people." 
(Acts 3:23.) All who do not obey Jesus during this Gospel 
Age are not destroyed; but, under the great Mediator between 
God and men, the antitypical Moses, who shall rule the world 
during the Millennium, the Scriptures will be fulfilled— all 
that will refuse divine favor under that New Covenant will 
be utterly destroyed. 



R4341 : page 63 

QUESTIONS RE THE COVENANTS 

What is the Abrahamic Covenant? 

(1) Is it for the selection of the Seed? 

Its promise is THE SEED: (1) Jesus; (2) The Christ; (3) 
The earthly seed through them. 

(2) Or is it the blessing of all the families of the earth? 



Ultimately, yes. The result will bless all the nations. 
(3) When did it begin— with Abraham, Isaac or Abel? 
With Jesus Christ: but its provisions extend backward 
and forward to all who have exercised "the faith of Abraham." 

What is the Sarah Covenant? 

(1) Is it proper to say that the Sarah and Abrahamic 
Covenants are one and the same thing? 

The Abrahamic Covenant primarily is the Sarah Covenant 
—the Faith or Promise Covenant. 

(2) Under what Covenant were the Ancient Worthies 
developed, Abrahamic or Sarah? 

The Abrahamic or Faith Covenant, typified by Sarah. 
All justified by faith are of this Covenant. The others are 
covenants of works. 

(3) Are the Ancient Worthies the fleshly seed, or are the 
Jews who come under the New Covenant in the Millennial 
Age the fleshly seed? 

The Ancient Worthies primarily, but all who ever come 
to the Faith and Works relationship under the New Covenant 
will, as children of "the Anointed," be grandchildren of 
Abraham, who typified God— the Father. 

(4) Is the Sarah Covenant as comprehensive as the 
Abrahamic Covenant? 

No! It relates only to the "Seed of Promise." 

(5) Does the Sarah Covenant come to an end at the 
close of the Gospel Age? 

Yes. 

(6) Does the Sarah Covenant end when the last member 
of the spiritual Seed is born, or does it end after the 
Ancient Worthies come forth? 

After both: the two being shown in Joseph and Benjamin. 

(7) If the Sarah Covenant brings forth the spiritual 

Seed, how can we say that both seeds are brought forth under 
the Abrahamic Covenant? 
The dual feature is shown in Rachel. 

R4342 : page 63 

(8) If both the seeds are brought forth under the Sarah 
Covenant then how about Gal. 3:16, where it speaks of THE 
Seed which is Christ? 

The Christ is the Seed, but the "promise" is "sure to 
both. "-Rom. 4:16. 

(9) Are those now called to membership in The Christ 
justified by the sacrifice of the man Christ Jesus? 

Most assuredly, "By faith in his blood." Faith in the 
New Covenant justifies nobody. Those blessed under the 
New Covenant will be justified by works.— Rev. 20:13. 



page 64 

PUBLIC MINISTRIES OF THE TRUTH 



ONE-DAY LOCAL CONVENTIONS ADDRESSED BY THE 
EDITOR OF THIS JOURNAL AS FOLLOWS: 

WATERBURY, CONN., FEBRUARY 28 

All sessions in Buckingham Music Hall, corner Grand and 
Bank streets. Morning session for Praise and Testimony at 
11:00 o'clock. Afternoon meeting for the Public at 3 o'clock: 
subject, "Where are the Dead?" Evening meeting for the interested 
at 6:30 o'clock. 

Arrangements for cheap, clean lodgings have been made 
at a temperance hotel, for any finding it necessary to remain 
over night. Visiting friends cordially welcomed. 

BROOKLYN, N.Y., MARCH 7 

Discourse on Baptism, import and symbol, at 1 1 a.m. Discourse 
by Brother Russell at 3:00 p.m. Evening meeting for 
the interested at 7:30 o'clock. This will be a Question Meeting. 
Visiting friends cordially welcomed. 

All meetings will be held in the Brooklyn Tabernacle, Nos. 
13-17 Hicks street. Convenient to all cars and ferries— close 
to the old bridge terminus. 

SCRANTON, PA., MARCH 14 

BROOKLYN, N.Y., MARCH 21 



page 66 

STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES 
"MILLENNIAL DAWN" 
THESE STUDIES ARE RECOMMENDED TO STUDENTS AS VERITABLE "BIBLE KEYS. 
PRICES ARE NET AND BARELY COVER COST OF PRODUCTION. 
WHEN DELIVERED BY COLPORTEURS THE COST AND PRICE ARE INCREASED. 

SERIES I., The Plan of the Ages, gives an outline of the divine plan 
revealed in the Bible, relating to man's redemption and restitution: 
386 pages, in embossed cloth, 25c (IS l/2d). India paper edition, 75c. 
(3s. l-l/2d.). 

This volume has been published as a special issue of our journal— 
at the extremely low price of 5c a copy, in any quantity, postage included. 
(To foreign countries, 9c.) This enables people of slender 
purse to herald far and wide the good tidings in a most helpful form. 

SERIES II., The Time is at Hand, treats of the manner and time of 
the Lord's second coming, considering the Bible Testimony on this 
subject: 370 pages, in embossed cloth 25c. (IS. l/2d.). India paper 
edition, 75c. (3s. l-l/2d.). 

SERIES III., Thy Kingdom Come, considers prophecies which mark 
events connected with the "Time of the End," the glorification of the 
Church and the establishment of the Millennial Kingdom; it also contains 
a chapter on the Great Pyramid, showing its corroboration of the 
dates and other teachings of the Bible; 384 pages, in embossed cloth 
25c (IS. l/2d.). India paper edition, 75c. (3s. l-l/2d.). 

SERIES IV., The Day of Vengeance, shows the dissolution of the 
present order of things is in progress, and that all the panaceas offered 
are valueless to avert the predicted end. It marks in these events the 
fulfilment of prophecy, noting specially our Lord's great prophecy of 
Matt. 24 and Zech. 14:1-9; 660 pages, in embossed cloth 30c. (IS. 3d.). 
India paper edition, 85c (3s. 6-1/2.) 

SERIES V., The At-one-ment Between God and Man, treats an 
all-important subject— the hub, the center around which all the features 
of divine grace revolve. Its topic deserves the most careful and 
prayerful consideration on the part of all true Christians: 507 pages 
in embossed cloth 30c. (IS. 3d.). India paper edition, 85c (3s. 6-l/2d.). 

SERIES VI., The New Creation, deals with the Creative Week, 
Genesis 1 and 2, and with the Church, God's New Creation." It examines 
the personnel, organization, rites, ceremonies, obligations and 
hopes appertaining to those called and accepted as members of the 
body under the Head: 740 pages, in embossed cloth 30c. (IS. 3d.). 
India paper edition, 85c (3s. 6-l/2d.). 

The above prices include postage. 

IN FULL LEATHER BINDING, gilt edges, the set (6 vols.) $3.00, 
(12s. 6d.), plus postage 60c (IS) 

MILLENNIAL DAWN is published in foreign languages as follows: 
in German, five vols., in Swedish, Vols. 1, 2, 3 and 5; in Dano-Norwegian, 
three vols.; in French, two vols.; in Italian, one vol.; in 
Greek, two vols.; bound in cloth, uniform with English edition, prices 
the same. 

The volumes in English are bound in two styles, MILLENNIAL DAWN 
in green cloth binding and SCRIPTURE STUDIES in maroon cloth. Specify 
which you desire. 



page 65 



SEMI-MONTHLY 
VOL. XXX MARCH 1 NO. 5 
A.D. 1909--A.M. 6037 



CONTENTS 

The Opening at Brooklyn 67 

Proposed Conventions During 1909 68 

European Convention Tour 68 

Seattle, Washington, Tour 68 

Roman Catholics Enthusiastic 69 

The First Gentile Convert 69 

"Wonderful Words of Life" 71 

The Heart More Important Than the Head 71 

Life Unto Life or Death Unto Death 72 

Deliverance in Answer to Prayer 73 

Passover Season Sifting 73 

Loving Submission (Poem) 75 

"Make Straight Paths for Your Feet" 75 

Some Interesting Letters 78 

Berean Studies on the Atonement 79 

page 66 

Address Business Communications and Remittances to 

WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY 

610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA. 
--OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH, 24 EVERSHOLT ST., LONDON, N.W. 
GERMAN BRANCH, WERTER STRASSE, 39, BARMEN-ELBERFELD 
AUSTRALASIAN BRANCH, EQUITABLE BULDG., COLLINS ST., MELBOURNE 
PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POSTOFFICE. 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA 



PLEASE ADVISE us at once what quantities of 1909 Volunteer 
matter you will need and how shipments should be 
divided and addressed. 

R4343 : page 66 

SUBSCRIPTIONS TO "PEOPLE'S PULPIT" 

PEOPLE'S PULPIT is the title of a small new paper proposed 
to be published monthly, if the Postoffice authorities will 
grant it Second-Class mail privileges. 



We proposed to send PEOPLE'S PULPIT to fill out the year 
of "Old Theology Quarterly," but that was found inexpedient, 
so the latter filled out its own subscriptions. We have, however, 
arranged to have sample copies of the new paper, PEOPLE'S 
PULPIT, sent to our entire list— the first issue. This will serve 
as a sample and you can determine whether you wish to subscribe 
for it or not. 

It will contain chiefly Brother Russell's sermons, which 
many of you already have through other newspapers. Its 
value, therefore, would chiefly be for friends and neighbors. 

The new postal regulations are very strict, so that subscriptions 
for PEOPLE'S PULPIT must be made in quite positive terms. 
Cash must accompany each order or else a promise to pay or 
a request to have your subscription paid for you from the Society's 
funds. If, however, you are a Tract Fund contributor, you 
can so state and direct that the payment be made out of your 
donation. Or you can order for others on your donation account. 
Address orders to PEOPLE'S PULPIT, enclosed with 
letters to us, if more convenient. 

1 copy, monthly to one address, per year, 10 cents. 

2 copies, " 15 " 

8 50 " 

20 " $1.00 

125 " " " " " 5.00 

page 66 

THE MEMORIAL SUPPER 

The anniversary date for the celebration of the Memorial 
Supper this year will be Sunday, April 4, after six o'clock p.m. 

MANNAS are temporarily out of stock. Will have new 
supply after our arrival in Brooklyn. 



R4342 : page 67 

THE OPENING AT BROOKLYN 

THE friends at places where One-Day Conventions 
are held are pleased if they be reported in the 
WATCH TOWER, and we would be pleased to report 
them were it not that there is always such a sameness 
unavoidably connected with them. Almost without exception 
it could be said that the dear friends put forth 
strenuous efforts to bring the public service to the attention 
of the people, and that they succeed admirably, 
and that large and intelligent audiences are secured, 
and in many cases large numbers are unable to gain 
admittance. This sameness of the reports and our 
limited space alone hinder these reports. Nevertheless, 
if assured by many that they are appreciated and desired, 
we would take up the matter afresh. 
The opening of the Brooklyn Tabernacle on January 3 1 st 



and the subsequent work in that city, we are 
assured, would be of deep interest to the friends in 
general, and hence the present report. 

The opening day, appointed a month in advance, 
found us none too well prepared. Our stationary chairs 
had not yet been placed and many of the finishing touches 
were lacking. However, we had a very enjoyable day. 

The auditorium is on the second floor and has a 
seating capacity of over 800, but is conveniently arranged 
so that the curtains can be drawn, shutting off 
more than one-third of the seats. The Tabernacle is 
well lighted from the roof, and the side-walls are embellished 
with some of the gracious promises of our 
Father's Word in artistic workmanship and soft colors. 
The prevalent color of the walls, floor, etc., is olive 
green. The conditions altogether are very restful, and 
those who arrive before the meetings commence will 
find excellent food for quiet meditation. 

The floor below this, the street floor, is being fitted 
up for our office purposes, and the basement floor for 
our stock and shipping departments. 

The total number of the friends of the immediate 
vicinity, New York, Brooklyn, Jersey City, Newark, etc., 
in attendance, numbered about 200; probably another 
100 or more came from surrounding towns, and 27 from 
as far away as Boston. All seemed well pleased with 
the move which the Lord's providence seemed to direct, 
and pleased, also, with the building chosen and the repairs 
made. 

The eleven o'clock praise and testimony service was 
participated in by about 350, and was very enjoyable; 
the testimonies to the Lord's grace, and goodness, and 
care caused our hearts to overflow with gratitude. The 
afternoon meeting had been advertised to the public, 
and the attendance was very good. Close attention was 
given and we have hoped that some interest was aroused. 
In the evening we had a Question Meeting, and the 
character of the questions indicated intelligence and 
studiousness on the part of the dear friends. 

The following Sunday very nearly the same programme 
was carried out, but with less advertising. The 
afternoon meeting was not so large. The friends of the 
New York City congregation, those of Brooklyn and 
those of Jersey City, all voted their unanimous desire 
to be parts of the Ecclesia whose home will be at 
the "Brooklyn Tabernacle," and unanimously elected 
Brother C. T. Russell Pastor of the same. 

The following Sunday, February 14th, Brother Brenneisen 
spoke in the afternoon, and in the evening conducted 
a Berean Bible study. The attendance was all 
that could be expected. 

A special arrangement was made to meet the public 
on February 21st. The Brooklyn Academy of Music was 
secured for the afternoon, and the friends of Greater 
New York and vicinity certainly did manifest great zeal 
in the advertising of the meeting. The dear friends got 



out 150,000 copies of the first number of the new paper, 
"People's Pulpit," on the back of which was an advertisement 
of the Academy meeting. Window cards were 
used also, and posters, so that the meeting became 
widely advertised. The result was better than any of 
us had dared to anticipate. The house was crowded, 
seating 2200; approximately 400 stood, and it is estimated 
that more than 2500 people were turned away, 
unable to gain admission. To this overflow, however, 
the ushers distributed a special number of the WATCH 
TOWER so that we may hope that even they received 
some blessing. The large audience gave close attention 
for nearly two hours, and took the literature at the door 
with considerable manifestation of interest. How many 
grains of "wheat" were there and how many of these 
were favorable to influence, the Lord only knows, but 
we were pleased at the favorable hearing and the interest 
manifested upon the faces of the audience, which 
was a very intelligent one. 

At the close of the session, Brother Rutherford was 
announced to speak at "Brooklyn Tabernacle" on the 
following Sunday afternoon on the "Divine Plan of the 
Ages" from a Lawyer's standpoint. A large house of 
earnest hearers greeted him. 

Incidentally, we might mention another One-Day 
Convention recently held in Cleveland, a public service 
which was very remarkable, in respect to the congregation 
and the interest shown. The Cleveland friends, 
very full of zeal, engaged their largest auditorium, "The 

R4342 : page 68 

Hippodrome," which is one of the largest in the country, 

with a seating capacity of 4600. How thoroughly and 

wisely the dear friends exercised themselves in the advertising 

of that meeting may be judged from the fact 

that the house was full and many were standing, while 

about 600 were turned away by order of the Public 

Safety Department. 

These large attendances must not mislead any of us 
into supposing that the Truth is becoming popular. 
Our readers well know that such is not our expectation, 
although we are expecting that the next two years 
especially will see wonderful things accomplished in 
the spread of the Truth. Of course, the majority 
attending these meetings come from curiosity, but when 
we remember that we not only do not have the assistance 
of our Christian friends of the various denominations, 
but in many instances have their open, and 
especially their secret, opposition, the lesson is that 
religious people are doing more thinking for themselves 
than ever before, and it is in this class that we may 
hope to find a considerable amount of "wheat," some 
for the "Little Flock" and more for the "Great Company." 

In this connection, we believe that it will be of interest 
to nearly all of our readers that we mention some 



of the Lord's providences in connection with the locating 

of the Bible House family in Brooklyn. The Tabernacle 

has no living apartments connected with it, and 

when we sought to rent a suitable building for the housing 

of our family of more than thirty, we found that we 

had a difficult problem. We almost needed a hotel. 

While the Tabernacle is not in an aristocratic neighborhood, 

the residence district near it is of a good class 

with fine, large residences. Some of these are for sale, 

but none for rent. We thought of going a little distance 

and finding cheaper quarters, and then reflected that 

the car -fare to and from the office twice daily would 

amount to $1800 a year, and besides we would have inconvenience 

and loss of time. 

At an opportune time some friends of the Truth 
proposed that we purchase such property as would suit 
our convenience, put it into repair, and that they would 
furnish the money— we to hold the title and they to take 
a mortgage for the amount expended, on which they 
asked but five per cent, interest, and intimated that 
some of the interest might find its way into the Tract 
Fund from time to time. This proposal seemed providential 
and was gladly accepted as the cheapest and 
best thing possible. We anticipate that the interest 
will not amount to more than two-thirds of the car-fare 
estimate, possibly less. 

Thus prepared, we made a fresh examination of the 
district with a view to purchase, and finally made bids 
upon three properties suitable to our uses with some 
alterations. We are sure that we will surprise you when 
we state that the one of the three which came to us at 
a bargain price is what is known as "The Old Henry 
Ward Beecher Home." It certainly seems very remarkable 
that we should get the old Beecher Bethel and then 
by accident get his former residence. Considerable repairs 
are necessary, and are being made, but when completed 
our large family could scarcely be better fixed 
for the few remaining years of activity which we expect. 
The new home we shall call "Bethel," and the new office 
and auditorium, "The Brooklyn Tabernacle"; these 
names will supplant the term "Bible House." 

Some day we may have a Convention in Brooklyn, 
when we shall have an opportunity of greeting many 
of our dear readers at one or both of these new locations. 
We solicit your prayers on behalf of the work 
and the workers at these new establishments, that with 
humility of heart and word and conduct, our enlarged 
opportunities for service may result in the glory of God 
and in the blessing of others and our own spiritual development 
in the fruits and graces of the holy Spirit. 



R4343 : page 68 

PROPOSED CONVENTIONS DURING 1909 



LAST YEAR we concentrated our efforts and had 
one General Convention at Put-in-Bay. It was 
both enjoyable and profitable and served some 
better than any other arrangement. For the present 
year, however, it has been deemed best to pursue a different 
course— to have a number of Conventions in various 
parts. The advantage in so doing will accrue chiefly to 
those residing far apart and to whom a General Convention 
would be too expensive, both as to time and money. 
In pursuance of this plan we have already had the 
Nashville, Tenn., and the Jacksonville, Fla., mid-winter 
Conventions. That the friends may be able to order 
their affairs to the best advantage, an early announcement 
of the Convention arrangements for 1909 is requested 
and stated below. In it we have sought the 
greatest good for the greatest number. 

EUROPEAN CONVENTION TOUR 

Unable last year to spare the time for even a brief 
visit to the friends of Germany and Scandinavia, we 
promised (D.V.) to see them hastily this year. The 
routes of travel make it convenient to see the British 
friends again enroute, and this gives us pleasure, as we 
have many cordial solicitations. However, our time 
being extremely limited, we cannot do what we would. 
We must hope that it will be possible for quite a number 
of the friends to attend the London Three-Day Convention. 
Our proposed itinerary follows:— 

Brother Russell expects to leave New York May 5th, 
on the steamer Mauratania, and he hopes to arrive at 
Liverpool May 1 1th. He will be glad to greet the friends 
as follows, as may suit their convenience:— 

Liverpool, May 1 1 Stockholm, May 23 

Manchester, " 12 Copenhagen, " 24 

Glasgow, " 13 Berlin, " 25 

Edinburgh, " 14 Elberfeld, " 27 

Bergen, Norway, " 17 London Convention, " 29-31 
Christiana, " 19,20 Due to arrive in Brooklyn, 

Orebro, Sweden, "21,22 N.Y., June 8 

SEATTLE, WASHINGTON, TOUR 

Leaving Brooklyn at 12:45 p.m., Thursday, July 
8th, our first stop will be at Memphis, July 10th, via 
Frisco Line. Leaving at 1 1:40 p.m. (111. Central Ry.), 
we are due to reach New Orleans Sunday, July 1 1, at 
10:45 a.m. Leaving at 9 p.m. we hope to reach Houston, 
Texas, at 10:15 a.m., and, leaving at 12:25 p.m., to reach 
San Antonio, Texas, at 7:35 a.m., July 13. Leaving at 
9 a.m., July 14, via El Paso at 8:30 a.m. of the 15th, we 
hope to reach Los Angeles at 12:45 Friday night, July 
16th. We leave at 5 p.m., July 17, arriving at Oakland, 
Cal, 8:45 a.m., July 18. Leaving at 8:57 p.m., July 19, 



we are due at Portland, Ore., 7:15 a.m., July 21, Wednesday. 

Leaving at 1 1:45 p.m. we are due at Seattle 

Thursday, at 8: 15 a.m. Leaving at 9:30 p.m. (N.P.Ry.), 

R4343 : page 69 

Sunday, July 25, arrive at Spokane at 10:50 a.m., Monday, 
July 26. Leaving at 3:20 p.m. (O.S.L.Ry.) arrive at Butte, 
Mont., 7:40 a.m., July 27. Leave at 2 a.m., July 28, arrive 
at Denver at 10:50 a.m., July 29. Leave July 30, 1:15 
p.m. (C.B.&Q.Ry.), ar. at St. Joseph, Mo., July 31, at 9:30 
a.m. Leave August 2 at 1:45 p.m., arrive Huron, S.D., at 
7 a.m., Aug. 3. Leaving at 8:10 a.m., arrive at Aberdeen, 
S.D., at 11:55 a.m. Leave (C.N.&St.P.Ry.) 8:35 
p.m., arrive at St. Paul, Minn., at 8:10 a.m., August 4, 
and Chicago at 9:45 p.m. Leaving Chicago at 1 1:45 p.m. 
(P.R.R.) arrive at Pittsburg at 6:05 p.m., August 5. 
General Meeting at Allegheny Bible House, 7:30 p.m. 
Leave 9:40 p.m., arriving at Brooklyn 9 a.m., August 6. 
Of course, changes of railroad schedules may make 
necessary some slight modifications of the foregoing. 
One-Day Convention, Memphis, Tenn. July 10 
New Orleans, La. " 11 
Houston, Tex. " 12 
San Antonio, Tex. " 13 
Los Angeles, Cal. " 17 
Three " " Oakland, Cal. " 17-19 

One " " Portland, Ore. " 21 

Four " " Seattle, Wash. " 22-25 

One " " Spokane, Wash. " 26 

" " " Butte, Mont. " 27 

Two " " Denver, Colo. " 29-30 

Five " " St. Joseph, Mo. July 29-Aug. 2 

Three " " Aberdeen, S.D. Aug. 1-3 

The Convention Committees of the Churches at the 
places named will please confer with us respecting 
further details desired. 



R4343 : page 69 

ROMAN CATHOLICS ENTHUSIASTIC 

ROMAN CATHOLIC dignity has been affronted 
and its fame mocked of late in regions where it 
has dominated for centuries— in Italy, France, 
Spain and Austria. But it finds its influence growing 
remarkably in the countries which threw off its yoke 
centuries ago— in Germany and Great Britain, as well 
as the United States. In the latter countries it is putting 
forth fresh energy and showing great vigor. 
Protestantism, through the influence of Higher Critics 
and Evolutionists, etc., having lost its former ground 
of Protest, sees no reason at present for longer thinking 
of the Mother Church as "The Man of Sin." Now they 



find in her much to respect and to follow, and little to 

reprove, except that now she is more loyal to the Bible 

than they, barring the item of Purgatory and a few incidentals. 

Well did the Scriptures predict the "Rolling 

together of the heavens as a scroll"— Protestantism being 

one part and Catholicism the other. They find 

themselves touching all along the line which both 

unites them and holds them apart. The Scriptures 

show a still closer intimacy in the near future, after 

Protestantism shall have combined or federated. 

The Church of Rome is losing no opportunity for 
the display of her mighty power, that Protestants and 
politicians may take due notice. Recently, in the leading 
cities of the Protestant world, she has thrown her 
banners to the breeze and shows fresh vitality— (1) in 
London, a general council of Bishops such as has not 
been held for centuries, because prohibited by the 
British Law; (2) at Boston, the intellectual hub of earth, 
was held a great celebration for the Pope's Jubilee— a 
monster affair in every sense of the word, more than 
5000 musicians alone giving marshal music to the other 
thousands who paraded, and the still other thousands 
who looked on; (3) at Chicago, the great Metropolis of 
the West, she has held another huge meeting of Catholic 
Societies. It is hoped by them that the English speaking 
world has thus been thoroughly impressed with the 
mighty power of the claimed successor of St. Peter, and 
claimed vicegerent of Christ, who says that for thirty 
years he has been debarred of the power necessary for 
reigning with the kings and kingdoms of earth. Surely 
papacy is now claiming that she is no widow— but a 
mighty queen.— Rev. 18:7. 

Papacy seems to have discovered that the land of 
the free yields the best return financially and otherwise, 
for she is expending lavishly in propaganda. She does 
not forget, however, that the sword is a mighty weapon, 
and with her religious propaganda her military endeavors 
keep pace, for she is encouraging her young 
men so to enlist in the regular army and State militia 
that there will be solid regiments of Catholics. She is 
giving similar attention to the supply of Catholic 
cadets for the battleships of the nation. Whoever thinks 
that the Pope and his Counselors are asleep makes a 
great mistake. This great System, in cooperation with 
the Protestant Federation, will in a few years take a 
prominent part in the stirring events of the world's 
affairs. 



R4344 : page 69 

THE FIRST GENTILE CONVERT 
-ACTS 10:1-48.~APRIL4.~ 



Golden Text:— "In every nation he that feareth God, and 
worketh righteousness, is accepted with him."— Acts 10:35. 

THIS lesson seems to illustrate the necessity for our 
understanding of the "Divine Plan of the Ages." 

After being blessed with this aid for several years 
we can scarcely appreciate what was our condition before 
this light shone on our pathway. Could we always 
have this in mind, it would assist us in the exercise of 
patience and forbearance towards our dear friends in 
all the nominal churches. In illustration of this we 
quote the words of a Doctor of Divinity on this very 
lesson— a man of much more than average intelligence, 
too. He says, "The narrow exclusiveness of the Jews, 
which had fortunately kept their religion pure for so 
many centuries, was a formidable barrier to this extension 
[of the gospel, beyond the Jews]. Christ himself 
had preached only to Jews. That was necessary, for 
the time of his ministry was too brief for a larger field, 
and the Jews at first would not have listened to a 
broader Gospel. But the time had come to break down 
the barrier of Jewish exclusiveness and carry out 
Christ's larger thought." 

Not seeing the "Divine Plan of the Ages," this 
teacher and most others impute to our Lord merely 
motives of expediency and broadening thought, and to 
the Jews narrowness and exclusiveness, whereas when 
once the "Plan of the Ages" is seen, it is discerned that 
it was God who was exclusive and who insisted upon 
the Jews separating themselves from Gentiles and who 
told them that they alone were his special nation, his 
chosen people. It was God who made a Covenant with 
that nation and not with others. It was God who declared, 
"You only have I known (recognized) of all the 
families of the earth."— Amos 3:2. 

It is the Apostle who explains to us that Israel had 
"much advantage every way" over all the other nations, 

R4344 : page 70 

because to them were committed exclusively the oracles 
of God— the Law and the Prophecies. To them alone 
Jesus came, not because of narrowness on his part, nor 
because of insufficiency of time on God's part. God 
delayed the sending of Messiah for over four thousand 
years. He could easily enough have made our Lord's 
ministry longer and have allowed it to extend to the 
Gentiles, had he chosen. On the contrary, our Lord declared, 
"I am not sent, save to the lost sheep of the 
House of Israel. "-Matt. 15:24. 

The proper view of the subject shows us that time 
and order have to do with every feature of the Divine 
Plan, that it has an exactness to a day. "But when the 
fulness of the due time was come, God sent forth his 
Son, born of a woman, born under the Law, to redeem 
them that were under the Law." (Gal. 4:4,5.) At exactly 



the right time he began his ministry. Exactly three and 
a half years thereafter it ended on the very day indicated 
in the type. On the very day indicated our Lord 
arose from the dead. On the very day indicated in the 
type the Pentecostal blessing came. And we may be 
sure that it was on the very day indicated that the incidents 
of this lesson occurred. That day must have been 
exactly three and a half years after our Lord's crucifixion. 

Why? Because, according to Divine prophecy, 
"seventy weeks" of years, 490 years, had been specifically 
set apart as a period of favor to the Jewish nation. 
It had been foretold that at the beginning of the last 
seven years of that period Messiah would come and that 
in the exact middle of that seven years Messiah would 
be cut off in death, but not for his own sins, but for the 
people's. It had been foretold that the prophecy would 
be marked by the anointing of the "most holy" at Pentecost 
and the further end of the seventieth week would 
also be marked as the termination of God's special, exclusive 
favor toward Israel. It was so marked by the 
sending of the Gospel message to Cornelius, and by his 
begetting of the holy Spirit after he had believed the 
message. 

The record shows that Cornelius was a just man, a 
reverential man, a benevolent man, a man every way 
prepared to be a follower of Jesus— a Christian, the 
only obstacle being that he was not a Jew. That obstacle 
was not Jewish prejudice, but an insurmountable 
one— God's unwillingness to deal with any others than 
his covenanted people of the seed of Abraham. So soon 
as the Covenant arrangement with Israel terminated, 
and God's "due time" came for dealing with such 
Gentiles as were in proper condition of heart, he had no 
difficulty in finding messengers to convey the good tidings, 
as our lesson shows. 

It is difficult for us to remember that but a few years 
ago we, like the mass of Christians, still somehow believed 
that we had been under the Law, as were the Jews; 
that the Ten Commandments and the sacrifices, etc., 
were all given to our fathers and that they were under 
the Jewish Law Covenant established at Mt. Sinai. We 
all believed also that, following our Lord's death, we 
were transferred from the Law Covenant, instituted by 
Moses, and came under the provisions of the New Covenant, 
which we supposed was in effect. It was in harmony 
with this that we used to sing with the spirit, but 
with misunderstanding also, the words:— 
"Free from the Law, O happy condition, 
Jesus has died and there is remission." 

The "Divine Plan of the Ages" showed us that the 
Law Covenant was not given to, and did not affect, 
Gentiles, but Israelites only. We were redeemed, but 
not redeemed from the Law; only the Jews, who were 
under that Law, could be redeemed from the curse of 
that Law. The same "Divine Plan of the Ages" shows 
us now that the New Covenant belongs to natural Israel, 



and will go into effect at the beginning of the Millennium, 
and that we are not under it at all. It shows us that 
we are under a still higher and grander Covenant than 
either the Law Covenant or New Covenant; that we are 
under the Faith Covenant, the Grace Covenant, the 
Abrahamic Covenant, the Oath-Bound Covenant, as 
the Apostle says in Heb. 6:17-19 and Gal. 3:29. 

Now we perceive that our high calling to be members 
of the Body of the Messiah, his Church in glory, 
signifies that we with him, under his Headship, as his 
Bride, will be associated in the mediating of that New 
Covenant between God and Israel and all the nations 
during the Millennial Age. Our lesson teaches us that 
God has an intimate acquaintance with all of our affairs, 
and at the appropriate time 

"God moves in a mysterious way, 
His wonders to perform." 

Our Lord indeed intimated that ultimately his 
Gospel message would be extended to all nations, beginning 
at Jerusalem. The Jews themselves had always 
expected that they would first be nationally blessed, and 
that God's blessing through them would extend to other 
nations, just as it ultimately will do, not under their 
(old) Law Covenant, instituted by Moses, but under 
their New (Law) Covenant, which will be in due time 
instituted by Messiah glorified. The disciples, therefore, 
had no thought of the Gospel invitation being extended 
to the Gentiles. They considered that, like all 
the preceding favors of God, it would go to the Jew only. 
It was not bigotry and not prejudice that lay at the 
bottom of this, but due to the Divine dealing of the past 
and the tenor of the Divine promises. The disciples 
had not yet learned that the Gospel dispensation, with 
its Spiritual Israel, is, as it were, a parenthesis in the 
Divine Plan, with Israel dropped at its beginning and 
restored to position at its conclusion. 

Cornelius had his vision first. He saw in a vision 
"openly," not in a dream, an angel of God coming in 
unto him. He talked with the angel and received the 
assurance that his prayers and his alms of years had 
now been received of the Lord, because the "due time" 
had come— the end of Israel's covenanted favor. We 
may be sure that at the same time the alms and prayers 
of all other Gentiles ascended up as incense to the Lord. 
We may be sure that blessings were arranged also for 
all such, and the Gospel sent to them, though not in so 
marked a manner as to Cornelius, because the Lord 
would make of his case a special lesson for the benefit 
of the apostles and of all of us who have lived since. 
In recounting this matter elsewhere Cornelius says that 
the angel told him to send for St. Peter and gave him 
his address and added, "When he is come, he shall tell 
thee words, which shall be to the saving of thyself and 
house." 

It will be observed that Cornelius' alms and prayers 
had not saved him. The death of Christ had not saved 



him, though it was necessary to his salvation; and his 

good works and prayers were necessary to his preparation 

for a blessing. The blessing could not come to 

him, except through a knowledge of the Truth, just as 

the Apostle assures us it shall ultimately reach all mankind. 

He declares, "God will have all men to be saved 

and to come to a knowledge of the Truth."— I Tim. 2:4. 

Let us not forget the importance God has attached 
to words— not to all words, nor to any words, but to the 
particular words or message of his grace, through the 
merit of Christ's blood. Cornelius was rejoiced, and 
showed his faith by immediately sending messengers 
to the Apostle. Meantime, while they were approaching 

R4344 : page 7 1 

Joppa, Peter at noon-time betook him to prayer, 
perhaps seeking special guidance as to what should be 
his next move in Christian work. He got the answer 
through a dream-vision and through the messengers of 
Cornelius. He went with the messengers, nothing fearing, 
and yet not for a moment presupposing what 
actually took place. He took with him six men, probably 
as witnesses, or as an escort, or because of the dignity 
of the person upon whom he was calling. He 
doubtless was surprised to find that Cornelius had invited 
into his house his kinsfolk and special neighbors, 
who with his own family made quite an assemblage. 
The simplicity of the centurion's faith was thus clearly 
attested. When St. Peter inquired why Cornelius had 
sent for him, he explained the visit of the angel and 

R4345 : page 71 

declared that now they were ready to hear the words, the 

"WONDERFUL WORDS OF LIFE" 

Note well the fact that, even though the special 
favor promised Israel had ended, there was still but one 
way for the good tidings to reach Cornelius. St. Paul 
declares that "faith cometh by hearing, and hearing by 
the Word of God." It came not to him by impression. 
Just so today; the knowledge of the Truth goes not to 
people, however ready for it, by mental impression, but 
still, as then, God honors and uses his faithful ones as 
his mouthpieces. Mark the expression, "When he is 
come, he shall tell thee words which shall be to the saving 
of thyself and house." Now, by reason of the art of 
printing, the message reaches many otherwise— by 
printed words. 

Let us note carefully what these words of life were. 
They were the simple story of the Cross: The story of 
man's fall, his sentence to death, his hopelessness as 
respects extricating himself from that condition and 
sentence; and the remedy which God in his mercy provided. 



The essence of the message was that "Christ 
died for our sins, according to the Scriptures, and rose 
again for our justification." The message continued, 
and showed how the justified ones were invited to become 
joint-sacrificers with and thus joint-sharers in 
Christ's coming glory. The centurion's heart had been 
troubled. There was something in the message that 
satisfied his longings as nothing else had ever done. 
He believed in the Redeemer and was thus justified. 
His consecration to the Lord, of years' standing, now 
became intelligent and specific. As his heart went out 
to the Lord in full acceptance of the Divine terms, in 
full consecration of his little all to the Divine service, 
the Lord accepted it, and manifested the acceptance; 
just as he had done with the consecrated Jewish believers 
at Pentecost. God having thus recognized Cornelius 
as a disciple and follower of Christ, a New 
Creature begotten of the holy Spirit, Peter tells us that 
he could not believe otherwise than that it was right for 
him to explain baptism to the centurion, and to give 
him water immersion, symbolic of the immersion into 
Christ's death, which he had already experienced. 

THE KEYS OF THE KINGDOM 

Our Lord had declared that he would give to St. 
Peter the keys of the Kingdom of heaven. A key symbolizes 
right or authority to open. On the day of Pentecost 
the Lord used St. Peter as his special mouthpiece 
in opening the door of the Kingdom to the Jewish 
people, to all who were in the right condition of heart 
to receive its blessings. Thus we read that "Peter, 
standing up with the eleven, said," he being the spokesman. 
So here, again, when the time had come for the 
message of the Gospel to go to the Gentiles, it was St. 
Peter who was granted the privilege of throwing the 
door wide open by the sermon which he preached to 
Cornelius. The "key" or power to open on both occasions 
was used by St. Peter. 

THE LESSON OF THE GOLDEN-TEXT 

These words of St. Peter do not signify that he had 
previously been mistaken in supposing that the Divine 
favors were all confined to the Jewish nation. He had 
been right in that supposition. It was in line with all 
the Scriptural declarations. St. Peter meant by these 
words that he perceived that now God was no longer a 
respecter of persons and nationality; that now, henceforth, 
the righteous, God-fearing, in every nation were 
to be acceptable. He now perceived the meaning of the 
vision granted him on the house-top, "What God hath 
cleansed, that call not thou common or unclean." The 
cleansing at first was merely typical and to Israel only, 
accomplished through the blood of bulls and goats. 
The antitypical cleansing through the blood of Christ 



was confined for a time to Israel only. But now, in the 
Lord's providence, the middle wall of partition was 
broken down, so that all believers amongst the Gentiles, 
seeking fellowship with the Lord, might become adopted 
members in Spiritual Israel, the "household of faith," 
and might be covered by the merit of the better sacrifice 
of Christ. 



R4345 : page 71 

THE HEART MORE IMPORTANT THAN THE HEAD 

"Keep thy heart with all diligence, for out 
of it are the issues of life."— Prov. 4:23. 

WE realize that our heads need keeping: and some 

of us at one time might have been inclined to 

say, "Keep thy head with all diligence, in line 

with the doctrines of Christ, and thy heart will be all 

right, for God will keep it." This, however, is a mistake. 

God has stated the matter correctly. We are not 

competent to keep our heads. We are competent and 

responsible for the keeping of our hearts. If we diligently 

keep, watch, guard our hearts from evil, and in 

full harmony with the Divine Word and its spirit of the 

Truth, righteousness, love, God will do the rest. He 

will guide our imperfect reasoning faculties, and we 

shall know his doctrines. 

Keeping the heart signifies keeping guard over our 
sentiments. It signifies a critical inspection of every 
motive of life. Why do we speak? What is the object 
desired? Why do we do this, or not do that thing? 
Is the motive honorable, just, loving? Do we love 
righteousness? Do we hate iniquity? Is the love of 
God being more and more shed abroad in our hearts? 
Is it increasing God-ward and man-ward, and toward 
the brethren? This is watching, "keeping our hearts," 
and implies that if a selfish thought or motive or ambition 
be found lurking anywhere, or seeking to guide in 
act or word, it should be promptly expelled— that the 
heart may be pure, clean. Keeping the heart means 
also activities in love, benevolence, helpfulness and 
the cultivation of thoughts and sentiments in accord 
with the Divine. It means not only the purifying of the 
heart, but the garnishing of it with the fruits and graces 
of holiness and love, that it may be acceptable to the 
Lord. So surely as injustice or sin or impurity is 
harbored to any extent, the heart is proportionately defiled 
and proportionately unacceptable to the Lord, and 
in the way leading towards repudiation by him. 

The words, "the issues of life," would remind a 
lawyer of the fact that when a case is tried in court the 
jurors are sworn to do their duty in respect to the issue 



R4345 : page 72 

joined— the decision to be reached. So all of the Lord's 
consecrated people are on trial. The issue has been 
joined. It means, (1) life or death eternal; and (2) additionally 
to those who win life there is another issue, 
namely, whether that life eternal shall be on the highest 
plane— of the divine nature and Joint-Heirship with 
Christ— or on the lower spirit plane of the Great Company- 
like unto the angels. Do we realize the issue 
joined in this trial, the outcome of which is so vital? 
If we do, and if we believe the Lord's declaration that 
the issue or result will depend upon our heart condition, 
then we see a reason why we should use "all diligence" 
in keeping our hearts pure, sweet, tender, loving, "a 
copy, Lord, of thine." 

Once, when our eyes of understanding began to 
open and we discerned the length and breadth and 
height and depth of love Divine and the wonderful Plan 
of Salvation, we inclined to think that the number who 
would fail to attain life everlasting, either in this age 
or in the Millennium, would be a small number. We 
would even have inclined to the Universalist view that 
all would ultimately be saved, had it not been for certain 
texts of Scripture which clearly intimate that, according 
to the Divine foreknowledge, there would be 
some who would die the Second Death, as a result of 
the "sin unto death"— "There is a sin unto death; I do 
not say that ye shall pray for it." — I John 5:16. 

But as we have become more and more familiar 
with the mind of the Lord as presented to us in his 
Word, we discern that none will be granted eternal life, 
except they shall attain a certain character development, 
and that that character development means not merely 
an outward loyalty and restraint from sin, but a heart 
loyalty and love for righteousness, and hatred toward 
iniquity. During the Millennium outward perfection 
will be the standard, yet ultimately in the end of that 
age, the heart development will be the test, which will 
determine who may go beyond to eternal life, and who 
may not. 

The heart test may now be said to be the only one, 
because our flesh, justified, then consecrated to death, 
is not the New Creature which hopes for glory, honor 
and immortality, but merely its imperfect servant or 
tool. The New Creature's heart or affections must be 
loyal to the very highest principles of Justice and Love, 
and, according to its development along these lines, 
will be the Divine decision for life or for death— on some 
plane or on no plane of being. The Great Company 
must have the Christ-like character, as well as the Little 
Flock and as well as the Restitution class at the end of 
the Millennium. We are not to understand that there 
will be, for any of the consecrated, any further trial or 
education or development or testing after the present 
trial is ended. No one will be in either the Little Flock 



or the Great Company except those who are in loving 
loyalty to God, to the brethren, to the principles of 
righteousness. All others will be condemned as unfit 
for life eternal upon any plane of being. 

Perhaps the worldly might say to us, It must be a 
great strain upon you and make your life miserable to 
be obliged to think continually of the right or the wrong 
of every act and every word and every thought, and to 
be obliged to repudiate and disown every sentiment not 
entirely just and loving. We reply, that at first it might 
have so appeared to us, but the Lord leads his people 
gently, graciously, step by step, to an appreciation of 
the principles of righteousness and love. Following on 
to know the Lord means, to such, continual growth in 

R4346 : page 72 

grace as well as in knowledge. We are glad that we 

see distinctly the issue joined in our case— that it is for 

life or death. To us this is the chief consideration— 

the making of our calling and our election sure, to life 

eternal. As we get a glimpse of the wonderful things 

which God has in reservation for those who love him— 

earthly pleasures, self-denials, self-sacrifices, all lose 

their weight and power— and gradually we come to the 

place where we "delight" to know and to do the Lord's 

will— to the mental attitude in which these Divine regulations 

are not grievous to us, but really joyous. This 

means that our minds have been "transformed," so that 

the things which we once loved, now we hate; and the 

things which once we hated now we love. Yet we approached 

this high position gradually. Those who 

come into Present Truth now have advantages in many 

respects, but we must also remember that as the time 

of testing grows shorter, it signifies that the tests themselves 

will be the sharper. 

LIFE UNTO LIFE OR DEATH UNTO DEATH 

The Apostle, contemplating the situation of those 
who have been saved by faith, through the knowledge 
of the Lord, and of his gracious plans, declares that the 
message becomes to such a life or a death message. 
The demands of our consecration to some appear onerous, 
burdensome. They have an odor of death that 
repels them, and leads on to Second Death. To others 
the ways of the Lord and the requirements of his holiness 
have a sweet odor, a life odor, bringing refreshment. 
Such an appreciation of the Divine goodness 
and of the Divine Plan, the Apostle refers to as a sweet 
odor of life, and tending and leading up to the glorious 
life condition which they shall share in the Resurrection 
of the blessed. 

The Apostle realized that the message he was 
preaching would have one or the other effect upon all 
who had the spiritual ears. It would be to them either 



a savour of life unto life or of death unto death. Then 

he adds, "Who is sufficient for these things?" (2 Cor. 2:16.) 

There is a tremendous strain of responsibility 

upon all who minister the Lord's Truth. Who is sufficient 

for these things? How can any of us fully grasp 

and comprehend the value of present opportunities? 

And how can those who, in the name of the Lord, present 

his message sufficiently realize the weight of responsibility 

attaching? 

Summing up, then, let us each know that if we do 
not keep our hearts from the leaven of malice, envy, 
hatred and strife, the issue with us will be the Second 
Death, and in the interim assuredly we would lose much 
of the light and spiritual blessings which we once enjoyed. 
If, on the other hand, we keep out the evils referred 
to, and put on the graces of the Lord's Spirit- 
meekness, gentleness, patience, long-suffering, brotherly 
kindness, love— the decision in our case will be life, 
eternal life. And in the interim, while waiting for our 
resurrection "change," our experience will be continual 
growth in grace, in love, and in knowledge of the things 
freely given of the Lord to such as are in this heart condition. 
These shall know the Truth and the Truth 

shall make them free— not with the freedom of the unregenerate, 
but with the liberty of the sons of God- 
liberty to do right; liberty to suffer injustice for 
righteousness sake; liberty to lay down our lives for 
the brethren, and, in general, for the Truth, and in 
doing good to all men as we have opportunity. 

"TAKE HEED TO YOURSELVES" 

The Apostle's words to the Elders of the Ephesus 
Church never were more fitting to the people of God in 
general than they are today. He said to them, "Take 
heed therefore unto yourselves and to all the flock, over 

R4346 : page 73 

the which the holy Spirit hath made you overseers, to 
feed the Church of God, which he hath purchased with 
the blood of his own Son. For I know this, that after 
my departing shall grievous wolves enter in among you, 
not sparing the flock. Also of your own selves shall 
men arise, speaking perverse things, to draw away 
disciples after them. Therefore, watch and remember 
that by the space of three years I ceased not to warn 
every one night and day with tears."— Acts 20:28-31. 

The Elders everywhere need to take special heed; 
because in every trial the most favored and most prominent 
have the severest besetments and tests. Hence 
the Apostle exhorts, "Be not many of you teachers, 
brethren, knowing that a man shall receive the more 
severe testing." We, likewise, exhort all the Elders who 
in heart are pure, unselfish, that they have nothing but 
love and good wishes for all mankind, and that they 



become more and more filled with the fruits and graces 

of the holy Spirit, taking heed also to the flock. Remember, 

that the flock is the Lord's and that you have 

a responsibility to the Lord, as well as to them. Remember, 

that you are to watch for their souls (interests) 

as those who must give an account to the Great Chief 

Shepherd. Remember, that the principal thing is Love, 

in all; and, while not neglecting doctrines, give special 

heed to the development of the Lord's Spirit amongst 

the various members of his Body, that thus they may 

become "meet for the inheritance of the saints in light," 

and, according to the Divine will, be not suffered to 

stumble in this evil day, but, having done all, to stand 

complete in Christ, his Body, his Members, his Joint-Sacrificers, 

his Joint-Heirs. 



R4346 : page 73 

DELIVERANCE IN ANSWER TO PRAYER 

-ACTS 12:1-19.-APRIL 11.- 

Golden Text:— "The angel of the Lord encampeth round about 
them that fear him, and delivereth them."— Psa. 34:7. 

OUR lesson is supposed to date about twelve years 

after our Lord's crucifixion. A period of rest 

and prosperity was now followed by persecution. 

Herod Agrippa I. had been appointed King of 

Judea. He was grandson of Herod the Great, the 

murderer of the babes of Bethlehem. He was nephew 

of Herod Antipas, who beheaded John the Baptist. It 

was his son, Agrippa II., before whom the famous address 

was made by St. Paul. (Acts 26:28.) He was not 

a Jew, but an Edomite, a descendant of Esau. He appears 

to have been desirous of the good will of the 

people, even at the cost of principle. He took pains to 

observe the minutia of Jewish ceremonials. He hung 

up in the temple the gold chain which the Emperor 

Caligula had given him. It is related that at a "Feast 

of Tabernacles" he caused the entire Book of Deuteronomy 

to be read in the hearing of the people, and that 

he "burst into theatrical tears" when the reader came 

to the words, "Thou mayest not set a stranger over thee, 

who is not thy brother." Thereupon the populace obsequiously 

cried, "Don't weep, Agrippa, you are our 

brother." 

PASSOVER SEASON SIFTING 

On the lookout to curry favor with the Jews, especially 
the influential ones, Agrippa caused the Apostle 
James to be beheaded, and finding that this brought 
great pleasure to the Jews, he had the Apostle Peter 



arrested. The Greek word here rendered apprehend 
rather implies that his arrest was after searching. 
Probably all of the apostles were more or less secreted 
about that time, but, trusting to the sacredness of the 
Passover season, St. Peter ventured forth and was arrested 
and imprisoned, Agrippa intending his death 
directly at the close of the Passover week. Meantime, 
however, the Lord delivered him, as this lesson shows. 

We can well imagine the sadness of the Church at 
that Passover season, which must have reminded them 
considerably of the time of our Lord's death and the 
alarm then amongst his followers. It may not be proven 
to the satisfaction of all, but to us for some years it has 
seemed as though each Passover season, each Memorial 
celebration, was a time of special trial and testing 
amongst the Lord's followers. As Judas and Peter and 
all of the Lord's disciples got their sifting at this particular 
season of the year, so, it does seem to us, the 
sifting and shaking, by which Satan desires to have 
others of the Lord's followers, are specially permitted 
at the Memorial season. But whether this is a true supposition 
or not, it will surely not injure the Lord's 
people to be specially on guard against the wiles of the 
Adversary at these times— since we are to watch and 
pray always, lest we fall into temptation. 

The thought of special trial, special temptation 
from the Adversary at this season of the year, seems to 
have been the foundation for the so-called "Lenten 
Season," or period of special restraint, fasting and 
prayer, which has come down to us through the oldest 
channels of Church history. The fact that the "lenten 
season" is with many today a mere formality does not 
mean that it is so to all, nor that it was so originally. 
Strongly would we recommend the fasting and prayer 
at all times enjoined in the Scriptures, and, if possible, 
that alertness be specially exercised by all of the consecrated 
during the forty days preceding the Memorial 
Supper. 

As we have already explained, our self-denials are 
not merely along the lines of food and drink, but extend 
to all of our appetites. Nevertheless a very simple 
and very limited diet in the Spring of the year would 
undoubtedly be beneficial for the majority of mankind, 
even were there no spiritual blessings and prayers connected 
therewith. Winter cold bringing hearty appetites, 
the result toward Spring is apt to be a surfeited 
or over-charged condition of the system, from which it 
needs to be relieved by a measure of abstention, which 
is as favorable to spirituality as surfeiting is 
unfavorable. 

THE CHURCH PRAYED FOR PETER 

St. Peter is supposed to have been imprisoned in 
the famous Castle of Antonio, possibly in the very same 
room in which our Lord was arraigned before Pilate, 



and the same one to which Paul was subsequently taken 

R4347 : page 73 

when mobbed in Jerusalem. Peter had a guard of four 
quaternions (four soldiers each), who relieved each 
other every three hours. Two of the four were chained 
to Peter's arms, one to each arm, and a third was outside 
the door and a fourth in the passage leading to the 
outer iron gate. The power of Divine grace helping in 
every time of need and giving peace amid alarms, is well 
illustrated in this case by the fact that under all these 
circumstances St. Peter was fast asleep when the angel 
of the Lord came to deliver him. The proprieties of the 
case are also illustrated by the fact that Peter's friends, 
the Church, were not asleep, but praying for him. It was 
not for him to pray for himself deliverance from the 
power of Agrippa, for he had already consecrated his 
life unto death, and properly should feel quite ready to 
lay down his life at this time, if such proved to be 

R4347 : page 74 

the Lord's will in respect to him. For him to have 
asked for the prolongation of his life would have 
been to ask amiss, and would have manifested a 
wilfulness incompatible with a full consecration to the 
Lord's will. But with the Church it is different. They 
could with all propriety, while expressing to the Lord 
their confidence in the Divine supervision of the 
Church's affairs, tell him also of their love for St. Peter 
and of how much his sacrificing in the service of the 
Truth had done for them and was doing for them. They 
could properly enough express the hope that it might 
be the Lord's will that he should continue with them for 
their joy and comfort and upbuilding in the "most holy 
faith." It should not surprise us either that this prayer-meeting 
on St. Peter's account lasted all through the 
night and, for aught we know, other meetings of the 
same kind may have been held besides the one referred 
to in this lesson, which was at the home of Mary, the 
mother of Mark, the writer of the Book of Mark and the 
cousin of Barnabas, presumably the unnamed person of 
Mark 14:51. 

It may be asked, Would it not have been appropriate 
for the Church to have offered prayer and then to have 
retired as usual, leaving the results entirely with the 
Lord? We reply that the examples given us in the 
Scriptures fully warranted the all-night prayer-meeting 
and even its continuance for several days. Do we not 
know of our Lord's remaining all night in the mountain 
at prayer? Do we not remember his long and repeated 
prayers in Gethsemane? Do we not remember the 
Apostle's exhortation to the Church, "Praying without 
ceasing, and in everything giving thanks"? Giving this 
a liberal construction as signifying a prayerful attitude 



of mind and continued looking to the Lord for his grace 
and guidance, nevertheless our Lord's parable of the 
importunate widow and her repeated comings and her 
reward all teach the same lesson of importunity. Besides, 
our Lord thus applied the parable, saying, "Shall 
not God avenge his very elect, which cry day and night 
unto him, though he bear long with them? I tell you 
that he will avenge them speedily."— Luke 18:7,8. 

In one sense of the word the fears and sufferings of 
the Lord's people and their trials and difficulties ascend 
to the Lord in prayer and call to Divine Justice for 
vengeance, recompense, punishments, without any word 
from his people to this effect. Rather their petition 
should be in line with Stephen's prayer for his enemies, 
"Lord, lay not this sin to their charge." Nevertheless, 
as Abel's blood is said to have cried to the Lord for 
vengeance, so the blood of his saints is said to cry unto 
him day and night, "How long, O Lord, dost thou not 
judge and avenge?"— Rev. 6:10. 

The Lord certainly does not wish us to understand 
that he has no oversight, arrangement or plans of his 
own, nor that the Divine arm may be moved by our 
prayers in any direction at our pleasure, at any time. 
On the contrary, the Lord assures that all of his purposes 
shall be accomplished and that his Word shall 
not return to him void, "but shall prosper in the thing 
whereto it was sent." (Isa. 55:11.) Nothing can alter 
the definite, fixed outlines of the Divine program. But 
the Lord has evidently left certain of the filling in of 
our experiences subject to change or modification. 
These minor details he is ready to use for the blessing 
of his people, for the development of their faith. Thus 
in St. Peter's case the Lord was doubtless intending a 
deliverance in some manner, because he had a further 
work for him to do, but he allowed it to come about in 
such a manner as to indicate it as a reward of the faith 
of those who prayed for him. Otherwise the deliverance 
might have come sooner or later, and in response to 
faith or works along some other line. 

The Lord evidently desires to cultivate in us a 
quality of faith, trust. Therefore he has made faith a 
condition for all of his blessings of the present age, and 
distinctly tells us that without faith it is impossible to 
please him, and that he desires us to "walk by faith and 
not by sight."— 2 Cor. 5:7. 

WHY ONE TAKEN AND THE OTHER LEFT 

The question materially and properly arises, Why 
was Herod permitted to kill the Apostle James and not 
permitted to kill the Apostle Peter? Was St. James unworthy 
of any further part in the Gospel work, or less 
worthy than the Apostle Peter? Was there not enough 
work for all, or was St. James permitted to die because 
he was ready for death, because he had finished his 
course? And was St. Peter preserved alive because he 



had not finished his course? None of these suggestions 
seems to be the correct one. Rather let us surmise that 
both apostles were loyal and acceptable to the Lord 
and at the mark of perfect Love, fit for the Kingdom. 
Let us suppose that the Lord preserved Peter because 
he had a special work for him to do, and that he allowed 
the beheading of St. James, not because there was nothing 
more that he could do, but because by such a death 
as he experienced and at such a time he could accomplish 
the most that was possible— a work which 
could not have been so well done at another time, nor 
by the death of another person. St. James, apparently, 
was the leader amongst the apostles and his execution 
would be a great shock to the cause, awakening the followers 
of our Lord to renewed zeal and energy in the 
proclamation of the Truth. It doubtless served to increase 
the appreciation of the people for the apostles, 
causing them to give still more earnest heed to their 
teachings and to realize how greatly the cause of the 
Lord had been made dependent upon them, the "twelve 
apostles" of the Church.— Rev. 21:14. 

This, then, would help to explain why the Church 
prayed day and night for St. Peter. The loss of St. 
James made St. Peter and every other Apostle doubly 
precious in the estimation of the "household of faith." 
God intended that St. Peter should live to be an old 
man, for this was our Lord's prophecy respecting him. 
But the emergency proved a blessing to the Church, by 
way of stirring up their pure minds to an appreciation 
of the Lord's cause in general and for St. Peter in particular. 
A similar lesson may be drawn today. As we 
see some ripe grains taken and other ripe grains left, 
it may mean that the Lord can use the death of the one 
the better and the life of the other the better, in his 
dealings with the Church. 

A REAL ANGEL, A REAL DELIVERER 

The time in which the holy angels were permitted 
to materialize still continued a power possessed by 
them, but, we believe, is not now permitted to be exercised. 
It was between three and six o'clock in the last 
watch, for Peter was not missed until sunrise (Vat), 
when the guards were changed. St. Peter, sleeping 
peacefully, was awakened by the angel, whose features 
were radiant, because this was necessary in order that 
the Apostle might discern that his deliverer was a holy 
being. The Scriptures mention numerous appearances 
of angels as men without radiant appearances. Peter 
was bidden to rise up. Quickly and simultaneously the 
chains which bound him to the soldier by either hand 
were loosed. He was instructed to put on his wooden 
shoes, or sandals, and to put on his outer garment, or 
cloak, and to follow his leader. We read that he followed, 
realizing the facts as those of a dream. Thus 



R4347 : page 75 

he was led past the first and second wards, or doors until 
they came to the great gate of the city, which opened 
of its own accord, and then the angel left him. 

It is worthy of notice that the miracles performed 
here were only such as were beyond Peter's natural 
power. Whatever he could do he was required to do, 
namely, putting on of his sandals and his cloak, and 
following the angel. He could have been transported. 
His own sandals or other sandals could have been 
fastened to his feet. A new coat might have been provided. 
But the lesson is a more profitable one as it was 
given. Similarly in the Lord's dealings with us today, 
we should remember that it is ours to do everything 
within our power, and the Lord's to overrule all things 
for our good, and to supply our deficiencies from his 
abundance. Thus still he gives us day by day our daily 
bread, in the rain and the sunshine and the seed; but 
he expects us to labor for it, to plow the ground, to sow 
the seed, to harrow it, to thrash it, grind it and bake it. 

"When Peter was come to himself," when he realized 
the facts in the case, that he was free, he said, "Now I 
know of a surety that the Lord hath sent his angel and 
delivered me out of the hand of Herod and.. .of the 
Jews." St. Peter's faith was strengthened. Willing to 
die, he found that the Lord was willing that he should 
live and labor and endure, and he was equally pleased, 
rejoicing, we may be sure, for the privilege of further 
service, even though it would mean further sacrifices 
and sufferings for the Lord's sake and for the sake of 
his people. 

Doubtless the angel started Peter in the direction 
of Mary's home, where the prayer was being made on 
his behalf. The description of the house with an outer 
gate implies that it was one of the better class. Peter's 
knock was heard by little Rose, for such is the meaning 
of Rhoda. So overjoyed was she that, forgetful to 
let him in, she ran first to tell the praying household 

R4348 : page 75 

that Peter was at the gate. Expecting no deliverance 
at such an hour, some thought the maiden mistaken, 
and then insisted that it must be his angel— in harmony 
with the prevalent thought that an angel had supervision 
of each individual of God's people and that such 
might personate the one under his protection. 

The brethren were surprised at the Lord's answer 
to their petitions, because it came so unexpectedly as 
respects time. There was an outburst of excitement 
and questions, which the Apostle was obliged to silence 
by the shaking of his hands. Then he narrated the 
wonderful story of his deliverance and bade them tell 
it to the other James, the brother (cousin) of Jesus, and 
the other disciples. Then Peter went his way, whether 



to another city or to another house, we do not know. In 
any event, he exercised wisdom in not needlessly provoking 
Herod. There was consternation with the coming 
of daylight. Later on in the same chapter we learn 
of another visit of the angel of the Lord— this second 
time to smite Herod with disease (intestinal worms), 
from which he subsequently died. This chapter then 
shows us the power of Satan, the power of God, and the 
power of prayer. 

THE GOLDEN TEXT 

Of course, our Golden Text is a symbolical statement 
illustrative of the Divine guardianship of all those 
who are truly his. The thought is the continual supervision 
of our affairs by the Lord. Whether we think of 
the angel of the Lord as one of the heavenly host 
specially appointed on our behalf, or whether we think 
of him from the standpoint of the various powers of 
nature, the levers of which are all in the Divine care, it 
matters not. We have the assurance that the Father 
himself loves us and that all the heavenly powers are 
pledged to those whom he has accepted in Christ Jesus, 
and these unitedly guarantee blessings to all those who 
abide in God's love. This means to abide in faith in 
the Redeemer. It means to abide loyal to our consecration, 
to do the Father's will to the extent of our 
ability. That will is declared to be that we shall love 
the Lord supremely, our neighbor as ourselves, and all 
the members of the household of faith, as Christ loved 
us. 



page 75 

LOVING SUBMISSION 

I may not understand just why the clouds obscure the sun, 
But I can trust him still, and feebly say, "Thy will be done." 
I know not why each door of service he sees fit to close; 
But I rejoice to find my will would ne'er his way oppose. 
I can but wonder why it seemeth to my Father best, 
To loosen from its resting place upon my throbbing breast, 
The priceless jewel fastened there by his own hand— but then, 
I joy to feel the mother-heart can still respond, Amen! 

I do not always clearly see the lesson I should learn, 
But hour by hour I'll strive to let the hallowed incense burn. 
I know not why the sweet must turn to bitter in the cup; 
But still I press it to my lips, and through my tears look up 
To him who is "too wise to err, too good to be unkind," 
Assured that when the cup is drained, a blessing there I'll find. 



Press hard, then, Master Workman, and refrain not, if I weep— 
The marble's fairest beauty grows beneath the chiseling deep. 
Yea, Lord, let skies be overcast, as seemeth best to thee; 
Take from my arms the dearest thing Thy love hath given me; 
Let sweet or bitter fill my cup, according to thy will; 
I'll closer clasp thy hand in mine, and in the flame hold still; 
And thus, although Thou slay me, I will praise thee night and 

day, 
I'll lay each burden at thy feet, and "bear a song away." 

-G. W. Seibert. 



R4348 : page 75 

"MAKE STRAIGHT PATHS FOR YOUR FEET" 

-HEBREWS 12:13.— 

WHEN the Apostle says, "Make straight paths for your 
feet, lest that which is lame be turned out of the 
way," what does he mean? He does not mean that 
we should literally shovel a path smooth, nor does he refer 
to our literal feet. All will agree to this. Evidently the 
Apostle's teaching is that each one of the Lord's sheep has 
more or less of earthly blemish (imperfection), in consequence 
of which lameness it is difficult for him to make steady progress 
in the footsteps of our Lord. He urges that as we find 
out what our weaknesses are, physical and mental, we should 
endeavor to shape our course of life accordingly, so as to be 
able to overcome the difficulties of the way and the besetments 
of the Adversary. We make the straight paths by 
choosing such a course as will not unnecessarily aggravate 
and excite our weaknesses, and thus make us the more lame. 
We are to seek to overcome the lameness, and, to do so, are 
not only to pray, "Abandon us not in temptation," but are to 
seek to avoid the temptations in all ways. How do we do 
this? We answer, by the exercise of our wills, or determination— 
by mental resolutions; or, in other words, by making 

R4348 : page 76 

vows or solemn promises to the Lord respecting our determinations 

to take the proper course. Anyone, therefore, who 

has followed the Apostle's injunction in our text has made 

vows to the Lord, which he should be faithful in performing, 

if he would come off a victor and have the Divine approval. 

The Lord does not lay these vows upon us, commanding 
us to do thus, and not to do so. This would be placing us 
under law and would hinder us from offering sacrifices as an 
antitypical priesthood. Only in general terms, therefore, does 
the Lord speak to his people, indicating to them the right 
path and leaving to them the matter of making their vows, 
according to their necessities, and paying their vows, and thus 
making progress in grace and knowledge and in character 
development. Whoever has not seen his need of making resolutions, 



making vows to the Lord, has not recognized the first 

principle of Christian development. He who finds from the 

Enemy's attack where his wall is weakest, and who then repairs 

the weak places as quickly as ascertained, does so by 

resolution to the Lord— by vows. He who has not discovered 

any weaknesses in his character is duly blind and "cannot 

see afar off." He who has not attempted to correct his weaknesses 

by resolutions to the Lord, vows to the Lord, has not 

yet begun that character development which must be completed 

before he can be pronounced an overcomer. 

Let us here present two dialogues bearing upon this 
question of character development by the aid of vows or 
resolutions:— 

Bro. A— Have you taken the Vow recently suggested to 
us in the WATCH TOWER? 

Bro. B— No. It seems to me that however useful it may 
be to others, it would not be so for me. 

A— Does the old man rebel against being tied down too 
tightly? 

B— I hope that is not the case. It seems to me that I 
already am doing practically everything that is stipulated in 
the Vow, and hence, that I need not take it. With reference 
to the first section, of praying for God's will to more thoroughly 
control my life, I already do that. Section two I already 
observe to the full— remembering my dear colaborers in the 
Harvest Work every day and striving to appreciate more fully 
my own privileges in it. As for section three, I certainly strive 
daily to scrutinize thoughts and words and actions, as I believe 
that every Christian should do. How can we do otherwise? 
Referring to section four, I long ago resolved to have 
nothing to do with Occultism or Spiritism, recognizing them 
as having to do with the Adversary. I have long observed 
the spirit of this section and, I might say, its letter also, with 
the exception of the reference to being in a room alone with 
one of the opposite sex, with the door wide open. I have not 
always followed that plan, but am free to confess that it 
would be a very good general rule to follow, and that it 
would save many people from trouble and, perhaps, be advantageous 
to myself. 

A— Why, Brother B, as I understand you, you have already 
taken these various parts of the Vow as mental resolutions 
to the Lord, in their spirit, if not in their letter. The 
difference seems to be that you have made separate vows of 
each point, whereas the WATCH TOWER has aggregated these 
various points into one Vow! 

B— Perhaps that is a proper way of stating the matter 
and yet, understand me, I have not bound myself as respects 
the future, but merely have this ideal before my mind as a 
proper course; then, as each case comes before the bar of my 
judgment, I decide it on its own merits entirely, and accordingly, 
if you please, resolve respecting that one case, or vow 
respecting that one case, that I will follow such a course. 

A— I see; but, dear Brother, that course gives you a 
whole lot of vowing many times a day, and gives you the 
bother of deciding many times a day. It may be that you 
have an extraordinarily well-balanced mind and that you have 



little difficulty in recognizing the line of principle in all of 
life's affairs, thus being able to decide each little question as 
it comes to you quickly, promptly, correctly, and that your 
mind is not liable to swerve from the principles of righteousness, 
even under pressure of temptations. If so, I can see 
that your plan of testing each little question as it comes and 
vowing or resolving on each point, and thus making many 
vows for one day, may, perhaps, be a safe enough plan for 
you, but would that plan be the safest and best for everybody, 
do you think? Surely you and I know some of God's 
dear people who are not very quick in their application of 
principles and doctrines to the affairs of life, some who are 
quite likely to be a little unbalanced and swerved in the 
presence of temptations. Would it not be wise for such to 
make their vows with cool deliberation, in harmony with the 
Divine will, when not beset with temptation, and thus to 
guide their footsteps, not merely for that day and moment, 
but for all the future days of life? Would not this be in full 
accord with the Apostle's exhortation of our text, "Make 
straight paths for your feet, lest that which is lame be turned 
out of the way"? Further, dear brother, if you already are 
recognizing these principles in your daily life, are you not 
leaving open a door to the Adversary, through which some 
time he might intrude upon you and pervert your judgment, 
under some kinds of temptation which we cannot now surmise 
in detail? 

If you are already bound by the principles which obtain 
in this Vow, as you admit, would it not be fastening on 
the armor, as it were, for you to take the Vow and thus relieve 
yourself from an interminable amount of consideration, 
questioning and deciding left to be done at the most unguarded 
and unfavorable moment, when the Enemy is before 
you, with his temptations? Besides, dear brother, as St. Paul 
declares himself willing to resolve or vow to eat no more meat, 
if thereby he would help a weaker brother, would not that 
be a valuable consideration for us in respect to this Vow, and 
an assistance to us in determining what we would best do to 
help the brethren, especially if we perceive that the Enemy 
is assaulting the flock, and particularly when we remember 

R4349 : page 76 

that it is a part of our covenant with the Lord, not only to 
assist the brethren in so slight a matter as this, but, if necessity 
calls for it, to lay down our lives for them? 

Brother C, what do you think of the Vow? Have you 
declared or subscribed it to the Lord as yours? Is it your 
solemn resolution before the Lord that you will follow the 
various points outlined in the suggested Vow? 

C— No; I have not taken it. I confess that I am afraid 
of it— fearful that I could not keep it. 

A— Why, dear brother, I am surprised at your expression. 
Did I not understand aright that you had made a full 
consecration of your life, your rights, your liberties, your all, 
to the Lord, even unto death? If so, that Vow, or Resolution, 
which you probably also symbolized in baptism, and which, 



therefore, is termed your baptismal Vow, is still upon you and 
is all-comprehensive? If you can keep that Vow, you certainly 
will have little trouble in keeping the Vow suggested 
in the WATCH TOWER. Tell us, please, what features seem to 
you so burdensome, so impossible? Surely not the first? 

R4349 : page 77 

C— No; I desire, surely, God's will to rule more and 
more in my heart and in my mortal body. 

A— Well, surely it is not the second point of the Vow 
which you object to— so surely as you are consecrated to the 
Lord and enjoying the light of the present harvest work and 
your own privileges in connection with it and all the dear 
colaborers! You surely remember these every day, or ought 
to. You are surely losing a blessing, if you do not do so. I 
advise that you so resolve at once and that you note carefully 
the blessing that will thus come to you, as you think 
about the work of the Lord and his people and your own 
harvest privileges and opportunities. Quite a good many report 
that they are having blessings along this very line- 
that as they think daily of their privileges in the harvest field, 
it strengthens their resolutions and gives them courage to 
thrust in the sickle of Truth. Tell me, dear brother, that you 
do not oppose, but fully endorse that feature of the Vow. 

C— Well, of course, when you put it that way, I agree 
partly. But suppose that I should fail some day to thus 
think and pray, either because of forgetfulness or because of 
sickness, or what not? 

A— If you should be delirious or lie unconscious, so that 
you could neither think nor pray, you would not be responsible. 
Likewise, if, in spite of your very best endeavor or resolution, 
the matter slipped your mind, you would not be responsible, 
because no man can do beyond his ability, and the 
Vow expressly declares for things that are reasonably possible 
by God's assisting grace. However, after taking the Vow 
you would assuredly find yourself living in that higher atmosphere 
in which you would be as unlikely to forget the 
harvest work and colaborers, as to forget your meals. More 
and more it would become a part of your very life, and help 
to raise your thoughts from the things of earth to the heavenly 
things and to reset frequently your affections on the things 
which are above. Look, now, at the third section of the Vow. 
Surely, dear Brother C, there is nothing in that section which 
your heart would not approve. Have you not already resolved 
to God and vowed to him to scrutinize your thoughts and 
words and doings, with a view to better service to him and 
to the brethren? I surely hope so, dear brother, for otherwise 
how could I think of you as a consecrated Christian at 
all? 

C— Oh! yes. I agree to it that that is all very fine, but 
can I watch every thought and word and act? 

A— Remember, dear brother, that you, the New Creature, 
have an enemy very close to you all the time— your old self. 
That old self would like to have you, the New Creature, off 
guard, so that you would not so carefully scrutinize every 



thought, every word, every act. It is that old self that is now 
fighting the Vow and saying, "Don't bind me any tighter, I 
have little enough liberty now." You must not mind what 
the old man says, dear brother. Listen, instead, for the Lord's 
voice. Through the Apostle, he tells us to kill the old man. 
"Mortify, therefore, your members, which are upon the earth." 
(Col. 3:5.) A large part of your difficulty, dear brother, and 
of the difficulties of all who seek to walk in the narrow way, 
is that the old man cries out and wants to retain liberty and 
life, but it is contrary to the interests of the New Creature 
that any attention should be paid to it. Tell him at once 
that you thought that he was dead and buried long ago, and 
are only finding out to the contrary now, and that by this 
Vow you intend to kill him outright and screw down his coffin-lid. 
It is your old man that does not like the Vow, dear 
brother, and not you, the New Creature, who must certainly 
approve it as being a help to yourself and to all the dear 
household of faith. 

Brother C, I understand that you said some very unkind 
things in respect to those who took the Vow— that you both 
thought evil and spoke evil, and acted in an improper manner. 
Dear Brother, this was surely not you, the New Creature, 
but the old creature, in command. How beneficial it would 
have been to you had you taken the Vow, and thus have 
impressed upon your mind a careful scrutiny of your every 
thought and word and act! It is useless for us to pray, 
"Abandon us not unto temptation, but deliver us from the 
Evil One," if, when the Lord shows us how we may ward off 
temptation and put a barrier between the Evil One and ourselves, 
we refuse to heed his counsel. 

I cannot think that the fourth part of the Vow is impossible 
to you, dear Brother C, nor that you really consider 
it unwise, in view of what we know of our Adversary and 
his various wiles, and in view of what the Scriptures tell us 
of his greater power in the closing of this Harvest time; you 
surely would not consider it wise to be careless in respect to 
the particular traps which we recognize are already set and 
baited for the world and for the Church during "the hour of 
temptation" which is now upon the whole world. Surely you 
are agreed that there are only two Captains, the Lord and the 
Adversary, and that it is a part of our duty, if we would be 
faithful soldiers of the cross, to oppose Satan's tactics and 
devices in every way, shape and form, do you not? 

C— Surely so, dear Brother A. And I believe that I can 
think of no objection on that score, either. 

A— Now, Brother C, we are to the last paragraph of the 
Vow. Your objection must be here, or you have none. What 
is the objection? You say you are afraid you cannot keep it. 
My thought, dear brother, is the very reverse— that you need 
not be afraid if you do not keep it. Are you afraid that you 
cannot conduct yourself always toward those of the opposite 
sex in private, as you do in public, in the presence of the 
Lord's people? If you have weaknesses along that line, dear 
brother, it is the very point which you need to fortify by just 
such a Vow as this. 

C— I fear that I should forget, or that, if I remembered, 



I would not be equal to the test. 

A— Dear brother, it is the New Creature that would make 
this Vow. The old creature would never make it. The New 
Creature resolves to do its best, resolves to God that, to the 
best of its ability, it will follow this course. And God says 
to the New Creature in return, "My grace is sufficient for thee; 
my strength is made perfect in weakness." What remains in 
the way, dear brother? Nothing, except it be a lack of faith 
on your part to accept the necessary grace and strength, or 
unless it be a lack of determination, which would mean a 
lack of consecration, which would imply that you were living 
in neglect of your original consecration vow, or baptismal 
vow. By all means, dear brother, remedy this matter. Exercise 
faith and determination to keep your original covenant, 
to keep your human will dead. This Vow will undoubtedly 
assist you in the carrying out of such a determination, and, 
if so, it will help you to make your calling and election sure. 
Without such a determination, apparently, you could never 
make it sure. 

Now, for the last clause of the Vow. What is the objection 
here? Is there any? 

C— My pride objects a little to the suggestion, though I 
acknowledge that the arrangement would be a safeguard and 
that, under its operation, no doubt, many would be preserved 

R4349 : page 78 

from indiscretions whose tendencies might not be spiritual, 
and might even be toward carnality. 

A— Well, my dear Brother C, your two arguments in opposition 
are the strongest arguments in favor of the Vow. If 
you have any pride on the subject, mortify it, deaden it. 
"Humble yourself under the mighty hand of God." Do it for 
the sake of others, if not for your own sake, though you admit 
that you have need of it for your own sake. As for the second 
point you make, surely that is an argument in favor of the 
Vow. It is a barricade, coming between the Lord's people 
and special temptation. If it should save from injury only 
one for whom Christ died, would it not be worth while for us 
all to take the Vow? But I assure you, dear Brother C, that 
I have information which leads me to think that hundreds of 
the Lord's people would be safeguarded by that Vow, and be 
nearer to the Lord, more closely "Under the shadow of his 
wings," and, consequently, farther from the great Adversary, 
the Fowler of Psalm 91. I urge you, dear brother, to take the 
Vow, not as a new one, for your original vow of consecration 
was all-inclusive. It is positive. This Vow is in a sense negative. 
In this Vow we formulate a list of some of the things 
we will not do, because we believe that by their avoidance 
we would be brought nearer to the Lord and separated from 
the power of the Adversary, and be ready more fully to render 
assistance to the brethren, who, with ourselves, are struggling 
up Zion's Hill in the narrow way. 

Do not take the Vow to please Brother Russell, nor as 

R4350 : page 78 



a fetish or charm to ward off the Adversary, but take it intelligently, 

as unto the Lord, and throw your influence in 

favor of it to all the dear brethren in Christ. There is a 

blessing in it, and the quicker you take it, the quicker you 

will share in that blessing, which many others are already 

confessing. "Make straight paths for your feet." 



R4350 : page 78 

THE NEW COVENANT AND THE NEW TESTAMENT 

THESE two words in our English are the same word 
in the Greek. The explanation of the matter is 
this:- 

The blessings of God upon Abraham were ostensibly 
given to the Jewish nation, but not actually so. A 
hidden meaning, or spirit, made that blessing, under 
the Law, applicable only to Jesus, who alone kept the 
Law and inherited its blessings. 

Secondly, That spiritual inheritance of the Law 
blessing came to all those who accepted Christ as the 
end of the Law and became united to him by consecration 
unto death. Thus, Spiritual Israelites are the 
heirs with Jesus of everything pertaining to the Abrahamic 
Covenant. 

However, our Lord's object in keeping the Law was 
not merely to gain life for himself, but by dying and 
getting the new nature for himself to be able to give to 
natural Israel, in harmony with the Divine law, the 
blessings which they had originally received, but were 
unable to retain through weakness of the flesh. Thus, 
through Jesus' death, a testament— good-will— or blessing, 
was entailed upon natural Israel; but instead of 
giving them that blessing at once, by Divine arrangement 
it is given first to Spiritual Israel, the "Holy 
Nation," the "Royal Priesthood," the "Peculiar People;" 
it is given to these conditionally— that they will not 
keep it to themselves, but dying as members of the Body 
of Christ, they will join with their Head in his will, or 
testament, giving all those earthly rights as the Seed of 
Abraham, to fleshly Israel. As soon as all the members 
of the Testator shall have died, this New Testament or 
New Covenant will thereby be sealed, or made effective, 
operative toward natural Israel. 

Thus Jesus was the minister, or servant, of the New 
Covenant which God proposed to make with Israel. 
Although he had a right to all that is to go to Israel, he 
kept it not, but freely surrendered it for us and them. 
We as his brethren, justified through faith in his blood 
(not through faith in the New Covenant), were permitted 
to become "able ministers of the New Covenant 
or New Testament"— able or fully qualified by our justification 
and by the terms of our sanctification, to be 



associated with our Lord and Head as sharers in his 
sufferings, proclaimers of his grace, announcers of the 
New Covenant, and assistants one of another as members 
of his Body in the filling up of the sufferings of 
Christ to the intended end. 



R4350 : page 78 

SOME INTERESTING LETTERS 
"AFTER MANY DAYS" 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL: 

Enclosed newspaper clipping from a Dayton, Ohio, paper 
is worthy of more than passing notice as a piece of church 
news:— 

"Rev. E. E. Baker, formerly of this city, but lately of Los 
Angeles, Cal., has withdrawn from the ministry to become 
western manager for the school of salesmanship. In his 
farewell to his congregation Mr. Baker said:— 

"The pastor of the present day has to preach what his 
congregation wants him to, or he won't keep his job. If a 
minister were not dependent upon the people he is supposed 
to uplift, we would have a broader, truer and more effective 
work from the pulpit to-day.'" 

Mr. Baker was pastor of the First Lutheran church of 
Dayton and was one of the most popular clergymen of 
the city. He resigned his charge to accept a call to the 
Woodward Avenue Presbyterian church in Cleveland, and 
later accepted a call to the Los Angeles church. 

About ten years ago Rev. Baker accepted from me, for 
criticism, a copy of your "What Say the Scriptures About 
Hell." After looking it over, he not only failed to criticise, 
but stated that a person could not preach from the pulpit all 
one thought. His taking this stand at this time seems to me 
to be the result of a ten-years' battle in his mind, and I am 
pleased to note that he now has the courage to stand by his 
convictions. 

Your brother in Christ, G. C. DRISCOLL. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

We again express to you our continued and growing 
love for yourself, and also for the work entrusted to 
your hands. We would also like to express our satisfaction 
with "the Vow" in many, many ways; and particularly 
blessed have we been by the prayer for you all 
there and the work in your hands and our humble part 
therein. 

This Vow has been also the means of bringing home 
to us the fulness of the Consecration Vow long since 
made, and has caused us to be much more careful in 
our scrutiny of our daily life, not only in the home, but 
before the world as well. The Word has been made 
more precious to us than ever before, and we cannot 



but feel that the Vow has been instrumental in a large 
measure in this. 

We are indeed pained to know that some are offended 
by that which it would appear could not offend any who 
do not desire to be somewhat entangled in the yoke of 
sin. The blessing to those who take it in its fulness 
will surely be manifest in the general Church. 

With kindest regards to yourself and the friends, 
and especially to Brother Page, who, we note, is with 
you again, we are, Very sincerely yours, 

C. H. DICKINSON AND WIFE. 



page 79 

BEREAN STUDIES ON THE ATONEMENT 
THE TEXT-BOOK USED FOR THIS COURSE 
IS SCRIPTURE STUDIES, SERIES V (E)* 

Questions on Study V.— The Baptism Witness of the Spirit 

APRIL 4 

(1) What particular thought is marked by "The Day 
of Pentecost"? P. 209. 

(2) Why is the blessing of the holy Spirit called a 
"spirit of adoption"? Who are adopted? And why? 
P. 210. 

(3) When the holy Spirit of God is said to have been 
shed forth, does it convey the thought of personality or 
not? Are persons ever shed forth or can a person be 
shed forth? Could a spirit or influence be shed forth? 
P. 210. 

(4) If the Father, the Son and the holy Spirit are 
really, as some claim, "one in person," how could the 
Son receive the holy Spirit from the Father and shed it 
forth? Is it not much more reasonable and much more 

in harmony with the teachings of the Scriptures to understand 
that the Father is one person, that the Son is 
another person, separate and distinct, and yet one in 
the sense of being fully in harmony? And is it not 
reasonable to think of this holy influence, this Divine 
power, as proceeding forth from the Fountain of all 
Grace, the Father, and coming properly to the Son, 
highly exalted to Divine glory and power? And is it not 
proper to think of the Son receiving this holy Spirit as 
the Advocate or Attorney for the "household of faith," 
and as the members of his Body, the Church, and dispensing 
it upon them? P. 211, par. 1. 

(5) Some urge that Christians pray for fresh Pentecostal 
blessings. Is this suggestion Scriptural or not? 

Give the reasons. P. 211, par. 2. 

(6) Which was the first baptism of the holy Spirit 
and what was its effect? And how was it manifested? 
P. 211, par. 3. 



(7) Who did the baptizing of Jesus with water? 
Who with the holy Spirit? Who baptized the Church 
at Pentecost? P. 212, par. 2. 

(8) What was the outward evidence of the spirit's 
baptism in Jesus' case? What in the Church's case at 
Pentecost? What in the case of the first Gentile convert, 
Cornelius? P. 212, par. 2; P. 213, par. 1. 

APRIL 1 1 

(9) Why was there a special manifestation of the 
holy Spirit in the case of Cornelius? P. 213, par. 2. 

(10) If a special manifestation by spirit baptism 
had not been granted to Cornelius, what would have 
been the effect upon all of us, who by birth are Gentiles 
and not Hebrews? P. 213, par. 3. 

(11) Do we know of any other baptism of the holy 
Spirit than these three that apply to the Gospel Age? 
And are we not deprived of some blessing in that we 
have no such outpouring? If not, why not? Explain 
the philosophy of it. P. 214. 

(12) What relationship subsists between water 
baptism and baptism of the holy Spirit, which we are 
now discussing? P. 215, par. 3. 

(13) How should we regard the views of some who, 
contrary to the Scriptures, pray and agonize for a Pentecostal 
blessing? P. 216. 

(14) Will there ever be another baptism of the holy 
Spirit? If so, when, where, upon whom? P. 217. 

(15) What will be the effect of that spirit baptism? 
P. 218. 

APRIL 18 

(16) Will the outpouring of the holy Spirit upon all 
flesh signify that all will be received into eternal fellowship 
with God? P. 218, par. 1. 

(17) Is there anything peculiar in the phraseology 

of Joel's prophecy? State it. Then explain the statement 
in harmony with other Scriptures. 

(18) In what sense can we properly consider the 
old men said to dream dreams as being the Ancient 
Worthies, whose philosophies were but vague visions- 
presentations of the wonderful Millennial facts which 
shall yet be fulfilled? 

(19) In what way can we say that the young men of 
the future will see with clearness of vision and actually 
the things of which the Ancients but vaguely dreamed"? 
P. 220, par. 1. 

(20) Will the holy Spirit, granted during the Millennium, 
be the same spirit or power or influence of God 

that Christians of the present age enjoy? P. 220, par. 1 . 

(21) Will those receiving it be similarly thrown out 
of harmony with the world? Why not? 

(22) Will that baptism of the Spirit cost the baptised 
one suffering and self-denial, as the baptism of the 



Spirit now affects the Church? If it will not, why not? 
P. 220, par. 2. 

(23) Will the baptising during the Millennium mean, 
as now, the begetting of the holy Spirit to a change of 
nature? If not, why not? P. 220, par. 3. 

(24) What will it signify? P. 221. 

APRIL 25 

(25) Was our Lord in the flesh the Second Adam? 
P. 221, par. 3. 

(26) When did our Lord become the Second Adam? 
Cite the Scriptural proof. And explain how the Second 
Adam, a spirit being, could be the father of restored 
humanity on the earthly plane. 

(27) While we are not to pray for fresh Pentecosts 

or spirit baptisms, may we pray for a filling of the holy 
Spirit? P. 222, par. 1. 

(28) Cite a Scripture which authorizes us to pray 
for the holy Spirit. P. 222, par. 3. 

(29) Would such prayers be miraculously answered, 
or by what means should we expect that the seeker 
would find and the knocker have the door of blessing 
opened up to him? P. 223. 

(30) Is more than prayer necessary to the obtaining 
of the holy Spirit? If so, what more is essential? 

P. 223, par. 2. 

(31) Quote and cite a Scripture which urges us to 
be filled with all the fulness of God? P. 224, par. 1. 

(32) When our Lord assured us that our heavenly 
Father is pleased to give the holy Spirit to them that 
ask him, can this be properly understood to mean that 
the Father would wish us to ask for another God, a third 
person to the trinity of God? Is such a thought reasonable 
or connected with the promise? P. 224, par. 2. 

(33) Where and how are we to seek and find God's 
further blessing and holy Spirit? P. 225. 



*Five years ago DAWN-STUDIES, VOL. V., was reset, and 
unfortunately the type was not exactly same size as before; and 
hence page for page they differ. The references given in these 
Berean Studies apply to the present edition, a copy of which 
postpaid will cost you but 30c. But keep your old edition, for 
unfortunately the new Bible Helps refer to its pages. 



page 80 

PUBLIC MINISTRIES OF THE TRUTH 
UNDER THE AUSPICES OF PEOPLES' PULPIT 
ASSOCIATION OF BROOKLYN, N.Y. 



ONE-DAY LOCAL CONVENTIONS ADDRESSED BY THE 
EDITOR OF THIS JOURNAL AS FOLLOWS: 

SCRANTON, PA., MARCH 14 

Morning sessions in Concert Hall, Guernsey Building, 316 
Washington avenue. Special service of Prayer, Praise and 
Testimony at 9:00 a.m., and discourse for the interested at 
10:30 o'clock— Brother Russell will address the friends. 

Afternoon session for the public at 3:00 o'clock in Lyceum 
Theatre. Subject, "Where are the Dead?" 

Visiting friends cordially welcomed. 

BROOKLYN, N.Y., MARCH 21 

Discourse by Brother Russell at 3:00 p.m. Evening meeting 
for the interested at 7:30 o'clock. This will be a Question 
Meeting. Visiting friends cordially welcomed. 

All meetings will be held in the Brooklyn Tabernacle, Nos. 
13-17 Hicks street. Convenient to all cars and ferries— close 
to the old bridge terminus. 

PITTSBURG N.S. (Allegheny), PA., MARCH 28 

Session for the public at 3 p.m. in Allegheny Carnegie 
Hall, Corner Ohio and Federal Sts. Visiting friends heartily 
welcomed. Baptismal services for those desiring same and 
notifying, at 10:30 a.m. Question meeting at 7:30 p.m., 
Bible House Chapel, 610 Arch street. 

BROOKLYN, N.Y., APRIL 4 

BOSTON, MASS., APRIL 11 



BROOKLYN TABERNACLE EVERY SUNDAY 



Preaching at 3:00 p.m. Praise service at 7:00 p.m.; 
Berean Bible Study at 7:30 p.m. Convenient to New York 
via Subway, and Jersey City via P.R.R. Annex Ferry. 



STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES 
"MILLENNIAL DAWN" 



THESE STUDIES ARE RECOMMENDED TO STUDENTS AS VERITABLE "BIBLE KEYS. 

PRICES ARE NET AND BARELY COVER COST OF PRODUCTION, 

WHEN DELIVERED BY COLPORTEURS THE COST AND PRICE ARE INCREASED. 

SERIES I., "The Plan of the Ages." gives an outline of the divine plan 



revealed in the Bible, relating to man's redemption and restitution: 
386 pages, in embossed cloth, 25c. (Is. l/2d.) India paper 
edition, 75c. (3s. l-l/2d.) 

This volume has been published as a special issue of our journal— 
at the extremely low price of 5c. a copy, in any quantity, postage included. 
(To foreign countries, 9c.) This enables people of slender 
purse to herald far and wide the good tidings in a most helpful form. 

SERIES II., "The Time is at Hand," treats of the manner and time of 
the Lord's second coming, considering the Bible Testimony on this 
subject: 370 pages, in embossed cloth, 25c. (Is. l/2d.) India paper 
edition, 75c. (3s. l-l/2d.) 

SERIES III., "Thy Kingdom Come," considers prophecies which mark 
events connected with the "Time of the End," the glorification of the 
Church and the establishment of the Millennial Kingdom; it also contains 
a chapter of the Great Pyramid, showing its corroboration of the 
dates and other teachings of the Bible: 384 pages, in embossed cloth, 
25c. (Is. l/2d.) India paper edition, 75c. (3s. l-l/2d.) 

SERIES IV., "The Day of Vengeance," shows that the dissolution of the 
present order of things is in progress, and that all the panaceas offered 
are valueless to avert the predicted end. It marks in these events the 
fulfilment of prophecy, noting specially our Lord's great prophecy of 
Matt. 24 and Zech. 14:1-9: 660 pages, in embossed cloth, 30c. (Is. 3d.). 
India paper edition, 85c. (3s. 6-l/2d.) 

SERIES V., "The At-one-ment Between God and Man," treats an all- 
important subject— the hub, the center around which all the features 
of divine grace revolve. Its topic deserves the most careful and 
prayerful consideration on the part of all true Christians: 507 pages, 
in embossed cloth, 30c. (Is. 3d.) India paper edition, 85c. (3s. 6-l/2d.) 

SERIES VI., "The New Creation," deals with the Creative Week (Genesis 1 
and 2), and with the Church, God's "New Creation." It examines 
the personnel, organization, rites, ceremonies, obligations and 
hopes appertaining to those called and accepted as members of the 
Body under the Head: 740 pages, in embossed cloth, 30c. (Is. 3d.) 
India paper edition, 85c. (3s. 6-l/2d.) 

The above prices include postage. 

IN FULL LEATHER BINDING, gilt edges, the set (6 vols.) $3.00, 
(12s. 6d.), plus postage, 60c. (Is.). 

MILLENNIAL DAWN is published in foreign languages as follows: 
German five vols, in Swedish, vols. 1, 2, 3 and 5; in; Dano-Norwegian, 
three vols.; in French, two vols.; in Italian, one vol.; in 
Greek two vols.; bound in cloth, uniform with English edition, prices 
the same. 

The volumes in English are bound in two styles, MILLENNIAL DAWN 
in green cloth binding and SCRIPTURE STUDIES in maroon cloth. Specify 
which you desire. 



page 81 



SEMI-MONTHLY 
VOL. XXX MARCH 15 NO. 6 
A.D. 1909-A.M. 6037 



CONTENTS 

Views from the Watch Tower 83 

Christian Nations Perplexed 83 

Occult Phenomena 83 

Another Harmony Suggestion 84 

Brother Russell's Sermons 84 

"Why Persecutest Thou Me?" 84 

How Noble His Conversion! 85 

Ransomer, Redeemer, Sin-Offering, Atoner, Advocate, 

Mediator 87 

Confusion of Tongues in Babylon (Illustrated) 89 

Christians First at Antioch 90 

Christ Our Passover (Poem) 92 

Missionary Spirit of Christianity 93 

Reasons for a Layman's Change of Belief 94 

Some Interesting Letters 95 

page 82 

Address Business Communications and Remittances to 

WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY 

610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA. 
--OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH, 24 EVERSHOLT ST., LONDON, N.W. 
GERMAN BRANCH, UNTERDORNER STRASSE, 76, BARMEN 
AUSTRALASIAN BRANCH, EQUITABLE BULDG., COLLINS ST., MELBOURNE 
PRICE $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POSTOFFICE. 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA 



R4360 : page 82 

ADDRESS US HEREAFTER AT BROOKLYN, NY. 



TO THE LIST OF GENERAL CONVENTIONS IN OUR LAST 
ISSUE ADD BROOKLYN, NY., SEPTEMBER 
4TH TO 6TH, INCLUSIVE 



VERY CHEAP POCKET HYMNALS WITHOUT MUSIC 

As the friends are learning the tunes of the Hymns of the 
Millennial Dawn, they are coming to a fuller appreciation of 
the fact that there is not another collection in the world its 
equal— either in high standard of quality or in lowness of 
price. These are well termed "333 Ageless Hymns"; because 
they never grow old. The tunes, too, are grand and never 



wear threadbare. 

The suggestion that all sing the same hymns, and all 
know the tunes at our Conventions, has borne good fruit also. 
All this has led up to a demand for the hymnal in very cheap 
form. This demand we can now meet. Orders may be sent 
in at once. Prices as follows:— 

Paper covered, 4 cents each, postpaid; per 100, charges 
collect, $2.00. In Great Britain, (2d.) per copy; (10s.) per 100. 

Cloth covered, 6 cents each, postpaid; per 100, charges 
collect, $3.50. In Great Britain, (3d.) per copy; (12s., 6d.) 
per 100. 



R4383 : page 82 

THE VOW IN BOOK-MARK FORM 

By April 10th we hope to have the Vow Poem and also in 
Prose in good supply. We can fill your orders by mail, postage 
prepaid, as follows:— 

On Satin Ribbon, 10 cents; three for 25 cents. 

On silk finished paper, 25 cents per 100. 



page 82 

PROBABLE DELAY IN FILLING OF ORDERS 

On account of the moving which is now in progress, the 
friends would do well to remember that quite probably there 
will be delay in the filling of orders now being received, and 
also in the answering of correspondence— for a few days only, 
we trust. 



R4350 : page 83 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER 
CHRISTIAN NATIONS PERPLEXED 



OUR dear friends, who do not believe in a future Millennium, 
attempt to prove that we are now enjoying the 
blessings of Christ's Kingdom, and point us to the 
Christian nations of the world, called "Christendom." They 
are greatly perplexed when we inquire why if Christ is King 
he should have different forms of government, and why his 
different governments for centuries have fought each other 
and today are wasting the blessings of our day on armies and 
navies and fortifications? 
Alas! the name "Christendom" is a delusion. Satan is still 



"the prince of this world" and the term "Satandom" would 
be the truer title. But our "wily" Adversary is so crafty that 
he puts darkness for light and deludes the poor world. Thank 
God that soon Satan shall be bound for a thousand years that 
he may deceive the nations (peoples) no more, until the thousand 
years are finished.— Rev. 20:3. 

Meantime, however, some useful purposes are being 
served by the military expenditures. Employment is being 
given to millions of men not only in military and naval services, 
but also in the building of guns and forts and battleships, 
—the mining of the ore, the smelting and rolling of the 
steel, etc. And not the poor, but the rich, foot the bills in 
taxes. The following from the Atlantic Monthly is 
interesting:— 

CAUSE OF NATIONAL DEFICIT 

All the great nations are today facing deficits, caused in 
every case by the military and naval experts. Into what a 
tangle the finances of Russia and Japan have been brought 
by militarists is known to everybody. Germany has, in a single 
generation, increased her national debt from eighteen million 
dollars to more than one billion dollars. The German 
Minister of Finance looks wildly around in search of new 
sources of national income. Financial experts confess that 
France is approaching the limit of her sources of revenue. 
Her deficit is created by her army and navy. The British 
government is always seeking for new devices by means of 
which to fill a depleted treasury. Her Dreadnoughts keep her 
poor. Italy has for years staggered on the verge of bankruptcy 
because she carries an overgrown army on her back. 
Even our own rich republic faces this year a deficit of over 
a hundred million dollars, largely due to the one hundred and 
thirty millions we are spending on our navy. Mr. Cortelyou 
has called our attention to the fact that while in thirty years 
we have increased our population by 85 per cent, and our 
wealth by 185 per cent., we have increased our national expenses 
by 400 per cent. 

MANY SECESSIONS FROM THE GERMAN STATE CHURCH 



Ecclesiastical circles in Germany are much exercised at 
the rapidly increasing desertions from the State Church. 

Although the process of official separation from the 
Church is one of the greatest difficulty, delay and expense, it 
is computed that in Berlin alone considerably over 10,000 persons 
have severed their connection with the Church during 
the past year. So great is the number of those who are notifying 

R4351 : page 83 

their intention to terminate their membership that special 
offices have been opened in Berlin to receive their applications, 
which now number between 300 and 400 daily. These applications 



are almost altogether from members of the Lutheran 
Church, and hardly affect the Roman Church at all. Added 
to this is the significant fact that the numbers of communions, 
baptisms, and church marriages are rapidly diminishing. It is 
computed that for every five marriages celebrated five years 
ago in church and registry office only three are now celebrated 
in both places, the other two being satisfied with a civil 
ceremony alone. 

Among the working classes, especially those attached to 
the Social Democratic party, there exists a bitter hostility to 
the clergy and all institutions which they control. The clergy 
have not shown themselves sympathetic to democratic wishes, 
siding on almost all occasions where conflict exists between 
poor and rich, between possessors and dispossesed, with the 
class in power. There is, moreover, a widespread feeling that 
the clergy are paid far too high salaries, yet notwithstanding 
this large additions have been made recently to their incomes. 

Much dissatisfaction is also felt at the methods employed 
by the ecclesiastical authorities in collecting those dues assigned 
to them by law. Defaulters are as ruthlessly treated 
as though their debt were a civil one, and it not infrequently 
happens that defaulters' goods and chattels are sold to meet 
church demands. 

But probably the chief cause of the movement against the 
Church is the spread of agnosticism among all classes of the 
population, and the fact that even in those universities where 
until recently an orthodox theology was taught, there are now 
few chairs from which ultra Liberal views are not proclaimed. 
—London Daily Chronicle. 

OCCULT PHENOMENA 



The newspapers far and near are publishing the following 
item, which can be understood only from the Bible standpoint, 
namely, that humanity is beset by the fallen angels 
("demons") except as protected by the divine power. And 
that now, in the end of the age, as a part of the great test 
or trial of the world, the divine protection will be relaxed in 
considerable measure. And that as a result occult phenomena 
will increase human delusions with a view to various ensnarements, 
mental and physical. The "very elect" will be 
shielded by the Truth and by its holy Spirit, keeping their 
hearts and minds in Christ Jesus. (Matt. 24:24.) We read:— 

"Fred E. Foskett, a young machinist of Orange, Mass., 
has attracted the attention of Prof. James, of Harvard, and 
other leading members of the Boston branch of the American 
Society of Psychical Research, who gave him tests recently. 

"The first of the tests was held at the home of Prescott 
F. Hall on Saturday afternoon. Prof. Wm. James and several 
well-known professors were there, and test conditions as 
nearly perfect as possible were made. Foskett was seated in 
the center of a room before a small table. There he performed 
every feat of the Hindu fakir and the Buddhist 
adept. 



"On the table was an ordinary kerosene lamp with a chimney 
and a flat wick, a pan and several quarts of alcohol. According 
to the reports of those present, Foskett succeeded in 
every test. The first test was made with ordinary sulphur 
matches. Foskett lighted half a dozen, one after the other, 

R4351 : page 84 

holding them with one hand so close to the fingers of the 
other that the flames curled around them. He then lighted 
the lamp and held his hands above the wick, while the flames 
curled over them and the soot completely blackened them. 

"From one of these tests to another Foskett went, while 
the scientists held their breath and watched every motion 
until he came to the climax. In this he poured a quart of alcohol 
into the basin, lighted it and then washed his hands, 
bathing them for nearly ten minutes in the burning fluid, 
washing it up over his arms and to his face— literally bathing 
himself in blazing alcohol. That completed the tests for 
Saturday. As soon as they were finished the physicians present 
examined Foskett, and they could not find the slightest trace 
of a burn or blister. Foskett then told them that the flames 
did not give him the slightest sensation of burning, that he 
felt comfortably warm and pleasant, and nothing more. 

"The second tests were made at the home of Prof. James 
in Cambridge, and under the same conditions as the day before. 
Considerable mystery is thrown about them. Mr. Hall 
said they were so startling that he did not care to discuss 
them until they had been tried again. Another scientist 
who was there said that Foskett performed all of his experiments 
of the day before, and then ABSOLUTELY AND POSITIVELY 
DEM ATERIALIZED ."' 

"He seemed to dissolve into thin air as we watched him. 
Was gone forty-one seconds and then materialized." 

ANOTHER INSTANCE 

A brother in Present Truth had a peculiar experience 
lately. He was called to the house by cries of Fire! He 
found that the lighted lamp had fallen over on the bookstand. 
The oil was blazing over the little table, burning the 
books, etc. In desperation he carried the stand out and threw 
it, lamp, books and all, into the snow. The blaze encircled his 
arms and came into his face and he expected to be terribly 
burned. To his surprise not even the hair of his arms was 
singed. 

After smothering the burning carpet he went to pick up 
the things thrown into the snow and found his WATCH TOWER 
Bible and Diaglott still burning, whereas the Bible of his 
wife (a Methodist) was not at all burned, though on the 
same table. 

The wife reasoned that this was a mark of God's displeasure 
against our publications. We argue reversely, that 
it marked Satanic displeasure. 

This reminds us of the case of a young man obsessed 
of evil spirits. A brother in the Truth heard of his case 



and called to advise him how to get rid of the evil spirits- 
taking along the Spiritism pamphlet and a copy of the WATCH 
TOWER. When he attempted to enter the room where the 
youth was, the latter became so agitated that the Brother 
retired. Later he entered without the literature all right. By 
conversation he got the youth to exercise his will against the 
spirits and finally got him reading. 

Gradually he regained his freedom, and when last we 
heard, he was rejoicing in the Lord and had symbolized his 
full consecration by water baptism. 

ANOTHER HARMONY SUGGESTION 



Some who have visited the Bible House and participated 
in our morning hymn and prayer, and the subsequent thanksgiving 
at the breakfast table and reading of "The Vow" and 
discussion of the MANNA text offer a suggestion. They desire 
"The Vow" in some form convenient for reading with the 
MANNA, and to know the numbers of the hymns to be sung, 
that they may join with us in voice as well as in heart. 

Undoubtedly this spirit of oneness and brotherhood will 
increase as we get the love of God more and more shed abroad 
in our hearts. The Bible House Family— henceforth the "Bethel 
Home," deeply reciprocates these precious sentiments, and will 
sing and pray and discuss with the more pleasure because of 
this fresh evidence of the oneness of the family of God 
everywhere. 

Our worship hour is 7:00 a.m., except Sundays, at 8:00 
a.m. We have long given the choice of hymn to each in turn. 
Hereafter we will permit each to choose in advance and publish 
in advance the choice monthly, as follows:— 

BETHEL HYMNS FOR APRIL 

(1) 19; (2) 121; (3) 155; (4) 105; (5) 198; (6) 193; 
(7) 7; (8) 179; (9) 176; (10) 224; (11) 263; (12) 307; (13) 
312; (14) 233; (15) 208; (16) 325; (17) 119; (18) 87; (19) 
144; (20) 268; (21) 114; (22) 273; (23) 116; (24) 63; (25) 
313; (26) 4; (27) 72; (28) 194; (29) 93; (30) 217; (31) 264. 

Our provision for copies of "The Vow" for use in the 
MANNA book is in the form of Book-marks, described on 
second page of this issue. 

BROTHER RUSSELL'S SERMONS 



Some of the dear friends appear fearful lest Brother Russell 
should become popular and then vain. Take no anxious 
thought on the subject, dear friends. Leave matters in the 
Lord's hands. He can give you rest and keep you from 
stumbling either into cold opposition or even lukewarmness. 

As already expressed, our expectation is that the Truth 
will have a very brief season of wonderful prosperity, which 



will draw the attention of Christendom to it through the pens 
and tongues of friends and foes. Even so it was in the close 
of our Lord's ministry, until the "rulers" said, "The world is 
gone after him," and took counsel to kill him. As the change 
of sentiment came quickly and those who hailed our Lord as 
King five days later cried out "Crucify him," so here the 
change may come quickly also. 

What the Newspaper Syndicate now handling Brother Russell's 
sermons may sometimes say of him in laudatory terms, 
by no means represents Brother Russell's humble estimate of 
his own talents. Publishers must be allowed to use their own 
ideas of what they publish and how they introduce it. 
They recognize the fact that the sermons are striking a responsive 
chord with many of their readers; and they must 
make the unresponsive feel that there is merit and dignity in 
the service so that they will not oppose it. 

Brother Russell has tried sending out the sermons without 
his name— merely as sermons from Brooklyn Tabernacle. 
But some of the newspaper publishers object to this, declaring 
that the personal feature is necessary. Let us then worry 
less over each other and specially guard our own hearts in 
this evil day; lest any root of bitterness and fault finding 
spring up to turn us aside. In a word, let us leave to God 
his supervising work and look for and thankfully use the opportunities 
he may be pleased to grant us in his blessed 
service. We "hold the Head" when we thus recognize the 
Lord's headship of his own work. Any other attitude is 
dangerous. 



R4355 : page 84 

"WHY PERSECUTEST THOU ME?" 

-ACTS 9:1-19.-APRIL 18- 

Golden Text:— "And he fell to the earth, and heard a 
voice saying unto him, Saul, Saul, why persecutest 
thou me?"-V. 4. 

HAVING already noted the establishment of the Gospel 
in Judea and Samaria and the opening of the 
door of opportunity to the Gentiles, we come now 
to the consideration of the spread of the message amongst 
the Gentiles. This brings us into touch with the great Apostle 
Paul, whose labors in the ministry will be the theme of 
the International Lessons for the remainder of this year. 
The Apostle to the Gentiles had two names, Saul and 
Paul. Of Jewish parentage he was named after Israel's first 
King, Saul; but, as his father was a Roman citizen, it was 
proper that he should receive a special name with such and 
Paul was chosen— possibly because in the Greek language the 
name Saul (Saulus) signified "waddling." We find that after 
St. Paul's ministry reached to foreign lands he adopted and 
used his Roman citizenship name exclusively. 



His family stock was strongly Jewish and religious- 
Pharisees. This accounted for his not being sent to the University 
of Tarsus, but instead to Jerusalem to the School of 
Gamaliel. Nevertheless, quite probably his early association 
with learned Greeks helped to give him mental poise, which 

R4355 : page 85 

was afterward helpful to him when he addressed all classes. 

Tradition has it that his parents were quite wealthy, as 
their position of Roman citizenship implies. Paul's education 
in Gamaliel's School further implies this, as that was an advanced 
School or Seminary, attended by few except the sons 
of the rich. It is surmised that Paul's conversion to Christianity 
isolated him completely from his home and family and 
deprived him of an income previously enjoyed, all of which 
he gladly forsook for Christ's sake. The fact that he had 
a trade at tent-making is not out of harmony with this, for it 
is the custom of the rich to give their sons trades. The fact 
that St. Paul was poor and needed to use his trade seems to 
imply that his financial allowances were discontinued. His later 
condition, on the contrary, seems to imply that he afterward inherited 
a patrimony, which enabled him to live in his own hired 
house, with numerous conveniences, enjoyed at that time only by 
the wealthy, and surely not by prisoners in general. It is remarkable 
that money matters are scarcely mentioned in connection 
with our Lord and the Apostles, the coins in sufficient 
amount for taxes and the collection of donations for sufferings 
at Jerusalem at one time being the only exceptions we 
recall. We are glad to follow this same course in connection 
with the present Harvest Work and to commend it to all the 
Household of Faith everywhere. 

Although St. Paul declared, as his enemies would be inclined 
to say, that in bodily presence he was weak and his 
speech contemptible, nevertheless, in offset to this, we recall 
that at Lystra the populace compared him to their god Mercury 
and thus impliedly complimented his general brilliancy 
and vigor of manner or both. Dr. Peloubet summarizes this 
great man's character in the following glowing terms, which 
we fully endorse:— 

"He was deeply religious, whole-souled, ardent, energetic, 
persevering, broad-minded, affectionate, loving. He was great 
in more ways, probably, than any other man of human history. 
He was a great traveler, a great author, a great orator, 
a great organizer, a great missionary, a great philosopher. 
All of this genius was yielded in absolute consecration to 
Jesus Christ. He is the Moses of the New Testament. The 
two stand supreme amongst men." 

HOW NOBLE HIS CONVERSION 

We must not use this word conversion in its ordinary 
sense. We must remember St. Paul's own words to the effect 
that he was a strong believer in a true God and fully 
consecrated to his service, not in a formal or nominal sense, 
but heartily, energetically, with a zeal which persecuted the 



Church. He had a zeal toward God, but it was not according to 
knowledge. When God supplied him with the knowledge, it did 
not change his heart, his impulse, his devotion; it merely 
changed the direction of his activities. The word convert 
signifies to turn around. Paul was not turned from a wrong 
condition of heart to a right one, but he was turned about in 
his course of action. He served the same God, and with the 
same zeal, but intelligently and correctly. It is important 
that we note this carefully, so that we shall not expect God's 
dealings to be after this manner with unbelievers. He does 
not smite them down, but, as the Scriptures say, draws them. 
And he draws only such as are in the right attitude of 
heart— "Feeling after him."— Acts 17:27. 

St. Paul's experience may find more of a parallel in the 
Christian Church, amongst those consecrated to the Lord, 
but blinded by superstition. Such may violently persecute 
those of "this way," and may do so in all "good conscience," 
as did St. Paul. There is hope for all such, that in some 
manner the Lord will cause the eyes of their understanding 
to open. We have more hope of the conversion from error 
to Truth of those who, in their blindness, are bitter persecutors 
of "this way," than we have for those who are cold and 
indifferent or lukewarm. The Lord stands pledged to help 
those whose hearts are right toward him. True, many, like 
St. Paul, may weep bitter tears in future years over their 
misdeeds of ignorance, over their failure to give proper heed 
to the instructions of the Scriptures, but in the end the Lord 
will deliver them. On the contrary, however, there is little 
hope for any who have once tasted of the good Word of God 
and the powers of the coming age and been made partakers 
of the holy Spirit— if such shall fall away we may do all in 
our power for their recovery, but cannot have much hope. 
As the Apostle remarks, it will be impossible to renew those 
who have gone to this length. 

THE ARREST OF THE "INJURIOUS" MAN 

The previous lesson narrated the progress of the Truth, 
the Lord blessing the activities of its followers; but still Saul 
of Tarsus was energetically opposing the Lord's followers 
and, as an authority in the Law before the Sanhedrin and 
the high priest and the people, he was carrying the persecution 
with a high hand. It was evidently because of his consent 
that Stephen was stoned. His latest move was to get orders 
from the high priest to bring the Christians of Damascus to 
Jerusalem to be tried before the Sanhedrin, rather than that 
they should be tried in their local synagogue. The authority 
had been secured and Paul, as a representative of the highest 
Jewish authority of the time, accompanied by a band of men, 
possibly zealots like himself or possibly commissioned servants, 
a sort of police squad, neared Damascus at about midday. 
Suddenly, in the midst of the noonday brightness, came 
a still brighter light, which fell specially upon Saul, and in 
the midst of which he sank to the ground quite overcome. 
Was it a sun-stroke? No! It was a vision "Above the 
brightness of the sun at noonday"— a vision of the Christ, 



the Son of God in Glory. A voice was also heard, not only 

by Saul, but by his companions, though they comprehended 

not the words as he did. He heard in the Hebrew 

tongue the message from the Lord, "Saul, Saul, why persecutest 

thou me?" The bewildered Saul queried, "Who art 

thou, Lord?" And the answer came, "I am Jesus, whom 

thou persecutest." [The remaining words, "It is hard for thee 

to kick against the pricks; and he, trembling and astonished, 

said, Lord, what wilt thou have me to do?" are not found 

in the old manuscripts.] "Arise, and go into the city, and 

it shall be told thee what thou must do." 

What an opening of the eyes of Saul's understanding occurred 
at that moment, when he lost his natural sight by reason 
of the Lord's mercy upon him! We can better imagine 
than explain what must have been the course of his reasoning. 
With a self-righteousness he had been a believer in God 
against heresy and heretics. He had thought of himself, 
doubtless, as having a specially large degree of Divine approval, 
because of his untiring zeal— and now suddenly to be 
told that Jesus was really the Messiah! This was the significance 
of our Lord's first reproof, "Saul, Saul, why persecutest 
thou me!" Saul thought verily that he had been doing 
God service in persecuting those whom he believed were a 
little band of heretics, amongst whom were not many great, 
wise, learned or noble. Now, to his astonishment, he found 
that the Glorious One of the vision claimed generally the 
unwise, ignoble, poor as his brethren, his "members," whose 
sufferings were a part of his own. 

SAUL HUMBLED AND MEEK 

The zealous Pharisee, loyal and appointed to the putting 
down of heretics, who so prided himself upon his zeal for the 
Lord, in one moment was humbled to the dust, not only literally 
falling to the ground, but crest-fallen in his mind and 

R4356 : page 85 

self-esteem. The city of Damascus, which he had expected 
to enter with great dignity as the representative of the Jewish 
High Priest, the head of the Jewish religious system, he 
entered very differently. Opening his eyes after the voice 
had told him to go into the city, Saul found himself totally 
blind, so that he required to be led by the hand. So overwhelmed 
was he that for three days he did neither eat nor 
drink. He was doubtless acquainted at Damascus or possibly 
stopping at a hotel, but evidently on the most aristocratic 
street of the city, called "Straight," because it was really 
straight, as were so few of the streets of old-time cities. It 
was a very noble thoroughfare for those times of narrow 
streets. Its width was one hundred feet and it had a colonnade 
of marble columns separating the roadway from the 
building. 

ANANIAS GOD'S MESSENGER 



If one mentioned Ananias in the Scriptures was convicted 
of falsity toward the Lord, another of the same name 
was found faithful. He resided at Damascus. To him the 
Lord appeared in a vision directing him fully as to how he 

R4356 : page 86 

should find Saul and what he should do to him for the opening 
of his eyes. Ananias protested that there must be some 
mistake, because this man Saul had done much evil to the 
saints of Jerusalem. He knew also the purpose of his visit 
to Damascus. 

The Lord's commendation of Saul to Ananias was, "Behold, 
he prayeth!" Ah! how much of a story is told in those 
three words! How sure we may be that those who similarly 
humbly address the Almighty are in no injurious mood! True, 
there are hypocritical prayers, just as our Lord illustrated in 
the parable of the Pharisees and the publican, but, taken as a 
whole, private prayer may be considered a sure index to an 
honest, contrite heart. In our estimation, only the praying 
ones, even of the Lord's consecrated people, are at all likely 
to win the prize. If they do not love the Lord enough to 
render thanks for his mercies and to approach the throne 
of the heavenly grace and obtain mercy and strength to help 
in every time of need, then they are not likely to have sufficient 
strength to stand the trials and tests. We wish that we 
could feel sure that all of our readers are faithful and earnest 
in the practice of prayer. We are sure of many of them, 
but as we long for their progress, we urge them to embrace 
this great privilege heartily. 

Ananias is the first one accredited with the use of the 
word "Saints" in connection with Jesus' followers. As we 
well understand, the word signifies "holy ones," "sanctified 
ones." Surely it is a fitting name for all who profess and 
endeavor to follow in the footsteps of their Master. Let us 
each try to be worthy of the name, whether it ever be applied 
to us or not. 

A CHOSEN VESSEL TO ME 

In answer to Ananias' protest, in the vision the Lord said 
to him, "Go thy way, for he is a chosen vessel unto me, to 
bear my name before the Gentiles, and kings, and the children 
of Israel, for I will show him how great things he must 
suffer for my name's sake." Saul was peculiarly fitted by 
birth, by education and by temperament for the service for 
which the Lord chose him. He was a chosen vessel, and one 
of large capacity. And yet he was only a vessel. The good 
things that vessel was to carry were the Divine message of 
love and mercy. So it is with all the called "members" of the 
Church. We are merely vessels. The excellency, the merit, 
the worth, is of our Lord. We are merely servants to him 
and to his Church. We are not to understand that Saul was 
chosen to go to heaven, but chosen to be a vessel of mercy. 
But even in this respect his choice was dependent upon his 
own willingness. Speaking of the matter himself he declares, 



"I was not disobedient unto the heavenly vision." Elsewhere 
the Apostle tells us that the "Lord called me from my mother's 
womb." Presumably he meant that the Divine providence 
evidently had ordered and arranged that he should be born 
under certain conditions and environments which tended to 
make of him just such a vessel for the Gospel as he now was. 
This choice did not interfere with his free agency, however. 
He himself declares that he might still become a castaway, 
even after he had preached to others. The same lesson is 
appropriate to all of us. The Lord may order our affairs so 
as to give us special opportunities and privileges in connection 
with his work, but he never interferes with our hearts— 
to be in his service against our will. We may at any time draw 
back from the service, "But," said St. Paul, "if any man draw 
back, my soul shall have no pleasure in him."— Heb. 10:38. 
The chosen vessel was to bear the message of grace 

(1) To the Gentiles; 

(2) To Kings; 

(3) To Israel. 

We can see the propriety of preaching to the Gentiles 
first in order. We can see also that such a person as St. 
Paul had special opportunities for serving the Truth, on such 
occasions as those in which he appeared and reasoned before 
Felix, Augustus, Agrippa and others— possibly before the 
Emperor Nero. (2 Tim. 4:16,17.) His commission also 
mentioned Israel, and we remember how his preaching in 
various quarters was "to the Jew first." 

SUFFER FOR MY NAME'S SAKE 

How strangely it sounds, "For I will show him how great 
things he must suffer for my name's sake!" Is any other service 
than that of our Lord ever entered on these terms- 
promises of suffering? Surely not. Yet how honest for the 
Lord not to call his disciples under any misapprehension of 
the facts! We are called to suffer with him— to sacrifice ourselves, 
our earthly interests— to share his Cross and, by these 
experiences, to prove that we have been begotten of his 
Spirit, and that it has been shed abroad in our hearts and 
constituted us copies of God's dear Son. Faithfulness to this 
cause insures the reward of joint-heirship with our Redeemer 
in his Kingdom; nor can those Kingdom honors be hoped for 
on any other terms. The Apostle understood this and seems 
to give the thought, also, that the more any of the Lord's 
followers can share of the sufferings of Christ, in the flesh, 
proportionately will be his share in the glory which by and 
by shall be revealed to us— in the "members of his Body." 

The expression, "For my name's sake," is comprehensive. 
It includes everything connected with the Divine Plan, 
of which Jesus, the Messiah, is the center. It includes sufferings 
for the Truth's sake, because the Truth is vitally connected 
with the "only Name." It includes the brethren because 
they have named the name of Christ and they are 
under his name as members of his Body. It includes all the 
work of the Millennial Kingdom because he is the Head of it 
all, and his name, his honor, is associated with it all. Let us, 



therefore, be glad of any sufferings which come to us directly 
or indirectly, because of our faithfulness to the 
"precious name" and these various interests which are associated 
with it. 

"APPEARED TO THEE IN THE WAY" 

Assured by the Lord's leadings that the way was open 
to him to serve the Truth, Ananias hesitated no longer. In 
full confidence of faith he addressed Saul in the most kindly 
terms, saying, "Brother Saul, the Lord, even Jesus, that appeared 
unto thee in the way as thou earnest, hath sent me, 
that thou mightest receive thy sight, and be filled with the 
holy Spirit." (V. 12.) Promptly there fell from Saul's eyes 
something resembling fish scales. Evidently the intense light 
had destroyed the surface of the eye, which now peeled off. 
His sight was restored, though to what degree of perfection 
is questionable. It seems evident that for the remainder of 
life he was afflicted with weak eyes, which hindered his writing 
his own epistles, except one which, he remarked, was 
written in large characters. We can fancy the disadvantage 
he would be under in some respects by reason of this affliction, 
that his bodily presence would be much less attractive 
than before, and that nothing but the Truth behind his words 
could longer influence his auditors. 

We can fancy the sympathy which St. Paul's affliction 
called forth among the loving brethren. "I bear you witness, 
that, if it had been possible, ye would have plucked out your 
own eyes, and have given them to me."— Gal. 4:15. 

The Apostle as a chosen vessel was to have a very conspicuous 
part in the Divine program, in the introduction of 
the Gospel, and his own humility was a very essential matter. 
Doubtless the Lord foresaw that this remnant of his eye 
trouble would ever keep him in remembrance of the great 
blunder he made in his zeal without knowledge, and of the 
Lord's mercy to him. These two thoughts would doubtless 
keep him humble and trustful and probably provide a great 
blessing to him, even though he entreated for its removal, 
until the Lord indicated otherwise, saying, "My grace is sufficient 
for thee." (2 Cor. 12:9.) Ah, says the Apostle, if having 
this affliction means more Divine grace, then I am content 
to keep it and would be sorry to part with it. Let us, dear 
friends, view our trials, persecutions, difficulties, thus— as of 
Divine permission for our good. Let us be assured that he 
who has accepted us in the bonds of love and who has begotten 
us with his Spirit and called us sons, is not unmindful 
of our highest interests and would not suffer us to be 
tried and tempted except as he would make all such experiences 
work out harmoniously to our highest welfare. 

Saul had been praying and fasting for three days and 
nights and now realized the Lord's forgiving love, as manifested 
in the sending of Ananias, in harmony with his dream 
and with a recovery of a measure of his sight. With this 
evidence of Divine favor he would start afresh. First he 
would be baptized and thus symbolize his allegiance to the 



R4357 : page 87 

Crucified One. Then he would eat for the refreshment of 
his body that the strength might be used in the service of his 
new Master. 

We read that forthwith Saul preached Christ in the synagogue 
of Damascus. We admire his courage, his honesty! 
We do well to let the illustration quicken our own minds 
and hearts with appreciation that we may be fortified for similar 
and all emergencies— to use every opportunity to serve 
the Lord and to undo anything that we have previously done 
amiss. Presumably the Apostle felt his need of special preparation 
for the ministry of the Cross of Christ. At all events 
it is presumed that it was shortly after his conversion, shortly 
after his preaching at Damascus, that he turned aside into 
the desert of Arabia. It is possible that those three years 
were spent studying out the various features of the Divine 
Program. Doubtless there he received visions which filled 
him with enthusiasm for the work of his great message, the 
blessings of which have come down through all age and 
are still with us. 

"Lives of great men, all remind us, 

We should make our lives sublime; 
And, departing, leave behind us, 

Footprints on the sands of time." 



R4352 : page 87 

RANSOMER, REDEEMER, SIN-OFFERING, ATONER, ADVOCATE, MEDIATOR 

ADMITTING that we are not justified by the degree 

of our knowledge of the Divine Plan, but by the fulness 

of our faith, we are, nevertheless, deeply interested 

in every expression of the Scriptures bearing upon 

the philosophy of the great fact which the arms of our faith 

have grasped as a whole. The fact was as large when first 

we laid hold upon it as it is today, but we did not see its 

details as we now see them. And quite possibly there may 

be certain features which will yet more fully open to our 

eyes of understanding in the future. Our proper attitude is 

one of gratitude to God for knowledge of the blessed fact 

that his forgiveness of sins is somehow or other made possible 

to us through the death of Jesus. It was the appreciation 

of that fact which justified us and drew us to the Lord 

in consecration, saying, "The love of Christ constraineth us." 

(I Cor. 5:14.) Since that blessed moment it has been our 

privilege to go on and on, growing in grace and in knowledge 

and appreciation, in love and self-sacrificing obedience. 

Let us continue in this way and permit no amount of philosophizing 

to rob us of the blessings and privileges already 

secured. Some seem in danger of so doing— in danger of 

quarreling over philosophies which they cannot see; and, 

by the wrong spirit fostered through the quarreling, they 

seem in danger of losing all the blessings ever enjoyed. Let 



us not follow such a course, but, while maintaining our justifying 
faith and spirit of devotion, let us seek to appreciate 
every feature of Divine Truth presented to us in the Divine 
Word. 

THE RANSOMER AND THE RANSOM 

The Gospel message is the good tidings respecting a Ransom 
sacrifice, on account of which God may be just and yet 
be the justifier of the believer. Of the Ransomer God gave 
the first intimation to father Abraham, yet without explaining 
the particulars. He merely intimated that in some manner 
Divine Justice would be satisfied by Abraham's offspring, the 
Messiah, and that in consequence a blessing would go 
through his Seed to all the families of the earth. When our 
Lord was introduced as the Seed of Abraham he made the 
first statement of the philosophy of the Divine Plan by which, 
as Abraham's Seed, he was to bring the promised blessing. 
He declared, "The Son of man came to give his life a ransom 
for many." (Matt. 20:28.) This comprehensive statement 
of the Ransom was not elaborated— no details were 
given. However, in the Law to Israel, God prefigured and 
elaborated the Ransom, not in such a manner that all would 
understand it, but in types and shadows, which in his "due 
time" he proposed should be made clear and plain to such 
as would have the proper eye of understanding, enlightened 
by the holy Spirit. 

SIN-OFFERING OF ATONEMENT 

The word Ransom, as we have already pointed out, signifies 
a price to correspond. Adam, disobedient and a sinner, 
was condemned to death and needed to be Ransomed or Redeemed 
or Purchased back from death and from the condemnation 
of Justice. As he was but one man, so it needed but 
one man to Redeem him, to Ransom him. But it needed a 
perfect man, and there was none such. And so God sent 
Jesus, holy, harmless and undefiled, to be the Ransom of 
Adam and incidentally of his race, because all were involved 
through his disobedience. When, therefore, Jesus "died, the 
just for the unjust," on Calvary, a price sufficient had been 
laid down to redeem Adam and his race. 

But this merit has not yet been placed in the hands of 
Justice. Merely the merit of the sacrifice of a perfect human 
life was laid down in death, and it belonged to our 
Lord Jesus when the Father raised him from the dead by his 
own power. 

What did the risen Jesus do with the merit of his own 
sacrifice? We answer, that forty days later he ascended up 
on high, there to appear in the presence of God for us— believers, 
the "household of faith." This was pictured in the 
Law. As Jesus said, "Moses wrote of me." (John 5:46.) In 
the type Aaron, the high priest, typified the consecrated Jesus 
anointed with the holy Spirit, the High Priest of our profession. 
As Aaron took the blood of the bullock, which represented 
his own blood or life or sacrifice, and went with it 



into the Most Holy and sprinkled it upon the mercy-seat to 
make for himself (and the under-priests) and for his house 
(the tribe of Levi) atonement for sins, so did our Lord 
Jesus do in the antitype. He took not the blood of the bullock, 
but "his own blood," the merit of his own sacrifice. He 
sprinkled it not for the literal priests and Levites, the typical 
people, but for the antitypical Royal Priesthood, and Levites 
(or servants) of the "household of faith." 

What has this to do with the Ransom? We answer, This 
is the philosophy of it, as set before us in the Scriptures. It 
is not God's intention nor our expectation that all or many 
will be able to understand this Divine philosophy. As our 
Lord says, It is "given" to some to understand and not 
"given" to others. (Matt. 13:11-17.) We write in hope of 
assisting only those to whom it is "given to know the Mysteries 
of the Kingdom of Heaven." We write not to those 
outsiders to whom it is not intended these mysteries shall be 
understood or made known— either because they never came 
into the right attitude of heart to receive them, or because 
they subsequently left that proper condition of loving devotion, 
humility and teachableness. 

So, then, our Ransom sacrifice was presented before the 
Father when Jesus ascended up on high after his resurrection; 
and, according to the God-given type, it was presented, 
not for all the people, but merely for the antitypical "household 
of faith." The Sin-Offering, the offering which Christ 
made to Divine Justice in offset to man's sin, was the Ransom. 
None but he could have given it, as we have shown, 
and he could have given it for one of the race only, or for all 
of the race of Adam, as he might choose to apply it. As a 
price it was sufficient for all, but for how many of the all he 
would choose to apply it rested entirely upon himself and the 
Divine Plan, which he was following, although, as the type 
shows, he did not apply it for all, but for merely the "household 
of faith"— "for us." Nevertheless it is ultimately to 
apply for all, "a ransom for all," not only in the sense that it 
was sufficient to meet the penalty for all, but additionally in 
the sense that it will yet be made available to all— indirectly— 
by passing the merit through the "household of faith," 
through the "members of his Body." 

The waters of a great spring are set apart for the supply 
of a great city. To serve the intended purposes it is 
passed through numerous pipes and spigots. It is the same 
water in each spigot because from that same spring. In partaking 
of its refreshment we might indeed refer to the spigot 
from which we drew it, or we might refer to the spring itself 
or sometimes to the one and sometimes to the other. So 
in thinking of the merit of our Lord Jesus' sacrifice we 
should remember that all sin-atonement merit sprang from 
our Lord's sacrificial death— whenever applied and however. 
He is the Ransomer. His blood is the blood of Atonement 

R4352 : page 88 

for the sin of Adam, which brought the death sentence upon 
him and his race. No one adds to that Ransom and no 



one takes away from it. In the divine plan it is appropriated 
to the Church, "the elect," in order to let us have the privilege 
of joining our Lord as his "members" and by dying with 
him; as sharers of his sacrifice we merely pass his merit on to 
natural Israel and the world through the New Covenant. 
He is the spring, we are the pipes. 

THE BETTER SACRIFICES THAN THOSE 

In Tabernacle Shadows of the Better Sacrifices (published 
in 1880) we have already elaborated this subject. We 
therein show that Christ, instead of applying the merit of his 
sacrifice directly to the whole world, eventually effects the 
same thing by applying his merit to the comparatively small 
class drawn of the Father during this age. The Father draws 
(John 6:42) to the Son for "justification by faith in his 
blood" those who love righteousness and hate iniquity, and 
who are feeling after God, if haply they might find him. The 
Son receives these and acquaints them with the fact that he 
has already made atonement for sin and presented it on behalf 
of "every one that believeth." And then he guides them 
to the further privilege of this Gospel Age— that they may 
become join t-sacrificers with him and thus become his Bride 
and Joint-Heir in his Mediatorial Kingdom, which is soon 
to be established for the blessing of the unbelieving world- 
yet undrawn, unjustified, unblessed. The Son will draw them 
during the Millennium.— John 12:32. 

Why should the merit of Christ Jesus be thus placed upon 
the "household of faith" and not upon the world of mankind 
in general? 

We answer that this feature of the Divine Plan of the 
Ages is, as yet, a "Mystery" to all except the "saints." To 
the latter God reveals this great privilege— that by it he will 
"bring many sons to glory," under the Captaincy of Jesus, 
and that these will be called "his brethren," "his members," 
"his bride," according to the various standpoints of observation. 
In order that they may share his nature and its glory 
they must share his sufferings, "his death"; thus, since he 
must suffer, the just for the unjust, so these, being justified 
through faith in his blood, must similarly suffer, the just for 
the unjust, as his "members," and as "filling up that which is 
behind of the afflictions of Christ;" not afflictions left behind 
in the sense of the Redeemer's incompetency to make the full 
Atonement for the sins of the whole world, but sins left 
behind in the sense that our Lord did not apply his own 
merit directly to the world of unbelievers. Their sins are 
left behind that the merit of Christ, passing through the elect 
Church, might benefit them just as much in the end, and additionally 
might give the "elect" of this age the opportunity 
of suffering with their Lord and Head, in order that in due 
time they might be glorified with him.— Col. 1:24. 

This is all clearly shown in the type of Leviticus 16. As 

R4354 : page 88 

the High Priest's own personal sacrifice is represented in the 



bullock, so the sacrifice of his adopted members, justified by 
his blood, is shown in the secondary or supplemental sacrifice 
of the goat. All who have studied the subject remember well 
that everything that was done to the bullock was done to the 
goat, and that thus our Lord in advance foretold and illustrated 
that all who will be members of the "elect," the Royal 
Priesthood, must be copies of God's dear Son, the great High 
Priest, by whose sacrifice they were justified. Again, these 
are they who are called to walk in the footsteps of Jesus, in 
the "narrow way"— the way of self-sacrifice, self-denial, the 
way of the cross. 

We have repeatedly called attention to the fact that these 
highly honored ones were originally "children of wrath even 
as others," and many of them "strangers and aliens from 
God," but brought nigh unto him "by the blood of the cross" 
and still closer through the sufferings of this Gospel Age, 
this anti typical Atonement Day of sin-offerings. 

Who cannot see that our Lord offered himself once for 
all, a sin-offering? and that Christ dieth no more than "once 
for all"? Who cannot see that there were two distinct sin-offerings 
in the type— the bullock and the goat? Who cannot 
see that there are two sin-offerings during this Gospel 
Age, our Lord, our Redeemer, the center of all the merit, 
and the sacrifice of his Church, his Body, to whom his merit 
is applied? Who cannot see that these two offerings, the 
bullock (Jesus) and the goat (the members of his Body), 
are the "better sacrifices" mentioned by the Apostle Paul? 
(Heb. 9:23.) Who cannot see that these are the sin-offerings 
which alone were burned outside the camp? (Lev. 16:27.) 
Who cannot see that the Apostle urges us to present our 
bodies living sacrifices and to "Go forth unto him without 
the camp, bearing his reproach"? (Heb. 13:13.) So surely 
as two and two make four, we who go without the camp with 
our Lord are therefore participants in the sin-offerings, exactly 
as the Apostle declares. 

"WE HAVE AN ADVOCATE" 

We have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the 
Righteous. The world has no advocate with the Father, because 
they do not believe and have not accepted Jesus as 
their Redeemer and Advocate: he has not "appeared" for 
them, but "for us." When he appeared in the presence of 
God for us, just after his ascension on high, he presented 
his merit for believer's "sins that are past by the forbearance 
of God." He did not apply his merit for our future sins, 
transgressions, trespasses, weaknesses, ignorances, etc. As 
the basis of his work as our Advocate, our Lord retained a 
measure of his abundant merit for this purpose, with a view 
to having us come daily to the throne of the heavenly grace 
to obtain mercy— not for the original sin, which for believers 
is past, through the forbearance of God, but for our daily 
trespasses of ignorance or weakness. So he encourages us to 
remember that the imperfections of our earthen vessel need 
be no hindrance as New Creatures, spirit-begotten, because 
for all these human weaknesses "we have an Advocate with 



the Father, Jesus Christ the Righteous." Thus we are exhorted 
to keep our garments unspotted from the world, because 
if we are in the right condition of heart we may appreciate 
the privileges of going to the throne of grace and 
having every trespass of weakness and ignorance blotted out, 
washed away. 

Thus our Lord is the Atoner "for our sins and also for 
the sins of the whole world." But there is a difference. Our 
sins are represented in one part of the sin-offering, the bullock, 
and the sins of the whole world are represented in the 
other part, the goat. (Heb. 13.) He has already made satisfaction 
for our sins. Now he is offering his "members" in 
sacrifice that we may share his sufferings and glory. He is 
passing his merit through us that he may apply it "in due 
time" "for the sins of the whole world." Surely the merit of 
the Atoner is not decreased in any wise by reason of its 
passing through those whom he accepts and whom the Father 
accepts as his "members" on the larger scale! 

This is the thought which our Lord suggested, saying, 
"Except a corn of wheat fall into the ground and die, it 
abideth alone; but if it die, it bringeth forth much fruit." 
(John 12:24.) The immediate fruitage of our Lord's death 
was the bringing forth of the Church and the "household of 
faith." The dying in turn of those grains accepted as part 
and parcel with the original is to bring forth in the Lord's 
due time the appointed crop suggested by the Prophet, saying, 
"There shall be an handful of corn in the earth upon the 
top of the mountains; the fruit thereof shall shake like Lebanon." 
-Psa. 72:16. 

"MEDIATOR OF THE NEW COVENANT" 

The word "Mediator" is not synonymous with the words 
"Ransomer," "Redeemer," etc. On the contrary there could 
be no use for a Mediator until first a Redeemer had ransomed 
mankind. The word "mediator" is Scripturally used 
in connection with the establishment of the Covenants, and 
never otherwise. For instance, "Moses, the mediator of the 
Law Covenant," and Christ, "the Mediator of the New Covenant." 
Notice, however, that Aaron, the priest, did not mediate 
any Covenant; neither does Jesus, as the antitypical 
Priest, mediate a Covenant. It was the work of the priest 
to offer sacrifices for sins, and this our Lord has been doing 
for nearly nineteen centuries, as the antitypical High Priest. 
All of the antitypical priesthood must offer up "sacrifices holy 
and acceptable to God," else they cannot be of the "Royal 
Priesthood."— Rom. 12:1. 

But notice further that Moses typified the greater Christ 

R4354 : page 90 

—Jesus the Head and the Church his "members." As, for instance, 
in Acts 3:23 St. Peter says, "For Moses verily said 
unto the fathers, a Prophet (Teacher and Mediator) shall 
the Lord your God raise up unto you from amongst your 
brethren, like unto me; him shall ye obey in all things, whatsoever 



he shall say unto you; and it shall come to pass, that 

every soul, which will not obey that Prophet, shall be destroyed 

from amongst the people." The antitypical Moses 

here pictured was undoubtedly the glorified Christ, Head and 

Body, in his instruction of the world during the Millennium. 

It is certainly not true that all are destroyed who disobey 

the Lord at the present time. It is this antitypical Moses 

taken from amongst the brethren that God has been raising 

up during this Gospel Age. Our Redeemer and Lord was 

raised up first to be "Head over the Church which is his 

Body." Since then the members are being raised up from 

the world, separated from the world to the Lord and the 

Millennial work.-Eph. 1:23; 4:4,12,16; 5:30; Col. 1:18; 

3:15. 

Moses was not the typical priest and made not the typical 
atonement for sin; that was the work of the priest— Aaron. 
Moses as the mediator of the Law Covenant typified The 
Christ, Head and Body, Mediator of the New Covenant. 

However, that it might be seen that the work of the 
Mediator of the future in the sealing of the New Covenant 
will be vitally identified with the Atonement work, we have 
the declaration of the type that Moses used in sealing the 
Law Covenant, the typical blood of both bulls and goats. The 
lesson of this most distinctly is that the greater Mediator, 
Jesus the Head of the Church, his "Members," will seal or 
sprinkle the New Covenant with the blood of both of the sacrifices 
the meritorious blood of the antitypical bullock (our 
Lord, our Redeemer), and also the blood of his "members" 
(the Church), the antitype of the goat. 

OUTLINED BRIEFLY IN REVIEW 

Looking back at the original Covenant made with Abraham, 
it is like a closed-up telescope. For hundreds of years 
natural Israel seemed to be the Seed of Abraham, to whom 
the promises were made and through whom all the nations 
of the world would be blessed. Yet after more than sixteen 
centuries the telescope was slipped out a notch and matters 
so completely changed that the Jew does not know what 
happened unto this day. The thing which did happen was 
that Christ Jesus came and personally became the Seed of 
Abraham, by obeying the Law. Then, by dying for Adam's 
race, he was exalted to be the Spiritual Seed of Abraham. 
Then he was ready to give the earthly part of Israel's blessings 
to as many as would receive them— by justification by 
faith. Bewildered Israel held off and the favor went to the 
few of that nation and to thousands of others previously in 
darkness— Gentiles. These, after accepting the blessed privilege 
of human justification, were invited to surrender it, to 
sacrifice it, as their Redeemer had done. 

This work of sacrificing has been going on for more 
than eighteen centuries, and soon will be finished. When the 
sacrificing finishes, to whom will the blessed privileges of 
fellowship with God and Covenant privileges then be given? 
We answer that the Apostle and the prophets declare that it 
will be given to Israel again, but not by their own Law Covenant, 



but by a Law Covenant which the Lord will make with 
them at that time. The Redeemer and his sacrificing associates, 
his "members" or "Bride," will act as Mediator of the 
New Covenant between God and Israel.— Ezek. 16:60,61; 
Rom. 11:27-32. 

Furthermore, the blessed privileges of that New Covenant 
will not be confined to those of Jewish birth, but all the 
nations of the earth will be privileged to become "Israelites 
indeed," without guile, and to come under the terms, conditions 
and blessings of that New Covenant. 

Thus eventually the blood of Christ shall extend in its 
efficacy and blessing, not only to the "household of faith" of 
this present time, but to the Jews in the next age and through 
them to all nations. It will be none the less the blood of 
Christ that will bless and whose efficacy will restore all nations 
to fellowship with God because (1) Spiritual Israel and 
(2) Natural Israel shall have been associated in conveying 
the blessing to all nations. 

R4355 : page 90 

Have in mind, then, that a priest never is a mediator of a 
Covenant and that a mediator of a Covenant is never a priest 
to offer sin-offering and make atonement. What God has 
thus distinctly separated in his Word, we do well to keep 
separate in our thoughts and words, else our poor heads will 
become confused over terms, even while holding fast to certain 
facts. 



R4353 : page 89 

CONFUSION OF TONGUES IN BABYLON 

[This page is an illustration of a "BIBLE BELIEVER" holding "THE WORD OF GOD" 
"HOLY BIBLE" standing in front of various mountains while people walk up 
to the monuments on top of the mountains. The following signs are placed on 
the mountains.! 



ALTARS OF SOPHISTRY. 
HIGH PLACES OF HUMAN 
PHILOSOPHY RANGE. 

OCCULTISM, SCIENTIFIC THEOLOGY, HYPNOTIC HEALING. -THE EMMANUEL MOVEMENT, 
ADVANCED THEOLOGY, SOCIAL SERVICE, RELIGIOUS LEGISLATION, SOCIALISM, 
NEW THOUGHT, HIGHER CRITICISM, NEW THEOLOGY, CHRISTIAN SCIENCE, 
EVOLUTION, ETHICAL CULTURE, SPIRITUALISM, THEOSOPHY, 
FEDERATION OF CHURCHES 



WORSHIP THE LORD IN THE BEAUTY OF HOLINESS 



The above illustration, sent us from an unknown quarter, 
is too good to pass unnoticed. We regret that we cannot 
give proper credit. The lesson is so plain as to require no detailed 
comment. Truly the world is passing by the Bible to 
worship at every other shrine than that of the Divine Truth. 
Yet even such falling away is less deplorable than falling 
from the pinnacle of Truth into bitter envyings and hatred, 
strife and vainglorying contentions. The changes of the last 
century are taken by Evolutionists and all "Progressives" to 
prove that a gradual progress of our race has been in operation 
for thousands of years, whereas there is no such evidence. 
They see not, neither can they understand, the true philosophy 
of the great advances of the century past in the arts 
and sciences. The Bible alone reveals the secret; and the 
secret of the Lord is with those that reverence him and his 
Word. Only such as have humble hearts, have the hearing 
ear to discern the message of the Scriptures. It declared long 
ago that this wonderful epoch would come, and explained 
that it would mark the end of the present age and the inauguration 
of the Millennium; that this would be the "day of God's 
preparation" for the reign of righteousness. It tells that the 
knowledge born of the travel and commingling and printing 
would bring present developments. It shows, too, that present 
blessings to the unregenerate hearts will mean discontent, 
and that they in turn will bring the great time of trouble which 
will shake the present social structure to its foundations 
and pave the way to the long-promised Kingdom of God under 
the whole heavens.— Dan. 12:4,9,10. 



R4357 : page 90 

CHRISTIANS FIRST AT ANTIOCH 

-ACTS 11:19-30; 12:25.-APRIL 25.- 

Golden Text:— "The disciples were called 
Christians first in Antioch."— Acts 11:26. 

ANTIOCH, on the sea coast north of Jerusalem, was 
once a very prominent city— the third city in the 
Roman Empire, only Rome and Alexandria taking 
precedence. Our Lord narrates the introduction of the Gospel 
there, giving us a glimpse of the simplicity of the early 
Church under the guidance of the holy Spirit and the instruction 
of two of the ablest teachers of the Gospel. From 
it, therefore, we may advantageously gather suggestions and 
helpful lessons respecting what the Church of Christ should 
ever be in faith, simplicity, love and zeal. 

First we notice the hand of providence. The stoning of 
Stephen spread to a general spirit of opposition to Christianity 
amongst the Jews. So far from this being accidental, it 
was the Divine purpose that thus messengers of the Gospel 
might be scattered in every quarter, carrying with them the 
message of good tidings on their lips and its spirit in their 



hearts and lives. Remembering our Lord's words, When they 
persecute you in one city or place, depart for another, his 
persecuted followers obeyed, and thus a blessing was carried 
beyond the boundaries of Palestine. Knowledge of the fact 
that "the middle-wall of partition," separating the Gentiles 
from the blessings and privileges of the Jews, had been 
broken down, had not yet become general. Hence the earliest 
preaching of the Cross of Christ was to the Jews only, and 
this was of Divine intention also; as St. Paul points out, It 
was necessary that the Gospel should be preached first unto 
you— the Jews— the natural seed of Abraham, to whom the 
promise was made. However, in the Lord's providence, some 
of these Antioch believers were Jews of Cyrene and Cypress, 
converts to Christianity; these being more familiar with the 
Greek language and less familiar with the Hebrew, overflowed 
the joy of their hearts, the good tidings of the Gospel 
message, upon their Gentile neighbors, who, to their joy, responded 
in a remarkable manner. "A great number believed, 
and turned unto the Lord."— Acts 11:21. 

The secret of their success lay in the fact stated, "The 
hand of the Lord was with them." The word hand, as a symbol, 
signifies power and direction. Here we have the true 
secret of all successful Christian work which will have the 
Divine approval. Each individual Christian, so to speak, is a 
finger of the Lord; as our dear Redeemer expressed the matter, 
"I, as the finger of God, cast out demons." (Luke 1 1:20.) 
If we would be used and useful as God's agencies, ambassadors, 
we should seek to be impulsed and guided by him. We 
are to hear his voice through the Scriptures and we are to 
realize his energizing power in the spirit of the Truth. As it 
is written, "I will pray the Father, and he shall give you another 
Comforter, that he may abide with you forever; even 
the Spirit of truth; whom the world cannot receive, because 
it seeth him not, neither knoweth him; but ye know him; for 
he dwelleth with you, and shall be in you." (John 14:16,17.) 
Whoever forgets this, to that extent fails to render acceptable 
service, which will bring forth the proper results. Nor are 
we always to gauge the success of our endeavors by the "great 
numbers," as in this case, which was quite exceptional. We 
should, however, expect some fruitage to our labors, and if, 

R4357 : page 91 

peradventure, by unwisdom in our methods of presenting the 

message we have lost our influence as "ambassadors for 

God," we should seek to appreciate the lesson of greater wisdom 

and should look to the Lord for an open door to service 

along some other lines or in some other place, where our lessons 

of experience could be put to practical effect. 

"THE EARS OF THE CHURCH" 

The oneness of the Body of Christ, the Church, is illustrated 
by the fact that this progress of the Truth at Antioch 
speedily became known to "the ears of the Church at Jerusalem." 
This reminds us of the Apostle's illustration in I Cor. 12th Chap., 



where he likens the Church to a human body, 

whose active members are hands, feet, eyes, mouth, etc. The 

Apostles at Jerusalem were on the lookout to help, to encourage, 

to assist in forwarding the Gospel in every quarter, just 

as we of the WATCH TOWER today feel an interest in and give 

attention to the progress of the Truth in every quarter. 

Christianity is not selfish, but the reverse. When selfishness 

is seen— avarice, self-seeking— it is so much of the Antichrist 

spirit creeping in. "To do good and to communicate, 

forget not," writes the Apostle. 

God uses means— human means so far as possible. And 
so he wishes that we, as his representatives, should follow 
his example. The decision was to send the new converts the 
help which it was realized they would need, to encourage 
them, to forewarn them of dangers, and to assist to clearer 
knowledge of the Divine Plan, that thus they might become 
a force for good and not for evil under the Lord's banner. 
A disciple named Joseph was chosen, one who had shown 
great zeal for the Lord and for the Church and who had 
given considerable of his property for the assistance of others. 
They gave him a new name, Barnabas, which signifies 
Son of Consolation. How beautiful! This testimony of 
itself draws out our love to Barnabas in a manner that would 
have been impossible if the record had been to the contrary— 
that, although a follower of Jesus, he was quarrelsome, disputative, 
a stirrer-up of strife and contentions. 

It may be said that none could have such discordant character 
and yet be a Christian at all. We agree that no matured 
Christian could be of such a character, yet we know 
of some who naturally are very contentious, who, by the grace 
of God, have received the Truth. These need to be the more 
vigilant in cultivating amiability and humility. And assuredly 
the brethren should have considerable patience with such, 
especially if they note in them loyal-heartedness toward God, 
the Truth and the brethren— and particularly if they see evidences 
that they are striving to overcome their natural contentiousness. 
However, it would be mistaken kindness to encourage 
such or to fail to indicate to them the unloving manner 
wherein they injure the cause they wish to serve. Such 
should never be chosen to positions of leadership or otherwise 
encouraged until they show evidences of victory along this 
line. Assuredly such should never be chosen as missionaries 
or representatives of the Church to others, for they would 
misrepresent the Lord and his Spirit, which is one of humility, 
gentleness and patience, even while strong and resolute 
for the Truth. 

THE SON OF CONSOLATION CHOSEN 

Barnabas was evidently a most wise selection to be a representative 
of the brethren at Jerusalem, a Pilgrim to the 
newly interested brethren at Antioch. The narrative indicates 
that he stopped to visit other groups of the Lord's people 
enroute, Antioch being the end of his prescribed journey. 
On his arrival several things resulted: 

(1) He himself received a blessing. "He perceived the 



grace of God and was glad." 

(2) He exhorted them all that with purpose of heart 
they should cleave unto the Lord. They had already separated 
themselves from heathenism and Judaism, and by faith 
and obedience and acceptance of the holy Spirit had been 
joined to Christ. The exhortation was that they should thus 
abide, separated from further affiliations and bound unto the 
Lord— with purpose of heart— not temporarily nor because of 
mental conviction of the logic of Christ's religion, but that 
their hearts should be fully given over to the Lord in the fulness 
of consecration. 

Such consecration was the subject of Barnabas' preaching 
for quite a little while, and the result was "Much people were 
added unto the Lord." Now notice another beautiful tribute 
to Barnabas' character, and let us each see to what extent we 
can find these characteristics predominant in ourselves, and to 
what extent we can, by God's grace, have them still more 
abound. We read, "For he was a good man, and full of the 
holy Spirit and of faith." What more could be said to the 
credit of any child of God? This testimony is far richer than 
if we read, "For he was a learned man, or a brainy man, and 

R4358 : page 91 

full of self-confidence and a mighty collector of monies for 
the Church." His heart was full of the spirit of holiness and 
he was full of faith as respects God's power and God's 
Truth. 

We remark that the usual signs of prosperity amongst 
nominal Christians are not here mentioned— Church building, 
collections, etc. The success of the early Church lay greatly 
in the fact that the money question was ignored, likewise the 
building of great temples for worship. The work was one 
of proclaiming Christ and turning the hearts of men from sin 
to righteousness, from ignorance to knowledge and unbelief 
to faith— from devilishness to saintship. 

SAUL BROUGHT TO ANTIOCH 

Barnabas perceived the largeness of the field of opportunity 
at Antioch and bethought him of Saul of Tarsus, whom 
he sought out and brought to the new field of labor. Evidently 
the Lord had allowed Saul to rest in quietness for a 
time to digest certain features of the Truth, to get himself 
properly gauged up. No doubt these lessons were needful for 
the development of humility and faith and obedience. Now, 
however, the time had come for Saul to be introduced into 
the Gospel work. Again God used instrumentality. Barnabas 
did not trust to writing a letter, but went to see him personally, 
to urge upon him activities in the Master's service 
and to point out to him the open door of a still greater work 
at Antioch, where Saul's learning and talents would be an 
additional fortification to the Truth and inspiration to the 
brethren. For a year he assembled with the Church at Antioch 
and taught much people publicly and privately. 



DISCIPLES CALLED CHRISTIANS 

The name "Christian" was first applied to the Lord's followers 
at Antioch. Such a name would not be given to them 
by the Jews, nor in any place where Judaism was paramount, 
because the Greek word Christ is the equivalent to the Hebrew 
word Messiah. And the Jews would be the last in any 
sense of the word to intimate that Jesus was the Messiah, or 
that his followers were Christians or Messiahans. We do 
not read that Christians first assumed this name at Antioch, 
but that they were first called it by others. Would that the 
custom had continued to prevail, and that still the only name 
by which the Lord's followers throughout the world would 
be known would be his name! Dr. A. McClaren correctly 
suggests, "If the men at Antioch had called Christ's followers 
'Jesuits' that would have meant the followers of the mere 
man. They did not know how much deeper they had gone 
when they said, not 'followers of Jesus' but 'followers of 
Christ'; for it was not Jesus the man, but Jesus Christ, 
the man with his Office, that makes the center and bond of 
the Christian Church." 

There is a forceful lesson in the following from the pen 
of Rev. Peloubet, D.D.:- 

"John Wesley was said once to have dreamed that he 
saw a great throng entering hell and he asked whether any 
Methodists were among them. Yes, he was told, and plenty 
of them. And Baptists? Yes. And Presbyterians? Yes. 
Then in his dream he found himself suddenly at the gate of 
heaven and earnestly asked the porter who were inside. 
Methodists? Not one. Presbyterians? Baptists? No, not 
one of these. Catholics? No. 'Then who are inside,' he 
asked. 'Only Christians,' was the reply." 

We are not endorsing Brother Wesley's dream of the 
crowds entering heaven and hell; believing as we do, that all 
go to the Bible hell, the grave, the tomb, and that the First 
Resurrection will be composed only of the saints victorious. 
We do, however, feel sure that in that Resurrection of the 
Blessed and Holy, sectarianism and membership in sectarian 
institutions and worldly lodges will not be recognized as giving 

R4358 : page 92 

such members any priority, honor or glory, but possibly 
the reverse. The name that will stand will be Christians. They 
will all be that. Why should Messiah's Bride, after taking his 
name, confuse matters in any degree by adding to it the name 
of any human being or institution? We urge them all to stand 
free from all human titles and bondages in the liberty wherewith 
Christ has made us free. Our bondage is to the Head 
and under his direction, and by his Spirit we are firmly 
bounden by all the principles of righteousness and to all those 
who have his Spirit, his mind, his disposition, as living members 
of the one Body. To separate ourselves from these 
bonds of love and sympathy and fellowship and obedience 
would mean our starvation and death, even as a branch cannot 
abide itself, nor bear fruit, except it abide in the Vine, in 



fellowship with the other branches of the same Vine, and as 
a participant in the juices (the graces, the blessings) which 
come to all the true branches through the root. 

THE FRUITAGE OF THE SPIRIT AT ANTIOCH 

In the Lord's providence the Antioch brethren were advised 
in advance of impending famine throughout the civilized 
world. The scarcity would affect all parts and classes, but 
especially be severe upon the poor, by reason of the high 
prices. Immediately the Antioch brethren bethought them of 
the fact that the brethren at Jerusalem, specially poor and 
persecuted, would be special sufferers from that famine and 
they desired to aid them and made a collection accordingly. 
They did not hesitate, because, not wealthy themselves, they 
would probably also feel the severity of the famine. The 
love of God shed abroad in our hearts overcomes much of 
our natural selfishness and tends to make us generous and 
thoughtful of others. How beautiful, how Christlike, the 
spirit! We must love these brethren for this and seek to 
emulate their example and to be of willing mind as respects 
any assistance to be rendered to any of the fellow-members 
of the Body of Christ, near and far. 

The Apostle truly intimates that if any professed follower 
of Christ see his brother have need and close up his 
heart of compassion against him and refuse him aid, this 
would be an indication that he lacked the spirit of the Head, 
the spirit of love, the distinctive feature which our Lord said 
would indicate his disciples as different from all others in the 
world. "By this shall all men know that ye are my disciples, 
if ye have love one for another."— John 13:35. 

Whenever an opportunity for doing good comes to our 
attention it should not be slighted, but reasonably investigated 
with the thought that possibly the Lord has brought this matter 
to our attention as a test of love for him or for the brethren. 
Indeed it will profit us greatly if we can learn to look at all 
of life's affairs from this standpoint. If trials and difficulties, 
joys and pleasures, are all scrutinized with the thought of the 
Lord's oversight and guiding care in respect to our interests 
and affairs it will greatly increase our faith and our spiritual 

joy. 

Paul and Barnabas were the chosen agents to see to the 
transportation of the food supply for the aid of the Jerusalem 
brethren in the approaching period of famine. In due course 
they returned, bringing with them John Mark as a further 
helper in the good work. 



R4358 : page 92 

CHRIST, OUR PASSOVER 



BY REBECCA FAIR DONEY 



In the dark night, when Egypt lay asleep, 
Forth went the angel, God's command to keep: 
Slay all the first-born, even from the throne, 
Down through the realm to the humblest home. 

Swift was his work; and on the midnight air, 
Oh, what a cry of anguish, and despair 
Rose, from the hearts of those in every home: 
God's word was sure; the last great plague had come. 

But in the homes of Israel, what a sight! 
Darkness without, in every dwelling, light. 
Clad for a journey; shoes upon their feet; 
With staff in hand, a solemn feast they eat. 

Their father's God had heard their cries at last: 
His time had come; their bondage now was past; 
So in that night while Egypt mourned her dead, 
They ate the lamb with bitter herbs and bread. 

But why this blood we see on every door? 
Why does the angel, seeing, pass it o'er? 
Israel's first-born in Egypt's danger shared; 
And only through that blood could they be spared. 

Centuries passed; and still by God's command, 
Each year they slew, and ate the paschal lamb. 
Not that its blood could for their sins atone, 
But as a type of one that yet should come. 



That sinless one, who, hanging on a tree, 
Bore all earth's sins, to set the prisoners free; 
That Righteous One, that perfect Lamb of God, 
Who for the world gave his most precious blood. 

Our blessed Lord, with those whom he loved best, 
On that last night, sat down to keep the feast. 
"With great desire," he told his chosen few, 
"Have I desired to eat this feast with you." 

R4359 : page 92 

"My heart is grieved; for I betrayed shall be 
By one of you, my chosen company." 
"Lord is it I?" each asked in trembling tone, 
"Nay, Lord, we'll die with thee! cried every one." 

But in great sorrow, still our Lord did say, 
"One shall deny; another shall betray; 
All be offended, and flee unto their own- 
But for my Father, I should be alone." 



After the feast, he took the Cup, and said 
"Drink ye of it; for you my blood was shed. 
I drink no more, until I drink with you, 
In that glad day, when we shall drink it new." 

Then blessed the bread, and as each one did take, 
"This is my body, broken for your sake." 
Oft as ye drink this wine, and eat this bread 
Ye do show forth the suffering of your Head. 

Bearing the whole world's load of guilt and shame, 
Knowing his own would soon deny his name; 
Knowing, by God, he would forsaken be, 
Thus our Lord went to his Gethsemane. 

And still that sacred feast down through the years, 
Thy saints commemorate with holy tears. 
Keeping the words of him, who said, "This do 
In mem'ry of my dying love for you." 

In this dark night, Lord, we, thy first-borns meet, 
With staff in hand and shoes upon our feet. 
Thy precious blood is sprinkled on our hearts; 
Thy broken body life to us imparts. 

Come, dearest Lord, and bless us while we feast; 
Around this board, be thou our honored Guest. 
We eat, and drink, and here our vows renew; 
Oh to our vows, Lord, keep us ever true! 

All earthly hopes and joys, behind us lay; 
Lord, we would walk with thee, the narrow way. 
What is earth's joys and what its glittering dross? 
We gladly leave it all for thy dear cross. 

Thy matchless sacrifice doth us afford, 
A chance to share thy sufferings, dearest Lord. 
Broken with thee, we claim this privilege rare, 
That in thy joys we may obtain a share. 

On this Atonement Day, we would lay down 
Upon the altar, Lord, beside thine own, 
Our sacrifice; it is so very small; 
Take, Lord, and offer it; it is our all. 

Day after day, our testings, Lord, increase: 
This side the veil, we know they must not cease. 
Scourging, or sword, or flames, whate'er it be, 
Help us, dear Lord, in our Gethsemane. 

R4359 : page 93 

The bitter cup that to thy lips was pressed, 
We, too, would drain, nor shrink at bitterness. 
These marks of sonship share with our dear Head; 



To live with thee, we must with thee be dead. 

We'll take the cup tho' filled with grief and pain; 
Drink the last drop, and, dying, drink again; 
Oh wondrous joy! this time, the cup shall be 
The cup of life, and immortality. 

Lord, we have had a blessed feast with thee; 
Now we go forth that we may tested be. 
Help us, that we do not our Lord betray; 
When Satan tries to sift, Lord, for us pray. 



Some solemn night, mid scenes of dread, and woe, 
While the fierce winds from every quarter blow; 
While passions rage, and tempests onward sweep, 
Their last memorial, thy saints shall keep. 

They may be few who gather round the board; 
Many, be entered into their reward. 
Praising the One who led them safely home; 
Waiting, until the marriage hour shall come. 

Some, weary grew, before the fight was o'er; 
Some, through offence, would walk this way no more. 
Zealous awhile, methinks, they did run well, 
But at the test of Love, they stumbled— fell. 

Those who are left, the last of thy dear "feet," 
Keep the last feast before the mercy seat; 
Gathering strength for what before them lies, 
When they complete in death, their sacrifice. 

Some glorious morn the angelic host shall sing! 
Some glorious morn the bells of heaven ring! 
The Church of Christ has passed her trial stage; 
Eternal bliss is hers from age to age. 

Before his Father's throne, with love and pride, 
Christ shall present his perfect, spotless Bride. 
The feast begins; the marriage hour has come; 
Christ and his faithful, are forever One. 

On that blest day, the Bridegroom shall sit down, 
With his dear Bride beside him, on the throne. 
To share his joys; to see his blessed face; 
In that blest throng, oh Lord, give us a place. 
February 21, 1909. 



R4359 : page 93 

MISSIONARY SPIRIT OF CHRISTIANITY 



-ACTS 13:1-12~MAY2.~ 

Golden Text:— "Go ye into all the world, and preach the 
Gospel to every creature. He that believeth and is baptized 
shall be saved: but he that believeth not shall be damned." 
-Mark 16:15, 16. -(Omitted in the old Mss.) 

THIS verse and all this chapter from verse nine to the 
close is acknowledged by all scholars to be an interpolation 
—an addition to the Scriptures— not written 
by Mark, but added centuries later. The words are not found 
in the oldest Greek manuscripts. We would better use the 
well-authenticated words of Matt. 28:19, "Go ye, therefore, 
and teach all nations, baptizing them in the name of the 
Father, and of the Son, and of the holy Spirit." 

The spirit of Christianity is an aggressive one. The 
Gospel sets before the true believer an object, a motive, which 
inspires to an enthusiasm of the highest degree. The message 
becomes a burning one which must flame forth as a 
true light to enlighten others. Otherwise it would become 
extinct, smothered. "Quench not the holy Spirit, whereby ye 
are sealed," may surely be applied to a proper missionary 
spirit, as well as in other ways. 

Missionary endeavor in foreign lands certainly has been 
in harmony with the Divine intimation, that a knowledge of 
the grace of God might be scattered abroad so as to select 
God's "elect" from every quarter. We are not by these 
words endorsing everything connected with the methods or 
the message which have been sent forth in the name of the 
Gospel. We do believe, however, that a blessing has resulted 
even through the use of wrong methods and impure teachings. 
Those who have given money to the cause have surely 
received a blessing, compensating every endeavor to serve the 
Lord. The sacrifice of earthly means has brought its blessing 
and compensation in fervency of spirit. We are not certain 
to what extent the heathen have been benefited by the 
lessons civilization has brought them; some, more; some, 
less. Only the Lord will know how to determine the actual 
results and to apportion the rewards for services in his cause. 

It is our thought that while there is so much to be done 
at home in civilized lands, those who have their hands full do 
well to content themselves therewith, leaving it for the Lord to 
open up the way later, according to his wisdom and grace, 
for the heathen to hear the message. Our readers will remember 
that in the Lord's providence it seemed wise that 
Brother Booth and wife should go to Africa as representatives 
of the Truth. This seemed to be no hindrance to the 
work in civilized lands, and the evidences were that the Lord 
had some ripened grains of wheat in far-off Africa. Word 
from Brother Booth and others of Cape Town and vicinity 
assure us that the proclamation of the good tidings of great 
joy is making fairly good headway in that region. Three 
white brethren there are now preaching to mixed audiences 
continually. Some half dozen little congregations are rejoicing 
in a growing knowledge of the Divine Plan of the 
Ages. Further, three black brethren have espoused the cause 



R4360 : page 93 

and zealously begun its proclamation. One is laboring near 

Cape Town. One has already journeyed nearly two thousand 

miles and is exerting a considerable influence amongst his 

people near Lake Nyasa. Another has just started for the 

same vicinity on foot, a journey of about a month. With 

him go six or eight other young black Christians who thus 

journey, that they may have the benefit of his indoctrination 

on the way and be the better prepared to tell the tidings of 

great joy when they reach their fellow-countrymen. Our missionary 

efforts, however, both at home and abroad, are of a 

different character and different inspiration than other missionary 

efforts. Ours is not a proclamation of a fierce God and a 

great place called hell or Purgatory into which all their forefathers 

have gone and into which they must go unless they 

receive our message. Ours is the missionary message of St. 

Paul and Barnabas— an announcement that the God of love 

has provided a Redeemer; that in due time the Redeemer 

will establish his Kingdom and through it bless all the families 

of the earth with a knowledge of his grace, and grant 

assistance back into harmony with God and thereby an opportunity 

for eternal life. 

Ours is a message of special favor now being given out 
to any who have the "ear to hear" and the heart to appreciate 
and accept it. Ours is the missionary hunt for the 
Lord's jewels, for his "Royal Priesthood," his "little flock," 
his "elect"— that these may be enlightened and assisted to a 
clearer knowledge of the Truth, that they may make their 
calling and election sure to joint-heirship with their Redeemer 
in his coming Kingdom. Our chief work is at home 
or in places where the Gospel has already been proclaimed, 
because we understand the Scriptures to teach that we are 
in the Harvest time of this Gospel Age, just as the work of 
the Lord and his Apostles was in the Harvest time of the 
Jewish Age. To his disciples Jesus said, "I sent you to reap 
that whereon ye bestowed no labor." Other men labored and 
ye are entered into [the fruit of] their labor— harvesting the 
ripened grain. It will not surprise us to learn in due time 
that as many as two hundred new believers in Africa celebrated 
the Memorial Supper this year in excess of the number 
that partook of it last year. Of course, two hundred 
are not many, nor can we hope that they will all be ripened 
grains of wheat. However, we consider this a very favorable 
opening, considering the length of its establishment. 

THE MISSIONARY SPIRIT IN ANTIOCH 

Our lesson tells us that there were three public speakers 
at Antioch, besides Paul and Barnabas, and that as they 

R4360 : page 94 

served and practised self-denial, the holy Spirit indicated 
that Barnabas and Paul should have a special work to do in 



carrying the message of God's grace to others. And in this 

way we have a suggestion in respect to the proper course 

to be pursued amongst the Lord's people generally, wherever 

it is found, that the number of public speakers and teachers, 

Berean Lesson leaders, etc., is greater than is really needed. 

Instead of wasting valuable time and energy all should recognize 

the facts of the case, and square them to the instructions 

of this lesson, and separate some to special missionary 

effort. A failure to notice the breadths of the Lord's work 

and the privileges of service has proven a temptation 

to some, and led to fault-finding and bickering, heart-burnings 

and discouragements, instead of mutual encouragements, 

sympathetic aids, and increase in the joy of 

the Lord and spread of the Truth. Each member of 

Christ, and especially each one of teaching ability, should 

seek to take the broadest possible view of the Lord's work 

and the most loving and appreciative view of every fellow-servant's 

endeavors. This course leads to mutual upbuilding, 

while the other course tends toward coldness and leanness, 

if not to back-biting and devouring one another. 

LAID THEIR HANDS ON THEM 

The Church ordained the Apostles for this missionary 
service. The laying on of hands did not signify the impartation 
to them of any spiritual or occult powers. It did not 
mean the giving to them of authority to preach. It did mean 
that the congregation of the Lord at Antioch recognized 
these two men as God's servants and authorized them to go 
forth as their representatives, and impliedly at their charges, 
to carry the message of good tidings to others. As the 
priests laid their hands upon the animals which were to represent 
them in sacrifice, so the Church laid their hands upon 
those who were to represent them in the service of the 
Truth. 

Similarly today we are following what we believe to be 
the direction of the holy Spirit in sending forth the Pilgrims 
to proclaim the good tidings. They go forth, as the 
apostles expressed the matter, not authorized to preach by 
man or men or human systems, but by him who said, "Go ye, 
disciple all nations"— people of all nationalities, and not 
merely the Jews, as at first. Nevertheless the Church in general 
lays its hands upon these Pilgrims in the sense of saying, 
"You go with our approval, as our representatives, and all 
of your expenses will be met out of our donations to the 
Tract Fund. Serve the Lord faithfully and make reports to 
us through the Society's channels. 

LIGHT AND DARKNESS IN CONFLICT 

They decided to go first to the Island of Cyprus, probably 
because Barnabas was a native of that Island and because 
it would be their proper route in going into Asia Minor. 
Apparently nothing of special moment occurred until they 
had gone almost the length of the island, where they came in 
conflict with a Jew, a sorcerer, known as Elymas or magician. 



Much of the trickery of that time and today is aided and 
abetted by the fallen angels or demons. Elymas perceived that 
the reasoning of the Apostle was having its effect upon the 
governmental deputy or pro-consul and sought to gainsay the 
Truth, recognizing that the success of the Apostles meant the 
loss of prestige to his own presentations of falsehood. St. 
Paul, imbued with a special power of the holy Spirit, fastened 
his gaze upon Elymas and said, "O full of all guile and all 
villainy, thou child of the devil, thou enemy of all righteousness, 
wilt thou not cease to pervert the right ways of the 
Lord? And now, behold, the hand of the Lord is upon thee, 
and thou shalt be blind, not seeing the sun for a season." 

It was not Paul's power, nor Paul's judgment, but the 
Lord's, and Paul was merely his mouthpiece. Nor does the 
Lord always thus punish his opponents now, but rather this 
was an exceptional occurrence, intended to assist in the establishment 
of the religion of Christ as well as to encourage 
the apostles in their further ministries. It is not for us to 
seek to emulate St. Paul's course in this matter. He was an 
Apostle, specially empowered and specially used in a sense 
that we are not. It is ours to preach the Word and to leave 
the results to the Lord. However, the day is not far distant 
when, under the power of the Kingdom, those who resist the 
Truth will be dealt with vigorously and feel the heavy hand 
of Divine judgment on them. We are glad, however, that 
there will be a recovery from those judgments, even as there 
was in the case of Elymas; even as his blindness was only 
for a season. Of that future Age it is written, "When the 
judgments of the Lord are abroad (everywhere) in the land, 
the inhabitants of the world will learn righteousness." No 
doubt Elymas learned something by his experiences, and the 
narrative indicated that the matter was of great assistance to 
the pro-consul. But his belief was aside from the miracle. 
As we read, "The deputy, when he saw what was done, believed, 
being astonished at the teaching of the Lord." We 
remark here that this is the proper influence which we should 
seek to leave in every heart; not astonishment at our ability 
or oratory or other powers, but astonishment at the teaching 
of the Lord's Word. Indeed, there is no doubt that this is 
the secret of the progress of the Harvest message today. 
People are astonished at the doctrine. Our Pilgrim speakers 
are not beyond the average. Many would say, perhaps, 
not up to the average of denominational ministers, but they 
have the teaching. They have the Divine Plan of the Ages— 
and this it is which impresses and astonishes those who hear. 



R4361 : page 94 

REASONS FOR A LAYMAN'S CHANGE OF BELIEF 

If any one had approached me four months ago with any 
"new" or different religious belief than I then had, I would 
have stated that I was a Congregationalist and satisfied with 
that belief; that I did not think there was any belief nearer 



right or nearer to Bible truth. Not that I think Congregationalism 
better than the faith or belief of other denominations, 
but certainly just as good. 

But recently the unexpected happened. A "new" belief 
was brought to my attention, one concerning which I knew 
but little. This was Pastor Charles T. Russell's first volume 
of SCRIPTURE STUDIES, known as "The Divine Plan," of 
which I was hearing much from day to day. I had always 
considered myself quite liberal in my estimate of those of a 
different Christian faith, but toward these books I found 
myself bitterly prejudiced. 

Some things were brought to my attention which I 
thought, if true, every one ought to know. But were they 
true? Could they be true? I did not want to be won over 
to any "new thing," but there were some things of which I 
wanted to know more, and to these I listened and read, but 
not wanting to be convinced. 

Finally replying to inquiry, I said I was not so obstinate 
or headstrong as to refuse to believe or to be convinced, if 
I was in error in regard to Scripture teaching, provided the 
statements presented to me were Scriptural and would lead 
to a better understanding of the Bible and of God's plan, and 
provided also the proofs could be produced. 

In this spirit I began the reading and study of the MILLENNIAL 
DAWN-SCRIPTURE STUDIES. I found each volume of 
the series intensely interesting, as God's wonderful plan and 
truth was unfolded. After reading the series of six volumes 
I can say that if these books are true they certainly are the 
most wonderful and important books ever written— outside 
the Bible. And I believe they are true! If they are true 
every one ought to know the Bible teaching. 

I found that the chronological results are reached by five 
separate and distinct lines of computation, and the same 
careful and conscientious handling of every subject is manifested 
throughout the series. 

Pastor Russell rids religion of error, the error which has 
crept in little by little through the Church of Rome, etc. He 
rids religion of tradition and man-made creeds and seeks to 
make plain God's way in all Scriptural purity, proving all 
teaching by Scripture, and by unperverted Scripture alone. 

He does not exalt self. He exalts Christ alone, with the 
Father. He tears down nothing taught in God's holy Word. 
He builds up no creed nor religious system, but takes the 
Scriptures and the Scriptures alone for our spiritual guide, 

R4361 : page 95 

proving and testing all things by that standard. He combats 
evil of every kind, and every shade of infidelity, Spiritualism, 
Higher Criticism— every form of unbelief. 

At first thought some conclusions seem radical to one 
accustomed to the usual so-called "orthodox" interpretations, 
but in every instance they will be found to be soundly Scriptural. 

Believers in MILLENNIAL DAWN do not teach, as some 
seem to think, that those who believe and faithfully follow 
these teachings are the only ones to be saved. They not 



only teach that all such must follow the Master in the strait 
and narrow way, but teach also a more compassionate gospel 
and a broader plan of salvation for all who will be saved, 
than is usually understood and commonly taught by others. 

MILLENNIAL DAWN does teach that there are other 
truths than those commonly taught by the various churches 
and religious systems, truths that are important, and these 
it seeks to make plain. 

Not one more creed to add to the world's diversified religious 
beliefs, but the one interpretation, which means harmony 
of all Scripture and unity of belief and purpose to all 
Christians of whatsoever name— to all seekers after truth 
who are willing to forsake all and follow Christ. 

J. M. M.-Ia. 



R4361 : page 95 

SOME INTERESTING LETTERS 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

May the richest blessings of the Living God rest 
upon you, and upon all who are determined to cooperate 
in the doing of the Lord's will. My prayers are for 
you and them many times every day. Your name is continually 
being pressed before the Throne. 

Let me take this opportunity to thank you and the 
dear Lord for the full and beautiful— yea, gorgeous light 
turned upon the Covenants— another proof that the 
Word of God is being fulfilled: "The path of the just is 
as the shining light, that shineth more and more unto 
the perfect day." "The way of the wicked is as darkness; 
they know not at what they stumble."— Prov. 4:18,19. 

This last clause brings a measure of sadness. They 
stumble at the light, the very thing that should be a 
blessing to them. No doubt this precious light will 
also prove offensive to the spiritual vision of some 
whose eyes are weak and cannot, therefore, stand the 
full glare of the light of God's Truth. If so, it shows 
they are unfit for the Kingdom. But it makes the heart 
ache. 

I am truly your servant in love and service of our 
Lord and King, O. L. SULLIVAN. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

It has been on my mind for some time to write you 
of the extreme thankfulness to our heavenly Father and 
to you for the experience I have had in connection with 
"the Vow." After reading February 15th TOWER, I can 
no longer refrain from writing. My heart overflows 
with gratitude after reading dear Brother Gibbs' letter, 
which surely needs no explanation. 

He has exactly expressed my heart sentiments. I 



have been in one of the same traps in which he was. I 
also quickly ate of the bait which appeared so good, 
but now see the course I was following. I had not yet 
become a "first-rate back-biter," but was working my 
way rapidly toward one. Oh, Brother Russell, it grieves 
me to think of the untrue things I believed and thought 
of you. I am now deeply impressed by your sincerity 
and daily manifestations of the Christ-like spirit and 
tender love and care over the entire flock, as expressed 
in the TOWER. 

I am so thankful for the Lord's guidance of you in 
sending our dear Brother Herr among us, for it was 
through him I have been delivered from the snare of the 
Adversary. He showed me in a most loving manner 
how all such evil surmises and back-biting (against you 
in connection with "the Vow") were not fruits of the 
Master's spirit of love. By these fruits we can know 
them. After clearing my mind of those evil thoughts, 
I then could not see any objections to the Vow. 

I cannot see how a true child of God could oppose 
it, or your presentation of it in the TOWER. I have now 
made "the Vow" "my Vow" unto the Father, knowing 
what it means to me the rest of my life. I would prefer 
making it as a Vow instead of a resolution, as I feel a 
vow more binding than a resolution. Need we hesitate 
to be bound in any way closer to the Lord! 

I would not exchange the precious blessings enjoyed 
since making "the Vow," for the spiritual coldness endured 
while having the spirit which opposed it. Everything 
is with new beauty and clearness. I press onward 
with renewed zeal, realizing more clearly how very carefully 
we must guard our every thought (as we build character 
by thought), to bring every thought into captivity 
to the will of Christ, and think only of the things that 
are pure, holy, lovely and of good report. And with the 
holy things always uppermost in our minds, how can 
we find any time for evil surmising and speaking ! 

It is with great sorrow I see some taking the course 
they are in their oppositions to "the Vow," those noble 
and esteemed ones, who have been particularly dear to 
me as brethren in Christ. It is with very much heartfelt 
sympathy for you, Brother Russell, as I know what 
it has been to you, but I also know of the Lord's special 
care and guidance over you to keep you in such peace 
of mind and love amid such fiery darts of the Adversary. 

It seems that you have done all in your power to tell 
them of the course they are taking and they cannot yet 
see the unreasonableness of their arguments. Let us 
continue to pray for them. 

I have made apology for my former stand to all 
those to whom I particularly slandered you and "the 
Vow," so I do not especially request that this letter be 
published, although I would not be ashamed to give such 
a testimony to the whole Church. I am assured of your 
forgiveness of my sin. 

May our dear Lord continue to bless you richly and 



use you in his service unto the end. You may know of 
my daily remembrance, and Christian love for you 
and the whole Bible House Family. 
Your sister in the One Hope, 

CORA BRACKMAN,-Pa. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

I feel that I must write you, if only a few lines. I 
have been thinking daily about "the Vow." It seems to 
me it is the sixth volume in a "nutshell."— Rev. 21:9. 

Do you realize how much I need your prayers, and 
the Lord's grace as my eyes open— are being opened? 
May grace abound. 

Your brother, W. M. HERSEE. 



page 96 

PUBLIC MINISTRIES OF THE TRUTH 
UNDER THE AUSPICES OF PEOPLE'S PULPIT 
ASSOCIATION OF BROOKLYN, N.Y. 



ONE-DAY LOCAL CONVENTIONS ADDRESSED BY THE 
EDITOR OF THIS JOURNAL AS FOLLOWS: 

PITTSBURG N.S. (Allegheny), PA., MARCH 28 

Session for the public at 3 p.m. in Allegheny Carnegie 
Hall, Corner Ohio and Federal Sts. Visiting friends heartily 
welcomed. Baptismal services for those desiring same and 
notifying, at 10:30 a.m. Question meeting at 7:30 p.m., 
Bible House Chapel, 610 Arch street. 

BROOKLYN, N.Y., APRIL 4 

Discourse by Brother Russell at 3:00 p.m. Evening meeting 
for the interested at 7:30 o'clock, when the annual Memorial 
Supper will be celebrated. Visiting friends cordially 
welcomed. 

All meetings will be held in the Brooklyn Tabernacle, Nos. 
13-17 Hicks street. Convenient to all cars and ferries— close 
to the old bridge terminus. 

BOSTON, MASS., APRIL 11 

Morning and evening meetings in Faneuil Hall. Take 
surface cars from depots going through Dock Square. Local 
friends will be at stations to assist visiting friends. Meeting 
at 10:30 a.m. for Prayer, Praise and Testimony. 

Afternoon session for the Public in Tremont Temple, 
Tremont street, between School and Bromfield streets, at 3:00 



o'clock; subject, "Where are the Dead?" 

Evening meeting for the interested at 7:30 o'clock. Arrangements 
have also been made for a meeting in Tremont 
Temple Building, on Saturday evening, for the benefit of those 
who may have to come to the city at that time. When purchasing 
railway tickets inquire for reduced rates, account of 
Bible Students' Convention. 

TOLEDO, OHIO, APRIL 18 

BROOKLYN, N.Y., APRIL 25 and MAY 2 



BROOKLYN TABERNACLE EVERY SUNDAY 



Preaching at 3:00 p.m. Praise service at 7:00 p.m.; 
Berean Bible Study at 7:30 p.m. Convenient to New York 
via Subway, and Jersey City via P.R.R. Annex Ferry. 



STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES 
"MILLENNIAL DAWN" 

THESE STUDIES ARE RECOMMENDED TO STUDENTS AS VERITABLE "BIBLE KEYS. 

PRICES ARE NET AND BARELY COVER COST OF PRODUCTION, 

WHEN DELIVERED BY COLPORTEURS THE COST AND PRICE ARE INCREASED. 

SERIES I., "The Plan of the Ages." gives an outline of the divine plan 
revealed in the Bible, relating to man's redemption and restitution: 
386 pages, in embossed cloth, 25c. (Is. l/2d.) India paper edition, 75c. 
(3s. l-l/2d.). 

This volume has been published as a special issue of our journal— 
at the extremely low price of 5c. a copy, in any quantity, postage included. 
(To foreign countries, 9c.) This enables people of slender 
purse to herald far and wide the good tidings in a most helpful form. 

SERIES II., "The Time is at Hand," treats of the manner and time of 
the Lord's second coming, considering the Bible Testimony on this 
subject: 370 pages, in embossed cloth, 25c. (Is. l/2d.) India paper 
edition, 75c. (3s. l-l/2d.) 

SERIES III., "Thy Kingdom Come," considers prophecies which mark 
events connected with the "Time of the End," the glorification of the 
Church and the establishment of the Millennial Kingdom; it also contains 
a chapter of the Great Pyramid, showing its corroboration of the 
dates and other teachings of the Bible: 384 pages, in embossed cloth, 
25c. (Is. l/2d.) India paper edition, 75c. (3s. l-l/2d.) 

SERIES IV., "The Day of Vengeance," shows that the dissolution of the 
present order of things is in progress, and that all the panaceas offered 
are valueless to avert the predicted end. It marks in these events the 
fulfilment of prophecy, noting specially our Lord's great prophecy of 
Matt. 24 and Zech. 14:1-9: 660 pages, in embossed cloth, 30c. (Is. 3d.). 
India paper edition, 85c. (3s. 6-l/2d.) 

SERIES V., "The At-one-ment Between God and Man," treats an all- 
important subject— the hub, the center around which all the features 
of divine grace revolve. Its topic deserves the most careful and 
prayerful consideration on the part of all true Christians: 507 pages, 
in embossed cloth, 30c. (Is. 3d.) India paper edition, 85c. (3s. 6-l/2d.) 

SERIES VI., "The New Creation," deals with the Creative Week (Genesis 1 
and 2), and with the Church, God's "New Creation." It examines 
the personnel, organization, rites, ceremonies, obligations and 
hopes appertaining to those called and accepted as members of the 
Body under the Head: 740 pages, in embossed cloth, 30c. (Is. 3d.) 
India paper edition, 85c. (3s. 6-l/2d.) 

The above prices include postage. 

IN FULL LEATHER BINDING, gilt edges, the set (6 vols.) $3.00, 
(12s. 6d.), plus postage, 60c. (Is.). 

Is also published in foreign languages as follows: German, six vols., 
in Swedish Vols. 1, 2, 3, 5 and 6; in Dano-Norwegian, three vols.; 
in Greek, three vols.; in French, two vols.; Hollandish, Spanish, 
and Italian, one vol. each; bound in cloth, uniform with English edition, 
prices the same; in Polish, condensed edition, one vol., 10 cents. 



page 97 



SEMI-MONTHLY 
VOL. XXX APRIL 1 NO. 
A.D. 1909--A.M. 6037 



CONTENTS 

Views from the Watch Tower 99 

Combating Higher Criticism in Canada 99 

Alas! Too True!! (Illustrated) 101 

Unworthy of Everlasting Life 101 

Judge Yourselves Unworthy 102 

"Mediator of the New Covenant" 103 

The Original Abrahamic Covenant 103 

Two Covenants Added 104 

Abraham's Three Wives 105 

Atonement not Mediation 106 

Through Much Tribulation Enter the Kingdom 107 

Be Ye Not Forgetful, Readers 108 

The Covenant of the Law 109 

"Jesus the Mediator of the New Covenant 110 

Berean Studies on the Atonement Ill 

page 98 

Address Business Communications and Remittances to 

WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY 

610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA. 
--OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH, 24 EVERSHOLT ST., LONDON, N.W. 
GERMAN BRANCH, UNTERDORNER STRASSE, 76, BARMEN 
AUSTRALASIAN BRANCH, EQUITABLE BULDG., COLLINS ST., MELBOURNE 
PRICE $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POSTOFFICE. 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA 



R4363 : page 98 

"THE OVERLAND MONTHLY" 

This magazine, widely known on the Pacific coast, is running 
a series of special articles from Brother Russell's pen, 
entitled "The Divine Program." They began with February 
last. 

We have a special clubbing arrangement with the magazine 
by which it and the WATCH TOWER both cost little more 
than the price of the magazine alone, namely $1.80. Orders 
at this rate should be sent to us. In Canada the cost would 

page 98 



be 60 cents per year additional for postage 



NEWSPAPERS PUBLISHING THE SERMONS WEEKLY 

We are keeping the friends advised of newspapers in their 
vicinity publishing the sermons, so that they may patronize 
these if they desire. The reports that reach us indicate that 
the sermons are being excellently received. They are now 
published in more than a hundred journals regularly. Our 
friends have done much to encourage the newspapers by telling 
them of their appreciation of the service. Let the good 
work go on. 

Anyone subscribing for these sermon papers and failing 
to receive them should promptly notify us as well as the publishers. 
Notify us also, please, if any week the sermons fail 
to appear. 



POLISH TRACTS DELAYED 

We have delayed the preparation of the Polish Tracts 
until we could ascertain exactly how many could be used judiciously. 
Word has been received from friends in various 
parts of many whom they suppose they can reach, and will 
reach, provided we supply them the tract papers free. We 
hope ere long to have our list complete and send forth the 
first number of the quarterly, possibly not until at our new 
address. Address hereafter, 13-17 Hicks St., Brooklyn, N.Y. 



R4362 : page 99 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER 
COMBATING HIGHER CRITICISM IN CANADA 



A THEOLOGICAL storm has been raised in Canada 

along the lines of "Higher Criticism." This was 

started by Rev. George Jackson's address before the 

Y.M.C.A. of Toronto, on February 16th. The meeting 

was opened by the singing of "Coronation" and prayer, 

and then the reverend gentleman, greeted with applause, began 

an attack upon the Scriptures, entitled "The Early Narratives 

of Genesis," saying:— 

"The Early Narratives of Genesis' include in this interpretation, 
in this use of the phrase, the first eleven chapters of the Book of Genesis. 
Perhaps I may say that this is really 
one of the course of monthly Sunday afternoon lectures 
which I have been giving to men in the Sherbourne St. 



church; and, inasmuch as this is only one of the course, it 
is so far incomplete. It is a kind of an illustration of the 
general attitude of mind toward the Old Testament, which, 
in the course of this address, I have been trying to explain 
to my people." 

Rev. Jackson's people, "my people," are Methodists and 
the evidence is that they are following Rev. Jackson into infidelity 
as his sheep and are not giving attention to the voice 
of the true Shepherd; possibly because they have not heard 
his word sufficiently to know his voice and to realize that they 
should be his people, his sheep, if they would be properly 
guided to his heavenly fold. 

From the stenographic report of Rev. Jackson's presentation 
he holds that the Bible is not of Divine inspiration; 
that its statements are not worthy of all acceptation, and that 
they are not sufficient "that the man of God should be thoroughly 
furnished to every good word and work."— 2 Tim. 3:17. 

Something of a storm was raised amongst the theologians 
of Toronto, but apparently not over the truth or 
falsity of Rev. Jackson's presentations, but rather over the 
fact that Rev. Dr. Carman, also a Methodist, who took the 
opposite position favored by the Bible, understood Rev. Jackson 
to charge him with taking his stand for the Bible, not 
honestly but through cowardice. When Rev. Jackson withdrew 
all imputation of cowardice the disturbance subsided. 
The newspapers noted the fact that many ministers endorsed 
Rev. George Jackson's position. Some of them, however, 
thought the controversy of little moment and that religion 
should be viewed from the practical and not the theoretical 
standpoint, and afterward called it a "theological tempest in 
a teapot." What cared this reverend gentleman whether Genesis 
be true or a lie— a Revelation from God or a work of 
monkey-men? He took the view that all thinking men were 
in the same boat in taking the biblical story of the creation 
of the world. ..not as correct history. In other words, 
they had so little faith in the inspiration of the Scriptures as 
to be unwilling to contend for the same and believed that 
their theologies would stand, even if the Scriptures should 
fall. Alas! we believe this to be only too true: that the majority 
of theological views contain so little of the Bible that 
its elimination would affect them but little. On the contrary, 
were they to lose the teachings of Plato and Aristotle respecting 
human immortality they would be sadly bereft indeed. 

A LAYMAN TO THE RESCUE 

In the midst of the commotion the Hon. S. H. Blake 
stepped forward to champion the Bible as a Divine Revelation 
"worthy of all acceptation and able to make us wise 
unto salvation." He has been investigating the matter and 
finds the colleges of Canada thoroughly given over to Higher 
Critical Views and teachings (the same being true of the 
United States and everywhere). The Hon. Blake, supposing 
these colleges to be blameworthy for the general alienation of 
ministers from the Bible as the Word of God, has been inquiring 
into the legality of their teaching theology at all and 



seems to find, to his own satisfaction at last, that they have 

no such authority; that the teaching of theology is by Canadian 

Law restricted to another class of colleges, not Universities. 

Alas! how rude will be the awakening of the Hon. 

Blake when he discovers that the theological colleges and 

seminaries are teaching precisely the same Higher Critical 

Infidelity— that all the preachers of all the denominations are 

being ruined as respects faith in the Bible as the Word of 

God! However, we greatly admire Hon. Blake's stand for 

the Bible as the Word of God and subjoin some of his arguments 

which he has presented in pamphlet form under the 

caption, "The teaching of Religious Knowledge in University 

Colleges Ultra Vires": 

"***As the minds of an increased number of 
young men and women are turning to the mission field, there 
will no doubt be more students from year to year ready to 
take advantage of the opinions or instruction referred to. 
The theological colleges may for this reason look forward to 
many additional students. 

"I believe that this is the cause of the increased interest 
in legitimate Bible study, which I hope may continue, notwithstanding 
persistent efforts made in and outside of our 
theological and other institutions to frustrate such study by 
seeking to make the Word of God of no effect by the ever-changing 
motions of a noisy class of men who take for their 
motto: 'Quantum est quoid scimus,' instead of the more lowly 
one— the mark of the truly learned, as he picks a pebble on 
the vast ocean of learning— 'Quantum est quod nesimus.' It 
will be an evil day for our ministers, missionaries, and teachers, 
should God permit that what appears to be about the 
only sure standing ground left us in the world be shaken to 
its centre; that the statement, 'The Word of God, which liveth 
and abideth forever,' is proclaimed as an hallucination, 
and that being born of 'Incorruptible seed by the Word of 
God' is an old-fashioned delusion, to be rejected with as little 
compunction as if it were a heathen fable. If we pursue this 
process of disintegration so that the wonderful cohesive 
power of this Book shall cease, its author may well write 
over this wreck, 'They have sown the wind, they shall reap 
the whirlwind.'" 

R4362 : page 100 

HIS OWN CREED 

"***I have never been in the least shaken in the 
simple creed as to the Bible given to me as a child over sixty-five 
years ago. 

"(1) Nothing is more probable than that our Creator 
who is hereafter to be our Judge, should give to his creatures 
a revelation of his will concerning them, and lay down rules 
and regulations for the conduct of their life, for obedience to 
which they shall one day be answerable to him. 

"(2) A book is found which purports to come from him, 
and which gives such a revelation. This Book, wherever 
found, and made the guide of life, has raised the individual 



and the people so using it to a position not reached by those 
ignorant of its contents or who refuse its guidance. 

"(3) The God who created the universe and all the wonders 
therein found and preserves them in their places, could 
undoubtedly give with accuracy such a revelation and could 
preserve it to his people for the purpose intended without 
error. 

"(4) No other book has ever been found purporting to 
be the Word of God, and which could answer the purposes 
above set forth. 

"(5) 'When the Word was made flesh and dwelt among 
us. ..the only begotten of the Father, full of grace and 
truth,' there was a well authenticated volume in existence to 
which 'the Light of the world' continually referred, saying: 
'Search the Scriptures'; 'The Scriptures must be fulfilled'; 
The Scripture cannot be broken.' He ever referred to this 
Volume as the Word of God, as the infallible rule, test, and 
touchstone. He thus endorsed in the most unmistakable manner 
all the Scriptures as the infallible Word of God. 

THE OPINION OF JOHN WESLEY 

"I thankfully acknowledge the immense debt I am under 
to this simple presentation concerning our Bible, from which 
standpoint I have never been in the slightest degree moved 
by the ever-changing and never-to-be-relied-upon attacks of 
those who, not looking or asking for spiritual discernment, 
merely kiss the Book that they may endeavor to persuade 
people that their hostile attacks are made in the reverent 
spirit of investigation. 

"Amidst the perpetual attacks made by the clergymen of 
our various churches, and especially by those in our theological 
colleges, upon the Bible, it is refreshing to turn to the 
writings of a well-known clergyman of the Church of England— 
the Reverend John Wesley, whose use of the Bible 
wrought so marvelous a change in England at a period when 
it was nearly drifting to a revolution which might have paralleled 
that in France of the eighteenth century. He says 
in the third volume of his writings, page 504: 

'"It would be excusable if these menders of the Bible 
would offer their hypotheses modestly. But one cannot excuse 
them when they not only obtrude their novel scheme 
with the utmost confidence, but even ridicule that scriptural 
one which always was, and is now, held by men of the greatest 
learning and piety in the world. Hereby they promote 
the cause of infidelity more effectually than either Hume or 
Voltaire.' 

QUESTIONS TO BE ANSWERED 

"***You have presented a strong appeal to me in 
your letter. Will you permit me to urge upon you the two 
following requests? The first is, Will you use your best endeavors, 
as chancellor of Victoria College, to place Toronto 
University and University College in their true position under 
the incorporating acts, by preventing in either of them, 



through a 'back door,' or by any other mode of entrance, 

teaching and examinations in 'religious knowledge,' or 'theological 

R4363 : page 100 

subjects'?****The second is, If the theological 
institutions in affiliation with the university insist on 
instruction in these subjects and on the lines above referred 
to, then in common fairness let the laymen, whose money is 
demanded to support such instruction, know exactly what is 
the teaching that is insisted upon. Let there be a meeting of 
these new lights, and insist upon a positive statement showing 
clearly: 

"(a) What books of the Bible, in addition to Jonah, do 
they think should be eliminated as not being the inspired 
Word of God, to be accepted as such by their students; 

"(b) What chapters in the other books of the Bible they 
consider should be treated in the same manner; what portions 
of the books are: 

(c) Merely myths; 

(d) What allegories; 

(e) What poetical effusions, to be merely admired; 

(f) In what way do they replace the story of the creation; 

(g) Was there any Garden of Eden; 
(h) Was there any Adam or Eve; 
(i) Was there any Satan; 

(j) Was there any sin; 

(k) Was there any punishment for it; 

(1) Was there any promise of a Saviour; 

(m) Was there any deluge; 

(n) Was there any Abraham; 

(o) By what means is the ordinary reader to know what 
portions (if any) of this Book are to be taken as the absolute 
Word of God, to be accepted and acted upon at the peril 
of the reader, and when does the apparent Word of God 
pass into scientific subjects, unreliable history, poetical effusions, 
myths, allegories, parables, etc., which are withdrawn 
from the region of inspiration and are merely human utterances, 
to be dealt with as the reader pleases? 

A SCIENTIFIC BIBLE 

"****It would be a matter of very great relief to 
a large number of Christian men if the result of these investigations 
to which you refer were put into the concrete shape 
of a real Bible, showing what portions (if any) are the inspired 
Word of God, to be accepted as such, and putting as 
an appendix the errant human portion, including 'mistakes 
of Moses.' This would go far to settle the minds of many 
people and to prevent controversies." 

A SUGGESTION TO MANY "TOWER" READERS 



The following brought us many replies. Other friends 



in other cities and through other papers may do as well. This 
is commendable for its brevity and what it does not attempt 
to explain: 

THE SCRIPTURES RE HADES 

To the Editor: In reply to the letter by "A Sinner Saved 
by Grace" in The American recently I wish to thank our 
friend for calling our attention to the Scripture concordance 
on the several words— hell, pit, devil, second death, fire, brimstone, 
etc. I assure all American readers that we find on examination 
of the Scriptures upon these subjects that the word 
"hell" in the Old Testament is translated from the Hebrew 
word sheol, which occurs in all 65 times, and in every instance 
it refers to grave, pit, state of the dead— a state in 
which there is no consciousness or pain or knowledge or device 
of any kind. 

Please note following texts: Amos 9:2; Psalms 139:8; 
Psalms 16:10; 6:5; 49:14,15; 89:49; 115:17; Ezek. 32:27; 
Jonah 2:1,2; Gen. 37:35; 42:38; Job 14:13; 17:13; Eccl. 9:10, 
etc. In the New Testament we find the word "hades" translated 
hell, and it is synonymous with "sheol" in the Old Testament. 
For proof texts see Acts 13:35. In regard to the devil 
we find Heb. 2:14; Rom. 16:29, etc., that he is to be destroyed. 
Consequently when we read in the symbolical book 
of Revelation that Satan and the beast and the false prophet 
are to be cast into the lake of fire and brimstone, which 
is called the second death, we can be sure it is the same penalty 
that is everywhere in Scripture pronounced against all 
evil-doers. See Rom. 6:23; 5:12; Ezek. 18:4; Gen. 2:17; 
Psalms 49:12-16; Psalms 46:4; Psalms 6:5; Eccl. 9:5-10; 
3:19,20,22-29; Job 14:21, etc. 

I would advise all Bible students who are seeking for 
truth and a clear understanding of the Bible and God's plan 
of salvation with mankind to procure a free copy of a magazine 
which treats this subject thoroughly. Address Brooklyn 
Tabernacle, New York. A BIBLE STUDENT. 

Baltimore, March 1, 1909. 



R4363 :page 101 

[In the top left quarter of this page there is an illustration of a 

"LIBERAL MINISTER" preaching from the "ADVANCED THEOLOGY PULPIT" 

with the following list of teachings printed on a scroll to the left:] 

TAUGHT IN MANY SERMONS 
TO-DAY 

"ALL RELIGIONS ARE GOOD." 



"IT MAKES NO DIFFERENCE 
WHAT CHURCH YOU BELONG 



TO, OR WHAT YOU BELIEVE 
AS LONG AS YOU LIVE UP TO 
ITS TEACHINGS." 



"THE THEATRE IS AN UPLIFTING 
INSTITUTION. 
(EXCEPT ON SUNDAYS)" 



"THEATRE GOING, CARD PLAYING 
NOVEL READING, DANCING ETC. 
ARE NOT INCONSISTENT WITH 
THE CHRISTIAN LIFE." 



"DARWIN, SPENCER AND 
HUXLEY WERE PROPHETS 
NO LESS THAN MOSES." 



"IF THE BIBLE DISAGREES 
WITH "SCIENCE" DISCARD 
THE BIBLE." 

[end of illustration] 

ALAS, TOO TRUE!! 



Whilst we deplore and condemn the prostitution 
of the ministry of the Gospel, and the 
apparent dishonesty of so many "ambassadors 
for Christ" falsely so-called, nevertheless, we 
are not without sympathy for the perverts. 
They have reached their present position gradually. 
First deceived by the "doctrines of 
devils," re immortality in torment, they gradually 
lost all faith in all creeds and in the Bible. 
But they needed bread and butter, and concluded 
that all the world is deluded and that 
they, as well as others, may serve to the world 
the delusions they desire. 

Perhaps they even convince themselves 
that they can serve others better by promulgating 
error than preaching truth. Gradually 
their moral sense becomes benumbed until 
they practice deceit with a feeling that it is 
noble and ennobling. 

How all who discern the Truth, the beauty 
of the Divine Word, should rejoice therein and 



handle it carefully, lest they lose the priceless 
jewel! Soon its value will be seen as never 
before— the day shall declare it. 

With malice toward none and charity for 
all, let us, whose eyes of understanding are 
opened to the light of the Morning, be faithful 
to the Truth, whether men hear or forbear 
to hear. 



R4364:page 101 

UNWORTHY OF EVERLASTING LIFE 

-ACTS 13:13-52.~MAY9.~ 

Golden Text:— "The Word of the Lord was 
published throughout all the region."— V. 49. 

ALTHOUGH the missionary journey was only beginning, 
this lesson starts with the statement of what 
"Paul and his company did," whereas previously 
the narrative was respecting Barnabas and Paul. Barnabas 
was still the "Son of Consolation," still loved and approved 
of the Lord, but Paul was his "chosen vessel to bear his 
name to the Gentiles," and the special power of God upon 
him and through him promptly manifested itself. If, thereby, 
any spirit of jealousy awakened in the bosom of Barnabas, 
it was a great mistake. We trust that there was not— that 
he still realized that his special talent for Divine service was 
in being a "Son of Consolation"— now privileged to help, to 
encourage, to comfort St. Paul. To so do would be to properly 
recognize the Lord's oversight of his own work, and to 
rejoice to have his will done. Similar testings come to all 
of the Lord's brethren to this day— testings of humility, of 
brotherly love, of full submission to the Lord— of faith in 
his guidance of his own work. These testings are specially 
severe upon brethren of prominence in the Church. Hence 
the Apostle's exhortation, "Be not many of you teachers, 
brethren, knowing that the man (who is a teacher— in any 
failure) shall receive the greater condemnation." (Jas. 3:1.) 
Nor can we complain against the providence which thus tests 
us; rather we must concede the propriety of it; that those 
being selected for the glorious privileges of the future must 
fully demonstrate to the Lord humility and absolute loyalty 
to his will, even in our secret thoughts. Let us each apply 
the lesson, remembering the Apostle's words, "Let him that 
thinketh he standeth take heed lest he fall." (I Cor. 10:12.) 
And again, "Humble yourselves, therefore, brethren, under 
the mighty hand of God, that he may exalt you in due time." 
-I Pet. 5:6. 

The same verse briefly states that John Mark departed 
from the missionaries, returning to his home at Jerusalem. 
What led him to this course is not stated. Faintness of heart, 
lack of faith, lack of courage— some arrows of the Adversary 



evidently smote him. This is evidenced by the fact that 
St. Paul was unwilling to accept him as a companion on a 
future missionary tour. Evidently he learned a valuable lesson, 
however, since we find that eventually he was restored 
to the Apostle's favor, as indicated by Col. 4:10 and 2 Tim. 4:11. 
While rejoicing in this recovery it is well that we resolve 
that such a course will not be ours, but that, as our 
Lord suggests, after having put our hands to the plow we 
will not look back, but press forward to the goal. 

Another lesson is that those who are unfaithful under 
such conditions should not be received back again, just as 
though they had been faithful. Doubtless it was to Mark's 
everlasting advantage that St. Paul rebuked him and declined 
his further companionship for work until he had shown evidences 
of more developed character. The lesson of reconciliation 
is valuable, too. We should remember Gladstone's 
remark that "No man ever became great or good, except 
through many and great mistakes"; also Wayland's remark, 
"I saw a man last week who has not made a mistake for 
four thousand years. He is a mummy in the Egyptian Department 
of the British Museum. The only people who make 
no mistakes are dead people." 

A NOTABLE SERMON BY A NOTABLE MAN 

The next prominent stop of the missionaries was at Antioch 
of Pisidia, a great city, though not such a metropolis 
as the Antioch of our last lesson. (There were in all sixteen 
Antiochs.) 

The first Sabbath day found Paul and Barnabas in a 
Jewish synagogue, according to their custom; because the 
Jews who had been waiting for the fulfilment of the Messianic 
prophecies were the best prepared soil for the Gospel 
message; at least so far as their heads were concerned. Entering 
with the others they took seats and, after prayers, listened 
to the reading of a portion of the Law, a selection from 
the prophets by the Elder of the congregation, styled the "angel 

R4364 : page 102 

of the synagogue." Then came the time for addresses by 

the rabbis or other learned persons. The officiating Rabbi 

recognized Paul and Barnabas as intelligent and cultured men 

and sent them word that they would be pleased to have them 

use the liberty of the synagogue, and give the people an address, 

if they felt so disposed. Then Paul stood up in his 

place, not going to the public stand. Saluting with his hand, 

St. Paul began his address, saying that he had something 

that should be heard by all Israelites and by others who reverenced 

God. He proceeded in a wonderful discourse, which 

in some particulars reminds us of Stephen's address— which 

St. Paul had doubtless heard and rejected. His argument 

was:— 

(1) That God, having a great blessing to bestow upon 
mankind, had chosen the nation of Israel as a channel for the 
blessing; and that his care for that nation, ordering its affairs 



for centuries, was in line with this original purpose. 

(2) He showed that, by and by, in that nation of 
Israel God had further indicated the choice of a special 
family through which the blessing should come. Messiah 
was to be the offspring of David. And "the sure mercies of 
David," to be accomplished in Messiah, would mean God's 
sure mercies to Israel as a nation, because Messiah would 
come to them as their King. 

(3) Finally, after centuries of waiting, Messiah did 
come in this very line of descent— of the house of Israel— 
of the family of David— Jesus of Nazareth.— V. 23. 

(4) The Messiahship of Jesus had already been recognized 
to a considerable extent— Vs. 24-26. 

(5) The Jewish nation as a whole, however, represented 

by their rulers, heedless of the testimony of the prophets, and 
ignoring Jesus' manifest purity, had accomplished his death 
through the Romans.— Vs. 27-29. 

(6) The Messiahship of Jesus was proven by his resurrection 
from the dead. This accorded with the prophecies 

of the Scriptures and was attested by numerous witnesses. 

(Vs. 30-37.) Note the absence of cant and rant in this discourse. 

Note the appeal to reason, the logic of the argument 

—fact upon fact, each in its proper place and order. However, 

the mere recitation of these facts might have accomplished 

little. The Apostle proceeded to draw from the facts 

a great lesson, most important to his hearers, namely, that 

(7) All were sinners, and that Jesus, the Messiah, 

through his death, had become the Saviour of sinners. Whatever 
his future work, he was already doing work for all those 
who would hear the message and give hearty response. 

Here is still the test of the right preaching of the Gospel. 
It must recognize sin and not claim, as Evolutionists do, 
that "If man fell at all he fell upward"; that instead of being 
condemned of God as a sinner, man is being approved 
of God for his evoluting endeavors and successes. The Gospel 
of Christ recognizes Original Sin and the fall from God's 
likeness, the need of a Ransom sacrifice, the fact that Christ 
is our Redeemer and that "by his stripes we are [to be] 
healed"; that through his death our reconciliation was made 
possible; and that reconciliation means the covering of the 
sins of the believer from God's sight now, his privilege of 
entering the School of Christ and being prepared for heavenly 
glory. The Apostle briefly showed how justification from 
sin and alienation from God has thus been made possible— 
a justification far greater and more thorough than that which 
the Jews had enjoyed for centuries under their Law Covenant; 
for theirs was only for a year and the "Law made 
nothing perfect," while the blood of Jesus, applied on behalf 
of believers, is effective for all of the various kinds and degrees 
of sin traceable, directly or indirectly, to the original 
sin of Adam, under which condemnation passed upon all. 

THE WARNINGS OF THE GOSPEL 

Notice carefully that the Apostle did not say to his hearers 
that a rejection of his message would condemn them to 



eternal torment. Not a word of that. But he did quote them 
an Old Testament Scripture which said, "Behold, ye despisers, 
and wonder, and perish; for I work a work in your days, a 
work which ye shall in no wise believe, though a man declare 
it unto you."— Acts 13:41. 

Nor does the Apostle say that his quotation declares absolute 
hopelessness for the despisers when they perish. The 
prophecy merely states that God's Plan would be declared 
and that all who despised it would nevertheless wonder at it 
and would perish without availing themselves of the blessings 
of salvation. God knows, not we, how many of these despisers 
who wonder, while perishing, have sinned against a 
sufficiency of light to hinder them from ever having any further 
opportunity during the Millennium. The Apostle does 
assure us that "Satan, the god of this world, hath blinded 
the minds of them which believe not," and the Scriptures 
assure us that the time is nearing when Satan shall be 
"bound" and deceive the people no more. (2 Cor. 4:4.) The 
same Apostle assures us that when the New Covenant shall 
be sealed and its beneficent arrangement inaugurated, God 
"will have all men to be saved, and to come to a knowledge 
of the truth. "-I Tim. 2:4. 

In the older manuscripts the 42nd verse reads differently 
and indicates that the Apostles, after having delivered their 
address, did not stop (as was the usual custom) in the synagogues 
to hear and answer questions. Having delivered their 
message they preferred that it should take effect upon the 
hearts and that the discussion sure to follow might thus be 
delayed for a time. The people present, both Jews and proselytes, 
exhorted the Apostles that they might hear more of 
these things. One version implies that they desired this further 
information during the week; another, that they would 
expect it on the following Sabbath. In the synagogue there 
were quite a number who were devout, and, of course, a still 
larger number who were merely formalistic in their worship. 

R4365 : page 102 

The devout ones, as usual, were interested in the Truth. 
They followed the missionaries, who exhorted them "to continue 
in the grace of God," to realize that they had already 
been recipients of God's grace through the Law and the 
prophets and that they should go on and attain to the full 
fruition of their hopes, through the Lord's continued guidance, 
indicating that our Lord's advent and work were but a 
further part in the grace of God, in which they had already 
become sharers, and that to reject this would be to reject all 
the favors hitherto bestowed upon them. 

ENVY, EVIL-SPEAKING, CONTENTION, BLASPHEMY 

The next Sabbath there was a great concourse to hear 
the Apostles. Whether they spoke inside the synagogue or 
from its steps to people gathered in a broad plaza, we are 
not told. However, they had not proceeded far in their discourse 
until there were interruptions, contradictions, anger 



and blasphemy from some of the prominent Jews. Envy was 
at the bottom of all this. Their preaching had never drawn 
such crowds, and besides, the message given by these Apostles 
claimed to be something better than Judaism offered, 
something better than the Law and its sacrifices and feasts 
and fasts. Behold, how the Truth is a searcher of the heart! 
How it draws some and repels others ! What a foe to Truth 
is the spirit of ambition, of jealousy, of envy! How it leads 
the natural man to anger, malice, hatred, strife, envy! And 
how the interests of the New Creature are endangered from 
this same quarter! How pertinent St. Paul's exhortation 
that all who name the name of Christ shall put off anger, 
malice and strife and works of the devil and be clothed with 
meekness, patience, love, if we would fight the good fight and 
gain the great prize ! 

The effect upon the missionaries was to embolden them. 
They had spoken most gently, avoiding everything to arouse 
prejudice and opposition; but now, when, in spite of all, the 
opposition arose and threatened the efficacy of the Truth, 
they must be bold. They must state plainly the facts. They 
must show the envious, evil-speakers just where they stood. 
The people in general, dominated by these leaders, needed 
also to be shown the line of Truth. Now the Apostle declared, 
"We have done our duty in giving you Jews the first 
opportunity to hear of this grace of God, but seeing that you 
thrust it from you and judge yourselves unworthy of everlasting 
life, we turn to the Gentiles." 

JUDGE YOURSELVES UNWORTHY 

What a force there is in these words! God has so arranged 
matters during this Gospel Age that his Word of 

R4365 : page 103 

Truth and grace judges, tests, the honesty, the sincerity of 
those who profess to be his. It was not that the Apostle was 
judging their hearts and saying, You are not worthy of this 
message. The rejection of the message showed that the 
hearer was unworthy at heart. Each one who thus decided 
added to the count or list of those not worthy of eternal life 
under present conditions, under the present offer to faith and 
obedience. How many of them will have any further opportunity, 
and whether or not the further opportunity would 
avail them anything, is not for us to say. They are in the 
Lord's hands. Whatever he shall do for them will be entirely 
satisfactory to all who have the mind of Christ. We are 
sure of the 

"Love Divine, all love excelling," 

and that it will give every member of Adam's race a full, 
impartial trial for life eternal, as a result of the redemption 
which is in Christ Jesus. 

Similarly today some who hear the message reject it with 
anger and malice and hatred and strife. They little realize 



that they are passing judgment upon themselves and proving 

by their prejudicial course and lack of harmony with righteousness 

that they are not worthy of life everlasting. And 

alas! some who had tasted of the good Word of God and 

the powers of the age to come and been made partakers of 

the holy Spirit and been fellowshiped as disciples and fellow-heirs 

of the same Body— some of these, Judas-like, at 

times have withdrawn themselves in similar anger, hatred, 

malice, strife, bitterness, blasphemy, evil-speaking. Alas! we 

fear that their case is hopeless as respects a future trial. 

We shall be glad for anything that God may have for 
them, but we are reminded of the words, "It is impossible to 
renew them again unto repentance," if they fall away from 
the Truth, after once having seen and enjoyed it. It is notable, 
too, that such, as a rule, lose all fear of Second Death. 
Their eyes of understanding on this, as well as on other features 
of the Plan, grow dim. Our sorrow for them would 
be unspeakably deep, were it not that we realize that "The 
Lord will judge his people" and that we are in the day of 
which he has foretold us— when the sifting and shaking and 
purging of his people is due to take place. When we realize 
that "he doeth all things well," and makes no mistakes, it 
convinces us that we might have greatly erred in the past respecting 
heart condition, or that changes of character can be 
speedily effected under the bite, the poison, the sting, of pride, 
envy, slander, etc. 

Then the missionaries quoted from the prophecies the 
Lord's Word, to the effect that the light which was to first 
shine to Israel was also to be to the Gentiles, and that the 
salvation which was first offered to the covenanted people 
was yet to extend to the uttermost parts of the earth. How 
consoling ! How satisfying ! We are reminded that but very 
few realize the length and breadth of this great salvation 
through the only name; that it is yet to extend to every creature, 
even though it requires the Millennial Kingdom to bring 
this widespread knowledge and glorious opportunity. 

When the Gentiles heard this they were glad and honored 
the Word of the Lord. "And as many as were ordained 
to eternal life believed." This does not signify ordained of 
God to have eternal life, but literally so many of them as 
were of the class and character which God proposed should 
have eternal life— these believed. There is a good thought 
here which applies as a general principle, namely, under the 
Divine arrangement, the Truth and the believing of it, are so 
related that only those of a certain cast of mind can believe, 
under present conditions. This includes the thought that they 
must have a certain harmony with God and righteousness, 
and that they must submit their minds to the Lord, that they 
may be taught of him through the channels he may be pleased 
to use. 

The result of these efforts was a widespread recognition 
of the Truth— of the message of God— "The Word of the 
Lord was spread abroad throughout all the region." 

"On! Fear not, nor falter, 
But give of your best; 



It is all that an angel can do; 

Leave the rest unto God; he is sure, 

And he loves more your flags 

When the powers of darkness have rent them to rags. 

The law of the soul is eternal endeavor, 

And bears the man onward and upward forever." 



R4365 : page 103 

"MEDIATOR OF THE NEW COVENANT" 

"And to Jesus, the Mediator of the New Covenant, 
and to the blood of sprinkling that speaketh better 
things than that of Abel."-Heb. 12:24. 

SOME dear brethren seem to have difficulty in harmonizing 
former and our more recent presentations on 
the subject of the New Covenant and its Mediator. 
They seem to get the thought that the latter presentations 
are contradictory to the previous ones, and that some radical 
change of sentiment is thus involved. On the contrary our 
views respecting the facts are in no sense or degree altered. 
We still believe and teach that Christ died for our sins, that 
without his redemption work there would be no remission of 
our sins, and in the future no remission of the sins of the 
world. We still claim that all the virtue, all the merit for 
sins, is in his personal sacrifice, finished at Calvary. What 
then is the change? Merely we now see that we have for 
years been using wrong terms when expressing right 
thoughts. For instance: We have spoken of Jesus as being 
the Church's Mediator, when we should have said that he is 
the Church's Redeemer and Advocate and the world's Mediator, 
because this latter is the Scriptural presentation. We 
have spoken of ourselves as being blessed by the terms of the 
New Covenant, whereas clearer light upon the subject shows 
us that it is Israel and the world that get God's blessing thus, 
and that the Church gets her blessing under most favorable 
portions of the original Abrahamic Covenant, symbolized by 
Sarah and not under the Law (or Hagar) Covenant nor under 
the New (Law) Covenant symbolized by Keturah. 

THE ORIGINAL ABRAHAMIC COVENANT 

The Apostle declares that God preached the Gospel in 
advance to Abraham, saying, "In thy Seed shall all the families 
of the earth be blessed." (Gen. 28:14.) The Apostle 
shows that the original Abrahamic Covenant contained two 
parts, or two seeds, represented in the two statements, Thy 
seed shall be, (1) as the stars in heaven, and, (2) as the 
sands of the seashore. The first seed mentioned relates to 
Christ— Jesus, the Head, and the Church, his Body. The 
Apostle enunciates and emphasizes this in Galatians 3:11,29. 
Abraham's spiritual Seed, like the stars of heaven and the 
brightness of the firmament, is the channel through which the 



secondary seed will receive its blessing. The secondary seed 
of Abraham, likened to the sands of the seashore, represents 

R4366 : page 103 

all the families of the earth, which ultimately will come into 
harmony with God, during the Millennial Age. As Abraham 
typified God, the picture shows two classes of God's children, 
developed through Abraham— Christ and the Church on the 
spirit plane and the perfected Restitution Class of mankind 
on the earthly plane. 

The Apostle refers to these two seeds, the one developed 
under Faith and the other under Law and works. The first, 
the spiritual Seed under the Abrahamic Covenant, is now in 
process of development during this Gospel Age. The second, 
the seed according to the flesh, the Restitution Class, is to be 
developed under the New Covenant and by its Mediator, according 
to Law and works and actual perfection and not 
reckoned by faith merely. Its type was the Law Covenant, 
which had Moses for its Mediator, but which brought nothing 
to perfection. The Apostle's words are, "Therefore it 
(the Abrahamic Covenant, covering the Church) is of faith, 
that it might be by grace; to the intent that the promise 
might be sure to all the seed; not to that only which is of the 

R4366 : page 104 

Law, but to that also which is of the faith of Abraham, who 
is the father of us all"— as Jehovah will be the Father of all 
the saved, not only of the Church Class, but also of the restituted 
world. As it is written, "I have made thee a father of 
many nations."— Rom. 4:16,17. 

All the families of the earth, all the nations that will be 
blessed (to whom the blessing will become effective) will 
thereby become the children of God, whom Abraham prefigured. 
It is to be hoped, then, that we can all see that the 
original Covenant made with Abraham includes everything 
that God promised to give, both to the Church and, through 
the Church to such of the world as will receive the grace 
of God not in vain. Notice that no additional Covenants 
were necessary so far as the Divine determination is concerned 
—it was all in the original Abrahamic Covenant. 

TWO COVENANTS ADDED 

If the original Covenant contained the Divine Promise 
to the full, both for the Church and for all the families of 
the earth to be blessed through the Church during the Millennium, 
why did God arrange for two other Covenants, 
namely (1) the Law Covenant, instituted at Mt. Sinai with 
the nation of Israel, with Moses as its Mediator, and, (2) 
the New Covenant, which is to follow and is to bless Israel 
and the world? We answer that these two Covenants were 
added for the good and sufficient reason that they further 
elucidate the Divine Purpose, and, rightly understood, help 
us to appreciate the operation of Divine love and justice, 



past, present and to come. 

(1) The Law Covenant. What was its object? The 
Scriptures answer that it was added to the Abrahamic Covenant 
to fill up the time until the promised Seed should come, 
to whom the original Covenant applied, and that this was 
necessary, because of sin, that the high Divine standard for 
the Seed might be shown. It is certainly a fact that the Law 
Covenant with the nation of Israel rendered this very service. 
It set up the standard which approved Jesus and condemned 
all others. It helped to develop the Jewish nation towards 
God and towards righteousness. It helped to fit and prepare 
them for the glorious "calling" of the Gospel, as it ultimately 
came to them, inviting them to the Divine favor and join t-heirship 
with Messiah in the glorious Millennial Kingdom, 
upon conditions of faithfulness and following in the footsteps 
of their Redeemer. It had a beneficial effect in that, under 
God's providences, the Jewish nation was the most advanced 
in righteousness of any nation of the world at the time of 
our Lord's first advent, so that amongst them several thousands 
were found fit for transfer from Moses to Christ. Furthermore 
the arrangements of the Law Covenant provided 
for certain typical transactions and for prophecies which have 
been very helpful to Spiritual Israel during this Gospel Age, 
illustrating to us in the types and shadows of the Law, and 
enunciating through the prophecies, various matters appertaining 
to the blessing of the Church during this Gospel Age 
and to the blessing of the world during the Millennium. 

This conglomeration, this mixing, of the matters pertaining 
to two Ages in the types of the Law Covenant have confused 
things, to some minds. The Lord hides things from us 
so as to develop in us the necessity of searching for them. Thus 
the children of God grow stronger from the Truths, by reason 
of the difficulties they have in the mastication of them, 
even as it is with the natural food; those who thoroughly 
masticate obtain the better nourishment. 

Thus we have clearly before our minds the thought that 
the Law Covenant "made nothing perfect" and added not a 
whit to the original Abrahamic Covenant, though it gave certain 
typical foreshadowings in connection with the general 
plan. That the Law Covenant was never intended to take 
the place of the original Covenant, is the Apostle's argument. 
He develops this at considerable length in Galatians 4:21-31. 
The Apostle addresses Christian believers who, while recognizing 
Christ as the original inheritor of the Abrahamic Covenant, 
felt that somehow or other they were still under the 
Law Covenant, very much as some of us for a time recognized 
Christ and the completeness of the Abrahamic Covenant, 
and yet somehow supposed, without Scriptural 
authority, that we additionally needed the New Covenant 
and were under it. We now see that the Church, the 
Body of Christ, is not under either the old Law Covenant, 
which came to an end, or under the New (Law) Covenant, 
which has not yet been even sealed. 

What we Spiritual Israelites have is the superior portion 
of joint-heirship with Christ in the Original Covenant represented 
by Sarah, as the Apostle distinctly declares in Galatians 3:29, 



"If ye be Christ's then are ye Abraham's Seed and 
heirs according to that promise." 

The world is to get all of its blessings and favors of 
Restitution through the New (Law) Covenant, the second 
addition to the Original Covenant. This New (Law) Covenant 
has not yet been instituted, because the Mediator, who 
is to inaugurate it and to cause its blessings to reach to every 
member of the race during the Millennial Age, has not yet 
been completed. The New (Law) Covenant will be inaugurated 
in the end of this Gospel Age, and will embrace the 
entire period of the Millennial Age. This is the teaching of 
the Apostle in our text. Jesus our Redeemer and Head is its 
appointed Mediator, in the merit of his own sacrifice finished 
on Calvary. He could have sealed it and could have begun at 
once its operation, had not the Father "provided some better 
thing for us," his Church, his Bride whom God foreknew as 
his members. This is "the mystery," that the Gospel Age 
has been devoted to the development of the "body" of Messiah, 
the Mediator by sacrifice. 

In Hebrews 12th Chapter St. Paul points us down to the 
end of this Age and to the inauguration of the New Age, under 
the New (Law) Covenant. He shows that its inauguration is 
typified in the inauguration of the old or typical Law Covenant. 
He draws the contrast between the two. When the 
Old Law Covenant was instituted, Moses came down from 
the mountain and set forth the tables of the Law and sprinkled 
them with the blood, sealing the Covenant in a sense, 
and then took of the blood and sprinkled all the people. This 
was typical of what is to occur shortly. The anti-typical 
Moses, The Christ (Jesus the Head, and the Church, the 
Body) will come down from the mount veiled, hidden, because 
mankind could not endure the glory of the shining 
presence. 

The inauguration of the Law Covenant was accomplished 
in a typical time of trouble, a shaking of the mountain, the 
fearing and quaking of the people. The antitype of 
what occurred at Mt. Sinai will take place at Mt. 
Zion (the Millennial Kingdom of Christ) as soon as the "election" 
closes and the new age opens. The Great Mediator 
(Head and Body) veiled, hiding the glory of the spirit 
condition, will set forth the Law, and sprinkle it with his 
blood of the New (Law) Covenant— as Moses took of blood 
and sprinkled the (Old) Law Covenant in the type. The difference 
is that Moses sprinkled the tables of the Law with 
the blood of bulls and goats, but the antitypical Moses, the 
Mediator of the New (Law) Covenant, will (symbolically) 
sprinkle the Law with the antitypical blood of the better sacrifices 
(antitypes of the bullock and the goat)— "his own 
blood"— not only the precious blood of Jesus, but the blood 
of the sacrifices of all those whom he shall have accepted as 
"members of his Body." Then, as Moses sprinkled all the 
people at Mt. Sinai in the type, so in the antitype, on a larger 
scale, the Christ, Jesus and his members, will, during the Millennium, 
sprinkle all the people, that is bring all mankind to 
a knowledge of the Truth and to an appreciation of their 
privileges of full return to harmony with God and his Divine 



laws and regulations. 

"SOME BETTER THING FOR US" 

We hope that the Lord has blessed us with great plainness 
of speech in treating this subject, and that every reader 
can clearly discern that God's Covenant with Abraham primarily 
related to the Seed of promise and faith only, and 
was symbolized by Sarah, who bore the Seed. The Law Covenant, 
Hagar bore not the Seed, failing to perfect anything. 
The New (Law) Covenant costs the death of the Seed in 
order to pass the earthly rights back to natural Israel and 
through them to the world of mankind. And this so, not because 
God could not have done otherwise but because it 
pleased God to do it thus. 

R4366 : page 105 

Well did the Apostle declare that there is a "mystery" connected 
with the peculiar relationship of Christ and "the 
Church, which is his Body." So heavily clouded is this Mystery 
that the Jews could not see it at all, except the few 
who were Israelites indeed, and they not until after they had 
been imbued with the holy Spirit at Pentecost. Even then, 
as St. Paul pointed out, it was difficult for them to grasp the 
Mystery, that the Gentiles also were to be fellow-heirs with 
themselves in these special blessings that appertained to Messiah 

R4367 : page 105 

and the faithful few, the "very elect." 

Whoever realizes that the Church is Joint-Heir with her 
Lord; that those who now suffer with him shall also reign 
with him by and by, should have no difficulty in seeing that 
the death of the Church, as the Apostle declares, "fills up 
that which is behind of the afflictions of The Christ," and that 
only those who thus have part in the afflictions of Christ will 
have a share in the glory that shall follow. We are at a loss 
for words to make this subject more plain than it is already 
stated in the Scriptures. What we each need is the enlightening 
of the eyes of our understanding, that will enable us to 
discern "the deep things of God." But the Scriptures assure 
us that these "deep things" of the "mystery" are only for the 
Spirit begotten. -I Cor. 2:10,13. 

This holy Spirit is one of humility and faith and obedience 
of heart— and, so far as possible, of word and of deed 
also. We trust that the Vow is helping many to get into this 
attitude, where they will be the nearer to the Lord and thus 
have the more abundant favor and blessing and enlightenment. 
One thing to be borne in mind is that our sacrifices 
would be without merit or value; that it is only because our 
Redeemer adopts us as his members and imputes his merit to 
us and counts our sacrifices as a part of his own— only thus 
does any merit attach to anything that we may say or do or 
sacrifice. 

Whoever sees the above clearly must see that during this 



Gospel Age the branches of the Vine have been in process 
of development and are a part of it; and that only as they 
bear the fruit of the Vine will they be retained as members 
thereof. This picture of the vintage of the Church, the One 
Vine— Christ— the crushing of all the grapes, and the gathering 
of all the wine, is a picture of the experiences of the 
whole Church. 

Another picture of the same thing loses sight of the Vine, 
and represents our participation with the Lord by the Cup 
itself. Our Lord, after participating of the Cup, gave it to 
his disciples, urging that they drink all of it. That Cup of 
suffering and self-denial has come down to us during eighteen 
centuries, and is still with us. It is a prophetic Cup, representing 
all the sacrifices and all the sufferings of all the 
members of the Body of Christ, from the Head down to the 
humblest feet members. 

The faithful of the past have participated and the Cup 
has now come to us, and the Master's voice still says, "Drink 
ye all of it." Soon the last drop of it will be drained and 
then the sufferings of the Church which is his body— the 
Body of Christ— will have been completed. Immediately, 
through the resurrection, the glorious "change" promised shall 
follow. 

Of that Cup of suffering of which the Lord tasted and 
which he passed on to his followers, and members, he said, 
"This is the Cup of the New (Testament) Covenant shed for 
many for the remission of sins. Drink ye all of it." Participate 
ye all in it. It is not for the world to drink of that 
cup of the sufferings of Christ. That honor is reserved for 
his saints. They alone may participate with their Lord in his 
sufferings. If the blood of the New Covenant be participated 
in by all the faithful members of the Body of Christ, how 
could the New Covenant itself be sealed until the members 
of the Body had all participated? It would be impossible. 
Whoever sees clearly that which is a "mystery" to the world 
must see that the work of The Christ in the inauguration of 
the New Covenant could not begin until the perfecting of his 
own Body, which is the Church. And the first, the initial 
feature of the inauguration of the New Covenant, is its sealing 
with the blood, and all of his blood has not yet been shed. 

This sealing of the New (Law) Covenant has nothing to 
do with the ransom nor with our justification. We are not 
justified by any Covenant, but by faith in the precious blood 
of Jesus. Who cannot see that nobody could be justified by 
faith under the New (Law) Covenant? The Law is not a 
"new" faith arrangement but a "new" work arrangement. 
The Old Law Covenant (of works) failed only because its 
mediator could not render the needed aid. The New Law 
Covenant (of works) will succeed because it has a "better 
Mediator," able to restore to perfection, and ability for perfect 
works, all who will. 

ABRAHAM'S THREE WIVES 

Abraham had three wives; Sarah, his original spouse; 
then later, Hagar, Sarah's maid, whom she urged upon him 



as a supposed assistance to God in the carrying out of the 

Covenant, after a long delay and waiting; and third, after 

Sarah's death, Abraham took Keturah to wife, and by her 

had many children, whereas by the primary wife and by the 

maid, but one each. The Apostle's language justifies us in 

considering this matter allegorical or typical. The holy Spirit, 

through St. Paul, tells us that Sarah represented the essence 

of the original Covenant and that Hagar represented the Law 

Covenant. He explains that the Jewish people were in bondage 

under their Law Covenant and therefore the antitypes of 

Ishmael, Hagar's son, and that these were cast out from Divine 

favor, even as Hagar and her son were cast off from 

Abraham's family by Divine instruction, and to make the type 

complete. The Apostle introduces this lesson to show us that 

the Covenant of Grace, under which the Gospel Church is developed, 

has nothing whatever to do with the Covenant of 

the Law; that the two were separate and distinct. 

Hagar's child might indeed appear to be the child of 
Sarah for a time, but it was not; even as Sarah's child, Isaac, 
was in no sense Hagar's son. The Apostle's argument is, 
"So, then, brethren, we, as Isaac was, are the children of 
the promise"— the original Covenant, and not children of the 
Law Covenant. Similarly, we fancy, the Apostle, if writing 
today to those who claim to be under the New Covenant, represented 
in the type by Keturah, would tell them plainly, 
"You cannot be children of two covenants, children of two 
mothers." If you are children of the Keturah Covenant in 
any sense or degree, you cannot be the children of the Sarah 
Covenant; and if you are children of the Sarah Covenant, 
then in no sense or degree can you be the children of the 
Keturah Covenant, or New Covenant— which is not yet in 
existence. 

"CHILDREN OF THE OATH" 

The original Covenant with Abraham, typified by his wife 
Sarah, is the one which God bound with an oath, and which 
the Apostle describes in Hebrews 6:13-20 and which he calls 
"the hope set before us in the Gospel" and our "anchor sure 
and steadfast within the veil." We, then, are the children of 
the oath of God, the children of "the promise." Our begetting 
promise, through Christ, to the New Nature, is wholly 
different from the promise by which the Jews were begotten, 
as the house of servants; and wholly different also from the 
promises by which restored Israel and all the families of the 
earth will be begotten to human nature through Restitution 
processes, as the children of the Keturah Covenant. 

What is the difference between the promises by which 
we came into the family of God and the promise by which 
others may come into the family of God hereafter? We 
answer, the differences are very great indeed. God will not 
deal with the world directly during the Millennium. He has 
committed all things to his Son, and the Son, in harmony 
with the Divine program during this Gospel Age, has been 
accepting as his "members" such as the Father has "drawn" 
to him, granting them the spirit of adoption and thus bringing 



them into new spirit relationship. No such promises will 
prevail in the begetting of other children of God, the "other 
sheep which are not of this flock." These children of the 
oath, or children of the promise of God, are the special 
"little flock," to whom it is the Father's good pleasure to give 
the Kingdom, as the Master declares. 

On what basis, different from that of the world, are these 
acceptable to God? We answer that the world will be accepted 
only when they reach actual perfection, under the processes 
of Restitution at the close of the Millennial Age. The 

R4367 : page 106 

Father will have no dealing with the world until, mankind 
being perfect at the end of the Millennium, Christ shall deliver 
up the Kingdom to the Father. Then men will fall into 
the hands of the living God; but be perfectly secure, because 
of their perfection, if they are at heart loyal to God and the 
principles of his Government. 

Jesus Christ (and his Bride and Joint-Heir) will stand as 
"Mediator between God and men" during the Millennium. 
All of mankind's communications and relationship to God 
must come to them through Messiah, and all of God's dealing 
and relationship with mankind will be in and through the 
Messiah. How different from that is the dealing of God with 
the Church of this Age, "Abraham's Seed and heirs according 
to the promise." These are "drawn" by the Father, as 
Jesus declares, "No man can come unto me (now), except 
the Father which sent me draw him," and whoever cometh 
unto me, drawn by the Father, I will in no wise reject. 
(John 6:44.) Some of our Lord's followers were drawn to 
him of the Father before he had completed the sacrifice for 
sins at Calvary, and others have been drawn throughout the 
Gospel Age; as the Apostle declares, "Even so many as the 
Lord your God shall call." (Acts 2:39.) Here is a reversal 
of the Divine purpose. The Gospel Church, under the Abrahamic 
Covenant arrangement, are drawn to the Son by the 
Father, "Given unto him." The world in the next Age the 
Father will not draw, but the Lord Jesus will draw them to 
himself. "If I be exalted, I will draw all men unto me." And 
even after the Son draws them unto himself, he must as 
the Mediator keep them unto himself until he shall have instructed 
them, disciplined them, and made their knees to bow 
and their lips to confess, and taught them the necessary lessons 
and brought them back to all that was lost, before the 
Father will have anything to do with them— at the close of 
the Millennial Age. 

R4368 : page 106 

Who will say that the children of the free woman, the 
Sarah Covenant, have not a great advantage every way over 
the children of Keturah, and not only have they this more 
favorable reception of the Father, but they receive directly 
his begetting to the spirit plane; as we read, "Blessed be the 
God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, which according 



to his abundant mercy hath begotten us again unto a lively 

hope by the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead." 

(I Pet. 1:3.) These are his "elect." As the Apostle says, 

"Whom he did foreknow, he also did predestinate to be conformed 

to the image of his Son, that he might be the first-born 

among many brethren."— Rom. 8:29. 

WHEREIN IS THE DIFFERENCE? 

Why should God make such a difference in his dealings? 
Surely there is a logical reason connected with the matter, 
if we can but ascertain it. And surely it is true that "The 
Lord God doeth nothing but he revealeth it unto his servants." 
If all mankind had been at heart "Israelites indeed" 
there would have been no need of a mediator and a New 
Covenant— the Abrahamic Covenant would have been quite 
sufficient. It is because the world of mankind is estranged 
from God, rebellious against the Divine Law, and lovers of 
Sin, that the mediatorial work is a necessary one. The Great 
Mediator (Head and Members) after making "an atonement 
for the sins of all the people," at the close of this age, will 
take all the people in hand, and, by chastisements and corrections 
in righteousness, cause every knee to bow and every 
tongue to confess, in harmony with the Divine arrangement, 
or be cut off in the Second Death. 

All men are sinners and all are children of wrath and 
under Divine sentence of death; but there are other respects 
in which all are not alike. Some hate the chains of Sin, 
wherein they are held, and long for freedom and for reconciliation 
to God, while others love the sin and are estranged 
from God. God is not in their thoughts. Here, then, we 
have the ground for the difference in God's dealings with 
the two classes. He takes note of those who are weary and 
heavy laden; these, feeling after God, if haply they might find 
him, he is pleased to "draw," during this Gospel Age, through 
the knowledge of the Truth, to Jesus, that at his hand they 
may be justified and become acceptable, if they will, as "members" 
of his Body, suffer with him now. Then they will reign 
with him by and by. The ungodly are not "drawn" or called 
in consecration with the High Calling of this Gospel Age, but 
left to be dealt with by their Redeemer, when he shall assume 
the Office of Mediator between God and men— the world. 

But is it not Scripturally declared of believers that "We 
were enemies of God through wicked works"? And does 
not that place us on the same level with the world, in enmity 
against God? We answer, No, there is a difference. The 
worldly mass are enemies against God, not merely in respect 
to their works being imperfect, such as he cannot accept, but 
also and specially because their hearts are estranged from 
him. They love unrighteousness. Believers, on the contrary, 
although enemies through wicked works, are not enemies at 
heart, and God, who reads the heart, deals with them from 
that standpoint and leads them to Christ, that the merit of his 
sacrifice may offset the demerits of their sin and their imperfect 
or wicked works. 

But does not the Apostle again say that we "were aliens 



and strangers and foreigners from the commonwealth of Israel"? 
Yes, we, who were Gentiles, were entirely separated 
and alienated from God, until Christ came, and we found 
access to Divine favor through him, whereas the Jew had a 
measure of Divine favor and opportunity for development, 
before Christ came. Three and one-half years after Christ's 
death, St. Paul says, the middle wall of partition or separation 
between Jews and Gentiles was taken down, so that, 
in God's providence, the honest-hearted Gentile was no more 
an alien and a foreigner to God than his Jewish neighbor. 

ATONEMENT NOT MEDIATION 

There is a difference between Atonement for Sin and 
mediation between God and the sinner. There are certain 
senses in which we might correctly say that the person 
who made atonement for the sins of another was his mediator, 
but this is not the Scriptural use of the word mediator. 
The Bible speaks of Christ as the Mediator of a Covenant, 
not as a Mediator for sins. However true it is that he mediated 
an atonement for the sins of the world, that is not a 
Scriptural form of statement. Believers, as well as all the 
remainder of the world, need to have an atonement made for 
our sins, as a basis for our reconciliation to the Father. But 
believers are under a Covenant which needs no mediator, as 
St. Paul distinctly points out. "A mediator is not of one." 
(Gal. 3:20.) That is to say, Where a Covenant has only one 
side to it, it does not have, nor require, a mediator. On the 
contrary, covenants which have conditions demand a mediator, 
as, for instance, Moses was the mediator of the Law 
Covenant, and Christ was the Mediator of the New Covenant. 
Under both of these covenants there is a conditional proposition 
—"If ye will do those things, I will do this thing. If ye 
will obey my laws and keep my statutes, I will bless you," etc. 

Let us notice carefully why the original, or Sarah Covenant, 
"The mother of us all," needed no mediator. It was 
because in it God made no conditional promises. They were 
all unconditional to whoever would become The Seed. "In 
thy Seed shall all the families of the earth be blessed." There 
are no conditions in that promise, and hence, there would be 
nothing for a mediator to set straight. God himself undertook 
to choose who should constitute the Seed of Abraham. 
He chose our Lord Jesus to be the "Head over the Church, 
which is his Body," and he foreordained, and, in harmony 
with that foreordination, chose and called, throughout this 
Age, such as he desired might have the privilege of membership 
in that Seed of Abraham. There was no place for a 
mediator in connection with it, for God did his own selecting. 
As it is written, "Ye are God's workmanship." "The Father 
himself loveth you." "Whoever is drawn of the Father 
cometh unto me." "No man can come unto me except the 
Father which sent me draw him." 

TAKE ANOTHER GLANCE 

Honest-hearted ones now "drawn" of the Father are, 



indeed, children of wrath, and hence, before they can be received 
of the Father as sons, he delivers them over to Christ, 
and Christ's acceptance of them, or justification by faith in 
his blood (not faith in a covenant) makes them ready to be 
returned again to the Father, if they still so will. It is to 

R4368 : page 107 

these justified ones that the Apostle says, "I beseech you, 
therefore, brethren, by the mercies of God, that ye present 
your bodies a living sacrifice, holy and acceptable unto God, 
which is your reasonable service." If these needed to be 
made actually perfect they would need to be left in the hands 
of the Son for such restitution work as is his alone, and 
would be held over for the Millennium. But instead they are 
justified by faith. Their faith in Christ, in the merit of his 
sacrifice, attested by their repudiation of sin, "Is counted unto 
them for righteousness," Jesus applying his merit on their 
account. When, afterwards, these made full consecration of 
themselves to do the Father's will, even unto death, and 
when they were begotten of the holy Spirit as New Creatures, 
they became "members" of the Seed of Abraham, members 
of the Mediator of the New Covenant. Then they by 
faith passed to a new plane, where no sin or imperfection is 
imputed to them, so long as they fulfil their consecration 
Vow and "Walk not after the flesh, but after the spirit."— 
Rom. 8:1. 



R4368 : page 107 

THROUGH MUCH TRIBULATION ENTER THE KINGDOM 

-ACTS 14:l-28.-MAY 16.- 

Golden Text:— "All the gods of the nations are idols; 
but the Lord made the heavens."— Psa. 96:5. 

NOTWITHSTANDING the success which attended the 
message at Antioch in Pisidia, the spirit of the Adversary 
was aroused in the Jews, who stirred up 

devout and honorable women (Greek proselytes to the Jewish 
religion). They worked upon their prejudices, slandering the 
apostles and their work and their motives. These women in 
turn exercised influence with the chief men of the city, until 
finally the missionaries were expelled. Their next stop was at 
Iconium, about seventy-five miles southeast. Here again they 
first preached in the synagogue to the Jews, and a great multitude, 
both of the Jews and also of the Greeks (Jewish proselytes), 
believed. But again the unbelieving Jews worked upon 
the Gentile population by calumnies. Hence the apostles remained 
there a "long time," probably several months, because 
there were many converts needing instruction and because it 
was an excellent field of labor every way. Finally, however, 
the chief Jews of the synagogue and the Gentiles whom they 



influenced, formed a plot for the stoning of the missionaries 
and alleged blasphemers. Learning of this the apostles followed 
our Lord's injunction of Matt. 10:23, to flee from persecution. 
Their next stop was at Lystra, twenty miles further 
to the southeast. 

How human nature repeats itself! As it was God's covenanted 
people— yea, and the chief of the synagogue who opposed 
the Gospel and maltreated its servants who sought 
merely to do them good— so all through the age the professed 
servants of God have been the persecutors of their brethren! 
And so it is today! The slanders, the misrepresentations, 
come not from the politicians and the worldly, but from the 
Lord's professed followers, some of them of large influence. 

R4369 : page 107 

It is still true that there are "perils amongst false brethren" 

and a Judas spirit is to be expected now, as well as then. How 

shall we receive these things? If they discourage us or turn 

us aside in fear, it would prove that we are not worthy of the 

Kingdom privileges and honors, which are to be granted only 

to those who come off, by the Lord's grace, "more than conquerors" 

to those who willingly, gladly, take the spoiling of 

their goods, their good names, earthly reputation, etc., rather 

than prove disloyal to the Lord and his brethren. Nor must 

we render railing for railing, nor slander for slander. We 

must take maltreatment patiently. 

NO SYNAGOGUE-BUT A MIRACLE 

Lystra was the capital of what was called Wolfland. Its 
people were less civilized than in other places visited. Evidently 
there were few or no Jews there and no synagogue. 
The preaching to the people was in the forum. 

While St. Paul was preaching he perceived amongst his 
auditors a man lame from birth, giving close attention and, 
perceiving that he had faith to cooperate with healing, he 
commanded him, "Stand upright on thy feet." The miracle 
astonished the people, who, in their amazement, began to speak 
to each other, no longer in the Greek language, but in the 
Laconian, which the missionaries did not understand, saying 
that these were gods in human form. The apostles evidently 
retired to their own dwelling apartments after the miracle and 
were astonished when, a little time afterward, the people came 
together to offer sacrifices to them, calling Barnabas Jupiter, 
and Paul Mercury. The people had certain traditions about 
the gods coming down to earth as men and these doubtless led 
up to their remarkable treatment of the missionaries. 

One of these tales was to the effect that Jupiter and 
Mercury once visited this very city of Laconia. The people took 
them to be vagrants and refused to entertain them, and ridiculed 
and maltreated them. At last two peasants received 
them into their hut with hospitality, giving them their best. 
In return the gods transformed their hut into a glorious temple, 
over which they were set as the chief ministers of earth, 
while their neighbors were overwhelmed in a flood. The statue 



of Jupiter stood before Lystra's gate, and it was supposed that 
this story was repeated annually in the hearing of the people. 
Thinking of Paul and Barnabas as later manifestations of 
these same gods, they determined that now was their opportunity 
to show them reverence and hospitality. 

Now came a temptation to the missionaries— such temptations 
as in one form or another are apt to come to all who 
engage actively in Christian work. Would they receive the 
homage of the people and then, as gods, seek to instruct them 
respecting Christ as the true Son of God come from heaven, 
who had died for the world's redemption, etc., or would they 
stop the procedure forthwith? Such temptations are very 
forceful with many: "Let us do evil that good may follow." 
Similar temptations of the present time might be suggested. 
A minister might sail under false colors, under denominational 
name, which misrepresented his heart and which he misrepresented. 
He might seek thus to do God service and to advance 
the Truth, but would it be wise? Would it please God 
to have us thus do evil that good might follow? We think 
not. The Truth may be presented as kindly, sympathetically, 
harmoniously as possible, but it can never fight a good fight 
under a cloak of hypocrisy. 

The same principle applies to others; the business man 
may put his light under a bushel for the sake of trade and 
with the promise to himself that he will use money gained in 
forwarding the Truth. But would such a course be acceptable 
to the Lord? We believe not. Some affect ignorance of the 
Truth or disdain for it, that they may retain social position, 
and persuade themselves that there are more than compensating 
advantages favorable to the Lord, the brethren and the 
Truth, in the course which they pursue. We believe that they 
prove themselves unworthy of a position in the "little flock" of 
overcomers. The principle is of broad application, and it is 
the principle each of the Lord's people should see, and fix 
clearly in his judgment, that he may guide himself 
accordingly. 

HONESTY REWARDED WITH STONES 

The missionaries ran in amongst the people, dissuading 
them from sacrifice and assuring them that they were ordinary 
men like themselves. They informed them that their very 
mission was to turn them from such works of ignorance and 
superstition and to indicate to them the true God, his true 
character, and his proper worship. They said to them, "We 
bring you good tidings, that ye should turn from these vanities 
unto the living God, which made heaven, and earth, and 
the sea, and all things that are therein." Wisdom from on 
high guided them to know that it would be useless to quote 
the Old Testament Scriptures to these people, who had no 
knowledge of them. They discoursed, therefore, what the 
people could understand and appreciate, and thus they set a 
grand example to all who should ever speak as messengers 
of the Lord. Much of the preaching is far over the heads of 
the hearers. 



R4369 : page 108 

They introduced to their attention the God who made the 
heaven, earth, sea and all the contents of these. They explained 
that although this great God was interested in his 
creatures always, yet hitherto he had permitted all the nations 
to walk in their own ways untaught, unrestrained. Nevertheless 
he did give them certain evidences of his constant care, 
in the sunshine and the rain, with the fruitage of earth and its 
seasons, thus providing mankind with food and occasion for 
gladness and appreciation of life. 

Only a scrap of the discourse is given. We may suppose 
that the Apostle here, as elsewhere, proceeded to explain that 
the times of this ignorance of the past, which God had winked 
at or paid no attention to, were now ending; that a new phase 
or turn of his great Divine Plan had come. And now all men 
everywhere are admonished to repent, to turn from sin, to 
strive to come near to God in reverence and obedience, and 
to hope for eternal life in his provision. Doubtless he explained 
that the foundation for these hopes and these commands 
to repent were laid in the great fact that God had 
given his Son to be man's Redeemer, and by and by man's 
Restorer. No doubt he explained to them that every effort 
toward righteousness and Truth and godliness would have 
its reward, while every wilful sin would surely, at some time, 
have its punishment, either in the present age or in the age to 
come. No doubt also he showed the people that the Divine 
call of the present time is intended merely to call out of the 
world a "little flock" of saintly followers of Jesus to be his 
Bride in the Kingdom. 

However, it was probably only a few days after this that 
some other Jews came to Lystra, zealous as Paul of Tarsus 
himself had been to oppose the message respecting the Nazarene. 
The benighted people, who one day were ready to do 
sacrifice to St. Paul as a god, shortly afterward, under the 
envious slanders stirred up by the Adversary, stoned him and 
then dragged him out of the city and left him to be devoured 
by beasts and birds. But evidently some disciples had been 
made, for as we read, "As the disciples stood around about 
him, he rose up, and came into the city; and the next day he 
departed with Barnabas to Derbe." Such a man with such a 
spirit was necessarily a force wherever he went; a force for 
good, as he had once been a force for evil, because now the 
spirit which energized him was a consecrated one, a holy one. 
There is a lesson and example here for all of us which we 
must not miss. He wisely determined that it would be unwise 
to do more public work at Lystra, so long as the public mind 
was in such a ferment. To have done so would have been 
merely to bring needless persecution upon the disciples who, 
young in the faith, might not so well have been able to 
stand it. 

DERBE, THEN HOMEWARD BOUND 

Evidently some Divine power, some supernatural strength, 
was accorded the Apostle, else he never could have so quickly 



recovered after the stoning. The explanation is, first, St. 
Paul's own indomitable will, which mastered his body and 
made it his servant; and secondly, Divine cooperation assisting 
him so to do. And will it not be considerably so with us? 
Will not faith and courage and zeal and determination effect 
much as to our ability to stand and withstand the trials and 
difficulties of life? And will not the Lord's grace be sufficient 
for us? And whether he permit us to be smitten down with 
the literal stones or the symbolic arrows, the bitter words, is 
he not able to succor us, that we be not overwhelmed? 

Apparently the preaching at Derbe resulted in making 
many disciples. Then the apostles turned their faces homeward 
—toward Antioch, the Ecclesia which sent them forth as 
its representatives. Seeking not merely return, but braving 
return by the same way as they went, they had the opportunity 
of meeting with the disciples at the various places and 
strengthening them and encouraging them in the good way, 
the "narrow way." Nor was there any deception in their 
preaching. They did not tell believers that shortly they would 
find themselves prospering in their business interests by becoming 
disciples of the Crucified One. They did not tell them 
that they would find Christianity the passage way into the 
social circles of the wealthy and refined. On the contrary, 
their message was in harmony with our Lord's words, "In the 
world ye shall have tribulation. These things have I spoken 
unto you, that in me ye might have peace." (John 16:33.) 
Again, "Marvel not, my brethren, if the world hate you;" (I John 3: 13.) 
"Blessed are ye, when men shall revile you, and 
persecute you, and shall say all manner of evil against you, 
falsely, for my sake."— Matt. 5:11. 

So we read that, as they journeyed, they "confirmed the 
souls of the disciples, exhorting them to continue in the faith 
and explaining to them that through much tribulation we must 

R4370 : page 108 

enter into the Kingdom of God"— that this is the Divine arrangement 

for the perfecting of our characters and for our 

testing as respects our fitness for joint-heirship with our Lord. 

Let us not forget, dear friends, that the present evil world 

(age) has not yet closed; that Satan is still its Prince, and 

that tribulation is still the cost of a place in the Throne! Expecting 

this, persecution will not disappoint us when we receive 

it. As with our Lord, we may find that "A man's foes 

shall be they of his own household"— his own people, his own 

nation. 

"Be strong! 
We are not here to play, to dream, to drift; 
We have hard work to do and loads to life; 
Shun not the struggle— face it; 'tis God's gift. 

"Be strong! 
It matters not how deep entrenched the wrong; 
How hard the battle goes, the day how long; 
Faint not— fight on! Tomorrow comes the song." 



R4370 : page 108 

BE YE NOT FORGETFUL READERS 

WE have been astonished at the peculiar statements 
made by some who should have known better- 
respecting our recent presentations regarding the 
Covenants. They declare that we are now contradicting our 
former presentations, etc. As an answer to their absurd statements 
two of our readers have requested that we republish the 
below article, copied, verbatim, from our issue of March, 
1880. We also suggest the rereading of "Tabernacle Shadows 
of Better Sacrifices," first published the same year. When 
we see those opposing "the Vow" becoming spiritually blind 
to things they have professed to see for years, it gives us more 
and more respect for that Vow. For, practically, every one 
opposed to the Covenants is opposed to "the Vow." We gave 
forth "the Vow" as a helpful resolution, little surmising that 
it would awaken such hostility as to create a schism, but evidently 
the Lord so intended.— 1 Cor. 11:19. Following is the 
article referred to:— 

THE THREE GREAT COVENANTS 

A covenant is a ratified, unalterable agreement. God has 
made many covenants with man. (Gen. 6:18; Jer. 33:20, etc.) 
Three, however, stand out very prominently, as in them have 
been bound up all the best interests of mankind. 

FIRST: The Covenant of God to Abraham. This covenant 
seems to comprehend and include a blessing on the natural 
fleshly descendants, as well as upon the higher, spiritual, 
Seed, "which Seed is Christ; and if ye be Christ's (body), 
then are ye Abraham's Seed and heirs according to (this) 
promise." If this thought be borne in mind, it will assist us in 
grasping the full meaning of this Covenant. The spiritual seed 
is called the "blessing seed" and "stars of heaven." It is prophesied 
that "They that turn many to righteousness shall shine as 
the stars forever." (Dan. 12:3.) And Jesus calls himself 
"the bright and morning star." This thought seems to have 
had more weight and meaning with the ancients, who looked 
up to the stars with superstitious reverence, believing that they 
controlled the destinies both of nations and of men. So 
probably this portion of the covenant represented by stars 
signifies heavenly rulers— Christ and his Bride. The natural 
descendants are probably meant when mention is made of "a 
great nation" possessing "this land"— Canaan— said to be as 

R4370 : page 109 

the "sand of the sea." This represents an earthly people as 
plainly as the stars do the heavenly. Let us read the covenant 
and see that it contains these two elements, and recognizes 
both natural and spiritual Israel. (Gen. 12:2,3; 13:14-16; 



15:18, and 22:16-18). Paul assures us that "the seed" referred 

to in this covenant is Christ. (Gal. 3:16.) Fleshly Israel 

lost this, the cream or choicest part of the covenant— the 

spiritual. As Paul says (Rom. 11:7): "Israel hath not obtained 

that which he seeketh for, but the election hath obtained 

it." But the losing of this better part does not cut 

them off entirely from having a part in that covenant. "For 

brethren, that you may not be conceited with yourselves" 

(thinking that all of God's favor and covenant are taken from 

them and given to you), "I wish you not to be ignorant of 

this secret: that hardness in some measure has happened to 

Israel till the fulness of the Gentiles may come in" (i.e., until 

the bride selected from the Gentiles has been completed). 

"And then all Israel will be saved, as it has been written, 

The Deliverer shall come out of Zion, and shall turn away 

ungodliness from Jacob," and "This is THE COVENANT WITH 

THEM FROM ME, when I shall take away their sins. "-Rom. 1 1:25 

-"Diaglott." 

Though for 1800 years they have been counted as enemies, 
and blinded to the gospel, yet they are still beloved for 
the fathers' sake; for the gifts and calling of God are without 
repentance (v. 29); i.e., these earthly blessings are just 
as sure to them as our spiritual ones are to us, because God 
so promised or covenanted, and never changes. Thus, we see 
the breadth and grandeur of God's plan and arrangement- 
how the natural seed was cast aside for the time that the 
spiritual might be developed, who, in their turn, are to be 
made the instruments for blessing the natural; when they 
shall obtain mercy through your mercy; when "The Deliverer 
shall come out of Zion (spiritual Israel— the church) and 
turn away ungodliness from Jacob" (fleshly Israel). When 
we see this, we see the fulness of this covenant to Abraham. 
It shows us what God meant when he promised that Abraham's 
seed should be mighty, possessing the gates of their 
enemies (the place of power and control), and be so far 
above others as to be able to "bless all the families of the 
earth." "O, the depth of the riches of the wisdom and knowledge 
of God! How unsearchable his judgments and untraceable 
his ways; for who hath known the mind of the Lord?" 

THE COVENANT OF THE LAW 

is the second covenant we wish to consider. It was unlike 
the Abrahamic, in that it was conditional and two-sided, i.e., 
it was made between God and Israel and by its arrangements 
God was bound to do certain things, if Israel did certain 
other things. The one with Abraham was unconditional. God 
said: "I will," etc.; and although that was the Abrahamic covenant, 
Abraham was in no way obligated. (Circumcision was 
instituted after the covenant.— Rom. 4:10. It was not Abraham's 
covenant, but God's entirely; and for this reason it had 
no mediator. (A mediator is one who stands between the 
parties to an agreement or contract, whose duty it is to see 
that both parties fulfil their parts of the covenant.) Instead, 
God sware by himself that he would keep his covenant. 
[See form of oath Gen. 15:8-18 and Jer. 34:18-20.] "The 



Law," is called a covenant. [Compare Gal. 3:17 and 4:24.] 
It was ordained in the hands of a mediator (Moses, Deut. 5:5), 
which proves that it contained conditions for its fulfilment; 
for "a mediator is not of one" (Gal. 3:20), or, not 
necessary where there was only one party contracting, as in 
the case of the Abrahamic Covenant. 

This (the Law) was not a part of the first covenant, 
neither was it made with the people of the world, but only 
with fleshly Israel— "And Moses called all Israel and said 
unto them: Hear O Israel. ..The Lord our God made a 
covenant with us at Horeb. The Lord made not this covenant 
with our fathers, BUT WITH US, even us who are all of us here 
alive this day." Deut. 5:1-5. 

That the Ten Commandments, particularly, and the ceremonial 
law, incidentally, constituted this covenant, is clear 
from the reading of the remainder of this chapter. A difference 
between moral and ceremonial law is now recognized, 
but it is of men. God called them one— "The Law." This 
Law Covenant was seemingly designed as a blessing to Israel, 
yet really by coming under it they condemned themselves; for 
it is written "cursed [condemned] is every one that continueth 
not in all the words of the Law to do them." God never intended, 
therefore, that they should be benefited by this covenant 
since, "By the deeds of the Law shall no flesh be justified 
in his sight." What then was the object of this covenant? 
It had two objects: first, it demonstrated that the natural 
man as a fallen creature, could not live in harmony with God 
—could not do right or be righteous. And finally it was 
proved and illustrated that a perfect man could keep God's 
perfect law, when Jesus did keep it and thereby became heir 
legally as well as by grace, to all the provisions of both 
covenants. 

SECONDLY: The Law "was appointed on account of transgressions, 
till the seed should come to whom the promise related." 
(Gal. 3:19.) God knew the best time, and "in due 
time sent forth his Son." The law was introduced because 
the proper time had not come for the development of "the 
seed" referred to in the covenant to Abraham, and was intended 
to prevent Israel's becoming degraded like other nations, 
and to act as a restraint on their fleshly nature, and an 
educator of self-control, etc. It thus was a "schoolmaster," 
which, by showing them their own weakness, prepared them 
to receive Jesus Christ as their justifier from the things which 
the law condemned. (Gal. 3:24.) And it did this very 
work. By the time the seed was due, it had prepared some 
to receive Jesus. 

THIRDLY: It was used as a type, not of the Abrahamic, 
but of the new covenant, to illustrate the operations and conditions 
of that covenant, as we shall soon see. 

R4371 :page 109 

"THE NEW COVENANT" 

Is repeatedly mentioned in Scripture. It should not be misconstrued 
as being God's covenant with us— "the seed;" no, 



that was part of the Abrahamic covenant, and although in 
harmony with each other, they are not the same, nor is the 
"new covenant" made with the church at all. It does not 
come into operation until the spiritual seed as well as the 
fleshly children, have come into possession of what was promised 
them under the Abrahamic covenant. 

It, like the law which was its shadow or type, is between 
God and fleshly men— the world. If, therefore, this covenant 
is between two parties (God and the world), there must be 
conditions binding upon both; hence there must be a mediator 
(as in the type) to stand responsible for the fulfilment of the 
conditions of both. Who, then, is to act as mediator of the 
new covenant? Let Paul answer: "Jesus, the mediator of the 
new covenant." [Heb. 12:24.] Yes, Jesus, our Head, is the 
one, and the only one, who can stand uncondemned before 
God's righteous law. In him God recognizes his holy Son, 
separate from sinners, and in Him humanity may, and soon 
will, recognize their Lord, now highly exalted, but once "the 
man of sorrows and acquainted with grief, who, by the grace 
of God, tasted death for every man"; and "who is a faithful 
High Priest," able to sympathize. Only through him can the 
world ever be made at-one with God— His great work is at-one-ment. 
He will associate with Him in this work His tried 
and faithful bride. Now, what are the conditions of this new 
covenant? They are, as in its type, the law, do and live. 
God can never be a party to any covenant recognizing sin. 

R4371 :page 110 

Perfect righteousness ["Be ye perfect"] has always been the 

condition on which God recognizes or communes with any 

of His children. Christians in the present age, although not 

individually perfect, are reckoned so, being hid in Christ, and 

as members of His body are covered by His robes of righteousness. 

But in the coming time, the imputed righteousness 

of another will not avail, but "every man shall die for his 

own sin" [not the sin of Adam], or vice versa, live by his 

own righteousness [perfect obedience]. 

It may be asked, then: In what way will the new age 
under the new covenant differ from the Jewish age under the 
law covenant? If the conditions of life are obedience to 
God's perfect law, will it not result, as the law covenant did, 
in condemning all under it to death? We answer no, the 
difficulty then was, not with the law, but with man. Man, in 
his fallen, imperfect condition, could not keep "the law ordained 
to life." But the conditions of this new covenant on 
God's part are, that man shall be brought to a condition in 
which he can obey the perfect law, and always keep it in his 
heart, as it is written, "Behold the days come, saith the Lord, 
that I will make a new covenant with the house of Israel, and 
with the house of Judah....This shall be the covenant that 
I will make with the house of Israel after those days, saith 
the Lord: I will put my law in their inward part, and write 
it in their hearts, and I will be their God, and they shall be 
my people, for I will forgive their iniquity, and I will remember 
their sin no more." "In those days they shall no more 



say, the fathers have eaten a sour grape, and the children's 

teeth are set on edge, but every one shall die for his own iniquity. 

-Jer. 31:31. 

"And in that day I will make a covenant for them with 
the beasts of the field and with the fowl of heaven and with 
the creeping things of the ground and I will break the bow, 
and the sword, and the battle, out of the earth." (Hos. 2:18. 
See also Jer. 32:37-41, Ezek. 37:26.) We see clearly that the 
new covenant is yet future and also that a great change will 
be effected in the condition of Israel, who, under the Law 
previously, were unable to keep it. The trouble then was, 
"the fathers [Adam and his successors] had eaten the sour 
grape of sin, and the children's teeth were set on edge" so 
that they could not keep the Law of God; so the Day of 
Atonement is brought in [the Gospel Age] and during it, 
they, and all men, are redeemed from sin and the curse, 
through Jesus Christ, who, by the grace of God tasted death 
for every man. The man Christ Jesus, holy, harmless, separate 
from sinners, was made a curse for us, made sin [i.e., 
dealt with as the sinner] for us, [he] who knew no sin. And it 
is consequently after the gospel age when they are pardoned 
freely for Christ's sake, and restored to the condition of sinless 
perfect manhood, that the new covenant comes into force. 
And to this thought agree the words of Paul [Rom. 1 1:27]. 
"This is my [new] covenant unto them when I shall take 
away their sins." 

The nations are to be blessed also under this new covenant, 
by becoming "daughters" to Israel. "I will give them 
unto thee for daughters, but not by thy (old) covenant." 
-Ezek. 16:61. 

We have seen that to every covenant to which there are 
obligations of two parties, there is a mediator, or one who 
stands between guaranteeing the fulfilment of its conditions. 
As under the covenant of the Law, Moses was the mediator, 
so is 

"JESUS THE MEDIATOR OF THE NEW COVENANT" 

And to him God looks for the fulfilment of the Law, and to 
him Israel and the world look for ability to comply with its 
conditions. Remember that we, the gospel church, do not 
come to Christ under the new covenant, neither under the 
"old" or Law covenant, but under a covenant older than either 
of these [Gal. 3:17], the Abrahamic covenant; as part of 
"The Seed." "If ye be Christ's [body], then are ye Abraham's 
Seed and heirs according to (that) promise."— Gal. 3:29. 

As the typical or Law covenant [or "testament"— same 
Greek word;] was ratified or sealed by Moses its Mediator, 
with the blood of a bull and a goat annually, so the "new 
covenant" is sealed with the blood of "better sacrifices" 
[plural] which these represented, viz.: Christ— Head and 
body. 

Moses took a bunch of hyssop and scarlet wool and therewith 
sprinkled of the ratifying blood mixed with water, both 
the book (type of the Law) and all the people. (See Heb. 9:19.) 
So with the New Covenant it must also be ratified with 



blood; and the mediator of the "New," gives his own blood 
(life,) both head and body, during this gospel day of sacrifice. 
And soon when the better sacrifices are complete, the 
people will be sprinkled with this cleansing blood and with 
the pure water of truth. It will sprinkle both book (law) 
and people, bringing the people into harmony with God and 
therefore into harmony with his Law. Their teeth will no 
longer be set on edge; no longer will they, when they would 
do good find evil present with them; for "All shall know the 
Lord from the least to the greatest," and "The knowledge 
of the Lord shall fill the whole earth." 

Who will do the sprinkling after the sacrifices are complete? 
It was Moses in the type; it will be the Great Prophet 
and Mediator in the antitype— "A Prophet shall the Lord 
your God raise up unto you of your brethren, like unto me; 
him shall ye hear in all things whatsoever he shall say unto 
you. And it shall come to pass that every soul which will 
not hear that Prophet, shall be destroyed from among the 
people." (Acts 3:22.) This prophecy belongs to the "Times 
of restitution of all things," and is quoted by Peter as applicable 
there. 

That prophet or teacher— "The Christ"— Head and body 
is now being "raised up" (to power) and soon the work of 
sprinkling and cleansing humanity begins; and the soul (person) 
who will not then obey and be cleansed shall be destroyed. 
In that age, the sinner a hundred years old will be 
cut off, though at that age he would be but "a child."— 
Isa. 65:20. 

ABRAHAM'S THREE WIVES 

Let us briefly review these covenants as they are illustrated 
in a type or allegory. (Gal. 4:22-31.) Paul explained 
that Abraham's wife, Sarah, was a type of the covenant made 
with Abraham, referring to "The Seed." As years rolled by, 
and no child came, they began to look for a fulfilment in 
some other way, and Hagar takes the place of a wife and 
bears a son, who apparently is to be the heir. So the original 
promise of God meant Christ, but He was not born until "due 
time," and in the meantime "The Law" was given from Sinai, 
apparently taking the place of the covenant, and under the 
law covenant a fleshly seed was developed— fleshly Israel. 
But the Abrahamic covenant had not failed, and after the 
Hagar covenant had borne fleshly Israel (typified by Ishmael), 
the true seed of Abraham and heir is born, under the first (or 
Sarah) covenant; i.e., Christ Jesus and the members of His 
body— spiritual Israel. 

This is as far as Paul carries the type, because speaking 
only of the two seeds, natural and spiritual, and the two covenants 
under which they come into existence. But as we find 
that God is to make "a new covenant," "after those days," 
we naturally inquire: Why was not this new covenant typified 
by a wife as well as the other two? And upon examination 
we find it was so illustrated. Turning to Gen. 24:67, we 
read how Isaac receives Rebecca into Sarah's tent, and she 
becomes his married wife, etc., illustrating how our heavenly 



bridegroom will receive His bride at the end of her journey, 

R4371 :page 111 

and bring her into, and associate her with Himself in the enjoyment 

of all things promised in the first (or Sarah) covenant. 

Then we read: "Then, again, Abraham took a wife, 

and her name was Keturah," illustrating, as plainly as a type 

can, the new covenant. 

Each of the first two covenants, bore but one offspring: 
The first, the "heir of all things" (Isaac— the spiritual Israel), 
and the second, fleshly Israel, beloved for the Father's sake. 
But the New Covenant (Keturah) bears six sons, which, 
taken with the one of Hagar would be seven— a complete 
number— representing that all the fleshly children would be 
developed under the Hagar and Keturah or "Law" and 
"New" Covenants. The name Sarah means Princess, Hagar 
means flight or cast out, Keturah means incense or sweet; 
all of which are significant. 

Oh, how our covenant— the Royal— looms up above all 
the others! Let us not forget that we must die with Jesus, if 
we would LIVE and share in the glorious work of sprinkling 
and cleansing the world in the next age. "That by means of 
death. ..they which are called might receive the promise 
of eternal inheritance."— Heb. 9:15. 



page 111 

BEREAN STUDIES ON THE ATONEMENT 
THE TEXT-BOOK USED FOR THIS COURSE 
IS SCRIPTURE STUDIES, SERIES V (E)* 

Questions on Study V.— The Baptism Witness of the Spirit 

MAY 2 

(1) Why is the witness of the Spirit an important doctrine 
to the people of God? P. 226, par. 1. 

(2) What is meant by "our spirit" in Romans 8:16,— 
"The Spirit itself beareth witness with our spirit that we are 
the children of God?" 

(3) Why should we consider the holy Spirit another 
God separate and distinct from the Father and Son, if we 
do not consider our spirit a separate person from ourselves? 

(4) Is there danger of trusting too much to "feelings" 
and what is the remedy? P. 226. 

(5) Quote some hymns in proof that doubt and distress 
prevail and show the real difficulty and the cure. P. 127. 

(6) Explain the difference between Faith and Credulity. 
P. 228. 

MAY 9 

(7) How may we obtain the witness of the holy Spirit? 



P. 229. 

(8) How may we be sure that we made the proper start 

in the heavenly way? And that we are still on it? And that 
we shall make our calling and election pure? P. 230. 

(9) Is our "full assurance of faith" based upon our perfection, 
or what? P. 231. 

(10) Are tribulations a witness of the holy Spirit to 
God's people? If so what testimony or "witness" do they 
bear? P. 232. 

(11) Are the Lord's dealings with us all alike, or alike 
to all? If not, why not? P. 233. 

(12) Why do some of God's children require more and 
others less disciplining? 

(13) Are all chastenings evidences or witnesses of divine 
displeasure? If not, explain other reasons for them and 
services through them. P. 234. 

MAY 16 

(14) What prunings should we note and what results 
should we expect? P. 234, par. 2, 3. 

(15) Quote several texts from the Bible, showing the 

Spirit's witness to us, and explain how these should be understood 
as witnesses and how they should influence our lives. 
P. 235. 

(16) What did the experiences of our Lord Jesus witness 
respecting divine favor with him? Explain his sufferings 

as in full accord with the Spirit's witness and show how ours 
should correspond. P. 236. 

(17) Would our Lord's witness of the Spirit have been 
the same had he taken a different course? Pp. 236, 237. 

(18) Explain 1 John 5:4, showing how it is a witness 
and to whom it applies. P. 237. 

(19) Is our knowledge of holy things and of "things to 
come" a witness or testimony? If so, of what? P. 238. 

(20) What should every Christian resolve re the witness 
of the Spirit? P. 239. 

MAY 23 

(21) Will the holy Spirit witness to the converts of the 
Millennial Age? If so will the witness be the same as to us 
or in what respects different? P. 239, par. 3. 

(22) Explain the difference between a real witness of 
the Spirit and the unsatisfactory reliance upon "feelings"? 
P. 240. 

(23) Why should those possessing the true "witness" rejoice 
and those not possessing it seek it? P. 241. 

(24) What is it to be sanctified by the holy Spirit? And 
what are the needful steps to this end? P. 241. 

(25) What did St. Paul mean by his prayer that God 
would sanctify his people "wholly"? 

(26) Are there degrees of sanctification? and are these 
degrees easily attained? P. 243. 

MAY 30 



(27) Explain what is signified by the expression, "new 
creatures in Christ Jesus." P. 243, par. last. 

(28) Is a filling of the holy Spirit attainable? If so, is 
it of sudden or of gradual attainment? P. 244. 

(29) Could we be properly said to be filled with a spirit 
person? and could the same person fill many persons and still 
retain personality? In a word is personality divisible? 

(30) What is the Apostle's illustration of our being 
filled with the holy Spirit? Show the application. P. 245. 

(31) Can we be "filled with the holy Spirit" without 
conforming to the divine conditions? And can we thus conform 
unless we know the conditions? And can we know the 
conditions except by the study of God's Word and obedience 
thereto? P. 245, par. 2. 

(32) Is the sealing of the Spirit the same thing as the 
witness of the Spirit? 

(33) What is meant by the seal of the Spirit? When 
is it obtained? Suddenly or gradually? Pp. 246-248. 



*Five years ago DAWN-STUDIES, VOL. V., was reset, and 
unfortunately the type was not exactly same size as before; and 
hence page for page they differ. The references given in these 
Berean Studies apply to the present edition, a copy of which 
postpaid will cost you but 30c. But keep your old edition, for 
unfortunately the new Bible Helps refer to its pages. 



page 112 

PUBLIC MINISTRIES OF THE TRUTH 
UNDER THE AUSPICES OF PEOPLE'S PULPIT 
ASSOCIATION OF BROOKLYN, N.Y. 



ONE-DAY LOCAL CONVENTIONS ADDRESSED BY THE 
EDITOR OF THIS JOURNAL AS FOLLOWS: 

PITTSBURG N.S. (Allegheny), PA., MARCH 28 

Session for the public at 3 p.m. in Allegheny Carnegie 
Hall, Corner Ohio and Federal Sts. Visiting friends heartily 
welcomed. Baptismal services for those desiring same and 
notifying, at 10:30 a.m. Question meeting at 7:30 p.m., 
Bible House Chapel, 610 Arch street. 

BROOKLYN, N.Y., APRIL 4 

Discourse by Brother Russell at 3:00 p.m. Evening meeting 
for the interested at 7:30 o'clock, when the annual Memorial 
Supper will be celebrated. Visiting friends cordially 
welcomed. 



All meetings will be held in the Brooklyn Tabernacle, Nos. 
13-17 Hicks street. Convenient to all cars and ferries— close 
to the old bridge terminus. 

BOSTON, MASS., APRIL 11 

Morning and evening meetings in Faneuil Hall. Take 
surface cars from depots going through Dock Square. Local 
friends will be at stations to assist visiting friends. Meeting 
at 10:30 a.m. for Prayer, Praise and Testimony. 

Afternoon session for the Public in Tremont Temple, 
Tremont street, between School and Bromfield streets, at 3:00 
o'clock; subject, "Where are the Dead?" 

Evening meeting for the interested at 7:30 o'clock. Arrangements 
have also been made for a meeting in Tremont 
Temple Building, on Saturday evening, for the benefit of those 
who may have to come to the city at that time. When purchasing 
railway tickets inquire for reduced rates, account of 
Bible Students' Convention. 

TOLEDO, OHIO, APRIL 18 

BROOKLYN, N.Y., APRIL 25 and MAY 2 



BROOKLYN TABERNACLE EVERY SUNDAY 



Preaching at 3:00 p.m. Praise service at 7:00 p.m.; 
Berean Bible Study at 7:30 p.m. Convenient to New York 
via Subway, and Jersey City via P.R.R. Annex Ferry. 



page 114 

STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES 
"MILLENNIAL DAWN" 

THESE STUDIES ARE RECOMMENDED TO STUDENTS AS VERITABLE "BIBLE KEYS. 

PRICES ARE NET AND BARELY COVER COST OF PRODUCTION, 

WHEN DELIVERED BY COLPORTEURS THE COST AND PRICE ARE INCREASED. 

SERIES I., "The Plan of the Ages." gives an outline of the divine plan 
revealed in the Bible, relating to man's redemption and restitution: 
386 pages, in embossed cloth, 25c. (Is. l/2d.) India paper edition, 75c. 
(3s. l-l/2d.). 

This volume has been published as a special issue of our journal— 
at the extremely low price of 5c. a copy, in any quantity, postage included. 
(To foreign countries, 9c.) This enables people of slender 
purse to herald far and wide the good tidings in a most helpful form. 

SERIES II., "The Time is at Hand," treats of the manner and time of 



the Lord's second coming, considering the Bible Testimony on this 
subject: 370 pages, in embossed cloth, 25c. (Is. l/2d.) India paper 
edition, 75c. (3s. l-l/2d.) 

SERIES III., "Thy Kingdom Come," considers prophecies which mark 
events connected with the "Time of the End," the glorification of the 
Church and the establishment of the Millennial Kingdom; it also contains 
a chapter of the Great Pyramid, showing its corroboration of the 
dates and other teachings of the Bible: 384 pages, in embossed cloth, 
25c. (Is. l/2d.) India paper edition, 75c. (3s. l-l/2d.) 

SERIES IV., "The Day of Vengeance," shows that the dissolution of the 
present order of things is in progress, and that all the panaceas offered 
are valueless to avert the predicted end. It marks in these events the 
fulfilment of prophecy, noting specially our Lord's great prophecy of 
Matt. 24 and Zech. 14:1-9: 660 pages, in embossed cloth, 30c. (Is. 3d.). 
India paper edition, 85c. (3s. 6-l/2d.) 

SERIES V., "The At-one-ment Between God and Man," treats an all-important 
subject— the hub, the center around which all the features 
of divine grace revolve. Its topic deserves the most careful and 
prayerful consideration on the part of all true Christians: 507 pages, 
in embossed cloth, 30c. (Is. 3d.) India paper edition, 85c. (3s. 6-l/2d.) 

SERIES VI., "The New Creation," deals with the Creative Week 
(Genesis 1 and 2), and with the Church, God's "New Creation." It examines 
the personnel, organization, rites, ceremonies, obligations and 
hopes appertaining to those called and accepted as members of the 
Body under the Head: 740 pages, in embossed cloth, 30c. (Is. 3d.) 
India paper edition, 85c. (3s. 6-l/2d.) 

The above prices include postage. 

IN FULL LEATHER BINDING, gilt edges, the set (6 vols.) $3.00, 
(12s. 6d.), plus postage, 60c. (Is.). 

Is also published in foreign languages as follows: German, six vols., 
in Swedish Vols. 1, 2, 3, 5 and 6; in Dano-Norwegian, three vols.; 
in Greek, three vols.; in French, two vols.; Hollandish, Spanish, 
and Italian, one vol. each; bound in cloth, uniform with English edition, 
prices the same; in Polish, condensed edition, one vol., 10 cents. 



page 1 13 



SEMI-MONTHLY 
VOL. XXX APRIL 15 NO. 8 
A.D. 1909-A.M. 6037 



CONTENTS 

Views from the Watch Tower 115 

Rev. Lyman Abbott on Resurrection 115 

Rapidly Growing Burden of Militarism 115 

Settling Doctrinal Differences 116 

The Conclusion of the Matter 117 

The Memorial Celebration 118 

Our Personal Responsibilities 119 

The Sweet-Brier Rose (Poem) 120 

"You Hath He Quickened" 120 



The Begetting, then the Quickening 121 

"Not the Spirit of Timidity" 122 

The Tongue a Power for Good or Evil 124 

Samples of Interesting Letters 126 

Brooklyn Bethel Hymns for May 127 

My Solemn Vow to God 127 

R4372:page 114 

PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY 
CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
"BROOKLYN TABERNACLE," 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, N.Y., U.S.A. 

Foreign Agencies:— British Branch: 24 Eversholt St., London, 
N. W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, Barmen. Australasian 
Branch: Equitable Building, Collins St., Melbourne. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR 

REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 

Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:— All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 
and in touch with the Studies, etc. 



SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER. 

APPLICATION MADE FOR ENTRY AT BROOKLYN, N.Y. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, DANISH AND ITALIAN EDITIONS. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



YOUR ORDERS DELAYED 

Removal to Brooklyn interfered considerably with the filling 
of orders for books, and it will take two weeks more for 
us to get fully caught up. 

India Paper STUDIES, Vols. 4, 5 and 6, are out of stock, 
and as the paper must be imported, it will be some months 
before all orders can be filled. 

WATCH TOWER BIBLES 



We have in stock a few of Nos. 1918 and 1938 only. See description 
and price in WATCH TOWER of Nov. 1, 1908. The 
sale of these Bibles has been phenomenal; 10,000 India Paper 
Bibles in eighteen months breaks all records. We will publish 
more, but they will not be ready for some months. 

HOW TO ADDRESS LETTERS TO US 

The PEOPLES PULPIT has received many letters and remittances 
which should have been addressed WATCH TOWER 
BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY. Nothing should be addressed 
PEOPLES PULPIT except subscriptions for that journal. And 
such letters may be enclosed in your envelope addressed to 
the WATCH TOWER if you are writing to us; but make the 
letters and subscriptions separate, so that we need only to 
hand them over to the proper parties. This is to comply with 
United States mail requirements. A money order for both may 
be sent to the WATCH TOWER. 



R4373 :page 115 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER 
REV. LYMAN ABBOTT ON RESURRECTION 



WHEN addressing the students of the Yale University 
on the subject of "Human Immortality" from the 
text, "The dead shall rise again," Doctor Abbott is 
reported to have said:— 

"I do not think the dead will rise again. I do not 
think that good people ever die. Their spirits, I think, 
just drop off the body, as clothing, and they go on into a 
higher and larger life. 

"When people really die, I do not think they ever live 
again. There are some people who in their lives on 
earth become wholly animal, wholly sensuous. These 
people, with the going out of life from their bodies, I 
think really die, for they have no place in a higher life. 

"I do not think of those whom we see no longer as 
being in spotless raiment afar off, knowing nothing of 
what we are doing and being happy in only a sort of 
negative bliss. I believe they are with us still, though 
we cannot see them, and that they are still very interested 
in what we do. A year ago my wife died in a 
foreign land, but I still feel that she is beside me helping 
and inspiring me." 



This is a frank statement of what Doctor Abbott thinks 
or guesses. He is to be commended for not trying to 
prove that his text means the reverse of what it says. 



How much better it would be for the world if all Bible 
teachers thus distinguished between what they think 
and what the Bible teaches. But what is the value of 
the doctor's thought? On what is it based? What does 
he know on the subject on which to base speculations and 
surmises? Was he ever dead? Does he really know 
anyone who passed through the experience of death? 
Until we get such a demonstration we prefer to believe 
the Bible, corroborated by our five senses, rather than 
trust to the infallibility of Doctor Abbott's thinking 
apparatus. 

Dr. Abbott is a gentleman and a scholar of no mean 
caliber, yet his teachings, here reported, are in line 
with the claims of Spiritism, which the Bible teaches us 
is demonism. Should the doctor resist the seductive proposition 
of Spiritism to put him into communication with 
his dead wife, etc., it will be because of his strong character. 
Many of those who read his words may be far 
less strong to resist and may fall under a demoniacal 
spell, led on by the doctor's words, to seek 
communication. 

Well do the Scriptures declare of our day, "The wisdom 
of their wise men shall perish; the understanding 
of their prudent men shall not be manifest."— 
Isaiah 29:14. 

PEACE! PEACE! AND DREADNOUGHTS 



"Britain built a ship which created a class by itself. 
By a strange fatality she called the ship the Dreadnought, 
but experience is teaching her that from it she 
has everything to dread. Germany began to build new 
ships and naturally these were Dreadnoughts. Other 
Powers are about to follow. Among them we regret 
to find our own land. But it is inevitable that if any 
ships are to be built they must be Dreadnoughts. 

"An interesting suggestion has been made by a London 
writer proposing the co-operation of the fleets of the 
two English speaking peoples, Britain to guarantee the 
safety of our possessions on the Pacific and we to guarantee 
the safety of hers in the North Atlantic."— Ex. 



Peace! Peace! is the cry, as the Scriptures predicted. 
Yet there is no peace, as they declare. True, no war is 
being waged at the present time; but it is surely expected, 
and the great nations dread it and spend millions 
on war preparations in harmony with those convictions. 
Would the world's wise and rich men tax themselves to 
the point of distress for war purposes if they believed 
as Mr. Carnegie seeks to convince himself and others? 
Surely not! 

But why is there no peace? Because sin has entrenched 



itself in fallen human nature. Selfishness is 

sin and the cause of war; wickedness is the Scriptural 

name— "There is no peace for the wicked, saith my God." 

If Mr. Carnegie can tell the world how to convert its 
people, giving them tender instead of stony hearts, then 
the peace proposition will be quickly realized. But aside 
from such a wholesale conversion there is hope for peace 
only along the lines predicted in the Bible; namely, by 
the establishment of Messiah's Kingdom in spiritual 
glory and with unlimited power. This the Bible assures 
us is nigh at hand. But, alas! its blessings must be 
introduced by wars of selfishness which will wreck 
present institutions and prepare humanity to cry to God 
for his relief and the new heart. "Thy Kingdom come; 
thy will be done on earth as in heaven!" 

RAPIDLY GROWING BURDEN OF MILITARISM 



The "Dallas Morning News" says that "Militarism has 
reduced more people to slavery and crushed more nations 
into the earth than any of the other burdens. It is 
unaccountable that the civilization of to-day will promote 
or endure it. It means the same thing over again, 
and yet the educated people of the twentieth century 
tolerate it and hurrah over it just as the Assyrians and 
Persians did in the remote ages of passion, tyranny and 

R4373 :page 116 

conquest. The penalties of it are incalculable. The appropriations 
for armies and navies, tremendous as they 
are, are by no means the heaviest of the losses. There 
is no other line of jobbery and graft that is comparable 
to that of the sharp opportunity hunters who invent 
causes of war, and who sell to their pets in military 
politics the stores, supplies and equipments which are 
consumed by armies and navies, whether idle or active. 
But more scandalous than all the costly plundering and 
grafting is that loss of self-reliance, of ability to make a 
living, of civic character and peaceful purpose that follows 
in many instances the change from a life of working 
for a living to a life of idling or fighting for a living. 
"Truly, as an observant contemporary says, it is of 
little use for consumers to protest against a tax on coffee 
and sugar, for property owners to protest against income 
taxes, or for States to object to Federal inheritance taxes, 
unless a similar protest is made against the policies 
which relate to these taxes as cause to effect. What 
causes the deficit in National finances? Out of a total 
of $810,000,000 appropriated, exclusive of the postal Department, 
$526,000,000 was required to meet the war 
bills of the government! We are paying $1,440,000 a 
day for war! That is more than the cost of the first 
year of the Civil War, and more than half the cost of the 



last year, in which great armies were maintained in 
action. We are at peace with the world, but we are 
maintaining a war standard of equipment. We must 
pay for it. We have followed the nations of Europe 
in our military policy. In this we have taken on the 
deadly curse of the ages. As a nation we have never 
committed before any blunder that is comparable to it 
in either its material or moral penalties." 



The above is the serious side of this matter. The 
amusing side is that this war fever attacks nations in 
proportion as they become "Christianized" or "Civilized." 
Would we not better term this warlike spirit unchristian 
and uncivil? Ah, yes! to be a Christian is a personal 
and not a national matter. Not until Messiah takes the 
reins of government will there be an end of wars. 

As respects the war-expenditures, they cost the poor 
nothing and the middle class almost nothing. Why object 
to the rich having the costly toys— battleships costing 
millions to build and other millions to maintain? 
Do not these monies circulate amongst the masses? 
Does not the employment of men in the building and 
maintaining of a war-outfit relieve the pressure upon 
the labor market, too, and thus inure to the maintenance 
of wage-rates? Let the poor world have its way. 
Let it play with its toys and find by experience their 
little worth. Surely they will become the more ready 
for the new King and Kingdom of Righteousness! 

INTERNATIONAL PEACE FESTIVAL 



Andrew Carnegie, presiding at the International Peace 
Festival held by the Peace Society of New York to celebrate 
the peace now prevailing throughout the world, told 
an audience representing a score of foreign countries in 
Carnegie Hall that the only shadow on the occasion was 
the competition of great nations in building battleships. 
But he predicted that the day of universal peace is at 
hand. 

The stage presented a brilliant scene, "Peace" blazing 
forth in hugh white letters from the centre, flags of eighty 
nations adorning the hall, and delegations in costumes representing 
a dozen different nations, including seven 
Japanese girls in the front row in native dress, Russian 
belles in costume and others adding to the color scheme. 
Except the speeches of Mr. Carnegie and Dr. Wu Tingfang, 
the Chinese Ambassador, the programme was musical. 
Japan received the warmest reception of the evening, 
and nearly all the nations were represented by 
singers. 

Mr. Carnegie said in part: 

"It was thought proper that the Peace Society assemble 



to-night to celebrate the fact that the world at the present 
moment is at peace. 

MORE WAR ENGINES 

"The first thought that arises is an unpleasant one, 
viz., that never in the history of the world have the 
leading powers been engaged to such extent in hastening 
the construction of engines of destruction such as 
the world has never seen, a deplorable fact which cannot 
but give pain to every lover of his race." 



R4374:page 116 

SETTLING DOCTRINAL DIFFERENCES 

-ACTS 15:l-35.-MAY 23- 

Golden Text:— "We believe that through the grace 
of the Lord Jesus Christ we shall be saved, 
even as they."— V. 11. 

THE season of peace and prosperity, growth in knowledge 
and in numbers in the early Church, was 
followed by a season of contention and differences 
at Antioch. Paul and Barnabas returned 
from their missionary tour, and reported to the 
congregation which had sponsored their journey expenses. 
Together they, the Church and their missionaries, 
rejoiced in their mutual service for the Gentiles. 
The cause indeed was quite prosperous everywhere. 
Then came from Jerusalem, the headquarters of the 
Church, certain brethren, Hebrews by birth, who, perceiving 
that the Gentile Christians ignored circumcision, 
raised a great commotion on that score, claiming that 
circumcision would not save without Christ, neither 
would Christ's salvation be operative without circumcision. 
The minds of many were disturbed, and for a 
time a split in the Church seemed probable. But better 
counsels prevailed and their beloved brethren, Paul and 
Barnabas, were sent to Jerusalem as a committee to 
confer with the Apostles and Elders there. Our lesson 
tells of this Conference and its results. 

Incidentally we remark upon the wisdom shown by 
these early Christians— they had "the spirit of a sound 
mind." They had indeed great confidence in Paul and 
Barnabas and realized that under their ministrations 
they had already received great blessings from the Lord, 
which fact rather contradicted the idea that they could 
not be esteemed proper subjects for Divine favor without 
circumcision. They did wisely, therefore, to consider 
that the will of the Lord on the subject was positive 
and that his will would be indicated through the 
Apostles, of whom our Lord had said, "Whatsoever ye 



shall bind on earth, shall be bound in heaven; and whatsoever 
ye shall loose on earth, shall be loosed in heaven." 
These Apostles, then, might properly be expected to know 
and to be able to advise, whether circumcision would 
be a bounden obligation upon the Gentiles as upon the 
Jews, or whether they would be loosed from that obligation 
which had been placed upon Israelites— upon all 
of Abraham's family. 

THE JERUSALEM CONFERENCE 

The kindly deference of the Apostles, one to the other 
at the Conference, is quite marked in this account. It 
is also noticeable that they based their conclusions on 
the subject on what they found written in the Scriptures 
(the Old Testament) and their leadings of Divine providence. 
Gradually for several years the Truth had become 
more and more plain to them; how that the special 
favor of God to the Jews had given place to a general 
favor toward people of every nation, so that all men 
everywhere believing in the Lord, accepting his promises 
and consecrating their lives in harmony therewith, might 

R4374:page 117 

henceforth have equal privileges and advantages with 
those of Hebrew birth. They knew of God's covenant 
relationship with that nation, and it took time for them 
to become convinced that the Divine program had taken 
another step forward. Similarly in the end of this age 
there are many who realize that only a "little flock" has 
been called and has responded, sacrificed, under the 
present High Calling. It is difficult for these to grasp 
the thought that a change of dispensation is at hand 
and that God intends to complete the work of this age 
for the "elect" and to inaugurate a new work for the 
new age, for the non-elect, for the benefit of "all the 
families of the earth." 

The conclusions of the Conference are given us in few 
words, namely, that so far as God is concerned, he had 
recognized believers of Gentile birth by his holy Spirit 
in just the same way in which he had recognized 
believers of Hebrew birth, "and put no difference 
between us and them, purifying their hearts by 
faith." (Acts 15:9.) What more could be asked? 
And these Gentiles had received all this favor of God 
without having come under the bondage of the Law 
Covenant. Why, they wisely asked, should we put a 
yoke upon them, when God has made no such requirement? 
They realized that the Law Covenant was indeed 
a yoke. More than this, that it was so heavy a yoke 
that neither they nor their fathers had been able to 
bear it. Christ had relieved them of the yoke of the 
Law Covenant. Why should they put it upon brethren 
to whom the Lord had never given it? 

Going beyond this, even, they recognized that in some 



respects the Gentile, free from the Law, never having 
come under that yoke, held the superior position of the 
two; hence the statement, "We (Hebrews) believe that 
through the grace of the Lord Jesus Christ we shall be 
saved, even as they (Gentiles)." 

THE CONCLUSION OF THE MATTER 

We have in Vs. 22-29 the decision of the Apostles on 
the question. They not only wrote it out, but sent it at 
the hand of two of their trusted brethren, Judas-Barnabas 
and Silas, with Paul and Barnabas, that they might have 
the matter in written and in oral testimony. The declaration 
was that the disquieting teachings had not been 
authorized by the Apostles at Jerusalem. Then they 
briefly summed up, not as Law, but as "necessary things," 
the following:— 

(1) Abstain from sacrifices to idols; 

(2) And from blood; 

(3) And from things strangled; 

(4) And from harlotry. 

It was not intimated that abstinence from these things 
would make them Christians, for nothing but faith in 
Christ and consecration to him and endeavor to walk in 
his steps could constitute them Christians. By these 
recommended abstentions they declared, "It will be well 
with you"; you will find these recommendations profitable 
to you as followers of the Lord. As a matter of fact, 
the Apostle Paul has pointed out most forcefully that 
"Love is the fulfilling of the Law," because love for 
God would control the life as respects holiness, and love 
for our neighbor as respects earthly justice. The things 
here recommended were necessary to a preservation of 
the fellowship of the "Body" composed of Jews and 
Gentiles of their different education and sentiments. 
Without discussing whether or not harm could come to 
the meats sold in the markets, by reason of pagan ceremonies 
in connection with their killing, the advice was 
that these be abstained from, because Jews certainly 
would consider the eating of such meats as participations 
in the heathen idolatry— even though from the broad 
standpoint of fact the idol, being nothing but wood or 
metal or stone, could neither profit nor injure the food. 
Nevertheless, it was advisable that the Gentile Christians 
abstain from the use of their liberty in this direction, out 
of deference to the weaker brethren, Jews and Gentiles, 
who could not so deeply philosophize and whose consciences 
might be injured. 

A similar thought attaches to the prohibition of the 
use of blood. To the Jew it was forbidden, and under 
his covenant it was made a symbol of life— to partake of 
it would imply responsibility for the life taken. Moreover, 
in the typical ceremonies of the Law the prohibited 
blood was used as a symbol representing the sin-offering; 
for by the blood atonement for sins was effected. To 
emphasize these typical lessons the Jew had been forbidden 



to use blood. And there may be other, sanitary, 
reasons connected with the matter, which are not yet 
known to us. These prohibitions had never come to the 
Gentiles, because they had never been under the Law 
Covenant; but so deeply rooted were the Jewish ideas on 
this subject that it was necessary to the peace of the 
Church that the Gentiles should observe this matter also. 
The things strangled meant animals taken in traps, whose 
blood was not shed or drained out by bleeding to death, 
as the Jewish Law required of all meats that should be 
eaten. This restriction was necessary to the harmony between 
the two branches of spiritual Israel— that which 
came from Judaism and that which came from the 
Gentiles. 

If they did not wish to be contentious and cause divisions 
in the Church, the Gentile brethren would surely 
be willing to restrain or sacrifice their liberty respecting 
these matters. The fourth restriction specified was "fornication, 
the Greek signifying "harlotry." It is difficult 
to understand why one moral precept should be thus 
separated from others and placed on the list with ceremonial 
requirements. We incline rather to ask, Why not 
have included profanity, drunkenness, idolatry, adultery, 
false witness, murder, etc.? Are we to understand that 
the Gentiles are free to commit all the crimes in the 
calendar not stipulated by this Conference, and merely 
counseled respecting meats offered to idols, or that have 
died by strangulation— and the use of blood and fornication? 
Surely not. Rather all the requirements of the 
Law are included in the one law of the New Creation— 
Thou shalt love the Lord and thy neighbor. 

Love would cover idolatry, profanity, murder, theft, 
false witness, adultery, but the law of Love would not so 
thoroughly cover the items enumerated by the Counsel. 
These were necessary, proper, and we are to recognize 
the authority of the Apostles to "bind things on earth," 
and that they were so guided in their public utterances 
that they bound nothing unnecessarily, nothing contrary 
to the Divine will. It is our opinion, therefore, that 
these items thus superadded to the Law of Love should 
be observed by all spiritual Israelites as representing 
the Divine will. As a matter of fact nearly all the 
butchering for our markets is in harmony with the 
Jewish regulations, although many Jews decline to recognize 
this and eat only such meats as have been inspected 
and approved by their rabbis. 

R4375 :page 117 

The wise course pursued brought its good results. 
Harmony prevailed, unity of spirit, fellowship amongst 
the members. The secret of this lay in the fact that the 
Lord was recognized as having the supervision of the 
Church's affairs, and as guiding her course and directing 
her way through the appointed channels, the Apostles. 
Similarly to-day, where honesty of heart prevails amongst 



the Lord's people, schisms, divisions, should be unknown. 
The Lord's guidance and instruction should be sought— 
his Word through the Apostles. Moreover, the Lord has 
been pleased since the Apostles fell asleep to use faithful 
brethren in the Church as finger-boards to indicate the 
right path, in harmony with his Word through the 
Apostles and prophets. The thing necessary is the pure 
heart and the honest conscience and the humble spirit. 

"We would be one in hatred of all wrong, 
One in our love of all things sweet and fair; 

One with the joy that breaketh into song, 

One with the grief that trembles into prayer, 

One in the power that makes Thy children free 

To follow truth, and thus to follow Thee." 



R4375 :page 118 

THE MEMORIAL CELEBRATION 

ON Sunday evening, April 4th, approximately 450 
celebrated our dear Redeemer's Memorial Supper 
in Brooklyn Tabernacle. We were much pleased 
to have so considerable a number of communicants 
present. Of course, these were not all of Brooklyn 
proper. In fact, the regular congregation comes largely 
from the region round about. The occasion was a very 
solemn and impressive one. Our afternoon discourse on 
the Passover, typical and antitypical, led our minds in 
the proper direction for the appreciation of the solemn 
memorial and our comments in the evening related 
chiefly to the significance of the bread and the cup. 
We showed that the eating of the bread pictured the 
appropriation of our Lord's human rights, by which we 
were justified and by which our justification of righteousness 
in God's sight is maintained, notwithstanding 
the imperfections which are ours through heredity. We 
showed that the blood represented primarily our Lord's 
earthly life rights appropriated to us, justifying us to 
life. 

Then we took the second and larger view of the matter 
and saw in the light of the Apostle's words that 
all of the faithful, all of the Royal Priesthood, all 
of the members of the one Body of Christ, join with 
their Lord in becoming the One Loaf and join with Him 
also in the breaking of that loaf, that it may be the 
Bread of Restitution to the world of mankind. We 
saw in the light of the Apostle's words, too, that in 
becoming members of the Body of Christ we become 
sharers with our Lord in his cup of suffering, in his 
sacrifice of earthly life. We saw further how in the 
Divine purpose this earthly life, which we surrender 
forever, goes under the New Covenant to Israel, Judah 
and all the families of the earth, while we are granted 
spiritual life and rights. 



"The cup of blessing which we bless, is it not the 
communion (fellowship-sharing) of the blood of Christ? 
The bread which we break, is it not the communion (in 
his sufferings) of the body of Christ? For we being 
many are one bread and one Body; for we are all partakers 
(sharers) of that one Bread."— 1 Cor. 10:16,17. 

As we thus took a fresh glimpse at the significance 
of the "deep things of God," our hearts were stirred 
to their depths with the realization. How wonderful 
it seems that we should be called to such an intimate 
association with our Lord and Redeemer, both in the 
sufferings of this present time and in the glories that 
shall follow! We called to mind the fact that the Lord 
could not reasonably require less of us; that this is 
but a reasonable service, privilege and honor. We 
realized afresh how great would be our loss if we 
should fail to make our calling and election sure by 
unfaithfulness to the vows taken when we were accepted 
as his "members." We pointed out that even 
those who would constitute the "great company" must 
attain that standing through great tribulation, and that 
none could be acceptable to the Lord for life eternal 
except the pure in heart, filled with his spirit; and 
that, as the Apostle says, the matter with us is one 
of life or death eternal. We sought afresh to build 
one another up in the most holy faith and love and 
devotion and zeal, that the victory might be won— 
eternal life. We exhorted that it is really easier in some 
respects to gain that eternal life on the highest plane, 
the Divine nature and Royal Priesthood, than on the 
lower plane of spirit being, typified by the Levites. 

Almost all who were present partook of the memorial 
emblems and we closed the service with prayer, 
followed by a hymn, after which we went out quietly, 
without our usual greetings, striving to carry with us, 
so far as possible, the precious thoughts of the occasion. 

Reports thus far received are that the celebration has 
been very general and that in a majority of cases the 
numbers participating show an increase over last year. 
In a few cases the increase is small or none, because 
whereas friends from several districts had previously 
met together, they have now grown large enough to 
meet separately. The report from Pittsburg is an excellent 
one— just about as we expected; the Bible House 
Chapel was more than filled, so that extra chairs were 
needed and brought in. Notwithstanding this the showing 
is not as large as on some previous occasions, because 
usually these services have been held in Carnegie Hall 
or some other larger auditorium, and have been attended 
by friends from nearby places— notwithstanding our 
frequent reminders that it is desirable that the friends 
of each locality meet by themselves, after the manner 
of a family, in harmony with the original instructions of 
the type. 

Altogether the general interests of the harvest work 
seem to be deepening and broadening. Yet, we must expect 



continued and increasing testings of faith and love, 
even to the end of the Harvest time; for in no other 
manner does it seem possible for the Church to be 
tested. Thus St. Paul, while admonishing us to mark 
those who cause divisions (Rom. 16:17), and exhorting 
again that there be no divisions among you (I Cor. 1:10), 
declares, "I hear that there be divisions (schisms) 
among you, and I partly believe it; for there must be 
heresies among you that they which are approved may 
be made manifest among you." (I Cor. 11:18,19.) 
Again, St. John says, "They went out from us. They 
were not of us, for if they had been of us, they would, 
no doubt, have continued with us; they went out that 
they might be made manifest that they were not all of 
us."-l John 2:19,20. 

The substance of this teaching is that while it is true 
that the Body of Christ is one and should be bound 
together mutually by the bonds of love and sinews of 
Truth, nevertheless if, after we have done all in our 
power to hold a fellow-member with our love and with 
the truth he departs, we are to take the matter with 
equanimity, remembering that the Lord knows the heart 
and that having done all in our power the remainder 
is for the Lord to attend to and that he will attend 
to disciplining and bringing back into fellowship with 
the Body all that are truly his. "The Lord knoweth 
them that are his." We do not. We do well to remember 
this and to exercise full confidence and faith in 
the Lord and his wisdom and love and power in dealing 
with every disobedient member. It is ours to be 
kind and gentle toward all, while reminding ourselves 
and others of the Lord's own statement, "Vengeance 
is mine, I will repay, saith the Lord." 

Below we give reports of the numbers participating 
in the memorial celebration in the more prominent 
congregations which have thus far reported attendances 
of twenty and above: 

Meaford, Ont; Hoopeston, 111.; Clayton, Ga.; Colmra, 
Ala., 20. Everett, Wash., 21. Moore, Pa.; New Brunswick, 
N.J.; Mansfield, O.; Pt. Limon, Costa Rico; Reading, Pa.; 
Halifax, N.S., 22. So. Sharon, Pa., 23. Rochester, N.Y.; New 
Liskeard, Ont, 24. Elgin, 111.; Jacksonville, Fla., 25. New 
Albany, Ind.; Rockford, 111., 26. Port Clinton, O.; Auburn, 
Ind.; Iola, Kan.; Hartford, Conn.; Galveston, Tex., 27. Tampa, 
Fla., 28. Muncie, Ind.; Springfield, Mass., 29. Tiffin, O.; 
Allentown, Pa., 30. Suffolk, Va.; Harrisburg, Pa.; Milwaukee, 
Wis., 31. Birmingham, Ala.; Pasadena, Cal., 32. Dallas, 
Tex.; Knoxville, Tenn., 33. Cohoes, N.Y.; Worcester, Mass., 
34. Omaha, Neb., 35. Lynn, Mass.; Lancaster, Pa.; Denison 
and Sherman, Tex., 36. Detroit, Mich.; Schenectady, N. 
Y., 39. Vancouver, B.C., 40. Louisville, Ky., 41. 

Canton, O., 43; Struthers, O., Atlanta, Ga., 42; Denver, 
Col., Richmond, Va., 45; St. Joseph, Mo.; Altoona, Pa.; 
Binghamton, N.Y., 48; Baltimore, Md., Cincinnati, O., 49; 
Toledo, O., 50; San Antonio, Tex., 52; Hamilton, Ont., 55; 
Houston, Tex., 56; Dayton, O., Kansas City, Mo., 58; Portland, 



Ore., 61; Scranton, Pa., 73; Kingston, Jamaica, 79; Columbus, 
O., 84; St. Louis, Mo., 86; Indianapolis, Ind., 96; St. Paul, 
Minn., 99; Oakland, CaL, 100; Providence, R.I., 101; Barmen, 
Germany, 110; Cleveland, O., 134; Washington, D.C., 
149; Boston, Mass., 200; Philadelphia, Pa., 201; Chicago, 111., 
275; Glasgow, Scotland, 316; Allegheny, Pa., 320; London, 
England, 388; Brooklyn, N.Y., 450. 



R4376 :page 119 

OUR PERSONAL RESPONSIBILITIES 

SOME of the dear friends are "overcharged" in 
one way and some in another. Some surround 
themselves with so many cares of this life and 
are entrapped by the deceitfulness of riches, either already 
acquired or being sought after, that they have 
not time for proper spiritual nourishments and exercises. 
Hence these are spiritually weak and sick and 
need to go to the Great Physician and to heed the 
counsels of his word. Others are overcharged in trying 
to attend to the affairs of others and feeling responsibilities 
that the Lord has never put upon them. 
This also is an indication of spiritual weakness, for these 
dear friends are surely neglecting their own nourishments 
and exercises, else they would not have so much 
time to spare in finding fault with others. They need 
to read, mark and inwardly digest the various spiritual 
declarations to the effect that the Lord's people should 
learn not to be busybodies in other men's affairs. St. 
Paul says, "For we hear that there are some which 
walk among you disorderly, working not at all, but are 
busybodies." (2 Thess. 3:11.) And again he says, 
"And withal they learn to be idle, wandering about 
from house to house; and not only idle, but tattlers 
also, and busybodies, speaking things which they ought 
not." (I Tim. 5:13.) The Apostle Peter admonishes, 
"But let none of you suffer as a murderer, or as a thief, 
or as an evil doer, or as a busybody in other men's 
matters. "--I Pet. 4:15. 

Nothing in the above, dear friends, is written in any 
unkind spirit, but with the intention of helping some 
who are really good and noble at heart, but deficient 
in their faith in the Lord as the Manager of His own 
work; hence, sometimes they are given to evil surmisings, 
if not evil-speaking, in respect to brethren whom 
they should rather leave in the Lord's care, praying 
for them and, to the extent that they have actual knowledge 
and proper opportunity, doing what may commend 
itself to their judgment and confidence as their proper 
duty in the way of expostulation and suggestion; but the 
matter should surely go no further than this. They 
should not set themselves as regulators of the affairs 
of others, and especially not as regulators of the Lord's 



affairs. Surely the Lord can be trusted to manage His 
own cause. And surely we have confidence in His wisdom 
and ability, as well as in His justice and His love. 
Let us have more faith in the Lord and look rather for 
His leadings than for how we can steady the ark, unless, 
indeed, He has specially so set us in the Body of Christ 
as to put the responsibilities upon us. "God hath set 
the members every one of them in the body, as it hath 
pleased Him."— I Cor. 12:18. 

We offer the above suggestions in the warmest of 
Christian love to some of the dear friends who have 
chided us for permitting the newspapers to print our 
likeness and, as they would say, for using worldly means 
in the propagation of the Gospel message. They write 
us that they fear that the wide publication of our Sunday 
discourses by the newspapers, in connection with 
our removal to Brooklyn, etc., means somehow a lowering 
of the Divine standards and catering to the world 
and to the clergy, etc., etc. 

Our reply is that they should give themselves no 
concern in this matter, but leave it in the Lord's hands. 
He has succeeded in guiding His work and us in the 
past, and we feel sure will continue successful. A 
Leaven Purgative or a Faith Tonic would appear to be 
the proper prescription for this spiritual unrest. 

As a matter of fact, dear friends, we are confident 
that there is no lowering of the Divine standards in 
our public utterances— oral and printed. We are equally 
confident that we are very unpopular with the clergy of 
all denominations and that some of them are our bitter 
enemies, all of whom seem to do everything in their 
power to injure us personally and to hinder our service 
of the Truth. Neither do we think for a moment that 
our utterances are popular with worldly editors and the 
publishers. These are mostly irreligious and publish the 
discourses merely to interest their readers. We do not 
even think that our discourses are popular with the 
public. There is, however, a sprinkling of deeply religious 
people, and others who have a respect for religion, 
to whom the Bible has heretofore been a dark, 
mysterious, sealed book. Some of these are becoming 
interested in the Divine Plan— some slightly, some deeply 
interested. 

It is our thought that the Lord is opening the way 
at the present time for a very general circulation of a 
knowledge of the Divine Plan and that it is under the 
guidance of Divine providence that the sermons are now 
being printed in more than a hundred newspapers every 
week and reaching millions of readers. While maintaining 
the highest standard of Truth in our utterances we 
esteem it to be the Lord's will that we present the 
Truth in as attractive manner as we know how, if, by 
any means, we might win some, as the Apostle suggests. 
The use of pictures in public prints has greatly 
increased of late, and publishers insist that they must 
make every item of their papers attractive. That is 



their business, not ours. It is ours to see that the 
Truth is presented as wisely and as widely as possible. 
If we would have the co-operation of the newspapers in 
setting the Gospel before the public we must allow them 
liberty in respect to illustrations, headings, etc., within 
reasonable bounds. 

Our thought was that the sermons could be published 
under the caption of People's Pulpit of Brooklyn Tabernacle 
without the name of the author, and several were 
thus sent out. However, the publishers disapprove this 
and insist that our personality is a necessary feature to 
make the discourses attractive to their readers. 

Some of the dear friends forget that if it had not 
been for our use of progressive means in setting forth 
the Harvest message they might have remained in darkness 
respecting the good tidings, unless God had worked 
a miracle in bringing the matter to their attention in 
some other way. The lesson for us each and all is this, 
"Do with thy might what thy hand findeth to do," and 
give thy brother the same liberty also. Be glad and 
rejoice if, by any honorable means, the grace of God 
is made more widely known. Nothing is much more 
hurtful to a Christian than the souring or ferment of 
his mind. And where it attacks the heart it becomes 
fatal. It is the start of a root of bitterness. Let us 
put all such things away and remember the Master's 
words to the disciples, "He that gathereth not with me 
scattereth abroad." 

Be assured, dear brethren and sisters, that our move 
to Brooklyn and the occupation here of larger quarters 
adapted to the enlarging work means no change of sentiment 
on our part. We trust that the Lord will find 
every worker in the Brooklyn Tabernacle and Bethel as 
earnest and modest and humble and self-sacrificing as 
ever— and, if possible, more so. Judge not according to 
outward appearances merely, and think no evil. Should 
the Lord's blessing continue with the work for a couple 
of years as now, the Harvest message will, we doubt not, 
reach the people of small towns and the country through 
the newspapers as we never were able to do with the 
tracts and books. 

We are not expecting great things, but, temporarily, a 
considerable degree of prosperity. It will not surprise 
us if within two or three years a great change shall be 
permitted by Divine providence, which, to others than 
ourselves, would seem like a withdrawal of Divine favor 
from this work; but to us it will mean that the Harvest 
work is nearing its completion. Let us join hands in 
the reaping work while it is called day, for the night 
cometh wherein no man can work. 

Personally to be brought prominently before the public 
attention is distasteful to us; we would much prefer 
to proceed with the work quietly, unobserved and unknown, 
holding up the cross and hiding self behind it. 

R4376 : page 120 



Moreover we realize that the more we are brought into 
prominence the more are our enemies stimulated to 
slander us and to say all manner of evil against us 
falsely: for this cause also we would, if possible, hide 
personality, if the interests of the work permitted it. 
It seems evident, however, that the Lord's time has come 
to bring the Harvest message to the attention of the 
public; and it is this conviction that leads us to submit 
cheerfully, willingly, to the arrangements which Providence 
seems to be opening, and into which the force 
of circumstances seems to be pressing us. 

It will be remembered that in the close of our Lord's 
ministry there seemed to be a turn of the tide in favor 
of that Harvest message, so far as public opinion was 
concerned; this led the religious rulers and teachers of 
the people to the more bitter opposition, which eventuated 
in our Lord's crucifixion. May it not be that with 
the close of this Age, Present Truth may obtain a degree 
of public recognition which will serve to draw against 
it and its servants the ire and the fire of some who 
occupy prominent places and great influence in religious 
matters! We do not know, but we should not be surprised 
if such would be the result. 

We take this opportunity to express our appreciation 
of the interest and zeal shown by our readers in the 
supporting of newspapers publishing the weekly sermons, 
and sending words of encouragement to the editors. 
Permit us to suggest, however, that where more 
than one copy of the sermon is desired the subscriptions 
should be scattered amongst the various papers publishing 
the sermons, and that they be encouraged in proportion 
to their circulation. Another suggestion is that 
you send all subscriptions to the "Watch Tower" Office, 
as this will be much more advantageous to the cause. 

Another item: In the interest of the work we have 
contracted with a Newspaper Syndicate, giving it a general 
control of the sermons,— to say which newspapers 
may have them and which may not, the terms, etc. 
This Syndicate will handle the sermons for profit, nevertheless 
at a low price. Be assured that Brother Russell 
makes no profit by the sale of the Gospel. In view 
of this we advise that our friends hereafter refrain from 
any effort to have the sermons published in any newspaper 
—contenting themselves with the encouragement 

R4377 : page 120 

of the papers which are publishing them. The addresses 
of all the papers publishing these sermons will be sent 
to us. If your subscriptions be sent to us without specifying 
which paper you desire we will see that you 
get the one published nearest to your home, either a 
daily or weekly, as you may prefer. In most cases we 
can supply these to you cheaper than you could subscribe 
for them yourself, because the "Watch Tower" has a 



clubbing arrangement with many of these. 



THE SWEET-BRIER ROSE 

Beside my cottage door it grows, 
The loveliest, daintiest flower that blows- 
A sweet-brier rose. 

At dewy morn or twilight's close, 
The rarest perfume from it flows,— 
This strange, wild rose. 

But when the rain-drops on it beat, 
Ah, then its odors grow more sweet, 
About my feet! 

Ofttimes with loving tenderness 
Its soft green leaves I gently press 
In sweet caress. 

A still more wondrous fragrance flows, 
The more my fingers firmly close, 
And crush the rose! 



Dear Lord, oh, let my life be so,— 
Its perfume when the tempests blow, 
The sweeter flow! 

And should it be Thy blessed will 
With crushing grief my soul to fill, 
Press harder still. 

And while its dying fragrance flows, 
I'll whisper low, "He loves and knows 

His crushed brier-rose." G. W. S. Jan. 20 ,'09. 



R4377 : page 120 

"YOU HATH HE QUICKENED" 

-JAMES 2:14-26.-MAY 30.- 

Golden Text:— "Faith without works is dead."— V. 20. 

MANY have supposed doctrinal conflict between St. 

Paul and St. James, the former holding faith as 

the important feature of Christianity, the latter 

insisting that works take precedence. More or less this 

conflict of thought has come down the ages and is with 

us to-day. We hold that there was no such conflict between 



the Apostles, and that the subject, rightly understood 
to-day, leaves no room for disputation. St. Paul 
insists that the Law Covenant was a Covenant of works, 
and that none could be justified under it, because none 
could do perfect works, and that, therefore, all Jews were 
under condemnation. He points out that the original 
Abrahamic Covenant was better and superior to the Law 
Covenant, because its provisions did not require perfect 
works, impossible to the fallen man, but instead tested 
him along another line— the line of his faith. St. Paul 
did not mean, and did not say, that works were valueless 
in God's sight; but, realizing that the Jews, trusting in 
their special Law Covenant, already laid more stress 
upon works than upon faith, he pressed upon their attention 
the fact that with Spiritual Israelites of the Isaac 
class, heirs of the original Sarah Covenant, faith must 
be regarded as the standard. Under it whoever would 
attain the proper kind of faith would be acceptable to 
God. That Covenant does not declare for faith without 
works, but it does indicate a proper development of faith 
as necessary— something beyond the initial belief that 
"God is and that he is a rewarder of those who diligently 
seek him."— Heb. 11:6. 

Faith is a matter of steps and development; and only 
the developed faith could possibly bring to us the blessing 
of the Abrahamic Covenant. This would imply 
works, to the extent that they would be possible, as in 
attestation of the faith. Nevertheless, none of us can 
be justified by works, because our best works are imperfect. 
Our judgment, our test, in its last analysis is, 
"According to thy faith be it unto thee." (Matt. 9:29.) 
St. James possibly noticed a tendency in some to go to 
the opposite extreme in the matter of faith, and to 
ignore works entirely. He does not claim that any could 
do works that would justify them before God, but merely 
insists that if the right kind of faith be developed in the 
heart it will surely bear fruit and make an outward manifestation, 
according to circumstances. Undoubtedly this 
is a sound position and one fully in accord with our 
Lord's words, "By their fruits ye shall know them." 
-Matt. 7:16. 

Coming to an orchard filled with fruit, we may quickly 
discern the various kinds of trees by their fruits. So 
with the Christian. If he professes faith in Christ we 
are willing to acknowledge him as a brother, but "If 
any man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of 

R4377 : page 121 

his;" hence, we look for evidences of the Lord's Spirit, 
disposition, character, in all those who profess to be his 
"members," "brethren." (Rom. 8:9.) If we see little 
of the Lord's Spirit (disposition) we are inclined to next 
inquire how long the brother has known the Lord and 
professed consecration to him. We thus sometimes find 
"babes in Christ," who, for the time they have had a 



knowledge of him, should be more developed and have 
a larger measure of his Spirit. We should be on guard 
against considering such, in any sense of the word, suitable 
teachers or exemplars. 

On the contrary, we may very speedily discern the 
Spirit of Christ in some— their gentleness, meekness, 
patience, brotherly kindness, love. And if, as sometimes, 
these qualities be quickly developed in some who 
have only recently come to a knowledge of the Truth, 
we may the more rejoice with the fruit-bearer. However 
young in years, the fruit-bearing quality, the heart 
development, would indicate such to be possibly one of 
the "Elder" brethren— even though, because a novice, 
the Church may not yet consider it due time to advance 
him formally to an official position as an "Elder." 

THE BEGETTING, THEN THE QUICKENING 

In other words, the teachings of St. Paul and St. 
James may be fully harmonized by remembering the 
words of the former, "You hath he quickened, who 
were dead in trespasses and sins." (Eph. 2:1.) After 
the sinner, dead in trespasses and under condemnation, 
has, by the grace of God, heard of Christ and has accepted 
his share of the redemptive work by faith, he is 
"justified by faith," before he has had any time to bring 
forth works or fruitage of any kind. Then if, following 
the Lord's leading and instruction, he presented himself 
a living sacrifice to the Lord to take up his cross and 
follow in the footsteps of Jesus, the acceptance of his 
sacrifice by the Father meant his begettal to a new 
nature— to the spirit plane as a "New Creature." If 
the begetting spirit be not lost, if it do not die, a transformation 
work will progress. By and by a quickening 
or activity will result from the indwelling of the holy 
Spirit in the mortal body. If this process continues, 
ultimately the "New Creature" will be perfected and 
ready for birth on the spirit plane— by resurrection. 
Thus our Lord in his resurrection was the First-Born of 
many brethren, and we, his brethren, will be "born 
from the dead" in due time, if faithful. But if the spark 
of life perish, we become castaways and will experience 
no resurrection birth. 

From this standpoint we are ready to discern that the 
beginning of God's leading with us is along the lines 
of faith, and that it is to our faith that the promises of 
God appeal, and that by these "exceeding great and 
precious promises," touching our faith, energizing our 
faith, God works in us, first to will, and later to do, 
his good pleasure. To will to do right is of primary importance 
and is wholly of faith. The doing, which results 
from this faith, is God's operation through it and 
corresponds to the "quickening" of the natural birth. 
The period of the quickening may come sooner or later, 
but the strength, the vigor, of the unborn infant is 
usually estimated by the degree of quickening manifested. 



And so it is with the Christian. When his faith shall 
have developed sufficiently, the degree of his activity in 
obedience to God in the service of the Truth and righteousness 
and the brethren will indicate the strength or 
the weakness of his spiritual development. 

Self-examination along this line is very proper. If we 
have heard, seen, tasted, of the grace of God and enjoyed 
it, and if no desire to serve our gracious Father 
or to assist others to the same blessings that we enjoy 
has been manifested, it implies that our spiritual vitality 
is very weak and in danger of perishing. But if, on 
the contrary, we find ourselves burning with fervency 

R4378 : page 121 

of love for the Lord, and with appreciation of his great 
Plan of Salvation, and are consumed with a desire to tell 
the good tidings to others for their blessing, strengthening, 
upbuilding and participation in the Divine faith, it 
should encourage us. We should notice, too, that Jesus 
specially loved and favored the more zealous, vigorous 
and energetic of the apostles, Peter, James, John, and, 
we may be sure, Paul also. 

BE YE WARMED AND FILLED 

St. James presses his point and endeavors to awaken 
some who have a measure of faith, but who have not gone 
on to the quickening degree. He asks what profit there 
would be for us to say that we have faith if we do not 
have works to correspond— to attest the faith, however 
imperfect the works would be. He asks (R. V.), "Can 
that faith save him?" We answer, No. As St. Paul 
declares, It is the faith that works by love that counts. 
But it is the faith that counts, and not the works; because 
the faith can be perfect, complete; but perfection of 
works is impossible to us, because we have this treasure 
of the New Nature in an earthen vessel. 

Illustrating this point he suggests that to tell a poor 
brother of our faith that God will help him and to send 
him away without relief, when it is within our power to 
relieve him, would not be such a faith as God would 
approve. It would rather signify that we had deceived 
our own selves. It would profit us nothing. So faith 
that has no works, of any kind or degree, cannot be 
called a living faith, because, as yet, it has given no 
evidence of life— it has shown no quickening. 

St. James clearly attests his thought, saying, "A man 
may say, Thou hast faith, and I have works; show me 
thy faith without thy works, and I will show thee my 
faith by my works." Again he points to the special feature 
of the Jewish faith in one God in contrast with the beliefs 
of the heathen in many gods. He says to the Jewish 
brethren, "You boast in having knowledge of the one 
living and true God, but surely this is not the extent of 
your faith in this direction; because the devils believe 



and tremble. Oh, foolish man, faith without works is 
barren. It can never bring you life, birth." A faith 
that will not develop obedience, in harmony with ability, 
is, therefore, unavailing during this Gospel Age, even as 
imperfect works failed to justify to life under the Law 
Covenant. 

ILLUSTRATIONS OF FAITH AND WORKS 

Note the case of Abraham, the "father of the faithful." 
It is written that he believed God, and that his faith was 
counted to him for righteousness. But how much faith 
is required and to what extent is it involved in works? 
St. James points out that God placed a crucial test upon 
Abraham's faith, which would have proven it inefficient, 
if it had not developed to the quickened stage of works 
of obedience. It was years after the promise had been 
made, and Isaac, the seed of promise, was grown to young 
manhood, when God commanded that he should be sacrificed 
upon the altar— thus prefiguring how The Christ, 
the true Seed of Abraham (Gal. 3:29), must all have the 
testing of faith to the point of obedience, even unto death 
—sacrificial death. 

Then, fearful that he had given an example of so lofty 
a faith and obedience as would discourage us, St. James 
picks out and holds up before us another illustration of 
faith and works— that of Rahab the harlot. She had 
faith in God, but it would not have availed her if it had 
not developed to the degree of activity and helpful service, 
risking her own interests temporarily for the assistance 
of the spies. Manifestly she would never have had 
such works without faith— and it is the faith that 
is specially pleasing to the Lord. But the faith would 
not have been pleasing to the Lord, had it not led up 
to works in accord. Thus we see how works have to do 
with our justification, in conjunction with our faith, 
which is the foundation of our works. 

THE BODY WITHOUT THE SPIRIT 

St. James summarizes this thought, saying, "As the 
body without the spirit of life is dead, even so faith without 
works is dead." Some might think that the writer 
of these words had erred in likening the body to faith 
and the spirit of life to works, supposing that the illustration 

R4378 : page 122 

should be reversed, namely, to compare the body to 
works and the spirit of life to faith. But St. James has 
expressed the matter properly. A body must be had before 
any spirit of life could come into it. So a faith 
must exist before it can be quickened into activity. But 
the quickening is absolutely necessary ere we could have 
our birth of the spirit in the First Resurrection. 
Notwithstanding all that we have written on this subject, 



especially in Studies, Vol. VI., some of the dear 

friends occasionally write us in perplexity, desirous of 

knowing what course they should pursue, in respect to 

brethren (and sometimes prominent brethren) whose 

works do not correspond with their professions of faith. 

For instance, a letter recently received noted the fact 

that one prominent in the Truth at whose residence 

the meetings were usually held, has a weakness for intoxicating 

liquors. They feared that if the meetings were 

removed from his home he would not attend them 

elsewhere. They desired to know the Lord's will respecting 

their course of action. 

We were glad to note their love for the brother and 
also their solicitation for the Truth, lest his weakness 
might bring the cause of Christ to a measure of dishonor. 
We advised that the erring one be still treated 
as a brother, for his weakness may be of heredity and 
much against his own will; but we also advised that one 
thus weak should not in any sense of the word be set 
forth to the world as a prominent representative of the 
Truth; that so doing would dishonor the Truth and also 
be injurious to the brother, who might come to feel that 
his weakness was conceded by the brethren to be justifiable, 
and thus encouraged he might fail to put forth the 
necessary energy— fail to allow his faith to work in him, 
to rule him, to control his mortal flesh, as the Scriptures 
require. 

With full sympathy and brotherly love it is our belief 
that the brother is not being helped by the course pursued; 
that it would be better for him if the dear friends 
would give him loving reproofs and remove the meeting 
from his home. If he has any of the spirit of the Lord, 
the spirit of meekness and love of the brethren, such a 
course would be a most helpful reproof, setting before 
him, and before all, the high standards of Christian deportment. 
Is it claimed that this might lead him to 
antagonize the Truth? We answer that the Scriptures 
forewarn us that our Gospel is a "savor of life unto life, 
and of death unto death." (2 Cor. 2:16.) Our whole 
responsibility is in doing the Lord's will in the kindest, 
most gentle, most loving manner possible, yet with that 
force and positiveness which will impress a lesson upon 
those who are amenable to our influence and the influence 
of the Lord through us. 

We have just received a letter from a dear Sister who 
has been connected with and deeply interested in the 
Truth for years. She writes us that she is only now 
awakening to a realization of the wonderful privileges 
that are hers in connection with the Harvest work, and 
of "showing forth the praises of him who has called us 
out of darkness into his marvelous light." This dear Sister 
is only now becoming thoroughly quickened, energized 
with the Truth. The good features to result may be 
expected, not only in the bringing of others into a knowledge 
of the Truth, but also a bringing of her own heart 
into full harmony with the Lord and to greater character 



likeness to him, in the manifestation of the fruits and 

graces of the Holy Spirit. This quickening came in conjunction 

with the endeavors of the Sister to live up to all 

the various features of The Vow. We hope to hear from 

others similarly blessed and energized to good works for 

the Lord, the brethren and the Truth. 



R4378 : page 122 

"NOT THE SPIRIT OF TIMIDITY" 

"For God hath not given us a spirit of timidity; but of 
courage, of love and of a sound mind."— 2 Tim. 1:7. 

THERE is one kind of fearlessness which is begotten 
of self-esteem, lack of humility. This is not the kind 
enjoined upon the Lord's people. They are to be 
both tender-hearted and humble-minded. The spirit of courage 
possessed by the saints is based largely upon their faith 
in the Lord. Realizing the divine love and providential care, 
these can apply to themselves the gracious assurance that 
"The Father himself loveth you" and that "All things shall 
work together for good to them that love God, to the called 
ones according to his purpose." It is this realization of divine 
all-wisdom and all-power that gives the strength of heart 
referred to in our text. It will be readily seen, then, that 
this courage is based upon faith, though of course the faith 
must have a foundation of knowledge. The proper relationship 
of our growth is primarily knowledge: faith, courage, 
activity, and all of these continue to grow, and in their maturity 
make us wise, faithful, courageous overcomers in respect 
to the spiritual matters to which we have been called. 

Sometimes we realize our deficiencies and are not able to 
locate the cause. Some one says, I want to be an overcomer, 
to gain the victory over the spirit of the world, over the 
tendencies of my own fallen flesh and over the wiles of the 
Adversary, but somehow I cannot; I fail. Such should learn 
to look for the source of failure, the deficient element, and 
should fortify himself in respect to the same. Let him ask 
first, Is my failure to overcome due to a lack of courage? 
Am I fearful, and hence unable, to fight the good fight of 
faith and, by the Lord's assistance, to gain the victory? If 
he has the courage he may find that he has not been sufficiently 
trusting the Lord, but leaning too much on his own 

R4379 : page 122 

strength. Such should remember the Apostle's words, "When 
I am weak, then am I strong"; reversely, "when I am strong 
in self-assurance, I am then weak," because the Lord wishes 
me to rely not upon myself, but upon him, his strength, his 
grace. If the courage be found deficient the reason evidently 
is that the faith is lacking, and if so, there is a reason for it: 
either a lack of knowledge on which to build faith, or a lack 



of exercise and development of faith. The knowledge is to 
be sought from the right quarter, in harmony with the Lord 
and his Word, and the faith is to be exercised, continually 
recognizing the Lord's interest in us as his children, as testified 
to by his Word and by noticing the leadings of divine 
providence in our daily affairs. 

LOVE CASTS OUT FEAR 

There is a proper fear or reverence and disinclination to 
offend our heavenly Father and our Redeemer, which we 
wish never to lose. Perfect love will not cast out this fear, 
but rather intensify it. The fear which love casts out is 
timidity, a servile fear or dread of the Lord or of Satan, or 
the fallen angels, or of men and what they might do unto us. 
Perfect love cannot be attained without knowledge, faith, 
courage and overcoming. It is the result of the exercise of 
all this divine arrangement that brings us nearer to God and 
makes us truly thankful and appreciative of his gracious purposes 
and omnipotent power for their accomplishment. 

The spirit of courage needs special cultivation by the 
Lord's people. And this cultivation means growth in all the 
graces. For instance, if calamity befall us or threaten us we 
should immediately think of the fact that our Lord assures 
us that an insignificant sparrow cannot fall to the ground 
without the Father's notice and that we are of much more 
value than many sparrows. This thought at once strengthens 
the heart, nerves the arm, quickens the pulse of endeavor, 
provided we can realize that God is for us, that no earthborn 
cloud intervenes between our souls and the love for us 
which he has declared. If a cloud does obscure the Father's 
love we must the more earnestly, the more persistently get 
from behind it by getting our hearts right with the Lord, 
by going to him in prayer, by confessing our trespasses and 
by requesting mercy and grace to help and to restore us to his 
favor. 

"Be of good courage and he shall strengthen thine heart," 
is one of the blessings assured us in his Word. In the divine 
order courage is necessary in order to strength and 

R4379 : page 123 

victory. Some one has said, "One with God is the majority." 
With the courage to grasp this thought and to hold it things 
almost superhuman seem possible to the Lord's people, while 
without this courage they may naturally be weak and easily 
vanquished. 

COURAGE IN THE EVIL DAY 

Never before, perhaps, was courage so needed as it will 
be needed in the evil day just before us; but the Prophets' 
descriptions of the great trouble time before us are very 
figurative when they speak of fire and clouds and pillars of 
smoke, saying of this time, "I will show wonders in the 
heavens and in the earth, blood and fire and pillars of smoke," 



etc. But the consecrated children of God need have no timidity 

in respect to these matters if they have the proper 

courage, developed by proper exercise and built upon proper 

faith, founded upon the knowledge of divine revelation. His 

attitude of heart will be, "I will fear no evil, for thou art 

with me; thy rod and thy staff, they comfort me." Whether, 

therefore, storms financial, political, religious or demoniacal, 

come his way, the child of God may rest secure and be of 

good courage. The Lord is both able and willing to care for 

his interests and bring him off victor. Should the fallen angels 

be permitted to again materialize and personate either 

the dead or the living, this class need have no fear. Their 

perfect love for the Lord, based upon a knowledge and appreciation 

of his Truth, will lead them to triumph courageously 

over all the wiles of the Adversary and his hordes. 

THE ELECT TO BE UNDECEIVABLE 

The Scriptures abound with testimonies to the effect that 
the severe trials of the near future will be along the lines 
of deception. They speak of lying angels and deceivableness 
of unrighteousness and "lying wonders" and tell us that the 
Lord will send or permit a strong delusion that they may believe 
a lie. If we gain the right conception of the matter 
these deceptions are to affect the whole world, including its 
wise men, and indeed practically everybody except the "very 
elect"; and the "very elect" will be preserved, not through 
their own wisdom or superiority, but through the power of 
God, "For there shall arise false Christs, and false prophets, 
and shall shew great signs and wonders; insomuch that, if it 
were possible, they shall deceive the very elect."— Matt. 24:24. 

Our Lord in the parable of the wheat and tares tells of 
the harvest work and how in the present time he would 
gather "together his elect from the four winds, from one end 
of heaven to the other." (Matt. 24:24.) It is by thus gathering 
them that they will be protected in the time of strife 
and trouble when others will be deceived. But they are not 
to be gathered physically into one place, but spiritually; their 
minds, their hearts, their affections are to be gathered together, 
centered. Our text tells us that our Lord is this great 
Center to which his Elect must all be gathered if they would 
have rest or peace, if they would overcome the world, the 
flesh and the peculiar snares of the Adversary, which will 
now be laid for the feet of all and will more or less entrap 
all except the Elect class. 

"GATHER MY SAINTS UNTO ME" 

Figuratively all of these "very elect" ones are gathered, 
and the place is thus described, "I will say to the Lord, he is 
my refuge; in him will I trust"; and again, "He that dwelleth 
in the secret place of the Most High shall abide under 
the shadow of the Almighty." (Psa. 91:1.) Ah! no wonder 
that we also read, "No harm shall come nigh them." How 
could harm come to any who are thus close to the Lord? 
A thousand shall fall at thy side; ten thousand at thy right 



hand; but it shall not come nigh thee; because thou hast 
made the Lord thy refuge; thou hast made the Most High 
thy habitation."— Psa. 91:7. 

This nearness to God, into which his "very elect" will 
be gathered, will be the source of their protection. And the 
dangers to others will be in proportion to their distance to 
this great citadel of strength, this fortress, this refuge or 
tower. 

"Then let our songs abound, 

And every tear be dry; 
We're trav'ling through Immanuel's ground, 
To fairer prospects nigh." 

"ALL POWER IS GIVEN UNTO ME" 

These were our Lord's words after his resurrection. 
They were true then. They have been true throughout this 
age and they are still more completely true today, because 
we are now living in the time of which it is written, 
"He shall take unto himself his great power and reign." His 
reign has in some senses of the word already begun. He 
has already marshaled forces which will complete the overthrow 
of everything opposed to his Kingdom and its righteous 
laws. And we may be sure that the members of his 
Body still in the flesh this side of the veil are no less subjects 
of his providential care than is the world and its affairs. 
We may be sure that nothing is transpiring, either in the 
nominal Church or amongst the kingdoms of the world; 
amongst socialistic or political parties or in the financial 
world contrary to what will best serve our Lord's purposes 
in connection with the events just before us and the outworking 
of the same in fullest accord with the prophecies. 

Oh, that we could get this thought rightly settled in our 
minds! Yea, as the Scriptures say, "Settle it in your hearts" 
—that our Lord is at the helm superintending all of earth's 
affairs at the present time in a much more practical sense 
than ever in the past. And have we not seen his graciousness 
towards the Church in the thirty-four years of the harvest 
period that are already past? And can we doubt his continued 
supervision of the affairs of his betrothed to the grand 
consummation? "He who hath begun the good work in us 
is able to complete it," and he who has thus far conducted 
the Harvest work is able still to direct it, order, bless it and 
use it to his own praise and to the blessing of his people. 
"Who led thee first will lead thee still; 
Be calm and sink into his will." 

Let us not be timid either as respects the affairs of the 
harvest work in general, or as respects our own personal relationship 
to it and to the Lord. Let us learn more and more 
to be on the lookout for the leadings of his providence and 
utilizing knowledge which he has given us from his Word. 
Let us not be surprised concerning the fiery trials which may 
try us and the stormy billows which may at times seem about 
to overwhelm us, "For greater is he that is on our part than 
all that are against us"— however numerous, however strong, 
and whether demons or men. Let us remember that we are 



called to be overcomers and that the victory that overcometh 
the world is our faith. 

"Resist the devil and he will flee from you" is the Lord's 
testimony. This implies an assault by the Adversary. It 
implies that he should be resisted and can be resisted and 
that in the end he will flee from us, not because of arrogance 
or power on our part, but, as our Master said, "He hath nothing 
in me"; so if he finds it useless to continue his assaults 
he will probably flee also from us to other fields of service. 
We remind all of our readers that whoever comes under the 
influence of Spiritism, Christian Science, Hypnotism or any 
other form of Occultism is thereby endangering himself, not 
only for the moment, but also for the future, because the evil 
spirits operating through these various channels seek, some in 
one way and some in another, to delude, bewilder, confuse 
the reason and bring into subjection the minds of those 

R4380 : page 123 

with whom they have to do. Hence, any of the Lord's people 
who have had affiliation at any time with any of these are 
specially warned of liability to intrusion by these spirits. We 
remind all that the special channel through which they have 
had special success is human curiosity. We urge all of the 
Lord's people to restrain their curiosity and rely on the 
Lord's Word and have no dealings whatever with any of 
these occult systems. 

One dear sister told us recently that before coming into 
the Truth she had dabbled with Christian Science and Spiritism 
and had been entrapped with mediumship. She was a 
writing medium and could distinctly feel something take hold 
of her hand and guide her pencil while she wrote on topics 
of which she had no personal knowledge. After coming into 
the Truth, and realizing the source of this power, she resolutely 
repelled it in every way, asking the Lord by prayer for 
assistance. She gained strength to resist this influence, but 
has again been annoyed by the spirits taking her hand and 
endeavoring in various ways to arouse her curiosity so that 

R4380 : page 124 

she would yield her hand to them to learn their message 
for her. She remarked that she has now a fear and a dread 
of the evil spirits and a strong desire to be free. She finds 
herself freer from their influence when in the company of 
other people. We advised her against fear and against refusing 
to remain in a room by herself. By so doing she 
would be cultivating fear and subserviency and bringing herself 
into a condition of mind much more amenable to their 
intrusions. We advised her, and now advise all similarly 
affected, to resolutely set their wills in opposition, to refuse 
all communication, to ask no questions, receive no answers 
in any manner, but in the name of the Lord to command the 
evil spirit to depart, meantime going to the Lord in prayer 
"for deliverance and grace to help in every time of need." 
In conclusion, then, dear friends, be of good courage, of 



strong faith, of heroic determination, and see that your faith 
is not in yourself, nor in your vows, nor in your very best 
endeavors, but in the Lord. Trust in the Lord and the practise 
of your faith to control your thoughts and words and 
deeds and to bring you closer to our Father and Redeemer. We 
live in a time when worldly wisdom is taking hold of this 
need of courage and is advising people that it should be based 
upon self-confidence, self-assurance, self-esteem. This is the 
world's counterfeit, the Adversary's counterfeit of the true 
courage which the Word of God inculcates and through 
which we may not only rejoice in all of the present experiences 
of life, but ultimately "come off conquerors; yea, more 
than conquerors through him that loved us." 



R4380 : page 124 

THE TONGUE A POWER FOR GOOD OR EVIL 

-JAMES 3:1-12.-JUNE 6.- 

Golden Text:— "Whoso keepeth his mouth and his tongue, 
keepeth his soul from troubles."— Prov. 21:23. 

OUR lesson is generally acknowledged to be one 
of the most profound dissertations known in the 
world on the power of speech. St. James was 
evidently a very practical man. His remarks respecting 
the value of words as attestations of faith, noted in our 
last lesson, show this. To-day's lesson takes up the 
practical thought and applies it to the tongue in general, 
and especially to the power of speech in those recognized 
as Elders or Teachers in the Church. Thus our lesson 
opens with the exhortation, "Be not many of you teachers, 
my brethren, knowing that we (who are teachers) 
shall receive the heavier judgment," because in many 
things we all stumble. The thought is that whoever 
attempts to be a teacher, a "rabbi," takes a position 
which exposes him to more criticism than falls upon the 
ordinary member of the Ecclesia. And if he errs, he 
will be subjected to much more severe criticism and 
rebuke than if he made the same error in his own private 
judgment. More than this, from the Lord's standpoint, 
he assumes a great responsibility in becoming an ambassador 
of the Gospel and mouthpiece of the Lord. If 
faithfulness and care would bring him a great blessing 
and reward, unfaithfulness or carelessness would bring 
correspondingly heavy condemnation. 

These words of the Apostle, in conjunction with our 
Lord's suggestion that if bidden to a feast we take not 
a high seat, but a low one, and that we seek not the 
title "rabbi," but be humble, as "little children"— these 
suggestions from so high authority in the Church, combined 
with St. Paul's exhortation, "Humble yourselves 
under the mighty hand of God that he may exalt you 



in due time," should properly cause us to fear the responsibility 

of a teacher's position in the Church. If 

seemingly in the Lord's Providence we occupy such a 

position it should be held very humbly and with great 

fearfulness and continual watching and praying lest we 

enter into temptation and ensnare ourselves and others 

in error. 

"PRIDE GOETH BEFORE A FALL" 

Of course, there is a reason for this danger. It lies 
in ambition, which sometimes takes the direction of 
pride and sometimes the love of praise. The first of 
these, pride, is always reprehensible, never excusable, 
for surely no member of our race has any reasonable, 
just ground for pride, even though in comparison with 
the remainder of the race he might be forced to the 
conclusion that he was less fallen than many. The 
second danger to ambition, namely, love of approbation 
of others, is proper enough if rightly directed— Godward— 
but dangerous in proportion as it seeks human 
approbation, because those about us, likewise imperfect, 
might often approve and applaud things which our Lord 
would disapprove and reprobate. Hence, the only ambition 
allowable would be the desire to please God and 
to have his approval and ultimately his "Well done." 

Of course, this would incidentally mean a desire and 
expectation of having the approval of such of the Lord's 
brethren as have the Spirit of the Lord— "The mind of 
Christ." It might properly also include an appreciation 
of the love and esteem of all men. But these must not 
become any part of our ambition, nor must we expect 
that mankind in general would be so impulsed by 
righteousness and Truth and the spirit of these that they 
would approve and applaud the things most pleasing to 
the Lord. On the contrary, we must remember that if 
any man love the world and its approval and applause, 
the love of the Father is not in him. If he gets the 
approval of the world in general he should remember the 
Lord's words, "Woe unto you when all men speak well 
of you." It should be a sign to him that in an important 
sense and degree he was out of harmony with the Lord 
and his message— otherwise the world would hate him, 
as it did Christ, and cry out, "Crucify him." 

"ONE IS YOUR TEACHER, EVEN CHRIST" 

St. James is not warning us against service, nor seeking 
to hinder us from all good works one for the other, 
as members of the Body of Christ. His caution is against 
our attempting to be (school) masters or teachers. 
There is but the one Teacher or Schoolmaster for the 
entire Church of Christ for all this age. He is the "Head 
of the Church, which is his Body"— the Director, Supervisor, 
Caretaker, Instructor of the "members." 

True, the Apostle does intimate that the Lord "Hath 



set the various members in the Body as it hath pleased 

Him." He intimates that the qualities of eye and ear 

and tongue are head qualities in comparison with the 

hand, the foot, etc., which are body qualities. Our 

absent Lord or Head promised to be with every little 

gathering of his people. "Lo, I am with you always, 

even unto the end of the age," and thus with them he 

is pleased to exercise in some manner and through some 

agency the Chairmanship of such a meeting and to be 

the Teacher. But he will not force his Headship upon 

us. He waits to serve, to instruct, to guide so many as 

are in the right attitude of heart, desirous of knowing 

his will and doing it. Having instructed his people 

respecting his will, he expects them to follow his instructions, 

if they would have the blessing he is pleased 

to confer. If, therefore, when assembled in his name 

they follow the directions of his Word, hearken to his 

voice in the Scriptures and watch for the leadings of 

R4380 : page 125 

his Spirit, and approve it in each other where found, 
his blessing will be proportionate. 

Thus a responsibility is upon each little group to 
approve as its leader none but the consecrated. No goat 
must be chosen as a leader of the sheep, nor any sheep 
whose outward conduct does not give evidence of his 
sincerity of heart and desire to walk in the footsteps 
of the Master. Pride, and self-seeking ambition to be a 
lord over the flock, should not be tolerated, because they 
would be injurious, not only to the Ecclesia of believers, 
but also to the heady ones seeking to lead them. Nevertheless, 
where need to be restrained from taking the 
highest seats in the spiritual feast presents itself, the 
restraint should be exercised in a kindly, loving manner, 
with the remembrance that some have greater trials 
and temptations along these lines than have others, and, 
as the Apostle says, "Remembering thyself, lest thou 
also be tempted." 

St. James declares, "In many things we all stumble." 
He does not mean that we all fall into sin or grievous 
error, but he does mean that, so long as we are in the 
flesh and the Spirit of the Lord and his message are 
delivered through our imperfect powers, no one is infallible. 
Hence, those who do not aspire to leadership 
in the meetings of the "saints" should not be hypercritical 

R4381 :page 125 

of the brethren who seem to manifest humility 

of heart, and who endeavor to serve them, breaking to 

them the bread of life. They should be appreciated 

and loved for their work's sake, even if their every 

utterance cannot be accepted unqualifiedly. These sentiments 

attach not only to the oral teacher, but also to 

the printed page, by which another may be represented 



in the meeting. 

"THE SAME IS A PERFECT MAN" 

We are not to understand the Apostle to mean that 
any man is actually perfect, nor to mean that ability 
to bridle the tongue would indicate that perfection 
had been reached in every other channel of his life. 
His thought manifestly is that the tongue is the most 
difficult member of the human body to control and that 
whoever could succeed in gaining such a control of that 
member as would preclude his ever stumbling in speech 
would prove his ability to control every avenue of his 
nature. Of course, in this respect, as in every respect, 
there is no man perfect. "There is none righteous 
(perfect), no, not one." The only perfect one since 
Adam's fall was he who came down from above, and 
who is above or superior to all, because in him was no 
sin, no hereditary taint, no blemish. 

"Able also to bridle the whole body," gives us the 
thought of the restraint necessary to us in all of the 
affairs of life. "Let your moderation be known unto all 
men"— your self-restraint, the bridling of your entire 
body. The work of grace which the Lord proposes and 
admonishes is very thorough and leaves little time to be 
"killed" in foolish talking or jesting or games or frivolities 
or novel-reading. Some of the Lord's dear people 
have not gotten far enough developed to appreciate this 
—have not reached the quickened stage of activity in 
the service of righteousness and in the warfare against 
sin and selfishness in their own flesh. 

BRIDLING HORSES AN ILLUSTRATION 

St. James, to illustrate the power of the mind, the 
will, in the control of the body, and especially in control 
of the tongue, illustrates the matter by the bridling 
of a horse. The fiery steed, much stronger than a man, 
can be "broken" or tamed, bridled and made to do the 
will of the driver. But not so the tongue. It is most 
unruly. The new will takes hold with determination 
that the tongue shall go in the proper direction only, 
speaking forth words of justice and love, yet ere long 
the tongue runs away, breaks its bonds. Here we have 
a runaway accident with damage to some— perhaps to 
many. Similarly with ships; a rudder is so placed as 
to turn the ship about in the face of the most severe gales 
—not only little ships, but great ships are thus turned 
about by very small helms, which answer perfectly to the 
steering apparatus of the helmsman. But the tongue, 
which should be tractable to the guidance of the New 
Creature and its most useful servant, is, on the contrary, 
perverse, uncontrollable. The tongue, therefore, one of 
the least of our members, is one of the most important 
of them. It can accomplish great things, either for good 
or for evil, just as the little fire of a match might be 



so used as to set on fire a forest. 

"THE TONGUE IS A FIRE, 

A world of iniquity among our members. It defileth the 

whole body and setteth on fire the course (wheel) of 

nature; and it is set on fire of Gehenna." (Jas. 3:6.) 

Here we have a series of word pictures. The tongue is 

a world of iniquity in the sense that every iniquity in 

the world can be introduced descriptively by the tongue. 

Of course, the organ itself is never meant, but speech, 

which the tongue represents. By the tongue, by our 

speech, oral or written, every form of evil may find its 

highest power. The tongue can paint pictures more 

quickly and more vividly than any painter's brush. 

Since the world about us is full of iniquity expressed 

in a thousand forms it is within the range of the powers 

of the tongue to picture these and, by the printing press, 

to distribute them to thousands of millions. It is indeed 

a whole world of iniquity, if improperly used. 

Alas! that even amongst Christians this is frequently 

the case. Careless words, insinuations, hints, are dropped 

into the minds of neighbors or friends and, because 

these are already predisposed to evil-thinking, evil-surmising, 

etc., these words are like lighted matches 

dropped in a hayloft— apt to start a conflagration which 

may do incalculable injury to the neighbor and from him 

the sparks may fly far and near, working moral and 

spiritual havoc. 

The course of nature, more literally the wheel of life, 
or the human course from the cradle to the tomb, may 
easily be set on fire at any time. There are thousands 
of opportunities. The tongue is the match. Possibly 
St. James had specially in mind the course of the New 
Creature and its dangers. What if it should be set on 
fire and the entire spiritual prospect blighted, destroyed! 
That this is his thought seems to be implied by the 
words, "And it is set on fire of Gehenna." The world 
in general have evil tongues, reprobate minds; but being 
unregenerate the world's children are not in danger of 
Gehenna, the Second Death. But the Church, having 
received the grace of God in Christ, having been "begotten 
again," has staked its all upon the attainment of 
the spiritual blessing which the Lord has promised to 
the faithful. In the Church, therefore, the power of the 
tongue is much more potent than elsewhere. It may set 
on fire the course of the New Nature for some— a fire 
which may burn into the Second Death, and a fire which 
may not be confined to the one in whose heart it is 
ignited, but which may spread to others with similar 
effect, blighting the sweetness, the happiness, the Christ-likeness 
in the present life and destroying all future 
prospects. No wonder that our dear Redeemer admonished us to 

"TAKE HEED WHAT YE HEAR!" 



While each should be on guard against communications 

R4381 :page 126 

and sparks that would be injurious, each one should also 
be on guard against allowing sparks to fall upon himself 
and to ignite in his heart. The fire-quenching apparatus, 
the water of Truth, should be continually at hand 
also, so that any spark alighting, its baneful influence 
may be quenched before irreparable injury be accomplished. 
"Keep your heart," then, would seem to imply the 
thought that we not only are not to give forth evil as 
injurious sparks to others, but that we are to watch, 
guard our hearts, that no evil either originate there or 
be received into them. Let us remember the adage that 
we cannot help the flying of crows over our heads, but 
we can keep them from nesting in our hair. We cannot 
rid the world, nor even the Church, of evil-minded people, 
but we can avoid fellowshiping such, as the Apostle 
directed, saying, "Mark them which cause divisions 
amongst you and avoid them" (Rom. 16:17)— as you 
would avoid a pestilence or a vile odor or the sparks 
from a neighbor's burning barn. 

WILD BEASTS AND BIRDS AND SERPENTS 

St. James had evidently learned well and deeply his 
lesson respecting the ferocity of the human tongue. He 
compares it, roughly speaking, with beasts, reptiles, fish 
and fowl. He declares that any of these may be considered 
as tameable. Man's superiority and power to 
conquer these has been demonstrated. But power to 
conquer the tongue and to make it tame and obedient 
and thoroughly reliable has never yet been demonstrated. 
"The tongue can no man tame." It is an unruly (restless, 
ceaseless) evil. And no serpent bite contains so 
dangerous, so violent poison. The serpent's bite may 
cause pain and physical death, but the tongue can do 
more, in that it can produce moral ravage, which will 
bite, devour and cause madness to others, and its influence 
extends to death eternal. 

If we could but get a proper conception of the mighty 
potentialities of the tongue, it would make us almost 
afraid to speak a word, lest we should speak amiss. 
Such a fear would be very helpful to us, as gradually, 
then, a desire to speak the words of justice and love and 
soberness, the good tidings, should burst the restraint 
and find utterance, while the dread of the evil would 
still guard every expression. The result would be greater 
Godlikeness. 

THE TONGUE WHICH PRAISES GOD, CURSES MEN 

Here again we see that St. James is not speaking of 
the tongue from the worldly standpoint, but as a member 
of the Church of Christ to fellow-members. We all 



use our tongues in praising God, in confessing his grace 
and mercy and love, and in speaking forth his praises. 
This is proper. How can we do otherwise? But, alas, 
that it should be true that the same tongue which thus 
praises the Creator so often proves a curse, an injury, 
a world of iniquity to fellow-man! And especially to 
the fellow-members of the "household of faith!"— setting 
on fire the course of nature by slanders, evil-speaking and 
evil-surmising, hints, insinuations, etc. Oh, Lord, who 
is sufficient for these things! Truly, as St. Paul declares, 
"Our words are either a savor of life unto life or of 
death unto death." 

"SWEET AND BITTER, BLESSING AND CURSING" 

"My brethren, these things ought not so to be." We 
must see to it that we learn this great lesson in the 
School of Christ, that out of the mouth which praises 
God there shall not come forth that which would be injurious 
to the brethren— or anyone. Look at nature! 
Did anyone ever know of a fountain sending forth at 
the same opening sweet water and bitter? No ! As the 
same fountain could not yield salt water and fresh, so 
we cannot be copies of God's dear Son, nor fit for the 
Kingdom, so long as we have such a disposition. We 
must be conquerors. We must be overcomers. And the 
battle of each of us is within himself. We may indeed 
do all in our power for others and for the general cause, 
yet our victory and our title to the Lord's words, "Good 
and faithful servant," "More than conquerors," will not 
be for us except as our hearts are allowed to dominate 
our tongues and gain such a victory over impurity and 
lovelessness as will not tolerate them in any sense or 
degree. 



R4382 : page 126 

SAMPLES OF INTERESTING LETTERS 

MY DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

On Sunday evening 3 16 of us partook of the Memorial 
Supper in Glasgow; 305 in the Berkeley Hall, and 1 1 in their 
homes. We all felt it a solemn occasion, realizing, as we did, 
that we were memorializing our dear Lord's death and our 
own participation in that death; but at the same time we rejoiced 
in the knowledge that Jesus triumphed over death and 
is now present superintending the harvest work, and that we 
shall all so soon be with him and see him as he is. 

On two former occasions the Memorial Supper was celebrated 
in Glasgow on Sunday evening. The first of these was 
in 1899 when 16 met together; the other was in 1905 when the 
number had increased to 142. Truly the Lord hath done 
great things for us, whereof we are glad. 

In a recent letter to you, dear Brother, I told you that I 



was considering and praying over the Vow. I am glad to 
tell you that our loving heavenly Father has opened the eyes 
of my understanding, and I have made the Vow my own. 
The difficulty which I had was the thought that a Vow was a 
solemn undertaking before God which must never be broken 
for any reason whatever. An address by one of our elders 
(Brother Johnstone), put the matter in what was to me a new 
light. This was that the Vow, like our Consecration Vow, is 
to be made by us on the basis of our justification by faith. God 
does not expect perfection in the flesh; what he does expect 
is an earnest desire and a sincere endeavor to fulfil the terms 
of the Vow. With this thought in mind, I saw that the Vow 
was simply a decision by the new mind to carry out certain 
details implied, though not stated, in our Vow of Consecration, 
and if, owing to the weakness of our flesh, we fail at 
any time, the blood of Christ will cleanse us from this as from 
any other sin which is not a wilful transgression. The TOWER 
of March 1st, received a fortnight ago, on the day following 
Brother Johnstone's address, corroborated this thought. In 
it you stated that it was not the flesh, the "old man," but the 
New Creature, who takes the Vow. 

We are looking forward with glad anticipation to your 
proposed visit among us, and we are rejoicing also in the 
prospect of meeting and hearing our dear Brother and Sister 
Bundy. 

Praying the Lord's blessing on yourself and all others in 
"Bethel Home," and on the harvest work in general, I am, 
with a humble request for your prayers on my behalf, 

Yours in the Master's service, JOHN EDGAR. 



MY DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

I have for some time thought that I would write and tell 
you something of my appreciation of the books and the WATCH 
TOWERS during the two months that I was unable for the 
Pilgrim service. I have especially enjoyed the clear, concise 
statements in the TOWER in regard to the Vow and the 
Covenants. I have never had any special trouble over either. 
The only respect in which I have differed from the presentation 
of the matter in the TOWER was that I did not favor the 
publication in the TOWER of the names of those who took the 
Vow, but while I did not endorse that feature of the matter, 
I did not deem it of such vital importance as to protest against 

R4382 : page 127 

it. While I have greatly rejoiced in the privilege of reviewing 
the books, and with more than usual care scanning the contents 
of each issue of the TOWER, I have found much to confirm 
my faith, comfort my heart and stimulate to greater 
activity in the race for the glorious "prize of the high calling." 

In my examination of the articles, both on the Vow and 
on the Covenants, I have seen no Scriptural ground for disagreement 
with the Editor. I presume that it is because of 
this fact that I have felt more keenly the pain, as I have 



learned that some who formerly walked with us, and with 
whom we have taken counsel, and had sweet fellowship, have 
turned and walk no more with us. 

I trust that these dear brethren may search their hearts 
very diligently, that they may see whether their differences 
are really based upon a genuine difference of opinion as to 
doctrine or whether there may not be back of it some root of 
bitterness growing out of some real or imaginary wrong received 
in regard to personal rights, from a social or business 
point of view, or some lack of recognition or appreciation of 
personal worth or ability as servants of the Truth. I know 
from experience, as well as observation, and the teaching of 
God's Word, that the Adversary loses no opportunity of bringing 
dissension among the Lord's Anointed, and this planting 
of "roots of bitterness," I have noticed, is one of his favorite 
methods of operation. 

My joy knew no bounds when I saw through the light of 
Present Truth the possibilities placed in reach of every truly 
consecrated child of God, of becoming joint-heirs with Christ 
in the glory of his Kingdom for the blessing of all the families 
of the earth. But I soon saw another possibility— that of 
losing all for a single mess of pottage. I had a well-developed 
bump of self-esteem, and this assured me that I had certain 
personal rights and dignity that should be maintained, and 
that my personal worth as a public minister with many years 
of experience should be recognized. Oh, how glad I am that 
in the very beginning of my experience in this, the greatest 
undertaking of my life, the dear heavenly Father gave me to 
see not only the vanity of these things, but also the danger of 
losing the heavenly hopes and prospects by trying to conserve 
the earthly, and that I was early enabled to see that the Father 
himself is not only abundantly able, but that he has promised 
to care for every item of interest for his children! 

So far as personal rights of a business, social or other interest 
were concerned, I determined that they should have no 
part in determining the matter of fellowship with the brethren; 
and I have found this very helpful, for while comparing notes 
with Brother Russell, the Pilgrim brethren and the brethren 
in general, I have found but little to differ from them in 
doctrine, while along other lines I often find differences quite 
radical, and why not, since in our general make-up, education, 
etc., we are so different. So, then, I am not surprised when 
I find Brother Russell, the Pilgrim brethren and others doing 
and saying things that I would not think of doing or saying. 
This may cause me to stop and reflect for a moment, and I soon 
see that I am not looking at the matter from their viewpoint, 
or I would probably agree with them. So instead of 
wasting time and strength in contention over any of these 
differences of minor importance, or, perhaps, brooding over 
them until I conclude that the matter is so serious that I must 
break fellowship, I find it much better to drop all such claims 
and the more energetically prosecute the harvest work, which 
must soon be closed. 

May the Lord enable us all to keep humble hearts and 
level heads in these testing times! JOHN HARRISON. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

Peace be unto you and that multiplied. 

If it will not take too much of your time I want to tell 
you just a little how the dear Lord has blessed me lately, recalling 
the time when I first gave myself fully to the Lord in 
consecration; I remember how that for love of him and his 
brethren there was no sacrifice that seemed too hard for me 
to make. I loved him and his people, his Word and his will, 
with a burning and consuming love, but after the lapse of 
several years, I noticed a cooling off of my love to some extent. 
I prayed over the matter and was satisfied, but had not 
the fervent, pure-hearted love as at the beginning. So I went 
to work for the Lord, at anything that I could do. I pursued 
it with vigor, and was blessed in it, but nothing brought such 
blessing and peace as I had enjoyed at first, until I made up 
my mind to take the Vow. Had I known it would bring 
such joy, such peace, I would never have hesitated as long as 
I did, and very much regret that I did not take it at once. 
If I had a thousand tongues I could not tell how much I have 
been blessed since registering that solemn, holy Vow unto my 
Lord. I remember you and all that are his continually. 

Your brother, waiting for the deliverance, 
R. S. LUTTRELL. 



BROOKLYN BETHEL HYMNS FOR MAY 



After singing of the hymn the Bethel Family listens 
to the reading of "the Vow" to the Lord, then joins in 
prayer. At the breakfast table the MANNA text for the 
date is read and questions and comments considered. 
Finally, just before leaving the table, the MANNA comment 
is read. Desiring that all share the blessings, we 
commend the plan to others. The hymns for May are 
indicated below to permit all who so desire to join with us: 

(1) 166; (2) 279; (3) 208; (4) 261; (5) 221; (6) 229; 
(7) 165; (8) 283; (9) 3; (10) 246; (11) 113; (12) 264; 
(13) 238; (14) 123; (15) 95; (16) 177; (17) 82; (18) 191; 
(19) 121; (20) 274; (21) 19; (22) 327; (23) 194; (24) 152; 
(25) 291; (26) 28; (27) 52; (28) 9; (29) 317; (30) 313; (31) 4. 



R4383 : page 127 



MY SOLEMN VOW TO GOD 



OUR Father which art in heaven, hallowed be thy 

name. May thy rule come into my heart more 

and more, and thy will be done in my mortal 

body. Relying on the assistance of thy promised grace 

to help in every time of need, through Jesus Christ our 

Lord, I register this Vow. 

Daily will I remember at the throne of heavenly 
grace the general interests of the harvest work, and 
particularly the share which I myself am privileged to 
enjoy in that work, and the dear co-laborers at the 
Brooklyn Bethel, and everywhere. 

I Vow to still more carefully, if possible, scrutinize 
my thoughts and words and doings, to the intent that 
I may be the better enabled to serve thee, and thy dear 
flock. 

I Vow to thee that I will be on the alert to resist 
everything akin to Spiritism and Occultism, and that, 
remembering that there are but the two masters, I shall 
resist these snares in all reasonable ways, as being of the 
Adversary. 

I further Vow that, with the exceptions below, I will 
at all times and at all places, conduct myself toward 
those of the opposite sex in private exactly as I would do 
with them in public— in the presence of a congregation 
of the Lord's people, and so far as reasonably possible I 
will avoid being in the same room with any of the opposite 
sex alone, unless the door to the room stand wide 
open:— In the case of a brother— wife, children, mother 
and sisters excepted. In the case of a sister— husband, 
children, father and brothers excepted. 



1909-VOW MOTTO AND CALENDAR- 1909 

1909 Vow Mottoes now in stock. Order while they last, 
15 cents each, two for 25 cents, postpaid. 



CHEAP POCKET HYMNALS ARE DELAYED 



page 128 



PUBLIC MINISTRIES OF THE TRUTH 
UNDER THE AUSPICES OF PEOPLES PULPIT 
ASSOCIATION OF BROOKLYN, N.Y. 



ONE-DAY LOCAL CONVENTIONS ADDRESSED BY THE 
EDITOR OF THIS JOURNAL AS FOLLOWS: 

BROOKLYN, N.Y., APRIL 25, MAY 2 and JUNE 13 



Discourse by Brother Russell at 3:00 p.m. Evening meeting 
for the interested at 7:30 o'clock; this will be a Question 
Meeting. Visiting friends cordially invited. 

All meetings will be held in the Brooklyn Tabernacle, Nos. 
13-17 Hicks street. Convenient to all cars and ferries— close 
to the old bridge terminus. 

NEW BRITAIN, CONN., JUNE 20 

GLENS FALLS, N.Y., JUNE 27 



WESTERN CONVENTION TOUR 

It is proposed that the Western Convention Tour shall 
start a little earlier so as to include Piedmont, Ala. Hence 
Brother Russell will leave Brooklyn, N.Y., midnight July 7th 
via P.R.R.; arriving at Washington City 7: 12 a.m., July 8th; 
arriving at Atlanta, Ga., 5:00 a.m.; Piedmont at 9:21 a.m., 
July 9th; leaving Piedmont 7: 16 p.m., July 9th, and arriving 
at Memphis, Tenn., 7:30 a.m., July 10th. 

The Piedmont convention beginning on July 9th will continue 
for three days, although Brother Russell will be there 
only on the 9th. Able speakers will be arranged for on the 
two succeeding days. Particulars later. 



page 130 

STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES 
"MILLENNIAL DAWN" 

THESE STUDIES ARE RECOMMENDED TO STUDENTS AS VERITABLE "BIBLE KEYS. 

PRICES ARE NET AND BARELY COVER COST OF PRODUCTION, 

WHEN DELIVERED BY COLPORTEURS THE COST AND PRICE ARE INCREASED. 

SERIES I., "The Plan of the Ages." gives an outline of the divine plan 
revealed in the Bible, relating to man's redemption and restitution: 
386 pages, in embossed cloth, 25c. (Is. l/2d.) India paper edition, 75c. 
(3s. l-l/2d.). 

This volume has been published as a special issue of our journal— 
at the extremely low price of 5c. a copy, in any quantity, postage included. 
(To foreign countries, 9c.) This enables people of slender 
purse to herald far and wide the good tidings in a most helpful form. 

SERIES II., "The Time is at Hand," treats of the manner and time of 
the Lord's second coming, considering the Bible Testimony on this 
subject: 370 pages, in embossed cloth, 25c. (Is. l/2d.) India paper 
edition, 75c. (3s. l-l/2d.) 

SERIES III., "Thy Kingdom Come," considers prophecies which mark 
events connected with the "Time of the End," the glorification of the 
Church and the establishment of the Millennial Kingdom; it also contains 
a chapter of the Great Pyramid, showing its corroboration of the 
dates and other teachings of the Bible: 384 pages, in embossed cloth, 
25c. (Is. l/2d.) India paper edition, 75c. (3s. l-l/2d.) 

SERIES IV., "The Day of Vengeance," shows that the dissolution of the 
present order of things is in progress, and that all the panaceas offered 
are valueless to avert the predicted end. It marks in these events the 
fulfilment of prophecy, noting specially our Lord's great prophecy of 
Matt. 24 and Zech. 14:1-9: 660 pages, in embossed cloth, 30c. (Is. 3d.). 
India paper edition, 85c. (3s. 6-l/2d.) 

SERIES V., "The At-one-ment Between God and Man," treats an all-important 
subject— the hub, the center around which all the features 
of divine grace revolve. Its topic deserves the most careful and 
prayerful consideration on the part of all true Christians: 507 pages, 
in embossed cloth, 30c. (Is. 3d.) India paper edition, 85c. (3s. 6-l/2d.) 

SERIES VI., "The New Creation," deals with the Creative Week 
(Genesis 1 and 2), and with the Church, God's "New Creation." It examines 
the personnel, organization, rites, ceremonies, obligations and 
hopes appertaining to those called and accepted as members of the 
Body under the Head: 740 pages, in embossed cloth, 30c. (Is. 3d.) 
India paper edition, 85c. (3s. 6-l/2d.) 

The above prices include postage. 

IN FULL LEATHER BINDING, gilt edges, the set (6 vols.) $3.00, 
(12s. 6d.), plus postage, 60c. (Is.). 

Is also published in foreign languages as follows: German, six vols., 
in Swedish Vols. 1, 2, 3, 5 and 6; in Dano-Norwegian, three vols.; 
in Greek, three vols.; in French, two vols.; Hollandish, Spanish, 
and Italian, one vol. each; bound in cloth, uniform with English edition, 
prices the same; in Polish, condensed edition, one vol., 10 cents. 



page 129 



SEMI-MONTHLY 
VOL. XXX MAY 1 NO. 9 
A.D. 1909--A.M. 6037 



CONTENTS 

Views from the Watch Tower 131 

Unrest in France 131 

Prominent Ottoman a Zionist 132 

Passover and Atonement Day Sacrifices 132 

Heroes of Faith 133 

St. Paul's Illustrations of Faith 134 

"The Reproach of Christ Greater Riches" 137 

Questions on the Covenants 139 

He Hath Perfected the Sanctified 139 

Faithful Over Few (Poem) 140 

Quarterly Review— June 20 140 

Meekness, Gentleness, Patience, Character 140 

Yearly Requests for Pilgrim Visits 141 

Western Convention Tour 141 

Samples of Interesting Letters 142 

page 130 

PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY 
CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
"BROOKLYN TABERNACLE," 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, N.Y., U.S.A. 

Foreign Agencies:— British Branch: 24 Eversholt St., London, 
N. W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, Barmen. Australasian 
Branch: Equitable Building, Collins St., Melbourne. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR 

REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 

Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:— All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are not 
only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually and 
in touch with the Studies, etc. 



SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER. 

APPLICATION MADE FOR ENTRY AT BROOKLYN, N.Y. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, DANISH AND ITALIAN EDITIONS. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



PEOPLES PULPIT MONTHLY 

We are surprised that we have not had a more general 
response for the above paper— intended to supercede the Old 
Theology Quarterly. Surely some of our friends fail to comprehend 
the situation. PEOPLES PULPIT will contain Brother 
Russell's writings and be very suitable for use as Tracts. It 
desires entry as Second-Class Mail and to get it must be able to 
show its lists of actual subscriptions. 

We shall be gratified if our Tract Fund contributors will 
send the Society postal-card orders for 10 copies to 100 copies, 
each for one year (according to the needs of themselves and 
neighbors), with instructions to charge the price to your Tract 
Fund contributions. 

R4393 : page 130 

THE NEWSPAPER EVANGELISM 

The number of newspapers publishing Brother Russell's 
sermons weekly continues to increase. We advise these be 
given the preference and every way encouraged. If any 
paper cuts down the space below three columns or fails to 
publish the sermon, write the editor a kind card telling of 
your interest in the sermons and that you subscribe for his 
paper largely on account of the sermons. If you subscribed 
through us drop us a card of explanation also. 

page 130 

India "Studies" Vols. 4 and 5 temporarily out of stock. 



R4383 :page 131 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER 
UNREST IN FRANCE 



THE Chicago Tribune prints a lengthy dispatch 
showing great unrest in France. Trades-Unionism 
seems to have gotten everything into its control, 
including the public service. Fear for God and man 
seems gone and General Selfishness to be in supreme 
command. Those who have been studying with us the 
teaching of God's Word, which seems to indicate worldwide 



anarchy in A.D. 1915, will see in this report a 

strong confirmation of the date, so far as France is concerned. 

Indeed it looks as though the climax there 

might come much sooner. An extract from the dispatch 

follows:— 

"The labor riots at Meru, which now lies quiet 
under martial law maintained by half a dozen squadrons 
of cavalry, have made a profound impression 
throughout France following, as they did, the great hippodrome 
assembly at which civil service employes announced 
adhesion to the program of the Confederation 
Generale du Travail and authorized a secret committee of 
twelve to prepare for a general strike. 

"This has been a week of general depression which even 
perfect Easter weather and four days of feastmaking did 
not dissipate. Now it is generally felt and admitted that 
the republican government in its present form is going 
through the most critical period of its existence. That 
the tide of revolution has already risen above the danger 
point nobody denies. 

"Conservative opinion is that while nothing immediately 
threatens, the situation is one which calls for the highest 
degree of sagacity and decision on the part of leaders 
of the nation. Unfortunately, neither of these qualities 
has been recently manifested by the Clemenceau government, 
whose truculence, before threats by the postal 
strikers, brought on the present wider and more serious 
unrest. 

NO TROUBLE ON MAY 1 

"Revolutions do not announce themselves as a rule, so 
the wide circulation of the report that general strikes 
would be ordered by May 1 may be accepted as a guarantee 
that none will take place then. It takes time to organize 
a movement as vast as that contemplated by the 
Confederation Generale du Travail. 

"But what is preparing for the future? There has grown 
up in France an authority which looms as large as that 
of the government itself— labor unions, and their powers, 
already developed beyond anything known in America, 
are now immensely augmented by consolidation with 
civil service unions. The story of the origin and evolution 
of Syndicate de Fonctionnaires is sure to be an important 
chapter in the future history of France. Under 
the law of March 21, 1884, various groups of public servants, 
school teachers, postmen, postal clerks, telegraphers, 
bureau clerks, government architects, engineers, 
mechanics, etc., began to organize mutual benefit associations, 
which have developed into the revolutionary army 
of today. 

"Now we have the spectacle in France of the entire 
public service down to prison-wardens, who publicly 
promise to open the cells of any brothers committed to 
their charge, in the hands of organizations which are 
planning a universal strike and demanding the overthrow 



of the present parliamentary system. This can be described 
only as anarchy. At present it is a well-behaved 
anarchy. It is well behaved because the labor leaders 
believe— so easy has been their success thus far— that 
the revolution will be of little violence when the moment 



NEWS FROM MERU DISQUIETING 

"But the scenes at Meru are disquieting. There was 
something so diabolical in the deliberation with which 
the strikers, wheeling barrows of stones, marched through 
the darkness to the factories they had deserted and 
wrecked and pillaged them and their employers' homes 
that the people are recalling the sinister processions and 
sackings which preceded the Revolution. Not then could 
there have been more hate of the aristocracy than exists 
today toward the bureaucracy and the wealthy. 

'"We are animated by the same hatred of the capitalistic 
regime,'" cried Pataud, the strike leader, the other day 
at a meeting of clubs and workmen. 

'"We have no country save where we find a brother.' 
The republic is in danger; what do we care?' 'Why 
should the state be regarded as different from any other 
employer?' were among the sentiments cheered by uniformed 
government employes this week." 

DANGER SIGNALS OF A GREAT WAR 



While the world has been congratulating itself on the 
possibilities of an era of peace by means of the Hague 
Conferences and National Arbitration Courts the war 
trumpet is being heard. Men were supposing that they 
might usher in the time of peace without our Lord's second 
coming and the Millennial reign. The Bible, however, 
seems to imply a very great war as the precursor of the 
great reign of peace at our Lord's second coming. 

Note the following extracts from the public press on 
this subject:— 

"In Britain the House of Commons met last week to 
hear the most disquieting statement with regard to the 
strength of its navy and the progress of Germany ever 
laid before it. It was called upon to vote Navy Estimates 

R4383 : page 132 

showing an increase of only L. 2, 800,000. It met to consider 
a program of shipbuilding which provided only 
four Dreadnoughts and a sum of but L. 10,200,000 for new 
construction and armaments. For one day recriminations 
were hushed by the sense of danger. The voice of 
patriotism was heard. But the effort was too great to 
maintain, and during the past week faction and ignorance 
have reasserted themselves. The danger is being derided, 



though on the showing of ministers Germany in 1912 may 
have seventeen Dreadnoughts to the British sixteen. The 
German number may be even greater than ministers allow. 
Three Dreadnoughts are to be laid down by Germany's 
ally, Austria. Three more, it is believed, are to 
be built in Germany for foreign Powers. If they were 
added to the German force— and there is nothing to prevent 
this— then Germany in 1912 might have a force of 
twenty-three of these ships, a preponderance which would 

R4384 : page 132 

wipe out all our advantage in ships of the King Edward 
class, and which would foreshadow the loss of the command 
of the sea. But though such is the emergency, one 
member of the House of Commons demanded a rapid 
reduction in British naval expenditure; a second declared 
that the Labor party would unswervingly oppose a program 
of eight Dreadnoughts; and a third moved to reduce 
the small pay of our naval officers and to cut down the 
personnel of the fleet by 20,000 men. The parallel 
throughout is poignantly close to the attitude of Germany 
and France on the eve and outbreak of the Franco-German 
war."— London Daily Mail. 

"Germany believes that she need not wait for a paper 
equality or superiority. We hold that this fact is one 
which we are bound to take into consideration in making 
our calculations as to how to prepare against war. The 
more men dread an outbreak of war on moral and humanitarian 
grounds, the more necessary it is for them to 
do their best to make our preparations adequate. Only 
preparations so complete and on so vast a scale as to 
make even the ardent men who control German naval 
policy consider that the game is not worth the candle 
can prevent war in the future. That is our firm belief. 
We have still the time in which to make such preparations, 
but no time to waste in sleep or doubt."— London 
Spectator. 

"It is this public sentiment which constitutes the most 
dangerous factor in the present strained relations between 
Great Britain and Germany. Its peril lies largely in the 
fact that it is so unaccountable. There is no knowing at 
what time it will burst forth or what particular form the 
outbreak will take. That the kaiser, his responsible ministers, 
the principal statesmen, and the leading captains 
of industry, commerce and finance in his empire, are 
anxious for a war with England, nobody for one moment 
believes. But there has been so much talk in England 
of the necessity of smashing the Teuton navy before it is 
permitted to attain proportions large enough to rival the 
British supremacy of the seas, that both William and his 
people consider it necessary to provide for the maritime 
defenses of the empire and to endow the latter with a 
sufficient number of ships to admit of Germany being 
able to hold her own with England in all questions relating 
to the sea. The creation of a big German navy 



rivaling in size that of England is not necessarily meant 
for offense, but for defense of Teuton interests, and to 
enable the Berlin government to speak with the same 
weight and authority in maritime affairs as its magnificent 
army enables it to do by land. 

"On the other hand, England, which always has regarded 
not merely her wealth and her prosperity, but 
even her national existence, as based upon her maritime 
supremacy, is naturally profoundly alarmed at the extent 
to which the latter is threatened by Germany. And 
there are many in Great Britain who, holding these views, 
insist both in speech and in print, that it is a mistake to 
allow Germany time to build the ships planned in her 
naval program, and that it would be much better to 
fight her now and to frustrate her ambitions of maritime 
supremacy before she had been able to realize them. 
They urge that, whereas England is now vastly superior 
to Germany in naval strength, she may not be so two or 
three years hence. In Germany, on the other hand, there 
are patriots who clamor for their government to take advantage 
of the present complete disorganization of the 
British army, and of the virtual chaos that prevails in 
England's military affairs to precipitate a conflict for 
which the enemy may be better prepared in two or three 
years' time. 

"These opinions, voiced by the German press, are re-echoed 
far and wide, tending to excite popular sentiment 
against England to a dangerous degree. In fact, a favorite 
topic of discussion in Germany is the capture of London 
by a coup, possibly without a preliminary declaration 
of war, and it is pointed out that with the British metropolis 
in the hands of the invaders pretty well the whole 
vast British empire would be at the latter's mercy. For 
London is not merely the capital of the united kingdom, 
but the administrative, and, above all, the economic heart 
of the whole empire, besides being in matters of finance 
and of trade the chief brokerage and exchange mart and 
center of the civilized and uncivilized world. England's 
financial credit is at the present moment colossal; superior 
probably to that of any other nation in the world 
save perhaps the United States. But where would that 
credit be, with London, its headquarters, in the hands of 
a German enemy? What is to be feared, then, in the 
present situation, is not that England and Germany may 
deliberately and cold-bloodedly declare war upon one 
another, but that public feeling, perpetually excited by 
demagogues and by their newspapers, will be led to some 
excess, some outrage, some public manifestation of hostility, 
that the people on the other side of the North sea 
will find themselves compelled to resent. This, then, is 
the real danger of the present state of affairs, and it is 
all the more grave since it is impossible to foresee when 
and where it will occur, or how it can be averted, though 
it means war."— Chicago Tribune. 

PROMINENT OTTOMAN A ZIONIST 



The below clipping is certainly a straw in the wind, 
as it were, and in accord with our expectations: 

"Dr. Riza Tewfik, a member of the Chamber of Deputies 
and one of the foremost leaders of the Young Turk 
party, delivered a lecture on the Jewish question recently 
in Constantinople. ...In reply to an inquiry whether 
a good Ottoman could be a Zionist, he replied: 'Certainly, 
I myself am a Zionist. The methods of Zionism 
are exclusively peaceful. Palestine is your land more 
than it is ours; we only became rulers of the country 
many centuries later than you. A service would be rendered 
to our common fatherland by undertaking the 
colonization of that uncultivated land, Palestine. Your 
nation has incomparable qualifications for trade; your 
fellow Jews are sober and industrious. They would 
restore this desolate land. They would devote all their 
energies to the service of our dear fatherland, and I 
assure you that my co-operation will never fail you in 
order to attain this aim.'"— Detroit News Tribune. 



R4384 : page 132 

PASSOVER AND ATONEMENT DAY SACRIFICES 

OUR recent celebration of the Passover has raised 
the question, Did the sacrifice of the Passover 
lamb on the 14th day of the first month represent 
the same thought as the sacrifice of the Atonement Day 
on the 10th day of the seventh month? 

We answer, No, not exactly. These two types were 
put at opposite ends of the year; the one at the beginning 
of the religious year and the other at the beginning of the 
secular year. The secular year began in the fall and the 
religious year in the spring. The Passover sacrifice in the 

R4384 : page 133 

beginning of the religious year represented particularly 
the sacrifice of our Lord Jesus on behalf of the Church 
only, while the Atonement Day sacrifice in the beginning 
of the secular year illustrated the sacrifice of Christ and 
also the sacrifice of the Church, the "royal priesthood," 
and the broader work thereby accomplished "for all the 
people." 

The Passover lamb did not represent Jesus the Head 
and the Church his Body. It represented specifically our 
Lord Jesus, "The Lamb of God." It was prophesied of 
our Lord that not a bone of him should be broken. And 
the same was commanded respecting the Passover lamb. 
It was to be roasted whole, and not a bone of it was to 
be broken in the eating. Furthermore, the Passover 



lamb and its blood affected, preserved, "passed over," the 
firstborn ones only, representatives of the Church of 
the Firstborns only. The deliverance of the others is no 
part of the Passover picture. 

In the Atonement Day sacrifice, there is a distinct difference. 
Two sacrifices were offered— one for the high 
priest's body and his family and the other sacrifice "for 
all the people." The first, as we have already seen (in 
Tabernacle Shadows, published twenty-nine years ago), 
represents our Lord's death on behalf of the Church and 
the entire "household of faith." The second sacrifice on 
the Day of Atonement represents the death of the Church 
as the antitype of the Lord's goat "for the sins of all the 
people." The same high priest offered both, and typified 
our Lord Jesus and his work of first performing his own 
sacrifice; and secondly offering us, whom he accepts as 
his members. 

In the account of the consecration of the priests a 
bullock only is shown as the sin-offering (no goat, because 
it was not "for the people"). Then a burnt-offering is 
shown, which represents both the Lord and the Church 
in their united and yet divided position and relationship. 
A ram was killed and divided into pieces and washed, 
and then the pieces were laid in order, in relationship to 
the head, upon the Lord's altar; and the entire lamb was 
the burnt-offering. This represents the relationship of the 
Church, the members of the Body with the Lord, the 
Head of the Body.-Ex. 29:10-18. 

"BURNED OUTSIDE THE CAMP" 

Another item connected with the sin-offering of the 
Atonement Day sacrifice is well worthy of notice as totally 
different from that of the Passover; namely, that they 
alone were to be burned outside the camp. The bullock 

R4385 : page 133 

was burned first and secondly the goat. (Lev. 16:27; 
Ex. 29:14.) The burning represented the gradual destruction 
of the flesh. Outside the camp signified ostracism, 
rejection of men, dishonor. The Apostle says that our 
Lord thus suffered outside the camp and that we should 
arm ourselves with the same mind, with the full intention 
of suffering with him as his members. St. Paul emphasizes 
this fact saying, "For the bodies of those beasts, 
whose blood is brought into the sanctuary by the high 
priest for sin (offering), are burned outside the camp. 
Wherefore Jesus also, that he might sanctify the people 
with his own blood, suffered outside the gate. Let us go 
forth therefore [as the Lord's goat] unto him outside the 
camp, bearing his reproach."— Heb. 13:11-13. 

Notice that here the Apostle is pointing back to the 
typical sacrifices and comparing them with the better 
sacrifices of Christ and the Church; and that he exhorts 
us to share in Christ's sacrifice— to recognize ourselves as 



members of the Lord's goat class who go through experiences 
outside the camp similar to those which our Lord 
endured— he typified by the bullock, we by the goat. 

Some who were once of us, but who have gone out from 
us, are doing all in their power to shake the faith of any 
with whom they have influence. Although they have 
professed for years to see eye to eye with us (the fulfilment 
of this type and the fellowship of the Church with 
her Lord in these very sufferings of the present time), they 
now seem to have gone blind as respects these things and 
to be anxious to blind and confuse as many others as 
possible. What we have presented above is what we have 
been presenting for the past twenty-nine years to the 
best of our ability— showing, proving the Mystery of this 
Gospel Age to be that the elect Church is privileged to 
suffer with Christ as his members, and, by and by, to be 
glorified with him as members of the one Body, of which 
he is the Head. 

Nothing in this, nor in anything we have ever written, 
controverts the idea that our Lord Jesus gave his own 
blood as our sacrifice and that he finished the sacrifice 
for us at Calvary in his own Body on the cross. Then it 
was, according to the Apostle, that the time came for his 
exaltation to be the spiritual Head over the spiritual Body. 
He was not that spiritual Head in the flesh. It was after 
his resurrection that he became the Head of the Church, 
his Body. And the Church become his members only as 
spirit-begotten New Creatures, when their mortal bodies 
have been presented in sacrifice and accepted. In accepting 
us as New Creatures the High Priest accepts our 
sacrificed wills and then tests us respecting the accomplishment 
of it, counting the blood of our sacrifice as his 
own, because it was his that justified ours and made ours 
possible. 

Here we perceive the advantage of those who have 
wisely improved their time in the study of these truths 
which God caused to be prepared for their nourishment. 
Those who have been faithful in the study, and who lived 
according to it, are now strong. Others are now weak and 
liable to be carried about with every wind of doctrine. 
We cannot too strongly urge, dear friends, the necessity 
for spiritual nourishments— through meetings and particularly 
through reading. No amount of hearing can take 
the place of reading. Moreover, we advise connected, 
consecutive reading— especially the six volumes of the 
Dawn-Studies. We remind you afresh that many are now 
following the suggestions of a mother and her daughter 
who some time ago wrote a letter to the Tower telling 
that they had found that they could read the entire six 
volumes within a year by reading twelve pages per day. 
They had followed this course for one year and had begun 
it for the next. The suggestion has been taken up by 
several with excellent results and we commend it to you 
all. Our minds are leaky vessels and many who have read 
the Dawn-Study series several times find that their later 
readings reveal to them matters which they did not see 



earlier. 

R4385 : page 133 

HEROES OF FAITH 

--HEB. ll:l-40.-JUNE 13.- 

Golden Text:— "Faith is the substance of things hoped 
for, the evidence of things not seen."— V. 1. 

IN preceding lessons we have been discussing faith 
and works as the subtle power for good or evil 
wielded by the tongue. In this lesson we more 
particularly examine faith to learn of its importance as 
a motive power to good thoughts, good words and good 
deeds. 

The chapter under consideration is one of the masterpieces 
of holy writ. Indeed, the entire book of 
Hebrews occupies a very commanding position in the 
Bible. Some, indeed, have questioned its authorship, but 
to us there seems no room for doubt that it was written 
by St. Paul. It is marked throughout by his masterful 
logic, reverence and personal humility. It gives insight 
into the Divine Plan of the Ages, which fully comports 
with St. Paul's other epistles and which far transcends 
in this respect all the other writings of the Bible. It 
has been noted by some that its style is more lofty than 
that of some others of St. Paul's epistles; but this may 

R4385 : page 134 

be easily accounted for. Those other epistles, although 
full of sound reasoning and logic, are written in a simple 
and fatherly style for the general reader. This one was 
written particularly for the benefit of the other eleven 
apostles and other learned Hebrews who were slow to 
discern the change of dispensation. Naturally, therefore, 
it was St. Paul's masterpiece, because upon it he 
evidently expended the greater labor— demonstrating the 
typical character of the Jewish Dispensation and indicating 
the antitypes of the Gospel Dispensation, as well 
as some reaching well into the Millennium. The references 
in the thirteenth chapter to Timothy and the statement, 
"They of Italy salute you," imply that St. Paul 
wrote this epistle from Rome, where he was in prison. 

It should not be thought strange, however, that the 
Lord used this great but humble man, St. Paul, as his 
mouthpiece in presenting many of the "deep things" of 
the Divine Plan. His early education and his association 
with the Gentiles combined with his deep spirituality 
—and fulness of consecration to the Lord well 
qualified him to be, as was foretold, the Lord's "chosen 
vessel." Let us remember, too, the order stated:— 



(1) To bear my name to the Gentiles; 

(2) And before Kings; 

(3) And to Israel 

St. Paul's missionary efforts were first directed of 
the Lord to the Gentiles. It was later on that he stood 
before King Agrippa and other notables of Palestine- 
still later that he was sent a prisoner to Rome, and to 
some extent doubtless bore witness there before the 
Court. Later through this epistle to the Hebrews God's 
message through this Prince of the Apostles did much 
for "Israelites indeed" who were trammeled by the 
things of the Law Covenant and unable to disentangle 
themselves so as to rightly discern between the shadows 
in the types and the eternal verities antityped in the 
Christ, Head and Body, and his great work as the "antitypical 
Priest," "antitypical Prophet," "antitypical Judge" 
and "antitypical Mediator" of the New (Law) 
Covenant. 

"THE FOUNDATION OF THINGS HOPED FOR" 

Strictly speaking hope is unsubstantial— not a reality. 
It furnishes no genuine foundation— it is merely 
a hope. It will not sustain weight. But faith is more 
than hope. Faith implies a promise. And when a promise 
is made by the Almighty God, who changes not and 
who is as omnipotent as he is unchangeable, then faith 
can firmly trust him, come what may. Hope finds a 
foundation— finds in faith a substance, because the faith 
rests upon a Divine promise. Whoever, therefore, has 
hope that is without such a Divine promise has a foundationless 
hope. Thus we see the heathen with hopes and 
fears full of uncertainty; yea, many Christians, hoping 
for certain things, have uncertainty, fear and doubt, 
because they have not faith. And they have not faith 
because they are hoping for something which God has 
not promised and to many of them the things which he 
has promised are not known, not understood, and, therefore, 
not a basis for faith, nor a foundation for hope. 
Realizing these things, how careful we should be that 
our hopes should not soar away to uncertain fantasy, 
but build solidly upon the faith foundation of Divine 
promise. Such as have this proper faith must of necessity 
be students of the Divine Word and the greater 
their studies the more their faith; and the greater their 
faith the more their studies of the promises. 

The Apostle brings before our minds from the past 
a galaxy of faith heroes. He holds them up for our 
admiration, so that they shine and sparkle and excite 
our admiration and, we trust, stimulate us to similar 
faith-heroism. None of these enumerated by the Apostle 
was a heathen vagarist feeling after God and hoping 
against hope and soaring off in imagination. They were 
all positive, forceful characters, who knew in whom they 
believed and testified their faith by their obedience to 
God. 



JOHN CALVIN DEFINES FAITH 

"Eternal life is promised to us, but after death. We 
are told of a blessed resurrection, but we meantime become 
the prey of decay; we are promised righteousness, 
and yet sin dwells in us; we hear ourselves called blessed, 
and meantime are overwhelmed in infinite miseries; we 

R4386 : page 134 

are promised affluence of all good things, but are all our 
days in hunger and thirst; God proclaims that he will be 
ever present to help us, but seems deaf to our cries. 
What would become of us if we leaned not to hope, and 
unless our mind, guided by the Word and the Spirit of 
God, emerged through the midst of the shades, above 
this present world?" 

The Apostle briefly sums up the matter of the 
Christian's present lessons in faith, saying, "We walk 
by faith and not by sight." The more carefully we walk 
with God the more peaceful and the more joyful may 
be our Pilgrim journey towards the New Jerusalem. Outwardly 
the world, the flesh and the Adversary may harass 
us, but no grief, no tribulation can shake our inmost joy, 
if it be well founded upon the faith foundation of Divine 
assurances that we are children of God, in touch with 
the Infinite, beloved by our Redeemer, who assures us 
that "The Father himself loveth you," and the Apostle, 
that "all things shall work together for good to them 
that love God, to the called ones according to his 
purpose." 

ST. PAUL'S ILLUSTRATIONS OF FAITH 

"By it (faith) the Elders obtained a good report." 
Not all the Elders or ancients received a testimony that 
they pleased God— the "report" here referred to. No, 
the number who received this witness of God is comparatively 
small, and, in every instance, they were commended, 
not for perfect works, but for their faith. Their 
"faith was counted unto them for righteousness." The 
Divine intention was that those whose reverence for 
their Creator and obedience to his Word of promise 
shaped and moulded a human life under present conditions 
of imperfection and world-enmity to God thus 
implied that they had hearts so full of trust and the 
proper spirit that God could count it righteousness, count 
it perfection; because when in the resurrection such 
should receive perfect bodies under perfect conditions they 
would surely do the Divine will thoroughly. Hence their 
faith in God and his promises, attested by imperfect 
works, justified them to that Divine fellowship which 
they will fully enjoy when the things hoped for shall be 
realized. 

Thus in few words the Apostle summarizes what he 



afterwards proceeds to amplify respecting the Ancient 
Worthies. Then he begins a specification of faith. By 
faith we understand that the worlds were framed by the 
Word of God— in obedience to Divine direction. We believe 
this equally true, whether we understand the seven 
days of creation mentioned in Genesis to be twenty-four 
hour days or to be longer epochs— seven-thousand-year 
days. The fact that Divine energy is exercised through 
various channels and agencies and that worlds are not 
spoken into existence in a moment of time matters not. 
While God could speak worlds into existence, as our Lord 
by his word turned water into wine, as a matter of fact 
this is not his usual proceeding, even as the fruit of the 
vine is usually produced by sunshine and rain falling 
upon the earth in which the vine has been planted. It 
is, nevertheless, a matter of faith with us that what we 
see was miraculously formed, even though gradually. 
The Genesis account of creation does not go back to 
the forming of our world out of the elements, but begins 
with the statement, "Now the earth was, but was without 
form and void (empty)." As the seven days or epochs 
were consumed in a gradual lifting of mountains and 
sinking of oceans and bringing forth of fish and reptiles, 
fowl and beast and herbage, so we may well suppose that 
the formation of the earth itself was a gradual accomplishment 
of a still more remote period in which the 

R4386 : page 135 

various strata of the earth's surface were formed— limestone, 
shale, coal, etc. A godly man wrote, "Ever all 
things are Divinely directed, and in the uniformity of 
nature we see the work of God; or (else) we see about 
us that which is impossible, unthinkable,— power, wisdom, 
a plan without mind; infinite intelligence in a godless, 
scopeless world." 

Well did the Psalmist write, "For the heavens declare 
the glory of the Lord. Day unto day uttereth 
speech and night unto night showeth knowledge. There 
is no place where their voice is not heard"— by those 
who have a hearing ear. 

"HE BEING DEAD YET SPEAKETH" 

Particularizing the heroes of faith the Apostle begins 
with the first martyr, Abel, who is mentioned four times 
in the New Testament and three of the times particularly 
styled "the righteous." It was in his death that he spoke 
—in the fact that he died because of his devotion to the 
Lord. And has it not been so with many of God's saints— 
that their lives spoke more earnestly to their neighbors, 
friends and children after their death than while they 
lived? We know of many instances which have exemplified 
this. So Abel, the first martyr for righteousness in 
the world's history, yet speaks of his devotion to God 
and to principle. 



Figuratively his blood is said to cry out to God for 
vengeance. Divine Justice is supposed eventually to see 
to it that every crime, every injustice committed shall 
somehow and somewhere receive a just recompense of 
punishment, whether in the present or in the future life. 
The Apostle calls our attention to the fact that the blood 
of Christ, on the contrary, speaks the very reverse, and, 
instead of calling for justice, vengeance, upon those who 
crucified Jesus and have persecuted the members of his 
Body, will eventually call for mercy. Our Lord was the 
great sin-offering for mankind, and all whom he accepts 
as members are specifically styled sacrificers— on behalf 
of sinners— to seal for Israel the New Covenant, through 
which all the families of the earth may receive the blessing 
of Divine forgiveness. 

ENOCH WALKED WITH GOD BY FAITH 

The testimony respecting Enoch was that his was a 
life of faith; that he walked with God and not with 
the world; that he sought to walk righteously, in harmony 
with the Divine will. The testimony is that all that 
approach God must believe that he is (else they would 
not seek to approach him), and must believe that he is 
a rewarder of those that diligently seek him, else they 
would not deny themselves the things highly esteemed 
amongst men and seek at the cost of sacrifice to do the 
things pleasing to the heavenly Father. The record 
respecting Enoch is very meager, but we do know that 
he was a prophet and that through him the message 
came that Messiah would come eventually with ten thousand 
of his holy ones to execute righteousness, judgment, 
in the earth— to overthrow sin and set up Divine standards 
amongst men. "Behold, the Lord cometh with ten 
thousand of his saints, to execute judgment upon all."— 
Jude 14,15. 

Enoch not only prophesied this but he believed it and 
it stamped his entire character and made him separate 
from the world and drew him nearer to the Lord. Similarly 
faith in the coming of our Redeemer and the establishment 
of his Kingdom and the reward of his faithfulness 
and the judgment or trial of the world during the 
Millennium, in which every man will receive a just recompense 
of reward, whether good or bad— this faith still has 
a sanctifying power. Let us cultivate daily, hourly, the 
setting of our affections on things above, the things which 
God hath in store for them that love him, for which we 
pray, "Thy Kingdom come." 

"HEIR OF RIGHTEOUSNESS" 

Noah is the third of these faith heroes held up for our 
inspection. None of these was righteous in the absolute 
sense, for the Scriptures declare, "There is none righteous, 
no, not one." Of Noah it is written, "Now Noah was 
perfect in his generation"— he and his family were 



separate, free from the contamination of their time, from 
improper intercourse with the angels, which kept not 
their first estate.— Gen. 6:4. 

Noah's faith in God was manifested in his building 
of the Ark in obedience to the Divine instruction that a 
great rain and flood of waters would come, which would 
destroy every living thing and wipe out the corrupted 
race. This was no slight test of faith either, for we are 
to remember that the Scriptures declare that up to that 
time there had been no rain on the earth. It was moistened 
by irrigation and by mists and fogs. "For the Lord 
God had not caused it to rain upon the earth. ...But 
there went up a mist from the earth, and watered the 
whole face of the ground."— Gen. 2:5,6. 

For a long period Noah's faith was tested even unto 
the entering of the Ark and the closing of the door before 
the rains descended and the floods came. Of him it is 
well declared, therefore, "He became heir of the righteousness 
which is by faith." God is pleased to call Noah and 
all others who thoroughly, genuinely trust him, friends. 
He recognizes them as separate and distinct from the 
world in general. Their faith is their distinguishing 
quality. Nevertheless a manifestation of the faith and 
the testing of it by works of obedience is required. Blessed 
is the man who has much and strong faith in the Lord, 
which will stand trial, testing; for subsequently will be 
granted to him a corresponding blessing. Nay, more 
than this, the Lord has guaranteed us that he "will not 
suffer us to be tempted above that we are able" and he 
informs us that he knoweth our frame and remembereth 
that we are but dust. 

HE LOOKED FOR THE CITY OF GOD 

Next in the list of Ancient Worthies is Abraham, styled 
"The Father of the Faithful"— not because Noah and 
Enoch and Abel had not been faithful, but because with 
Abraham God started a faith family to whom were given 
many and great promises. That family became known 
as the nation of Israel, and latterly as Spiritual Israel. 
Again, Abraham was the father of the faithful, because 
while the heroes that preceded him exercised faith in 

R4387 : page 135 

God, it was more along abstract lines, whereas the Divine 
revelation to Abraham was the Gospel, the good tidings 
in definite form— that in and through his Seed all the 
families of the earth should receive a blessing. Thus the 
Apostle declares that God preached in advance the Gospel 
to Abraham, and thus all who believe that Gospel, of 
which redemption by Messiah is the essential, all such 
are called "the children of Abraham," and he is spoken 
of as their father, the one through whom this Gospel 
hope was caused to descend. 
But in still another sense Abraham was the Father of 



the Faithful: in the sense that he typified the heavenly 
Father, as Isaac typified our Lord Jesus, and as Isaac's 
bride, Rebecca, typified the elect Gospel Church. 

Abraham's call of God was the result of his having 
faith in God and because he lived at an appropriate time 
for the Divine purposes to begin to be expressed. First 
his faith was tested by the Divine command that he 
leave his native country to wander up and down through 
Palestine as a shepherd, dwelling in tents without any 
fixed habitation, without any attempt to take possession 
of the land and to establish himself in it by building 
fortresses, etc. The promise was that in after times God 
would bring his posterity to this land and give it to 
them for a possession. 

The promise went further and declared that if obedient 
the Lord's blessing would continue and that the seed of 
Abraham would become great and influential and that 
through it all nations would receive a blessing— and by 
implication all would come under its control. It required 
great faith to believe all this under the circumstances. 
And the test continued, as, year by year, Abraham's wife 

R4387 : page 136 

grew older, until the time of motherhood was long past. 
Still we read that Abraham's faith "wavered not." 

Still later, after Isaac the son of promise had been born 
and had grown to manhood, the Lord tested the faith 
of this wonderful man by telling him to offer his son 
as a sacrifice. We are not to assume that this instruction 
was given by any mere impression of the mind, nor would 
it have been proper for Abraham to have accepted and 
acted upon anything short of an absolute demonstration 
of the Divine will in such a matter. The father love, 
the hopes of years, and apparently the Divine Word and 
Oath were all about to be wrecked. Yet his faith "faltered 
not," for he accounted that God was able to raise his 
son from the dead and that surely God would fulfil his 
every promise to which he had bound himself, not only 
by his Word, but also by his Oath. 

While we exclaim, Wonderful faith! let us remember 
that this was the very quality of Abraham which specially 
commended him to the Almighty as his particular friend. 
And let us remember that if we would have the particular 
friendship and blessing and fellowship of the Lord this 
is the channel through which it is to be sought— the 
channel of faith, of trust, of obedience. "Without faith it 
is impossible to please God." The more faith we have 
the more pleasing we shall be in the Lord's sight and the 
more we may be used of him as channels of blessing to 
others— however imperfect we may be in other respects. 

And here it is worthy of note that Abraham was not 
perfect in every respect. On two occasions he was 
reproved by heathen kings and shown in some respects 
to have less lofty ideals, in one particular at least, than 
they would have given him credit for. Nevertheless, God 



did not reject Abraham because of those imperfections. 
Indeed, possibly those imperfections were partially the 
result of Abraham's endeavor to hold on to the Divine 
promises and to do everything in his power to bring 
them to fruition. He knew that the Divine promise was 
that his child, who should be the channel of God's blessings 
to the world, would be the son of Sarah; hence he felt 
that he must not jeopardize either her life or his own. 
This very desire to do nothing to interfere with the Divine 
promise may have had something to do with apparent 
weaknesses.— Gen. 20. 

"THE CITY WITH FOUNDATIONS" 

When the Apostle declares that Abraham "looked for a 
city which hath foundations, whose builder and maker 
is God," we must not think this to mean that in his 
journeying throughout Palestine, he expected some day 
to come upon a newly-built city of divine construction. 
Nor should we think with some others that Abraham was 
looking for the New Jerusalem to come down from heaven 
—a city built of literal precious stones with gates of literal 
pearls. No, Abraham knew nothing about that city, for 
nothing respecting it had yet been revealed. 

A city, in olden times, stood for and represented a 
fortification, a government, a rule of authority. Abraham 
realized that the earth was full of sin and violence and 
out of harmony with God. He knew that Enoch, his 
ancestor, a man of God, had already prophetically declared 
that Messiah would come, the representative of Jehovah, 
and establish a Government, a Kingdom, a City of 
Righteousness. He longed for that righteous government 
and realized that its foundation of righteousness would be 
deeply laid, and that it would be an everlasting Kingdom. 
He knew that occasionally a monarch came to an earthly 
throne possessed of good intentions and partially able to 
exercise these, but that soon his throne, his kingdom, 
crumbled and passed to others. 

Abraham, therefore, was not in sympathy with any in 
his day, nor since, in looking for an earthly kingdom, 
but he was looking beyond all these for the Kingdom of 
God's dear Son— the Millennial Kingdom. His eye of 
faith looked down and beheld Messiah and the exaltation 
of Israel and the blessing of all the families of the earth 
during the Millennial day. Our Lord Jesus attested this, 
saying, "Abraham rejoiced to see my day (the Millennial 
day of Christ's reign) and he saw it and was glad." The 
Jews misunderstood our Lord to mean that he had 
been with Abraham. Others misunderstand him to mean 
that Abraham saw by faith his work of sacrifice. It is 
true that our Lord did appear to Abraham. It is true that 
in a certain sense Abraham foresaw the sacrifice of Christ 
in the typical sacrifice of Isaac, but it is also true that 
"the Day of Christ" is the Millennial day for the world's 
blessing and that it was that which Abraham saw and 
which gladdened his eye of faith. 



We also see the same; and, sharing the same faith, we 
share the same joy and gladness of hope and expectancy. 
We indeed discern still more clearly than Abraham of 
what that city or Kingdom consists— that our Lord will 
be the great King, the Head over the Church his Body 
(his Members, his Bride) and that this Bride, the Lamb's 
Wife, is pictured symbolically in the New Jerusalem, 
whose foundation stones in glory will be "the twelve 
apostles of the Lamb." (Rev. 21:2,11-14.) We see 
more clearly than did Abraham (because guided by the 
holy Spirit through the Word) that the Ancient Worthies 
will be the earthly channels or agents through which this 
Heavenly City will send forth its blessings to Israel and 
to all the families of the earth. As it is written, "Ye 
shall see Abraham and Isaac and Jacob and all the 
prophets in the Kingdom." Christ and his elect spiritual 
Bride will not be seen by men except as we now see our 
Lord, with the eye of faith. 

"SHE JUDGED THE PROMISER FAITHFUL" 

We are glad that Abraham's wife is specifically mentioned 
in this list of faith heroes. It helps us to thoroughly 
grasp the Apostle's thought that the distinction of 
sex does not operate to the disadvantage of either male 
or female in connection with the Divine promises. Perhaps 
it cannot be said that Sarah's faith did not falter, but 
if it wavered for a time it certainly was recovered. Although 
she was past the age of motherhood she believed 
God. "She judged him faithful who had promised." Thus 
she was counted in with the noble list of whom the 
Apostle says, "These all died in faith, not having received 
the promises (the things promised), but having seen them 
afar off (with the eye of faith) and were persuaded of 
them, and embraced them, and confessed that they were 
pilgrims and strangers in the earth." 

Ah, yes, here is an important feature. It is not sufficient 
that we see glorious things of the Divine purpose, 
not sufficient that we believe them, not sufficient that we 
rejoice in them. We must be willing also to stand the 
test of being strangers and pilgrims in the present time. 
Those who cannot stand this test will not be accounted 
worthy of a share in those glorious things. Those Ancient 
Worthies, unsatisfied with any of the earthly prospects, 
sought the heavenly— not in the sense that we are seeking 
the heavenly, the spiritual things— in the sense of hoping 
for the completion of a change of nature from earthly to 
spiritual. They sought or desired the heavenly in the 
sense expressed in our Lord's prayer. They wished God's 
Kingdom to come, to be established in the earth— a 
heavenly rule of righteousness, a heavenly city or government. 
"Wherefore God is not ashamed to be called 
their God, for he hath prepared for them a city"— he has 
planned such a heavenly Kingdom or dominion as they 
hoped for. That Kingdom, the Scriptures assure us, will 
eventually be the "desire of all nations."— Hag. 2:7. 



ISAAC, JACOB, JOSEPH, MOSES 

We pass along the aisles of the hall of faith-fame and 
note the pictures to which the Apostle calls our attention 
—of Isaac, Jacob, Joseph, Moses. Each one has distinctions, 
characteristics and peculiar traits; but the quality 
of faith foundation in them all is that which makes them 
the people of God— those he is well pleased to acknowledge 
and to whom he has already promised blessings in 
the future because of their faith. If anything would 
inspire God's people to a cultivation of the grace of faith 

R4388 : page 137 

it surely would be a walk through this portrait gallery of 
the Faith Heroes of the past. 

Isaac showed his faith in the Abrahamic promise in 
that he conveyed with full confidence the Abrahamic 
blessing to his son Jacob; and none the less did he 
manifest faith in that promise when he gave a blessing 
also to Esau, realizing that under that original promise 
all the families of the earth to be blessed must include 
the family of Esau also. Jacob, exercised by faith in the 
promise made to his grandfather Abraham, manifested it 
in the ordering of all of the affairs of his life. Especially 
was it manifested on his death-bed when, after giving 
special blessings to the sons of Joseph, he worshipped 
God, leaning upon the headpost of his bed (translated 
staff in the common version). He recognized that the 
blessings that were to come to his family were all under 
Divine supervision and all included in the original promise 
made to Abraham. He further signified his faith by 
giving directions respecting his burial, that it should not 
be in Egypt, but in Canaan, the Land of Promise, which 
was Israel's by faith only. 

Joseph gave many manifestations of his faith in God. 
Not only as a boy, but also while in Egypt he clearly 
demonstrated his faith in the promise of God that Israel 
was to be the blessed people through whom the blessing 
of the Lord would eventually, in co-operation with Messiah, 
reach all the nations of the world. By faith he gave 
direction that when Israel would leave the land of Egypt 
for Canaan they should not forget to take with them 
his bones. This does not necessarily imply that he thought 
the bones and the dust that had once constituted his 
entity would be necessary to God in his resurrection, but 
it does signify that he would thus testify his faith in a 
resurrection of the dead— his faith that he would participate 
in the blessings that would come to Israel through 
the Messiah. 

"THE REPROACH OF CHRIST GREATER RICHES" 

In various ways did Moses testify his faith in God, but 
in none of them, perhaps, in a more remarkable fashion 



than in renouncing the privileges of the throne of Egypt, 
to which he was by adoption the heir. He chose rather 
to suffer affliction with the people of the Abrahamic 
promise than to dwell in luxury with the others. The 
people of Israel were the people of the Messiah, the people 
of Christ; hence in associating himself with them he 
was showing his esteem for the reproaches of the 
Anointed. Indeed, faith marks every step of the progress 
of Moses in Divine favor and service. 

"He endured as seeing him who is invisible." How 
graphically this describes the matter and how true it is 
to-day as well as then that the endurance of trials and 
testings is only possible to those who have the eye of 
faith— to those who can see invisible things, things invisible 
to others: especially those who can see the invisible 
King of glory and his, as yet, invisible Kingdom! It 
was through faith also that he instituted with Israel the 
Passover and the sprinkling of the blood, though we have 
no reason to suppose that to any considerable extent it 
was possible for him to comprehend the real meaning of 
the passover and the antitypical significance of the blood 
and its sprinkling. His faith again was demonstrated in 
the passage of the Israelites through the Red Sea. His 
obedience matched his faith in all these matters. 

While we stand in awe at the presence of so great 
faith, nevertheless we are encouraged thereby, because 
we realize that perfect faith is possible to us, although 
perfect works are not. Let us, then, hold fast by faith 
to the Divine promises and continue to walk by faith and 
not by sight, until, by and by, our change shall come and 
we shall enter into the realities of which now we have 
only the promises. 

"BY FAITH THE HARLOT RAHAB" 

It is incomprehensible to the world, and an astonishment 
to the saints, that in so many ways the Scriptures 
show that God is no respecter of persons— that he has not 
been choosing out exclusively the great or the wise or the 
good, but, on the contrary, has been choosing the sincere, 
the honest, the faithful, notwithstanding lowliness of 
birth, natural blemishes and imperfections. Truly does 
the Lord say, "My ways are not as your ways, nor my 
plans as your plans." And truly did our Redeemer say 
that publicans and harlots should go into the Kingdom in 
preference to faithless, self-righteous Pharisees. How 
glad we are that in God's providence the Apostle mentions 
Rahab and her faith, and how the Lord appreciated 
it and rewarded it! Surely there is a lesson here that 
should be well marked and inwardly digested by every 
one of us, not only for our own encouragement, but also 
for our guidance in respect to others. It is in full conformity 
with the Apostle's statement that God is choosing 
some of the "mean things of the world" in the present 
time to ultimately confound some of the greater and 
mightier and less faithful and obedient. 



After giving us this wonderful galaxy the Apostle 
seems to realize that he has only well begun the list. 
He declares that time would fail him to mention other 
faithful characters which have had God's approval, such 
as Gideon, Barak, Sampson, Jephthah, David, Samuel and 
the prophets, who through faith won victories, wrought 
righteousness, secured promises, etc. In every case the 
faith was tried, sometimes by cruel mockings and scourgings 
and sometimes by bonds and imprisonments. Some 
were stoned. Some were sawn asunder. Some were 
homeless wanderers, desolate of earthly comforts, afflicted, 
tormented— of whom the world was not worthy. 

"NOT PERFECTED WITHOUT US" 

After pointing us to these glorious heroes the Apostle 
intimates that they are a different class from ourselves, 
the disciples of Christ of this Gospel Age. They all died in 
faith, not receiving the things promised them, because 
God had provided something still better for us and had 
arranged that they could not get their blessing until we 
should first have received ours. 

What is this wonderful thing that belongs to us, separate 
and distinct from what belongs to them? We answer 
that our blessing, like theirs, is a faith blessing and reward 
and not a reward of works. Our blessing is superior to 
theirs because Jesus the Messiah has come, has given 
his life, has been highly exalted— and because we are 
now being called to membership in his Body, the Body 
of Christ, the Body of the great High Priest, the Body 
of the King of kings and Lord of lords, the Body of the 
Mediator between God and mankind. This matter of 
our call to another plane of being as the associates of the 
great Messiah is the "hidden mystery" not previously 
revealed. It is indeed "some better thing for us"— as 
much better as the heavenly inheritance is better than the 
earthly one. The Ancient Worthies, whose glorious career 
we have been considering and praising, must wait until 
the spirit-begotten class shall be born from the dead 
in the First Resurrection; then they shall receive their 
blessing of resurrection to the earthly plane, to be the 
earthly representatives of the Heavenly City, Heavenly 
Kingdom, and to share in a very particular way in the 
bestowment of God's blessing to Israel and to all the 
families of the earth. 

They all through the fall were imperfect and hence 
"children of wrath, even as others," and so are we. But 
they and we are willingly and intentionally and at heart 
in accord with the Lord and his righteousness as the majority 
of mankind are not: hence they and we have been 
enabled to hear God's voice, speaking peace and blessings 
to the willingly obedient. The Ancient Worthies responded 
to the extent of the privileges and blessings that were then 
tendered, proffered, available. And we of this Gospel 
Age have heard and responded to the still higher blessings 
and privileges of the high calling of this Gospel Age. 



JUSTIFIED BY FAITH 

The Ancient Worthies were not justified by a Covenant 
nor by a Mediator. Neither were we. Both they and 

R4388 : page 138 

we are justified by faith. They with ourselves come 
under the Abrahamic Covenant, which had no mediator 
and needed none, because made only with those of similar 
faith and heart desires to those of father Abraham. Although 
some of these heroes lived during the Jewish Age 
they were not justified by their Law Covenant but by their 
faith, for the Law Covenant made nothing perfect because 
of the inefficiency of its mediator; neither were any of 
them justified by Israel's New (Law) Covenant, for it 
has not yet been inaugurated. 

The selection of the members of the Mediator of Israel's 
New Covenant is now in progress. The Anointed (Christ, 
head and members) is the Mediator of the New Covenant. 
The Law Covenant was between God and the one nation 
of Israel, which it was proposed should first be blessed 
and made holy and granted eternal life and then become 
the channel of blessing to all other nations who would 
come into harmony with God by an acceptance of Israelitish 
obligations. That Covenant failed because its mediator 
Moses was unable to give life to anyone except in 
a typical sense temporarily. The New Covenant is to be 
between God and Israel and the world— between God and 
men. The Mediator is spiritual, but he does not mediate 
between God and a spirit-begotten class. He is a mediator 
for men with God. Hence the Church has no mediator, 
needs none, for the Church is not composed of those who 
are of human nature, but only of those who are begotten 
of the holy Spirit and members of the New Creation. These 
are Members of the Mediator that need no mediator. 
Because of their imperfections of the flesh, because they 
cannot do the things that they would, they need an 
Advocate, and they have one, "Jesus Christ the 
Righteous." 

R4389 : page 138 

As soon as all the Body members of the great Mediator 
Christ shall have been called and chosen and found faithful; 
then will come the time for the blessing of the Ancient 
Worthies, to whom will come the privileges and blessings 
of Abraham's seed according to the flesh. Through 
them God's blessing of the New Covenant will proceed, 
during the Millennial Age, to every creature: granting 
to all the fullest opportunities of reconciliation and 
eternal life. 

Throughout the Millennial Age those Ancient Worthies, 
as the earthly representatives of the heavenly Mediator, 
will in a sense be deprived of the bliss which would properly 



belong to those tried and found worthy. For a 

thousand years they will serve the imperfect race as 

rulers, instructors, uplifting priests, in contact with imperfect 

humanity, assisting them back to harmony with 

God and to all that was lost. 

Is it asked what reward will be granted to these Ancient 
Worthies for the labor accomplished during the Millennium 
in the uplifting of the world? We reply that the 
privileges of such a labor for mankind would of itself 
be quite a sufficient reward; but certain things in the 
Scriptures seem to imply that these Ancient Worthies will 
at the close of the Millennium receive a still further blessing, 
namely, that they will be changed from human to 
spirit nature. 

This is not distinctly stated in the Bible, but merely 
may be inferred. We have already seen that these faith 
heroes who preceded this Gospel Age were typically represented 
by "the red heifer" which was burned without the 
camp and whose ashes served to sprinkle the unclean. 
We have also seen that as a class these were represented 
as members of the tribe of Levi. In other words, the 
household of faith, as typified in the tribe of Levi, was 
represented in times past as well as now. And it was 
from that "household of faith" that during this Gospel 
Age the antitypical priests are being called, chosen and 
found faithful. We have seen that all who will constitute 
the "Royal Priesthood" and all who will constitute the 
"great company" were originally represented in this 
"household of faith," typified by the Levites. 

We have seen that the "little flock" and the "great 
company" both make consecration with a view to becoming 
sacrificing priests, but that only the few who have lived 
up to the terms and conditions of self-sacrifice will win 
the prize of membership in the High Priest's Body— membership 
in The Christ— membership in the Mediator of 
the New (Law) Covenant. Of the remainder, some will 
draw back completely and die the Second Death, while 
others, neither drawing back into perdition nor going 
forward into voluntary sacrifice, will be developed, proven, 
tested by the judgments of the Lord and be found worthy 
of life on the spirit plane as conquerors with palm 
branches, but not as "more than conquerors" with crowns. 
The justified who fail to go on to consecration pass back 
and become part of the world, while the consecrated who 
fail to go on to voluntary sacrifice nevertheless maintain 
their justification as New Creatures because in their testing 
they prove true. 

Thus the "great company" of this Gospel Age and the 
faith heroes of preceding times still remain members of 
the "household of faith," the antitypical Levites; while 
the "little flock" of crown-wearers, belonging to the same 
household of antitypical Levites, passes on to the position 
of "royal priesthood" in glory. During the Millennium 
some of those antitypical Levites (the "great company") 
will serve on the spirit plane, while others, the Ancient 
Worthies, the faith heroes of ancient times, will be serving 



on the earthly plane. What is more reasonable than to 
suppose that when their service upon the earthly plane 
shall have ended the latter class also will be received to 
the heavenly plane? This thought is confirmed by the 
fact that the typical Levites were granted no inheritance 
in the land— the earth. Thus in advance God intimated 
that they were to have no earthly inheritance— but a 
spiritual one. 

In Revelation 20:7-9 we are informed that at the close 
of the Millennial Age Satan will be released from restraint 
and permitted to bring temptation upon the restored 
world; and that some of mankind under his false teaching 
will become rebellious against the Divine authority 
and "go up and encompass the camp of the saints and 
the beloved city." This camp of the saints seems to 
symbolically tell us that even at the close of the Millennial 
Age, when all mankind shall have reached perfection of 
human nature (or, failing to do so, shall have been destroyed 
in the Second Death), there will still be a distinction 
between this camp of the Holy Ones and mankind 
in general? Why the distinction when all are perfected? 
Because, we believe, the Divine intention was to show 
that even when mankind shall have reached perfection 
the Ancient Worthies will still in some sense be separate 
and apart from the remainder of the perfect race. It 
is at that time that we understand the Ancient Worthies 
will be changed from earthly to heavenly organism. 

"SO GREAT A COULD OF WITNESSES" 

The moral of our lesson is summed up in the first verse of Hebrews 12th 
chapter, in which the Apostle says, 
"Wherefore, seeing that we also are compassed about 
with so great a cloud of witnesses (martyrs), let us lay 
aside every weight, and the sin which doth so easily beset 
us, and let us run with patience the race that is set before 
us, looking unto Jesus, the author and finisher of our 
faith." 

What a grand exhortation! Let us heed it! Let us 
give faith its proper place. Let us feed our faith upon 
the Word of God and upon all the Divine providences of 
our experiences in life as they daily come to us! Let us 
thus follow in the footsteps of our great High Priest, the 
Captain of our salvation, our Leader, our Forerunner, 
whose sacrifice is the foundation for our faith and whose 
power in glory is to be its consummation, when he shall 
receive us unto himself in the First Resurrection, "In 
a moment, in the twinkling of an eye." 



R4389 : page 139 

QUESTIONS ON THE COVENANTS 
Question— (1) From Exodus 24th it appears that it 



was the blood of the peace-offerings and of burnt-offerings 
(not of sin-offerings) which sealed the Law Covenant. 
Should we not understand the same to hold in regard to 
the New Covenant? 

Answer— The sin-offering, burnt-offering and peace-offering 
evidently pictured the same sacrifices, but from 
different standpoints. In every case we would understand 
the bullocks to represent our Lord Jesus and the 
goats to represent the Church, the under-priesthood. The 
sin-offerings represented the sufferings of Christ and of 
all who walk in his footsteps as respects their relationship 
to the Lord, "Outside the camp," and their course as New 
Creatures inside the holy and ultimately beyond the 
second vail in the most holy. And it shows the merit 
of the sacrifice eventually applied on the mercy-seat, and 
for whom applied— the blood of the bullock first, for 
the Church; the blood of the goat afterward, for all the 
people. 

The burnt-offering shows the same sacrifices but from 
a different standpoint— that of Divine acceptance. It 
shows that the offering was made to God and accepted by 
God as a whole, even though, as shown in the sin-offering, 
the sufferings were inflicted by men and the services 
rendered unto men. 

The peace-offering (Lev. 3) would appear to be another 
view or picture of the same sacrifices, representing the 
willingness of the individual who sacrificed— that nothing 
was of compulsion, so far as God was concerned; and 
that there was peace between God and the sacrificer, so 
that the offering was not made for his own sins. 

So then, it seems very appropriate that, as described in 
Exodus 24, it was the blood of peace-offerings and burnt-offerings 
that sealed the Law Covenant. The sin-offering 
feature has to do with the satisfaction, but the burnt-offering 
and peace-offering imply that the sacrificers 
voluntarily lay down their earthly rights in the interest 
of those who will be blessed under the New Covenant 
and that God accepts these sacrifices as sealing that New 
Covenant— entirely aside from the Atonement for Adamic 
sin, accomplished by the same sacrifices, viewed from the 
standpoint of the sin-offering. 

Question— (2) The children of Israel, whom God called 
his firstborn, his own people, etc., had and needed a mediator. 
Should we not correspondingly expect that Spiritual 
Israel would require a mediator? 

Answer— The children of Israel, from God's standpoint, 
were a typical people— they represented typically all who 
would ever become Abraham's seed, on the heavenly and 
the earthly planes. Thus it is written, "I have made thee 
a father of many nations." All who will ultimately be 
saved to relationship with God out of many nations were 
well represented in the many tribes of Israel. 

God took one of those tribes, the tribe of Levi, and 
separated it from the others for his own special use and 
as a channel for the blessing and instruction of the other 
tribes, which represented all the families of the earth. 



That tribe of Levi, as we have already seen, typified the 
"household of faith"— all those who will be brought into 
harmony with God through the Sarah division of the 
Abrahamic Covenant. These all, as a household of faith, 
are together styled the firstborn and are developed under 
the Faith or Grace Covenant, and not under the New 
(Law) Covenant. 

R4390 : page 139 

The tribe of Levi itself was divided, a priestly class 
being selected, and the remainder of the tribe assisting 
or serving under them. So in the antitype— a "little 
flock," a priestly class, is selected for the pre-eminent 
position and constitutes "Abraham's Seed" on the highest 
plane, the Divine nature. This class, The Christ, is composed 
of Jesus, the Head, and the Church, his members. 
As the center of the Divine blessing this Royal Priesthood, 
of which the Redeemer is the Head, has a variety 
of titles and of offices— King, Priest, Judge, Law-Giver, 
Mediator, Father— and each of these titles indicates a 
special feature of its service as the Seed of Abraham in 
blessing all the families of the earth, represented by the 
remaining tribes. 

The other tribes of natural Israel did need a mediator 
and the mediator was in the specially set apart tribe, 
Moses represented the entire priestly class and the tribe 
of Levi in his various functions as mediator between God 
and the nation. 

It is true that God did sometimes speak of natural Israel 
as his first-born, and similarly Ishmael was the first-born 
of Abraham. The Apostle Paul calls our attention to this 
very matter, telling us that natural Israel corresponds 
to Ishmael, the son of Hagar, who represented the Covenant 
of bondage. Spiritual Israel constitutes the Church 
of the First-Born, the Body of Christ, and was never in 
bondage, being a child of the free woman, "the Heavenly 
Jerusalem, the mother of us all." The Covenant of Grace 
was represented by Sarah. It had no mediator and needed 
none. Why does it need no mediator? Because those 
chosen under this Covenant of Grace are all at heart loyal 
to God, lovers of righteousness and haters of iniquity. 
These the Father was pleased to receive into his family, 
in response to their faith and consecration. They became 
members of the Body of the Mediator, who, during the 
Millennial Age, will represent God to mankind, enforcing 
his laws and in his name uplifting the willing and 
obedient. 



R4390 : page 139 

HE HATH PERFECTED THE SANCTIFIED 
-HEBREWS 10:1-14.- 



ST. PAUL in this Scripture seeks to show the Hebrews 
that the sacrifices of bulls and goats enjoined 
for a time have come to an end; and that the Jewish 
Priesthood has been supplanted by a higher one- 
Christ and his members, a "Royal Priesthood." He pictures 
our Lord as addressing the Father in respect to the 
matter, saying, "Sacrifices and offerings of bulls and of 
goats Thou wouldst not (these do not satisfy the demands 
of Thy Law as the redemption price of sinners), but a 
body hast thou prepared me....Lo, I come to do thy 
will, O God." There, says the Apostle, he taketh away 
(or pusheth aside) the first or typical sacrifices of the 
Law Covenant (bulls and goats) that he may establish or 
bring into place the second— the antitypes of those 
sacrifices. 

As the Father prepared a special body for our Lord 
Jesus, that was holy, harmless and undefiled and suitable 
as our sin-offering, so he has provided also a Body of 
Christ in the flesh, on a larger scale, for sacrifice; by providing 
for our justification through his blood. As the 
Apostle says, "Being justified freely by his grace we have 
peace with God through our Lord Jesus Christ." And 
then he adds, "By which also we have access into this 
grace wherein we stand and rejoice in the hope of the 
glory of God."— Rom. 5:1. 

We get into this grace— into this sharing in the glory 
of Christ in his Kingdom, in his nature, by reason of the 
opportunity which our justification gives us of becoming 
members of the High Priest, sharers in his sacrifice. St. 
Paul refers to this elsewhere, saying to the justified ones, 
"I beseech you, therefore, brethren, by the mercies of 
God (your justification), that ye present your bodies a 
living sacrifice, holy, acceptable to God, and your reasonable 
service." (Rom. 12:1.) Here we have the declaration 
that we are participants in this sacrifice and that our 
sacrifice is acceptable to God and counted of him holy 
because of our faith in and relationship to the Great High 
Priest who has adopted us as his members and is sacrificing 
us as members or parts of himself. In harmony with 
this we read with our text, "By the which will we are 

R4390 : page 140 

sanctified (set apart as holy and consecrated join t-sacrificers 
with our Lord) through the offering of the Body of 
Jesus Christ." 

The Apostle's argument is that by one offering Christ 
has perfected forever them that are sanctified. Through 
his merit there is naught against us now and nothing to 
hinder us from accepting the gracious invitation to suffer 
with him as his members, presenting our bodies as living 
sacrifices through the merit of his sacrifice. 

Under the New Covenant God will remove the sins of 
Israel and Judah and all that come into relationship with 
him under that Covenant and when that remission of sins 



shall come it will be an evidence that the sin-offerings of 
the Atonement Day are at an end, as the Apostle stated 
in verse eighteen. The remission of sins has not yet come 
for Israel and the world, because the offering for sins is 
not completed— Christ is still offering up himself. The 
great Day of Atonement is not yet closed, though nearly 
so. 

In this connection let us note the Apostle's words that, 
having confidence in the merit of Christ's sacrifice for us, 
"we may have boldness (courage) to enter into the 
holiest." Who entered the holiest in the type? The high 
priest alone, once every year on the Day of Atonement. 
Who in the antitype will enter the Most Holy in the end 
of the antitypical Day of Atonement? The antitypical 
High Priest— Jesus the Head and the Church his Body. 
It is because of our faith and obedience along this line 
that we are accepted as members of the High Priest's 
Body, whom he is sacrificing, that we have hope to enter 
in ultimately into the Most Holy as his members; and 
thither we are already entered by faith. 



FAITHFUL OVER FEW 

"O Blessed Lord, how much I long 
To do some noble work for thee! 
To lift thee up before the world 
Till every eye thy grace shall see; 
But not to me didst thou intrust 
The talents five or talents two, 
Yet, in my round of daily tasks, 
Lord, make me faithful over few. 

"I may not stand and break the bread 
To those who hunger for thy Word, 
And 'midst the throngs that sing thy praise 
My feeble voice may ne'er be heard; 
And, still, for me thou hast a place- 
Some little corner I may fill, 
Where I can pray, 'Thy Kingdom Come!' 
And seek to do thy blessed will. 

"A cup of water, in thy name, 
May prove a comfort to the faint: 
For thou wilt own each effort made 
To soothe a child or aid a saint; 
And thou wilt not despise, dear Lord, 
My day of small things, if I try 
To do the little I can do, 
Nor pass the least endeavor by. 

"To teach the wise and mighty ones 
The weak and foolish thou dost choose, 
And even things despised and base 
For thy great glory thou canst use; 



So, Lord, tho' humble be my sphere, 
In faith I bring to thee my all; 
For thine own glory bless and break 
My barley loaves and fishes small." 
— F. G. Burroughs. 



R4390 : page 140 

QUARTERLY REVIEW 

-JUNE 20.- 

Golden Text:— "With great power gave the apostles witness 
of the resurrection of the Lord Jesus."— Acts 4:33. 

THE lessons of the quarter may be reviewed by each 
according to his preferences of method. The 
Golden Text seems to embody the principal features 
of all the lessons; for each one discussed some feature 
of the great work of the Church, namely, the witness for 
Christ. We considered the witness given at Jerusalem, at 
Damascus, at Antioch, during the missionary journey in 
Asia Minor, and finally Paul's witness at Rome respecting 
the Heroes of Faith. All this witnessing was to the point. 
It all testified that Christ died; that his death was not 
for his own sins, but as man's Redeemer. 

The witnessing also specially related to our Lord's 
resurrection as stated by the Golden Text, because a dead 

R4391 :page 140 

redeemer would be powerless to become the Messiah and 
to establish the Divine Law amongst those whom he had 
purchased with his blood. "Jesus and the resurrection" 
was the general theme of the early Church, to which was 
added the hope of glory— the Second Coming of Jesus to 
receive his Bride to himself, to change her to his own 
nature, to associate her with him in his Kingdom glory 
and then to begin the Millennial reign of righteousness, 
to bring all mankind to a knowledge of God. And all this 
was based upon the precious sacrifice finished at Calvary. 

Our text tells us that this witnessing was done with 
power, great power. It was not made secondary to 
politics, to social questions, to evolutionary theories or 
higher critical dissertations. It, and it alone, constituted 
the apostolic theme. And so it should be with us. The 
resurrection of the Lord and its value and signification 
to the Church and the world through the Divine Plan 
should be ever prominent in our witnessing. 

Not only by their words and logical presentations did 
the apostles witness, but their lives were witnesses. As 
the Apostle said, "Ye are our epistles, known and read 
of all men." The lives of the early Church were the 
special witness to the Lord. Without the consistency of 



their lives and their consecration to the Lord and to the 
Truth, it is evident, the message would have had no 
such import as it bore. So it is with us to-day. It is 
well that we preach the Word. It is still more important 
that we live in it. But it is the ideal thing to both preach 
and live the Truth. "Let your light so shine before men 
that they may see your good works and glorify your 
Father which is in heaven." 



R4391 :page 140 

MEEKNESS, GENTLENESS, PATIENCE, CHARACTER 

NEVER was there a more important moment for the 
Church than now, as respects the above listed 
elements of the Lord's spirit. When the great 
Enemy has special power because it is "the hour of 
temptation which shall try all them that dwell upon the 
face of the whole earth," every soldier of the Cross must 
be more alert than ever. But let us put character and 
principle first, then patience, gentleness, meekness. 
As St. Paul wrote to Timothy, "In meekness, correcting 
those who oppose themselves." 

Our love for the brethren, coupled with our knowledge 
of the testing strain they are under, will supply the 
needed incentive for the exercise and cultivation of the 
graces named. And let us remember, that this is our 

R4391 :page 141 

testing hour no less than theirs. The test to some may 

be false teachings; the test to others may be their positiveness 

and character in dealing with the error, or their 

love for the brethren and the gentleness with which they 

will seek to do all in their power to rescue them, even 

though they feel the task a hopeless one.— Heb. 6:3. 

If we fail of love we are failing on the most important 
point of all. Hence it is important to each of us 
to take our stand for the right and against the wrong, 
but lovingly, gently, firmly. For instance, in the matter 
of the Vow: it is quite proper to explain its Scripturalness, 
to show that its every provision is in fullest 
accord with the teachings of the Bible, and to point out 
its advantages and its blessings to your own heart; but 
it would not be just or loving to do more than this. 
Leave the matter for the Lord to deal with by his spirit 
and providences. If the act be not a voluntary one it 
loses its value in God's sight. Do not allow the Vow or 
any other voluntary matter to cause a division amongst 
the members. Should the division come along other 
lines it would be different. We must do all in our power 
to maintain "the unity of the spirit in bonds of peace." 



page 141 

YEARLY REQUESTS FOR PILGRIM VISITS 

AT this season each year we ask that those desirous 

of Pilgrim Visits send in formal requests 

therefor, preferably on a post-card. We keep 

these on file and arrange the Pilgrim routes accordingly. 

We desire these yearly, because frequently conditions 

change greatly within one year. 

Remember that no charge is made for these services. 
The Society pays all the Pilgrims' traveling expenses, 
etc., and takes up no collections. The cost is borne by 
the general fund, to which many of you are or have 
been contributors. 

It may be too late to include your place if you write 
when you see that a Pilgrim is headed your way, therefore, 
cooperate please by at once sending a 1909 post-card 
request, answering as many of the questions below 
as possible: 

(a) How many Bible students reside in your vicinity? 

(b) Are weekly meetings held? 

(c) How many are usually in attendance? 

(d) Where do you now meet? (Give full street 
address.) 

(e) At what hours are the Sunday meetings held? 

(f) Was a vote taken on the "Pilgrim" invitation? 

(g) How many voted for the invitation to be sent? 
(h) How many, if any, voted against the invitation? 

(i) Would a suitable place be found for a public meeting? 
(j) What attendance do you think could be secured 

for the public session by such notification and 

advertising as your class would give? 
(k) Would a suitable place be found for semi-private 

meetings for the interested? 
(1) Have the members of your class chosen leaders in 

accordance with DAWN, Vol. VI., chaps. 5 and 6? 
(m) Give full names and full addresses of the two (2) 

to whom notices of a coming "Pilgrim" should be 

sent, and notify us as to any change or removal, 
(n) If your town is not on a railroad give the name of 

proper railroad station at which to stop, 
(o) How many miles from station is meeting place, 

and which direction from station? 
(p) Would "Pilgrim" be met at station? 
(q) If not, how could "Pilgrim" get from said station? 
(r) Give writer's full name and address, 
(s) Any additional remarks. 



R4391 :page 141 

WESTERN CONVENTION TOUR 



UPON learning of the Western Convention Tour a 
number of friends inquired as to our willingness 
to have company, and whether or not a Convention 
Party could be arranged to travel together in a 
Tourist Sleeping Car. 

We replied that we certainly would be pleased to have 
the company and find that the Tourist and Kitchen-car 
arrangement is feasible. The figures below include the 
use of the car for twenty-five days and nights and three 
plain, substantial meals per day with an allowance of 35 
cents each for meals not taken. The longer excursion 
would start from Chicago and take in all of the Convention's 
stops noted in The Watch Tower except the first 
and the last named— Piedmont, Ala., and Aberdeen, S.D. 
Others might join the party in Texas and California at a 
slightly increased cost for the round trip. All the details 
of this arrangement are in the hands of Brother L. W. 
Jones, M.D., No. 2024 Washington Boul., Chicago, 111. 
Applications for space on these cars should be made not 
later than June 15, accompanied by a deposit of not less 
than fifty ($50) dollars. 

Arrangements are being made for a long and a short 
Western Convention Trip. 

THE LONG TRIP 

This route will take in all the Conventions mentioned 
in the Tower, with the exception of Aberdeen. 

One or more special cars will be used, and meals provided 
if desired, as follows: 

Option No. 1— This means an entire section in the 

sleeper for 25 days, and three meals per day. $96.25 
(A refund for meals not eaten on train, 35c.) 
Railroad fare from Chicago and return 77.25 



$173.50 



Option No. 2— This means an entire section in the 
sleeper for 25 days and nights, but occupied 
by two persons, with three meals daily for 
each person. Thus Option No. 2 would cost 

each person 61.25 

(A refund for meals not eaten on train, 35c.) 
Railroad fare from Chicago and return 77.25 



$138.50 
THE SHORT TRIP 

This route would take in Seattle, Spokane, Butte, Denver 
and St. Joseph. The round trip railroad fare from 
Chicago will cost $62.50. Sleeper for round trip would 
be about $15, but this could be cut in half if two persons 
occupied a berth. 

All meals on this short trip would be extra, as would 



also the hotel accommodations while at the conventions. 
About $100 ought to cover the expenses of this short 
trip. 



R4391 :page 142 

SAMPLES OF INTERESTING LETTERS 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

We are sending you a list of names to be recorded 
as having taken the Vow. This list is our entire class. 
We enjoyed Brother Sullivan's visit very much. All the 
class seems to be growing in knowledge and love. 

Your brethren in Christ, 

CLASS OF TWENTY-FOUR AT BOAZ, ALA. 



DEAR BRETHREN:- 

I want to tell you that the colored Ecclesia here, 
numbering fourteen in all, partook of the emblems of 
our dear Redeemer's flesh and blood. We felt it a very 
solemn occasion, more especially as we looked at the 
shortness of the time when we shall drink it new with 
our dear Redeemer in our Father's Kingdom. 

Pray for us, as we do for you, that we may be found 
faithful. We are receiving untold blessing by reading 
the Vow along with the HEAVENLY MANNA. With much 
love in our dear Redeemer, 

Yours in the blessed hope, P. W. LEMONS. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

We gladly improve this opportunity of expressing 
our deep appreciation of your progressive work along 
the lines of Present Truth. 

The illumination of the entire Plan has been intensified 
by the clearer light on the Covenants. The 
Vow has proved especially helpful. 

"Meat in due season," "things new and old" from 
the storehouse are indeed served through your sermons, 
WATCH TOWER and magazine articles to those who 
hunger and thirst after righteousness and a knowledge 
of the Divine program. 

We rejoice with the dear ones abroad, joyfully anticipating 
your presence with them the coming month. 
Greet for us "those of like precious faith." "God be 
with you till we meet again." 

May the dear Lord richly bless you and "Bethel" 
family in your new field of labor, is the daily prayer of 
thousands, including your brother and sister, 

W. W. GOODWIN AND WIFE,-Pa. 



R4392 : page 142 



DEAR BROTHER:- 

In sending you this list of brethren and sisters who 
wish to signify their appreciation and approval of the 
Vow as a means of drawing them closer to the Lord and 
to each other— as well as those of our class who have 
previously sent in their names— we thought you would 
be pleased to know that the attitude taken toward the 
Vow and toward each other from the first has been of 
such a happy character that all have taken the Vow, except 
one, without the slightest sign of friction over 
differences of opinion regarding it. And the one who 
did not sign it refrained from doing so, not because he 
was opposed to it, but merely because he thought he 
was not ready, as yet, for the advanced position he 
seemed to think the Vow implied. This fortunate outcome 
has been accomplished by the wisdom and tolerance 
of those who first took the Vow, in that they did 
not wish to press their convictions on the others. The 
others, noting this, were led to a closer and more favorable 
attitude of mind toward the Vow and toward those 
who took it. We believe if this attitude had been taken 
by classes generally much needless friction would have 
been avoided. 

Sincerely yours in the Master's service, 

CLASS OF FIFTEEN AT MEAFORD, ONT. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

I am sure you will allow one who loves you to intrude 
a little on your time. How I would love to have 
an hour's talk with you. I would have told you long 
ago of my sympathy in the sittings of late, but knew 
your time was fully occupied. 

I want to say that I stand by you with my sympathies, 
and mention you at least twice each day at the 
throne of grace. I hope I shall never forget what the 
Lord has done for me and thousands of others at your 
willing and faithful hands. My own bodily condition 
is expressed fairly well in Job 7:3,4. 

I have been receiving scores of letters and cards 
from the dear friends from all parts, and would be glad 
to answer them all if I could spare the time to do so, 
but I can do so little in the way of work, that it seems 
to require about all of the time I can put in to accomplish 
the little. 

I am glad to say that by the Lord's kind favor I 
have been, and still am, able to earn as much as is needful. 
I want to tell you also that I still take my stand 
by "the Vow," and fail to see how any brother or sister 
in the Truth can find any reason to oppose; also your 
articles on the Covenants. I am sure you remember 



me in prayer. May the Lord's blessing ever be with 
you. 
Yours in "the best of bonds," 

HAYDEN SAMSON. 



MY DEAR PASTOR:- 

I am writing to assure you that for the last year, or 
year and a half, the dear heavenly Father has continued 
to manifest his love toward me by one scourging after 
another, and now I realize at last what his lesson is for 
me. The rod has been applied harder and harder until 
at last the wisdom from above is beginning to penetrate 
this old, thick head of mine. On my bed of sickness I 
plead earnestly for instruction. And thank God and 
the dear Saviour the instruction came. 

I am very weak yet, and can scarcely pen this, but 
I am so glad that the precious privilege and joy of contributing 
to the spread of the harvest message, has not 
been taken from me entirely, as my lack of appreciation 
of it deserved. And now, dear brother, I am enclosing 
you a draft payable to the Tract Society. I desire that 
this be used in any way that your judgment may deem 
best, guided by the Lord, as I know you are. Dear 
brother, I attribute the precious blessings I am receiving, 
first of all to my God and my dear Master, and then 
to "the Vow." Praise God, may I be able to sing as 
never before, "None of self and all of thee." 

I humbly ask your forgiveness for the harsh things 
I have said and written of you. I regret them from the 
bottom of my heart. I know the dear Master delights 
to honor you. Surely I can do no less. I can write no 
more this time. God bless you. M. D. HARPER. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

It is my privilege once more to write you concerning 
the celebration of the Memorial Supper. Seven of 
us met last night in a quiet room apart from the world, 
to meditate upon that eventful night, nearly nineteen 
hundred years ago, when the great sacrifice was offered 
up to Justice— "Christ our Passover, slain for us"; and 
we rejoice that we are still "in the house" and that the 
blood is upon the door-posts. The preciousness of the 
"Lamb of God" grows upon us and we delight to feed 
upon it, even though it means that we must also swallow 
some of the bitter herbs of persecution and sorrow. 
"Soon the shadows, weary shadows, will forever pass 
away." 

We were impressed also with the thought of our 
being broken with him as part of the "one Loaf," and 
of our covenant to drink of the cup of which he drank, 
"filling up that which is behind of the afflictions of 
Christ," and willingly and gladly renewed our vows to 



be "dead with him," for our experience with the blessed 
Lord has taught us that to follow him means gain a 
"hundred fold," even in this present time, and a calmness 
and serenity of spirit. His peace, "My peace I 
give unto you." 

Often the flesh shrinks when we come to the bitter 
part, but it is our earnest desire that the mind of the 

R4392 : page 143 

flesh have less and less control of the new man— that 
the "same mind may be in us which was also in Christ 
Jesus." 

We remembered you in prayer, dear Brother, and 
all the family of God, "scattered abroad," and yet drawn 
very closely together by the "tie that binds." 

Our loving sympathy is ever with you, beloved 
Brother, in all your many trials and straining of tender 
ties, and we are so grateful that in it all you continue 
to bear us (the Lord's people in general) upon your 
heart, and are so concerned for us, that no harm comes 
to us. God keep you, dear Brother, and strengthen 
you unto the last. Your sister in the Lord, 

BESSIE LOCKERBIE HENDRICKS,-Mich. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

Have just arrived home, after a precious little season 
together with others of the Lord's consecrated— "In 
remembrance" of our dear Saviour's sacrifice on our 
behalf. 

Thirteen of the dear friends "assembled themselves 
together," and one brother, who was ill, was served at 
home, making fourteen in all participating. Our hearts 
were saddened as we remembered what "Christ our 
Passover" endured "for us," and were filled with joy at 
the other thought of "That day when I drink it new with 
you in my Father's Kingdom." How this event increases 
in importance to us as we near the Kingdom, and very 
properly so, as the light of the dawning day sheds its 
radiance more and more clearly on the path of the just. 

Some, whom we loved dearly as brethren in Christ, 
who have assembled with us in former years, did not 
meet with us this year, and this fact lent an added tinge 
of sadness to the occasion, but with our dear Saviour, 
we say, "Thy will be done." 

We cannot help but feel that they missed a wonderful 
privilege, which in the very near future they will regret. 
We thank our heavenly Father, that another year 
finds us still loving the Truth, and with desires to be in 
harmony with it, and with our God. We thank him also 
for the precious little "Vow." We know that we have 
been blessed by taking it, but just how much it may 
have aided in keeping our hearts in a condition of 
loyalty and sympathy and obedience to the Truth, we 



may not know this side the vail. We do know, however, 
that Satan has gotten the advantage of some who have 
not taken it, and we learn the lesson of humility and 
watchfulness and prayerfulness, lest the great Adversary 
trip us, and stumble us, over some such plain, 
reasonable and simple requirements as are contained 
in this "Vow." 

I fear that if the "Vow" had been a vow to do some 
"great work," some of those who have stumbled would 
have been eager to take it, but since it was a "Vow" to 
prayer and watchfulness of thought and word and 
action they stumbled because of its very simplicity. If 
the dear Lord can use this little "Vow" to make manifest 
the heart condition of some of these who claim to 
be his; what may the next test be? Perhaps it may be 
something seemingly more simple and of less importance 
than the "Vow," and who shall be able to 
stand? And the Psalmist answers, "He that hath clean 
hands and a pure heart." The "heart" is the all important 
thing. "Keep thy heart with all diligence." 
"Let us fear, lest a promise being left us of entering 
into his rest, any of you, should seem to come short of 
it." 

Pray for us, dear Brother, that we may never let 
any "root of bitterness" spring up in our heart, and defile 
either ourselves or others. 

We are glad to say that we are striving daily to 
keep every feature of the "Vow," and this means that 
we remember you and all the Brooklyn Bethel family 
at the throne daily. With Christian love to all, 

Your Brother in Christ, R. H. BARBER. 



DEAR BROTHER IN CHRIST:- 

I have been rejoicing in Present Truth since March, 
1908, and would have written you sooner had not the 
greater part of my thirty-six years been spent in the 

R4393 : page 143 

newspaper, printing and publishing business, which 
enables me to draw a fair idea of your burdensome 
duties while serving the Lord in so many different 
capacities. However, I am impressed that it would be 
unwise on my part to further delay writing you, hence 
this letter. 

We have a small class here which elected me teacher. 
Will you and the Bethel family remember me daily 
at the throne of grace? I want more of the holy Spirit 
and the spirit of a sound mind. I want to teach with 
understanding. 

Fifteen years ago I joined my wife and the Methodist 
Church. I knew at the time my wife was the principal 
magnet, although I firmly believed the Lord would 
come my way and in due time make me as happy as my 



brethren professed to be. My blessed Redeemer did 
not give me the sweet assurance I expected, and after 
two years I withdrew with more noise and confusion 
than I commenced with. I resolved to never enter the 
building again and that resolution has not been broken. 
I took up Darwin, Hume and Ingersoll. These were 
later discarded for Confucius, Buddha and Mohammed. 
None of these things satisfied my hunger for Truth. 
Then came the Book of Mormonism, which I read with 
considerable enthusiasm and finally passed it up to a 
Baptist preacher. About this time Mrs. Eddy made 
her little bow in my community, beginning with my 
wife's mother, a very bright and well-disposed lady, 
whose wealth and social prominence added no little to 
the Eddy Idea at this place. I studied the proposition 
hard, but was not permitted to see the point. One day 
one of the Lord's faithful, Bro. C. S. Livingston, of 
Enterprise, asked me if I would take pleasure in the 
Truth if I knew it was Truth. I told him I would. Then 
he gave me Volume I and asked me to go to my closet 
and pray for help to understand that book. If there 
was a God I wanted to know it. Besides I was in the 
middle of a campaign for an important county office and 
the election was only six weeks ahead, and I wanted to 
please Brother Livingston and get his vote. I went on 
to my closet and tried to pray. It was the first time I 
had tried to communicate with the Lord in ten or twelve 
years. My petition was short and remarkably stupid, 
but the Lord certainly looked at the spirit in which I 
approached him and not the eloquence or multiplicity 
of words. One week later I retired from politics forever, 
thank the Lord. My friends urged and threatened, but 
I retired from the race. Five weeks later I had read the 
six volumes, Tabernacle Shadows and several WATCH 
TOWERS. I went out on the streets and wrangled with 
every preacher and Sunday School teacher I could find. 
I thought I was going to be a power among my friends 
and political followers. But alas, it is sad to relate. 
They say, and believe, "Much study has wrecked his 
mind, for a truth he has paresis ! " 

I have been zealous for the Lord and the doctrine 
of the Kingdom. On every suitable occasion I pour out 
all the hail at my command; but they won't listen. If 
they can't slip away they will try to change the subject- 
sing, do anything except listen. Not one grain of wheat 
can be traced to my energies. The real pillar of the 
Baptist Church at this place for twenty years, Brother 
J. J. Morris, accepted the Truth four months ago and 
Babylon charges me with his ruin and destruction. 
Would to God they told the truth, but they do not; as 
usual, they err; the Lord did it. And now, since he is 
not grinding at their mill, they say "he always did have 
cranky notions." 

Enclosed you will please find "the Vow," our Vow. 
All the "Israelites indeed, in whom there is no guile," 
will take the Vow. The more I see of it the more I am 



impressed that it is the Lord's sieve. 

Please send us a Pilgrim. The friends want an 
Alabama Convention at Texasville in the summer. Remember 
us daily at the Throne of grace. 

Yours in the One Hope, W. M. BAILEY. 



page 144 



PUBLIC MINISTRIES OF THE TRUTH 
UNDER THE AUSPICES OF PEOPLES PULPIT 
ASSOCIATION OF BROOKLYN, N.Y. 



ONE-DAY LOCAL CONVENTIONS ADDRESSED BY THE 
EDITOR OF THIS JOURNAL AS FOLLOWS: 

BROOKLYN, N.Y., JUNE 13 

Morning Rally and Testimony Meeting at 10:30 o'clock. 

Discourse by Brother Russell at 3:00 p.m. Evening meeting 
for the interested at 7:30 o'clock; this will be a Question 
Meeting. Visiting friends cordially invited. 

All meetings will be held in the Brooklyn Tabernacle, Nos. 
13-17 Hicks street. Convenient to all cars and ferries— close 
to the old bridge terminus. 

NEW BRITAIN, CONN., JUNE 20 

GLENS FALLS, N.Y., JUNE 27 



BROOKLYN TABERNACLE EVERY SUNDAY 



Preaching at 3:00 p.m. Praise service at 7:00 p.m.; 
Berean Bible Study at 7:30 p.m. Convenient to New York 
via Subway, and Jersey City via P.R.R. Annex Ferry. 



page 146 

STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES 
"MILLENNIAL DAWN" 

THESE STUDIES ARE RECOMMENDED TO STUDENTS AS VERITABLE "BIBLE KEYS. 

PRICES ARE NET AND BARELY COVER COST OF PRODUCTION, 

WHEN DELIVERED BY COLPORTEURS THE COST AND PRICE ARE INCREASED. 

SERIES I., "The Plan of the Ages." gives an outline of the divine plan 
revealed in the Bible, relating to man's redemption and restitution: 



386 pages, in embossed cloth, 25c. (Is. l/2d.) India paper edition, 75c. 
(3s. l-l/2d.). 

This volume has been published as a special issue of our journal— 
at the extremely low price of 5c. a copy, in any quantity, postage included. 
(To foreign countries, 9c.) This enables people of slender 
purse to herald far and wide the good tidings in a most helpful form. 

SERIES II., "The Time is at Hand," treats of the manner and time of 
the Lord's second coming, considering the Bible Testimony on this 
subject: 370 pages, in embossed cloth, 25c. (Is. l/2d.) India paper 
edition, 75c. (3s. l-l/2d.) 

SERIES III., "Thy Kingdom Come," considers prophecies which mark 
events connected with the "Time of the End," the glorification of the 
Church and the establishment of the Millennial Kingdom; it also contains 
a chapter of the Great Pyramid, showing its corroboration of the 
dates and other teachings of the Bible: 384 pages, in embossed cloth, 
25c. (Is. l/2d.) India paper edition, 75c. (3s. l-l/2d.) 

SERIES IV., "The Day of Vengeance," shows that the dissolution of the 
present order of things is in progress, and that all the panaceas offered 
are valueless to avert the predicted end. It marks in these events the 
fulfilment of prophecy, noting specially our Lord's great prophecy of 
Matt. 24 and Zech. 14:1-9: 660 pages, in embossed cloth, 30c. (Is. 3d.). 
India paper edition, 85c. (3s. 6-l/2d.) 

SERIES V., "The At-one-ment Between God and Man," treats an all-important 
subject— the hub, the center around which all the features 
of divine grace revolve. Its topic deserves the most careful and 
prayerful consideration on the part of all true Christians: 507 pages, 
in embossed cloth, 30c. (Is. 3d.) India paper edition, 85c. (3s. 6-l/2d.) 

SERIES VI., "The New Creation," deals with the Creative Week 
(Genesis 1 and 2), and with the Church, God's "New Creation." It examines 
the personnel, organization, rites, ceremonies, obligations and 
hopes appertaining to those called and accepted as members of the 
Body under the Head: 740 pages, in embossed cloth, 30c. (Is. 3d.) 
India paper edition, 85c. (3s. 6-l/2d.) 

The above prices include postage. 

IN FULL LEATHER BINDING, gilt edges, the set (6 vols.) $3.00, 
(12s. 6d.), plus postage, 60c. (Is.). 

Is also published in foreign languages as follows: German, six vols., 
in Swedish Vols. 1, 2, 3, 5 and 6; in Dano-Norwegian, three vols.; 
in Greek, three vols.; in French, two vols.; Hollandish, Spanish, 
and Italian, one vol. each; bound in cloth, uniform with English edition, 
prices the same; in Polish, condensed edition, one vol., 10 cents. 



page 145 



SEMI-MONTHLY 
VOL. XXX MAY 15 NO. 10 
A.D. 1909-A.M. 6037 



CONTENTS 

Brooklyn Bethel Hymns for June 146 

Views from the Watch Tower 147 



"Blasting at the Rock of Ages" 147 

The Orthodox Student vs. the Orthodox Teacher. 148 

Tabernacle and Bethel Reception 149 

"Walk Honestly as in the Day" 150 

"Put Ye on the Lord Jesus Christ" 151 

The Emmanuel Movement 152 

"For This He Did Once" 153 

"If We Suffer With Him" 154 

"Come Over and Help Us" 155 

"There is a Sin Unto Death" 157 

Western Convention Tour 158 

An Interesting Letter 159 

Berean Studies on the Atonement 159 

page 146 

PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY 
CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
"BROOKLYN TABERNACLE," 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, N.Y., U.S.A. 

Foreign Agencies:— British Branch: 24 Eversholt St., London, 
N. W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, Barmen. Australasian 
Branch: Equitable Building, Collins St., Melbourne. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR 

REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 

Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:— All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are not 
only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually and 
in touch with the Studies, etc. 



SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER. 

APPLICATION MADE FOR ENTRY AT BROOKLYN, N.Y. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, DANISH AND ITALIAN EDITIONS. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



BROOKLYN BETHEL HYMNS FOR JUNE 



After the singing of the hymn the Bethel Family listens 
to the reading of "the Vow" to the Lord, then joins in 
prayer. At the breakfast table the MANNA text for the 
date is read and questions and comments considered. 
Finally, just before leaving the table, the MANNA comment 
is read. Desiring that all share the blessings, we 
commend the plan to others. The hymns for June are 
indicated below to permit all who so desire to join with us: 

(1) 267; (2) 29; (3) 19; (4) 313; (5) 257; (6) 119; 
(7) 4; (8) 208; (9) 17; (10) 152; (11) 301; (12) 230; 
(13) 193; (14) 105; (15) 66; (16) 121; (17) 130; (18) 263; 
(19) 273; (20) 85; (21) Vow; (22) 8; (23) 71; (24) 291; 
(25) 258; (26) 312; (27) 191; (28) 169; (29) 120; (30) 279. 



ITALIAN VOLUNTEER MATTER 

The Volunteer matter for use among Italians is now ready, 
and we trust that those having Italian friends or living near 
Italian sections will recognize the opportunity and order what 
they can judiciously use. 

POCKET HYMNALS DELAYED 

The cloth and paper editions of the Pocket Hymnals have 
been unexpectedly delayed in shipment, but we expect to be 
filling orders by the time this issue reaches you. 



R4393 : page 147 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER 
"BLASTING AT THE ROCK OF AGES" 



FOR the past twenty years we have been sounding 

the Alarm against the infidel tendencies of the 

colleges and seminaries of Christendom. We 

have pointed out that Higher Criticism of the 

Bible and the Evolution Theory are taught in practically 

every institution of learning of higher grade than a 

Grammar School and that even in these the seeds of infidelity 

are being sown in the class books and studies, 

though not openly lectured upon. 

In these twenty years we have counselled parents that 
it is better to give their children less education than to 
risk the complete wreck of their religious instincts and 
faith in God and the Bible. Our views were thought to 
be extreme and rarely heeded. Now parents are writing 
us of their sad mistake— that the faith of their children 
is irreparably lost, because they refuse to read the only 
thing which would enable them to regain the ground of 



faith lost, namely The Divine Plan of the Ages. 

Finally, when the new manhood and womanhood have 
been thoroughly inoculated with the poison of infidelity 
others are awakening to the situation; as, for instance, 
Mr. Harold Bolce, who writes in the "Cosmopolitan," and 
Hon. S. H. Blake, who has started a good warfare in 
Canada. 

We give below John Temple Graves' note of alarm. 
He says:— 

Out of the curricula of American colleges a dynamic 
movement is upheaving ancient foundations and making 
an open way for a revolution in the thought and life of 
this people. Those who are not in close touch with the 
great colleges of the country will be astonished, in most 
cases indignant, to learn the creeds that are being fostered 
by the strong men in the professors' chairs. 

In hundreds of classrooms there is a scholarly repudiation 
of all solemn authority, and it is being taught daily 
that "the Decalogue is no more sacred than a syllabus"; 
that "the home as an institution is doomed"; that "there 
are no absolute evils"; that "immorality is simply an act 
in contravention of society's accepted standards"; that 
"democracy is a failure and the Declaration of Independence 
only spectacular rhetoric"; that "the change 
from one religion to another is like getting 
a new hat"; that "moral precepts are passing 
shibboleths"; that "conceptions of right and 
wrong are as unstable as styles of dress"; that "wide 
stairways are open between social levels, but that to the 
climber children are encumbrances"; that "the sole effect 
of prolificacy is to fill tiny graves," and that "there can 
be and are holier alliances outside the marriage bond 
than within it!" 

Every quoted sentiment is from the spoken or written 
word of some one of the leading and famous professors 
of the great colleges. 

And the colleges carrying such new and revolutionary 
creeds are not the minor schools, but those vaster seminaries 
such as Harvard, Yale, Princeton (shade of Jonathan 
Edwards behold it!), University of Pennsylvania, 
University of Chicago, Columbia, Syracuse, California, 
George Washington, William and Mary, Northwestern, 
the universities of New York, Iowa, Kansas, Michigan, 
Wisconsin, Cornell, Brown, Leland Stanford, Union, 
Nebraska and others. 

In each of these great institutions some professor, 
neither infallible nor inspired, but a free thinker rioting 
in the mere license of opinion, and some, alas, hungering 
for the notoriety of the utterance, are flinging down daily 
doctrines like these, not to strong and mature men capable 
of discrimination and accustomed to disputation, but 
speaking from responsible stations to youthful and undeveloped 
minds which are accustomed to receive what 
comes from the scholar in the chair of authority as the 
unchallenged gospel of the time. 

"Meat for strong men and milk for babes," has no 



restraining influence upon the riot of opinion among these 
so-called professors of to-day. If these men really believe 
the monstrous conceptions which are stirring the 
age to unwholesome revolution against the doctrines of 
the ages, they should at least voice them first in serious 
councils of their peers, and submit them solemnly and 
primarily to an arena in which orthodoxy can fairly defend 

R4394 : page 147 

its Gibraltars and stand by its own. 

But to strip every shred of reverence from the foot of 
thought— to march out before unfledged youth of either 
sex— to dissect God, and Religion and Homage and Home, 
and Government as if they were mere fossils, or vertebrates 
or equations— to leave morals afloat upon inclination, 
and so unsettle standards of virtue that every youth 
might swing unsmitten of conscience from the classroom 
to the scarlet woman in the street— this is carrying 
liberty of thought to the rank license which makes the 
intellectual commune and presages the revolution which 
is the beginning of chaos. 

The presidents of these great institutions, held in check 
by boards and councils, are not usually the voices of this 
amazing propaganda. But college professors, in the enjoyment 
of apparently too much liberty, and of rarely 
questioned responsibility, are sowing the seeds of these 
dangerous doctrines day by day in the minds of a quarter 
of a million of American young men and women who are 
going out to make the morals, the manners and the 
civilization of our country. 

I protest the initial exploitation of these "doubtful 
disputations" upon the great body in whom all of us have 
such vital concern. I deny the right of teacher or professor 

R4394 : page 148 

to take such advantage of youth sent by orthodox 
parents to university halls. 

I am neither preacher nor Puritan. I neither cavil 
nor cant. I am an ordinary man of the world, who, as 
unworthy as he is, keeps yet in reverence the old orthodox 
faith of his fathers, and I do not hesitate to say 
that if I had a son in one of these colleges, and I heard 
that such doctrines were being fed to him out of the 
irreverent lips of uninspired thinkers, I would put my 
hat on my head and walk up to the chancellor's office 
of that university and demand on behalf of my son, and 
of other sons of American citizens, that these intellectual 
banditti of the classroom should practise their license of 
opinion upon the sunrise clubs or the free thought societies 
to which they belong, or ought to belong, and to 
leave unstained to these tender minds those old honored 
and orthodox creeds by which American fathers and 
mothers for over a hundred years have led their children 
up to the honor of the American home and to the responsibility 



of the American citizen. 

THE ORTHODOX STUDENT VS. THE ORTHODOX 
TEACHER 



Under date of Toronto, March 29th, 1909, the Hon. H. 
S. Blake of Canada replies to a college student respecting 
the responsibility of college teachers for the spread 
of Infidelity amongst the people, under the specious name 
of "Higher Criticism," thus:— 

My Dear Brother:— I have received and thought a great 
deal over your letter of the 19th inst... 

I have not time to reply to all the letters that I have 
received containing complaints of the teaching given by 
those who "sit in Moses' seat," but have made the 
Word of God of none effect." 

You will, therefore, excuse me if, while I deal with 
your difficulty, I also take up some other points that 
have been presented. 

You ask my attention to one of the text-books which 
is prescribed for you in your course of study for the 
ministry, namely, "The Life of Christ," by Burton & 
Matthews (Constructive Studies); and you say as to 
this, "I have been impressed by the amount of what I 
consider 'Higher Criticism' that I find there." But this 
should not surprise you, for this book has the endorsement 
of "The University of Chicago," which University 
gives its imprimatur to a work of Professor G. B. Foster 
on "The Finality of the Christian Religion," in which it 
is declared at page 130 that to the scientific understanding 
of the world, and to the intellectual attitude super-induced 
by science, a miracle cannot be admitted; and 
again, at page 132, where the anti-supernaturalistic principle 
is not only admitted, but is paraded, and a man 
is said not to be a "modern" who does not admit it, 
Prof. Foster affirms, "An intelligent man who now affirms 
faith in such stories (miraculous narratives like the 
Bible) as actual facts can hardly know what intellectual 
honesty means." 

So that you perceive from other books which have the 
authority of this University that the miracle of the resurrection 
of Jesus is not to be accepted. You may possibly 
in due course be led to this book, but in the meantime 
you refer to page 269 of the text-book, which you 
are obliged to study, where this comment on 
verse 33, of chapter XV. of the Gospel of St. Mark, is found:— 

"And when the sixth hour was come, there was darkness 
over the whole land until the ninth hour." On 
which the comment is: "Darkness; if taken literally, it 
was probably due to a storm of sand.. ..But probably 
the phrase in its origin is metaphorical." There is 
no more reason to think that this is metaphorical than 
that the fact of the crucifixion itself was a mere metaphor. 
Even as children, we learned that God hung the 



world in mourning when the creature crucified the Creator. 

It was fitting and proper that this should be done. 

Continue to believe it as God's miracle to call 

the attention of the world, at that time assembled in 

Jerusalem, to the depth of the crime committed. Second, 

you call attention to the belittling of the mode in which 

God called the attention of all to the fact that Jesus 

Christ was the new and living way into the Holy of 

Holies. It was intended to strike home to the mind 

of a Jew the great truth beyond any other means that 

could be presented. The Jew might well stand awe-struck 

at the rending of the heavy veil and the throwing 

open to the gaze of all that which for centuries was regarded 

as too sacred a place to be entered but once in 

the year, and that by the High Priest alone, and then 

not without blood. 

To say that, "This rather than a physical fact is perhaps 
all that the words should be taken to mean," is 
without any warrant whatever. These two instances to 
which you refer are simply illustrations of the determination 
of those who are introducing the new Bible to 
drive away everything that savors of the miraculous. 

Pay no attention to the statements of the Higher 
Critics "that certain words are apparently an addition 
to the original narrative, etc." He says it is "apparently" 
so to him. But in all such cases take my advice 
and thankfully accept the text that has stood for all 
these centuries rather than the suggestions of some new 
light.... 

It may be helpful to you to read this quotation from 
Wesley's preface to his explanatory notes of the Bible 
printed for the "Wesleyan Methodist Bookroom": 

"Concerning the Scriptures in general, it may be observed, 
the word of the living God, which directed the 
first patriarchs also, was, in the time of Moses, committed 
to writing. To this were added, in several succeeding 
generations, the inspired writings of the other 
prophets. Afterwards, what the Son of God preached, 
and the Holy Ghost spake by the apostles, the apostles 
and evangelists wrote. This is what we now style the 
Holy Scripture. This is that 'Word of God which remaineth 
forever,' of which, though 'heaven and earth 
pass away, one jot or tittle shall not pass away.' The 
Scripture, therefore, of the Old and New Testaments is a 
most solid and precious system of divine truth. Every 
part thereof is worthy of God; and all together are one 
entire body, wherein is no defect, no excess. It is the 
fountain of heavenly wisdom, which they who are able 
to taste, prefer to all writings of men, however wise, 
or learned, or holy."... 

But, you will say, Did John Wesley know of the wonderful 
teachings of "new light," "modern thought," 
"common sense," "rational views"? Did he know of 
the infirmities of Genesis, the mistakes of Moses, the 
childishness of the story of Jonah? And had he recognized 
that a belief in miracles was a sure mark of superstition 



to be at once rejected by anyone that pretended 
to intellectual power? 

Why, John Wesley lived in the very centre of this atmosphere 
when, as one of the "Bible moths" in his 
Oxford days, he was the perpetual object of attack, ridicule 
and obloquy by the smart, clever infidel set of the 
18th century. He was a contemporary of Thomas Paine, 
with his "Age of Reason" and "Common Sense," and 
of Voltaire and Volney. 

After quoting Dr. Eakin's words in defense— "It is a 
significant fact that neither Charles Bradlaugh, in England, 
nor Colonel Ingersoll, in America, has had any successor" 
—Mr. Blake concludes:— 

How amused these two gentlemen would be if they, 
revisiting the scenes of their labors, attended some of 
the lectures of the higher critics in the Toronto Y.M. 
C.A. and elsewhere, and perused their many volumes! 
How "significant" to them would be the fact that their 
labors were not thrown away, and that so-called ministers 
of God were playing him false, and that schools and 
colleges rendered their presence unnecessary, as the 
work commenced by them was being so constantly, efficiently 
and thoroughly carried on by their ecclesiastical 
successors! 

It is a still more "significant fact" what a wonderful 

R4394 : page 149 

resemblance the above teaching, sanctioned by Dr. 
Eakin, bears to the results that we find amongst our 
students and graduates who have had the disadvantage 
of his teaching ! 

One reason urged for preserving such teaching which 
should trouble every lover of our country is, that the 
students thus instructed are to be throughout the length 
and breadth of our land the teachers in our public 
schools, and are to receive diplomas enabling them to 
continue to spread abroad the infidelity of this destructive 
criticism. 

Truly, "the plague is begun." How is this plague to 
be "stayed?" There is no more live question in our 

R4395 : page 149 

Dominion to-day than is this. 

It is not denied that this is the teaching we have in 
some of our colleges, and that the determination is to 
proceed with such instruction in order to educate those 
that are to be the teachers in our land to believe in and 
to present a mangled edition of the Bible. Remember, 
my dear friend, that these men do not seek to strengthen 
faith in the Bible, to build up their pupils in a reverence 
and love for it and an acceptance of it as God's 
Word. All the doubts, difficulties, uncertainties, objections, 
contradictions, imperfections, mistakes, that can 
be conjured up from minds that have been devoted to 



this one-sided study are presented. The views of people 
that do not know how to weigh evidence are given as 
conclusive. 

If a man has his doubts as to the authenticity of the 
Bible as God's Word, he is to be deeply pitied, and is 
worthy of great sympathy. If with such doubts he 
spreads them abroad, pity should end in reproof; but if 
with such doubts he accepts the position of instructor of 
youth and spreads abroad the poison with which he is 
afflicted, he should be found guilty of treason against the 
State, which he is wounding in its most vital part. 
H. S. BLAKE. 



R4395 : page 149 

TABERNACLE AND BETHEL RECEPTION 

THE month of April proved none too long for the 
transfer of the Headquarters of the Society from 
Pittsburgh to Brooklyn. It may astonish some 
of the friends to know that, between the stock of Tracts 
and Books, office fixtures, home furniture, etc., seven 
large cars were required for the removal. It required 
considerable time to pack and as much or more to unpack 
and to properly locate here. Meantime we did 
our best to handle our large mail and the orders it 
contained. If some of you have been unduly delayed 
and inconvenienced we trust that you will pardon us, 
remembering the cause of it. We trust that in our new 
quarters we shall be able to serve the increasing demands 
upon us more successfully than has been recently 
possible in the old quarters, where matters had 
become considerably congested. 

Naturally the friends of New York and vicinity have 
felt a justifiable curiosity and interest in the arrangements, 
not only in the Tabernacle Auditorium but also 
in its office and shipping departments, and an additional 
curiosity in the home which we style Bethel. However, 
remembering the general interests of the work everywhere, 
we requested the dear friends in this vicinity to 
restrain their loving curiosity, assuring them that when 
we would be in order a general Reception would be 
arranged. The opportune time for that reception came 
the night before we took the steamer for the European 
tour. We want to give you all a little picture of the 
Reception on that evening, so that those who can never 
visit the Tabernacle and Bethel actually may enjoy the 
pleasure of a mental survey of their appointments. 

THE TABERNACLE AND BETHEL FAMILY "AT HOME" 

The family took an early luncheon so as to be prepared 
to give their entire attention to the visiting friends. 
The reception was set for from seven to nine o'clock, but, 



as had been anticipated, some came earlier. On 
they came, a happy company of about three hundred and 
sixty— according to some estimates four hundred and 
fifty. They were received at the entrance, No. 13 
Hicks street, in the Sales Room by a brother and 
three sisters. From there another sister showed them 
the sisters' cloak room and lavatory. Then a brother 
showed them the Mailing Department— how the lists are 
kept; how they are printed upon the wrappers; and how 
the Towers and People's Pulpit are prepared for mailing. 
Next they were shown the Subscription Department and 
the locations occupied by the different helpers and the 
safes in which the addresses are kept by the card system. 
Next they were met by a representative of the Colporteur 
Department, who gave them some explanation respecting 
that part of the work. Then they had explained to them 
the method of keeping track of the Pilgrims and the 
requests for their services by the card system. After 
this they were shown the desks of the various workers 
in the Correspondence Department. 

When through with this inspection they were referred 
to another brother, who showed them the files of old 
Towers and then directed them onward to the Basement. 
Arriving in the basement a brother took them in charge 
and showed them the Packing Department. Another 
showed them the type-setting arrangements. Then they 
were shown the bins in which the general supplies of 
"Dawn-Studies" in the various languages, Booklets, 
Tracts, Charts, Bibles and Mottoes are kept. Then they 
looked at the furnace. These inspections being finished 
they were directed to a front stairway which landed them 
on the street at entrance No. 17 Hicks street. Here they 
were directed how to find their way to "Brooklyn Bethel," 
some blocks distant. In the center window in the front 
of the Tabernacle on plate glass in gold and colors the 
cross and crown pin, which so many of you have, is reproduced 
on a large scale— about three feet in diameter. 
Above it are the words, BROOKLYN TABERNACLE, 
PEOPLE'S PULPIT. Below the cross and crown design 
are the words "IN THE CROSS OF CHRIST WE GLORY." 
Wishing to give to each visitor a memento of trifling 
value, one of these cross and crown pins was thought 
most suitable; accordingly one was presented to each 
before leaving the building. 

THE BETHEL RECEPTION 

The constant stream of people occasioned no end of 
comment in the neighborhood. The Bethel doors stood 
wide open and one of the sisters receiving the friends 
as they entered ushered them into the parlor, a fine large 
room. The parlor is furnished in part with the parlor 
furniture from the Allegheny Bible House but mainly 
with furniture purchased with the "surplus" money presented 
by the Allegheny Congregation to Brother Russell, 
in connection with the rug and the mahogany desk and 



chair and stands for his study. Some of the sisters received 

the friends in the parlor and then passed them 

along through the double doorway to Brother Russell, 

who received them in his study. These two splendid 

rooms with lofty ceilings and heavy stucco work constitute 

the main floor of Bethel. In the center of 

the study is an old style, massive chandelier, to the bottom 

of which is suspended a white dove with pinions spread 

wide, a present to the study by Sister Seibert. Additional 

to the articles already described as presented to 

the Study by the Allegheny Church is a large arm chair 

presented to Brother Russell some years ago by the 

Los Angeles Church, also a stenographer's desk, a large 

photograph cabinet containing pictures of hundreds of 

Watch Tower friends, including Pilgrims and Colporteurs. 

There also is a couch where Brother Russell 

sleeps at night within reach of the telephone and thus 

within reach of you all, the world over. Finally we 

must not forget to mention a large walnut book case 

covering the entire west side of the room— with a capacity 

R4395 : page 150 

of two thousand volumes— the identical one used 
for years by that celebrated preacher, Henry Ward 
Beecher, who may not improperly be said to have made 
Brooklyn famous. 

From the study the visitors were shown upward to the 
second floor, which is devoted exclusively to the use of 
the unmarried sisters. This floor has four rooms. Upward 
still to the third floor they were shown, whose five 
rooms are occupied by the married couples of the family. 
This is as high as some of the friends cared to go. But 
those who desired were shown to the top floor, whose 
six rooms are occupied by the unmarried brethren. 

While inspecting the upper floors the friends were invited 
to look out of the windows at the rear of the house. 
There they saw a most enchanting spectacle. To their 
left was the Harbor and Staten Island and Jersey City, 
while directly in front of them were scores of the most 
massive and lofty buildings in the world— lower New 
York. The electric lights could be seen in the windows 
in many of these twenty and thirty stories high. The 
Singer Building, electrically illuminated from base to 
roof outside and inside (forty-seven stories), was a sight 
which could not be duplicated elsewhere in the world. 

REFRESHMENTS CAME NEXT 

So much walking and sight-seeing served to give the 
friends some appetite and appropriately they were next 
invited to the basement of the building, where a dining-room 
more than fifty feet long was able to accommodate 
sixty at a time. They were supplied some simple refreshments 
at the willing hands of members of the family. 
From the dining-room and its hallway access was 



had to the street and the dear friends were bidden 
"Good night!" We hope the visitors enjoyed themselves 
as much on the occasion as did the household of Brooklyn 
Tabernacle and Bethel. 



R4401 :page 150 

"WALK HONESTLY AS IN THE DAY" 

--ROMANS 13:8-13.-JUNE 27.- 

Golden Text:— "Put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ."— Rom. 13:14. 

THIS is the regular quarterly temperance lesson, and 

an excellent one. It inculcates temperance in respect 

to every thought, word and act of the consecrated 

Christian. It opens with a delineation of the 

Divine Law, showing its comprehensive character— that 

it relates to all of life's affairs. "Owe no man anything, 

but to love one another." We can never discharge 

that obligation. It is upon us every day and 

every hour of life and enters into all of life's interests. 

Other debts or obligations we may meet and be through 

with, but this debt of love, the essence of Divine command, 

is our obligation toward God, toward the Church, 

toward our families, toward all men, even our enemies. 

Why? Because, "He that loveth his neighbor has fulfilled 

the law." No wonder no Jew could keep the Law! 

No wonder no Gentiles would try to keep it! 

No wonder the Scriptures suggest the keeping of the 
Law of love only to Christians— to those begotten 
of the holy Spirit and thus have the assistance of the 
grace of God in daily living, as well as the mercy of 
God in Christ to cover all of their imperfections, all of 
their unintentional shortcomings. But it is expected of 
these consecrated ones that they will keep that Law. 
Whoever comes short of it in spirit, in heart intention, 
is unfit for the Kingdom, and will not be of the "little 
flock." More than this, if he comes short of this standard 
of heart intention he cannot be in the "great company" 
either, for God has not provided eternal life for 
any except such as shall now attain to this condition 
of love in the heart, the will or intention; and during 
the Millennial Age only to those who shall attain perfect 
love actually. 

"LOVE THY NEIGHBOR AS THYSELF" 

The Apostle next enumerates some of the perspicuous 
commandments— the one against adultery, the one 
against murder, the one against theft, the one against 
false witness, the one against covetousness. All of these 
commands presuppose a fallen condition of mind, out 
of harmony with God— a selfish heart. Is it not selfishness 



that leads any to covet the things which belong to 
another? Is it not selfishness, the opposite of love, that 
leads to false witnessing? Is it not selfishness, the opposite 
of love, that leads to theft? Is it not selfishness that lies 
back of murder and adultery— self-love, self-gratification? 
And the essence of all the other commands is Love, the 
same love to our neighbor that we have for ourselves, the 
same desire for his welfare, his prosperity, his happiness, 
his health, etc. Whoever, therefore, attains to this position 
of full consecration to God, a begetting of the holy 
Spirit, has before him this great lesson— to learn to love 
his neighbor as himself. 

Well does the Apostle add, "Love worketh no ill to his 
neighbor," no injury of any sort. Love would prompt 
us to be as careful of the health of our neighbor as of 
our own, as careful of his reputation as of our own, as 
careful of his property as of our own, as careful of his 
feelings as of our own. What a wonderful world it 
will be when the Kingdom of God's dear Son in the 
Millennial Age shall have brought all mankind back, 
mentally, morally and physically, to the original perfection 
of human nature, in the image and likeness of the 
God of Love— having destroyed all refusing to 
co-operate! 

"IT IS HIGH TIME TO AWAKE" 

We must bear in memory that the Apostle was addressing 
Christians in whom the new life had been begun. 
His language implies what we know is very frequently 
the case, namely, that after the early Christian experience 
of turning from sin to righteousness, from ignorance 
and superstition to faith and knowledge, and from 
the feelings of the stranger to a realization of adoption 
and membership in the family of God, there comes later 
to some a measure of carelessness, drowsiness. A spirit 
of the world comes in and threatens to overwhelm the 
New Creature. The beautiful truths lose some of their 
freshness, crispness, beauty and flavor. Something new 
is looked for, and is provided by the Adversary, along 
the lines of more or less self-gratification in earthly 
things. 

The strenuosity of the new experience reacts and 
spiritual lethargy comes on. The experience of realizing 
sins forgiven and ourselves adopted into the family of 
God and the necessity for learning the lessons of the 
School of Christ is considerably forgotten. Some such 
occasionally cry out, "Where is the blessedness I knew 
when first I knew the Lord? Where is the soul-refreshing 
view of Jesus and his Word?" Such a cry implies an 
awakening of the kind which the Apostle wished to 
encourage. In other words, in this lesson he says, 
"Knowing the time that now it is high time to awake 
out of sleep; for now is our salvation nearer than when 
we believed. The night is far spent, the day is at hand; 
let us, therefore, cast off the works of darkness, and let 



us put on the armor of light." The thought here evidently 
is a double one:— 

(1) We who have accepted Christ should be awake. 
Each day and week and month and year should find us 
more awake and more zealous and more appreciative of 
our wonderful privileges. Our salvation, our resurrection 
"change," is surely nearing day by day. 

(2) From whatever standpoint we view the matter it 
must be that the night-time of sin is far spent. It must 
be that the morning of the new dispensation is near. 
The Apostle wrote after four thousand years had passed 
and when the fifth was under way. We live when the 

R4401 :page 151 

entire six thousand-year days are in the past and the 
seventh, the Millennium of promise, is chronologically 
already begun. 

From both standpoints, with both arguments, it is 
proper for us to cast off the works of darkness and everything 
pertaining to sin and error and to put on the armor 
of light to prepare us for the duties of the new day, the 
morning light of which shines now. 

The exhortation of the Apostle is as appropriate today 
as it was when written, and we urge its forcefulness 
upon all. In our estimation the Lord has sent to his 
people in the present time the exhortation of the Vow 
we have suggested to wake them up. One dear brother 
recently said to us, "I have already told you of my ungodly 
life, before the Truth reached me. When I accepted 
the Truth and made my full consecration to the 
Lord I experienced a blessing of great joy and peace. 

R4402:page 151 

Afterwards I lost this joyful feeling in considerable measure. 

At first the loss of it distressed me. I sought it 

carefully, but found it not. I am more pleased to tell 

you that since I took that Vow and brought my original 

Vow of consecration up to date, as it were— since then 

the joy has returned to me and I have ever precious 

fellowship and communion with my Lord. I am striving 

to continue in this relationship and not to 'grieve the 

holy Spirit, whereby I am sealed, unto the day of redemption." 

We believe that this is the experience of a 

great many and the lesson for us is not far to seek. Any 

endeavor to draw near to the Lord by the renunciation 

of hindrances and the making of straight paths for our 

feet must surely bring a blessing. 

"HONESTLY AS IN THE DAY" 

The word here rendered "honestly" might more properly 
be translated becomingly, in harmony with our 
faith, our hope, our appreciation of the Lord, our appreciation 
of the morning light. By way of contrast the 



Apostle stipulates certain things as belonging to the 
night which would be unbecoming to us, not only in 
their grosser sense, but also in the more refined. Live 
not in intoxication. Surely it would be unbecoming for 
any saint to become literally intoxicated at a banquet 
or a revel, but surely, also, there is a more refined sort 
of reveling and intoxication. One can become intoxicated 
with a revel in pleasure of any kind, in automobiling, 
in golfing, cricketing or social whirl. The true 
Christian must recognize all of these as things that do 
not belong to the morning of the new dispensation, 
things that are incompatible with the light of Present 
Truth, which show us where we stand at the opening of 
a new dispensation and what wonderful possibilities arise 
for the sacrificing of the present life and for the attainment 
of the glories of the Kingdom. 

As Christians we should not walk (live) in chambering 
(unlawful intercourse), wantonness (self-gratification). 
These experiences apply to some in a gross sense, 
but to others surely in their refined sense. There is no 
fellowship or communion between light and darkness on 
any plane, because the two are opposites. Any intercourse, 
therefore, with things of darkness, the things of 
sin, the things occult, the things that are not in fullest 
harmony with the Lord are an unwarranted, unlawful 
intercourse or fellowship. Likewise wantonness (selfishness) 
may apply to a refined kind of selfishness (self-gratification), 
pampering of appetites and failure to sacrifice 
earthly pleasures, in harmony with our consecration 
Vow to engage in the service of the Lord, the Truth 
and the brethren; or in doing good to all with whom we 
come in contact and have opportunity. 

The Christian should not live (walk) in strife and 
envying. Here again a coarse and a refined thought 
may be apparent. To the world the strife may be understood 
grossly to mean fisticuffs and physical encounters 
and such bitter jealousies as would lead to evil deeds 
and murder, actual or in the heart; or we could apply 
these injunctions in a more refined way to saints as an 
exhortation that our lives be not strifeful, but that we 
follow peace, seek to promote the interests of peace 
everywhere— in our own home, in our neighborhood, 
amongst the Lord's people far and near. "Follow peace 
with all men, and holiness, without which no man shall 
see the Lord." Envyings, jealousies, alas, in a refined 
sense, are to be found with nearly all mankind. Often, 
unrecognized by the New Creature, jealousy is a fruitful 
source of much injury in the Church, which is the Body 
of Christ. No other evil quality can lead to more harm 
to ourselves and others than envy, jealousy. We are to 
put off all these things. 

"PUT YE ON THE LORD JESUS CHRIST" 

Here we have the thought. Our hearts are already 
consecrated to the Lord. We are already adopted into 



his family by the begetting of his holy Spirit. But our 
flesh is not perfect and it continues to love many of the 
garments of the old nature, which we are to put off. 
Gradually we are to substitute the new clothing, the 
livery of heaven, by which all may know us outwardly 
as well as know us by profession to be children of God, 
brethren of Christ, "heirs of God and joint-heirs with 
Jesus Christ our Lord." 

Putting on the Lord Jesus is not the work of a moment, 
nor of an hour, nor of a month, nor of a year; it 
is the work of a life time. But unless it be begun it will 
never be completed. And indeed we may be sure that 
we can never fully put on Christ's characteristics. However, 
the Lord will see our endeavor, our strenuous fighting 
to put off the old nature, to put off the works of 
the flesh and to be clothed with the garments of righteousness, 
suitable to our relationship to him— the livery, 
the clothing, that will make us separate from the world, 
sanctified to God through Jesus Christ our Lord. 

"MAKE NO PROVISION FOR THE FLESH" 

Ah, here we have an important point to be remembered. 
On it will greatly depend our success or our 
failure as respects the winning of the prize. When as 
New Creatures we made full consecration to the Lord 
and surrendered all the rights of the human nature our 
flesh did not agree to the contract, but protested. Subsequently 
it found it good policy to reason with the New 
Creature quietly, calmly, urging moderation in righteousness 
and self-sacrifice— urging, too, that we should not 
be more extreme than are others; that we should not 
make ourselves foolish in the estimation of others, lest 
this bring contempt upon the cause we desire to serve. 

Ah, how shrewd, how cunning, how deceitful is the 
flesh! If we would give heed to its plausible reasoning 
we would go out of the race altogether, failing to sacrifice, 
and hence failing to become members of the "royal 
priesthood," and to share the Kingdom glory of our Redeemer. 
Occasionally the New Creature wakes up and 
purposes energetic, thorough-going measures of self-sacrifice 
in every direction; but the old nature, the flesh, 
quietly makes its appeal— You must at least reserve thus 
and so; and, You cannot cut off thus and so entirely; 
and, it would be monstrous and unjust to yourself to 
practise self-denial to such an extent. You must make 
provision for the flesh! is its claim. "Make no provision 
for the flesh," urges the Apostle. And the flesh generally 
has its own way; for that reason the overcoming 
self-sacrificers will be but a "little flock," while those 
who will go into the Second Death or into the "Great 
Company" will be more numerous. 

The question, Shall I make provision for the flesh to 
fulfil its desires, or, shall I not? should be weighed by 
every saint. Much depends upon the decision. It is at 
this very juncture that the "Vow to the Lord" which 



we have been recently advocating as seasonable to all of 

the "household" of faith is proving a great blessing to 

many. It is helping them to the point of making absolutely 

no provision for the flesh to further its desires 

along any line. It promises, if possible, more careful inspection 

than ever of each word and thought and act. It 

raises barricades at various weak points and thus 

R4402 : page 152 

strengthens the New Creature and confirms its highest 
resolutions, and it proportionately binds the old nature 
and mortifies (deadens) it. 

The old nature is exceedingly deceitful. It will not 
admit that it is afraid of the Vow. Rather it will boast 
that it has no need of it, because it is already dead. 
The difficulty all the time is that the old nature fears to 
see the New Creature shut and permanently bar every 
door to its liberties. It urges that if the New Creature 
makes no provision for the flesh, it should not at least 
make such strenuous provision against the flesh and its 
liberties. Let us hearken to the voice of the Lord 
through the Apostle and close every avenue whereby the 
flesh might attack us in a moment of weakness or inattention. 
Let us throw out the pickets of prayer and 
watchfulness against every thought and word and act 
not in fullest harmony with the Spirit of our Lord. Let 
us thus by the aid of the Vow put on the Lord Jesus 
Christ and make no provision for the flesh to fulfil its 
desires. 



R4396 : page 152 

THE EMMANUEL MOVEMENT 

NUMEROUS inquiries come to us respecting the 

Emmanuel movement— Is it right? Is it of the 

Lord? etc. We reply that we believe that those 

identified with it are honest, sincere and well-intentioned 

as other Christian people, Theosophists, Christian Scientists, 

etc. In our opinion all of these people are beyond 

their depths— hoodwinked by our great Adversary. We 

see the whole civilized world inclining towards Christian 

Science, Hypnotism, Emmanuel Movement, etc.— seeking 

physical healing. As already pointed out in these 

columns we believe that Satan has considerable power 

under Divine restriction and that it is always a baneful, 

injurious power. We believe that in various ways the 

Adversary and the fallen angels (demons) can and do 

favor diseases and especially those which appertain to 

the mind and the nerves. We believe that the time has 

come in which Satan, endeavoring to hold back mankind 

from giving attention to the Divine Truth now due 

to be appreciated, has become a miracle-worker, a disease-curer, 



in order to attract attention away from the 
Truth. 

Furthermore we understand that it is through such 
mental suggestions, etc., that the evil spirits are now 
attempting to gain, more than ever, control of humanity. 
In Christian Science we perceive the method to be a 
confusing of the human judgment, so as to render those 
under its influence incapable of rational thought along 
religious lines, so confused do the advocates become 
through false definitions. We believe that the mind 
cures, etc., more commonly called hypnotism, and supposed 
to be merely exercise of the mind, are really attempts 
of the fallen angels, the demons, to break down 
the human will, the barrier which God has granted for 
protection against them: that thus these evil spirits may 
ultimately gain a much larger control over our poor 
race than ever since the flood. 

Physicians are paying to be taught how to exercise 
hypnotic influences upon their patients. One large dry 
goods store in New York City employs, at $8000 a year, 
a man who was once a minister of the Gospel of Christ 
and subsequently a lecturer on hypnotism and mental 
control. His business now is to instruct the clerks of 
that large establishment how to exercise hypnotic influences 
upon their customers so as to increase the sales 
of the establishment. 

Finally, in the Emmanuel movement, we believe that 
these evil spirits are coming still closer and becoming 
more dangerous and seductive; because the claim is that 
this hypnotic power in the hands of ministers of the 
gospel is a duplication of the work of Christ and the 
apostles in healing the sick nineteen centuries ago. 
Books have been written explaining to ministers how to 
introduce this "Emmanuel Movement" into their 
Churches. Circulars are sent to all ministers everywhere 
urging the importance of these books and this 
method. We can imagine no more seductive method 
for the introduction of the influences of the evil spirits, 
the fallen angels, in the breaking down of the human 
will. Lest we should be misunderstood, we repeat that 
we have no thought that any of these people practise 
hypnotism with any suspicion that they are in collusion 
with the fallen angels or doing evil to the fallen race. 
Rather they are benevolent and desire to "do good to all 
men." But they do not understand the Word of God. 
"My people perish for lack of knowledge." They are 
being ensnared by the very ones who should be their 
pastors, assistants and protectors, and by reason of their 
confidence in them. 

What the end of the matter will be the Lord only 
knows. But it is surely the fact that every time a 
person is hypnotised his will is the weaker. He can 
the more easily be hypnotised again and thus the brains 
and nerves of the civilized world are being trained for 
an onslaught from the evil spirits. Well indeed the 
Apostle wrote, "We wrestle not with flesh and blood, but 



with wicked spirits in exalted positions." 

As we write a clipping is handed us from the "New 
York Herald" which shows that some others see something 
of the danger in this direction. We quote the 
clipping and follow it with an extract from "The Housekeeper" 
on the same subject, which will be interesting 
reading. 

MINISTER ATTACKS EMMANUEL MOVEMENT 

According to the Rev. Dr. I. M. Haldeman, pastor of 
the First Baptist Church, Broadway and Seventy-ninth 
street, if the Emmanuel movement is allowed to continue 
its work it will ruin the Church. 

Mr. Haldeman in his sermon said the only church that 
would survive would be the Christian Science Church. 
He added that the Emmanuel Movement is more of a 
peril than Christian Science because the Christian Scientists 
had kept apart from the orthodox church, while the 
Emmanuel movement was born in the Episcopal Church 
and invaded the Baptist ranks. 

Through the practice of hypnotic healing clergymen 
would be subjected to scandal, Dr. Haldeman said, because 
of "the tender relationship a minister comes into 
with his flock." 

"I beg you to turn away from the Emmanuel movement," 
said the minister. "It will give you salvation in 
time and damnation in eternity. The time has come 
to rise up and protest against ministers turning themselves 
into hypnotists and their churches into mental 
healing hospitals." 

Dr. Haldeman declared the Emmanuel movement "one 
of the most accursed and damnable inventions of the 
age." 

THE EMMANUEL MOVEMENT 

The following is from the "Housekeeper":— 

We have been asked why we have not printed something 
about the "Emmanuel Movement." Like some 
other questions in this world of ours, the question is 
easier asked than answered. 

It would be a simple matter to print an article showing 
the historical growth of the movement, and one 
strongly advocating its principles. 

It would be a simple matter to print an article strongly 
condemning the movement. 

R4396 : page 153 

There are many people, with ability to write, who have 
made a careful study of the phases of the movement, but 
who hold diametrically opposite views. A religious 
movement is perhaps the most difficult phenomenon of 
human life to study. If we are neither exponents nor 
opponents, we are the friends of neither and the enemies 



of both. As with the earliest Christian faith, "He who 
is not for Me is against Me." 

The movement is comparatively new, and thus it is 
very hard to comprehend its principles, especially as so 
much has been written about it that one is confused by 
the mass. Any new movement or faith acquires a large 
number of disciples who have been waiting for something 
new. Until these followers leave the ranks in 
pursuit of something newer, it is difficult to observe the 
fire for the smoke. 

The movement takes its name from a church in Boston 
whose ministers were the pioneers. Undoubtedly there 
are a large number of converts to the movement who 

R4397 : page 153 

have followed the Christian Science ideas more or less 
closely but have been restrained for certain reasons or 
beliefs from joining the Christian Science church. 

Many of these people have found in the Emmanuel 
Movement what they have sought, good counsel for a 
wearied soul, the suggestion from an outside source that 
there is hope, the balm of spiritual peace, the evidence 
of optimism and power of mind over body— and have 
been given medicines for their sick bodies. 

But if we are really to consider the movement, we 
cannot stop at this point. To a lay mind, the Emmanuel 
movement seems to be a combination of religious faith, 
mental faith curing, and modern medicine. At first 
thought this would seem to be an admirable combination, 
but is it not rather a compromise to salve the 
prejudices of all? 

James M. Buckley, editor of "The Christian Advocate," 
has written of some "Dangers of the Emmanuel Movement." 
He has pointed out that hypnotism and suggestion 
do not always tend to induce a higher, more moral 
tone, although so stated, in spite of our wish that this 
might be so. He asks if the time of a servant of a 
church is not now crowded with the many duties; does he 
not labor seven days of a week and sigh for more time 
to administer to the spiritual wants of his flock? This, 
he suggests, should be considered before ministers enter 
the ranks of healers. 

Consider human nature, American human nature. If 
ministers become medical advisers and use mental healing, 
in such cases will we not have experiments in suggestion, 
hypnosis and untrained diagnosis throughout 
the land which will be as foreign to the first ideals of 
the Emmanuel church in Boston as it is possible to 
imagine. If the mind becomes sick, which is one of the 
suggestions of the Emmanuel Movement— and a very 
good one— would it be any less quackery to try experimental 
cures upon it than upon the body? 

"Psychology" is a word which it is becoming necessary 
to understand. However, we have not really advanced 
so very far in the study of psychology, only far 



enough to establish certain premises— and we should be 
careful not to take wild flights therefrom. Has not the 
Emmanuel Movement taken a little of psychology and 
assumed the rest? The very fact that we, that is, our 
workers, thinkers and experimenters, specialists, have 
been progressing should lead us to be content to wait 
until certain conclusions have been more definitely 
proved. Of course, if we wait, wait, forever wait, and 
never act, we will be waiting at the millennium. But 
we have been eating a great deal of mental food of late, 
and it might be wise to digest a little bit of it. 

"The Housekeeper" believes that fresh air, careful diet, 
good living and good thoughts— the well-rounded life — 
this is the best physician. But like the servant of old, 
the physician of medicine is worthy of his hire and a 
very good hire. 

It is well to consider what certain physicians have 
said of the Emmanuel Movement. In an interview in 
the "Boston Herald," Dr. J. J. Putnam, professor of nervous 
diseases at the medical school at Harvard University, 
said in part:— 

"I consider the whole affair an injury to the progress 
of scientific medicine... .When the Rev. Mr. Worcester 
talked to me he gave me to understand that his 
idea was to take those of his parishioners who needed 
suggestive help, and if there were no real physical disturbance 
in the individuals to lead them along the line 
of self-control by suggestion. I also agreed with him 
that many of these unfortunates needed assistance in the 
way of getting some occupation— something congenial 
that would take their minds away from themselves— to 
stop their introspection, the self- worry.... 

"At the present moment the claims of the Emmanuel 
people are misleading, if not something else. The public 
lectures at a dollar admission in other cities, and other 
well known commercial methods, do not look well in 
either priest or doctor. 

"There are many reasons why this sensational movement 
—a veritable epidemic— should be limited and controlled. 
First, the notoriety given it brings out a crowd 
of morbid individuals who will impulsively jump at any 
fad which offers new sensations. This state only increases 
their unstable condition. The marvelous cures 
reported in the press and from the platform mislead the 
masses and put hope in the really ill, which is cruel, for 
many of these will believe until the second shock of disbelief 
comes, and by this time they have lost faith in the 
trained physician, in all treatment and suffer on unaided. 
Many of these unfortunates resort to quack 
medicines and thus become morphine and alcoholic 
victims. 

"The crowd of untrained and unfitted clergymen who 
at once jump into the role of medical men and preach 
and practice what they call psycho-therapeutics is 
going to do great harm, is an injury to the public 
welfare.... 



"This is the whole trouble with the statements now 
going out to the world from the Emmanuel healers; the 
public are led to believe that there is a decided line 
between functional and organic diseases, and that the 
untrained— the clergymen throughout the country— can 
mark this line, when in truth the experienced neurologist 
is not at all certain." 

Opinions by other physicians of equal standing reiterated 
Dr. Putnam's statements. 

It is always a sore trial to any sincere person to attempt 
to criticise or discourage a movement which is 
noble and generous in its conception, but like mistaken 
charity, the tree must be known by its fruit. 



R4397 : page 153 

"FOR THIS HE DID ONCE" 

"Who needeth not daily, as those high priests, to offer up 
sacrifice, first for his own sins, and then for the people's; 
for this he did once, when he offered up himself."— Heb. 7:27. 

IN studying the Book of Hebrews it is well to keep in 
memory that the Apostle's thought was not to give a 
detailed explanation of the types of the Law, but 
merely to prove to the Jews that they should look beyond 
the high priests and the under-priests of the Aaronic order 
for a greater Higher Priest of our profession (order) and 
a superior under-priesthood, "a royal priesthood." In the 
text above quoted St. Paul is drawing attention to the 
fact that a repetition daily and yearly of the sacrifices 
of the Law on a higher plane is not to be expected, but 
rather that the One Priest (Christ, Head and Body,) in 
the one antitypical Atonement Day accomplishes the entire 
work which will usher in full forgiveness and reconciliation 
to all the people. This in type was done in the one 

R4397 : page 154 

Atonement Day and the antitype of that Atonement Day 
is not yet ended. It will close with the end of this Gospel 
Age. It will close when the last member of the Body 
of Christ shall have suffered with the Lord, "Filling up 
that which is behind of the afflictions of Christ."— 
Col. 1:24. 

The first offering of the Day of Atonement was the 
bullock, which typified the man Jesus. It was because of 
this offering and by the act of consecration that our Lord 
became the Anointed One— "the High Priest of our profession. 
As the spirit-begotten High Priest our Lord for 
three and a half years offered up himself, his manhood, 
in sacrifice. He finished that offering, typified by the bullock, 
at his death. Then, as shown in the type, he took 
the blood of the bullock and proceeded into the Most 



Holy, "there to appear in the presence of God for us"— 
the "household of faith." 

In the type the typical high priest, after offering 
the first sacrifice and after applying its blood on behalf of 
the body (the under-priest) and his house (the tribe of 
Levi), laid his hands on the Lord's goat and slew it and 
did with it as with the bullock, except that its blood when 
taken into the Most Holy was differently applied— on 
behalf of the other eleven tribes, who represented all 
nations, peoples, kindreds and tongues of humanity. 

These two offerings and their distinctly separate 
sprinklings of blood were both parts of the one Atonement 
Day service— "this he did once." Two deaths are 
clearly shown and two blood sprinklings; and on behalf 
of two different classes; but they were parts of the one 
sin atonement. Just so our Lord, during his earthly ministry, 
was dying daily, yet it was one sacrifice; so also 
when we fill up a share of his sufferings, dying daily, it is 
part of his sufferings and sacrifice, which he is still accomplishing 
in us once for all— this he does once and will 
never repeat. All sacrificing of this sort will end with 
this age— he will accept no further members of the Body 
of Christ, no additional members to "the royal 
priesthood." 

As we have repeatedly shown, the first Atonement Day 
sacrifice was our Lord's sacrifice of his own flesh, the 
man Jesus, and the second sacrifice was that of his 
adopted members— those justified by his blood and consecrated 
to his service even unto death. These accepted 
by the Lord are sacrificed by him as parts or members 
of himself; and their blood (death) is counted in as a 
part of the blood of Christ— "dead with him." This is 
the "Mystery" hidden from previous ages and generations. 
The "fellowship of this Mystery" was granted to the Jews 
and Gentiles of the "little flock" of the called and chosen 
and faithful. 

Our Lord as the High Priest laid his hand upon the 
"Lord's goat" at Pentecost. His power (hand) there 
came upon his followers accepting their consecration and 
bringing to them the trying experiences as his members 
which faithfully endured will, according to the Divine 
plan, grant them a share with him in his divine 

R4398 : page 154 

nature and Kingdom. It is not the suffering of the 
Church that counts, but the sufferings of Christ. It is 
because we are counted in as members of Christ, "members 
in particular of the Body of Christ," that we are 
permitted to be his members on the spirit plane and to 
share the glories and honors of our Head. "If we suffer 
with him, we shall reign with him." "If we be dead with 
him we shall live with him." 

Thus the sufferings of Christ, while in the one sense 
of the word ended at Calvary, in another sense of the 
word continue in his members; this is a "Mystery" to 



many. The sufferings of Christ are still in process and 
his faithful ones are still filling them up. St. Peter tells 
us that the prophets of old spake of the sufferings of 
Christ and of the glories that should follow. The sufferings 
of Christ Jesus were followed by his personal glorification, 
demonstration of which was given at Pentecost; 
but the glory mentioned in this text has not yet been 
accomplished. It awaits the completion of the sufferings 
of Christ— the sufferings of the members: "For if one 
member suffer, all the members suffer with it." (1 Cor. 12:26.) 
"When he shall appear in glory, we shall appear 
with him." We shall be glorified together if we 
suffer with him as his members. 

With the Jews there was a Day of Atonement every 
year, with its sacrifices repeated year by year continually. 
But with Christ there is but one antitypical Atonement 
Day and when its "better sacrifices" shall have been accomplished 
—when the great antitypical High Priest shall 
have finished the work of offering up himself, including 
his members, thereafter there will be no more sufferings 
of Christ for anybody to fill up. The glory of the 
Millennial Kingdom will then be ushered in. The sins of 
the whole world will be blotted out so far as God is concerned 
and the High Priest of our profession will be a 
Priest upon his throne (Head and members) after the 
order of Melchisedec. 



R4398 : page 154 

"IF WE SUFFER WITH HIM" 

"The Spirit itself beareth witness with our spirit, that we are 

the children of God: and if children, then heirs; heirs of 

God and joint-heirs with Christ, if so be 

that we suffer with him, that we may 

be also glorified together."— Rom. 8:16,17. 

ST. JUDE speaks of "our common salvation"— a 
salvation from sin, from death, from human imperfection 
to human perfection— to all that God 
intended that our race should be, to all that our race lost 
through Adam's disobedience. The Divine provision is, 
as expressed by our Lord, "to seek and to recover that 
which was lost. "-Matt. 18:11. 

The world is to be sought and to be recovered during 
the Millennium, its period forjudging (disciplining) 
and trial for life eternal. Then the faithful and obedient 
of all peoples will obtain full Restitution and life 
eternal. But now, in advance, this "common salvation" 
comes by faith to a certain class— to those who have the 
hearing of faith and the eye of faith, and obedient hearts. 
These, by virtue of the merit of Christ applied to them 
when Jesus "ascended up on high there to appear in the 
presence of God for us"— these are reckoned as having 



all the advantages of restitution imputed to them on account 
of their faith. They do not get restitution actually, 
but reckonedly. Their faith is counted to them for 
righteousness or perfection. 

Why is there this discrimination in Divine providence 
—that some now hear the voice of the Son of Man and 
live, through Justification of Faith, while others will not 
hear the voice of the Son of Man and come to life and 
perfection until the Millennium and then actually and 
not reckonedly?— "Verily, verily, the hour is coming, 
and now is, when the dead shall hear the voice of the 
Son of God; and they that hear (obey) shall live."— 
John 5:25. 

The answer is that this is a part of the "Mystery" of 
God; that the Lord is now seeking for and electing a 
special class to be joint-heirs with his Son— joint-sufferers 
with him in his sacrifice and joint-sharers in his 
Kingdom glory, "the Bride, the Lamb's Wife." The 
special arrangement permitting these to be justified by 
faith instead of actually justified (or perfected) is with 
a view to their being privileged to offer a proper sacrifice 
—"holy, acceptable to God, their reasonable service." 
(Rom. 12:1.) This Justification by faith is necessary 
because nothing unholy or unclean may come to the 
Lord's altar, as the Law clearly taught and the types 
clearly showed. Every sacrifice for the Lord's altar 
must be "without spot or blemish." Every member of 
our race was spotted and blemished by inherited sin and 
imperfection, and hence the necessity for the Divine 

R4398 : page 155 

provision of Justification by faith— not faith in Covenants, 
but faith in the precious blood of Christ, the Lamb 
of God which taketh away the sin of the world." This 
faith grasps the fact that while the sin of the world 
has not yet been taken away by the Lamb of God, and 
the world still lies under condemnation, nevertheless the 
merit of the blood has been applied on behalf of the 
"household" of faith— and in due time will be made 
efficacious, under the New Covenant, for the bringing of 
forgiveness to every creature, with the opportunity of 
eternal life. 

But under which Covenant does God purpose to receive 
the faith-justified ones as sacrificers? The answer 
is that the Divine proposal to the Redeemer that he 
sacrifice and as a reward of his sacrifice be highly 
exalted to the Divine nature and glory— this blessing 
(which belongs only to Jesus and was applied only to 
his sacrifice) has by the gracious plan of God been extended 
to include all those of this Gospel Age who have 
the character likeness of the Redeemer. They are invited 
to share in his sacrifice, and are promised that if faithful 
they shall share in his glory. 

But what sacrifice is this? Could Justice call for 
more than a life for a life— the death of Jesus as the 



ransom-price for the death penalty of father Adam? 

Surely not. Justice has no voice in the present proceeding 

of Grace. Justice, however, cannot interfere, if 

it is agreeable to the Great Judge and the Redeemer 

to accept a "little flock" of justified believers 

as members under the Redeemer as Head. This very 

matter pleased the Father and pleased the Son, and is, 

therefore, a part of the Divine program. These members 

are "elect according to God's foreknowledge through 

sanctification of the spirit and the belief of the Truth." 

(1 Pet. 1:2.) Their selection is not a change in the 

Divine program, for they were "chosen in him before the 

foundation of the world." (Eph. 1:4.) Their selection 

was unexpected of the angels and of men and hence was 

a "mystery" and still is a "mystery" to mankind. "The 

world knoweth us not, even as it knew him not." (1 John 3:1.) 

But the selection of this class was always 

the Divine purpose. "The God and Father of our Lord 

Jesus foreknew us also by Jesus." 

Whatever, therefore, was the Divine program for the 
Master, the Forerunner, the Chief -priest, is the Divine 
program for his members— they must "walk in his 
steps"; they must "suffer with him"; they must "fill up 
that which is behind of the afflictions of Christ." If any 
decline so to do, he loses his place as a member of the 
Body. We know, nevertheless, that the full number of 
the "elect" will ultimately be found and every one of 
them will be sacrificers, for none others are members of 
his Body. It is the spirit of the Head coming upon these 
that produces the sacrifice of the flesh (the justified 
flesh) "holy, acceptable to God."— Rom. 12:1. 

There is only one object in the sacrifice which God has 
provided for, the sacrifice which Jesus accomplished, and 
is accomplishing in all those who will become his members 
—that is a sacrifice for sin. It is presented to God, 
holy and acceptable. In this respect it differs from other 
sacrifices which men make; as, for instance, a father or 
mother may sacrifice comfort or even sacrifice life, on 
behalf of their offspring, but such sacrifices, however 
appropriate, are not the sacrifice of Christ— are not of 
the "better sacrifices" typified in the sacrifices of the 
bulls and the goats. 

St. Paul calls our attention to the fact that only 
those sacrifices which were burned outside the camp 
were a Sin Offering. Next he shows how our Lord was 
the sin offering. Then he points out how, if faithful 
members of his Body, we also must suffer outside the 
camp— as members of the sin-offering— represented in 
"the Lord's goat." This sacrifice is not yet completed. 
It is in process. Hence the Apostle's expression, "Let 
us go to him outside the camp, bearing his reproach"— 
just as the slain goat was carried outside the camp and 
there consumed as the bullock had been. (Heb. 13:11-13.) 
These matters, dear readers, are amongst the 
"deep things of God which no man knoweth except by 
the spirit of God." (1 Cor. 2:10.) The world knows 



nothing about them. "To you it is given to know the 
mysteries of the Kingdom of God, but to outsiders all 
these things are spoken in parables." (Matt. 13:11.) 
Outsiders are in what the Scriptures term "outer darkness" 
—the darkness which belongs to this present time 
of ignorance and superstition. (Matt. 25:30.) The 
few have been permitted to enter into the banqueting 
halls and to see the glorious beauties of the riches of 
Divine grace. Blessed are your eyes that see and your 
ears that hear. As for those who never saw they properly 
have our sympathy, nor should we expect so much 
of them as of ourselves who have been blessed with this 
knowledge of this important sacrifice and of its glorious 
reward. Furthermore, as we are now in the sifting and 
testing time, it must not surprise us if some who once 
saw eye to eye with us in these matters become blind to 
them and drift into the "outer darkness" as respects 
these matters and others— we know not how far. Truths 
so interweave that one lost or perverted injures presently 

R4399 : page 155 

the beauty of the entire fabric. 

Our expectation must be that the differences will increase 
and that the loss of spiritual sight will ultimately 
extend to other features of the Divine Plan. We have 
nothing but sympathy to express for such. Indeed to us 
their case is most pitiable. It is practically a hopeless 
case, too, whereas some of those who have never seen 
and never tasted we may hope will yet see and taste of 
this grace. But of those who see and who then become 
blind our Lord says, "If the light that is in thee become 
darkness, how great is the darkness." (Matt. 6:23.) It 
would be better not to have known the way of 
Truth than to have departed from the holy command. It 
is not for us to judge one another, but to leave all in 
the Lord's hands, assured that he makes no mistake. 
We may have thought their hearts all right, when the 
Lord may have seen them to be all wrong. But the results 
will show. And what we could not read, and should 
not have attempted to read of unfaithfulness to the 
Truth, will be manifest of themselves in the Lord's time 
and way. Let us not forget that he that sanctifieth and 
they that are sanctified (his members) are all one. He 
is in us all. In our consecration we lose our humanity 
and all of its rights, exchanging these for our spiritual 
membership in the Body of Christ. 



R4399 : page 155 

"COME OVER AND HELP US" 
-ACTS 15:36; 16:15.-JULY 4.- 



Golden Text:— "Come over into Macedonia 
and help us."— Acts 16:9. 

TO-DAY'S lesson is connected with the introduction 

of the Gospel into Europe. After 

the conference at Jerusalem, noted in a previous 

lesson, Paul and Barnabas remained for a time 

at Antioch. But seeing that there were many laborers 

there and that a larger field was little worked, a second 

missionary journey was planned. Barnabas and his 

nephew John Mark went in one direction, while with St. 

Paul went Silas (Sylvanus), with whom he had become 

acquainted at the Jerusalem conference and who is reported 

to have been a Roman citizen, as was St. Paul. 

It is with this latter couple that we have to do in this 

lesson. Their course lay through Syria and Cilicia, 

Derbe and Lystra. In these places they confirmed the 

R4399 : page 156 

faith of such as had already been accepted of the Lord 
through the Apostle's first missionary tour, and the 
working of the Truth during the interim. It was at 
Lystra that Timothy was found, a young man of Jewish 
mother and well trained in the Scriptures by her and 
his grandmother— his father being a Greek. We note 
that amongst the things presented to the Churches was 
the decision of the Jerusalem conference that the Jewish 
Law should not be considered binding to the Gentiles, 
except in certain features noted in a former lesson. 

After good success in the mission up to this point the 
Apostle had in mind a journey through Asia Minor, 
but apparently things went unfavorable until the Apostle 
concluded that the Lord was hindering their efforts and 
in perplexity began to think of other fields of labor. His 
moment of uncertainty was the Lord's opportunity for 
directing him. He dreamed that he saw a man dressed in 
the costume of the Macedonians beckoning to him and 
saying, "Come over and help us." The Apostle accepted 
this as of Divine leading and promptly began the journey 
which took him into Europe. We have here an evidence 
of God's supervision of all the interests of his 
Church. He was not averse to permitting the message 
to go into Asia Minor, for it did go there later, possibly 
at a more opportune time. But this was the time for 
sending the message to Europe. 

Evidently the Lord could have directed his message 
southward through Africa and away from Europe, but 
there is a "due time" connected with every feature of 
the Divine Plan— and now, by Divine arrangement, the 
message of God's grace in Christ was to go to the Greeks, 
who at this time were recognized as the foremost people 
of the world in literature and the arts. 

It is supposed that it was about this time that Luke, 
the physician, became attached to Paul's company. A 
man of education, a scribe, as well as a physician, the 



Lord evidently provided him as St. Paul's amanuensis, 
that thereby the Apostle's letters should reach many of 
the Churches of that time, as well as the Lord's people 
from then until now. Thus it came that Luke wrote not 
only a version of the Gospel, but also the Book of Acts 
and nearly all of St. Paul's epistles. Here we have another 
illustration of the privileges of the various members 
of the Body of Christ. Luke could not be the 
Apostle Paul nor could he do St. Paul's work; but he 
could be used of the Lord honorably and efficiently in a 
greater spread of the Truth. 

So it is with us. We cannot be apostles. We cannot 
do anything very great; but, if filled with the Spirit of 
the Lord, it is our privilege to be used to some extent in 
some service of the Truth. And any service for the Lord 
and for the brethren, even to the washing of feet and any 
menial service, is, as our Lord shows, honorable and a 
privilege. 

LYDIA OF THYATIRA 

Philippi, one of the chief cities of Macedonia, in Greece, 
appears to have been the first place for the preaching of 
the good tidings in Europe. As usual, on the Sabbath 
day the Apostle and companions sought for some who 
worshiped God, who hoped for the Kingdom that God 
had promised, knowing that such would be the better 
prepared to receive the message he had to deliver; that 
Jesus had appeared as the Redeemer and had laid the 
foundation for the Millennial Kingdom in the sacrifice 
of himself; that the blessings of his sacrifice would ultimately 
be made available to every creature, but that 
now, in advance of the dealing with the world in general, 
the Lord is calling out a Spiritual Israel, a "little 
flock," to be his kings and priests with Jesus in the administration 
of the Millennial blessings. 

Apparently there was no synagogue in Philippi, and 
matters may have looked very unfavorable to Paul and 
his companions. However, they heard of a little religious 
meeting held every Sabbath by the river side, 
outside the city gate. It was a prayer meeting principally 
and place of Divine fellowship. Not having the 
facilities of a synagogue they probably had no Scripture 
parchments, and hence no reading of the Law, but merely 
prayer and worship. All this was favorable to the Gospel 
message the Apostle had to present. He spoke to 
those who resorted thither, commending the importance 
of their worshipful condition of heart and the importance 
of praise to the Giver of all good. Then he proceeded 
to declare the good tidings of the sacrifice of 
Jesus, of his death and resurrection, and his Second 
Coming in power and great glory. He showed surely 
that the invitation now being given was for joint-sacrifices 
with Jesus whose reward would be joint-heirship 
with him in the Millennial Kingdom, as members of his 
Body, the Church. 



However many or few were at the meeting there was 
one present whose heart was in the right condition to 
receive the message— a woman named Lydia, a dealer in 
purple. Dyes were much more expensive in olden times 
than now and the secret knowledge of how to make them 
was turned to financial profit. Thus it is supposed that 
Lydia was in quite comfortable circumstances financially. 
Not only did the Truth open her heart, enlightening the 
eyes of her understanding, but she was prompt to obey 
it in full consecration; and prompt to symbolize that consecration 
in water baptism— "She and her household." 

It is not always that religious parents have religiously 
inclined children. Several instances of the kind are mentioned 
in the Scriptures. Personal experience teaches us 
also that the parent who is earnestly consecrated to the 
Lord and guided by his Word has generally a good influence 
upon those nearest to him and directly under 
his care. Such an influence should be hoped for, prayed 
for, sought for by every parent. But it cannot be obtained 
except by carefulness, circumspection of word and 
deed. These in subjection imply that the very thoughts 
of the heart are brought into captivity to the will of God 
in Christ. Nevertheless parents who have failed to discern 
the Truth and recognize its responsibilities until 
their children have outgrown parental instruction must 
not chide themselves unmercifully if their children do 
not respect them and their religious convictions. Rather 
they should remember that the Lord is thoroughly acquainted 
with the situation and will hold them accountable 
only for what they do or do not after they have 
come to know him and to an opportunity for understanding 
the instructions of his Word respecting their own 
lives and the training of their children in the nurture and 
admonition of the Lord. 

"AND SHE CONSTRAINED US" 

The fact that Lydia's household believed implies that 
she was the mother of adult children. And these were 
so thoroughly under her influence that they worshiped 
with her the true God, neglecting the idolatries prevalent 
in Philippi. We may infer that she was a widow, 
since her husband is not mentioned. Hence it was her 
right, without conference with anybody, to invite the 
Apostle and his companions to share the hospitality of 
her home. She seems properly to have realized that, instead 
of honoring them, she was honoring herself and 
her home by having such guests— the ministers of God, 
the brethren of Christ— under her roof. Note her language 
when inviting, "She besought us, saying, If ye have 
judged me to be faithful to the Lord, come into my house, 
and abide there. And she constrained us." The latter 
statement implies that the Apostle was not too ready to 
force himself upon anybody, that he did not urge, saying, 
Surely myself and companions who have preached to 
you should be served by you in temporalities— though 



R4400 : page 156 

that was the Truth. Rather the Apostle made no reference 
to temporalities. Indeed, after the suggestion of 
Lydia had been made it was apparently not too quickly 
accepted, but with the indication that the disciples of 
Jesus had no desire to intrude upon others. This is implied 
in the statement that they were "constrained," 
gradually drawn or led to accept invitation. How beautiful 
it is to see God's children wisely exercised in such 
matters! How much more is their influence upon one 
another for good! 

R4400 : page 157 

This lesson may be considered as specially teaching 
Divine supervision of the true Gospel and its ministers. 
Yet how diversified God's dealings and how necessary 
that his children in ministering the Truth should have 
fullest confidence in his wisdom, love and power! Note 
the sharp contrast that, after specially guiding the 
apostles to this place and then to a very small meeting 
and apparently one family of converts, the Lord next 
allows what seems to be a great catastrophe to befall his 
faithful servants. This trial came through the evil 
spirits. A young woman, possessed (obsessed) by an 
evil spirit (one of the fallen angels), was used for fortune-telling 
etc., the spirit working through her, divining 
or giving intelligence of things that were lost, telling 
fortunes, etc. She was a slave girl and very profitable to 
her owners— a syndicate apparently of influential men. 

For several days, as the Apostle and companions went 
to and from the home of Lydia attending to the Lord's 
work, this obsessed girl followed them, shouting in a 
loud voice, "These be the servants of the Most High God, 
which show unto us the way of salvation." Of course, 
the girl did not know them, but the evil spirits knew 
them. To what extent they forecasted the results we 
may not definitely know, but quite possibly what occurred 
was what they had premeditated, namely, that the 
Apostle would cast out the evil spirit and that this 
would bring upon them and any converts a violent attack 
from the owners of the girl and their friends and 
all whom they could arouse to a frenzy of excitement, of 
wrath and rioting. Or the evil spirit may simply have 
told the truth without considering the possibility of the 
Apostle commanding it to come out of the woman— 
possibly supposing that they would be rather pleased with 
a testimony from any quarter. But we read that St. 
Paul was grieved as day after day this testimony was 
made. He was not grieved that a testimony was borne 
to the Truth, but grieved that it should come from such 
an evil source, for he knew that it would have no respect 
for the Truth; for any of the fallen angels who would 
have respect for God and the principles of righteousness 



would not seek to obsess humanity when it knew that 
it would be to their injury and contrary to the Divine 
will. 

The S.S. teachers' instruction books will probably suggest 
to them that this woman had hysteria or was somewhat 
demented. But this is out of accord with the facts 
of the case, as Scripturally set forth, and quite contrary 
to the words of the Apostle. He said not a word to the 
young woman, assuming that she was not at all accountable. 
He addressed the evil spirit as such, and commanded 
it in the name of Jesus to come out of the woman 
—just as Jesus and the apostles under his instruction 
had frequently cast out these spirits. 

WITH A SPIRIT OF DIVINATION 

Just as the owners of the swine were angry with our 
Lord because of the loss of their swine, when the 
"legion" of demons cast out of the man entered the 
swine and the owner suffered loss, so here; while the 
Apostle and all who had proper hearts would rejoice 
that the woman was free from the evil spirit's power, 
her masters, who profited by her sad condition, were 
made angry. Their pocket-books were touched. They 
could not legally attack the Apostle because he had done 
the woman no harm. But they could have revenge and 
hence raised a riot, claiming that these men with the 
new religion were interfering with the rights of the 
people of Philippi, which was a Roman province in 
Greece. 

And the Lord permitted all this; yea, permitted the 
rioting to reach considerable proportions. Paul and Silas 
were carried before the rulers at the market-place for 
the imposition of sentence. The rulers, who held office 
specially for the preventing of rioting and for preserving 
order, were greatly excited and rent their garments 
as an indication of their distress and dissatisfaction that 
such a disturbance should be brought to their city. The 
thought was that the men against whom the populace 
would thus rise up must be guilty of something and 
deserving of punishment. They knew not that the evil 
spirits had to do with the arousing of the riot. As St. 
Paul elsewhere expressed it, "We contend not with flesh 
and blood merely, but with wicked spirits in influential 
positions." 

To satisfy the mob, to restore peace quickly, the 
missionaries were publicly beaten, presumably with rods, 
and then were committed to the prison. Alas, we say, 
what a reward for missionary effort! What a recompense 
for sacrificing their lives for the Lord and the 
Truth— that these men should be evil-spoken of, evil 
thought of and evilly treated! 

Let us remember that the God who changes not is our 
God, and has supervision of the interests of the Church 
to-day as then. Let us remember that he requires of 
us to-day, as of those missionaries, that we be 



willing to represent him, willing to endure hardness and 
thus to make full proof of our ministry— of our service 
for Christ and his message. Would it require faith 
on the part of the missionaries to accept such experiences 
as providential and not to think of them as evidences 
of the Lord's disfavor or neglect? So must we learn 
similar lessons of faith, in the School of Christ, and be 
glad to follow in the footsteps of Jesus and the apostles, 
and learn to rejoice in tribulations, as well as in 
prosperity. 



R4400 : page 157 

"THERE IS A SIN UNTO DEATH" 

-1 JOHN 5:16.- 

ONCE we were inclined to believe that the final 

results of God's great Plan of Salvation would 

show the vast majority of his creatures saved and 

granted eternal life through faith in Christ and obedience 

of heart. However, as the years roll by and as our view 

of the Divine requirement becomes more clear, our expectations 

are considerably modified. From our present 

viewpoint it will not surprise us if the number going 

into the Second Death will be a considerable one. 

This does not mean that our clearer sight shows the 
love of God to be less than we had at first supposed, nor 
that the provision made will come short and fail to 
grant a full opportunity of eternal life to every creature. 
It does mean that daily we are coming to see in a clearer 
light the high standard which God will require of all who 
will be granted life eternal at any time and on any plane. 

The fact is that God leaves the human will entirely 
free; that he seeks not the worship of those whom he 
will be obliged to coerce and restrain, but merely "seeketh 
such to worship him as worship him in spirit and in 
Truth." God's provision is that with the close of the 
Millennial Age "there shall be no more crying, no more 
sighing, no more dying;" because there shall be no more 
sin; because all the former things of sin shall have passed 
away. Putting these items together we perceive that 
the tests to prove who are worthy and who are unworthy 
of life eternal must be very crucial. None must go beyond 
the Millennial Age whose heart is not perfect; for 
if any others should be admitted there it would mean a 
perpetual danger of recurrence of sin in some form— a 
menace to the perfect bliss of that blessed state. 

The world will have its purgatorial experiences during 
the Millennial Age— its blessings under the reign of 
the glorified Messiah, the Mediator of the New Covenant, 
Head and Body. By lessons, encouragements and 
chastisements it will learn the lesson of obedience to the 
Divine will, that thus it may attain to the full perfection 



of God's likeness and to life eternal. But failing to attain 

R4400 : page 158 

this blessed state during that time appointed, the only 
alternative will be Second Death, for no provision is 
made for sin or sinners beyond the Millennium. 

The Church's trial, as we have seen, is now taking 
place during this Gospel Age. Every justified believer 
who knowingly and intelligently consecrated himself and 
whose consecration the Lord has accepted by begetting 
him of the holy Spirit— every such one is on trial now, 
for either life or death, and he can have no future 
opportunity. In other words, the trial of the spirit-begotten 
ones of this age will eventuate in eternal life 
on the spirit plane or eternal death, just as the trial of 
the world in the time of Restitution will eventuate in 
eternal life on the human plane or in eternal death. 

Consider what this means: It means that all who will 
be saved during the Millennium must attain to a condition 
of actual perfection and absolute heart loyalty to God, 
absolute love of righteousness and hatred of iniquity, if 
they would have eternal life. It means to you and me 
and all other spirit-begotten ones of this age that, if we 
do not reach a perfection of heart-development during 
the period of our trial, we shall die the Second Death. 
Thank God, it does not mean a perfection of the flesh, 
which would be impossible to us; but a perfection of the 
spirit, a perfection of the New Mind, a perfection of the 
will. But, oh, how much a perfect heart signifies! No 
wonder our dear Redeemer said, "Blessed are the pure 
in heart, for they shall see God" ! Any impurity of heart, 
of intention; any degree of evil contention, anger, hatred, 
strife, bitterness of heart, would mean just so much 
shortage of the Divine standard— perfect love. 

We are not competent to judge, however. Some may 
have perfect love in their hearts who, because of imperfections 

R4401 :page 158 

in their flesh, make a poor showing of it. In 
our experience, however, comparatively few even make 
the claim of perfect love, either for God or for the brethren 
or for neighbors, not to mention their enemies. We 
may be sure that of all spirit-begotten ones in such a 
condition at the time of death there will be no place 
found amongst those counted worthy of life eternal. The 
only alternative for them will be Second Death. 

They could not be of the "little flock" because God has 
foreordained that every member of it must be "a copy of 
his dear Son." "For whom he did foreknow, he also 
did predestinate to be conformed to the image of his Son, 
that he might be the firstborn among many brethren." 
(Rom. 8:29.) Can they not, then, be of the "great company"? 
We answer, No. All who would be of the "great 
company" must, through tribulation, attain to heart perfection, 



in order to be accounted worthy of life eternal. 
The difference between the "great company" of overcomers 
and the "little flock" of "more than conquerors" is 
that the former prove faithful under stress, when forced 
to the decision, while the latter class, the "little flock," 
possess more zeal, press forward joyfully to do, to be, to 
suffer, to serve; but both classes, to be overcomers at all, 
and to get eternal life at all, must reach the mark 
of perfect love. 

Ah, yes, God's ways are wise and just and loving. It 
would not be to his glory nor in the interests of his 
faithful ones or others for him to admit to eternal life 
conditions any deficient in love. Does this alarm us and 
cause us to fear for our own acceptance and our own 
attaining of eternal life? The Apostle says, "Let us 
fear, lest a promise being left us of entering into his rest, 
any of you should seem to come short of it." (Heb. 4:1.) 
Let the thought stimulate us to a renewed zeal and energy 
in conquering self and the old nature and in pressing on 
from glory to glory and from one degree to another 
higher degree of likeness to our Lord. 

We feel sure that, in the Lord's providence, the Vow, 
published again in the last issue, is proving a great 
blessing and great help to many. Let no one take it 
except after mature consideration, but let all who see it 
to be thoroughly Scriptural in its every provision take it 
as a partial expression of their original consecration 
Vow of baptism into Christ's death. It is proving a 
blessing to many to daily read it every morning in connection 
with the Manna text and comment and morning 
devotion. It helps to impress upon the mind and 
upon the heart the very things which are most necessary 
to be remembered and yet most likely to be forgotten 
in the necessary hurry and push of the present 
life. Let us with deliberation and determination take 
all the vows that will assist us to a closer walk with 
God and to the binding of our sacrifice to the altar. We 
shall surely need in the trial time which is now upon the 
Church every assistance which the Lord provides, that 
we may be able to stand; that we may develop the 
proper character; that we may make our calling and 
election sure. 



R4395 : page 158 

WESTERN CONVENTION TOUR 

IT is proposed that the Western Convention Tour 

shall start a little earlier so as to include Piedmont, 

Ala. Hence Brother Russell will leave Brooklyn, 

N.Y., midnight July 7th, via P.R.R.; arriving at Washington 

City 7:12 a.m., July 8th; arriving at Atlanta, Ga., 

5:00 a.m.; Piedmont at 9:21 a.m., July 9th; leaving 

Piedmont 7:16 p.m., July 9th, ar. at Memphis, Tenn., 7:30 



R4396 : page 158 

a.m., July 10th. Leaving at 11:00 p.m. (111. Central), 
we are due to reach New Orleans Sunday, July 1 1, at 
10:45 a.m. Leaving at 9 p.m. we hope to reach Houston, 
Texas, at 10:15 a.m., and, leaving at 12:25 a.m., to reach 
San Antonio, Texas, at 7:35 a.m., July 13. Leaving at 
9 a.m., July 14, via El Paso at 8:30 a.m. of the 15th, we 
hope to reach Los Angeles at 1:30 p.m., Friday, July 
16th. We leave at 5 p.m., July 17, arriving at Oakland, 
Cal, 8:45 a.m., July 18. Leaving at 8:57 p.m., July 19, 
we are due at Portland, Ore., 7:15 a.m., July 21, Wednesday. 
Leaving at 1 1:45 p.m. we are due at Seattle 
Thursday at 8: 15 a.m. Leaving at 9:30 p.m. (N.P.Ry.), 
Sunday, July 25, arrive at Spokane at 9:00 a.m., Monday, 
July 26. Leaving at 3:20 p.m. (N.P.Ry.) arrive at Butte, 
Mont., 7:40 a.m., July 27. Leave at 11:40 p.m., ar. at Billings, 
8:50 a.m., July 28. Leave 9:30 a.m., arrive at Denver 
11:30 a.m., July 29 (C.B.Q.Ry). Leave July 30, 1:15 
p.m. (C.B.Q.Ry.), ar. at St. Joseph, Mo., July 3 1, at 9:30 
a.m. Leave August 2 at 1:45 p.m., arrive Huron, S.D., at 
7 a.m., Aug. 3. Leaving at 8:10 a.m., arrive at Aberdeen, 
S.D., at 1 1:55 a.m. Leave (C.N.&St.P.Ry.) 8:35 
p.m., arrive at St. Paul, Minn., at 8:10 a.m., August 4, 
and Chicago at 9:45 p.m. Leaving Chicago at 11:45 p.m. 
(P.R.R.) arrive at Pittsburg at 6:05 p.m., August 5. 
General Meeting at Allegheny Bible House, 7:30 p.m. 
Leave 9:40 p.m., arriving at Brooklyn 9 a.m., August 6. 
Of course, changes of railroad schedules may make 
necessary some slight modifications of the foregoing. 
Four-Day Convention, Piedmont, Ala. July 8-11 



One " 


Memphis, Tenn. 


" 10 


" " " 


New Orleans, La. 


" 11 


" " " 


Houston, Tex. 


12 


" " " 


San Antonio, Tex. 


" 13 


Three " 


Los Angeles, Cal. 


" 16-18 


" " " 


Oakland, Cal. 


17-19 


One " 


Portland, Ore. 


" 21 


Four " 


Seattle, Wash. 


" 22-25 


One " 


Spokane, Wash. 


" 26 


" " " 


Butte, Mont. 


27 


Two " 


Denver, Colo. 


" 29,30 


Five " 


St. Joseph, Mo. July 29-Aug 


Three " 


Aberdeen, S.D. 


Aug. 1-3 



The Convention Committees of the Churches at the 
places named will please confer with us respecting 
further details desired. 



R4402 : page 159 

AN INTERESTING LETTER 



DEAR BROTHER:- 

I do not know if you have any more time now than 
you ever had to read poor letters, for I know you are 
always kept busy in the Master's service. But I must 
tell you about that Vow. 

I had always prayed for you and all those who 
labored with you in the WATCH TOWER office, from the 
time I first took the TOWER, which was in 1882. And 
then, when you sent out the Pilgrims to preach God's 
Grand Plan of the Ages, also the Colporteurs, prayer 
was added daily. But when the Vow was first brought 
to my notice, I did not think much about it; but after 
studying it a while the Lord showed me that it was a 
binding of the sacrifice closer to the altar that I made 
when I consecrated, so I took the Vow and sent you 
word. And oh, what a blessing has been mine since 
then, for though I am weak and frail and old, the Lord 
my God has drawn me closer to himself. And I can 
appreciate more and more the 91st Psalm and John 14:21-23, 
and though I can do so little in his service, he 
has promised never to leave nor forsake me, because I 
trust that he who began the good work in me, is able to 
finish it. My desire is not to be a stumbling block in 
my own way; I desire to follow my Lord even unto death. 

I enjoy the WATCH TOWER and those sermons in 
the Cincinnati Enquirer very much. May the Lord 
keep you faithful even unto death as that servant, is 
my daily prayer. 

Your sister in his service, 

MRS. J. A. MARWOOD,-Neb. 



page 159 

BEREAN STUDIES ON THE ATONEMENT 

THE TEXT-BOOK USED FOR THIS COURSE 
IS SCRIPTURE STUDIES, SERIES V (E)* 

Questions on Scripture Study V. 
—The Spirit of a Sound Mind 

JUNE 6 

(1) In the text, "God hath not given us the spirit of 

fear, but of power and of love and of a sound mind" (2 Tim. 1:7), 
what is the contrast? What is the antithesis 
to the spirit of a sound mind? Page 249, par. 1. 

(2) In this Scripture are we to understand that the 
four spirits mentioned are persons? or are any of them 
persons? or are they merely qualities of mind which 
might appertain to persons— on the human or on the 
spirit plane? P. 249, par. 1. 

(3) If a Christian has a spirit of fear, to what should 
it be attributed? What is lacking in him when his mind 



is under the control of such a spirit or influence? And 
what is the remedy for such an undesirable condition 
of spirit or mind? P. 249, par. 2. 

(4) Does the spirit of Christ take hold upon the strong-minded 
or the strong-bodied merely, or upon the weak-minded 

and weak-bodied merely? What is the result in 
either case? Give Scripture proofs. P. 250, par. 1,2. 

(5) In the text quoted (2 Tim. 1:7) what is meant 
by the "spirit of power"? Does it refer to physical 
strength or spiritual strength or what? P. 250, par. 3. 

(6) Similarly explain "the spirit of love" in the same 
text. Is it natural love, or what kind? How does it 
operate? And does it abide or will it pass away? Cite 
Scripture. P. 250, par. 3. 

JUNE 13 

(7) Are the Lord's people naturally more sound of 
mind— better balanced mentally— than the remainder of 
the world? Or how do they compare on the average? 
P. 251, par. 1. 

(8) What is the effect of the Truth upon the fully 
consecrated believer begotten of the holy Spirit and 
taught of God? How does he compare with the average 
man? P. 251, par. 2. 

(9) Explain how it is that there is such diversity of 
mind and say whether there are many of strictly sound 
mind. Quote Scriptures. P. 251, par. 3. 

(10) What are some of the causes of mental unbalance 
and in what manner does the holy Spirit rectify 
natural weaknesses and mental defects? P. 252, par. 1,2. 

(11) Give an illustration of the manner in which the 
spirit of a sound mind rectifies an imperfect judgment. 
P. 252, par. 2. 

(12) Give some illustrations of evidences of mental 
unsoundness common to the world and often to the 
Church. P. 252, par. 3. 

(13) What is the most general mental ailment as evidenced 
by asylum statistics, and is the same mental 

weakness a besetment to Christians? P. 254. 

(14) Which is the greater need amongst men, restitution 
of bodies or of morals or of sound minds? And 

what would the latter have to do with correcting the two 
former? P. 254, par. 2. 

JUNE 20 

(15) What quality of mind is the source of the greatest 
trouble to the world and the greatest to the Christian? 
What is the antidote or remedy which the Scriptures set 
forth? P. 254, par. 2. 

(16) What is the antidote for that poisoned condition 
of mind styled "the spirit of fear"? Cite the Scriptural 
antidote. P. 255, par. 1,2. 

(17) Does the spirit of the Truth correct over-confidence 
and under-confidence?— How? Cite the Scriptures. 



P. 255, par. 3. 

(18) Why is it that the heavenly hopes and promises 
appeal to some and not to others equally educated and 
intelligent otherwise? Explain the philosophy. P. 256, 
257. 

(19) What is the answer of the "spirit of a sound 
mind" to our Lord's inquiry, "What will a man exchange 
for his soul"— his being, his existence? P. 258, par. 1. 

(20) How were we redeemed from vain conversation 
and how does the spirit of a sound mind give a new 
viewpoint to every affair of life? P. 258, par. 2; P. 259, 
par. 1. 

(21) Which ambitions are restrained by the heavenly 
promises and which are encouraged and developed thereby? 
Cite Scriptures on the subject and show their application. 

P. 259, par. 2,3. 

JUNE 27 

(22) Show the philosophy of how the spirit of a sound 
mind deepens and broadens character. What if anything 
opposes this? Cite the Scriptures. P. 260, par. 1. 

(23) If patience, sympathy, generosity, love, godlikeness 
are elements of a sound mind, show how these qualities 
become more developed and appreciated. P. 260, par. 2. 

(24) What is the effect of the spirit of a sound mind in 
the home? How does it operate? What is the motive 
or mainspring? P. 260, par. 3. 

(25) Will the spirit of a sound mind make its possessor 
the best husband or wife, the best sister or brother, the 
best parent or the best child? Why so or why not? Give 
the philosophy of the matter. P. 261. 

(26) What is sure to be the effect of this spirit of a 
sound mind? P. 262, par. 1. 

(27) Cite one of the evidences of the unsoundness of 
human judgment. Cite the Scriptural admonition 
touching the defect. P. 262, par. 2. 

(28) Who may have this spirit now and is there hope 
that others may have it in the future? Cite the Scriptures. 
P. 262, par. 3. 

(29) Is there anything to suggest or to prove that 
the spirit of a sound mind, the spirit of wisdom, the 
spirit of common sense, is a spirit being which comes 
into us, or is it simply an instruction, a basis of proper, 
sound reason? 



*Five years ago DAWN-STUDIES, VOL. V., was reset, and 
unfortunately the type was not exactly same size as before; and 
hence page for page they differ. The references given in these 
Berean Studies apply to the present edition, a copy of which 
postpaid will cost you but 30c. But keep your old edition, for 
unfortunately the new Bible Helps refer to its pages. 



page 160 

PUBLIC MINISTRIES OF THE TRUTH 

UNDER THE AUSPICES OF PEOPLES PULPIT 
ASSOCIATION OF BROOKLYN, N.Y. 



PIEDMONT, ALA., CONVENTION, JULY 8-11 

The friends of this locality request a General Convention 
for that section, so it is arranged at the beginning of Brother 
Russell's Western Tour. He will be there one day; but able 
speakers are provided for the other sessions. Railroad rates 
are expected. Further announcement later. 

ONE-DAY LOCAL CONVENTIONS ADDRESSED BY THE 
EDITOR OF THIS JOURNAL AS FOLLOWS: 

BROOKLYN, N.Y., JUNE 13 

Morning Rally and Testimony Meeting at 10:30 o'clock. 

Discourse by Brother Russell at 3:00 p.m. Evening meeting 
for the interested at 7:30 o'clock; this will be a Question 
Meeting. Visiting friends cordially invited. 

All meetings will be held in the Brooklyn Tabernacle, Nos. 
13-17 Hicks street. Convenient to all cars and ferries— close 
to the old bridge terminus. 

NEW BRITAIN, CONN., JUNE 20 

GLENS FALLS, N.Y., JUNE 27 



page 162 

STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES 
"MILLENNIAL DAWN" 

THESE STUDIES ARE RECOMMENDED TO STUDENTS AS VERITABLE "BIBLE KEYS. 

PRICES ARE NET AND BARELY COVER COST OF PRODUCTION, 

WHEN DELIVERED BY COLPORTEURS THE COST AND PRICE ARE INCREASED. 

SERIES I., "The Plan of the Ages." gives an outline of the divine plan 
revealed in the Bible, relating to man's redemption and restitution: 
386 pages, in embossed cloth, 25c. (Is. l/2d.) India paper edition, 75c. 
(3s. l-l/2d.). 

This volume has been published as a special issue of our journal— 
at the extremely low price of 5c. a copy, in any quantity, postage included. 
(To foreign countries, 9c.) This enables people of slender 
purse to herald far and wide the good tidings in a most helpful form. 

SERIES II., "The Time is at Hand," treats of the manner and time of 
the Lord's second coming, considering the Bible Testimony on this 
subject: 370 pages, in embossed cloth, 25c. (Is. l/2d.) India paper 
edition, 75c. (3s. l-l/2d.) 

SERIES III., "Thy Kingdom Come," considers prophecies which mark 
events connected with the "Time of the End," the glorification of the 
Church and the establishment of the Millennial Kingdom; it also contains 
a chapter of the Great Pyramid, showing its corroboration of the 
dates and other teachings of the Bible: 384 pages, in embossed cloth, 
25c. (Is. l/2d.) India paper edition, 75c. (3s. l-l/2d.) 

SERIES IV., "The Day of Vengeance," shows that the dissolution of the 
present order of things is in progress, and that all the panaceas offered 
are valueless to avert the predicted end. It marks in these events the 
fulfilment of prophecy, noting specially our Lord's great prophecy of 
Matt. 24 and Zech. 14:1-9: 660 pages, in embossed cloth, 30c. (Is. 3d.). 
India paper edition, 85c. (3s. 6-l/2d.) 

SERIES V., "The At-one-ment Between God and Man," treats an all-important 
subject— the hub, the center around which all the features 
of divine grace revolve. Its topic deserves the most careful and 
prayerful consideration on the part of all true Christians: 507 pages, 
in embossed cloth, 30c. (Is. 3d.) India paper edition, 85c. (3s. 6-l/2d.) 

SERIES VI., "The New Creation," deals with the Creative Week 
(Genesis 1 and 2), and with the Church, God's "New Creation." It examines 
the personnel, organization, rites, ceremonies, obligations and 
hopes appertaining to those called and accepted as members of the 
Body under the Head: 740 pages, in embossed cloth, 30c. (Is. 3d.) 
India paper edition, 85c. (3s. 6-l/2d.) 

The above prices include postage. 

IN FULL LEATHER BINDING, gilt edges, the set (6 vols.) $3.00, 
(12s. 6d.), plus postage, 60c. (Is.). 

Is also published in foreign languages as follows: German, six vols., 
in Swedish Vols. 1, 2, 3, 5 and 6; in Dano-Norwegian, three vols.; 
in Greek, three vols.; in French, two vols.; Hollandish, Spanish, 
and Italian, one vol. each; bound in cloth, uniform with English edition, 
prices the same; in Polish, condensed edition, one vol., 10 cents. 



page 161 



SEMI-MONTHLY 
VOL. XXX JUNE 1 NO. 1 1 
A.D. 1909--A.M. 6037 



CONTENTS 

Brooklyn Bethel Hymns for July 162 

Views from the Watch Tower 163 

Armageddon 163 

"Scientific Proof of a Future Life" 164 

Danger in Tampering with Supernatural 165 

Brother Russell's European Tour 167 

What Must I Do to Be Saved? 167 

Paul and Silas Sharers in Sufferings 168 

"Father, Glorify Thy Name" (Poem) 169 

The Bereans the More Noble 169 

"Think it Not Strange" 171 

Worshiping the Unknown God 172 

"The Children of the Blessed" 174 

Sample of Interesting Letters 174 

Berean Studies on the Atonement 175 

page 162 

PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY 
CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
"BROOKLYN TABERNACLE," 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, N.Y., U.S.A. 

Foreign Agencies:— British Branch: 24 Eversholt St., London, 
N. W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, Barmen. Australasian 
Branch: Equitable Building, Collins St., Melbourne. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR 

REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 

Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:— All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 
and in touch with the Studies, etc. 



SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER. 

APPLICATION MADE FOR ENTRY AT BROOKLYN, N.Y. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, DANISH AND ITALIAN EDITIONS. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



BROOKLYN BETHEL HYMNS FOR JULY 



After the singing of the hymn the Bethel Family listens 
to the reading of "the Vow" to the Lord, then joins in 
prayer. At the breakfast table the MANNA text for the 
date is read and questions and comments considered. 
Finally, just before leaving the table, the MANNA comment 
is read. Desiring that all share the blessings, we 
commend the plan to others. The hymns for July are 
indicated below to permit all who so desire to join with us: 

(1) 333; (2) 9; (3) 301; (4) 105; (5) 95; (6) 328; 
(7) 19; (8) 72; (9) 1 17; (10) Vow; (1 1) 179; (12) 1 10; 
(13) 198; (14) 209; (15) 7; (16) 294; (17) 193; (18) 257; 
(19) 313; (20) 12; (21) 263; (22) 96; (23) 216; (24) 230; 
(25) 165; (26) 8; (27) 141; (28) 4; (29) 29; (30) 233; (31) 130. 



RE POSTAGE STAMP REMITTANCES 

If necessary to make small remittances in stamps kindly 
send 5, 10 or 15-cent values, when possible. We cannot use 
foreign stamps; we must return them for redemption. 

SIXTH VOLUME IN GERMAN 

Orders for the sixth volume in German, pages the size of 
WATCH TOWER and bound in leather, at $1.50 per volume, 
may now be received, but will be somewhat delayed in filling 
because all orders are forwarded to Germany and filled there. 



R4403 : page 163 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER 
ARMAGEDDON 



"THE OLD claim formerly made here and there by 
highly imaginative and expectant calamity prophets, 
that the time was at hand for the great and 
final conflict, the battle of Armageddon, has died down 
until one rarely receives a crude tract or hears a pulpit 
warning to remind him of such impending disaster. Just 



about the time the wild prophets have yielded to the spirit 
of brotherhood and peace that has been taking fast hold 
upon the world, one finds a desperate contention and uproar 
amongst the ambitious warlords, egged on by mercenary 
makers of the machines and accoutrements of war 
and by ambitious hopefuls in uniform, to outdo each 
other in preparations for the Battle of Armageddon. 

"If there had been announced in flaming lines across 
the sky the great and awful fact that the final battle of 
destruction and annihilation was at hand, it could hardly 
have led to more sudden and tremendous preparation for 
war than that now under way between three of the leading 
nations of the world, the very nations that boast of 
the Anglo-Saxon desire and purpose to encourage the arts 
of peace. The best that can be said of such untimely departure 
from the peace policy so loudly professed by these 
countries for the last decade is that the warlords in the 
saddle and interests which find profit in war and in preparations 
for war have grossly and outrageously misrepresented 
and misused the people over whom they have influence 
and power. 

"Twenty years ago there began a promising movement 
to promote the peace of the world. The movement led up 
to largely attended conferences in all civilized lands, and 
The Hague Peace Court was one of the results of the 
work of wise and progressive men, including the leading 
statesmen of the time. Arrangements were consummated 
at great expense by which disagreements were to be settled 
according to rules of justice and not by a resort to 
butchery and fire. The peace movement did not stop 
here. Peace treaties became fashionable, and a week 
rarely passed without an account of some happy pact between 
the very nations now most desperately bent on 
preparing for the great Battle of Armageddon and some 
one of the nations whom their warlords and captains of 
the military industry pretended to suspect or fear. 

"The unsound minds of a few ambitious warlords, reinforced 
by the greed and ambition of other men, have 
led to a sad loss in the courage, the morals and the purpose 
of the modern world. There has been no fall to be 
compared to it in many centuries. Just as the world had 
really begun to turn swords into plow-shares the whole 
policy of peace and brotherhood was exchanged in a 
night, as it were, for a war policy in pursuance of which 
the plow is now being converted into the sword. As 'The 
News' sees it there has been committed in this an awful 
crime against humanity. Mr. Birrel, Secretary for Ireland, 
submitted an apt comment upon President Taft's 
declaration approving the present policy in this country. 
He said:— 

'"When I was young, America set the example of an 
unarmed nation, but things have not worked out as was 
expected. Mr. Taft's speech on the question of United 
States armaments were words of doom. They have shattered 
some of the best hopes of humanity, for they show 
that even across America they have joined the ranks of 



the armed and are to be supplied with a great navy and 
a powerful army. It is a miserable pity that hopes should 
be shattered, and that we are now to deal with the 
United States as a fully equipped military and naval 
nation.... Wherever we go, we find armament, armament, 
armament.' 

"What must be the end of this desperate game in which 
enlightened nations are actually striving to outbuild each 
other? Truly, as 'The Independent' declares, It is hopeless, 
for there is no end but utter collapse.' It has come 
to mean almost slavery for millions of the people of England 
and Germany already. 

"Dr. Jefferson contributes to a recent number of 'Atlantic' 
a soul-stirring protest against this crazy display of 
warlordery. He says:— 

'"A nation which buys guns at $70,000 each when the 
slums of great cities are rotting, and millions of human 
beings struggle for bread, will, unless it repents, be overtaken 
soon or late by the same divine wrath which shattered 
Babylon to pieces, and hurled Rome from a throne 
which was supposed to be eternal.' 

"The one desperate means of relief is suggested by 
the Japanese Mail:— 

'"Yet it may even be that in this very costliness lies 
the best hope of ultimate restrictions, if not abandonment 
—that the sighing of the nations under the heaviness 
of the burden may at last find expression in the 
creating of some central controlling power, drawn from 
all alike, upon whose omnipotent will shall rest the decision 
of all issues which, in its absence, might plunge 
the world in war.' 

"Such a power or tribunal was supposed to have been 
found in The Hague Peace Court, the very name of 
which the rampant warlords of the earth now seem to so 
heartily despise."— "Dallas Morning News." 

RELIGIOUS REAPPROACHMENT 



At the meeting of the House of Commons Sir George 
Kekewich will present a bill "to amend the law ecclesiastical 
with respect to inter-communion between the 
Church of England and other Christian Churches." 

The bill, which is a one-clause measure, provides that 
"it shall be lawful for any clergyman in holy orders of 
the Church of England, not suspended or deprived by 
order of an ecclesiastical Court, to preach or minister 
in any chapel of any other Christian denomination, or in 
any building, with the assent of the minister or owners 

R4403 : page 164 

or trustees thereof, as the case may be; and for any 
minister of any other Christian denomination to preach 
or minister in any cathedral or collegiate or parish 



church or chapel of the Church of England with the 

assent of the dean, incumbent, or clergyman or other person 

in charge thereof, as the case may be." 

It will be observed that the bill refers to any building, 
as well as any chapel, and Sir George Kekewich 
told our Lobby Correspondent that the measure as 
drafted will apply to Roman Catholics as well as to 
Nonconformists.— Exchange. 

PREDICTS REFORM OR REVOLUTION 



"I may be wrong, but I feel that things strange and 
terrible are in the air. Here property rights are violated 
and religion persecuted and here cabinet ministers are 
insulted in the streets. The government trembles before 
striking functionaries and finally retreats. Men talk of 
barricades and revolutions and of a republic which shall 
be run by trade unions composed of people who have no 
Christ. What more do you want? Months must see a 
change or the years— not more than five, perhaps, 
surely will see the end." 



The above is credited to "Father Kelley," of Chicago, 
respecting his recent visit to Paris. 

"SCIENTIFIC PROOF OF A FUTURE LIFE" 



In a sermon in which he told of the effect of religious 
seances and the efforts of certain writers to shatter 
belief in a future life, the Rev. H. D. C. Maclachlan 
preached to a large congregation in Seventh Street 
Christian Church on "The New Spiritualism," in which 
he gave scientific proof of a future life and exhorted 
his hearers to be of good cheer and continue to hope. 
Mr. Maclachlan spoke in part as follows:— 

"There has been no more remarkable change in public 
opinion than that witnessed within the last few years 
with regard to that class of facts known as spiritualistic. 
There was a time when it was not quite respectable to 
believe in them, but quite recently there has been a 
change. Ghosts have become respectable; planchette 
and table rapping are parlor amusements; the popular 
magazines vie with each other in saying nice things about 
mediums and their ways. 

RESULTS OF MEDIUMS 

"The cause of this change in public opinion has been 
a similar change in scientific belief. It is not more than 
thirty years ago that orthodox science refused so much 



as to investigate the things of which we are speaking. 
When Sir William Crookes, the great chemist, brought 
in his report to the Royal Society of England, in which 
he avowed his belief in the leading phenomena of the 
seance room, his report was not even taken from the 
table. But since that day the history of Galileo and his 
telescope, through which the scientists of Padua refused 
to look, has repeated itself. 

"Some twenty -five years ago the Society for Psychical 
Research was formed in England with such names as 
Crookes, Myers, Romanes, Eidgwick, Barrett and others 
on its list of members, and since that day telepathy, table 
rapping, clairvoyance, clairaudience, telekinesis, apparitions, 
materializations, mental healing and all the other 
phenomena which Professor James, of Harvard, aptly 
calls 'residual,' have been investigated. Mediums have 
been transferred from back parlors, where all sorts of 
trickery was possible, to the physical laboratories of the 
universities. They have been put under conditions of 
strictest control. Even the traditional darkness has been 
denied them. And still the wonderful results came. One 
after another leading scientists entered into these investigations 
skeptical and contemptuous, but came out of 
them believers in the facts on the evidence of their own 



R4404 : page 164 

CERTAIN FACTS RESCUED 

"I am not speaking of professional mediumship, still 
less of Spiritualism as a cult— as a religion. I am not 
forgetting the so-called exposes of the Fox sisters and of 
Slade and that Cambridge experiment with Eusapia Paladino. 
Professional mediumship is undoubtedly to a 
large extent fraudulent. But when scientific men of the 
first standing tell us that out of the welter of fraud and 
delusion which has made mediumship taboo in cultured 
circles, they have rescued certain facts which they are 
investigating with all the patience which they give to 
their own scientific personalities, and when we are 
further told that on the basis of these investigations 
some of them believe they have found a scientific demonstration 
of a future life— we cannot afford to believe that 
such men as these are such easy dupes as to be arrant 
fools. 

"But what about mediumship? How does it stand today? 
I spoke a little while ago about laboratory research 
in mediumship. This method of research has been 
adopted only within the last few years, and especially in 
the case of the famous Italian medium, Eusapia Paladino. 
This Eusapia has been investigated in the laboratories 
of several of the Italian universities by such men 
as Rochet, Lombroso, Morselli, Foa, Battazzi, etc., each 
and all of whom started into the investigations wholly 
skeptical and perfectly sure that under the conditions 



they would impose no results would be reached. They 
took no chances. 

'"Let the medium impress a photographic plate,' they 
said; 'let her illuminate a screen treated with platinocyanide 
of barium; let her discharge a golf leaf electriscope 
without touching it; let her displace the rod of a 
metronome; let her register pressure on a manometer.' 

PHANTOM HANDS SEEN 

"What were the results? At the latest series of sittings 
which have come to hand held in the University of 
Naples under direction of Professor Bottazzi, all these 
precautions were taken; yet objects were moved at a 
distance, phantom hands were seen; the scientific tests 
were satisfactorily made; and as direct evidence the existence 
of some force hitherto unknown to science, but as 
real as kathode and X-rays, a Morse telegraph key was 
displaced by the psychic in such a way as to leave a 
tracing on a cylinder, a photograph of which may be 
seen in one of the numbers of the Annals of Physical 
Science. 

"In face of such evidence, do we not feel that Hodgson 
is right when he says:— 

'"A man who denies the phenomena of Spiritism today 
is not entitled to be called a skeptic; he is simply 
ignorant' 

"The next question is that of the interpretation of the 
facts. Three interpretations are possible. First, that 
these phenomena are the manifestations of an obscure 
and hitherto unknown form of vital energy. This is the 
biological explanation to which the Italian investigators 
(with the exception of Lombroso) lean; second, they may 
be explained as manifestations of what is known as the 
sub-conscious mind, or the subliminal self. This is the 
explanation in favor with perhaps the majority of the 
investigators. A third explanation is that held by a 
minority perhaps, but at least a very influential one, and 
is to the effect that while many of the phenomena are 
explicable in the two former ways, there is at least a remainder 
that can be explained only on the supposition 
that there exist intelligences (whether discarnate human 
beings or others) which manifest themselves through 
these abnormal types whom we call mediums or sensitives. 
To this view the following leaders in thought adhere: 
Myers, Lombroso, Hodgson, Hyslop, James, Lodge 
and others. 

PROOF OF FUTURE LIFE 

"What, then, is the gain to faith? Much every way. 
In the first place, if these things be so, it is no longer 
unscientific to believe in miracles. The significance of 

R4404 : page 165 



this is tremendous. For upwards of fifty years the whole 
tendency of modern science has been to deny the credibility 
of miracles. 

"Science brings the message, 'Be of good cheer. God 
in these latter days is working marvelously, and before 
many years have passed belief in a life beyond death may 
be just as scientific as to believe in wireless telegraphy or 
the marvels of the X-ray. Only be patient— only work 
and hope.'" 



Here we have it. Spiritism is becoming respectable, 
not only in scientific quarters, but now to the Church. 
Note well the arguments by which the foolish things accomplished 
by Spiritism are held up before the people 
as helpful to their Christian faith— as proofs of a future 
life. Another Exchange tells of a Spirit Exhibition in a 
Methodist Church by a minister. 

What is more evident than that this minister himself 
lacked a full assurance of faith respecting a future life 
and had full confidence that his congregation also lacked 
such a faith; otherwise surely he would not have brought 
forward such matters as attestations and supports of 
faith. Only a poor, weak, rotten, tottering faith could 
be really supported by such stuff as Spiritism offers. And 
it will be noticed that while various theories are referred 
to respecting the power behind these spirit manifestations, 
the scientists whom he quotes are utterly ignorant 
of the real power and intelligence back of Spiritism, 
Theosophy, Hypnotism, etc. "The wisdom of their wise 
men shall perish; the understanding of their prudent 
men shall be hidden." (Isa. 29:14.) Their failure comes 
from the neglect of the Word of God, which would have 
informed them respecting the evil spirits, their origin, 
etc. Blessed are our eyes for they see and our ears for 
they hear the wisdom from on high. But alas, the poor 
world lacking this wisdom, misled by its trusted, 
scientific and theological teachings, is rapidly coming 
under the power of the evil spirits! "And for this cause 
God shall send them a strong delusion, that they shall 
believe a lie who believe not the Truth, but had pleasure 
in unrighteousness."— 2 Thess. 2:11,12. 

DANGER IN TAMPERING WITH SUPERNATURAL 



The English author, Dr. J. Godfrey Raupert, is now 
in this country, under assignment from Pope Pius X. 
to lecture to the students of all Roman Catholic seminaries 
upon the dangers of psychical research and the 
evils of Spiritualism. During the last few months, Doctor 
Raupert has delivered lectures at many institutions 
of learning in New York and vicinity, and he expects 
to continue his stay in this country until he has an opportunity 



to visit many other institutions. 

While a member of the English Society for Psychical 
Research and a personal friend of many of the most 
prominent European investigators, Doctor Raupert not 
only declines to accept the theory of spirit communications, 
but even declares that every phase of psychical research 
is produced by an evil force, which, sooner or 
later, will wreck the minds of those who subject themselves 
to its influence. 

Dr. Raupert writes as follows in the "Philadelphia 
Public Ledger":— 

'"If there is any one thing in this world which the 
great mass of the American people need it is to have their 
eyes opened regarding the dangers of the psychical research. 
For many months the most popular periodicals 
have been devoting a great deal of space to these matters, 
and, as the result, people who had never given any 
serious thought of psychic problems are now inclined to 
try experiments that are fraught with the greatest perils 
to the mental and physical organism, as well as to the 
moral character. 

'"Unfortunately, the writers of these articles have, 
almost without exception, entirely neglected this phase 
of the subject, leaving their readers to walk ignorantly 
into a trap from which they may find it extremely difficult 
to escape, and it seems as though it was time that 
somebody should come to the front to explain why 
psychical investigation is one of the most hazardous occupations 
in which it is possible for a human being to 
engage. 



"In any case, it is the opening of a door to the invasion 
of activities that we do not, and cannot understand, 
and all experience proves that, once opened, this 
door is not so easily shut. Moreover, as these invasions 
invariably play havoc with the victim's moral, mental and 
physical life, even when they do not— as they often do- 
lead to permanent afflictions, or to death, it is impossible 
to see where science has any right to invade this 
domain, or to invite others, still less guarded than themselves, 
to invade it for them. 

'"Prof. W. F. Barrett, of the Royal College of Science 
for Ireland, and one of the vice-presidents of the English 
Society for Psychical Research, did not hesitate to admit 
the existence of these evils. "These practices," he said, 
"are dangerous in proportion as they lead us to surrender 
our reason, or our will, to the dictates of an invisible and 
oftentimes masquerading spirit." 

MAN'S BIRTHRIGHT IN DANGER 

"And again, in speaking of a case resembling obsession, 
he said: "Possibly this is an instance of duplex 
personality; more probably, I think, it is what it purports 



to be, a lower influence or 'spirit,' acting through 

the medium.... The danger lies, in my opinion, not 

only in the loss of spiritual stamina, but in the possible 

disintegration of our personality; in the liability to lose 

that birthright we each are given to cherish our individuality, 

our true selfhood, just as in another way this 

may be impaired by sensuality, opium or alcohol." 

'"While this may seem to require a belief in "obsession," 
or the actual possession of unembodied spiritual 
intelligence, this phase of the matter is really of less immediate 
importance than might appear at first thought. 
Personally, I have witnessed scores of cases, that, while 

R4405 : page 165 

they were designated as "insanity" by the scientists, to 

me, at least, so closely did they resemble genuine "obsession" 

that I was inclined to think that there was some reason 

for the belief that the patient knew more about the 

nature of his disorder than the physician who attended 

him. 



'"The Spiritualists tell us that everything depends 
upon the attitude with which we look upon the "spirits"; 
that if our life is pure and our purpose a noble one, we 
have nothing to fear from our experiments. This, however, 
is an entirely erroneous theory. As a matter of 
fact, it makes no difference how we approach the 
"spirits," for the best minds and the purest souls are 
wrecked quite as easily as those of less spiritual nature. 
Often, in the beginning of the experiments, there is a pretense 
at lofty utterances. 

'"The "spirits" indulge in high-flown talk about the 
future of life and its conditions, and endeavor to impress 
the investigator with his own utter earthliness and ignorance. 
I have known many cases in which the "control" 
purported to be the discarnate spirit of some great novelist, 
poet or philosopher, and, for a time, the role assumed 
has been played to perfection. But, sooner or 
later, the change invariably comes. 

"The pure and beautiful communications become 
mixed with impure language, and, finally, the victim 
awakens to the fact that he is entirely at the mercy of a 
force over which his will no longer exercises the slightest 
control. These are the facts and it makes no difference 
by what theory we endeavor to explain them. Call them 

R4405 : page 166 

"detached personality," if you will; apply one of the 
many terms that science used to designate the several 
forms of insanity; say that the trouble is due to subconscious 
functioning alone— however you may explain 
it, the fact still remains that the study of psychical problems 



is the direct cause of the disorder. 
A CASE IN INSTANCE 

'"To indicate how easily this disintegration of the 
personality may be brought about, I can refer to a case 
that has been brought to my attention since my arrival 
in this country. The victim is a young woman of exceptional 
intelligence and marked refinement— the wife of a 
man who is well known as a writer upon scientific 
subjects. 

'"Somewhat less than a year ago this young woman 
became interested in psychic investigations, and commenced 
to experiment for herself, using a "planchette" 
for the purpose. At first there was little result, but, 
finally, after patient waiting, she became a fluent writer, 
not only with the planchette board, but with a pencil 
held in the hand, and the communications received were 
of a most convincing character. 

'"About this time she began to experience pains at 
the base of the brain, and these gradually increased until 
they became almost unbearable. Her step was interrupted 
and her health began to fail perceptibly. 

URGED TO SUICIDE 

'"It was at this time that she announced that she was 
"obsessed"; that the intelligence that had communicated 
through her had taken full command of her body, so that 
she was no longer a free agent. Treatment of every kind 
was tried— all to no benefit. And now a new and more 
terrible feature developed. Hitherto the impulse had 
been to write— to write all the time, with pen, a pencil, 
or even a finger in the air— anything so long as the detail 
of writing was accomplished. 

'"Now it was voices that sounded in her head. Sometimes 
one, but more frequently two, three, or even four 
voices, talking to one another and freely conversing 
about her. Some would commend her conduct; others 
would blame her. Some would swear and curse and call 
her names— names so vile that she could scarcely have 
heard them in her normal state, while others would try 
to defend her from the coarser and grosser forces. 

'"In the early stages the things that the voices told 
her to do were practically harmless, but before long, they 
commenced to urge her to commit suicide, and she sought 
to obey them. Twice she attempted to take her own 
life, but was unsuccessful; yet all the time she has realized 
that she was being urged to her own destruction, and 
has been unable to resist. It was as though her own 
will was entirely in subjection to that of some diabolical 
intelligence. 

'"And this is in no respect an exceptional case. I have 
heard of many similar experiences in this country, and I 
have a record of hundreds that have occurred in Europe. 
Since first taking this stand as an exponent of the dangers 



of Spiritism, people have written to me from all 

parts of the world, and all these letters have told practically 

the same story. Everywhere lives are being 

rained, minds are being shattered, and personality is being 

disintegrated as the result of the most innocent experiments 

in psychical research. 

'"During a trip on the continent some three years ago 
I made the acquaintance of a successful business man, 
who told me incidentally that he had acquired the power 
of "automatic writing." He said that it was the source 
of much entertainment and amusement to him, and, as 
he did not believe in "spirits" or the survival of human 
personality after death, he was not in the least interested 
to discover what the source of the strange messages 
might be. He thought that the phenomenon might be 
due to the action of some undiscovered or unknown law 
of our mental life. 

'"It had become a habit with him to resort to his 
"mystic" writing on all possible occasions, and he not 
only asked advice in perplexing questions, but was guided 
by that advice. His physical health was good except that 
he complained of a pressure over the back of his head, 
which would come on suddenly, and continue, increasing 
in severity, until he yielded to the impulse to write. As 
soon as the message had been given, this feeling would 
pass away. 

'"I pointed out some of the dangers of these experiments, 
but my warning only caused him very great amusement. 
About two years later, being again on the continent, 
I made inquiries regarding my acquaintance. I was 
told that he had met with a serious accident and had 
just been discharged from the hospital. Accordingly, I 
went to see him, and, at my request, he gave me a full 
account of what had happened. 

UNDER A DOMINATION 

"The promptings to take the pencil and write had 
gradually, but very steadily, increased, and, as it was 
always accompanied by severe pressure over the head, he 
had never been able to resist the impulse for any great 
length of time. The amusement of the thing wore off 
with the increased and compulsory frequency of the experiment, 
and it had finally come to the point where he 
considered the writing rather a nuisance. In consequence 
he had again and again offered determined resistance 
to the impulse, even at the risk of passing sleepless 
nights and injuring his health, but he always had to 
give way in the end. 

'"Thus a kind of domination had been established over 
him, and as he could not conceive how a mere tendency 
or habit could so thoroughly establish itself, he questioned 
the pencil, and was informed that he was under 
the influence of the spirits, and that if he did not do their 
bidding they would ruin him. 

"It was at about this time that the impulse commenced 



to assume a different form. Instead of the 

prompting to write, a thought suggesting some absurd if 

not quite unreasonable action would come to his mind, 

and, regardless of his own judgment, he would finally 

yield to it to obtain relief from the painful pressure in his 

head. 

THE FIRST STEP 

'"I have quoted these cases at some length because 
they are typical of the experiences of so many persons 
who have become the unfortunate victims of these dangerous 
practices. In most cases the first false step is taken 
through a chance introduction to "planchette," the "ouija 
board," or some other apparently harmless and extremely 
amusing contrivance. Perhaps at the first trial there 
may be little if any response from the board, but if 
sufficient patience and persistence are shown and the 
proper attitude of passivity is maintained conscientiously 
it will probably not be long before the desired results 
will be realized. And it is from that moment that both 
the mind and the body of the operator are in danger. 

'"I have had my attention called to many of these 
cases of alleged "obsession" or duplex personality since 
coming to America, and I have no reason to doubt that 
there are quite as many victims of Spiritualism and 
psychical research in the insane asylum of this country as 
there are in Europe, and that means thousands, if not 
tens of thousands. 

'"One particularly sad case is that of a metaphysician 
who was well known to New Yorkers only a few years 
ago. An extremely brilliant woman and a successful 
practitioner, she exhibited no indications of mental derangement 
until after the accidental discovery of her 
ability to write "automatically," when, within a very brief 
space of time, her mind began to show the effects of her 
experiments, and a few months later it became necessary 
to send her to one of the institutions for the insane, and 
there she is still confined. 

"Though a woman of pure mind, noble character and 
great intellectual attainments, the ruin of her life was 
the price required for the privilege of making a few innocent 
psychical experiments. Certainly "like" did not 
"attract like" in her case! 

R4406 : page 167 

THOUSANDS MADE INSANE 

"And, in view of all these facts— for there are hundreds 
of equally well-established cases that might be 
cited— does it seem unreasonable that we should demand 
that psychical researchers show us some good 
object that is being attained by these investigations- 
some purpose that can justify this sacrifice of health and 
reason, if not life itself. For many years this work has 



been going on, and, so far as we can ascertain, its history 
can be traced by the trail of insanity and death for 
which it has been responsible. 

'"More than thirty years ago Dr. Forbes Winslow reported 
that "ten thousand unfortunate people are at the 
present time confined in lunatic asylums on account of 
having tampered with the supernatural." 

'"And what have we learned in return? We have 
faith that there is a life beyond the grave, but has 
psychical research been able to demonstrate its reality? 
We believe that there is a spiritual as well as a material 
world, but what evidence of this fact has science been 
able to gather? 

"'If we are to judge the character of that plane of 
existence by the lying, malicious and mischievous intelligences 
with which we come in contact through psychical 
research, the fact is almost irresistibly borne in upon 
us that we have been in communication not with departed 
friends, as we may have so fondly imagined, but rather 
with a company of spiritual burglars and confidence men. 

'"Does mob law reign in the "borderland," and are 
there no spiritual police? If there are, how come all 
these "obsessions" to take place, and who devises the 
frauds and tricks that are played so successfully upon 
people who are neither fools nor knaves?'" 



R4406 : page 167 

BROTHER RUSSELL'S EUROPEAN TOUR 

On Board "Mauretania," May 10th, 1909. 

TO THE FAMILY OF BROOKLYN BETHEL, 
BELOVED IN THE LORD:- 

When our steamer left the wharf in New York, while 
you were singing, "Blest be the tie that binds," and "God be 
with you till we meet again," my heart was full, and not 
mine alone; others, total strangers to us, were deeply 
affected, and one at least expressed himself as feeling a 
greater degree of security and safety in view of the divine 
blessing thus invoked. I estimated the number of our 
friends on the pier from the New York Church at about 90, 
and called to mind and applied to myself St. Paul's words, 
"I thank my God upon every remembrance of you, always 
in every prayer of mine for you all making request with 
joy. And for your fellowship in the gospel from the first 
day until now."— Phil. 1:3-5. 

We have had a very calm, and in every way pleasant 
voyage. The sea was exceedingly quiet, and our vessel, the 
speediest of the speedy, excelled her previous best record, 
making 612 knots during one 24 hours. 

Knowing in advance the boat we would take, several 
friends of the Truth going to Europe made it convenient 
to take the same vessel, and the fellowship enjoyed made 



the trip doubly delightful. However, we had not much 
time for visiting, as Brother Huntsinger, a stenographer, 
knowing that we would be pressed for time, kindly volunteered 
to make the journey with us, that we might have 
the opportunity of dictating some sermons and "Watch 
Tower" articles while going and coming across the Atlantic. 
The quietness of the voyage and our good health greatly 
facilitated this feature of the work. 

Our companions in voyage brought with them tracts 
which were liberally distributed on the ship, and apparently 
to some purpose, not only interesting some, but arousing 
the prejudice of others. On the ship were a Catholic 
bishop, two priests, two monks, two nuns and several 
Protestant preachers. The opposition became so bitter 
that not only the Catholics, but the Protestant preachers 
joined in requesting the Captain to cancel an appointment 
he already had made for us to preach. It was canceled 
with apologetic statements to the effect that the Ship 
Company merely sought to serve the public, and while 
surprised at the opposition felt it necessary to concede 
to its wishes. However, we are by no means certain that 
the hindrance thus effected did not work out some measure 
of good, as a considerable number of passengers expressed 
themselves as quite incensed at the narrow and bigoted 
course of both Catholics and Protestants, who evidenced 
the weakness of their cause by their fear to have the Truth 
of the Bible openly stated and heard. For our part we 
were unconcerned by the episode, believing that it was 
ours to use opportunities which the Lord might grant, and 
ours to be submissive and patient if the opportunity for 
presenting the Truth to the public were denied— if only 
a small hearing was had amongst the friends. It is ours 
to use opportunities with appreciation; it is the Lord's 
to open the door, to furnish the necessary opportunities. 
We are content to do our part, and to leave his part for 
his wisdom to direct, knowing that all his gracious purposes 
shall be accomplished. 

Yours in the love and service of our Redeemer and King, 
C. T. RUSSELL. 



R4406 : page 167 

WHAT MUST I DO TO BE SAVED? 

-ACTS 16:16-40.-JULY 11.- 

Golden Text:— "Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, 
and thou shalt be saved, and thy house." 

PAUL AND SILAS, bruised and doubtless bleeding 
from the cruel beating they had received at the 
command of the rulers of Philippi, were enabled 
to praise God in the prison, notwithstanding the fact that 
it must have been, like other prisons of that time, a most 



unhealthful and disagreeable dungeon. That night they 
sang praises to God. The other prisoners listening 
must have been surprised, it probably being the first time 
hymns to God had ever risen from that prison. If any 
other songs at all had ever echoed from its walls they 
were probably ribald, and inspired by alcoholic spirits. 
It is indeed remarkable that practically none but the 
Christian religion possesses a hymnology. Buddhists 
have none; the Mohammedans have none; the Confucians 
have none, and these three represent more than one-half 
of the world's population. Indeed, there seems to be 
nothing happifying or consoling in any religion except 
that of the Bible. The Bible alone teaches the love of 
God, his care over his consecrated saints and his provision 
for their change to glory, honor and immortality- 
yea, for the awakening of all the families of the earth 
and the bringing of all to a knowledge of the grace of 
God and to opportunities for life eternal. 

We can readily see that nothing less than a strong, living 
faith in God enabled those two missionaries to feel 
that their adversities endured for the sake of the Gospel 
meant to them Divine approval, if rightly received. It 
was because they realized that their trying experiences 
were but "light afflictions" which, under Divine providence, 
would work out for them a far more exceeding 
and eternal weight of glory— only this enabled these distressed 
men to triumph in their hour of distress and to 
praise God for the privilege of suffering as members of 
the Body of Christ, filling up a share of the sufferings of 
Christ that by and by they might also share his glory 
as members of his Body— members of the great antitypical 
Moses, the Mediator of the New Covenant. ~ 
Acts3:23. 

These things are written for our instruction, that, beholding 
the faithfulness of others, we might be encouraged. 
Our Covenant is the same as theirs and theirs 
the same as the Lord's, for the sufferings of Christ are 

R4406 : page 168 

one, however varied in character, and the glories to 
follow will be one, although the sharers will differ as 
star differeth from star in glory. The greater the sufferings 
faithfully endured, uncomplainingly, rejoicingly, 
the greater will be the reward in the Kingdom of our 
Father and of our Lord. 

A WELL-TIMED EARTHQUAKE 

Whilst the missionaries were singing, an earthquake 
shock was experienced which jarred the walls and loosed 
the staples of the chains whereby they were bound, releasing 
also the bars wherewith their prison-doors were 
held in place. The jailor, finding the doors down and 
supposing that the prisoners had escaped, and knowing 
that he would be held responsible, drew his sword and 



was about to suicide, when St. Paul called to him and 
said: "Do thyself no harm. We are all here." By this 
time the jailer was fully convinced that the missionaries 
committed to his care were remarkable men— not ordinary 
criminals. Possibly, indeed, he had some knowledge 
of demonism and obsession and had heard that, by 
word of mouth, one of these men had spoiled a supposedly 
Divine "oracle," by exercising some superior power. 

At all events the jailer was now ready to care for 
these prisoners and to hear the message of God's love. 
Presumably he first secured the prison, the while thinking 
over all these matters, and then brought the missionaries 
into his own living quarters in the prison. He 
attended to their comfort and meantime heard from them 
something respecting their mission— respecting Jesus the 
Messiah and his death as the world's Redeemer. He was 
convicted of sin. He realized in a general way at least 
that all mankind are sinners, aliens, separated from God 
by wicked works. He longed for a realization of a forgiveness 
of his own sins and a reconciliation with his 
Creator. And these missionaries, above all others, could 
help him. Hence his inquiry, "What must I do to be 
saved?" What must I do to come into relationship with 

R4407 : page 168 

God, that I, like you, might be able to realize his loving 
care in all of my affairs; that, like you, I might be able 
to glory in tribulation, and to realize that all things will 
work together for my good under Divine providence? 

The answer came promptly: "Believe on the Lord 
Jesus Christ and thou shalt be saved, and thy house." 

Taking this as the text the missionaries explained to 
the jailer and his household some of the philosophy of 
the Divine Plan of Atonement, the death of Jesus, the 
just for the unjust, the blessing that, in due time, is to 
reach Adam and his race through the resurrection processes 
and the privilege now of hearing and accepting the 
Divine call to joint-heirship with Jesus as his "members" 
in the sufferings of this present time and the glory that 
shall follow. 

The Truth-seed sank into good soil. Those present believed 
and gratefully accepted the privilege of discipleship 
—to suffer for Christ's sake. Forthwith they were 
baptised, thus symbolizing their death to the world and 
to sin and to self, and their desire to walk in newness of 
life as "members" of the Christ. Ah, how the missionaries 
must have realized that they were as much providentially 
directed to the jail (by the injustice of the magistrates) 
as they had been previously guided to Lydia 
and the riverside prayer meeting ! Their faith was 
strengthened. They were willing to endure hardness 
with patience and joy for the sake of enjoying this great 
privilege of carrying the good tidings to others. 

According to some standards it was now high time for 
these missionaries to strike for Five Thousand Dollars a 



year and a parsonage, and especially to strike against 
any further persecution or beatings and to tell the Lord 
that they had had enough along the lines of self-sacrificing. 
But the effect was just the opposite. They were the 
more encouraged to go on, to endure still further sufferings. 
We must see to it that our experiences tally with 
those of Jesus and the apostles. We must not be looking 
for any other kind nor be satisfied unless we find 
opportunities for suffering for the Truth's sake. We may 
be assured that although times have changed in some 
respects our Lord was quite right when he declared, 
"Whosoever will live godly in this present time shall 
suffer persecution." It may be in his own home and 
family or in the Church or from the world; he will not 
escape if he is faithful. If, therefore, any of us is 
escaping persecutions he should feel fearful of his condition 
and make careful examination as to whether or not 
he is faithful to all the privileges and opportunities 
he can find. This does not mean that we should seek 
persecutions in the sense of doing foolish things or doing 
proper things in a foolish manner. But it does mean 
that we should not shrink the responsibility of proper 
conduct, because of fear of consequences. Fear is one of 
the most subtle foes of the "little flock." It should be 
offset by trust, faith in God. 

PAUL AND SILAS SHARERS IN SUFFERINGS 

The account tells us that St. Paul alone rebuked the 
evil spirit and thus he alone was responsible for the 
tumult. We can readily see how Silas might improperly 
have taken a course in opposition— might have publicly 
reprimanded St. Paul and partially, at least, have joined 
with the multitude and thus have escaped arrest and 
beating and imprisonment. Or if his disloyalty had been 
greater than this he might have upbraided St. Paul and 
said, Why did you not mind your own business and let 
that young woman alone? She was commending us, not 
opposing us. We should have gone right along preaching 
the Gospel. You are always getting us into trouble. 
I intend to leave and to start on a more successful missionary 
tour of my own. Alas, we all know some who 
have just such a wrong spirit as would take such a wrong 
view of the situation. We are glad that it was not so 
with Silas— that he was a worthy companion to the noble 
Paul. He recognized the Lord's blessing upon the Apostle 
and that he was being specially used of the Lord and 
that whatever experiences came to them the Lord was 
able and willing to overrule for good. Thus Silas was 
privileged to share in the privileges of the beating, of the 
songs, of the conversion of the jailer. Surely it means 
a great deal and brings a great deal of blessing to have 
faith in the Lord and to be obedient to Divine providences 
and not too worldly-wise and cautious and self-seeking. 

The Apostle mentions in Heb. 10:32 some who "endured 
a great fight of affliction," and some others who 



were merely their companions in the shame without experiencing 

the same losses. The Apostle points out that 

God appreciates faithfulness in either of these respects 

and will duly give a reward. Let us be faithful to the 

Lord, followers of his leading and sharers of his 

blessings. 

"LET THEM COME AND FETCH US" 

The magistrates evidently realized that they had no 
just cause against the missionaries. The beating and imprisoning 
of them was merely to satisfy the public clamor, 
just as when Pilate similarly commanded Jesus to be 
beaten, not as a satisfaction for justice, but to appease 
the anger of the multitude. But St. Paul had not been a 
lawyer for nothing. The night before he had probably 
attempted to tell the rulers that he and Silas were Roman 
citizens and had the right to demand a fair trial before 
having any kind of punishment, but probably the clamor 
of the people was so great that their protests were unheard. 
Now, however, the missionaries sent word to the 
magistrates that they were Roman citizens and had been 
unjustly dealt with and would have to be treated in such 
a manner as would show that they had done no wrong. 
This would avoid leaving a reproach upon the faith at 
Philippi. The public should not say to them, "Your 
teachers were tried and expelled from this city and forbidden 
to return." On the other hand, notice the spirit of 
compromise. The missionaries did not insist on going 
forth to preach in public and demand that they be given 
legal protection in the exercise of their liberties. On 
the contrary, they concluded they had accomplished all in 
their power and that God's providence was now directing 

R4407 : page 169 

them elsewhere. They acted upon Jesus' counsel, "If 
they persecute you in one city flee to another." 

Thus a peaceful compromise was effected by which the 
magistrates were relieved from further difficulty and the 
missionaries were honorably led forth as men who had 
done nothing amiss, but who had concluded that in the 
interests of peace they would quit the city, although their 
rights as Roman citizens would have permitted them to 
remain. Some of the Lord's people make the mistake of 
not insisting sufficiently on their rights and others err 
in the opposite way of insisting too much for their earthly 
rights. Here in St. Paul's condition we find illustrated 
the proper course— "the spirit of a sound mind." He 
insisted on such of his rights as were reasonable and 
necessary for the cause, and he freely relinquished other 
rights in the interests of peace; in harmony with the 
Scriptures, "Seek peace and pursue it;" and again, in 
harmony with his own exhortation, "So far as lieth in 
you, live peaceably with all men." 

Before separating they returned to the home of Lydia 



and "met the brethren" and comforted them. What they 
said for the comfort of the brethren is not difficult to 
imagine. They surely recounted to them the joy they 
had experienced in suffering for Christ's sake and how 
the Lord overruled their trials and difficulties, sufferings 
and imprisonment for good, in that thereby the jailer and 
his family were added to the number of brethren— "the 
Lord's jewels." 

Whoever has read the New Testament properly has 
surely noticed the spirit of brotherhood therein recorded 
as prevalent amongst those accepted of the Lord 
as members of the household of faith. And whoever intelligently 
comes in contact with those who are now rejoicing 
in the Present Truth must surely note something 
of the same spirit of brotherhood, in a remarkable 
degree. 



"FATHER, GLORIFY THY NAME!' 1 

"Father, glorify thy name!" 

Is my humble prayer; 
Not because in all thy joys 

I may have a share; 
But because my love for thee 

Has grown deeper, Lord, 
I would have thy blessed name 

By all hearts adored. 

"Father, glorify thy name!" 
Is my earnest prayer. 

It may cost me keenest pain- 
Yet, O Lord, I dare 

To uplift this fervent plea, 
And the answer claim: 

Though it mean the cross for me, 
Glorify thy name! 

"Father, glorify thy name!" 

Is my daily prayer. 
All the loss my life may know 

Thou wilt help me bear; 
To thy will I say, Amen! 

In thy love I trust: 
Father, glorify thy name 

Through unworthy dust! 

"Father, glorify thy name!" 

Is my constant prayer; 
I have nought to dread or fear— 

Thou hast all my care. 
Death can be but gain for me, 

E'en a death of shame: 
Father, grant my humble prayer, 

Glorify thy name! 



-F. G. BURROUGHS. 

R4407 : page 169 

THE BEREANS THE MORE NOBLE 

--ACTS 17:1-15.-JULY 18- 

Golden Text:— "Thy Word have I hid in mine heart, 
that I might not sin against thee."— Psa. 119:11. 

LEAVING Philippi the missionaries, Paul, Silas and 
Timothy, went a journey of about one hundred 
miles to the southwest and stopped at the city of 
Thessalonica, made famous by the fact that two of St. 
Paul's epistles were addressed to the Christians of that 
city. En route they passed two cities, where apparently 
they found no opening for their message, no hearts prepared. 
Philippi was one of the few cities where the Gospel 
made any headway, that had not first come under the 
influence of Judaism to some extent. Evidently the scattering 
of the Jews throughout this region had more or 
less acquainted their neighbors with the true God and the 
observance of his laws and respect for his revelations and 
for the promised Messiah. 

At Thessalonica the missionaries found a Jewish synagogue 
and, in harmony with their usual custom, they 
attended worship there and for three Sabbath days they 

R4408 : page 169 

reasoned with the attendants from the Scriptures. The 

word here rendered reasoned implied a dialogue or discussion. 

The Apostle discussed the Bible with the Jews. 

This form of preaching the Gospel, which has fallen considerably 

into disuse amongst Christians, is an excellent 

one. We have endeavored to revive it amongst the friends 

of Present Truth everywhere by specially commending to 

them the Berean Studies and such discussions of the 

Word with the aid of helps. The effect is excellent. In 

this way many obtain clearer conceptions of the Truth 

than they would get from any ordinary discourse. True, 

the "Pilgrims" usually deliver discourses, because their 

visits are but occasional. But even these we urge to give 

in each place at least one sample of a properly-conducted 

Berean Study, that the dear friends may become accustomed 

to this early method of indoctrination. 

This method of discussion was usual with the Jews, 
but they needed just what the Lord sent them in the 
Apostle, namely, some one to explain the Scriptures, some 
one to answer their questions and to show them and to 
help them to find the answers to their own questions in 
the Scriptures. So to-day it is important that a Berean 
Study have a wise and an intelligent leader, of sufficiently 



humble mind to be worthy of the Truth himself and to be 
willing to call attention to it through whatever channels 
the Lord may be willing to use for its dissemination. Not 
only is it true that "pride goeth before destruction, and a 
haughty spirit before a fall," but it is also true that pride 
blinds the mental vision and hinders many from being 
able to see the Truth who otherwise might be burning and 
shining lights— showing forth true light. Instead, many 
are so anxious to shine forth a light of their own that 
they get between the people and the true light. The 
Lord is willing to help us to humble ourselves in proportion 
as we are diligent for his service, willing to be nothing 
ourselves and careful to recognize as leaders only 
such as hold forth the words of life without seeking undue 
prominence for themselves in the Church. 

IT BEHOOVED CHRIST TO SUFFER AND TO RISE 

After telling us that St. Paul reasoned or discussed 
with the Jews the Gospel message something of his 
method is explained; namely, he opened the Scriptures to 
them, explaining what they had not previously noted respecting 
the fact that it was necessary for Christ to suffer 
(death) and to rise from the dead before he could be the 
King promised. The Jews knew of the Scriptures which 

R4408 : page 170 

referred to his sufferings, but they ignored them and 
grasped only those which referred to our Lord's Millennial 
reign of glory, honor and power. The Apostle showed 
the connecting links— that death reigned over the race 
through the power of sin inbred, ingrained, and was in 
harmony with the Divine sentiments, "The soul that sinneth 
it shall die." He showed that none could be released 
from this condition without a Redeemer. Messiah 
would indeed reign over his Kingdom, the world, but 
previously a redemption must take place, a lifting of the 
curse. Then he produced the facts of Jesus' death, the 
Just for the unjust, and that his resurrection was exactly 
what was declared by the prophets, and the necessary 
thing, for him to carry out in due time the foretold blessing 
of Israel under the New Covenant and the blessing of 
the world through Israel. He showed that first, however, 
an elect class must be gathered to be associated with 
the Lord in his Kingdom and that these must demonstrate 
their worthiness by laying down their lives in his 
service in consecration. The sum of his argument was, 
"This Jesus whom I preach unto you is the Messiah." 

Some of the Jews believed the message and took sides 
with Paul and Silas, but evidently only a minority. With 
them were some devout Greeks, quite a number also of 
prominent women. The division time had come. The 
"wheat" amongst the Jews in Thessalonica must be separated 
from the "chaff" class, as elsewhere; they were 
being gathered into the Gospel garner, into the spirit 



dispensation. They were being transferred from Moses 
to Christ, from natural Israel to the new Spiritual Israel, 
called to be a "royal priesthood, a peculiar people," for 
a Divine purpose. 

Of course, only a minority of the Jews were in a proper 
attitude of heart to receive the good tidings, and the effect 
upon the remainder was to embitter them, because 
the arguments were too strong for them and because, not 
being humble-minded, but proud-spirited, they became 
jealous of the success achieved by these strangers who 
had been in the city but a few weeks and who, nevertheless, 
had already made considerable impression upon Gentiles, 
whom they had been unable to influence and to 
convert to Judaism. 

Having no truthful argument, no logic wherewith they 
could overcome the arguments of the missionaries, the 
unbelieving Jews resorted to Satan's usual tactics of misrepresentation, 
slander, arousing prejudice, hatred, malice, 
etc. They incited an uproar in the city— a mob, 
which made an assault upon the house of Jason, with 
whom the missionaries were lodging. Not finding the 
missionaries, the mob, under leadership, took Jason and 
other believers before the magistrates, saying, "These 
that have turned the world upside down have come here 
also." Jason has received them, and thus is a participant 
in their wrong doing. They are traitors to this government 
and its honorable Emperor Caesar, for they teach 
another King called Jesus. 

This was almost the exact charge made against our Redeemer 
when he was brought to Pilate's judgment bar. 
And there was a measure of Truth in it, for the Caesars 
not only claimed to be civil rulers of the world, but also 
claimed the title Pontifex Maximus, or chief religious 
ruler. While the Kingdom that Jesus and the apostles 
preached is a heavenly one, a spiritual one, the message 
includes the thought that in due time this heavenly rule 
or authority would be extended to the affairs of earth 
and Messiah's Kingdom be world-wide— under the whole 
heavens. We can readily see how such a proclamation 
might be construed as treasonable from the world's 
standpoint, but surely the Jews had no excuse for using 
their influence along these lines, for they well knew that 
all the hopes and promises in which their nation rejoiced 
led up to just such a Kingdom hope. Nevertheless, their 
pride and hatred blinded them to the injustice of their 
course, when they incited the heathen multitude. 

It will not at all surprise us if, in the near future, we 
should be similarly charged with treason because we 
preach "the Kingdom of God's dear Son" about to be 
established in power and great glory; and that its establishment 
will take place in the midst of a period of social 
distress and anarchy. It will not surprise us, either, if 
false Christians (Christians not in the proper attitude of 
heart to receive the message of Present Truth) should 
be the very ones to incite the multitudes and the rulers 
against us. 



TURNING THE WORLD UPSIDE DOWN 

This charge was made by the Jews. They realized that 
there was a conflict on between Judaism and Christianity, 
and that wherever the two came in contact there could 
be naught else than a clash and conflict, and one or the 
other be turned upside down. Similarly, some of those 
who at present are blinded to Present Truth rail at us, 
using almost the same language. And the truthfulness 
of the assertions cannot be controverted. The Gospel of 
Christ did create differences in the Jewish system then, 
as the Gospel Truth is doing now in Christendom. And 
this is what Jesus foretold when he said, "Think not that 
I have come to send peace upon the earth. I have come 
to send a sword. A man's foes shall be they of his own 
household." Our experiences, like the experiences of the 
apostles, corroborate the Truth of our Lord's statement. 
An irrepressible conflict is on. However, had the Jews 
only properly understood the matter they need not have 
given themselves such concern, but might have known 
that comparatively few would accept the message of the 
Gospel— the few going out from them would scarcely be 
missed. 

And so it is today. Our dear friends in the various denominations 
are fearful that Present Truth will capture 
their people by the wholesale. But they are mistaken. 
It will take only the select, the "elect," and leave the 
remainder. The wheat are comparatively few in proportion 
to the tares. And only the wheat is being gathered. 
The tares must be left in the bundles— in sectarian bodies. 
And it is better so. They must not in any manner get 
in amongst the wheat ready for the garner— the separation 
amongst the wheat and the tares should not, and 
could not, take place in the past, but must and will take 
place now in the harvest of this Age. 

This attack upon Jason and others apparently was not 
permitted of the Lord until the work of propagation had 
been well accomplished and those who had an ear to 
hear had a good opportunity to hear the message. The 
rulers of Thessalonica put Jason and the other believers 
under bonds to guarantee against a certain forfeit of 
money or property that these Christian missionaries 
should raise no further disturbance. As a result Paul 
and Silas realized that their work at Thessalonica was at 
an end and that they must not jeopardize the interests of 
the cause and their friends by their further public utterances. 
Paul agreed that they should leave the city 
quietly, secretly. 

"THEY SEARCHED THE SCRIPTURES DAILY" 

The next stopping place was Berea, and there, as usual, 
the missionaries went first to the synagogue. They were 
agreeably surprised to find the Jews at that place so honest-hearted. 
We read, "These were more noble than those 



in Thessalonica, in that they received the Word with all 
readiness of mind, and searched the Scriptures daily, 
whether those things were so." Many of them, therefore, 
believed— Jews and Greeks, men and women. Here 
is a suggestion to us— to all. We should have a judgment 
and conviction respecting the Divine Word, but it 
should not be so unreasonable a one as would hinder us 
from receiving a further knowledge from the same source. 
We are to try the spirits, the teachings, the doctrines. 
This does not signify, however, that we "are to be 
blown about by every wind of doctrine." We should 
know in whom we have believed and having once been 
convinced we should not be easily turned aside from a 
properly grounded faith. If we are satisfied that we 
have been building upon the Rock Foundation furnished 
us in the Divine Revelation we should expect that any 
further light coming to us would not be contradictory to 

R4409 :page 171 

that which we have received and found Scriptural and 

harmonious with the Divine character. We should expect 

that all further light from the Divine Word would 

be consistent with the foundations of our faith. Anything 

that would set aside or make valueless the first 

principles of the doctrines of Christ should be promptly 

rejected. 

If, for instance, anyone attempted to prove to us that 
we were justified by faith in a Covenant we should 
promptly reject it and assure him that we were justified 
by faith in the precious blood of Christ and that the substitution 
of a Covenant for the blood would be setting 
aside the very foundations for our faith, upon which we 
have been building. Similarly all doctrines which ignore 
the fall of man and, therefore, ignore or deny that he 
was created perfect and in the likeness of God should be 
set aside because, if the fall of man be denied, the redemption 
is necessarily denied and everything else built 
upon that doctrine of redemption. As a matter of fact, 
the various religious theories of the world require very 
little thought or study on the part of any Christian who 
has built his faith, not upon human traditions, but upon 
the Word of the Lord. The doctrine of the Ransom, that 
Christ died for our sins and that we have forgiveness 
through faith in his blood, and reconciliation thus to God 
will generally prove, test, decide, the various new doctrines 
presented to us and show us quickly that they 
are not of God, nor in harmony with the Divine Plan, of 
which the Cross of Christ is the center. 

We must be on guard even in respect to doctrines 
which acknowledge the precious blood. And a clear discernment 
of the Divine Plan is necessary to this end, and 
this implies the searching of the Scriptures daily. It is 
not sufficient that we have used the Divinely provided 
helps. We are to remember that our memories are 
treacherous and that if we are not imbibing the Word in 



some form we are apt to lose valuable connecting links, 
leaving us open to some of our great Adversary's covert 
attacks. 

PERSECUTED IN EVERY CITY 

If the missionaries of the Cross were vigilant and 
earnest, so were the servants of error. The Jews of 
Thessalonica learned that the missionaries were at Berea 
and forthwith began to foment strife and to raise a disturbance 
amongst the people. The missionaries concluded 
that this was a sign that they should move forward. 
Let us consider how much we might gain by following 
such a course! Let us be on the alert to watch 
for the leadings of the Lord's providence and, while not 
fleeing persecution in the ordinary sense, be ready to 
move when persecution seems inevitable and when apparently 
it might be considered as an indication from the 
Lord that he had service for us in some other field of 
labor. "When they persecute you in one city, flee ye to 
another." Thus persecuted St. Paul went next to Athens 
and thither Silas and Timothy followed him later. 

"THY WORD HAVE I HID IN MINE HEART" 

The Golden Text reminds us that not only the Word of 
the Lord is necessary as a guide to a knowledge of him, 
but that it is valuable to us and necessary, after we have 
found the Lord and become members of his family, begotten 
of the holy Spirit. Moreover it is necessary that 
we do more than know about the Scriptures and have an 
appreciation of their teachings. We must get their Truths 
into our hearts. There are certain points which underlie 
the Divine Law and all of its regulations bearing upon 
us, and these points cannot be comprehended at once. 
Day by day as we persevere in the study of the Truth, as 
we meditate upon God's Law by day and by night, we 
come to clearer views of these great principles of Truth- 
Justice, Love and Wisdom— which underlie all of the 
Divine Government. In proportion as we attain this attitude 
of heart and mind we know the Lord not only in 
the sense of appreciating his glorious character, but in 
the sense that we are enabled to put those points into 
operation in our daily lives— in our deeds, our words, our 
thoughts. Whoever does not attain to this heart appreciation 
of the Divine arrangements will be sure to sin 
against the Lord, to keep his Covenant of consecration 
imperfectly and those who so do will fail to gain the 
highest prize, if, indeed, they be accounted worthy of 
eternal life upon any plane of being. 

Let us then not only search the Scriptures daily and 
obtain intellectual appreciation of the Divine character, 
but let us meditate upon these eternal verities in our 
hearts. Let us familiarize ourselves with these points 
of Divine Government. Let us come more and more into 
sympathy with them— come into fullest harmony with 



our Creator and his requirements ! 



page 171 

"THINK IT NOT STRANGE" 

"Beloved, think it not strange concerning the fiery trial which 

is to try you, as though some strange thing happened 

unto you; but rejoice, inasmuch as ye are partakers 

of Christ's sufferings, that, when his glory 

shall be revealed, ye may be glad also 

with exceeding joy."— 1 Pet. 4:12,13. 

PERHAPS few have learned to value the discipline 
of the Lord as did the faithful Apostle who 
wrote these words. While he as well as others 
realized that no affliction for the present seemeth joyous, 
but rather grievous, yet knowing the ministry of such 
discipline, and recognizing it as an additional evidence 
of sonship to God, he rejoiced in being a partaker of it. 

But why is it that fiery trials must come to us? Is 
there no way of gaining the crown without these crosses? 
No, there is not; for if ye receive not the discipline of 
trial "whereof all are partakers, then are ye bastards, 
and not sons," "for what son is he whom the Father 
chasteneth not?" Trials of faith and patience and love 
and endurance are as necessary to our development and 
our fitting for the high position to which we are called, 
as are the instructions of the divine Word and the special 
manifestations of divine grace. The blessed sunshine 
and shower have their benign influence, but none the less 
the cloud and the storm; but we need ever to bear in 
mind that the cloud has its silver lining, and that God is 
in the whirlwind and in the storm. 

Like water upon the parched earth, and like sunshine 
to vegetation after winter snows, so the message of 
divine truth comes to us and with it the blessed realization 
of divine favor. In the joy of our new-found treasure 
we are apt to think at first that we have actually 
entered the Beulah land of joy and peace where sorrow 
and trial can never more come to us. But no; there are 
sorrows ahead and trials beyond, and we will need all 
the strength which the truth can give and all the blessed 
influences that divine grace can impart to enable us to 
endure faithfully to the end. 

But do not stop to worry about the trials until they 
come; only remember the Apostle's words— "Think it 
not strange," when they do come. They come to prove 
you and to strengthen your character and to cause the 
principles of truth and righteousness to take deep root in 
your heart. They come like fiery darts from our great 
enemy, Satan, whose wrath against the children of light 
is permitted to manifest itself in various ways; but his 
darts cannot injure those who securely buckle on the 



divinely provided armor of truth and righteousness. 
"Wherefore," says the Apostle, "take unto you the whole 
armor of God,. ..above all, taking the shield of 
faith, wherewith ye shall be able to quench all the fiery 
darts of the wicked."— Eph. 6:13-17. 

The Christian life is thus set forth as a warfare— a 
warfare, "not against flesh and blood, but against principalities, 

page 172 

against powers, against the rulers of the darkness 
of this world, against spiritual wickedness in 
high places." (Eph. 6:12.) In other words, as 
Christians, imbued with the spirit of our Master, we find 
the principles of truth and righteousness which we have 
espoused, to be at variance with the whole present order 
of things, which is to a very large extent under the control 
of "the prince of this world"— Satan. And when 
sin is thus so inwrought throughout the whole social 
fabric of the present age; and not only so, but when we 
also find the flesh, our own old nature, in harmony with 
it, we see into what close quarters we must come with 
the enemy, and what a hand-to-hand and life-long struggle 
it must needs be. Yet our weapons are not carnal, 
but spiritual; and the Apostle says they are mighty for 
the pulling down of the strongholds of error and iniquity. 
-2 Cor. 10:4,5. 

When, therefore, the fiery trials and darts from the 
enemy come upon you, be ready as an armed soldier of 
the cross to meet and withstand them. If you run away 
from them, you are a coward, and not worthy to be 
called a soldier. 



R4409 : page 172 

WORSHIPING THE UNKNOWN GOD 

-ACTS 17:16-34.-JULY25.- 

Golden Text:— "God is a spirit; and they that worship him 
must worship him in spirit and in truth."— John 4:24. 

ST. PAUL awaited the coming of Silas and Timothy 
at Athens, then the center of the world's culture, 
intelligence and worldly wisdom. Athens 
boasted that in one century of its intellectual dominance 
it had sent forth more intellectual giants into all the 
world than all the rest of the world had supplied for 
five centuries. Jerusalem had been the center of true 
religion, as Rome was the center of the world's imperial 
authority, and Athens was the world's intellectual capital. 
We can imagine St. Paul walking through the streets of 
that great city, admiring its architecture, the most wonderful 
of the world, listening to some of the scientific 



teachers of that day and noting the numerous monuments 
with which the city was fairly crowded. Pliny, the historian, 
notes the fact that about this time Athens contained 
more than three thousand public statues and a 
countless number of lesser images in private houses. Of 
these the majority were of gods, demigods and heroes. 
He notes the fact that in one street there stood before 
every house a square pillar carrying upon it the bust of 
the god Hermes. Every gateway and post carried its 
protecting god. Every street had its sanctuary. 

No wonder we read that Paul's spirit was stirred 
within him as he beheld so intelligent a city wholly 
given over to idolatry, apparently utterly ignorant of the 
true God. The longing seized him to tell these worldly-wise 
men of the great Creator and his wisdom, justice, 
love and power. He found the Jewish synagogue as 
usual and there he reasoned with the Jews and with 
devout persons and in the market places he talked with 
all who were willing. Our translation says disputed, but 
it is generally admitted that this word does not well represent 
the thought of the original, which rather signifies 
conversed or reasoned. Disputes, in the ordinary sense 
of that word, are of little value, usually accomplishing 
little good. 

Some called him a babbler, implying that there was 
neither reason nor sense in his presentation, but others 
thought more favorably and were curious to have a formal 
discourse. So in the Lord's providence the way was 
open for him to deliver a discourse on the Plan of the 
Ages amongst the wise men of the earth on Mars Hill, 
probably in the great structure known as the Parthenon. 
This must have seemed a favorable opening to the Apostle 
to find intelligent people really inquiring respecting 
the Gospel he had to proclaim. However, the curiosity 
of the Athenians, like that of some of the worldly today, 
was superficial. They wished to keep abreast of 
every new theory, but particularly that they might the 
better defend their own position to which they were already 
committed. 

YE ARE TOO RELIGIOUS 

Our common version reports the Apostle to have begun 
his discourse by accusing his hearers of being too 
superstitious. However true the statement might have 
been it would have been an unwise one, as it would have 
prejudiced and offended his hearers from the outstart 
and needlessly. We do well, therefore, to translate the 
word too religious, instead of too superstitious. And 
this translation fits well with the discourse which followed. 
For the Apostle proceeds to show that by the 
images erected they recognized innumerable gods and 
that in addition he had seen one altar to the unknown 
God. This was being over-religious in one sense of the 
word— unwisely so. Reason should have taught them 
what Revelation teaches us, namely, that there is but 



one living and true God. The mind that roams about and 
grasps innumerable gods is truly over-religious and 
under-wise. 

"TO THE UNKNOWN GOD" 

The inscription on one of the altars, "To the unknown 
God," became the text of the Apostle's discourse. He 
preached the true God and Jesus Christ whom he had 
sent. He showed Divine justice and its requirements, 
which we, as the fallen race of Adam, are unable to 
meet; that thus we are under condemnation and unworthy 
of eternal life. He showed that God so loved the 
world that he sent his Son to be our satisfaction price, 
to redeem us from the condemnation of death and to 
grant us resurrection privileges. He explained that this 

R4410 : page 172 

true God was neither stone nor wood, nor were there any 
such representations of him, but that, as our Golden 
Text declares, "They that worship him must worship him 
in spirit and in Truth." He drew their attention to a 
greater God than they had ever thought of. He showed 
the length and breadth of the Divine love— that it was 
not confined to one nation or people, but that God had 
made of one blood all nations of men for to dwell on all 
the face of the earth, having determined the appointed 
season in which they should come to a knowledge of himself, 
according to the place of their residence; because 
he desires that all should seek him and that feeling after 
him they should find him. 

How true! The Lord has revealed himself to some of 
us and has drawn us to a knowledge of himself and to 
opportunities for still further knowledge and grace. Yet 
many are still in ignorance, his time or season for their 
being brought to a knowledge of the Truth having not 
yet fully developed. He is being found by those who desire 
to find him; those who are out of accord with sin; 
those who are feeling after God with a desire to find him. 
To this class alone does he appeal. How glad we are 
that, after having gathered the "elect" of this Gospel 
Age, he will ultimately cause every knee to bow and 
every tongue to confess, and the knowledge of the Lord 
to fill the whole earth! 

The Apostle, in speaking to philosophers, spoke from 

R4410 : page 173 

the standpoint of reason, instead of attempting to discuss 

the matter from the standpoint of Divine Revelation, as 

he would have done had he been speaking to a congregation 

of Jews or Christians. Thus to the barbarians and 

to the stoics of Athens, he became a philosopher that he 

might the better assist them to the true philosophy and 

the Plan of the Ages. For instance, had he been speaking 



to the Jews or Christians he might have noted the 
fact that all out of Christ are out of Divine favor and 
under Divine condemnation; but in addressing these 
philosophers he stated the truth from another standpoint. 
He called attention to the fact that in one sense of the 
word the entire human family are brethren and all of 
them God's children, or offspring. Note the logic of the 
matter. If humanity be the offspring of God, as his children 
they should in some degree resemble him. And that 
being true the gold and silver and stone images must be 
very poor representations of the true God. Man himself, 
as the child or offspring of God, would better represent 
him, especially in the higher elements of his character. 

"THIS IGNORANCE GOD WINKED AT" 

Paul anticipated the question of his hearers— Why do 
you come around now to tell us of this God? If he is 
our Creator and we are his children why did he not long 
ago send us a message? And are we responsible for not 
having worshipped him, when we knew him not? The 
Apostle's answer is, You are not responsible up to the 
present time. Such ignorance or idolatry God winked at 
or let go unnoticed, because until now his great plan had 
not reached that stage of development which authorized 
the sending of the message to you. Now the message is 
for you. God has sent it. He commands all men everywhere 
to repent— of sins, all unrighteousness, and to 
come back into harmony with himself. 

It may be asked, Why tell men to repent at that time 
more than previously? We answer, that the Apostle explains 
why, by saying that now God commands all men 
everywhere to repent because he has appointed another 
day of judgment. In the first judgment Adam on trial 
was found unworthy of eternal life and was sentenced to 
death. His entire race shared in his death penalty. But 
now in due time Christ had redeemed Adam and his 
race from that death sentence and thus opened the way 
for the appointment of another day of judgment, of trial 
for life or death eternal. This second trial or day of 
judgment would not be merely for those who would be 
living at the time, but would have to do with all of the 
race, of every nation, people, kindred and tongue, "All 
men everywhere." This would imply an awakening of 
the dead. Otherwise the millions who have already died 
could never have God's grace and could never have an 
opportunity or participation in it. The proof that this all 
was God's intention and that he was able to raise the 
dead St. Paul points out as already demonstrated by the 
fact that the One who redeemed the race by his death 
had risen from the dead and in due time would be prepared 
to carry out all the provisions of the Divine Plan 
in dealing not only with the living, but the dead of the 
race and giving to all a gracious opportunity for eternal 
life;— and the blessed opportunity of this was now presented 
to those who heard. 



SOME MOCKED AT THE RESURRECTION 

No other religion than that of the Bible teaches a 
resurrection of the dead. All others teach that death is 
a deception— that when men die they really become more 
alive; when they lose consciousness, they really become 
more intelligent. Only the Bible teaches in accord with 
the voice of our sense that the dead are dead and "know 
not anything." Only the Bible teaches that a future life 
is dependent upon the resurrection of the dead. Only 
the Bible teaches that the redemption of the dead is dependent 
upon the death of our Lord Jesus. Only the 
Bible teaches that the Redeemer must come again the 
second time— not again to suffer, not again as the man, 
but as the Lord of life and glory on the spirit plane to 
change his elect Bride to his own nature, and to associate 
her with him in his Kingdom glory, and to establish 
amongst men the reign of righteousness long promised, 
and for which we pray, "Thy Kingdom come; thy will 
be done on earth as it is done in heaven." 

The philosophers of that day at Athens, like the 
philosophers of our day and of every epoch, sneered at 
the doctrine of the resurrection of the dead. Some of 
them denied a future life entirely; others held that 
human life persisted and is indestructible. All were 
in opposition to the Bible teaching of a sentence of death 
and redemption by death and a resurrection from death. 
All interest in the teaching of the apostles vanished for 
the majority when they learned that the entire philosophy 
rested upon the resurrection of the dead. To 
the worldly mind nothing seems so irrational and unreasonable 
as this feature of the Christian religion. This 
doctrine today is proving a test to many. Few can receive 
it. Yet all who do not receive it are very certain 
to stumble into some of the pitfalls of error which the 
Adversary is permitted to arrange now for the stumbling 
of all who reject the counsel of God. 

NOT MANY GREAT OR WISE 

Nevertheless the Apostle's mission was not in vain, for 
we read that "certain men clave unto him"— stuck to 
him. The Truth is a magnet which has a drawing 
power upon hearts of a certain character. The Apostle 
did not expect to convert many of those philosophers. 
He knew that not many wise, rich, great or learned 
according to the course of this world could come in 
amongst those whom the Lord is calling at the present 
time to constitute the Bride of Christ. He knew that 
their time to hear the message would be during the 
Millennium— in that day of judgment or trial of which 
he had just been telling. Some of those who declined to 
hear further said: "We may hear you again on this matter;" 
but if the Truth did not appeal to them at once it 
is quite doubtful if it would do so later. 



Does not this same principle hold true to-day? Is it 
not still true that the Lord is seeking a "little flock" 
only? Is it not still true that acceptance of the Truth 
indicates those who are drawn to the Lord and guided 
by his holy Spirit? and that inability to see its beauty 
and force is an indication of unworthiness of it? Let us 
be content, if possible, to find and to bless with the 
Truth those whom the Lord our God has called and 
drawn, and let us be content to leave the others for his 
"due time" after having put the Truth before them. 
The condemnation of death will continue upon all except 
the household of faith until the time for the establishment 
of the great Kingdom. Then Israel will be blessed 
under the terms of the New Covenant; the blood for the 
sealing, the blood of Christ, is now being prepared in the 
sufferings of the Head, in which the Body is permitted 
to share. Then, under the provisions of that New (Law) 
Covenant, the blind eyes of Israel will be opened and 
their deaf ears will be unstopped and reconciliation made 
complete to them. Evidently this privilege of reconciliation 
will be open to all the world of mankind who, 
by becoming proselytes, may share the blessings of that 
New Covenant with Israel. And how glorious will be our 
privilege if we are found faithful— to be sharers with 
our Lord in putting that New Covenant into execution, 
and, as its Mediator, blessing Israel and the world! 

OUR GOLDEN TEXT 

We do well to keep continually in mind the thought 
that God, with whom we have to do, is a spirit being of 
unlimited power; that he can read the very thoughts and 
intents of our hearts and that any worship or service 
that we could render, that he could accept, must be 
honest-hearted— rendered in spirit and in truth. He 
seeketh only such to worship him, and of this class there 
are but a few at the present time. After the Covenant 
of Grace shall have gathered out all the household of 

R4410 : page 174 

faith, the Royal Priesthood and the Great Company of 
antitypical Levites, then, as a means of extending God's 
favor, the New Covenant will witness the thousands of 
the world coerced to righteousness— that all may be enabled 
to see, to experience the love of God and the 
blessings of righteousness, to the intent that all who will 
may come into heart harmony with him and proportionately 
experience Restitution, the re-writing of the Divine 
Law in the very character, the very being. Yet in the 
end, even with the world, only such as worship God in 
spirit and in truth will be finally approved and be granted 
life eternal beyond the Millennial Age. 



R4411 :page 174 

"THE CHILDREN OF THE BLESSED" 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

I submit to you some of my deductions, desiring to 
know whether you view these matters in this light. My 
ruminations follow:— 

The 65th chapter of Isaiah, from the 17th to the 25th verses 
inclusive, gives a prophetic view of the Millennial 
Reign of Christ, as is shown from the statement in the 
17th verse, "I create new heavens and a new earth." 
Evidently this is the same new arrangement that Peter 
saw by faith when he said, "We, according to God's 
promise, look for a new heavens and a new earth, in 
which dwell righteousness"— the same new heavens and 
new earth that are referred to by the Revelator in chapter 21, verses 1-5 
inclusive. 

During a recent study particular attention was directed 
to verse 23 of Isaiah 65, which reads, in the Leeser Translation, 
"They shall not toil in vain, nor bring forth unto 
an early death; for the seed of the blessed of the Lord 
are they, and their offspring with them," and the question 
presented itself whether the statement, "nor bring 
forth unto an early death," had reference to child bearing 
during the time of the incoming Kingdom. It will 
be observed in the King James Translation the reading 
is, "nor bring forth for trouble." Young's Concordance 
shows that the Hebrew word "Yalad," translated "bring 
forth," beget, bear, is exactly the same word used under 
inspiration in Genesis 3:16, where God said unto the 
woman, "I will greatly multiply thy sorrow, and thy 
conception; in sorrow thou shalt bring forth children." 
With these points in mind note the significance of Isaiah 65:20 
(Leeser's Translation): "There shall no more come 
thence an infant of few days, nor an old man that shall 
not have the full length of his days; for as a lad shall 
one die a hundred years old; and as a sinner shall be 
accursed he who (dieth) at a hundred years old." 

These Scriptures seem to indicate that child bearing 
will continue for some time, at least, into the Millennial 
Age, if not up to within one hundred years or thereabouts 
of its close. At first thought this apparently conflicts with 
the Lord's statement in Luke 20:34-36, "And Jesus 
answering said unto them, The children of this world 
marry and are given in marriage; but they which shall 
be accounted worthy to obtain that world and the resurrection 
from the dead, neither marry nor are given in 
marriage; neither can they die any more; for they are 
equal unto the angels and are children of the resurrection." 
However, a more careful consideration of these 
words of the Lord would indicate that he presented at 
least primarily the estate of those accounted worthy to 
obtain an inheritance as members of the Kingdom, and 
as sharers in its resurrection, thus leaving the question 
of human conditions during the period of "resurrection by 



judgments" for amplification under other Scriptures, as 
well as under the secondary application of the Lord's 
words in Luke when the walk up to full resurrection by 
the earthly class is attained. 

We recall God's mandate to Adam and Eve after the 
creation, "Be fruitful and multiply and fill the earth." 
No doubt this command will have been literally carried 
out by the time of the end of the "Gentile Times." From 
other Scriptures we know that during the Gospel Age there 
will have been taken out from amongst men not only the 
"little flock," who will be upon the throne with their 
Lord, but also a "great number," who will be before the 
throne. In addition to these there is the "Son of Perdition" 
class who go to the Second Death; and the teaching 
of the Scripture is that during the Millennial Age there 
will also be some of this latter class who will not attain 
the heights to which the Highway of Holiness leads, and 
hence will be cut off in the Second Death. 

We have learned in our Bible Studies that our Heavenly 
Father is an Accurate Book-keeper, and that during 
the past few years the door has been left open after the 
close of the "General Call," that the places of those who 
lose their crowns may be secured by other volunteers, who 
are willing to join in and do what they can in the completion 
of the harvest work. Reasoning by analogies, 
the suggestion presents itself that the same Accurate 
Book-keeper, designing to have the Earth properly filled 
with human sons, has probably so arranged that during 
the Millennium, and from those who have not been child-bearers 
during the present evil world, there shall be 
"brought forth" those who may take the place of those 
sons of Adam who have gone to higher planes, or who 
through wilful sin lose life entirely. This class coming 
up by an awakening from the dead are not considered as 
Adam's seed, but are the seed of the "Blessed and only 
Potentate," who will then be known as the "Everlasting 
Father." (I. Tim. 6:15; Isaiah 9:6.) This gives special 
significance to the phrase in Isaiah 65:23, "For the seed 
of the Blessed of the Lord are they, and their offspring 
with them." 

Surely it will be a wonderful manifestation of the love 
and favor of God to thus arrange to fill the places in 
the human ranks that either his special favor on the one 
hand, or Satanic character on the other, may have vacated. 
And, further, under such an arrangement the manifold 
wisdom of God would be shown in ordering conditions 
under which child-bearing would be not in sorrow, as 
under the Adamic conditions since the fall, but under 
blessed conditions, where every feature of the curse would 
be removed. Thus humanity would have an example of 
how the earth would have been peopled had Adam and 
Eve not sinned, and had sorrow in conception and multiplication 
of conception not been inflicted as a penalty. 

Again, we can see that another grand feature will be 
brought to light; i.e., that it is sin in its cancerous working 
that has caused the fearful degeneracy in sex matters 



that is today preying upon the world, and that this 

quality, given to the race by its Beneficient Creator, when 

used in wisdom and righteousness, will be shown to be of 

the divine and pure order. It is true that right-minded 

men and women, even during the reign of sin, have discerned 

that it is sin and the abuse of God's favors that 

has brought especial trouble along these lines, yet, 

amongst the sodden classes of all ages and nations, the 

gross darkness is so complete upon this, as well as other 

matters, that no doubt a demonstration coming through 

the channels suggested will bring to full light the righteousness 

and majesty and wisdom and power of our God in 

this as in all other matters. 



R4411 :page 174 

SAMPLE OF INTERESTING LETTERS 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL AND ASSOCIATES:- 

It is now two months since I took the Vow, although 
I have been in favor of it since I first read it in the WATCH 
TOWER. I cannot keep from sending these few lines. 
The 91st Psalm is a great comfort to me, and I am glad 
I can come closer to the altar under the shadow of the 
Almighty. 

It is two and a half years since I found the Truth, 

R4411 :page 175 

and as I had been many years looking for it, I shall 

never forget the joy I then experienced and have experienced 

daily from that time in walking in my Master's 

footsteps accordingly. Through this light I have come 

to a larger appreciation and love for God, and am glad 

that I can now sing the song of Moses and the Lamb, 

more and more every day, and glad that the strings of 

my heart respond in harmony and more fully. It gives 

me courage and strength when I am weak; it gives me 

peace when storms are raging. It is a blessed privilege 

to offer gifts on the altar. 

My heart overflowed with joy when I realized that 
some of my friends had begun to see the same light. 
When we are willing to give up our former theories and 
are willing to reason together with our Lord we shall be 
able to say, "Thy will O Lord." I rejoice in taking this 
further step and in this way getting closer to the 
brethren and sisters, for I know that God will supply 
all my needs according to his riches in glory by Christ 
Jesus. 

What shall I render unto the Lord for all his benefits 
toward me? I will take the cup of salvation and 
offer the sacrifice of thanksgiving, and pay my Vows 
unto the Lord now in the presence of his people. 

Your sister in the One Hope, 



IDA C. IRENIUS.-N.Y. 



page 175 

BEREAN STUDIES ON THE ATONEMENT 

THE TEXT-BOOK USED FOR THIS COURSE 
IS SCRIPTURE STUDIES, SERIES V (E)* 

Questions on Scripture Study V. 
—Supposed Objections Considered 

JULY 4 

(1) Is it possible that the translation of the Scriptures 
by Trinitarians would give a gloss or color to their work? 
Does this apply to the revised version as well? P. 263. 

(2) Where do we read of quenching the holy Spirit? 
Give Scriptural quotation. P. 264, par. 2. 

(3) Where do the Scriptures speak of our being sealed 
with the holy Spirit? What does this signify? P. 264, 
par. 2. 

(4) Do the Scriptures speak of grieving the holy 
Spirit? What thought does this convey? P. 264, par. 2. 

(5) Cite a Scriptural passage speaking of the Spirit of 
Truth speaking of and showing things to come. P. 265, 
par. 1. 

(6) When we previously considered this text what did 
we ascertain concerning its meaning? P. 170. 

(7) Under what circumstances did our Lord utter the 
words of this text? What was the effect of the circumstances 
upon the apostles? And why did he promise them 

a Comforter? P. 265. 

(8) Explain our Lord's meaning in this promise of the 
Comforter, the Spirit of Truth. Did he mean another 
person than himself? If so, in what manner could another 
person advantageously fill his place? P. 266, par. 1. 

(9) Was it the Spirit of the Truth, the Spirit of Jesus 

or the Spirit of the Father or both, or was it a spirit being 
separate and distinct from them? P. 266. 

(10) Just what were the disciples to understand by the 
promise? P. 266, par. 2,3. 

JULY 1 1 

(11) In the expression "holy Ghost" what is the meaning 
of ghost? P. 269. 

(12) Read John 14:26. Explain how the "holy Ghost" 
could be sent, and what is implied by such expressions as 
"sin against the holy spirit," "pour out the holy spirit," 
etc. P. 267. 

(13) What is the significance of the expression that 
God would send the holy Spirit in his (Jesus') name? 
Why not in the Father's own name? P. 267. 

(14) Did the holy Spirit of the Father ever act as a 



comforter to our Lord Jesus? If so, where and how? P. 
268, par. 1. 

(15) Does the knowledge of the Father's will and of 
things to come comfort the natural man or only the New 
Creature? Why? P. 268, par. 1. 

(16) Where do we read, "They were all filled with the 
holy Spirit and began to speak with tongues as the Spirit 
gave them utterance"? P. 268, par. 2. 

(17) Explain the double action of the Spirit in this 
text, first possessing or filling them, and second speaking 
through them. P. 268, par. 3. 

JULY 18 

(18) Whom did St. Peter accuse of lying to the holy 
Spirit? Cite the Scripture. P. 269, par. 1. 

(19) How did Satan fill the heart of the evil-doer? Did 
he come personally into the man? Is Satan personally 
present everywhere? And in all liars and evil-doers? 
How could he be, except by his influence? P. 269, par. 2. 

(20) St. Peter speaks of lying to the holy Spirit. Why 
did he not say lying to God or lying against the Truth? 
P. 269, par. 2. 

(21) St. Peter is quoted as saying, "Ye have agreed 
together to tempt the Spirit of the Lord." Where is this 
written? P. 270, par. 1. 

(22) How are we to understand this matter of tempting 
the Spirit of the Lord? P. 270, par. 2. 

(23) Our Lord mentions a sin against the holy Spirit. 
Where? Quote the passage and cite it. P. 270. 

(24) Did our Lord here mean to teach that the holy 
Spirit is a more distinguished person than either the 
Father or the Son? If not, why this form of statement? 
P. 270, par. 4. 

(25) Did our Lord disclaim the power which he used 
and attribute it to the Father, saying that he cast out 
devils by the power of God? P. 270, par. 3. 

(26) Explain this Scripture as a whole. P. 271, 272, 
273. 

JULY 25 

(27) Where do we read, "The Spirit said unto Philip, 
go near and join thyself to this chariot"? P. 273, par. 2. 

(28) Is there anything in this passage which seems to 
imply that the spirit or influence or power which directed 
Philip was aside from the Father or Son? Is there any 
evidence in it of another God? P. 273, par. 3. 

(29) Is there evidence of another God in the declaration 
"The Spirit said unto him, Behold, three men seek thee"? 
(Acts 10:19.) How should this passage be understood? 
P. 274, par. 1. 

(30) The holy Ghost said, "Separate me, Barnabas and 
Saul, for the work for which I have called them." Where 
are these words found and what do they signify? P. 274, 
275. 



(3 1) Where is it written, "It seemed good to the holy 
Ghost and to us," and what does this Scripture signify? 

(32) How was the Apostle forbidden of the holy Ghost 
to preach the Word in Asia? Give resume and cite the 
Scriptures. P. 276. 



*Five years ago DAWN-STUDIES, VOL. V., was reset, and 
unfortunately the type was not exactly same size as before; and 
hence page for page they differ. The references given in these 
Berean Studies apply to the present edition, a copy of which 
postpaid will cost you but 30c. But keep your old edition, for 
unfortunately the new Bible Helps refer to its pages. 



page 176 



PUBLIC MINISTRIES OF THE TRUTH 
UNDER THE AUSPICES OF PEOPLES PULPIT 
ASSOCIATION OF BROOKLYN, N.Y. 



PIEDMONT, ALA., CONVENTION, JULY 8-1 1 

The friends of this locality request a General Convention 
for that section, so it is arranged at the beginning of Brother 
Russell's Western Tour. He will be there one day; but able 
speakers are provided for the other sessions. Railroad rates 
are expected. Further announcement later. 

ONE-DAY LOCAL CONVENTIONS ADDRESSED BY THE 
EDITOR OF THIS JOURNAL AS FOLLOWS: 

BROOKLYN, N.Y., JUNE 13 

Morning Rally and Testimony Meeting at 10:30 o'clock. 

Discourse by Brother Russell at 3:00 p.m. Evening meeting 
for the interested at 7:30 o'clock; this will be a Question 
Meeting. Visiting friends cordially invited. 

All meetings will be held in the Brooklyn Tabernacle, Nos. 
13-17 Hicks street. Convenient to all cars and ferries— close 
to the old bridge terminus. 

NEW BRITAIN, CONN., JUNE 20 

GLENS FALLS, N.Y., JUNE 27 



BROOKLYN TABERNACLE EVERY SUNDAY 



Preaching at 3:00 p.m. Praise service at 7:00 p.m.; 
Berean Bible Study at 7:30 p.m. Convenient to New York 
via Subway, and Jersey City via P.R.R. Annex Ferry. 



page 178 

STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES 
"MILLENNIAL DAWN" 

THESE STUDIES ARE RECOMMENDED TO STUDENTS AS VERITABLE "BIBLE KEYS. 

PRICES ARE NET AND BARELY COVER COST OF PRODUCTION, 

WHEN DELIVERED BY COLPORTEURS THE COST AND PRICE ARE INCREASED. 

SERIES I., "The Plan of the Ages." gives an outline of the divine plan 
revealed in the Bible, relating to man's redemption and restitution: 
386 pages, in embossed cloth, 25c. (Is. l/2d.) India paper edition, 75c. 
(3s. l-l/2d.). 

This volume has been published as a special issue of our journal— 
at the extremely low price of 5c. a copy, in any quantity, postage included. 
(To foreign countries, 9c.) This enables people of slender 
purse to herald far and wide the good tidings in a most helpful form. 

SERIES II., "The Time is at Hand," treats of the manner and time of 
the Lord's second coming, considering the Bible Testimony on this 
subject: 370 pages, in embossed cloth, 25c. (Is. l/2d.) India paper 
edition, 75c. (3s. l-l/2d.) 

SERIES III., "Thy Kingdom Come," considers prophecies which mark 
events connected with the "Time of the End," the glorification of the 
Church and the establishment of the Millennial Kingdom; it also contains 
a chapter of the Great Pyramid, showing its corroboration of the 
dates and other teachings of the Bible: 384 pages, in embossed cloth, 
25c. (Is. l/2d.) India paper edition, 75c. (3s. l-l/2d.) 

SERIES IV., "The Day of Vengeance," shows that the dissolution of the 
present order of things is in progress, and that all the panaceas offered 
are valueless to avert the predicted end. It marks in these events the 
fulfilment of prophecy, noting specially our Lord's great prophecy of 
Matt. 24 and Zech. 14:1-9: 660 pages, in embossed cloth, 30c. (Is. 3d.). 
India paper edition, 85c. (3s. 6-l/2d.) 

SERIES V., "The At-one-ment Between God and Man," treats an all-important 
subject— the hub, the center around which all the features 
of divine grace revolve. Its topic deserves the most careful and 
prayerful consideration on the part of all true Christians: 507 pages, 
in embossed cloth, 30c. (Is. 3d.) India paper edition, 85c. (3s. 6-l/2d.) 

SERIES VI., "The New Creation," deals with the Creative Week 
(Genesis 1 and 2), and with the Church, God's "New Creation." It examines 
the personnel, organization, rites, ceremonies, obligations and 
hopes appertaining to those called and accepted as members of the 
Body under the Head: 740 pages, in embossed cloth, 30c. (Is. 3d.) 
India paper edition, 85c. (3s. 6-l/2d.) 

The above prices include postage. 

IN FULL LEATHER BINDING, gilt edges, the set (6 vols.) $3.00, 
(12s. 6d.), plus postage, 60c. (Is.). 

Is also published in foreign languages as follows: German, six vols., 
in Swedish Vols. 1, 2, 3, 5 and 6; in Dano-Norwegian, three vols.; 
in Greek, three vols.; in French, two vols.; Hollandish, Spanish, 



and Italian, one vol. each; bound in cloth, uniform with English edition, 
prices the same; in Polish, condensed edition, one vol., 10 cents. 



page 177 



SEMI-MONTHLY 
VOL. XXX JUNE 15 NO. 12 
A.D. 1909--A.M. 6037 



CONTENTS 

Views from the Watch Tower 179 

The Delusion of Militarism 179 

Church Federation Progressing 182 

Juvenile Law Breakers 182 

Brother Russell's European Tour 183 

"I Have Much People in This City" 184 

"Be of Good Cheer" 185 

St. Paul's Pastoral to Thessalonica 186 

"See That None Render Evil" 187 

"Pray Without Ceasing" 188 

"Quench Not the Spirit" 188 

A Little While (Poem) 189 

Asia Heard the Word of the Lord 189 

Hardened and Believed Not 190 

Samples of Interesting Letters 191 

page 178 

PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY 
CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
"BROOKLYN TABERNACLE," 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, N.Y., U.S.A. 

Foreign Agencies:— British Branch: 24 Eversholt St., London, 
N.W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, Barmen. Australasian 
Branch: Equitable Building, Collins St., Melbourne. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:— All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 



and in touch with the Studies, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, DANISH AND ITALIAN EDITIONS. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N.Y., POSTOFFICE 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA 



INDIA PAPER VOLUMES 

Volume six in India paper is again in stock; volume two, 
however, is out of stock, and it will be several months before 
more can be obtained. 

SIXTH VOLUME IN GERMAN 

Can now be obtained again, though orders will be forwarded 
to Germany, thus requiring about three weeks longer for filling. 

PLEASE DO NOT 

Send one and two-cent stamps as remittances for orders, if it 
is at all possible to obtain larger denominations. 

YOUR OWN ADDRESSES ON LETTERS 

Please remember the necessity and convenience to us of 
having your name and full address on each letter. An address 
is almost useless unless it contain the state or province. 

GERMAN VOLUNTEER LITERATURE 

This is excellent literature for Volunteer purposes; both 
tracts and TOWERS. Order all you can use judiciously amongst 
your German neighbors and friends. 

1909-VOW MOTTO AND CALENDAR-1909 

1909 Vow Mottoes now in stock. Order while they last, 
15 cents each, two for 25 cents, postpaid. 



Please address all letters to us at Brooklyn, N.Y. 
the Allegheny, Pa., office is closed. 



R4411 :page 179 



VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER 

THE DELUSION OF MILITARISM 

THE NATIONS CALLED AGAINST THEIR WILL TO THE BATTLE OF 
THE GREAT DAY OF GOD ALMIGHTY! 



"THE FUTURE historian of the first decade of the 
twentieth century will be puzzled. He will find 
that the world at the opening of the century was 
in an extraordinarily belligerent mood, and that the mood 
was well-nigh universal, dominating the New World as 
well as the Old, the Orient no less than the Occident. He 
will find that preparations for war, especially among 
nations which confessed allegiance to the Prince of Peace, 
were carried forward with tremendous energy and enthusiasm, 
and that the air was filled with prophetic voices, 
picturing national calamities and predicting bloody and 
world-embracing conflicts. 'We would have healed Babylon, 
but she is not healed.' 

"Alongside of this fact he will find another fact no 
less conspicuous and universal, that everybody of importance 

R4412:page 179 

in the early years of the twentieth century was an 
ardent champion of peace. He will find incontestable evidence 
that the King of England was one of the truest 
friends of peace who ever sat on the English throne, that 
the German Emperor proclaimed repeatedly that the cause 
of peace was ever dear to his heart, that the President of 
the United States was so effective as a peacemaker that 
he won a prize for ending a mighty war, that the Czar of 
Russia was so zealous in his devotion to peace that he 
called the nations to meet in solemn council to consider 
measures for ushering in an era of universal amity and 
good will, and that the President of France, the King of 
Italy and the Mikado of Japan were not a whit behind 
their royal brethren in offering sacrifices on the altar of 
the Goddess of Peace. A crowd of royal peacemakers in a 
world surcharged with thoughts and threats of war, a band 
of lovers strolling down an avenue which they themselves 
had lined with lyddite shells and twelve-inch guns, this 
will cause our historian to rub his eyes. 

The conflicting principles of the dawning Age of Peace 
and the declining Age of Warfare are illustrated in this 
striking contrast of Peace and War talk. 

"In his investigations he will find that the world's 
royal counselors and leading statesmen were also, without 
exception, wholeheartedly devoted to the cause of 
conciliation. He will read with admiration the speeches 
of Prince Bulow, Sir Henry Campbell-Bannerman, Mr. H. 
H. Asquith, Mr. John Hay, and Mr. Elihu Root, and will 
be compelled to confess that the three leading nations of 



our Western world never in the entire course of their 

history had statesmen more pacific than these in temper, 

or more eloquent in their advocacy of the cause of international 

good will. A galaxy of peace-loving statesmen 

under a sky black with the thunder-clouds of war, this is 

certain to bewilder our historian. 

"His perplexity will become no less when he considers 
the incontrovertible proofs that never since time began 
were the masses of men so peaceably inclined as in just 
this turbulent and war-rumor-tormented twentieth century. 
He will find that science and commerce and religion 
had cooperated in bringing the nations together; that the 
wage-earners in all the European countries had begun to 
speak of one another as brothers, and that the growing 
spirit of fraternity and cooperation had expressed itself in 
such organizations as the Interparliamentary Union, with 
a membership of twenty-five hundred legislators and 
statesmen, and various other societies and leagues of 
scholars and merchants and lawyers and jurists. He will 
find delegations paying friendly visits to neighboring countries, 
and will read, dumbfounded, what the English and 
German papers were saying about invasions, and the need 
of increased armaments, at the very time that twenty 
thousand Germans in Berlin were applauding to the echo 
the friendly greetings of a company of English visitors. 
And he will be still more nonplussed when he reads that, 
while ten thousand boys and girls in Tokio were singing 
loving greetings to our naval officers, there were men in 
the United States rushing from city to city urging the 
people to prepare for an American-Japanese war. It will 
seem inexplicable to our historian that when peace and 
arbitration and conciliation societies were multiplying in 
every land, and when men seemed to hate war with an 
abhorrence never known in any preceding era, there 
should be a deluge of war-talk flowing like an infernal 
tide across the world. 

"His bewilderment, however, will reach its climax when 
he discovers that it was after the establishment of an 
international court that all the nations voted to increase 
their armaments. Everybody conceded that it was better 
to settle international disputes by reason rather than by 
force, but as soon as the legal machinery was created, 
by means of which the swords could be dispensed with, 
there was a fresh fury to perfect at once all the instruments 
of destruction. After each new peace conference 
there was a fresh cry for more guns. Our historian will 
read with gladness the records of the Hague Conference 
and of the laying of the foundation of a periodic Congress 
of Nations, and of a permanent High Court. He 
will note the neutralization of Switzerland, Belgium and 
Norway; the compact entered into by the countries 
bordering on the North Sea, to respect one another's territorial 
rights forever; the agreement of the same sort 
solemnly ratified by all the countries bordering on the 
Baltic; the signing of more than sixty arbitration treaties 
twelve of these by the Senate of the United States; the 



creation of an International Bureau of American Republics, 
embracing twenty-one nations; the establishment 
of a Central American High Court; the elaboration 
and perfection of legal instruments looking toward the 
parliament of man, the federation of the world. 

"He will note also that while these splendid achievements 
of the peace spirit were finding a habitation and 
a name, the nations were thrilled as never before by 

R4412 : page 180 

dismal forebodings, and the world was darkened by 
whispers of death and destruction. While the Palace of 
Peace at The Hague was building, nations hailed the 
advent of the airship as a glorious invention, because of 
the service it could render to the cause of war. This 
unprecedented growth of peace sentiment, accompanied 
by a constant increase of jealousy and suspicion, of fear 
and panic, among the nations of the earth, will set our 
historian to work to ascertain the meaning of this strange 
phenomenon, the most singular perhaps to be met with 
in the entire history of the world. 

The winding up of the age and the destruction of 
Satan's kingdom, to make way for the Prince of Peace. 

"It will not take him long to discover that the fountains 
from which there flowed these dark and swollen 
streams of war rumor were all located within the military 
and naval encampments. It was the experts of the 
army and navy who were always shivering at some new 
peril, and painting sombre pictures of what would happen 
in case new regiments were not added to the army and 
additional battleships were not voted for the fleet. It was 
Lord Roberts, for instance, who discovered how easily 
England could be overrun by a German army; and it 
was General Kuropatkin who had discernment to see 
that the Russo-Japanese war was certain to break out 
again. The historian will note that the magazine essays 
on "Perils" were written for the most part by military 
experts, and that the newspaper scare-articles were the 
productions of young men who believed what the military 
experts had told them. Many naval officers, active 
and retired, could not make an after-dinner speech without 
casting over their hearers the shadow of some impending 
conflict. 

A HEATHEN PRINCIPLE SATAN'S DELUSION AS AN 
ANGEL OF LIGHT 

"It was in this way that legislative bodies came to 
think that possibly the country was really in danger; 
and looking round for a ground on which to justify new 
expenditures for war material, they seized upon an 
ancient pagan maxim— furnished by the military experts 
—'If you wish peace, prepare for war.' The old adage, 
once enthroned, worked with the energy of a god. The 
love of war had largely passed away. The illusion which 



for ages it had created in the minds of millions had lost 
its spell. Men had come to see that war is butchery, 
savagery, murder, hell. They believed in reason. Peace 
was seen to be the one supreme blessing for the world, 
but to preserve the peace it was necessary to prepare 
for war. This lay at the centre of the policy of the 
twentieth century. No guns were asked for to kill men 
with— guns were mounted as safeguards of the peace. 
No battleships were launched to fight with— they were 
preservers of the peace. Colossal armies and gigantic 
navies were exhibited as a nation's ornaments— beautiful 
tokens of its love of peace. And following thus the 
Angel of Peace, the nations increased their armaments 
until they spent upon them over two billions of dollars 
every year, and had amassed national debts aggregating 
thirty-five billions. The expenditure crushed the poorest 
of the nations and crippled the richest of them, but the 
burden was gladly borne because it was a sacrifice for 
the cause of peace. It was a pathetic and thrilling testimony 
of the human heart's hatred of war and longing 
for peace, when the nations became willing to bankrupt 
themselves in the effort to keep from fighting. 

THE NATION'S BLINDLY SEEKING PEACE BY THE 
ADVERSARY'S METHODS AND ADVICE 

"But at this point our historian will begin to ask 
whether there might have been any relation between 
the multiplication of the instruments of slaughter and 
the constant rise of the tide of war talk and war feeling. 
He will probably suspect that the mere presence 
of the shining apparatus of death may have kindled in 
men's hearts feelings of jealousy and distrust, and 
created panics which even Hague Conferences and peaceful-minded 
rulers and counselors could not possibly allay. 
When he finds that it was only men who lived all their 
life with guns who were haunted by horrible visions and 
kept dreaming hideous dreams, and that the larger the 
armament the more was a nation harassed by fears of 
invasion and possible annihilation, he will propound to 
himself these questions: Was it all a great delusion in 
the last day, the notion that vast military and naval 
establishments are a safeguard of the peace? 

"Was it a form of national lunacy, this frenzied out-pouring 
of national treasure for the engines of destruction? 
Was it an hallucination, this feverish conviction 
that only by guns can a nation's dignity be symbolized, 
and her place in the world's life and action be honorably 
maintained? 

"These are questions which our descendants are certain 
to ponder, and why should not we face them now? If 
this preparing for war in order to keep the peace is 
indeed a delusion, the sooner we find it out the better, 

R4413 : page 180 



for it is the costliest of all obsessions by which humanity 
has ever been swayed and mastered. There are multiplying 
developments which are leading thoughtful observers 
to suspect that this pre-Christian maxim is a piece of 
antiquated wisdom, and that the desire to establish peace 
in our modern world by multiplying and brandishing the 
instruments of war is a product of mental aberration. 
Certainly there are indications pointing in this direction. 
The world's brain may possibly have become unbalanced 
by a bacillus carried in the folds of a heathen adage. 
The most virulent and devastating disease now raging on 
the earth is militarism. 

"The militarist of our day betrays certain symptoms 
with which the student of pathology is not altogether 
unfamiliar. There are demon suggestions which obtain 
so firm a grip upon the mind that it is difficult to banish 
them. For example, a man who has the impression that 
he is being tracked by a vindictive and relentless foe is 
not going to sit down and quietly listen to an argument 
the aim of which is to prove that no such enemy exists 
and that the sounds which have caused the panic are the 
footfalls of an approaching friend. 

THE APPROACH OF JESUS AND HIS KINGDOM 

"The militarist will listen to no man who attempts to 
prove that his 'perils' are creations of the brain. Indeed, 
he is exceedingly impatient under contradiction; and, 
here again, he is like all victims of hallucinations. To 
deny his assumptions or to question his conclusions, is 
to him both blasphemy and treason, a sort of profanity 
and imbecility worthy of contempt and scorn. He alone 
stands on foundations which cannot be shaken, and other 
men, not possessing his inside information, or technical 
training for dealing with such questions, are living in a 
fool's paradise. The ferocity with which he attacks all 
who dare oppose him is the fury of a man whose brain is 
abnormally excited. 

THE NATIONS DRUNKEN 

"Recklessness of consequences is a trait which physicians 
usually look for in certain types of mental disorder, 
and here again the militarist presents the symptoms of 
a man who is sick. What cares he for consequences? 
The naval experts of Germany are dragging the German 
Empire ever deeper into debt, unabashed by the ominous 
mutterings of a coming storm. The naval experts of 
England go right on launching Dreadnoughts, while the 
number of British paupers grows larger with the years, 
and all British problems become increasingly baffling and 
alarming. The naval experts of Russia plan for a new 
billion-dollar navy, notwithstanding Russia's national debt 
is four and one-quarter billion dollars, and to pay her 
current expenses she is compelled to borrow seventy-five 
million dollars every year. With millions of her people 



on the verge of starvation, and beggars swarming through 
the streets of her cities and round the stations of her 
railways, the naval experts go on asking new appropriations 
for guns. 

"The terror of a patient who is suffering from mental 
derangement is often pathetic. Surround him with granite 

R4413 :page 181 

walls, ten in number, and every wall ten feet thick, and 
he will still insist that he is unprotected. So it is with 
the militarist. No nation has ever yet voted appropriations 
sufficient to quiet his uneasy heart. England's formula 
of naval strength has for some time been: The 
British navy in capital ships must equal the next two 
strongest navies, plus ten per cent. But notwithstanding 
the British navy is today in battleships and cruisers and 
torpedo boats almost equal to the next three strongest 
navies, never has England's security been so precarious, 
according to her greatest military experts, as today. It 
has been discovered at the eleventh hour that her mighty 
navy is no safeguard at all, unless backed up by a citizen 
army of at least a million men. 

"It was once the aim to protect England against probably 
combinations against her. The ambition now is to protect 
her against all possible combinations. In the words of a 
high authority in the British army, she must protect herself 
not only against the dangers she has any reason to 
expect, but also against those which nobody expects. 

TIME OF REVOLUTION AND TROUBLE 

"Like many another fever, militarism grows by what 
it feeds on, and unless checked by heroic measures is 
certain to burn the patient up. Men in a delirium seldom 
have a sense of humor. The world is fearfully grim to 
them, and life a solemn and tragic thing. They express 
absurdities with a sober face, and make ridiculous assertions 
without a smile. It may be that the militarists are 
in a sort of delirium. At any rate, they publish articles 
entitled, "Armies the Real Promoters of Peace," without 
laughing aloud at the grotesqueness of what they are 
doing. 

Bereft of reason are the nations by Satan's ingenious 
and terrible final beclouding of the minds of men. 

"The militarist is comic in his seriousness. He says 
that if you want to keep the peace you must prepare for 
war, and yet he knows that where men prepare for war 
by carrying bowie knives, peace is a thing unheard of, 
and that where every man is armed with a revolver, the 
list of homicides is longest. He declares his belief in 
kindly feelings and gentle manners, and proceeds at once 
to prove that a nation ought to make itself look as ferocious 
as possible. In order to induce nations to be gentlemen, 
he would have them all imitate the habits of rowdies. 
To many persons this seems ludicrous, to a militarist 



it is no joke. He is a champion of peace, but he wants 
to carry a gun. The man who paces up and down my 
front pavement with a gun on his shoulder may have 
peaceful sentiments, but he does not infuse peace into me. 
It does not help matters for him to shout out every few 
minutes, "I will not hurt you if you behave yourself," for 
I do not know his standard of good behavior, and the 
very sight of the gun keeps me in a state of chronic alarm. 
But the militarist says that, for promoting harmonious 
sentiments and peaceful emotions, there is nothing equal 
to an abundance of well-constructed guns. 

"A droll man indeed is the militarist. What matters it 
what honeyed words the King of England and the German 
Kaiser interchange, so long as each nation hears constantly 
the launching by the other of a larger battleship? 
And even though Prince Bulow may say to Mr. Asquith 
a hundred times a week, "We mean no harm," and Mr. 
Asquith may shout back, "We are your friends," so long 
as London and Berlin are never beyond earshot of soldiers, 
who are practicing how to shoot to kill, just so long will 
England and Germany be flooded with the gossip of hatred, 
and thrown into hysteria by rumors of invasion and 
carnage. 

THE WORLD GOING CRAZY 

"Like many other diseases, militarism is contagious. One 
nation can be infected by another until there is an epidemic 
round the world. A parade of battleships can 
kindle fires in the blood of even peaceful peoples, and increase 
naval appropriations in a dozen lands. Is it possible, 
some one asks, for a world to become insane? That 
a community can become crazy was proved by Salem, in 
the days of the witchcraft delusion; that a city can lose 
its head was demonstrated by London, at the time of the 
Gunpowder Plot; that a continent can become the victim 
of an hallucination was shown when Europe lost its desire 
to live, and waited for the end of the world in the year 1000. 
Why should it be counted incredible that many nations, 
bound together by steam and electricity, should fall under 
the spell of a delusion, and should act for a season like a 
man who has gone mad? But is it not true that the world 
has gone mad? The masses of men are sensible; but at 
present the nations are in the clutches of the militarists, 
and no way of escape has yet been discovered. The deliverance 
will come as soon as men begin to think and 
examine the sophistries with which militarism has flooded 
the world. 

"Certain facts will surely, some day, burn themselves 
into the consciousness of all thinking men. The expensiveness 
of the armed peace is just beginning to catch the 
eye of legislators. The extravagance of the militarists will 
bring about their ruin. They cry for battleships at ten million 
dollars each, and Parliament or Congress votes them. 
But later on it is explained that battleships are worthless 
without cruisers, cruisers are worthless without torpedo 



boats, torpedo boats are worthless without torpedo-boat 
destroyers, all these are worthless without colliers, ammunition 
boats, hospital boats, repair boats; and these altogether 
are worthless without deeper harbors, longer 
docks, more spacious navy yards. And what are all these 
worth without officers and men, upon whose education 
millions of dollars have been lavished? When at last the 
navy has been fairly launched, the officials of the army 
come forward and demonstrate that a navy, after all, is 
worthless unless it is supported by a colossal land force. 
Thus are the governments led on, step by step, into a 
treacherous morass, in which they are at first entangled, 
and finally overwhelmed. 

"All the great nations are today facing deficits, caused 
in every case by the military and naval experts. Into what 
a tangle the finances of Russia and Japan have been 
brought by militarists is known to everybody. Germany 
has, in a single generation, increased her national debt 
from eighteen million dollars to more than one billion 
dollars. The German Minister of Finance looks wildly 
round in search of new sources of national income. Financial 
experts confess that France is approaching the limit 
of her sources of revenue. Her deficit is created by her 

R4414:page 181 

army and navy. The British government is always seeking 
for new devices by means of which to fill a depleted 
treasury. Her Dreadnoughts keep her poor. Italy has for 
years staggered on the verge of bankruptcy because she 
carries an overgrown army on her back. Even our own 
rich republic faces this year a deficit of over a hundred 
million dollars, largely due to the one hundred and thirty 
millions we are spending on our navy. Mr. Cortelyou has 
called our attention to the fact that while in thirty years 
we have increased our population by 85 per cent., and our 
wealth by 185 per cent., we have increased our national 
expenses by 400 per cent. 

U. S. DEBT 

Largest in 1865-$2,680,647,869.74 

Smallest since, in 1891-$1,546,961,695.61 

Now 1909-82,637,913,747.04 

This year will probably exceed 1865, due to military 
expenses. The nation's wealth is $116,000,000,000. 

"It is within those thirty years that we have spent one 
billion dollars on our navy. And the end is not yet. The 
Secretary of the Navy has recently asked for twenty-seven 
additional vessels for the coming year, four of which are 
battleships at ten million dollars each, and he is frank to 
say that these twenty-seven are only a fraction of the 
vessels to be asked for later on. We have already, built or 
building, thirty-one first-class battleships, our navy ranking 
next to Great Britain, Germany standing third, France 



fourth, and Japan fifth: but never has the naval lobby at 
Washington been so voracious and so frantic for additional 
safeguards of the peace as today. 

"The militarists are peace-at-any-price men. They are 
determined to have peace even at the risk of national 

R4414 : page 182 

bankruptcy. Everything good in Germany, Italy, Austria, 
England and Russia is held back by the confiscation of the 
proceeds of industry carried on for the support of the army 
and navy. In the United States the development of our resources 
is checked by this same fatal policy. We have 
millions of acres of desert land to be irrigated, millions of 
acres of swamp land to be drained, thousands of miles of 
inland waterways to be improved, harbors to be deepened, 
canals to be dug, and forests to be safeguarded, and yet 
for all these works of cardinal importance we can afford 
only a pittance. We have not sufficient money to pay 
decent salaries to our United States judges, or to the men 
who represent us abroad. We have pests, implacable and 
terrible, like the gypsy moth, and plagues like tuberculosis, 
for whose extermination millions of money are needed at 
once. 

"On every hand we are hampered and handicapped, because 
we are spending two-thirds of our enormous revenues 
on pensions for past wars, and on equipment for wars yet 
to come. The militarists begrudge every dollar that does 
not go into army or navy. They believe that all works of 
internal improvement ought to be paid for by the selling 
of bonds, even the purchase of sites for new post-offices 
being made possible by mortgaging the future. They 
never weary of talking of our enormous national wealth, 
and laugh at the niggardly mortals who do not believe 
in investing it in guns. Why should we not spend as great 
a proportion of our wealth on military equipment as the 
other nations of the world? This is their question, and 
the merchants and farmers will answer it some day. 

"This delusion threatens to become as mischievous as it 
is expensive. Every increase in the American navy 
strengthens the militarists in London, Berlin, and Tokio. 
The difficulty of finding a reason for an American navy 
increases the mischief. Why should the United States 
have a colossal navy? No one outside the militarists can 
answer. Because there is no ascertainable reason for this 
un-American policy, the other American countries are becoming 
frightened. Brazil has just laid down an extravagant 
naval programme, for the proud Republic of the South 
cannot consent to lie at the mercy of the haughty Republic 
of the North. The new departure of Brazil has bewitched 
Argentina from the vision which came to her before the 
statue of Christ, which she erected high up amid the Andes, 
and has fired her with a desire to rival in her battleships 
her ambitious military neighbor. We first of all have 
established militarism in the Western world, and are by our 
example dragging weaker nations into foolish and suicidal 



courses, checking indefinitely the development of two 
continents. 

"Our influence goes still further. It sets Australia blazing, 
and shoves Japan into policies which she cannot afford. 
But we cannot harm foreign nations without working lasting 
injury on ourselves. The very battleships which recently 
kindled the enthusiasm of children in South America, 
Australia, and Japan, also stirred the hearts of American 
boys and girls along our Atlantic and Pacific seaboards, 
strengthening in them impulses and ideals of an 
Old World which struggled and suffered before Jesus came. 
It is children who receive the deepest impressions from 
pageants and celebrations, and who can measure the damage 
wrought upon the world by the parade of American 
battleships? Children cannot look upon symbols of brute 
force, extolled and exalted by their elders, without getting 
the impression that a nation's power is measured by the 
calibre of its guns, and that its influence is determined by 
the explosive force of its shells. A fleet of battleships 
gives a wrong impression of what America is, and conceals 
the secret which has made America great. Children do not 
know that we became a great world-power without the 
assistance of either army or navy, building ourselves up 
on everlasting principles by means of our schools and 
our churches. The down-pulling force of our naval pageant 
was not needed in a world already dragged down to low 
levels by the example of ancient nations, entangled by degrading 
traditions from which they are struggling to escape. 
The notion that this exhibition of battleships has added to 
our prestige among men whose opinion is worthy of consideration, 
or has made the world love us better, is only 
another feature of the militarist delusion." 



[The foregoing was written by C. E. Jefferson and published 
by the American Association for International Conciliation. 
It is issued with the endorsement of the forty-eight 
Directors of said Association who are amongst the 
most prominent American citizens. The interspersed 
comments in bold-faced type are ours.— Editor]. 

CHURCH FEDERATION PROGRESSING 



The national organization for church federation, which 
met in Philadelphia last December, and whose 450 delegates 
in a general way represented seventeen millions of 
Protestants, is slowly but surely moving. 

The resolution of the national organization was that 
branches of the work should be established at Chicago, 
Atlanta and Denver, while the national headquarters should 
continue in New York. It was in harmony with these decisions 
that the Chicago branch was organized on May 
6th. It appointed a district superintendent for its territory, 



with local advisory committees on Temperance, The 

Church and Modern Industry, Family Life, Sunday Observance, 

The Immigrant Problem, Home Missions, Foreign 

Missions, International Relations— to carry out locally 

just what the national committees propose shall be generally 

carried out. One of the committees will be expected 

to keep in close touch with labor, not merely along spiritual 

lines, but also in temporal matters. The proposition is 

that by thorough organization of the religious work in 

every large city of the United States, all denominational 

rivalry shall be eliminated, and everything adverse to 

Christianity or to the Federated Churches shall be opposed. 

It will not be an organic union of the denominations, in 

which they would lose their individuality, but it will be a 

combination for advice and co-operation. 

Thus we have the not unreasonable proposition. Who 
can tell the ultimate results of this federating? Its power 
will be felt in politics, and all the little denominations will 
be practically frozen out, and their people ostracized, if 
not persecuted. The result will be the loss of individuality 
in religious matters, and undoubtedly a great loss in 
spirituality. 



R4414 : page 182 

JUVENILE LAW BREAKERS 



NOT long since we called attention to the fact that 
the "Springfield Riots" were reported to have been 
instigated and maintained chiefly by boys of 
16 to 20 years. Much the same report came from the 
scenes of the Russian riots. Now note the below from 
France. Is this not remarkable? May it not be one of 
the results of modern infidelity so freely introduced into 
the schools and schoolbooks? The French writer referred 
to says:— 

"According to the official reports of the minister of 
justice for a number of years preceding 1904 there was 
an annual increase of about 5,000 crimes, which was not 
counterbalanced by any corresponding increase in population. 
The chairman of the committee of judiciary reform 
of the Chamber of Deputies recently reported to 
that body an increase of 80 per cent, since 1901 in the 
total number of crimes in the country. If the last five 
years alone are considered, the criminal statistics are 
even more appalling. 'Criminality,' says the eminent 
scientist and sociologist, Dr. Gustave Lebon, 'has augmented 
in proportions that are veritably terrifying; 30 
per cent, for the murders, while the sum for the criminality 

R4415 : page 183 

has doubled in five years.' This statement almost 
passes belief, but Dr. Lebon is an authority whose 



word goes. 

"In this connection, another dreary and dreadful fact 
(which no one thinks of disputing) is to be noted. 

"The average age of criminals is getting to be younger 
and younger. More than 60 per cent, of the inmates of 
the 'maisons centrales' (as the houses of correction are 
called) are under 29 years of age. Many of the bands 
of 'Apaches' consist of boys of from 14 to 17, and their 
chiefs are often not more than 19 or twenty. 

"How does it happen that crime, especially crime on 
the part of the young, is increasing at such a terrible rate? 

"It would not be fair, of course, to assign this abominable 
state of things to any one cause; but it is certain 
that the lack of religious instruction in the public schools 
and the truancy and juvenile vagrancy due to the inadequate 
school accommodations since the passage of the 
law against the congregations must be held responsible 
for a great deal of the trouble. An adult often commits 
a crime because he is a discouraged, a desperate man. 
He is often pushed into crime by the hardships he encounters 
in earning his bread. But when a mere boy 
takes to crime, the chances are that he has deliberately 
chosen crime as a career, because he has been brought 
up with false ideals, because he has been given wrong 
standards of living. The criminal of fifteen to twenty, 
as a rule, has not even so much as tried to live honestly. 
He has grown up to consider work dishonorable, to believe 
that the world owes him a living, and that it is his 
business to collect the debt by hook or by crook. He 
becomes a thief or a swindler because he thinks it a 
finer thing to be a thief or a swindler than to be a 
cabinet-maker or a plumber." 



R4415 : page 183 

BROTHER RUSSELL'S EUROPEAN TOUR 

THE FOLLOWING, WRITTEN BY BROTHER RUSSELL OFF 
THE SHORES OF NORWAY, RECOUNTS HIS JOURNEY 
THAT FAR FROM LIVERPOOL: 

ALTHOUGH our steamer broke all ocean records 
she was unable to land her passengers Monday 
night, but waited for the tide to reach her landing. 
There on the shore awaiting us, waving the Chautauqua 
salute with their handkerchiefs, we greeted about 
a dozen friends full half an hour before we could get 
ashore. We received very hearty hand-grasps and 
words of welcome and were soon en route for noon 
refreshments. 

At 3 p.m. we met an audience of the interested, probably 
125. It was a Question Meeting; we trust a profitable 
one. The questions were excellent— many of them 
relating to the Covenants. The meeting lasted two 



hours and was followed by supper. The evening meeting 
was semi-public, the attendance about 300. We had 
an excellent hearing while we endeavored to present the 
"Old, old story of Jesus and his love." We were most 
hospitably entertained by Brother and Sister McCoy and 
after a good night's rest were ready for the train for 
Manchester. 

The only disappointing feature connected with the 
visit was the evident disaffection of Brother Hay and a 
few others who have gone blind on the Covenants and 
on the participation of the Church as the Body of Christ 
in his sufferings as the Priest. We feel keenly for those 
who once were enlightened and had tasted the heavenly 
gift and the powers of the age to come and were partakers 
of the holy Spirit's enlightenment, when we see 
them thus go into the "outer-darkness" of the world's 
nominal church. Nevertheless, we must not murmur at 
the Divine Providence which thus "sifts" the chaff from 
the wheat. On the contrary, we appreciate the light the 
more, and prize the more all those who are permitted 
to remain in it; knowing that God makes no mistakes 
and that he would not suffer any to be deflected whose 
hearts were right. 

NEXT AT MANCHESTER 

About a dozen of the friends accompanied us from 
Liverpool to Manchester, where we were met at the 
railway station by Brother Glass and others. We were 
most hospitably cared for by Brother and Sister Glass, 
at whose home later we were refreshed by meeting 
Brother Hemery, the Society's British representative, 
who came from London with warm greetings from the 
London friends. 

The afternoon meeting at Onward Hall had an attendance 
of about 400, who greeted us by rising and singing 
"Blest be the tie that binds." The afternoon subject 
was "Christ in you, the hope of glory." (Col. 1:27.) We 
had excellent attention for two hours whilst we endeavored 
to show that those in Christ, by the begetting of 
the holy Spirit, have now as the hope of glory their 
share as Christ's members— in filling up that which is 
behind of his afflictions; specially left behind in our 
interest to permit us a share in his sacrifice and in the 
glory of God attached thereto— participation in the divine 
nature and the Millennial work. Incidentally we 
showed that the Vow seemed to be helping many to 
abide in the Vine as "branches"; and noted the fact 
that almost without exception the dear friends who have 
not taken the Vow are the ones who are losing their 
appreciation of the "Mystery" mentioned in our text- 
fellowship in the sufferings and attendant glories of the 
Christ. 

The evening meeting was in the "Large Free Trade 
Hall." For a week-night religious meeting it was surely 
a rousing one; about 3000 were present. Our topic was 



"The Overthrow of Satan's Empire." The attention was 
excellent. The dear friends of Manchester circulated 
150,000 tracts with notices of the meetings attached; 
and then there were posters and newspaper notices. 
They declared that their service (sacrifice of time, 
strength and money) had proven a blessing to themselves 
as a Church even if no fruitage should result from 
the presentation to others. However, the public evinced 
deep interest in sitting for nearly two hours; and bought 
books and took free literature with avidity. 

GLASGOW ON THURSDAY 

A good night's rest prepared us for further service. 
The Manchester friends gave us a hearty "God-be-with-you 
and come-again-soon." 

We reached Glasgow at 3 p.m., just in time for the 
3:30 meeting, to which we were at once escorted by our 
enthusiastic Scotch friends— Dr. Edgar and family and 
others to the number of about 25. 

The attendance at the afternoon meeting was about 
400 to 500— excellent for a mid-week afternoon. By 
request it was a Question Meeting. It lasted nearly two 
hours. Then came tea. Then at Glasgow City Hall at 
7:30 we had an audience of about 2000 very intelligent 
looking people, including, it was said, about twenty ministers. 
Our topic was "The Thief in Paradise, The Rich 
Man in Hell, and Lazarus in Abraham's Bosom." The 
meeting lasted about an hour and a half. We had excellent 
attention and trust that some were blessed. 

Brother (Dr.) Edgar and Sister Edgar entertained us 
and made us glad, both by words and deeds. They with 
a party of about twenty went on to 

THE EDINBURGH MEETING 

Again we were welcomed. About twenty of the Edinburgh 
friends met us and escorted us. We had a semi-private 
talk in the forenoon, a Question Meeting in the 
afternoon and a Public Meeting at night. The afternoon 

R4415 : page 184 

queries were chiefly along the lines of the Covenants 
and the Church's share in the sufferings of Christ. It 
becomes more evident daily that the ability to see and 
understand the "Mystery" of membership in Christ's 
Body by fellowship in his sufferings is the test of the 
hour as well as of the age. None but the spirit-begotten 
can appreciate it. The agitation is doing good to such- 
showing them more and more clearly the terms of "the 
fellowship in this Mystery, which is Christ in you the 
hope of glory." 

The evening meeting was in Synod Hall, one of Edinburgh's 
largest auditoriums. Nearly 2500 people are 
supposed to have been present, including probably twenty 



ministers of various churches. Excellent attention was 

given for an hour and a half to our discourse on "The 

Thief in Paradise, The Rich Man in Hell and Lazarus 

in Abraham's Bosom." The friends must have done valiant 

work to secure so large and so intelligent a hearing 

for the Truth. There was quite a demand for free literature 

and some books and pamphlets were sold at the 

door. 

We were entertained most comfortably by dear old 
Sister Allen, now in her 78th year. She and Brother 
Montgomery were practically the only ones in the Truth 
on the occasion of our first visit, in 1892. We were so 
glad to find them both steadfast and rejoicing. 

A goodly crowd met us Saturday morning at the railway 
station to bid us goodby— and come soon again. 
We realized afresh the oneness of the Body of Christ 
and, thanking God for it, were soon speeding 

TOWARD NEWCASTLE 

This was our first visit to this city. We greatly enjoyed 
it, meeting some new faces and some whom we 
had met elsewhere previously. Brother and Sister Rutherford 
entertained us— meeting us (with others) at the 

R4416 : page 184 

station and escorting us to their home, where after refreshments 
we had a heart-to-heart talk with the roomfull 
(about 20). Our talk bore on the general plan and 
the relationship of the Covenants and the fact that our 
Gospel, while full of the grace of God, is nevertheless 
unto life or unto death— according to the reception accorded 
to it by those who hear it— in the true sense of 
the word hear or understand. 

We had a very pleasant season of communion and 
prayer and refreshments, and then almost the entire 
party accompanied us to the steamer "Neptune," in 
which we departed for Bergen, Norway, Saturday, May 
14, at 7 p.m. From the pier the friends waved us 
"Good by and come back" with their handkerchiefs until 
faces were indistinguishable. They adopted "Aunt 
Sarah's" suggestion of waving the handkerchief inward, 
as signifying "return," "come back." 

We had a very quiet Sunday, resting up for further 
service, as much as "Neptune" would permit. The sea 
was quiet, but Neptune rolled in it, as though he liked 
to dip his sides as deeply as possible. Anticipating some 
need of rest we left Brother Huntsinger (our volunteer 
stenographer) in England, hoping to have assistance 
from him on our return trip on the Atlantic. 

Is it any wonder, dear "Tower" readers, that our heart 
is thankful to God as we pen you these lines on the 
North Sea, nearing Bergen? How pleasurable is the 
service of our King— through evil report and through 
good report, as deceivers and yet true; as unknown and 



yet well known. 

I want you all to know that I am praying for all the 
dear members of his Body, sharers of his sufferings, preparing 
to share his glory, by making their calling and 
election sure. 

Your brother in our dear Redeemer, 
May 16, 1909. C. T. RUSSELL. 



R4416 : page 184 

"I HAVE MUCH PEOPLE IN THIS CITY" 

--ACTS 18:l-22.-AUGUST l.~ 

Golden Text:— "In the world ye shall have tribulation; 
but be of good cheer, I have overcome 
the world."— John 16:33. 

ST. PAUL made but a brief stay at Athens, the 

Lord's providence guiding him to Corinth. 

Silas had remained for a time at Berea, and 

Timothy at Thessalonica, and later he returned to 

Philippi. Meantime St. Paul was apparently considerably 

cast down. His epistle to the Corinthians, written later 

on, clearly implies his discouragement and possible sickness. 

He wrote, "I was with you in weakness and in 

fear and in much trembling." (1 Cor. 2:3.) His rough 

experiences at Philippi, his small success at Athens, the 

slenderness of his purse, and his need of fellowship, contributed 

to make him rather downcast, and he informs 

us that the Lord encouraged him with a vision. Soon 

after his arrival at Corinth he found Aquilla and Priscilla 

his wife. They were tent-makers, and this being Paul's 

trade (as every Jewish youth was required to learn a 

trade) he abode and labored with them. Of this period 

of his affliction he wrote to the Thessalonians, "Therefore, 

brethren, we were comforted over you, in all our 

affliction and distress, by your faith." (1 Thess. 3:7.) 

And later he wrote of his experience to the Corinthians, 

saying, "Even unto this present hour we both hunger, 

and thirst, and are naked, and are buffeted, and have no 

certain dwelling place; and labor, working with our own 

hands: being reviled, we bless; being persecuted, we 

suffer it; being defamed, we entreat: we are made as the 

filth of the world, and are the offscouring of all things 

unto this day."-l Cor. 4:11-13. 

Many of us can find a lesson in St. Paul's experiences. 
If God permitted him to be in want, to be traduced, 
slandered, oppressed— if he needed such experiences in 
order to bring out the best that was in him and to make 
his epistles the more useful to the Church, possibly the 
Lord's dealings with us at times may be with the same 
end in view— our preparation for further usefulness in 
his service. 



PAUL WAS PRESSED IN SPIRIT 

Notwithstanding all of his discouragements and the 
fact that his tent-making labors barely sufficed to provide 
for him things decent and honorable, he never forgot 
that his chief mission in life was the preaching of 
the Gospel. If the earning of his daily bread hindered 
his preaching during the week he at least took his Sabbath 
days for the more important work when he could 
reach a congregation of the Jews. We read that he reasoned 
with them in the synagogue every Sabbath day. 
But apparently he was under a measure of constraint 
and did not speak in his usual boldness and vigor, perhaps 
because of the lack of moral support, which is an 
important factor with all and an essential to many. But 
finally Silas and Timothy arrived, bringing with them not 
only good fellowship and encouraging news from Berea, 
Thessalonica and Philippi, but also, as the Apostle tells 
us, a gift— quite probably from Lydia, the seller of purple 
dyes, supposed to have been comfortably circumstanced. 
The effect of these encouragements is intimated. Paul 
was pressed in spirit— he felt a fresh vigor urging him to 
still more vigorously present his message and bring matters 
to a focus and crisis at the synagogue. After testifying 
with great boldness and finding his message 
repelled by the majority of the synagogue, St. Paul 
forced the crisis himself by shaking his garment as 
though he would not even take from them the dust, saying 
to those who had opposed and blasphemed, "Your 

R4416 : page 185 

blood be upon your own heads. I am clean. From 

henceforth I will go unto the Gentiles." There are times 

when positiveness is absolutely necessary, even though it 

cause a division amongst those who profess to serve the 

same God. There are times when much more good can 

be obtained thus than by a continuance under disadvantageous 

conditions. 

The same is true today. Oil and water will not mix, 
and time spent in trying to blend them is altogether 
wasted. When positive bitterness and hatred are manifested, 
as in the case under consideration, it is better to 
withdraw. But neither the Apostle nor we would recognize 
as proper or at all allowable that the Lord's people 
should quarrel and take offense one with the other over 
trifles unworthy of consideration. The shaking off of 
the dust was not only what our Lord suggested but a 
custom of the time, a warning as it were, that the Apostle 
felt that he had discharged his entire duty and left the 
responsibility upon their own shoulders. 

The effect was good in two ways. It helped Crispus, 
the ruler of the synagogue, to take a decided stand, 
whereas otherwise he might have been stunted in his 
spiritual development. Crispus decided for the Lord 



Jesus and took his stand with the Apostle and a few 
others. Secondly, the fact that the Jews had repudiated 
the Apostle and his message would draw the attention 
of the Gentiles more particularly to his Gospel. And 
some of these already believed. The new meetings were 
held in the home of Justus, a reverent man who resided 
near the synagogue. Thus Paul's message in the synagogue 
would continually remind the Jews as they attended 
this synagogue worship and would be a continual 
invitation to them to come in and hear more respecting 
the fulfilment of the prophecies in Jesus. The result was 
that a considerable number of the Corinthians accepted 
God's grace and were baptised, thus symbolizing their 
consecration. Let us, too, learn that opposition is not 
necessarily an injurious thing to the Lord's cause. It is 
safe to say that a most dangerous condition is the stagnant 
one. 

Evidently the Lord saw that his servant Paul needed 
some special encouragement at this time and hence 
another vision was granted in which he was told, "Be 
not afraid, but speak and hold not thy peace; for I am 
with thee, and no man shall set on thee to harm thee, for 
I have much people in this city." 

What an insight this gives us to the Divine supervision 
of the Gospel message and its servants! How 
these words remind us of the promise that the Lord will 
not suffer us to be tempted above that we are able, but 
will, with every temptation, provide also a way of escape! 
That vision and its message, we may be sure, was 
not for the Apostle merely, but for us also and for all 
of the Lord's people from that time until now. The 
same God is rich unto all that call upon him and able to 
shield and to deliver all of his servants and will allow 
them only such experiences as his infinite wisdom sees 
will be advantageous to his cause, and work out for his 
servants a far more exceeding and eternal weight of 
glory. 

The Lord's statement that he had much people in 
Corinth teaches us a lesson also. It shows that the Lord 
knows the hearts of all— and has a care, not only for his 
saints, but also for those who have not yet heard of and 
received his grace, but whose hearts are in a favorable 
attitude of honesty, sincerity. A further lesson comes 
to us in this connection. We are to remember that the 
Lord is his own superintendent of missions and is able 
and willing to guide his consecrated servants, not only 
as to direction and place of service, but also as respects 
the time they shall remain to accomplish his will and the 
character of the experiences it will be necessary for them 
to have in order best to accomplish his purposes. The 
more our faith can grasp this situation, the more we can 
rely upon the Lord and use his wisdom instead of our 
own; the more successful will we be as his servants; 
and the more happy and contented; because realizing 
that all things are working together for good to us and 



R4417 : page 185 

for all who are his, submitted to his guiding care. 
A YEAR AND SIX MONTHS TEACHING 

Corinth was nicknamed the Vanity Fair of the World, 
because it was a center of frivolity, pleasure-seeking, etc. 
It is credited with having been one of the most licentious 
and profligate cities of its day. It may at first seem very 
strange to us that this vilest of the great cities should 
yield larger spiritual results than any other, so that the 
Lord would specially specify that he had "much people" 
there and would providentially detain his ambassador 
there a year and a half, while in other places he had 
been permitted to remain only a few days or a few weeks. 
The philosophy of the matter seems to be this: Outward 
morality frequently leads to a pharisaical spirit of 
self-righteousness, which is most pernicious and a deadly 
foe to true righteousness. On the other hand, where sin 
stands out glaringly it has a repulsive effect upon the 
pure in heart, upon all who love righteousness, and this 
repulsion from the evil seems to prepare such hearts the 
better for a genuine consecration to the Lord and for his 
message. This theory holds good, at least in the missionary 
work at Corinth, as in contrast with that of 
places much more respectable in reputation. 

The lesson for us in this connection is that we should 
be on guard in our own hearts against this self-righteous 
spirit of outward observance, which lacks true holiness, 
true sanctification. Is it not along this line that the 
Lord found fault with one of the seven Churches, saying, 
"Because thou art lukewarm, and neither cold nor hot, I 
will spew thee out of my mouth? Because thou sayest, 
I am rich, and increased with goods, and have need of 
nothing; and knowest not that thou art wretched and 
miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked." (Rev. 3:16,17.) 
This is our Lord's charge against the present 
state of the Church, so rich in earthly advantages, so 
rich in spiritual privileges, so self-satisfied. Let us be on 
guard lest in any manner or to any degree such a lukewarmness 
should come over us and we come under Divine 
disfavor. 

"BE OF GOOD CHEER" 

Our Lord's words in the Golden Text should comfort 
us, as they have comforted his people for the past 
eighteen centuries: "In the world ye shall have tribulation, 
but be of good cheer; I have overcome the world." 
There is no suggestion that we can escape similar tribulation. 
Indeed, if we escape the sufferings of Christ we 
will be denied a share in his coming glories. Hence, we 
should not desire to escape tribulation, but rather go on 
courageously; nevertheless, not too boastfully, not too 
courageously, but in meekness, in fear, in trust of the 



Lord's promises that he has overcome and is able to succor 
us in temptation's hour, and will do so if we but 
abide in his love and seek his protection. It is in view 
of this promised aid that we are exhorted to "be of good 
cheer." "Greater is he that is for us than all they that 
be against us." Not only will victory be ours, but, more 
than this, it is ours already. "Nothing shall by any 
means hurt you." What may seem to others to be injurious 
to us, must, under Divine supervision, work out 
blessings. 



R4417 : page 186 

ST. PAUL'S PASTORAL TO THESSALONICA 

--I THESS. 5:12-24.-AUGUST 8.- 

Golden Text:— "See that none render evil for evil unto 
any man; but ever follow that which is good."— V. 15. 

THIS might be termed a lesson on character building. 

It was written from Corinth during the year and a 

half in which St. Paul labored with his associates 

in the latter city, as detailed in our last lesson. The first 

epistle to the Thessalonians, of which our lesson is a part, 

is credited with being the first of the New Testament 

writings which have come down to us, A.D. 52. 

The epistle is a very fatherly one, very gentle and loving. 
When we remember that the believers addressed were 
merely "babes in Christ" less than a year old we are inclined 
to amazement that the Apostle should consider them 
prepared for teaching on so high a plane. But the fact is 
that the cause of Christ was very unpopular because of 
the pureness of its message, because it presented no comparison 
with the worldly spirit and because it called for a 
full consecration, not only of heart, but also of daily living, 
to the will of God and to his providences. 

Let us recall to mind the setting of this epistle. Less 
than a year before its writing the Apostle and Silas arrived 
from Philippi bruised and haggard, surely, as a result of 
their experiences in the riot and from the beating and 
other severe experiences connected with the dungeon at 
Philippi. It will be remembered that they had peace but 
a short time at Thessalonica, during which they made 
known the Gospel of God's grace. Then the Apostle was 
obliged to flee again, but subsequently heard from the believers 
at Thessalonica through Silas and Timothy. With 
a fatherly love he assayed several times to revisit the believers, 
but was always providentially hindered. Possibly 
these hindrances led up to the writing of this epistle, more 
profitable for them, as well as advantageous to all of the 
Lord's people throughout the world during eighteen centuries. 
Thus do God's providences "work together for good 
to those who love him." After faith has been instructed 



and developed through the wonderful lessons of God's 

Word, it becomes a firm foundation for peace and joy, comfort 

and rest under all conditions. 

THE WORD CHARACTER SIGNIFICANT 

The word character in Greek is exactly the same as in 
English. Originally it was the name given to a sculptor's 
tool— the forming chisel used in the development of the 
Greek statuary. Gradually the word broadened in its 
meaning to include not only the tool used, but the tooling 
process, the formation or shaping of the sculptures. Gradually 
also it came to signify the peculiarities or characteristics 
of a piece of sculpture. The word today in its English 
usage had reached a still higher plane and associates 
itself with the Divine character, which is the perfect example, 
and with humanity as it possesses more or less of 
the Divine characteristics. 

When St. Paul writes in Hebrews 1 . of Christ's being the 
"express image" of the Father's person, the phrase "express 
image," in the Greek is the word character. How 
beautiful the thought that our Lord Jesus, through whom 
the Father has spoken to mankind, explaining his Justice 
and his Love and his provision for our reconciliation— this 
one was the express image, the character-likeness of the 
heavenly Father, full of grace and truth! Nor does it seem 
strange to us that the Father, in inviting a "little flock" 
to joint-heirship with the Redeemer in glory, honor and immortality, 
has decreed, foreordained, that the acceptable 
ones, the "elect," must all be conformed to the likeness of 
his dear Son, who was the character likeness of himself. 
Truly there will be a wonderful family likeness in this 
Divine family— the Father, the Son, and the Bride, the 
Lamb's Wife! Who is sufficient for these things? Who 
is worthy of such exaltation? Surely those who would attain 
it must lay aside every weight, every besetting sin, 
and must persevere in the great work of mastering self 
and developing character— the one kind of character which 
God can approve and reward. 

As the sculptor must first have an ideal in his mind before 
he can follow it and hew the image from the rough 
stone, so must we recognize the true ideal of life and then 
follow it with all our hearts, with unwavering will. How 
important, then, that we have proper ideals before our 
minds; that we have a purpose in life; that it be a noble 
purpose of high standard! Herein is the value of the doctrines 
of Christ, the teachings of the Scriptures. They set 
before God's people the truest and noblest ideal and thus 
assist the pupils in the school of Christ in attaining higher 
and grander results than would be otherwise possible for 
them. 

It has been said that every man is the sculptor of his 
own career. To a large extent this is true, but with the 
Christian it is different. He gives himself to the Lord and 
the Lord undertakes to work in him "both to will and to do 
his good pleasure." Again, as it is written, "We are his 



workmanship." True the Lord does not do the work in us 
without our co-operation; but in our case he is the Principal 
or Superintendent and we are the assistants co-working 
with God for the attainment of that which he has set 
before us as his ideal, his design for us. The glorious pictures 
set before us in the inspired Word— of participation 
in the Divine nature and sharers, joint-heirs with our Lord 
and Redeemer— are so transcendently bright that they 
overwhelm us; nor are we able to realize their details except 
as, more and more, we become transformed by the 
renewing of our minds, by the Spirit of the Truth. 

THE MODEL OF OUR LESSON 

The model or ideal of this character lesson is found in 
the closing verses (23,24). Here the Apostle holds up before 
our minds the culmination of the Christian character, 
which the preceding verses tell us how to attain. He says 
(R.V.), "The God of peace himself sanctify you wholly, 
and may your spirit and soul and body be preserved entire, 
without blame, at the coming of our Lord Jesus 
Christ"; "Faithful is he that calleth you, who will also do 
it." In other words, this condition of complete sanctification 
is the Divine ideal before you and God will complete 
it in you if you will but follow the directions prescribed. 

R4418 :page 186 

Following these, every blow with the mallet and the chisel 
of self-control, and experience will gradually transform and 
shape us to the character likeness of our Lord. 

"Sculptors of life are we as we stand 

With our ungarbed souls before us; 
Waiting the hour at God's command 

Our ideal comes before us. 

"If we crave it, then, on the yielding stone 

With many a sharp incision, 
Its heavenly beauty shall be our own, 

Our life's beatific vision!" 

OVER YOU IN THE LORD 

"We beseech you, brethren, to know them that labor 
among you, and are over you in the Lord, and admonish 
you." 

While the Scriptures are very particular to maintain liberty 
of conscience for all of the Lord's people, and while 
they assure us that in Christ there is neither male nor female, 
neither bond nor free, but that his consecrated ones 
are "all one" in him, his members, nevertheless they distinctly 
set before us the thought that God is the supervisor 
of the affairs of his people and that their prosperity will 
result from their appreciation of the Lord's Headship and 
their recognition of those whom God hath "set in the Body" 



—apostles, prophets, pastors and teachers, helps, etc. The 

Lord's people are all children of God possessed of "the liberty 

wherewith Christ makes free," yet he has not given 

us a liberty to sin, but a freedom from sin, its slavery, its 

blight. These liberated ones, introduced by faith and consecration 

into the family of God, need to realize that the 

Father's house and all of its arrangements are under 

heaven's first Law— order. They must first learn to willingly 

and gladly submit to this order as the condition upon 

which they may abide in the Divine love and favor and participate 

in the family blessings. Neglecting to do so, they 

can never make progress into the deeper and more spiritual 

matters of that household, but, as babes unskilled and 

unruly, will be permitted to go no farther than the nursery. 

R4418 : page 187 

The recognition of the Lord and the watching for his 
guidance through his Word and his promises will enable 
the Lord's people to discern the ones he has set over them 
in the Lord. While, therefore, in the Divine order, the 
Church is to select its own servants, Elders, Deacons, Pastors, 
each member is to "stretch forth his hand" in voting, 
not according to his own judgment merely, but according 
to his understanding of the Divine judgment or will. If, 
therefore, in the Lord's providence, our conception of the 
matter is not realized; if, under a fair understanding and 
vote, some one is set over the Church contrary to our conception 
of the Divine will, we are to be submissive and cooperate 
with such to the best of our ability; because 
recognizing the Divine wisdom and power we are to realize 
that the will of the majority of the consecrated is to be 
accepted as the Divine will. If sometimes the Lord may 
seem to permit things in the Church to go contrary to her 
highest interest, we are not to fear, but to trust everything 
to him and to content ourselves with a full and free 
expression of our judgment of the Lord's will, whether 
others see eye to eye with us or not. 

The Apostle in our lesson takes for granted that the 
Church is acting in an orderly manner and has in the name 
of the Lord appointed some of their number to be over 
them in the Lord— to have a supervision and measure of 
control of the interests of the work. The Apostle urges 
that these be known, be recognized, not only personally, 
but in their capacity as servants in the Church and of 
Divine appointment through the Church. They are to expect 
admonishments from these. They are to realize that 
as faithful servants they must watch over the Church's interests. 
And all who love the Lord and the Truth should 
seek to cast as few difficulties in their way as possible and 
should do all in their power to uphold their admonitions 
and proper influence. These elect servants are supposed 
to labor amongst the brethren, as well as to admonish 
them. The service of the Church is not merely an honorary 
one. The word minister signifies servant and is a 
proper one and full of meaning— and more full of meaning 



than many seem to observe. 

Continuing the Apostle urges, "Esteem them very highly 
in love for their works' sake." Permit no rivalry of spirit 
to come in to constitute in your own heart and in others a 
root of bitterness. Permit no unkind word of criticism to 
fall from your lips as against any servant of the Church. 
On the contrary, esteem them, honor them, as their position 
requires, for in a measure they represent the Lord. 
And honor them in proportion as their labors of love in the 
Church seem to merit. Thus, the more Christ-like will be 
the more loved. 

Furthermore, St. Paul exhorts, "Be at peace among yourselves.' 
Why not? Why was it even necessary to suggest 
peace, harmony, amongst those who had left the world behind, 
named the name of Christ, and come together as the 
followers of the Prince of Peace? What should hinder 
their peace? Surely each one of them must have known 
from experience something of the wrangle and jangle of 
the world. As sheep every one of them has been to some 
extent worried by the wolves, or at least threatened. Having 
come together, why should not these worried sheep 
have rest and peace and joy and comfort under the Great 
Shepherd's Son and his appointed under-shepherds over 
them in the Lord? This is the ideal peace, love, harmony. 
Of course, not peace at any price, not harmony at any 
price, but peace and harmony because Divine standards 
are well upheld in the Body of Christ and because the voice 
of the Master has been heeded in the choosing of the Elders, 
Deacons, etc.; because all have been seeking to know 
the Lord, to know his will, to know those whom he hath 
set over them in the Church; because all are hearkening 
for the voice of the Shepherd and striving against the self-seeking 
spirit in word and in deed. 

ADMONISH THE DISORDERLY 

"And we exhort you, brethren, admonish the disorderly, 
encourage the faint-hearted, support the weak, be long-suffering 
towards all." We must assume that in these 
words the Apostle addresses the entire Church and that 
some features of this exhortation belong specially to the 
chosen representatives of the Church— the Elders. While 
it is true that any member of the Body of Christ might 
with propriety admonish any brother, encourage a faint-hearted 
one, give assistance to a weak one and be patient 
towards all, nevertheless some of these duties belong specially 
to the chosen Elders— they should be chosen with a 
view to the fact that they are more advanced in knowledge 
and in character, "Elder" brothers. The younger 
brethren, the brethren not specially designated by the 
Church as "Elder," should indeed feel an interest and a 
care, but they should exercise great caution in respect to 
admonishing the disorderly, realizing that the Church has 
specially appointed certain ones as Elder-brethren, and 
that specially upon these such duties properly devolve. 
Even when the disorderly need correction, it requires to 



be wisely done, else more harm than good may result. 
Many of the Lord's dear people need to learn this lesson 
and to restrain themselves lest they be disorderly in attending 
to a matter to which another is appointed under 
Divine regulation. 

We have already pointed out that the word "Elder" applies 
to the spiritual development and not to the natural 
years. As, for instance, Timothy, though a young man, 
was an Elder in the Church. So, in this young Church 
at Thessalonica, although none of them had been long in 
the Truth, some were found competent to serve the others 
as "overseers, to feed the flock of Christ." 

Notice the wisdom of the Lord's injunction through the 
Apostle. It was for peace, but not for peace at any price. 
The unruly, the anarchists, were to be admonished. The 
faint-hearted were to be encouraged. The weak were to 
be assisted. And each member of the Body was to endeavor 
to be patient, long-suffering, toward each other 
member. How beautiful the picture! How grand the ideal 
of a Church from the apostolic standpoint, the Divine 
standpoint, our standpoint! 

Let us each labor more and more towards these ends. 
Let us remember that while the Lord deals with us as individuals, 
he deals with us also collectively. While there 
is to be a development, shaping and polishing of the 
Christ-likeness in each of us individually, the same thought 
is to be preserved in connection with the Church as a 
whole. No man liveth to himself nor dieth to himself and 
no member of the Church of Christ is privileged to ignore 
the fellow-members of the Body of Christ. This is the 
Apostle's standpoint in this lesson. 

"SEE THAT NONE RENDER EVIL" 

Of course, each is to see for himself, first, that he renders 
no evil to others; but secondly the Church should see 
to it that none of its members in fellowship so do without 
being admonished. As we have seen, this is specially the 
duty of the "Elders"— to watch out for all the interests of 
the flock and the relationship between the Church and 
others. The Church is the Lord's family, and whatever 
one member of this family may do that is contrary to Justice 
and Love will bring reproach or dishonor to all the 
members and specially upon the Head of the House— our 
dear Redeemer. On the contrary, we are to see that all 
"follow after that which is good, one towards another and 
towards all." This is the uniform teaching of the Scriptures. 
It expresses a higher principle and more exalted 
character than generally prevails. The man or woman who 
would forget a kindness or ignore a benefaction would be 

R4419 : page 187 

esteemed as "mean" by everybody, civilized or heathen. 
There the world draws its line and declares by action, if 
not by word, that enemies are to be hated, opposed and 



grilled as opportunity may offer. Anyone who would be 
uniformly good to friends, neighbors and enemies would 
surely be godlike, to such an extent that he would be out 
of touch with the sympathies of his neighbors and friends. 
He would be considered soft and unmanly if he did not oppose 
his enemies and inappreciative of his friends if he 
treated his enemies generously. But we are not to follow 
the world's ideals. 

It was our Lord who set the example and gave the message, 
"Love your enemies. Do good to them that hate you 

R4419 :page 188 

and persecute you and speak evil of you." It was he who 
said, "If ye love them that love you, what thank have you? 
Do not publicans and sinners the same? But be ye like 
unto your Father in heaven, for he is kind to the unthankful 
and sends his rain and sunshine upon the evil and upon 
the good." Thus we see the spirit of the Lord manifested 
also through his apostles' words and the exemplification of 
these heavenly teachings should be manifest in the life of 
every follower of Christ. We are told we will thus glorify 
our Father which is in heaven, and thus also we shall 
form in ourselves and in others with whom we have influence 
the character-likeness of our Redeemer and of 
our Father. 

"REJOICE EVERMORE" 

From the worldly standpoint these must seem to be 
strange words to come from a man who for years had been 
serving Christ as a missionary, not only voluntarily depriving 
himself of the comforts of a home, the advantages of 
his station in life and training and Roman citizenship, but 
additionally enduring buffetings and scourgings, and, according 
to his own language, being treated as the "Filth 
and offscouring of the earth." Why should he think of rejoicing 
and, above all, why should he write to the Church 
at Thessalonica to rejoice? Was it not he that brought 
upon them the persecutions they had to endure? Without 
his message they would have known none of this. What 
an incongruous word to such people under such circumstances 
—Rejoice! Ah! the world knoweth us not, and it 
knows not the mainspring of our joy and peace. How can 
the world understand that those who receive the Divine 
message into good and honest hearts and the unction from 
the Holy One have a continual source of refreshment, not 
only in the Divine providential care in all of life's matters 
now, but additionally the inspiration of the "exceeding 
great and precious promises," which include the crown of 
glory and life eternal and the Divine nature. 

"PRAY WITHOUT CEASING" 

To some, prayer at any time is irksome, tedious, but 
to the true Christian prayer constitutes one of the greatest 



of God's blessings. His privilege of approaching the 
throne of the heavenly grace to obtain mercy and also to 
find grace to help in every time of need, is a privilege the 
value of which cannot be too highly esteemed. The 
Lord's people are glad to assemble themselves frequently 
for prayer and worship, not only on Sunday, but in mid-week. 
They are glad to bow the knee in prayer every 
morning, giving thanks to the Giver of every good gift 
for the favors of life— for all of life's blessings and 
privileges. They are glad at the close of day to review 
it and to give God praise for his blessing and protection, 
for mercies enjoyed, for the promises fulfilled, for petitions 
answered. They are glad also to have the opportunity 
of recounting the experiences of the day and of making 
apologies and asking forgiveness for shortcomings, 
and to renew their vows of loyalty and faithfulness in the 
name and strength of the Redeemer. These blessed 
privileges of prayer belong to the Lord's family because 
they are his and have access to him continually through 
their great Advocate, their Redeemer. 

However, the Apostle speaks of "praying without ceasing." 
What does he mean? We answer that the following 
statement is explanatory: "In everything give 
thanks." In a word, the life of an advanced Christian 
should be a life of prayer in the sense that a desire to 
know the Lord's will should be continually before his 
mind, and in every stress of life, in every trial, in every 
victory, in every undertaking, the will of the Lord should 
be sought and accepted and thanks should be given. The 
interests of the day committed to the Lord in the morning 
should be continually remembered as being in his loving 
care throughout the day. The experiences of life as 
they come should be accepted thankfully as under the 
Divine will; and thanks should be rendered for them, 
whether agreeable or disagreeable to the natural man, 
"For this is the will of God in Christ Jesus concerning 
you." This is what would please God. This is living up 
to the high privileges his grace has provided for us. Let 
us seek more and more to live up to the very highest 
pinnacle of our privileges. Proportionately we will find 
ourselves nearer to the Lord, and developing in his character 
likeness and rejoicing in hope of the glory of God 
and the precious things which he has in reservation for 
those that love him. 

"QUENCH NOT THE SPIRIT" 

The Scriptures represent God as being a light. "God is 
light." In the Tabernacle he was represented by a brilliant 
light on the mercy-seat called the Shekinah glory. 
Our Lord Jesus, filled with the light of the holy Spirit, 
was called "the true Light." And it was he that said of 
his followers, "Ye are the light of the world. Let your 
light so shine before men that they may see your good 
works and glorify your Father which is in heaven." 
Similarly the Divine power at Pentecost was represented 



by flames of light, cloven tongues of fire. Similarly the 
Spirit of the Lord from his Word is in the Scriptures pictured 
as the blaze of light from a lamp. As we read, 
"Thy word is a lamp to my feet, a lantern to my footsteps." 
The flame of sacred love, the holy Spirit of the 
Father and of the Son, was enkindled in our hearts 
through the Word of grace and the impartation of the 
holy Spirit. In proportion as we have fed this flame (the 
Spirit) with the Truth we have become burning and shining 
lights in the world— the Spirit of the Lord in us. 

But how easily such a holy flame may be extinguished 
—how quickly too ! A sufficient draft of the spirit of the 
world might extinguish our flame, quench it; or, even to 
put it under a bushel, we may shut off from ourselves the 
Divine supply of oil and spiritual oxygen and would 
soon quench the flame of love— the holy Spirit. We 
have not mentioned the Adversary; yet he is one of the 
potent influences to be contended against. He is continually 
attempting to get us into such a position as would 
extinguish our light and quench the Spirit. If not in one 
way, then in another our besetments come from the 
world, the flesh or the Adversary. Yet the Apostle intimates 
that we, and we alone, have the determining of the 
matter,— whether the holy Spirit in us shall be quenched 
or not. This is the Divine arrangement: We can take 
ourselves out of the Lord's hands if we choose, but 
neither saint nor sinner can do this for us. The Adversary 
himself is powerless to touch one of the Lord's 
"little ones" so long as he abides in him in faith, in love, 
in obedience. He himself, therefore, alone has to do with 
the matter, because God has promised that he will not 
suffer him to be tempted above that which he is able to 
endure, but will, with the temptation, provide a way of 
escape. As the flame of love is to be kept burning in our 
individual hearts so in the Church it is to be guarded, 
favored. 

"DESPISE NOT PROPHESYINGS" 

We are not to despise prophecies, but to respect them 
and to heed them. But this is not what the Apostle refers 
to. By the word prophesying he meant teaching, 
public utterance. Do not despise what anyone may publicly 
utter as a child of God in the Church of Christ. If 
he is a true Christian so far as you can discern, not only 
in his professions of faith in the Redeemer and his sacrifice, 
but also confesses him in a consecrated life, be 
willing to hear such. Receive him not to disputation of 
his doubts, but permit him to tell his view of the Truth 
of the Divine Plan, if he has something in harmony with 
the foundation which he seems to believe would be additionally 
helpful to others and to the Church. In a 
word, be not above hearing any of the brethren. 

Nevertheless prove all things and hold fast that which 
is good— that which stands the test. Because a brother 
is sincere, is earnest, does not prove that he is right in 



his Scriptural expositions. God could hinder such from 
having any opportunity in the Church. Nevertheless, his 
permitting them may work a blessing to all who are in the 
right heart attitude. Even if you cannot accept his proposition, 

R4419 : page 189 

the study of the subject, the searching of the 
Scriptures in the proving may be of lasting benefit to 
yourself, establishing you more than ever in the Truth. 
But let us be sure that we hold fast to the good. We 
have known cases in which this advice was not carefully 
followed. Some of the bad was taken with the good, and 
the result was untold mischief. 

"ABSTAIN FROM ALL APPEARANCE OF EVIL" 

According to the revised version, this is to abstain 
from every form of evil. Ah, yes! how comprehensive 
is the language of the Apostle. The Adversary, through 
the old nature, would have us believe that while it is true 
that some grosser forms of evil should be abstained from, 
it is not needful or proper that we endeavor to abstain 
from evil of every form. The plea is that we should give 
"the old man" a chance, and not kill him off too rapidly. 
Happy is he who heeds the Lord, says the Apostle, and 
pays no attention to "the old man." The first step in 
abstaining from every form of evil is to resolve or vow so 
to do. The fixing of the will, the purpose, the intention, 
must come before successful battling can be done. The 
will decides on which side of every question we may 

R4420 : page 189 

stand. Such a resolve to God is a Vow and such a Vow to 
abstain from every form of evil and every appearance of 
evil to the best of our ability is the very Vow we have 
recommended during the past year and which has been 
taken by so many of the readers of this Journal and which 
they report has been the source of so many blessings to 
them. 

Some say, Yes, we approve of every feature of that Vow 
as being consistent with the instructions of the Word of 
God— every item of it without exception, but we have not 
taken it. The fact is that we do not like to bind ourselves. 
We wish to retain our liberty, and to decide 
every question upon its merits. Our reply is that our 
Covenant to the Lord upon us is that every one of life's 
interests should be shaped according to our understanding 
of the Divine will and to glorify the Lord and to be of 
the greatest source of blessing to others and to ourselves. 
The question is how much liberty this leaves us. If we 
hold our liberty unto the moment of temptation our original 
Covenant binds us then to do and to be what would 
please the Lord. The difference seems to be that by making 
the Vow in a wholesale manner and covering practically 



every source of temptation for days and weeks 
and years to come we are more fully than before decapitating 
the old man and preparing him for burial. He 
prefers to have us prolong the agony and decide, if we 
must, at the last moment. Why so? Because he hopes 
that now and then the temptation may come in a most 
subtile form or at an unguarded moment and thus he 
might, even if only momentarily, gain a little advantage 
and liberty to the injury of the New Creature. Is it 
wise or is it unwise to make provision for the flesh, even 
to the extent of holding on to our personal liberties to the 
last moment? Would it not be to the advantage of the 
vast majority of people to settle these questions once and 
forever and thus cause the old man's hope to die and him 
the sooner to surrender? 

"THE GOD OF PEACE HIMSELF" 

Now we come to the concluding verses which we noticed 
at the beginning— the summing up, the character 
picture. If we follow the course outlined by the Apostle, 
God himself will sanctify us wholly, completely. Is not 
that what we desire? "Faithful is he that calleth us, 
who also will do all of his part." Hence the responsibilities 
lie with us. 

The Apostle carries his argument beyond the individual 
question to the Church, the Spirit of the Church, the Soul 
of the Church, the Body of the Church, which he prayed 
might be preserved entire and without blame to the coming 
of Jesus. Undoubtedly it would have remained unto 
this day had it maintained its early and proper relationship 
to the Lord. But departing from this the Church at 
Thessalonica was not preserved. There is no trace of it 
today. Let us, individually and collectively as an 
Ecclesia of the Lord's people, seek to have this sanctifying 
power of God wholly, fully in control of every power 
in us, and of our tongue, that we may glorify God in 
body and spirit which are his. We who are living in 
the end of the age may realize that the time has come, 
not only that judgment has begun at the house of God, but 
also that all the faithful may be preserved and experience 
part of the glorious change "in a moment, in the 
twinkling of an eye"— "the First Resurrection." 



A LITTLE WHILE 

A little while with weary feet to tread the narrow way, 

A little while, the time will not be long, 
A little while the sinless One to follow day by day, 

A little while to suffer and be strong. 

A little while with faltering tongue to testify for God, 

A little while to suffer scorn and shame, 
A little while with voice and pen to spread the Truth abroad, 



A little while to glorify his name. 

A little while with humble faith to wage the goodly fight, 
A little while, grasp firm the two-edged sword, 

A little while, Satanic hosts shall all be put to flight, 
A little while, then, trust thou in the Lord. 

A little while, a little while, Oh, let this be our song, 

A little while, lay not the armor down; 
A little while, a little while, the strife will not be long, 

A little while, and we shall wear the crown! 

G. W. S. 



R4420 : page 189 

ASIA HEARD THE WORD OF THE LORD 

--ACTS 18:23: 19:22.-AUGUST 15.- 

Golden Text:— "The name of the Lord 
Jesus was magnified."— Acts 19:17. 

OUR present lesson connects up St. Paul's experiences 

during a period of about two years and a half. He 

left Corinth probably six months after writing his 

letter to the Thessalonians, journeying to Jerusalem, determined, 

if providence permitted, to attend the next feast 

of Passover in the Holy City— not the Jewish feast, of 

course, but the substitute; as St. Paul explains, "Christ 

our Passover is slain; therefore let us keep the feast." (1 Cor. 5:7.) 

With the Apostle traveled Aquilla and Priscilla, 

who were about to make Ephesus their home. St. Paul 

himself stopped there briefly and, according to his custom, 

went into the synagogue and addressed the Jews. He was 

well received and urged to remain, but he hastened onward, 

promising, if possible, to return. 

When he did return on his third missionary journey he 
made a two-year stop at Ephesus, one of the principal cities 
of the world at that time, reputed to have been next to 
Athens in its culture and art and surpassing it in painting. 
Its temple of Diana was reckoned one of the seven 
wonders of the world. Thus it was a religious city after 
the heathen ideal. 

INSTRUCTED HIM MORE PERFECTLY 

After St. Paul was gone from Ephesus a Jew named 
Apollos, a convert to Christianity, came there and preached 
Christ with considerable boldness, knowing only the 
baptism of John, the baptism of repentance, which was 
for the Jews only. Aquilla and Priscilla were attracted to 

R4420 : page 190 



this eloquent man and privately instructed him in the way 

of the Lord more perfectly, more fully explaining to him, 

doubtless, respecting the Pentecostal blessing and the unction 

of the holy Spirit possible to all believers. Their 

course was commendable in that they did not publicly oppose 

Apollos but appreciated the work that he was doing 

and sought to assist him to a more complete, a more thorough 

ministration of the Gospel. It is the word spoken in 

season, not only the proper word, but in the proper manner, 

that the Lord is pleased to bless and to own. Let us 

each remember this and seek and pray to be wise as serpents 

and harmless as doves in the dispensing of the bread 

of life. 

Evidently Apollos had not been sufficiently convinced to 
lead him to attempt a further elaboration of the Gospel, 
and so when St. Paul returned for his stay of two years at 
Ephesus he found certain Christian brethren there earnest 
but lacking certain of the usual evidences of that time— 
the holy Spirit as a gift, as a power to speak with 
tongues, to heal, etc. Considering the case peculiar he inquired 
whether they had not received the holy Spirit since 
believing. The reply was that they had never understood 
it. Apollos had not taught them; and Aquilla and 
Priscilla, although clear in the matter themselves, had not 
been recognized as authoritative teachers. They were very 
ready to be taught of St. Paul, however, and gladly received 
his message and further demonstration of the Gospel. 
St. Paul directed that they be baptised again because 
the baptism which they had received was merely John's 
baptism for remission of sins. That was not sufficient for 
these men, because they were by nature Gentiles, and 
John's baptism was only for the Jews. Hence St. Paul 
directed that they be baptized afresh with the correct understanding 
—first, that they be justified, and second that 
baptism meant to them an immersion into the Body of 
Christ as members. Following the directions of the Apostle 
they were made sharers in the gifts of the holy Spirit. 

HARDENED AND BELIEVED NOT 

For three months the Apostle had liberty in the synagogue 
amongst the Jews and used it in ably presenting 
Christ as the Fulfiller of the demands of the Law Covenant, 
the Messiah, the Redeemer, and the glorified Head of 
the Church, at whose Second Coming the promised Kingdom 
of God under the whole heavens would be established. 
"He spake boldly for the space of three months, disputing 
and persuading the things concerning the Kingdom of 
God." He did not stop to dispute heathendom nor to dispute 
Greek philosophies. He had a message from the 
Lord and delivered it— the message of the Kingdom, 
understood today by so very few of the Lord's dear people. 

St. Paul testified that the Truth is a "savor of life unto 
life and of death unto death." Either it has a tender, a 
softening, a lubricating effect upon the mind and the life 
and the character, making it more loving and Christ-like, 



or, reversely, it has a hardening effect, an embittering effect, 
turning the opponent away from the Lord and his message. 
It does not surprise us that this was the effect at 
Ephesus; yea, and everywhere today, as well as then, 
wherever the Truth is spoken clearly, thoroughly, 
intelligently. 

Today, Catholics can preach in Protestant Churches; so 
can Jews. Unitarians and Trinitarians, believers in Election 
and Free Grace, believers in something and believers 
in nothing, can all mingle in so-called Christian harmony 
and fellowship and without a thought of persecuting one 
another. Why? Because, while they differ one from the 
other, they have a sufficiency of error in harmony with 
each other to constitute a basis of agreement. The evidence 
of this is that as soon as the Truth, the whole Truth 
and nothing but the Truth is proclaimed in their midst it is 
denounced by every one of them, opposed, slurred, falsified, 
vilified, lied about; and all associated with it come more or 
less under a social ban, a spirit of persecution. They do 
not like the savor of the Truth. To them it has an odor of 

R4421 : page 190 

death, of self-sacrifice, which is contrary to all of their 
hopes, aims and desires. Some of the opponents of the 
Truth today are hardening their own hearts by their attitude, 
just as did Pharaoh thirty-five hundred years ago, 
and just as did the chief priests, scribes and Pharisees 
eighteen centuries ago. We are sorry for them, but what 
can we do? 

HE DEPARTED FROM THEM 

When the opposition in the synagogue became unkind 
and bitter, malevolent, the Apostle departed, not from the 
city, which had not persecuted him, but from the synagogue, 
which was opposing his teaching. Here we have 
our suggestion also as to our own course. First we should 
be faithful to God; secondly, when our message is rejected, 
we should not stay to bore people with it, but go to those 
who have an "ear to hear." We should "preach the Gospel 
to the meek." 

Tyrannus had a school near the synagogue which, under 
the Lord's providence, by rental or in some other manner, 
became available as a preaching place for the proclamation 
of the Word, and St. Paul used the opportunity faithfully 
for about two years. The result was that from 
Ephesus "the gateway of Asia Minor," or, as it is sometimes 
called, "The eye of Asia," the Word of the Lord was 
carried to various cities by the traveling public, including 
Jews and proselytes. 

We remember that some two years before this St. Paul 
had endeavored to go into Asia Minor; but, "the Spirit 
suffered him not," is the explanation of his not going. The 
time for the message to reach Asia Minor had not yet arrived. 
How evidently God knows the conditions; not only 



the conditions most favorable for the character development 
of his faithful Apostle, but also the times and seasons 
most suitable for his own work in every place, including 
the arrangements of matters so as to draw out the 
various epistles which for centuries have proven so great 
value to the Household of Faith! 

MIRACLES BY THE HANDS OF ST. PAUL 

When we think of the gifts of the Spirit conferred upon 
this great Apostle, the gifts of tongues, healing, etc., we 
appreciate these evidences that he was a servant of God, 
yet these do not arouse our highest esteem. Accepting 
them as of the Lord we nevertheless appreciate still more 
highly as from the same source his gift of interpretation 
of the Divine Plan of the Ages, his elucidation of the philosophy 
of the same, his exposition of the types and the 
prophecies, his admonitions and exhortations along the 
lines of character-building. By these miracles through the 
pen of the Apostle, God has given us rich blessing— far 
more than natural sight and physical healing. Our faith 
has been made stronger, as well as our hope and our love 
for God and for the brethren. 

There were evil spirits then, as there are today, the difference 
being that today such obsessed ones are styled insane 
and treated accordingly, whereas probably one-half 
of the inmates of the insane asylums are really obsessed of 
the evil spirits, whose brains are not physically disordered. 
As St. Paul, amongst other miracles, cast out evil 
spirits in the name of the Lord, some of his opponents 
claimed that he did so merely by hypnotic influence, and 
that others could do the same if they would. Carrying out 
the thought they attempted to exorcise an evil spirit, with 
disastrous results. They commanded the spirit to come out 
of the man in the name of Jesus, whom Paul preached. 
But "the evil spirit answered and said, Jesus I know, and 
Paul I know; but who are ye? And the man in whom the 
evil spirit was leaped upon them, and overcame them, and 
prevailed against them, so that they fled out of that house 
naked and wounded." As these opponents were prominent 
men the matter became generally known both to Jews and 
Greeks at Ephesus and the result was a spirit of reverence, 
and the name of the Lord Jesus was magnified. 

BOOKS OF MAGIC, WITCH-CRAFT AND HYPNOTISM 

We read that "many that believed came and confessed 
and showed their deeds." They exposed the fact that many 
of their deeds were by occult or hidden power and injurious. 
They brought their books and burned them 
openly. They did not sell them to others and thus permit 
the evil influence to spread, but did their share towards its 

R4421 :page 191 

destruction. So should it be still. Those who turn to the 



Lord from darkness and sin should publicly confess the 
transformation of their hearts and lives and should destroy 
everything calculated to exercise an evil influence, either 
upon themselves or upon others. It is the thorough-going 
convert— converted from center to circumference— who has 
taken a radical stand for righteousness, as he previously 
took it for sin, that the Lord permits to honor him; and 
sometimes at the sacrifice of earthly interests. The testimony 
is, "So (thus) mightily grew the Word of God and 
prevailed." 

The Apostle's diversified experiences as a servant of the 
Lord are remarkable. At the beginning of his ministry he 
was beset and persecuted in nearly every city, while subsequently, 
as we have seen, he was comparatively without 
persecution for nearly four years. Who hath known the 
mind of the Lord? Faith assures us that all of the steps of 
the Apostle were Divinely, wisely ordered. Perhaps he 
needed the rougher experiences at the beginning of his 
ministry to polish him, to prepare him for his further service, 
the writing of his epistles, etc. Doubtless we shall 
understand his experiences better, and our own experiences 
better, when, by and by, beyond the veil, we shall 
see as we are seen and know as we are known. Until then 
the Lord requires that we exercise faith and confidence in 
him, nothing doubting. 



page 191 

SAMPLES OF INTERESTING LETTERS 

OUR BELOVED PASTOR:- 

Please accept this as our farewell greetings, hoping 
you may have a safe voyage and many blessings while 
you are separated from us. 

May the Lord bless and keep you until you return. 
Our prayers shall ascend in your behalf. 

Yours in our precious Redeemer and King, 
BROTHER AND SISTER C.,-Pa. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

Greetings from Oakland! We all wish you a happy 
voyage and a profitable, pleasant trip in Europe. 

We wish as a family and individually to express 
our love and appreciation once again to you for the 
beautiful Truth which came to us through you. We all 
eagerly look forward to the coming of the TOWER; it 
has been so very helpful to us. 

We now have a mid-week service, taking up the 5th 
volume. Some of the little class say they wish all days 
were Sundays or Wednesdays. 

May our heavenly Father's richest blessings be 
yours and may he guide you to the end. Much love 



from all the family. 
Your sister by his grace, M. WEBER,— Md. 



OUR DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

The Church at West Medford send to you love and 
greeting. Also to our dear Brother Bundy. 

We wish we could express in words our love and 
thankfulness to you, as our dear Lord's faithful servant. 
Our prayers are for you, that the power of the Highest 
be with you; that the peace of God which passeth all 
understanding shall keep your heart and mind. 

May the harvest message that you carry prosper; 
may the people understand how glorious a God we worship; 
how that his attributes are perfect and his Word 
vindicated; that his Word shall prosper in the thing 
whereto he sent it, and that his Truth does shew forth 
his praise. 

Of this European convention we pray, "Father, 
glorify thy name!" The Lord bless thee, and keep thee, 
our beloved Pastor. 

Yours in his grace, F. E. RILEY,— Mass. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

I know that you will have plenty to keep you busy 
on your voyage, but I do want to write just a note to 
reassure you of my continued love and prayers on your 
behalf. My thoughts and prayers will be with you, 
especially on your trip, and every day while you are 
traveling in the narrow channel over the waves of ill-will, 
bitterness and persecution— on to; yes, almost 
there!— to the glorious Kingdom on the other side. 

The enclosed card I have kept in my Bible for some 
time. I have looked at it so much and thought of what 
you said in April 1st TOWER. Will not the Lord's grace 
be sufficient for us? And whether he permit us to be 
smitten down with the literal stones or the symbolic 
arrows (the bitter words), is he not able to succor us 
that we be not overwhelmed? 

With increasing love and earnest, heartfelt prayer, 

Your sister in him, E. W.,— Tex. 



DEARLY BELOVED BROTHER:- 

I hope and pray that your voyage may afford you 
some rest and refreshment for the coming itinerary, 
and while you cannot "touch bottom" you may know that 
we follow your journey with the loving interest of the 
Body. 

We brethren in this locality are having some valuable 
experiences and trials, and are learning both how 
to sympathize with others and to realize that it is only 



"through much tribulation we shall enter the Kingdom." 

But oh! how glad I am to believe that these very 
things indicate the final testings and siftings. How 
careful we should be, lest a promise being left us any 
should seem to come short of fulfilling the just and wise 
conditions of it. 

With the exception of a possible half dozen the 
brethren here are appreciative of and in harmony with 
the unfolding of the Truth re the Covenants, and have 
enjoyed the presentations in the TOWERS as "meat in 
due season." 

I am more than pleased with recent "Interesting 
Letters." Pray for me, dear Brother Russell. I shall 
pray daily for you. 

Yours in the love of Christ, 

E. H. THOMSON,-D. C. 



GENTLEMEN:- 

Find $1.00 enclosed, for which please enroll me as 
a subscriber for two copies of PEOPLES PULPIT for five 
years beginning with Vol. I, No. I. 

Am very much interested in your new publication 
and want further information on the subjects discussed 
therein. 

Yours truly, WM. E. HAWKINS,--Del. 



PEOPLES PULPIT ASSN., 

DEAR BROS.:— You will find enclosed one dollar for 
ten subscribers for the PEOPLES PULPIT for one year 
each. This is what my little seven-year old boy Bill 
did last Monday evening. 

Yours truly, JEFF BUNCH,-Okla. 



SEE SPECIAL NOTICES ON SECOND PAGE 



Please address all letters to us at Brooklyn, N.Y. 
the Allegheny, Pa., office is closed. 



page 192 

PUBLIC MINISTRIES OF THE TRUTH 

UNDER THE AUSPICES OF PEOPLES PULPIT 
ASSOCIATION OF BROOKLYN, N.Y. 



SECURE SEATTLE LODGINGS NOW 

The brethren at Seattle believe that there will be a scarcity 
of lodgings there, because of the Exposition and cheap excursions. 
They suggest that all desirous of securing accommodations 
write for them at once, addressing F. A. Acheson, 
Ballard Station, Seattle, Wash. Give full particulars. 

ONE-DAY LOCAL CONVENTIONS ADDRESSED BY THE 
EDITOR OF THIS JOURNAL AS FOLLOWS: 

NEW BRITAIN, CONN., JUNE 20 

Morning session for Rally, Praise and Testimony at 10:30 
in O.U.A.M. Hall, 277 Main St. Afternoon meeting for the 
Public at 3:00 o'clock in the Russwin Lyceum. Subject, 
"Where are the Dead?" Evening meeting for the interested 
at O.U.A.M. Hall at 6:30 o'clock. Arrangements can be 
made for the entertainment of any required to remain over 
night by addressing Bro. C. W. Ambler, 21 South Burritt St. 

GLENS FALLS, N.Y., JUNE 27 



page 194 

STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES 

THESE STUDIES ARE RECOMMENDED TO STUDENTS AS VERITABLE "BIBLE 
KEYS." PRICES ARE NET AND BARELY COVER COST OF PRODUCTION. 

SERIES I., "The Plan of the Ages." gives an outline of the Divine 
plan revealed in the Bible, relating to man's redemption and restitution: 
386 pages, in embossed cloth, 35c. (Is. 6d.) India paper edition, 75c. 
(3s. l-l/2d.) 

This volume has been published as a special issue of our journal 
at the extremely low price of 5c. a copy, in any quantity, postage included 
(To foreign countries, 9c.) This enables people of slender 
purse to herald far and wide the good tidings in a most helpful form. 

SERIES II., "The Time is at Hand," treats of the manner and time of 
the Lord's second coming, considering the Bible Testimony on this 
subject: 370 pages, in embossed cloth, 35c. (Is. 6d.) India paper 
edition, 75c. (3s. l-l/2d.) 

SERIES III., "Thy Kingdom Come," considers prophecies which mark 
events connected with the "Time of the End," the glorification of the 
Church and the establishment of the Millennial Kingdom; it also contains 
a chapter of the Great Pyramid, showing its corroboration of the 
dates and other teachings of the Bible: 384 pages, in embossed cloth, 
25c. (Is. l/2d.) India paper edition, 75c. (3s. l-l/2d.) 

SERIES IV., "The Day of Vengeance," shows that the dissolution of the 
present order of things is in progress, and that all the panaceas offered 
are valueless to avert the predicted end. It marks in these events the 
fulfilment of prophecy, noting specially our Lord's great prophecy of 
Matt. 24 and Zech. 14:1-9: 660 pages, in embossed cloth, 30c. (Is. 3d.). 
India paper edition, 85c. (3s. 6-l/2d.) 

SERIES V., "The At-one-ment Between God and Man," treats an all-important 
subject— the hub, the center around which all the features 
of Divine grace revolve. Its topic deserves the most careful and 
prayerful consideration on the part of all true Christians: 507 pages, 
in embossed cloth, 35c. (Is. 6d.) India paper edition, 85c. (3s. 6-l/2d.) 

SERIES VI., "The New Creation," deals with the Creative Week 
(Genesis 1 and 2), and with the Church, God's "New Creation." It examines 
the personnel, organization, rites, ceremonies, obligations and 
hopes appertaining to those called and accepted as members of the 
Body under the Head: 740 pages, in embossed cloth, 30c. (Is. 3d.) 
India paper edition, 85c. (3s. 6-l/2d.) 

The above prices include postage. 

IN FULL LEATHER BINDING, gilt edges, the set (6 vols.) $3.00, 
(12s. 6d.), plus postage, 60c. (Is.) 

Also published in foreign languages as follows: in German, six vols., 
in Swedish, Vols. 1, 2, 3, 5, and 6; in Dano-Norwegian, three vols.; 
in Greek, three vols.; in French, two vols.; in Hollandish, Spanish, 
and Italian, one vol. each; bound in cloth, uniform with English edition, 
prices the same, in Polish, condensed edition one vol., 10 cents. 



page 193 

SEMI-MONTHLY 



VOL. XXX JULY 1 NO. 13 
A.D. 1909--A.M. 6037 



CONTENTS 

The Good Tidings Spreading in Africa 195 

Brother Booth Reports Favorably 195 

Brother Brink Writes Also 195 

Persecution Follows 196 

Brother Russell's European Tour 196 

Western Convention Tour 199 

The Ransom and The Sin Atonement 201 

The Three Burnings— Sacrifices 202 

He Appeared for Us 203 

The Scape-Goat's Part 204 

"This is My Blood-Drink Ye All Of It" 205 

The Field of Battle (Poem) 205 

Samples of Interesting Letters 206 

Brooklyn Bethel Hymns for August 206 

Berean Studies on the Atonement 207 

page 194 

PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY 
CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
"BROOKLYN TABERNACLE," 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, N.Y., U.S.A. 

Foreign Agencies:— British Branch: 24 Eversholt St., London, 
N.W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, Barmen. Australasian 
Branch: Equitable Building, Collins St., Melbourne. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:— All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 
and in touch with the Studies, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, DANISH AND ITALIAN EDITIONS. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N.Y., POSTOFFICE 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA 



VOW POST-CARDS 

We now have a very handsome folding post-card containing 
the Vow in prose and poem form, in gold letters on colored 
back-grounds, at 20 cents per dozen, postpaid. 

We still have a goodly supply of the Vow Mottoes. 

WITHDRAWAL LETTERS 

For those responding to the Lord's exhortation in Rev. 18:4 
these are excellent. They state the cause and purpose 
of one's withdrawal in very concise and clear terms that the 
motive may not be unnecessarily misunderstood. We supply 
them in any quantity needed, free, for the asking. 

VOLUNTEER MATTER IN DUTCH 

We have a large supply of the "Do You Know?" tract 
in the Hollandish language for use among your Dutch neighbors 
and friends. 

SWEDISH AND NORWEGIAN VOLUNTEER MATTER 

We still have an ample supply in both languages for Volunteer 
purposes. 

HELL BOOKLET AND VOLUNTEER MATTER IN GREEK 

A treatise of the Scripture teaching on Hell, in the Greek 
language, at 10 cents each. Also seven different Greek tracts, 
excellent for Volunteer matter. 

OUR LORD'S GREAT PROPHECY IN ITALIAN 

Treatise on Matt. 24th chap, (as in 4th vol.), at 10c each. 



R4421 :page 195 

THE GOOD TIDINGS SPREADING IN AFRICA 
BROTHER BOOTH REPORTS FAVORABLY 



RESPECTING the work in and around Pretoria it 

is very encouraging in many respects. While 

as yet not many of the English people are 

taking hold of the Harvest truths, the reception of them 



by the native Christians is very gratifying. On my first 
Sunday here I entered one of the large native compounds 
and began singing in several of the native languages 
successively. The dwellers responded as by an electric 
shock and gave close and joyful attention as they grasped 
some of the simpler features of the message. 

At this writing several of the natives who work at the 
mines and other places are so situated and so interested 
that they are going out from Saturday p.m. to Monday 
a.m. delivering tracts and teaching in the various compounds 
for thirty miles around Johannesburg and Pretoria 
of the Harvest-time and Restitution truths to the 
250,000 natives and Indians and some 20,000 Chinese 
cooped in from noon Saturday till over Sunday. They 
are overjoyed at having the same message brought here 
which they have heard was being proclaimed up in their 
home country, Nyassaland, by Brother Elliott Kamwana. 

One who has been here only three months tells that 
he saw Elliott baptise 300 in one day; another gives 
advice that in one place there are 700 adherents. And 
I am further informed that there are towards 3,000 in 
that country in about 30 separate places who have 
accepted the Divine Plan as preferable to Presbyterianism 
and the Church of England. Brother Elliott himself 
reports that there are about 9,000 who are interested 
somewhat, though not all of them to the extent named 
above. 

The method chiefly employed is singularly applicable 
to the conditions of the native towns. Every village 
has a Bwalo for the hearing of matters of public interest. 
The itinerant brother reading English translates the 
paragraphs in simple style into the vernacular of the 
people. Questions are entertained, etc. 

The native brethren are sending in subscriptions for 
"The Watch Tower" for points in Nyassaland to the 
number of 76. King Lenanika and the Prince Letitia, 
his son, and their Prime Minister, from 600 miles north 
of the Pretoria Falls, have sent highly educated Christian 
representatives for the whole six volumes. They 
wish this message to be fully studied and proclaimed 
through their country, and throughout that of their 
friends, the great Basulu chiefs of Basululand. 

Nor are the Europeans being neglected in this vicinity. 
Brother Brink and self are giving a series of lectures, 
gradually covering the message, in English and Dutch. 
Two sisters at Krugersdorp, 12 miles out of Johannesburg, 
are working up an interest and circulating "Dawn-Studies." 
These, like Brother Sargent, of Johannesburg, 
came out boldly in a street meeting in Cape Town. 

BROTHER BRINK WRITES ALSO 



MY DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 
May God bless you and keep you and spare you. I 



am overwhelmed by the most glorious Gospel, the love 
and majesty of God, the Father, that is being revealed 
from God's grand Book in these latter days of this 
Gospel Age through your instrumentality. 

"Glory be to God in the Highest, on earth, peace, 
good will to men." This was the theme of one of my 
trial sermons before I came out as minister of the 
Divine Word in 1897. But only now, since I read your 
"Studies in the Scriptures," the six volumes (Millennial 
Dawn edition), and since yesterday "The Watch Tower" 

R4422 : page 195 

(Vol. XXIL, January 15, 1901, No. 2), kindly lent me by 
Brother J. Booth, who arrived here a few days ago, do I 
realize the full import of that grand anthem of the 
heavenly hosts. 

I am lifted up into mid-heavens, and even higher, by 
this grandest of all Gospels, and day and night I am 
pleading with the Father in the heavens and his Christ 
to accept of me and my life and whole-hearted services 
and to facilitate my promulgating the same. 

I am endeavoring all I can to disseminate these truths, 
but am grievously hampered by personal indigence 
since I resigned my parish charge and salary already 
in the beginning of 1903, and worked and preached since 
then without income or remuneration, and besides lost 
all my property to the extent of L4,000 by political and 
ecclesiastical persecutions. I am further hampered by 
the indigence of the masses and the indifference of others. 

To Europeans I preach through and with the delivery 
of your volumes and tracts. But to natives of about 
twelve different denominations I preach these truths in 
their pulpits and churches and through your volumes 
and tracts. They, too, are amazed and overwhelmed, the 
Spirit of God co-operating. Many a native minister has 
Vol. I. from me and is reading and preaching these 
truths in Pretoria and elsewhere since I met them. 

I am doing the work by bicycle and have to traverse 
the same grounds several times, which proves rather 
fatiguing, with small monetary results. 

I am burning to get the books into the possession 
of every minister in the state, also the tracts and the 
special issue of "The Watch Tower." But I am too impotent 
and indigent; I cannot finance that matter. The 
great plunderer has been let loose on me, and since 
1903 has succeeded in completely circumventing me. I 
am practically bound hand and foot in respect to finances. 
Otherwise I am free from all sect prejudice and trammel. 
Thanks to God for that. My supplications are now day 
and night to Father "that I may know and be enabled 
to do Thy will." There are millions in South and Central 
Africa within easy reach prepared for these glorious 
truths. 

R4422 : page 196 



There, now, my dear brother, you have the true situation 
in a few words. Do as the mind and will of God 
may direct you. I am waiting and in the meantime will 
do what my hand finds as opportunities may offer. 
There is no time to waste. 

Believe me, sincerely yours in The Christ. 



DEAR BROTHER BRINK:- 

We are glad to hear from you and to note the influence 
of the Truth upon your heart and life and that 
you are glad to press your every energy into the Lord's 
service. We are glad to co-operate with you as we 
may be able. Our Society is small and poor as this 
world's affairs go, nevertheless the Lord has supplied all 
our needs thus far. No doubt you will yet see that the 
loss of your property was indirectly a favor and blessing 
from the Lord to direct your heart nearer to him and 
to prepare you the better for his service. 

We are enclosing you some assistance and ask of you 
a candid statement of what your income is at the present 
time and what you would need in order to sustain you 
in a self-sacrificing manner. It would be far from our 
thought to accept monies from the friends of the Truth 
here at considerable sacrifice to themselves and then to 
dispense it to missionaries or others who might use it 
extravagantly. Hence our feeling that it is necessary 
for us to inquire carefully of you respecting the facts— 
not with a desire to pry into your affairs, but with a 
desire to assist you and to fulfil our own responsibilities 
to the Lord and his cause. 

In your next please give us some particulars respecting 
the numbers and classes to whom you are permitted to 
minister the Truth in the English and in the African 
languages. 

Yours in the love and service of our Redeemer and 
King, C. T. RUSSELL. 

PERSECUTION FOLLOWS 



Since the above is in print we learn that Brother 
Elliott Kamwana was arrested and deported by the 
government at the instigation of the Calvinistic Scotch 
Missionaries of Bandawe, Lake Niassa, who were greatly 
surprised that their work of years could be so quickly 
lifted to the higher plane of our teachings. 

Seven at once volunteered to follow Kamwana in 
his preaching and if necessary to prison also. One of 
these is Brother Brink, the other six are of Kamwana's 
tribe, "Alonga." We cabled acceptance of the offer of 
Brother Brink and of the others, who also had been 
preachers previous to learning the Truth. We also 



sent five hundred dollars for expenses. 

We have written a protest to the British Commissioner, 
and to the American Consul a request for his 
good offices for peace and righteousness. 

Brother Kamwana baptized 9,126 in past year. 



R4422 : page 196 

BROTHER RUSSELL'S EUROPEAN TOUR 
IN SCANDINAVIA AND GERMANY 



OUR steamer "Neptune" reached Bergen, Norway, 
at 2 p.m., Monday, May 17. On the quay stood 
our dear Brother Luttichau, the Society's representative, 
who had come from Copenhagen to be our 
interpreter. With him to welcome us were about 20 
dear fellow-disciples. After a hearty greeting came the 
3 o'clock meeting. It was well attended by the friends— 
about 50— and others to the number of about 400. We 
spoke on "The Overthrow of Satan's Empire" for about 
two hours. Next came a luncheon and then an evening 
session— a Question Meeting for the interested, which 
lasted three hours. We were pleasantly surprised at 
the intelligence displayed in the questions asked. Eyes 
and hands expressed to each other our mutual joys in 
the Lord and his Truth, emphasizing the words spoken 
through the interpreter. 

Tuesday morning early we took the train for Christiania. 
By 8 p.m. we reached Glucken, where in summer 
the journey is continued for 28 miles by lake 
steamer. But the ice was still in the lake and hence 
navigation not opened. We made the journey quite 
comfortably in a one-horse, two-wheeled vehicle wrapped 
in a fur coat hired for the occasion by one of the 
friends. By two o'clock at night our party (some ten 
of the Bergen friends accompanied Brother Luttichau 
and myself to Christiania) had again reached the railway, 
and by 10 a.m. were at Christiania. 

Here, also, we had a most cordial reception from 
Brother and Sister Lindquist (who entertained us) and 
all of the dear household of faith— all of whom have the 
one spirit because they have the one faith and one 
baptism into Christ. The Norwegian people reminded 
us of the Scotch in general appearance and also in mannerisms. 
Indeed, we found that those who could speak 
and understand English would have understood us better 
if we had a little of the Scotch brogue. 

Wednesday and Thursday were well filled with enjoyable 
services for "the brethren" and for the great 
"Elder Brother" and for the "Father of us all." Some 
of the sessions were for the public and were crowded 



with intelligent looking and attentive hearers (about 
500 to 600). Other sessions were specially for the interested- 
including a Question Meeting. We had a 
fellowship dinner provided by one of the friends. Over 
one hundred participated— all of them deeply interested 
in Present Truth. 

OREBRO AND STOCKHOLM, SWEDEN 

We left the dear Norwegian friends at 6 p.m. Thursday 
and reached Orebro 8:23 a.m. Friday. Four of the 
dear friends met our train a few stations ahead, and as 
we alighted at Orebro probably a hundred and fifty were 
on the platform singing and waving their handkerchiefs 
and hats. Here again flowers were presented while we 
shook hands and presented our greetings through our 
interpreter, Brother Lundborg, the Society's representative 
for Sweden. We learned that some of these dear 
friends had come a journey of over one thousand miles 
for the spiritual privileges of this Convention. How 
our hearts flowed together in the Lord, notwithstanding 
the impediments of speech, none but the spirit-begotten 
can understand! 

The time was filled full. At 10 o'clock we gave a 
discourse on the Covenants, which lasted more than 
two hours. Then came general dinners at three restaurants. 
From 3 to 5 p.m. we preached on Baptism and 
its import, following which 53 were immersed, understandingly, 
including an ex-Baptist minister. About 
200 attended all these meetings for the interested. 

The State-College Auditorium had been secured for 
the addresses for the public in the evenings. It was 
full to overflowing and many stood for fully two hours. 
Attendance 800. Our topic was "The Overthrow of 
Satan's Empire." 

Saturday was similarly full of blessed fellowship 
and service. At 10 a.m. we had a Question Meeting 
until 12: 15; then a general dinner at restaurants. The 
afternoon session was a "Colporteur Meeting," but as 
usual it took up in general the harvest work and the 
privilege of each of God's children in some of its departments 

R4423 : page 197 

as under-reapers— colporteurs, sharp-shooters, 
volunteers. As the evening meeting would be for the 
public, this one closed the Convention proper. We sang 
together, "God be with you," while all who were Elders 
of Congregations, by invitation stood on our either 
hand (about 20 in all) and the Congregation singing 
filed past and gave a farewell hand-shake and greeting. 
The evening meeting was a duplication of its predecessor, 
except that a still larger crowd stood— probably 
160— and that our topic was different, "Where are the 
Dead?" 
After a good night's rest refreshed us we took the 



6 a.m. train Sunday morning, which brought us to 
Stockholm just in time for the 1 1:30 morning meeting. 
We would have been late had not friendly arrangements 
provided an automobile. The auditorium was packed 
before we reached it, and some, refused admittance, 
were still lingering near the door when we arrived. 
The attendance was about 700 to 800, about 100 standing. 
Our topic was "The Overthrow of Satan's Empire." 
We closed at 1 :30 and greeted the friends of the Truth. 
The same dear friends who entertained us six years 
ago had a cab awaiting us and entertained us at 
luncheon. 

A meeting for the interested was held from 3 to 4:15, 
when the doors were thrown open for the 4:30 public 
service on "Where are the Dead?" Again the auditorium 
was crowded and many stood until 6:20. An interlude 
of singing gave opportunity for strangers to depart, 
and then a special meeting with the interested lasted 
until 8:15, when we departed for our train accompanied 
by nearly a hundred of the friends, who gave us a final 
goodby and requested that we come soon again. Brother 
Lundborg accompanied us to Copenhagen. 

Monday morning brought us to Copenhagen. Here 
we were met by about thirty or forty dear friends at the 
depot. They were headed by Brother Luttichau, who 
parted our company at Christiania in order to prepare 
our way at Copenhagen. A cab soon brought us to the 
office of our Dano-Norwegian WATCH TOWER, maintained 
by our Society. By 10 o'clock about 100 of the 
interested had gathered there and we addressed them 
for two hours on "The Covenants." Then followed a 
general dinner provided by the friends in an upper 
room. Our seat was at the head of the table with 
Brothers Luttichau and Lundborg on either hand. 
Close by was a little girl of ten years, reported to have 
made a full consecration four years ago. She had read 
the DAWNS and had come a journey of about 300 miles, 
using therefore small sums of money given her last 
Christmas and since, so anxious was she to meet us and 
to enjoy the anticipated spiritual feast. 

In the afternoon about 100 sat for a photo, and then 
we had a two-hour Question Meeting. 

In the evening we had a session for the public. The 
house was crowded, many standing, about 600 present. 
We had closest attention for two hours. The earnest 
singing of the hymns assured us that our hearers were 
of the devout sort aside from those specially with us in 
the Truth. Indeed, all of our experiences in Scandinavia 
were very encouraging. The people as a whole 
impressed us as much more reverential than the masses 
of our beloved America. We believe that God has 
much people amongst the Scandinavians. We shall 
expect great things there during the next few years. 

Our train was to leave shortly after midnight and 
probably sixty of the friends remained after the meeting 
and took a cup of tea with us, and accompanied us 



to the railway station, where they sang for us in English 
a specially-learned hymn and sent greetings to the 
friends we would meet in Germany, Great Britain and 
America on our tour, at the same time urging us to 
come again and soon. 

HAMBURG, BERLIN, DRESDEN, BARMEN 

Our train brought us to Hanover about 1 1:30. We 
were met by Brother Koetitz, the Society's representative 
for Germany; with him were about eight local 
friends and two from outside places to greet us. We had 
a pleasant and profitable hour; then said farewell and 
started for Berlin, Brother Koetitz accompanying as 
interpreter. 

At Berlin three dear brethren awaited our coming 
and welcomed us and escorted us to the home of one of 
them, at which a congregation of about 50 was already 
waiting for us. Our chair and table were festooned with 
evergreen and forget-me-nots and back of us was the 
text: "I will bless thee and make thee a blessing."— 
Gen. 12:2. 

We had a delightful meeting of two hours considering 
the Covenants and then followed a Question Meeting 
full of interest to all. 

The evening session was for the public, and the 
brethren, although few in number, had so thoroughly 
advertised it that the room was crowded, so that nearly 
150 were obliged to stand for the two hours of the meeting. 
We had excellent attention and trust that some 
were impressed with the Truth. 

A good night's rest refreshed us and we took train 
Wednesday morning for Dresden, which we reached 
about noon. Four brethren awaited us at the depot 
and escorted us to a dining hall, where nearly one 
hundred greeted us with a song and an address of greetings, 
to which we responded, giving the greetings of 
others sent with us as well as our own. Next came an 
address to the interested on "The Covenants"; then a 
Question Meeting; then tea; then the public meeting in a 
larger hall had our attention on the topic, "The Present 
and the Future in the Light of the Bible." Although 
the evening was very wet the Auditorium was full- 
about 600— and we had excellent attention. We were 
entertained most hospitably by Brother and Sister 
Wentzel, and, refreshed, we started next morning 
on an all-day journey for Barmen, where we arrived 
just in time for an evening meeting at 8:30 o'clock. 
A crowd of the Barmen friends met us at the depot 
and escorted us. It was a public meeting. About 
800 were present, many of these standing. The interest 
evidenced by the singing was good and spiritual. All 
seemed to sing, and with their whole hearts, so that the 
Auditorium rang. If close attention and keen eyes are 
an indication, many who heard were interested and 
should be heard from later. 



Friday forenoon we inspected the Society's new 
quarters, wrote some letters and conversed with Brother 
Koetitz and family. The afternoon was devoted to a 
Question Meeting. It was deeply interesting. The Vow 
and the Sin-Offering, and how opponents of these 
should be regarded and treated, were among the interesting 
questions. Our replies were taken by a brother 
who is a stenographer and may appear later in these 
columns. In the evening we discussed The Covenants. 
At the close about 180 friends sang to us, "God be with 
you," and we waved each other goodby with our handkerchiefs, 
and departed for the 10:50 train for London. 

On the railway platform about 60 of the friends 
gathered to give us a parting greeting with the hand 
and by song and later with their handkerchiefs. We 
surely have a very warm place in our heart for our 
German friends, and in answer to their request promised 
to do what we could to visit them ere long again. 

R4423 : page 198 

THE LONDON CONVENTION 

A night and a day by boat and rail brought us to 
London at 5 p.m., May 29. About 200 of the friends, 
headed by Brother Hemery, the Society's British representative, 
greeted us at the railway station, singing, 
"Blest be the tie that binds our hearts" and waving us 
the Chautauqua salute with their handkerchiefs. We 
returned the salutations, and a little later expressed to 
the assembled Convention our appreciation of the privilege 
of being with them and the greetings we brought 
from the friends in America, Norway, Sweden, Denmark 
and Germany. We noted the oneness of spirit 
and joy in the Lord of all those walking in the light of 
Present Truth. 

The Convention had already begun; an excellent 
Testimony Meeting had been held, and Brother Bundy 
had given an interesting address in the afternoon. 
Brother Hemery spoke very acceptably in the evening, 
and we had an excellent opportunity for a little rest in 
preparation for the Sunday services. It was at this 
service that Brother Hemery announced, publicly, that 
from the time the Vow first was promulgated he had 
made it his own, in spirit, but that now finally he had 
taken it formally to the Lord, in the fullest sense. He 
felt that already he had a blessing through this tighter 
binding of his sacrifice to the altar. Many others informed 
us that they had taken the Vow but had not 
written us of the matter. We requested them to send 
us at least a post-card of information, as we desire as 
full a list as possible. 

There were three sessions on Sunday. In the 
morning a Praise, Prayer and Testimony Meeting gave 
excellent opportunity to the dear friends to tell the 
Lord and each other of their appreciation of Present 



Truth, and of their resolutions respecting further faithfulness 
in the service of the King, and his message, 
and his brethren. 

The Sunday afternoon meeting was attended by 
about 800 to 900, who gave closest attention to our two-hour 
presentation of "The Covenants." The evening 
service was the public one. The hall was crowded, 
about 1200 being present. We discussed "Where are 
the Dead?" and had closest attention. 

Monday forenoon was devoted to an immersion 
service. One hundred and twenty-nine symbolized 
their consecration (66 brethren, 63 sisters) all adults. In 
the afternoon we discoursed for an hour on the Ransom 
and the Sin-Offering, and then for an hour answered 
questions on the subject, apparently to the satisfaction 
of the hearers. The evening session was similarly devoted, 
the first hour to a discourse and the next to the 
answering of questions. 

On Tuesday afternoon we had a Symposium on the 
graces of the holy Spirit, in which six speakers participated, 
evidently to the pleasement of the attending 
friends. Then came the closing service of the Convention. 
We addressed the dear friends in a general way, 
pointing out the trials of the "narrow way" and the 
propriety and necessity for loving sympathy one with 
the other in love, forgiving one another and encouraging 
one another, after our Lord's example. Then came 
the Love Feast. We stood in the centre, Pilgrims 
Hemery and Bundy on either side and the Elders of the 
London Church on either side of these. Brothers Bundy 

R4424 : page 198 

and Hemery held the plates of bread. The congregation 

singing familiar hymns filed past, giving and receiving 

parting hand-grasps and words of cheer. It 

was an inspiring and affecting scene long to be remembered. 

Many said, "Pray for me that I may meet you 

in the Great Convention— the General Assembly of the 

Church of the First-Borns; I always remember you." 

Many remarked that they had taken the Vow, but had 

not yet sent us word of it, but would do so. Thus 

closed our best British Convention and one of the best 

ever held anywhere. 

On Wednesday we had a look about London in 
search of a more favorable general meeting place for 
the friends there. On Thursday we had a conference 
with the London Church Elders respecting the general 
interests of the work, and suggested that if a more 
central meeting place were found we might consider it 
a leading of the Lord's Providence for a return next 
October to endeavor to give the work in the world's 
metropolis a further boost— so greatly are we impressed 
with the wonderfully ripe wheat-field, of which 
London is the centre. 



BELFAST, DUBLIN, AND HOMEWARD 

Traveling by night we reached Belfast Friday and 
were entertained as on our last visit by Brother and 
Sister McComb. The afternoon was spent with the interested 
in their usual meeting room and was very enjoyable 
and we trust profitable. The evening meeting 
was for the public. About 450 were present, of whom 
about 100 stood for two hours. Great interest was 
manifested, many remaining for a Question Meeting 
until 11 p.m. 

After a good night's rest we started for Dublin, 
where we were met by a committee of four representing 
the Church and were hospitably entertained. Here we 
preferred a Church-meeting only. It lasted from 4 p.m. 
to 11:10 p.m., tea being served in the same room. 
The Dublin company is not in a most happy condition; 
several of the dear friends have become afflicted with 
"independent thinking," and claim "new light," which 
we tried to show them is really the "outer darkness" in 
which Christendom in general is discomforted. Our 
discussions of these differences were conducted in a 
most kindly manner, yet we fear not to any great profit 
to the disaffected, who seemed determined to hold to 
and to magnify their differences rather than to prefer 
harmony and seeing eye to eye. The beauties of the 
Divine Plan, once seen, they saw no more and seemed 
not to desire to see them again. We urged upon all the 
cultivation of love and humility and prayer and study 
as being all that could be counseled under the circumstances. 
The loyal ones expressed themselves as greatly 
strengthened, and incidentally mentioned that they had 
taken the Vow, while, so far as they knew, none of those 
who had turned aside had done so. 

We reminded them that we must not think strangely 
of such matters; that we know that we are in the harvest 
time of testing and separation and have already been 
forewarned that "a thousand shall fall" at our side, and 
that it is indeed a question "Who shall be able to stand?" 
rather than who shall fall? 

Notwithstanding our protests five of these dear 
friends accompanied us to the station at 3 a.m. Sunday, 
when our train left to connect at Queenstown with our 
steamer "Mauretania," which we boarded at 8:30 a.m. 
homeward bound. 

We had a pleasant homeward journey and, thanks 
to God's Providence in sending with us Brother Huntsinger 
(stenographer), we were enabled to write articles 
for the WATCH TOWER columns covering the points 
principally treated at the London and other conventions. 
We had but one opportunity for a public address on the 
steamship, but through it got into communication with 
several passengers, some of whom, we trust, may develop 
"hearing ears." 

Our vessel landed us at New York on June 1 1, a 



R4424 : page 199 

month and seven days from time of departure. Much 
as we had enjoyed our visit to the friends abroad and 
their fellowship, we were glad to be back— to re-engage 
in the services at the Brooklyn Tabernacle and Bethel. 

THE HOME RECEPTION 

As our steamer docked we discovered on the pier 
some of the friends waving with their handkerchiefs a 
welcome home. Some of them had been waiting for us 
for three hours. We reached Brooklyn Bethel at noontime 
and the entire family, gathered in the parlor and 
study, sang to us their welcome in some words composed 

page 199 

by Sister Land, as follows:— 

R4424 : page 199 

THE FAMILY WELCOME 

Welcome home to those who love you— welcome, Brother dear! 

Daily have our hearts been with you o'er the sea! 
E'en the ocean cannot separate between God's children here, 

Bound by cords of love divine to him and thee. 

We behold gross darkness gathering all around us here below, 
Men's hearts failing them through dread and doubt and fear; 

We rejoice with you to send out Truth's pure light of hope, 
Until nations, kindreds, tongues may God revere. 

CHORUS 

When we bade "Farewell— God speed thee! 
Bear his harvest message true 

To the dear ones waiting on that foreign shore," 
Then our fervent prayers ascended, that grace might still 

abound— 

Bring you safely back to home-ties as of yore. 

Noble heart! May God sustain you and rich blessings send 
While you're striving Truth's fair banner to uphold; 

God hath guided and preserved you for this special time of need, 
And through you hath sent us mercies manifold. 

So this day our hearts are glowing and in gratitude ascend 

To the one who kept you in his tender care; 
May the angel of his presence guard you to the end, 

And God crown you in his Kingdom— is our prayer! 

We returned the greeting, telling them of how the 
Lord had blessed our journey and encouraged us on the 
way and that we brought them the greetings of the 



friends in England, Ireland, Scotland, Norway, Sweden, 
Denmark and Germany. 

We briefly rehearsed the blessed season we had enjoyed 
with the friends abroad, telling them in few words 
of the forty-nine addresses given and the Lord's watchful 
care over all our interests in the long but speedy 
journey. 

Then followed another surprise and blessing. 
Brother Rutherford placed in our hands a bundle of 
papers, explaining that during our absence a number 
of other friends had concluded that it would be the 
Lord's will that we should be relieved of certain burdens 
and annoyances which have been our portion for some 
time, in connection with Mrs. Russell's request that the 
monthly allowance be increased from $40 to $100, which 
was allowed by the Court, but which we were unable to 
comply with, because all of our property, except that 
which brought the income of $40 per month (which Mrs. 
Russell had been receiving), had been donated to the 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY. The dear 
friends concluded to surprise us on the return home by 
clearing off these obligations. They handed us receipts 
aggregating over $9,000, showing a payment of Mrs. 
Russell's alimony into 1913, with Court costs, attorneys' 
fees, etc. Our heart returned thanks to the Great Giver 
of every good gift for this, a fresh manifestation of his 
loving care and for such evidences of brotherly love. 

What shall we render unto the Lord our God for all 
his benefits to us? We will take the cup of salvation. 
We will partake of the blood of the New Covenant. We 
will call upon the Lord for grace to help. We will pay 
our vows unto the Most High.— Psa. 110:12-14. 

Incidentally we remark that numerous false rumors 
have gotten abroad amongst the dear friends— to the 
effect that the Society's property in Allegheny had been 
sold and that its property in Brooklyn was attached, etc. 
There is no truth whatever in any of these rumors. 
Nevertheless we believe that the dear brethren who so 
nobly came to our relief did well. They surprised us 
with surprise, too, in that they did not seek a compromise, 
but paid every penny that was or could be asked, 
believing this to be the wisest plan and the one most 
pleasing to the Lord. 

Next our attention was drawn to stacks of mail 
awaiting our attention. Many of these were kind 
Christian greetings from individuals and Churches all 
over the United States— hundreds of them. One from 
Chicago was signed by the Elders and Deacons and 
other friends there to the extent of 167 names. The 
Boston Church, to be sure that their greetings would 
reach us in time, sent them by wireless to the ship, 
reaching us a day before our arrival. As a sample of 
the kind expressions received we give the following:— 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

The occasion of your return from a foreign shore, to continue 



your faithful ministry of the holy Word to the Lord's 
"little ones" at home, gives me opportunity to express my 
heart gratitude for the Master's blessing at your hands. 

Words but feebly tell the thankfulness of hearts made 
free in Christ. Hand-clasps and written phrase are human 
means by which we seek to show in part our love, our joy, 
our deep esteem. 

Please accept, Beloved Brother Russell, this humble expression 
of my continued appreciation of the Harvest Work 
and of your faithful service and my whole-hearted sympathy 
in, for and with you in this noble service of the Lord— my 
pledge of a deeper zeal and a quickening of the spirit of sacrifice 
as I witness your untiring devotion as you so unsparingly 
seek to "lay down your life for the brethren." "Your labor 
is not in vain in the Lord." God bless you! 

Yours in Christian love, 



[As we cannot possibly answer all of these letters 
by pen, we request that this be accepted as our 
acknowledgment of them and of our appreciation.] 



R4425 : page 199 

WESTERN CONVENTION TOUR 

WASHINGTON, D.C., JULY 7, EVENING MEETING 

PIEDMONT, ALA., JULY 8-1 1 

Other Speakers are provided for the 8th, 10th and 1 1th, 
Brother Russell being present on the 9th with Morning 
address to the interested at 10:30, and afternoon address 
to the Public at 3 o'clock. Subject: "The Overthrow of 
Satan's Empire." Ask ticket agent for reduced rates on 
Certificate Plan account of Bible Students' Convention. 
If for any reason these cannot be obtained, investigate 
the round-trip rates to either Borden Springs or Piedmont 
Springs, which are near. Very low rates can be obtained 
for meals and lodging. Those desiring accommodations 
address Mr. Geo. W. Henderson. 

MEMPHIS, TENN, JULY 10, 11 

Morning Rally for Prayer, Praise and Testimony at 
10:30 o'clock, and afternoon session for the interested at 
3 o'clock, in Italian Hall, Cor. 2d Street and Lincoln 
Avenue. Evening meeting for the Public in Jefferson 
Theatre, Madison Avenue, near Fourth Street. Subject: 
"The Overthrow of Satan's Empire." Bro. J. F. Rutherford 
will serve on July 11. Further information from 
Mrs. N. Turner, 734 Union Avenue. 



NEW ORLEANS, LA., JULY 1 1 

Morning meeting for Rally, Praise and Testimonies. 
Afternoon meeting for the interested at 3 o'clock. Evening 
meeting for the Public at 7 o'clock in the Athenaeum; 

R4425 : page 200 

topic: "Where are the Dead?" For particulars 
address Mrs. N. O. Pedrick, 6120 Perrier Street. 

HOUSTON, TEX., JULY 12, 13 

All sessions in Beach Auditorium, 1 106 Main Street. 
Rally meeting at 10:30 a.m. and address to the interested 
at 3 p.m. Evening meeting for the Public at 8 
o'clock. Subject: "The Thief in Paradise, the Rich Man 
in Hell and Lazarus in Abraham's Bosom." Brother 
J. F. Rutherford will speak on the 13th. For local particulars 
apply to Mr. S. H. Huston, Box 647. 

SAN ANTONIO, TEX., JULY 13, 14 

Morning Rally— Praise and Testimonies, at 10:30 
o'clock at 424 Soledad Street. Meeting for the interested 
at 3 p.m., and Public meeting at 8 p.m., subject: "The 
Thief in Paradise, the Rich Man in Hell, and Lazarus in 
Abraham's Bosom," in Grand Opera House. Brother 
Rutherford present on the 14th. For further information 
apply to Mr. W. T. Sessoms, 418 Warren Street. 

LOS ANGELES, CAL., JULY 16-18 

Brother Russell expects to be present the afternoon of 
the 16th till 5 p.m. of the 17th. Excellent programme, 
including Brother Rutherford, is provided for the other 
sessions. Purchase reduced rate tickets account of "Elks 
Convention." Further details from Mr. E. D. Sexton, 
214 O. T. Johnson Building. 

OAKLAND, CAL., JULY 17-19 

Saturday, the 17th, addresses by Brothers Sullivan and 
Bundy. Brother Russell in attendance the 18th and 19th. 
For further particulars address Mr. W. L. Dimock, 3418 
School Street, Fruitvale, Cal. 

PORTLAND, ORE., JULY 21, 22 

Morning Rally for Prayer, Praise and Testimony at 
10:30. Afternoon address to the interested at 3 o'clock. 
Evening meeting for the Public at 7:30 o'clock. Subject: 
"Man's Past, Present and Future in the Light of 
the Bible." Brother Rutherford will speak on the 22d. 
For local information address Mr. L. F. Shinaman, 348 
Seventh Street. 



SEATTLE, WASH., JULY 22-25 

Sunday, July 25th: "Question meeting at 10:30, conducted 
by Brother Russell, in Armory Hall. Meeting for 
Public at 3 p.m. Subject: "Where are the Dead?" 
Evening meeting for the interested at 7:30 o'clock. Week 
day sessions in Christensen's Hall, Cor. Broadway and 
Madison, arranged as per Programme. For further information 
address Mr. F. A. Acheson, Box 543, Ballard, 
Washington. 

SPOKANE, WASH., JULY 26 

Morning session for Rally, with Prayers, Testimonies 
and Songs, at 1 1:00 o'clock. Address to the interested 
at 3 p.m. Discourse to the Public at 7:30 p.m. Subject: 
"Thief in Paradise, the Rich Man in Hell, and Lazarus 
in Abraham's Bosom." For incidentals address Mr. 
M. O. Field, E. 2127 Sprague Avenue. 

BUTTE, MONT., JULY 27 

Morning meeting for Praise and Testimony at 10:30 
o'clock. Afternoon address to the interested at 3 o'clock. 
Evening session for the Public at 7:30. Subject: "Where 
are the Dead?" Particulars from Miss Alice L. Crossman, 
1024 South Wyoming Street. 

DENVER, COLO., JULY 29-AUG. 1 

Sessions in Central Christian Church, Cor. 16th Avenue 
and Lincoln Street. Afternoon of Thursday, the 29th, address 
by Brother Russell to the interested, and in the 
evening, at 8 o'clock, discourse to the Public on the 
topic, "Where are the Dead?" Friday morning at 10:30, 
a Question meeting. Purchase one-way first-class ticket, 
on July 26, 27 or 28, and ask for Certificate receipt. This 
when presented at Convention will secure you return passage 
at one-fifth regular fare to practically all points in 
Colorado. Watch, however, for any cheaper rate, special 
Tourist rate, or otherwise. Further items from Mr. F. L. 
Hall, 3559 Zuni Street. 

ST. JOSEPH, MO., JULY 29-AUG. 2 

All meetings will be held in the Auditorium, Cor. 4th 
and Faraon Streets. Take Union Depot and Stock Yards 
Car going north from Union Station. Full programme is 
provided, together with opportunity for immersion. The 
Sunday afternoon meeting will be for the Public, addressed 
by Brother Russell, with the topic, "Where are 
the Dead?" Inquire of Mr. Wm. Wild, 820 Dewey Avenue, 
for particulars. 

ABERDEEN, S. D., AUG. 1-3 



Meeting on Tuesday, August 3, at 3 p.m., in Gottschalk 
Auditorium. Subject: "The Overthrow of Satan's Empire." 
Evening meeting for the interested at 7 o'clock. 
Secure "Certificate" receipt when purchasing railway 
tickets. Good eating and sleeping accommodations may 
be had at reasonable prices. Any unable to provide their 
own entertainment will be arranged for by addressing Mr. 
Geo. Draper, Conde, S. D., before the Convention. 

TOLEDO, OHIO, AUG. 3-5 

The friends in this vicinity have also requested the 
privilege of a Convention, and since it was directly on the 
homeward journey, it has been granted. Brother Russell 
expects to be present on the 5th. Further particulars 
later or from Mr. E. W. V. Kuehn, 20 Produce Exchange. 

ALLEGHENY, PENNA., AUG. 6 

At the Bible House Chapel, 612 Arch St., at 7:30 p.m., 
Brother Russell will address the friends. 

RAILWAY SCHEDULE-Note Changes 

July 7 Lv. Brooklyn, N.Y 12:45 p.m. 

Arr. Washington, D.C 6:16 p.m. July 7 

July 8 Lv. Washington, D.C 9:00 a.m. 

Arr. Atlanta, Ga 5:00 a.m. July 9 

July 9 Lv. Atlanta, Ga 6:30 a.m. 

Arr. Piedmont, Ala 9:16 a.m. July 9 

July 9 Lv. Piedmont, Ala 7:30 p.m. 

Arr. Memphis, Tenn 7:30 a.m. July 10 

July 10 Lv. Memphis, Tenn 1 1:40 p.m. 

Arr. New Orleans, La 10:55 a.m. July 1 1 

July 1 1 Lv. New Orleans, La 9:00 p.m. 

Arr. Houston, Tex 10:15 a.m. July 12 

July 12 Lv. Houston, Tex 12:25 Night 

Arr. San Antonio, Tex 7:35 a.m. July 13 

July 14 Lv. San Antonio, Tex 9:00 a.m. 

Arr. El Paso, Tex 8:30 a.m. July 15 

July 15 Lv. El Paso, Tex 7:45 a.m. 

Arr. Los Angeles, Cal 1:30 p.m. July 16 

July 17 Lv. Los Angeles, Cal 7:30 p.m. 

Arr. Oakland, Cal 2:02 p.m. July 18 

July 19 Lv. Oakland, Pier, Cal 8:50 p.m. 

Arr. Portland, Oregon 7:15 a.m. July 21 

July 21 Lv. Portland, Oregon 12:15 Night 

Arr. Seattle, Wash 7:30 a.m. July 22 

July 25 Lv. Seattle, Wash 10:30 p.m. 

Arr. Spokane, Wash 12:20 noon July 26 

July 26 Lv. Spokane, Wash 9:55 p.m. 

Arr. Butte, Mont 11:18 a.m. July 27 

July 27 Lv. Butte, Mont 11:40 p.m. 

Arr. Billings (N.P.), Mont 8:25 a.m. July 28 

July 28 Lv. Billings, Mont 9:10 a.m. 



Arr. Denver (C.,B.Q.), Colo 11:30 a.m. July 29 

July 30 Lv. Denver, Colo 1:15 p.m. 

Arr. St. Joseph, Mo 9:30 a.m. July 31 

Aug. 2 Lv. St. Joseph, Mo 1:45 p.m. 

Arr. Huron (C.&N.W.), S.D 7:00 a.m. Aug. 3 

Aug. 3 Lv. Huron, S.D 8:40 a.m. 

Arr. Aberdeen, S.D 11:55 a.m. Aug. 3 

Aug. 3 Lv. Aberdeen, S.D 8:35 p.m. 

Arr. St. Paul (C.,M.&St.P.), Minn 8:10 a.m. Aug. 4 

Aug. 4 Lv. St. Paul, Minn 8:45 a.m. 

Arr. Chicago, 111 9:00 p.m. Aug. 4 

Aug. 4 Lv. Chicago (Wabash), 111 11:00 p.m. 

Arr. Toledo, Ohio 7:00 a.m. Aug. 5 

Aug. 5 Lv. Toledo (Penna.), Ohio 10:15 p.m. 

Arr. Pittsburg, Pa 6:00 a.m. Aug. 6 

Aug. 6 Lv. Pittsburg, Pa 9:40 p.m. 

Arr. Brooklyn, N.Y 8:15 a.m. Aug. 7 



R4426 : page 201 

THE RANSOM AND THE SIN ATONEMENT 

"For the bodies of those beasts, whose blood is brought into 
the sanctuary (Most Holy) by the high-priest for sin, 
are burned outside the camp."— Heb. 13:11-13. 

WE ALL recognize that the Bible teaches that sin 

is in the world; that sin entered the world 

by father Adam's disobedience, and that until 

a Ransom-price had been paid there could be no complete 

reconciliation between God and man. There must 

be a Ransom as a basis for reconciliation. We understand, 

therefore, the Scriptures to teach that our Lord 

Jesus, when he laid down his life, laid down the Ransom 

price. The word Ransom signifies corresponding price; 

and because our Lord Jesus did not have a nature that 

was the same as Adam's nature, it was necessary for 

him to leave the glory that he had with the Father before 

the world was, to humble himself and to take upon 

him the form of the human nature, that he, by the grace 

of God, could taste death for every man. And so we 

read in the Scriptures, "A body hast thou prepared me." 

There was no human being that had such a body 
as would be a sufficient sacrifice for the sins of mankind, 
because all were sinners. Had there been a perfect 
man he might have given his perfect life a ransom, but 
there was no perfect man. Therefore, as represented 
in the Psalms, "no man could give a ransom for his 
brother." Hence it was necessary for God to find one 
who would have the ability, who would have the necessary 
thing to offer for man. The Lord shows us through 
the Law that his law calls for "a life for a life, an eye 
for an eye, a tooth for a tooth"; that this was the basis 
of Justice on which God was operating in this matter. 



And so, because it was a man that had sinned, the 
death of an angel could not be his redemption price; 
it must be a like, or corresponding price. It was a 
human life that was lost, and it must be a human life 
given to constitute the redemption price. It was not 
sufficient that there should be bulls and goats slain 
during the Jewish time, because these, the Apostle explains, 
were only figures and types of the "better sacrifices" 
which God intended in due time to present. 

So the Apostle assures us that the man Christ Jesus 
came to our relief. He left the glory of the heavenly 
nature and took the human nature, for the very purpose 
of sacrificing it in order that he might be our Redeemer; 
because Justice required a man's death to 
redeem the man (Adam) who had sinned. 

When our Lord "died, the just for the unjust," it 
was that he might bring us to God; not only that he 
might bring us, the Church, to God, but that he might 
bring to God all of humanity who might desire to come 
to God. But his death did not bring us to God. His 
death was merely the laying down of the price, and 
that price was necessary to be found first. To illustrate: 
Suppose you had an obligation to meet— five thousand 
dollars. And suppose that you owned a property worth 
five thousand dollars, which you could sell. The price, 
or value, of the property would be a price exactly corresponding 
with the debt that was owing. You sell 
this property in order that you may have its value as a 
ransom price. But when you sold the property, you had 
not cancelled your obligation; you had merely sold the 
property, and obtained the price, which later you could 
apply. 

Such was the effect of our Lord's death. When he 
"died, the just for the unjust," he laid down "a corresponding 
price." Thus it is stated that "by one man's 
disobedience sin entered the world and death as a result 
of sin," and thus the death sentence and all its concomitants 
passed upon Adam's race, because all were 
infected by the disease of sin, and therefore were all 
under the sentence of death. Our Lord, in order to redeem 
us, laid down our Ransom-price, his own life. 
That Ransom-price was a sufficient price for Adam, or 
for any other member of Adam's race, or for all— just 
as he might subsequently apply it. No less than that 
would have paid for any one. If the Lord had purposed 
to redeem one individual alone and leave all the remainder 
of us out, it would still have taken his life, and 
nothing short of it; because it was man's life that was 
forfeited, and man's life must be the penalty. 

Because this condemnation came through the one 
man, Adam, therefore in meeting the penalty for one it 
could be so applied as to take in the whole human 
family. So we see the philosophy of this great doctrine 
of the redemption, and how God had fixed the matter 
purposely so he might be able to settle the debt to his 
own Justice by the one sacrifice of his Son. 



Now that, simply told, is the story of the Ransom, 
—and all of it. If Jesus, when he ascended up on high, 
had chosen to use that Ransom-price, or Ransom-value 
(which he then had in his hand), on behalf of all mankind, 
then indeed it would have been a sufficient price 
for all. But he did not do so. The story of how he 
does apply it is elsewhere told, and that is called the 
atonement for sin. The account of how our Lord applies 
his Ransom merit is shown in the typical sacrifices 
of Israel's Atonement Day. 

We are not to think of the Ransom and the Atonement 
as being the same thing. We are to remember 
that the Sin-Offerings are not Ransom sacrifices. We 
are to remember the Ransom sacrifice was not the Sin-Offering 
They are two separate propositions. But 
one view of Christ's work is presented from this standpoint 
of the Ransom price: that Christ's death was the 
Ransom-price, and was necessary, no matter how it would 
be applied; it must be given in offset for the one life that 
was forfeited and condemned by the Almighty's law. 
According to the Scriptures our Lord Jesus, in his sacrificial 
work, met various requirements: For instance, 
he was "born under the Law." What difference did 
that make? The Apostle explains that if Jesus had not 
been "born under the Law" his sacrifice would not have 
applied to the Jews, because God had previously separated 
the Jewish nation from other peoples by the Law 
Covenant which he made with them. 

That Jewish nation, under its Law Covenant, was 
on trial and failed to keep that Law Covenant after 
accepting its provisions, saying, "All these things we 
will do." Under their Law Covenant God offered them 
eternal life if they would keep his Law, but if they 
violated it the penalty would be eternal death. Thus 
they came a second time under the divine sentence: the 
first time with the rest of us under Adamic condemnation, 
and the second time through failure to keep their 
Law. Hence, the Apostle says that "the Law which 
was ordained unto life they found to be unto death," for 
"by the deeds of the Law could no flesh be justified in 
God's sight." Hence it was necessary for Christ to be 
born under the Law, to be a Jew, that he might redeem 
all the Jews under that Law Covenant arrangement. 

God has all these very different features in his 
plan, nevertheless Christ is the central point from which 
every one of these variations of the Divine programme 
radiates— the Jews to be redeemed specially, also the 
whole world of mankind aside from these; and besides 
God's purpose in connection with the Church, the elect, 
the Body of Christ. In order to keep ourselves from 
getting confused, we must do with these pictures of our 
Lord's work just as we do with the symbolical pictures 

R4426 : page 202 

of the Church he gives us in the parables. The parables 



furnish a variety of pictures of the Church. The Church 
is likened to the living stones of the Temple; to the 
members of his Body; to a flock of sheep; soldiers under 
Christ, "the Captain of our salvation"; and again likened 
to the Bride of Jesus the Bridegroom. 

Now, if we mix these all up, and ask, How could 
the Bridegroom marry the members of his own Body, or 
how could the Captain marry his own soldiers, or marry 
the stones of the Temple, you see what confusion we 
would have. Each picture, therefore, must be recognized 
as more or less separate and distinct if we would make 
any progress in understanding the Scriptures. In each 
picture there is a lesson, but we must not mix it up 
with other pictures. So, then, get distinctly in mind 
what the Ransom is, and leave it where it is; do not 
take it away from there and mix that thought with that 
of atonement or mediation. The Ransom was that 
which our Lord gave, and which could not be given 
by anybody else, and which needed not to have any 
repetition. But it did not show the application of Jesus' 
merit. He merely "gave himself a Ransom, to be testified 
in due time." 

How the blessing will begin and proceed is shown 
by the sin-offering. The sin-offering is the special feature 
of our topic, as represented in our text. 

SIN ATONEMENT BY SACRIFICE 

The Apostle in our text is discussing sin atonement. 
He points us to one particular picture illustrating his 
subject. In the typical service the Jews made various 
offerings and sacrifices— thank-offerings, peace-offerings, 
sin-offerings, etc. The sin-offering picture is the only 
one of these we are now looking at and discussing. 
The sin-offering for the nation was made annually, on 
the 10th day of the 7th month, which is styled the Day 
of Atonement. The offerings or sacrifices for sins, 
through which the Atonement or Reconciliation with 
God was effected, were made on this Day and lasted 
as valid for a year, at the end of which the whole procedure 
was repeated. The Apostle refers to this offering 
of bulls and goats year by year continually and tells 
us of the "better sacrifices" made by our Lord Jesus, 
which need no repetition, because actually canceling 
sin. We are to remember, however, that this one sacrifice 
of himself, which forever perfects all who come unto 
God through him, began with the sacrifice of our Lord 
Jesus in his own person and has been continued by him 
throughout this Gospel Age in the persons of his Church, 
his followers. These are invited to present their bodies 
living sacrifices, holy and acceptable to God and their 
reasonable service. As the High Priest accepts any of 
these sacrifices the consecrated one is begotten of the 
holy Spirit and henceforth counted as a member of the 
Body of The Christ— a member of the Body of the High 
Priest, who is doing the sacrificing. In this sense of 



R4427 : page 202 

the word the "better sacrifices" of the High Priest, which 
began eighteen centuries ago, when he offered up his 
flesh, continue in his followers as they offer up their 
flesh, which is acceptable in sacrifice, because of the 
High Priest— in his name, in his merit, as his sacrifice. 
In this sense of the word the whole work of the Day 
of Atonement is the day of sacrifice— though in another 
sense of the word, as shown by the type, it is divided 
into two parts— the sacrifice of the Head and the sacrifice 
of the Church, the members of his Body. 

THE TYPICAL PICTURE OF ATONEMENT 

In Leviticus 16th chapter we have the divinely 
arranged picture of the Day of Atonement and its 
sacrificial work. The high priest took a bullock, which 
was for himself— which represented himself— and slew 
(sacrificed) it. The bullock represented our Lord as 
a man; as expressed in the Scriptures, "A body hast 
thou prepared me." (Heb. 10:5.) Subsequently two 
goats were brought and tied at the door of the Tabernacle. 
These were taken from, or represented the congregation, 
the people of Israel, and were typical of the 
household of faith, the Lord's consecrated people— two 
classes of them, the "little flock" and the "great company." 
How beautifully the type shows that these have 
not bodies especially prepared for sacrifice. This is 
particularly shown in the statement that the goats were 
taken of or from the congregation of the children of 
Israel for a sin-offering, while no such statement is 
made respecting the bullock. In other words our Lord, 
by reason of his miraculous birth, was perfect, actually 
so— "holy, harmless, undefiled, separate from sinners." 
We, his disciples, however, imperfect, are of the world, 
children of wrath, even as others. Taken from the 
world our imperfections are reckonedly covered by the 
merit of Christ's sacrifice— by the first part of his sacrifice, 
atoned for by the blood of the antitypical bullock, 
the blood of Christ. We remind you that the Apostle 
points out that our Lord's sacrifice took place at the 
beginning of his ministry and was finished at its close; 
who could not be the sin sacrifice until his thirtieth 
year, under the Law. And it is written that just as 
soon as he became thirty he made the sacrifice: "Now 
when Jesus began to be about thirty years of age he 
cometh to John at Jordan to be baptized of him." We 
may be sure that he arrived in time to present himself 
in sacrifice to the Lord, at the very earliest possible 
moment. There it was, the Apostle tells us, that he 
fulfilled the prophecy, "Lo, I have come, as in the volume 
of the Book it is written of me, to do thy will, O God. 
Thy law is written in my heart." "There," says the 
Apostle, "he taketh away the first that he may establish 



the second." In other words, there he began to set 
aside the typical for the "better sacrifices." The offering 
of himself was instantaneous, but the presentation of 
his body to the trials and difficulties of life continued 
throughout the three and a half years of his ministry 
and finished on Calvary. He consecrated himself in 
a moment, to give up all, even life itself, in the Father's 
service. But the actual giving of time, influence, strength, 
vitality, lasted three and a half years. From the moment 
of his consecration at baptism he was reckonedly 
dead and, at the same moment, begotten of the holy 
Spirit. He was reckonedly alive as a new creature, an 
embryo spirit-being, during the three and a half years, 
the flesh being consumed and the new nature growing 
strong in the Lord, developing in harmony with the 
Divine will. At the cross the sufferings of the flesh, the 
consumption of the sacrifice, was complete, finished; and 
on the day thereafter the new nature was raised to 
perfection by the Father's power, a glorious spirit being, 
invisible to the dead world, but manifested to the disciples 
under various forms and under various circumstances, 
to prove to them that he was no longer dead, 
and the other fact, that he was no longer the man Jesus, 
but the glorified spirit Jesus. Thus the Apostle says, 
"He was put to death in the flesh, but quickened in the 
spirit." 

THE THREE BURNINGS-SACRIFICES 

In the type the fat, etc., were put upon the brazen-altar 
in the Court and all the remainder was burned, except 
the blood, outside the camp. The high priest took 
the blood, and his two hands full of incense and the fire 
from the altar and passed immediately into the holy, 
into the light of the golden candlestick. On the altar, 
which stood between the candlestick and the shewbread, 
he placed the fire and then crumbled the incense 
upon it. We read that the incense penetrated into 
the Most Holy. This was necessary. The significance 
of the statement is that the incense offered by 
the high priest was another picture, as seen by the 
Almighty. It was a sweet incense to God. It went 
before our Lord into the Most Holy and there rested 
upon the mercy-seat. Notice, then, the three burnings. 
The one in the Holy represented the Divine view of the 
sacrifice of Christ during the three and a half years of 
his ministry. The burning of the fat on the brazen-altar 
in the court represented our Lord's sacrifice as 
seen by his disciples and faithful followers, the justified 

R4427 : page 203 

ones— about five hundred brethren. And all who since 
have come into this condition of justification have by 
faith seen that same sacrifice. The burning of the 
carcass outside of the camp represented our Lord's sacrifice 



as viewed from the standpoint of man. To them 
it is an improper use of time and energy. To them 
his life had an evil odor, as they considered him a companion 
of publicans and sinners. The three burnings, 
outside the camp, inside the court and in the first of 
the holies, together represented our Lord's sacrifice from 
these widely different standpoints. When one ended, 
all ended— when our Lord was crucified. His sacrifice 
was finished then. He passed beyond the veil in the 
resurrection to follow. Yet our Lord's work was not 
finished at Calvary in another sense. It was merely 
begun. He had finished the first part of his sacrifice— 
the sacrifice of his own person, the body prepared. But 
he had a larger work yet to do, namely, according 
to the Father's plan, the acceptance and sacrifice of a 
Church class— "the Church of the firstborn, whose names 
are written in heaven." The Head of this Church had 
finished his sacrifice and become the Lord of glory, 
but the remainder had yet to pass through similar 
experiences to his— walking in his footsteps. 

HE APPEARED FOR US 

In the type when the high priest had finished the offering 
of the incense, he took the blood of the bullock and 
entered with it into the Most Holy, stooping under the 
second veil, which pictured our Lord's three days in the 
tomb. He arose the other side of the veil a spirit being 
and later ascended up on high, "there to appear in the 
presence of God for us." Looking at the type and tracing 
its fulfilment we find that this signified the sprinkling 
of the blood upon the mercy-seat and before the mercy-seat. 
When the Apostle says he appeared for us we find 
that this fulfilment was typified by the priest's presentation 
of the blood on behalf of himself and his house— the 
Church, which is his Body; the "great company," the 
"household of faith," the antitypical Levites, or the house 
of Levi. 

Next look at the other part of the type or picture. 
After offering the blood of the bullock the high priest 
came out and laid his hands upon the goats, as already 
described, and accepted one of them as the Lord's goat 
for sacrifice and the other as a scape-goat for destruction. 
The casting lots indicated that the high priest had 
no choice as to which should be the sacrifice. Even so 
all who make consecration to the Lord are eligible to 
sacrifice and the Lord is no respector of persons, but willing 
to accept all who are faithful to their covenant obligation. 
Those two goats, as we shall show, represented 
or typified the consecrated Church of this Gospel 
Age, who from the world have presented themselves to 
the Lord. The Lord's goat represents the members of 
the Body of the High Priest; the scape-goat represents 
the less faithful of the Church, the "great company," 
the antitypical Levites. In the type we read that the 
high priest laid his hands upon the Lord's goat and 



smote it, killed it, and took of its blood and did therewith 
even as he had done with the bullock, while its fat 
was similarly placed upon the brazen-altar and its flesh 
burned outside the camp. This fact illustrates the 
Church having part in Christ's sufferings and filling up 
that which was left of his afflictions. This is true not 
only of the apostles, but also of all who have since sacrificed 
their all in the interests of the Lord, the Truth 
and the brethren. 

In our text the Apostle identifies the Lord with the 
bullock and his faithful people with the goat. He reminds 
us that no other sacrifices than those of the sin-offering 
were ever burned outside of the camp, and no 
other sacrifices ever had their blood sacrificed and 
sprinkled in the Most Holy to make atonement for sin. 
Then the Apostle says, "Let us go with him (Jesus) 
outside the camp, bearing the reproach with him." 
These, then, are the "better sacrifices" which do take 
away sin, as explained by St. Paul. The effect of this 
great sacrificing work of the high priest during this one 
sacrifice Day of Atonement will never need repetition. It 
will thoroughly accomplish the Divine purposes. It will 
effect the full reconciliation of the world. The merit, of 
course, is in the sacrifice of the bullock. The bullock 
represented our Lord Jesus, while the goat represented 
a multitude of 144,000. The laying down of our lives in 
the Lord's service accounts nothing of real value— nothing 
that would of itself ever take away sin. The entire 
merit of our sacrifice is through the justification which 
first applied to this goat class through the merit of the 
bullock's sacrifice. 

The type tells us that the high priest counted this 
blood of the goat as a part of his one sacrifice, the one 
sacrifice by which all will be blessed who ever attain 
to everlasting life. The high priest presented the blood of 
the goat for a highly different purpose than that for which 
he had previously applied the blood of the bullock. The 
blood of the bullock was for the high priest and the 
members of his household. The blood of the goat was 
for all the remainder of the people of Israel. In the 
antitype the blood of Christ avails for his consecrated 
saints, the "little flock," the "royal priesthood," and for 
the Levites, the "great company," while the sacrificial 

R4428 : page 203 

merit of the Church, the Body of Christ, he applies on 
behalf of all the people, the world— as many of the world 
as desire to avail themselves of the glorious opportunities 
of reconciliation. 

When the high priest had finished the first sacrifice 
and the offering of his blood he came forth. He manifested 
himself at Pentecost and symbolically laid his 
hands upon the Church in the Pentecostal blessing, by 
which sacrifice his followers were enabled to be conformed 
to the terms and conditions of his sacrifice. But 



after offering the blood of the goat the high priest is 

represented as having finished his work. He puts off his 

sacrificial garments and puts on his garments of glory 

and beauty, typified by the glorious qualities of Christ's 

character and the honorable mission to which he had 

been anointed as the world's Prophet, Priest, King, Judge 

and Mediator. Thus coming forth he represents our 

Lord's Second Advent and assumption of divine glory 

and power, at which time the Church will be with him as 

members of his Body, to cooperate in the dispensing of 

the blessings of the New Covenant to Israel and to all 

the families of the earth. As on the Day of Atonement 

the people of Israel put on sackcloth and ate no pleasant 

food, but fasted and waited for the coming out of the 

high priest in his garments of glory and beauty, so it 

has been throughout this Gospel Age. The whole world 

lieth in the wicked one, overwhelmed in sin and death 

and corruption. Of them St. Paul declares, "For we 

know that the whole creation groaneth and travaileth 

in pain together until now. For the earnest expectation 

of the creation waiteth for the manifestation of the sons 

of God" (Rom. 8:22, 19)— waiting for the High Priest, 

Head and Body, typified by the glorious garments of the 

Jewish high priest. Following the picture a little further 

we see that the high priest in his glorious garments 

went to the Altar and lifted up his hands and gave his 

blessing to the people— the blessing of the New Covenant, 

the blessing of the forgiveness of sins, the blessing of 

pouring out of the holy Spirit upon all flesh. If in the 

type a blessing is portrayed, how much greater will be 

the blessing in reality! As in the type the people arose, 

threw off their sackcloth and fasting and rejoiced in 

their forgiveness, so in the Millennial morning the world, 

coming to an appreciation of the great High Priest and 

the sacrifices of Atonement, will arise from sin and degradation 

and death and rejoice in divine favor and in the 

realization of the many blessings of restitution set 

before Israel, as declared by the mouth of all the holy 

prophets since the world began.— Acts 3:20. 

WITH HIS OWN BLOOD 

In the context the Apostle says, "Wherefore Jesus 
also, that he might sanctify the people with his own 
blood, suffered without the gate." (Heb. 13:12.) Are 

R4428 : page 204 

we asked what people Jesus would sanctify with his own 
blood? We answer, in the broader sense of the word, 
"All people— all who ever will accept sanctification, 
cleansing, reconciliation through him." We read that he 
gave himself a ransom for all. It matters not that he 
did not apply it at once for all, but merely for us, the 
Church, the "household of faith." The intention of his 
sacrifice was for all. This does not alter the fact that 



thus far the merit of Jesus' sacrifice extends not beyond 
the "household of faith." In due time through the 
Church his merit will extend to every creature. Thus it 
is written, "They shall obtain mercy through your 
mercy," and we obtain our mercy through Jesus' death, 
as he by divine grace, tasted death for every man. 

THE SCAPE-GOAT'S PART 

Some, without mature thinking, have remarked that 
the scape-goat cannot represent a spirit being class, because 
it never went into the Holy nor Most Holy. We 
reply that neither did the bullock nor the Lord's goat 
go into the Holy nor Most Holy. It was merely the 
blood of these that was taken into the Most Holy, and 
the blood represents the surrender of earthly rights and 
privileges and life willingly, in pursuance of the divine 
will or arrangement. The scape-goat, or "great company" 
class, consists of those who made an offering of 
themselves and were accepted, but who failed to fulfil 
the conditions of their sacrifice. Failing to become members 
of the High Priest's Body and sharers of his glory 
on the divine plane, these would have had nothing, had 
the Lord not specially provided for them an experience 
of tribulation for the destruction of their flesh, that the 
spirit might be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus. They 
had been accepted of the Lord because of their faith and 
their consecration unto death. Failing to make good 
their consecration and holding on to the present earthly 
life, they would lose all, were it not for the arrangement 
thus made on their behalf for the destruction of their 
flesh. Nor are we to think of these as a dishonorable 
class, an unfaithful class, an undeveloped class. None 
can gain eternal life under the divine arrangement on 
any plane of being except as he shall be transformed and 
be brought to the condition of perfect loyalty to God and 
his righteousness. Any who do not come up to the highest 
standard of obedience to God would not be accounted 
worthy of eternal life in the "great company," or in any 
other. Having been begotten of the holy Spirit they 
could not reassume their earthly rights and restitution 
blessings. Those once consecrated and sacrificed are 
gone forever. If the spirit life be not attained the implication 
would be the Second Death. 

This "great company" class has nothing whatever to 
do with sin atonement, for the scape-goat was neither 
burned outside the camp, nor was its blood brought into 
the Most Holy. What, then, is signified by the statement 
(Lev. 16:21) that Aaron laid his hands upon the head of 
the scape-goat and confessed over it all the iniquities 
of the children of Israel and all their transgressions in 
all their sins, putting them upon the head of the goat? 

The sin atonement effected by the blood of the bullock 
and the blood of the Lord's goat represented the atonement 
for original Adamic sin and all the weaknesses 
and imperfections traceable directly thereto. Since the 



blood of these two animals made satisfaction for all such 
sins of all the people, it is manifest that none remained 
to be confessed upon the head of the scape-goat. What 
sins, then, were those which Aaron confessed upon the 
scape-goat's head? We reply that they were such trespasses 
as those our Lord taught us to pray for, saying, 
"Forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive those who 
trespass against us." If we freely forgive those who 
trespass against us, God will freely forgive us our trespasses. 
But he did not forgive original sin, but instead, 
sentenced us to death on account of it and provided 
his Son as our Redeemer. These trespasses are short-comings, 
imperfections, etc., as represented in carelessness 
or indifference or wilfulness or any other failure to 
do the Lord's will the very best we know how. The 
Lord represents that he keeps a very strict account of all 
the world's affairs. He explains that the severe tribulations 
which came upon the Jewish nation in the close of 
its harvest time was a retributive experience. In that 
awful trouble with which their age ended, as our Lord 
foretold, the Lord required all the righteous blood shed 
from the time of righteous Abel down to about that time. 
In a word, every injustice cries out for vengeance, for 
retribution, for penalty. The great original sin, whose 
penalty is death, our Lord Jesus has paid, dying, the 
just for the unjust. But there are many sins, many injustices 
of the past, as well as of the present, which are 
still unaccounted for to justice. For instance, in Revelation 
we read that the souls under the altar cried, "How 
long, O Lord, holy and true, dost thou not judge and 
avenge our blood on them that dwell on the earth?" 
(Rev. 6:10.) Justice is merely waiting for the full number 
of those persecuted for righteousness sake to be 
completed and then the punishment will come. The great 
time of trouble with which this age will end will, like 
the time of trouble which closed the Jewish Age, signify 
a time of settlement of the claims of Justice. The "great 
company," failing to sacrifice during the acceptable time, 
will be permitted to share a considerable measure of 
that trouble coming upon the world— to cancel, if you 
please, a measure of the troubles due to come upon 
humanity in general. When that time shall come these 
dear friends, represented in the "great company," will 
rejoice in their share of suffering and destruction of the 
flesh, that they may be saved as spirit beings in the day 
of the Lord Jesus. And what they shall suffer of the 
iniquities of the world will mean that much less for 
others in that day of trouble. 

"FELLOWSHIP IN HIS SUFFERINGS" 

That our Lord suffered, the Just for the unjust, the 
Scriptures clearly set forth— not merely the amount 
of pain which he experienced, or, in old English suffered: 
he suffered death on account of sin. We suffer with 
him. We are partakers of his sufferings. Our Lord's 



most severe sufferings were probably in Gethsemane, 

where, we read, that he was in a great agony and that 

"Of the people there were none with him;" even the 

faithful, beloved eleven apostles were drowsy and could 

not watch with him at that hour. But they could not 

comprehend his trouble— that the programme of the next 

few hours meant so much to him. He knew that in his 

covenant made at Jordan he had given up his earthly 

rights and privileges. He knew that now his entire dependence 

as respects a future life rested upon a resurrection 

from the dead and he knew, too, that if he had not 

performed the divine will perfectly, completely, that he 

could not be granted the glorious resurrection change 

and the eternal glory on the spirit plane. Thus we read 

that he offered up strong crying and tears unto him who 

was able to save him out of death and that he was heard 

in that thing which he feared. He feared death— not 

that he doubted the heavenly Father's promise that if 

his sacrifice was faithfully performed he would be 

granted a glorious resurrection. He feared that unintentionally 

he might have made some error, might have 

failed to perform some portion of his consecration vow. 

He feared, therefore, lest there had not gone the full 

measure of the cloud of incense into the Most Holy to 

R4429 : page 204 

cover the mercy-seat and to indicate that he had been 

faithful to the last degree in his sacrificing. Then it was 

that the angel appeared to strengthen him. What the 

strengthening was is not revealed, but most evidently it 

pertained to the things which he feared. Undoubtedly 

the angel, as the Father's representative, assured him 

about his faithfulness; that his sacrificing had been acceptable 

in the Father's sight. At once a great calm 

came, in which the great storm of anguish, which had 

threatened but a moment before to wreck his mortal 

body, subsided. Thenceforth we behold him the calmest 

of the calm— before the high priests enduring the contradiction 

of sinners against himself in the presence of 

Pilate and the rabbis. Led to the cross he was the most 

R4429 : page 205 

self-possessed of all of whom we have any knowledge on 
the occasion. When his disciples forsook him, it was he 
who interposed that they be not pursued, but let go their 
way. When Peter denied him, it was he who calmly 
looked towards Peter, reminding him of the prophecy. 
On the way to Calvary it was he who spoke words of 
peace to the weeping women, saying, "Weep not for me, 
but rather for yourselves." How different are the experiences 
of Christ's followers! We have him not only 
as an Example and as a Teacher, but as our Protector 
and as our Advocate. We may indeed have strong consolation 
because he has assured us that he has not only 



appeared for us, but that he is able to succor us in every 
time of need. He is still Head of the Church, which is his 
Body. He is still supervising the interests of all of his 
members. He is still saying to us, as he did to his disciples 
of old, 

"THIS IS MY BLOOD--DRINK YE ALL OF IT" 

Whoever fails to clearly see that the Church at the 
present time are the members of the Body of Christ 
can never understand how the Church is to share her 
Lord's sacrifice, as represented in his cup. After our 
Lord at the last Supper had himself partaken of the 
fruit of the vine, he handed the cup to his disciples, saying, 
"This is my blood of the New Covenant, shed for 
many for the remission of sins. Drink ye all of it." 
Not only did our Lord drink of the symbolical cup before 
giving it to his disciples, but he drank of the same 
actual cup, the partaking of which he requires of us as 
an evidence of our loyalty as his disciples. This is the 
cup of shame, of sorrow, of indignity, of self-denial on behalf 
of others. The Master spoke of it as the cup which 
the Father had prepared for him. He left some of it for 
us, that we might have the privilege of sharing in his 
sufferings and of the glory that shall follow as soon as 
the last member of his mystical Body shall have been 
glorified. When he passed the cup to his disciples at 
the Memorial Supper, his words, "Drink ye all of it," not 
only meant that all who would be his disciples must 
drink of that cup, but also meant that his followers must 
drink all of it, must leave none of it. In other words 
the sufferings of Christ belong exclusively to this Gospel 
Age, marked by his own sufferings at its beginning and 
terminating with the revelation of his glory in the Kingdom. 
There will be none of the sufferings of Christ for 
the world to drink of during the Millennial Age and 
there will be no opportunity for any of them to become 
joint-heirs with the Redeemer. The Master said that this 
cup was the blood of the New Testament— the new will, 
his will or Testament, by which he is bequeathing his 
earthly rights and earthly honors to the earthly seed of 
Abraham and to the world of mankind through them. 
It is his blood that was necessary for the sealing of the 
New Covenant and we were invited to share his cup, to 
share the sealing, and to share the dispensing of the New 
Covenant blessings to Israel and the world. Whoever 
does not drink of this cup, whoever does not share in the 
sufferings of Christ— the same sufferings which he experienced, 
as members of his Body— cannot share with 
him his Millennial throne of glory, by means of which the 
New Covenant blessings will be established with the 
world. 

Mark this intimation that his followers must be sharers 
with him in his sufferings and mark the declaration that 
the same must participate in the same sufferings if they 
would sit with him in his throne. Hearken to the two 



disciples as they inquired of him just before his death if 

they might sit, the one on the right hand and the other 

on the left in his Kingdom. Jesus replied, "Ye know not 

what ye ask. Are ye able to drink of the cup that I shall 

drink of, and to be baptized with the baptism that I am 

baptized with? They say unto him, We are able." (Matt. 20:22.) 

When they asserted their willingness to die 

with him he assured them that they would indeed share 

with him his throne and indeed drink of his cup and 

share his baptism of death and have place in his 

Kingdom. 

Let us hold fast to these precious promises. If others 
lose their hold and claim that they can no longer thus 
see with us, our pity should be for them that the light 
that they had has gone from them. Let us not smite the 
blind, but rather be kind and generous toward all. The 
greater the number of the blind, the greater is the blessing 
and privilege of those who do see. Let us rejoice 
in our privileges and use them. Let us remember the 
Master's words, "If the light that is in thee become darkness, 
how great is that darkness." Such are in a more 
pitiable condition than the world who never saw. Let 
us remember, too, that all kinds of blindness are more or 
less contagious and let us guard our spiritual sight as 
one of the most precious boons given of the Lord. 



THE FIELD OF BATTLE 

To grasp the two-edged sword, and forward rush upon the foe, 
To hear the Captain's cry, to see the flash of answering eyes, 
To feel the throbbing hearts of battling comrades in the 

ranks— 
That rapturous inspiration know, of warring for the Right, 
The holy joy of following him who points and leads the way! 

Ah, yes ! 'tis glorious thus to fight the goodly fight, and yet, 
Methinks, beyond the firing line, beneath those snowy tents, 
A fiercer conflict rages, day and night, where trembling hands, 
Wan lips and fever-lighted eyes do battle with a host 
Of deadly foes— grim giants, Doubt and Disappointment, 

fierce 
Despair— before whose fiery darts the bravest well might 

quail! 
They also hear the call, and hoarsely cry, "Lord, here am I!" 
They strive to reach their swords, to struggle to their feet, 

but back 
In helpless agony of weakness on their pallets fall, 
With brain afire, and reason tottering on its throne, their 

tears 
Of anguish flow. Sometimes the noise of battle sweeps 

beyond 
The range of those poor straining ears, and then the spectre 

Fear 
Stalks through the room, and lays an icy hand upon each 



heart: 
The awful thought, Our Captain hath forsaken and forgot, 
Our comrades forge ahead, they leave us here alone to die! 

But, no! the Lord of Battles is most merciful, he sends 
A swift-winged messenger: "Yea, though a mother may 

forget 
Her sucking child, yet will I not forget!" Then, like the calm 
That cometh after storm, sweet peace and quiet reign within 
Those troubled breasts; and so he giveth his beloved sleep. 

Ah, then! true-hearted comrades in the forefront of the fight, 
Remember that the wounded to God's army still belong, 
And send betimes to them a white-winged messenger of 

cheer. 
Oh, give Love's roses now, nor keep them for the coffin's lid, 
(A single flower is sweeter far than thousands by and by). 
Take time to speak a tender word, to shed a pitying tear, 
Or breathe, at least, a prayer throughout the watches of the 

night, 
And thus prove more than conquerors through the power of 

deathless love! 

G. W. S.-Jan., '09. 



R4429 : page 206 

SAMPLES OF INTERESTING LETTERS 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

I am sorry to hear that the untruthful statement has 
been circulated that you are denying the Ransom. Of 
you it can be said emphatically that you are the great 
defender and expounder of the ransom— from the year 
1872— and especially from 1878 even to this day. 

For centuries the doctrine of the ransom held a 
prominent place in orthodox theology, but there was 
no distinction made between the act of providing the 
ransom price and the act of paying that price over to 
Justice. This is most convincingly set forth in your 
writings. The "anti lutron" did not remove the sentence 
of death from the world; this is to be done by the 
hilasmos act. In your writings the act of presenting 
the ransom price as an offset for sins in the heavenly 
court of justice is divided into two parts— the Atonement 
for the Church and the atonement for the world; 
that the legal atonement for the Church was made on 
the Ascension day, and when the "ransom money" shall 
have been stamped with the image and with the superscription 
of the death of the Church, it will be paid over 
to Justice and God and the world will be at one— legally 
only. God cannot be reconciled to sinners; they must 
first be brought into a perfect condition ere they 
can enjoy the friendship of God; hence the necessity of 
an effective covenant. 



With greatest interest and pleasure I have followed 
you in your explanation of the three Covenants. I was 
used to speak of this Gospel Age as the New Testament 
time and of the Gospel Church as the New Testament 

R4430 : page 206 

Church, but you made a clear cut of it, declaring that 
the New Covenant is not yet in existence, that it belongs 
to the Millennial Age. This declaration dispelled the 
mist and caused me to see the wondrous doings of our 
God more clearly. The Seed promised in the Abrahamic 
Covenant is to bless Israel and all nations by the arrangement 
of the New Covenant. The New Covenant 
will be established as soon as its Mediator, Christ Head 
and Body, shall have been completed. Then will begin 
the great transaction. Christ as the High Priest 
shall enter into the Most Holy with the blood of the 
Church to justify God in his act of letting the world go 
from the chain of death— legally. God will then be at 
liberty to exhibit his wisdom, love and power toward 
mankind. The work of the atonement will then be 
finished and Christ shall come forth as the Mediator. 
The antitypical Ishmael, the Jewish nation, shall come 
from the wilderness condition to the promised land, 
even to Mt. Zion, the center from which God will rule 
the world during the Millennium. The New Covenant 
will be sealed and the precious work will begin— the 
work of taking away the sins of Israel and the taking 
away of the sins of the world, and the writing of the 
law of God in the hearts of the children of Israel and 
in the hearts of the people of other nations. 

You have brought wonderful things to my attention. 
I am taken captive by these things. What am I that 
I should come under the offer of getting the choicest 
portion of the Abrahamic Covenant? I remember the 
days when I was reading and thinking of the two Covenants 
mentioned by Paul in Galatians 4, but I did not 
understand, so I have watched and received eagerly 
whatsoever has come from your pen along the line of 
the Covenants. How precious it is to walk under the 
light shed upon them! Precious, sanctifying truths 
indeed they are. Daily I remember you and all your 
dear colaborers at the throne of heavenly grace. 

Yours in love of the Truth, 

K. P. HAMMER, -Can. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

For some time I have wanted to write and tell you 
how greatly I have been blessed since making the Vow 
my own, which I did at 11:15 p.m., January 9 last. 
Words fail to express the peace of mind I experienced 
as soon as I registered it with our heavenly Father. I 
am happier now than I have been since I came into 
Present Truth, and can truthfully say, each day I have 
received more light and knowledge and have increased 



joy in the Lord and in his service. My heart overflows 
with gratitude and extreme thankfulness to our heavenly 
Father for his goodness to me. 

Dear Brother Russell, I grieve very much when I 
think of the things I believed and thought of you. I 
am very deeply impressed by the way in which you have 
taken this trial and by your love for the brethren amid 
such terrible persecution, and I want you to know you 
have my heartfelt sympathy. I pray that those who 
are still in opposition may also have the eyes of their 
understanding opened before it is too late. 

May the Lord's blessing be with you all in "Bethel 
Home." May I ask you to pray on my behalf? With 
much Christian love to you all, 

Your sister in the blessed Lord, 

M. L. JAMES,-Pa. 



DEARLY BELOVED BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

I rejoice to tell you that Saturday, April 24th, the 
anniversary of the day I registered my "Vow" to the 
Lord, found me "safe in the arms of Jesus," much grace 
having been obtained in time of need. I love the Vow's 
sanctifying power and protection. The Lord bless thee 
abundantly. With sincere love and prayers, 

By his grace, C. WHITE,— Texas. 



DEAR BROTHER IN CHRIST:- 

"Grace to you, and peace, from God our Father, 
and the Lord Jesus Christ." "We give thanks to God 
always for you, making mention of you in our prayers 
"daily," "Remembering without ceasing, your work of 
faith and labor of love, and patience of hope in our 
Lord Jesus Christ"; making request that your trip 
among the dear ones abroad may be prosperous and 
assist in "building up many in the most holy faith." 

I want to tell you what a great blessing the Vow 
has been to me— and especially so since Brother Brown 
went home and I have had no earthly one to lean upon. 
The dear Lord has been very near, guarding and 
strengthening me for the daily battle with "the world, 
the flesh and the Adversary." 

"May he who is able to guard you from stumbling 
and to set you before the presence of his glory, without 
blemish, in exceeding joy," be with you to the end of 
your life's journey. 

Your sister in the Anointed, 

MARGARET REID BROWN. 



BROOKLYN BETHEL HYMNS FOR AUGUST 



After the singing of the hymn the Bethel Family listens 
to the reading of "My Vow unto the Lord," then joins in 
prayer. At the breakfast table the MANNA text for the 
date is read and questions and comments considered. 
Finally, just before leaving the table, the MANNA comment 
is read. Desiring that all share the blessings, we 
commend the plan to others. The hymns for Aug. are 
indicated below to permit all who so desire to join with us: 

(1) 4; (2) 61; (3) 236; (4) 280; (5) 215; (6) 9; (7) 286; 
(8) 152; (9) 110; (10) 334; (11) 105; (12) 141; (13) 139; 
(14) 328; (15) 155; (16) 117; (17) 119; (18) 8; (19) 35; 
(20) 130; (21) 47; (22) 273; (23) 7; (24) 125; (25) 246; 
(26) 19; (27) 194; (28) 14; (29) 88; (30) 71; (31) 325. 



page 207 

BEREAN STUDIES ON THE ATONEMENT 

THE TEXT-BOOK USED FOR THIS COURSE 
IS SCRIPTURE STUDIES, SERIES V (E)* 

Questions on Scripture Study V. 

—Supposed Objections Considered 

AUGUST 1 

(1) Where do we read, "The holy Ghost witnesseth 

in every city, saying, that bonds and afflictions await me"? 
Page 277. 

(2) What does this signify? Give details and cite the 
Scriptures. 

(3) How did the holy Ghost make the Elders of 
Ephesus overseers in the Church? P. 278. 

(4) The Apostle speaks of his own preaching as being 
"not in the words which man's wisdom teacheth, but 
which the holy Ghost teacheth." Where are these words 
found? What do they imply? P. 279. 

(5) We read that "the natural man receiveth not the 
things of the Spirit of God," etc. Where is the Scripture? 
What does it signify? Give the philosophy of the matter. 
P. 279, par. 3. 

AUGUST 8 

(6) Read 1 John 2:20,27. What thought is suggested 
in the words "unction" and "anointing" in these texts, 
and how are they applicable to the Church. P. 280, 281. 

(7) What does the word unction signify? What is the 
Greek word rendered unction and its import? P. 281, par. 2 

(8) Could these words, unction and anointing of the 
Spirit, apply to a person or only to a power or influence? 
P. 282, par. 1. 

(9) Who is the Holy One in the expression, "An unction 



from the Holy One"? P. 282, par. 2. 

(10) Cite other Scriptures which speak of the pouring 
out, shedding forth, anointing, etc., of the holy Spirit. 
P. 282, par. 2. 

(11) In this Scripture the wording implies that those 
who have the unction "know all things," are all-wise. 
What about this statement? Give a preferred translation. 
Is it here as in the oldest manuscripts? P. 282, par. 3. 

AUGUST 15 

(12) What is the truth and meaning of the words, "Ye 
need not that any man teach you"? P. 283, par. 1. 

(13) As it stands in our common version, would not 
this passage be in conflict with many others? Quote and 
cite some of these. P. 283, par. 2; P. 284, par. 1,2. 

(14) About when is it supposed that John wrote this 
epistle? Tell something of the world's condition at that 
time. P. 285. 

(15) To what class did the Apostle refer as "Them 
that seduce you"? (V. 26). P. 286, par. 1. 

(16) Give a paraphrase of the 27th verse on this text. 
P. 286, par. 3; P. 287, par. 1. 

(17) Where is it written that "The Spirit itself 
maketh intercession for us with groanings which cannot 
be uttered," and what spirit is here referred to? P. 287, 
par. 2. 

(18) How is this Scripture generally misunderstood? 
P. 287. 

(19) With the theory that it is the holy Spirit, one of 
three equal gods, is it reasonable to suppose that there 
would be anything too hard for it to utter? 

(20) Is the popular thought that we must approach 

the Father and the Son through the holy Spirit as another 
person a reasonable one or in accord with other Scriptures? 
P. 287, par. 3. 

(21) If the groaning cannot be uttered, how would 
there be groanings at all? Wherein is the error of the 
ordinary view of this text? Give a detailed explanation 
of it and cite the Scripture. P. 288, 289, 290. 

AUGUST 22 

(22) We read of the holy Spirit, "He will reprove the 
world of sin and of righteousness and of judgment." 
Where are these words found, and why is the holy Spirit 
referred to by the masculine pronoun he? P. 291, 170, 
171. 

(23) Does this Scripture imply that the holy Spirit 
operates in sinners for their reproof and their reformation? 
P. 291, par. 1,2. 

(24) If it operates only in the Church, the spirit-begotten, 
what would this text signify? P. 291, par. 3. 

(25) Explain how the holy Spirit reproves the world, 

what influence it exercises and how and the outward evidences 
thereof. P. 292. 



(26) In what sense are the Lord's people "children of 

light" and whom do they enlighten and what is the enlightening 
power? P. 293. 

(27) Mention some of the things which the holy Spirit 
reproves through the children of the light. Is such a reproving 
of the world the chief work of the holy Spirit in 

this Age, and the chief work of the Church, or not? 
P. 294. 

(28) Give illustrations of how the light of the holy 
Spirit in the children of the light might become darkness. 
P. 294, par. 2. 

AUGUST 29 

(29) In what verse of the Bible is the Spirit of God 
contrasted with the spirit of antichrist? P. 295, par. 1. 

(30) Is the spirit of antichrist a person? If not what 
would be the inference as respects the Spirit of God when 
thus used in comparison. P. 295, par. 2. 

(31) How should we "try the spirits"? And are both 
the spirit of the Truth and the spirit of error personated 
through human agencies, teachers, etc.? P. 295, par. 2. 

(32) Give one general Scripture text as respects false 
faith and true and false teachers which refers to the 
spirit of antichrist as not confessing the coming of Jesus 
in the flesh. P. 296. 

(33) Give illustrations of teaching which deny that 
our Lord came in the flesh and which, therefore, should 
be classed as anti or against, opposed to, the doctrines of 
Christ. P. 297. 

(34) What objection is sometimes raised to the common 
version of this text? Explain the matter in detail 

and show that our common version is well sustained. 
P. 297, last par. 

(35) Give Prof. Rinehart's definition of the Greek text. 
P. 298, 299. 

(36) Is it necessary to believe that Christ came in the 
flesh to logically believe in the Ransom? If so, how and 
why? P. 299. 



*Five years ago DAWN-STUDIES, VOL. V., was reset, and 
unfortunately the type was not exactly same size as before; and 
hence page for page they differ. The references given in these 
Berean Studies apply to the present edition, a copy of which 
postpaid will cost you but 30c. But keep your old edition, 
for unfortunately the new Bible Helps refer to its pages. 



page 208 

PUBLIC MINISTRIES OF THE TRUTH 
UNDER THE AUSPICES OF PEOPLES PULPIT 



ASSOCIATION OF BROOKLYN, N.Y. 



ONE-DAY LOCAL CONVENTIONS ADDRESSED BY THE 
EDITOR OF THIS JOURNAL AS FOLLOWS: 

GLEN FALLS, N.Y., JUNE 27 

At 10:00 a.m. Praise and Testimony Meeting in G.A.R. 
Hall, Corner Glen and South streets. At 11:00 o'clock discourse 
to the interested. 

At 3:00 p.m. public discourse on the subject: "The Thief 
in Paradise; the Rich Man in Hell, and Lazarus in Abraham's 
Bosom," in the Empire Theatre, Corner Glen and South Sts. 
Get off cars at Monument Sq. 

Visiting friends heartily welcomed. 

BROOKLYN, N.Y., JULY 4 

Morning Rally and Testimony Meeting at 10:30 o'clock. 

Discourse by Brother Russell at 3:00 p.m. Evening meeting 
for the interested at 7:30 o'clock; this will be a Question 
Meeting. Visiting friends cordially invited. 

All meetings will be held in the Brooklyn Tabernacle, Nos. 
13-17 Hicks street. Convenient to all cars and ferries— close 
to the old bridge terminus. 

Baptismal services will be arranged for if requested on 
first Sunday of any quarter. 



BROOKLYN TABERNACLE EVERY SUNDAY 



Preaching at 3:00 p.m. Praise service at 7:00 p.m.; 
Berean Bible Study at 7:30 p.m. Convenient to New York 
via Subway, and Jersey City via P.R.R. Annex Ferry. 



page 209 



SEMI-MONTHLY 
VOL. XXX JULY 15 NO. 14 
A.D. 1909-A.M. 6037 



CONTENTS 

Views from The Watch Tower 211 

Evolution and Character 21 1 

An Unsectarian Presentation 212 

"I Will Call for the Grain and Increase It" 212 



"My Grace is Sufficient for Thee" 213 

Heroism (Poem) 215 

Wresting the Scriptures 215 

The Things no Longer Seen 216 

The Blood of the Covenant 217 

The Dual Feature in Rachel 219 

Proper and Improper Statements 220 

Like Unto Jannes and Jambres 221 

"Weep Not for Me," but "Watch and Pray" 222 

Abraham's Three Wives 222 

Samples of Interesting Letters 223 

page 210 

PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY 
CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
"BROOKLYN TABERNACLE," 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, N.Y., U.S.A. 

Foreign Agencies:— British Branch: 24 Eversholt St., London, 
N.W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, Barmen. Australasian 
Branch: Equitable Building, Collins St., Melbourne. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:— All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 
and in touch with the Studies, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, DANISH AND ITALIAN EDITIONS. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N.Y., POSTOFFICE 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA 



THE WEEKLY SERMONS 

We trust that our readers who are taking newspapers 
which publish "Pastor Russell's Sermons" weekly will not 
forget to encourage the editors by post-card, referring briefly 



to some feature specially enjoyed or to the sermons in general. 
If you miss a paper or if a sermon fails to appear, send a post-card 
at once stating your disappointment and explaining that 
you subscribed solely for the sake of Pastor Russell's sermons, 
which are so different from all other sermons. 

PEOPLES PULPIT IN FOREIGN LANDS 

We do not advise friends in Canada, Great Britain, etc., 
to subscribe for "Peoples Pulpit." The sermons which appear 
in it can for most part be had in advance in the newspapers 
which publish the sermons. Send orders for the latter to us; 
we can usually supply them cheaper than the publishers would. 

British readers will find a sermon weekly in The Red Rose 
Magazine. Recommend it to your friends, send samples 
and drop an encouraging word at times to the editor. 

CONVENTION EXPENSES AS DONATIONS 

After conventions please send us a memorandum of the 
amount expended by the Church and it will be treated as a 
Church Donation and credited on the Tract Fund as though 
sent us in cash. Follow the same course as respects public 
meetings arranged for the Pilgrims. 

Dawn-Studies, Vol. I, Spanish, is in stock. 
Dawn-Studies, Vol. Ill, Greek, just received; paper covers. 

SUBSCRIBERS FOR PEOPLES PULPIT 

A convenient way for the friends desiring to subscribe for 
Peoples Pulpit would be by classes. Moneys intended to be 
sent us as Tract Fund donations might be so used if agreeable 
to you. One member of the class could act as its agent 
and order the papers for the class, but all to be sent to one 
address. His letter should be addressed to PEOPLES PULPIT 
and should enclose subscription money and be a business 
letter such as could be understood by the Postoffice Examiner. 

Subscriptions in Canada and Foreign countries are not 
solicited, as the rates would be double on account of postage. 

Prices will be as follows:— Single copies, per year, 12 cts. 
Club rate, to one address, 3 copies, 25 cents; 12 copies, $1.00; 
25 copies, $1.50; 50 copies, $2.50; 100 copies, $4.00; 300 copies, 
$10. 

NEW MISSIONARY ENVELOPES 

New envelopes are now to be had at the same price— 25 
cents per 100, postpaid. These are of excellent paper and 
have half-tone cut of all six volumes of SCRIPTURE-STUDIES 
on the front, and cut of the HEAVENLY MANNA on the back. 

CLOTH "HELPS" 

The Berean Bible Students' Manual is now in stock, uniform 
in size and binding with the SCRIPTURE STUDIES. Price, 



50 cents, postpaid. 

NEW SUPPLY OF WATCH TOWER BIBLES 
(Nos. 1918 and 1928) 

For description and prices see October 1, 1908 TOWER 

Greek Spiritism Booklet is also in stock at 10 cents. 

Italian Volunteer Supply temporarily Exhausted. 



"STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES" 

(SIX VOLUMES) 
INDISPENSABLE IN BIBLE STUDY 
WHOLESALE RATES TO WATCH TOWER SUBSCRIBERS: 

1st Set, Volumes I, II, III, 25 cents per volume, postpaid 
2d Set, Volumes IV, V, VI, 30 cents per volume, postpaid 



TRANSLATIONS IN VARIOUS LANGUAGES 



WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY 
13-17 HICKS ST., BROOKLYN, N.Y., U.S.A. 



R4430 : page 211 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER 
EVOLUTION AND CHARACTER 



IN his book on "The Wonderful Century," published 
ten years ago, Alfred Russel Wallace, the distinguished 
scientist and co-discoverer with Charles 
Darwin of the theory of Evolution, asserted his conviction 
that, in the matter of mechanical discovery, the 
human race had made more progress in the nineteenth 
century than in all the preceding eighteen centuries. It 
is somewhat difficult to reconcile this statement with the 
attitude he takes in his latest article on "Evolution and 
Character" in The Fortnightly Review. He has evidently 
grown more pessimistic. He declares now that it is 
doubtful if there has been "any considerable improvement 
in man's average intellectual and moral status during 
the whole period of human history"; and he says 
further: 
"In comparing a savage with a civilized race, we must 



always remember that the amount of acquired and applied 
knowledge which we possess is no criterion of mental 
superiority on our side, or of inferiority on his. The average 
Zulu or Fijian may be very little lower mentally than 
the average Englishman; and it is, I think, quite certain 
that the average Britain, Saxon, Dane and Norseman 
of a thousand years ago— the ancestral stocks of the 
present English race— were mentally our equals. For 
what power has been since at work to improve them? 
There has certainly been no special survival of the more 
intellectual and moral, but rather the reverse.... When 
we consider further that the effects of education and the 
arts are not hereditary, we shall be forced to the conclusion 
that we are today, in all probability, mentally 
and morally inferior to our semi-barbaric ancestors!" 

The Romans and the Greeks, Mr. Wallace reminds us, 
looked down on their ancestors with just as much contempt 
as we look down on Kaffirs and Red Indians. It 
is quite superficial to conclude that because people are 
in a savage or barbarian state as regards knowledge and 
material civilization, they are necessarily inferior intellectually 
or morally. "I am inclined to believe," says 
Mr. Wallace, "that an unbiased examination of the question 
would lead us to the conclusion that there is no good 
evidence of any difference in man's average intellectual 
and moral status during the whole period of human history 
at all corresponding with differences in material 
civilization between civilized and savage races today.... 
There is good reason to believe that some of the lowest 
savages today (perhaps all of them) are the deteriorated 
remnants of more civilized peoples." 

MENACE OF YELLOW JOURNALISM 



One of the severest and keenest indictments of yellow 
journalism ever written has lately appeared in The 
American Magazine from the pen of Prof. W. I. Thomas, 
of the University of Chicago. He takes the ground that 
the yellow papers published and spread broadcast in our 
American cities today are "a positive agent of vice and 
crime," making for all kinds of immorality. Our failure 
up to the present time to regard the yellow press as an 
immorality and to take steps to exterminate it is due, 
he thinks, in part to the fact that we have been reluctant 
to lose a time-honored faith in the printed page, and in 
part to the slowness with which we carry generalizations 
into practice. In connection with this last point he 
writes: 

"Moral exactions never, in point of fact, reflect the 
most advanced states of consciousness. Our practices 
run behind our judgments by a generation or two, but 
that we do slowly and surely carry our generalizations 
into practice is indicated by the fact that society has 
since the beginning been constantly changing the content 



of its commandments, and practices which at one time 
were not the objects of moral judgment (slavery, polygamy, 
blood-vengeance) have come to be classed as immoral. 
At the present moment there is a focus of consciousness 
containing commandments in the making. In 
it are located questions of political graft, monopolistic 
manipulation, the tyranny of labor, patent medicine fakes, 
impure foods, the race question, the woman question, and 
the question of the yellow journal. These are now being 
agitated and revalued by public opinion and the legitimate 
press, and when we have made our reconstruction 
we shall have some new commandments and some new 
crimes; and among them will be: Thou shalt not have 
the perversion of truth for a gainful occupation." 

Professor Thomas' first and fundamental objection to 
yellow journalism is based on its appeal to what he calls 
the "hate attitude" in men. This attitude exists in all 

R4431 : page 211 

of us. It dates back to the days when human beings 
spent most of their time killing animals or fighting with 
their fellow creatures. It partakes of the nature of impulse 
or appetite, and is almost as blindly elemental as 
hunger itself. During centuries of civilization this hate 
instinct has been modified and controlled, but under the 
surface it slumbers yet. A murder trial, a prize fight, a 
slanderous bit of gossip, an exciting game, have still the 
power to call it into play. 

In the light of these facts, says Professor Thomas, it 
becomes plain that the yellow journal owes its existence 
to the persistence in men of a primitive feeling of essentially 
anti-social character, and to the fact that a revival 
of this feeling brings a sense of pleasure. He 
continues: 

"Pleasurable shocks may be classified with some reference 
to their social significance. We have, first, the 
emotional interest of the reflex type represented by the 
whole gamut of competitive games from marbles to chess, 
which are pleasant, recreative and valuable— to the child, 

R4431 : page 212 

in developing a normal organism, and to the adult (in a 
society where the division of labor prevails), in taking 
the strain off certain overworked nerve centers and equilibrating 
the organism. A second form of shock is associated 
with horrors, misfortunes, detractions and slanders. 
Railroad wrecks, fires, murders and domestic 
scandals are types of this interest, which, as in games, 
is primarily of the nature of a blind reflex. Artistic 
presentations, of which tragedy is an example, are conflict 
situations of a generalized and reflective type, presented 
with such technique and perspective as to give an added 
significance to life. Scientific and business 'pursuits' are 
really of the hunting pattern of interest, involving the 



same emotional strains as the chase, though the emotion is 
subordinated to the reflective processes involved." 
—Current Literature. 

TURKEY ASKS JEWS TO COME 

Offers to Confer Full Citizenship Upon Immigrants on Arrival. 



"They shall bring all your brethren for an offering unto 
the Lord out of all nations."— Isa. 66:20. 

The Jewish Morning Journal gave out recently a special 
cable dispatch from Constantinople saying that the 
Turkish Government had invited the Jews of Russia and 
Roumania to settle in Turkey, agreeing to remove all restrictions 
and to grant full citizenship to them. Here is 
the text of the cablegram: 

"Ahmed Riza, President of the Chamber of Deputies 
visited to-day Hahm Pasha, the ritual head of the Jews 
in Turkey, and on behalf of the Turkish Government extended 
an invitation to the Jews of Russia and Roumania 
to migrate to Turkey. As proof of the good faith of the 
Turkish Government Ahmed Riza informed Hahm Pasha 
that the Government would abolish all restrictions against 
Jewish immigration, and, what is still more significant, 
will confer full citizenship on Jewish immigrants immediately 
on their arrival in Turkey." 

AN UNSECTARIAN PRESENTATION 



Dr. H. S. Pritchett, President of the Carnegie Foundation 
for the advancement of teaching, speaking recently 
on Leadership in the Colleges, said:— 

"Church membership is no test as to whether a man is 
a religious man or not; nor is it any criterion by which 
religious men may be chosen. The constant use of this 
criterion has served to impose upon young men both in 
and out of college the idea that the obligations of the 
religious life are binding only on those who have assumed 
membership in religious organizations. No more unhappy 
impression could have been created. The obligations 
of the religious life are the same upon every 
human being. The idea that he can escape the working 
out of the great laws which the Maker of the Universe 
has set up by declining to belong to a human organization 
is a grotesque one, and yet this is an idea common 
among young men. I believe, therefore, that the man of 
sincere religious life, outside any formal organization, 
has a notable opportunity today for religious leadership 
in college, and that he escapes some of the limitations 
which lie in the way of his brother who is part of a 
definite religious organization. No man has the right to 
evade the duties of leadership or of service by reason 



of his belonging to, or of his not belonging to a religious 
organization. To advance such a claim is like insisting 
that a man is not an American unless he belongs to the 
Republican or the Democratic party." 



R4431 : page 212 

"I WILL CALL FOR THE GRAIN AND INCREASE IT" 

-EZEKIEL 36.- 

OURS is the "day of God's preparation" for the glorious 
abundance of the Millennium and its blessings. 
Fresh proofs of this come to us daily. The 
electric light has superceded the tallow dip; the steamship, 
1000 feet long, has succeeded the canoe; the railway train 
has succeeded the pack -mule and the stage-coach. Already 
we live in a new world, which, in many respects, would be 
Paradise were it not for our fallen condition— our mental, 
moral and physical imperfections— our dying state. Still, 
however, the necessities of life require labor, toil, sweat 
of face; but how great a blessing is in this fact few seem 
to appreciate. Without necessity, idleness would soon 
breed vice and crime still more abundantly. 

Statistics tell us that the wood supplies of the world are 
running short and that already there is little to spare for 
fuel. They tell us also that the coal supply will last only 
about one hundred and fifty years more. They wonder 
whether or not mankind will soon freeze to death. God's 
people, however, looking from the standpoint of the Divine 
promises, may have full assurance of faith that the Divine 
foreknowledge has provided for every emergency. Already 
we know that the air that we breathe contains the 
very elements necessary to supply us adequately with heat, 
if we could but learn how to separate its component parts. 
Science has long been striving to accomplish this end. 
Faith tells us that when the Father's due time shall have 
arrived the problem will be solved simply enough, furnishing 
oxygen for fuel and nitrogen for the enrichment of the 
soil. 

Similarly scientists tell us that the earth cannot much 
more than provide food for its present number of inhabitants. 
They are in trepidation as to what kind of farming 
will be necessary to feed the world five hundred years 
hence. Through the Word of God the eye of faith may see 
that the time for human productivity is drawing to an 
end, that soon after the inauguration of the Millennium, 
conditions will change gradually— until finally human 
propagation will cease entirely. Still, however, according 
to the Scriptures, the world will gradually become filled 
with people; as our Lord's words declare, "All that are in 
their graves shall hear the voice of the Son of man and 
come forth." "Every man in his own order," says St. Paul. 

There will be an abundance of room for all of this population, 



but where their food supply will come from would 
be an astounding proposition to scientists. The child of 
God, whose eye of faith has already seen some of Jehovah's 
mighty power, may rest assured that he who planned all 
this has made necessary provision for the successful carrying 
out of its every feature. 

In the light of God's Word the eye of faith has assistance, 
and perceives that humanity's present fallen condition 
involves a great waste of food, which will be rectified 
as the race rises out of its imperfection and learns more 
thoroughly how to use blessings which are now comparatively 
wasted. Then again the eye of faith sees in the 
divine promise at the head of this article, and in other 
assurances of the Scriptures, that "the earth shall yield 
her increase"— sees the Divine provision for the needs of 
humanity. Already we have evidences of how these Scriptures 
may be fulfilled. In the once arid deserts of the 
United States artesian wells and irrigating canals are 
causing "the wilderness to blossom as the rose and the 
solitary places to be glad." Similar developments will 
doubtless later on extend to other desert lands. Contrariwise 
the marshes are being drained, and the eye of faith 
can see how the world will eventually be made all that is 
implied in God's promise of Paradise restored; that Jehovah 
"will make the place of his feet [his footstool] 
glorious." 

MIRACLE WHEAT -MIRACLE CULTIVATION 

A year ago we called attention to the miracle wheat, 
which was developed in Virginia, seemingly by accident. 
We know not to what extent it has been sown elsewhere, 
nor whether any wonderful results have been obtained. 
However, it gives to the eye of faith a suggestive lesson 

R4431 : page 213 

as to how God could "Call for the wheat-corn and increase 
it" many fold. Now we learn of some wonderful experiments 
which have recently been made by the Russian Government, 
which serve to show that in soil that is at least 
twenty inches deep a new method of cultivating wheat, 
gives promise of almost miraculous results. Even if only 
one-tenth of the results claimed can be obtained the advantage 
seemingly would be considerable. Even if the 
method be at present found impracticable for any reason, 
the suggestion to the eye of faith would be valuable everyway 
as showing God's people something of the hidden 
powers Divine, which are held in reservation for man's 
time of need. 

PLANTING WHEAT INSTEAD OF SOWING IT 

The new method of cultivating wheat, based upon these 
experiments, is the making of pits or trenches, twelve to 
twenty inches deeper than the surface level and forty-two 



inches wide. One grain of wheat planted at the bottom 
of each pit or forty-two inches apart in the trenches is 

R4432 : page 213 

covered lightly with two inches of soil. Every three weeks 
the covering process is repeated about two inches more 
each time, until ten coverings have been put on. The grain 
gives forth three shoots with the first covering. With the 
second covering each of these shoots "bushknots" and 
gives forth three more shoots, so that with the final covering 
the total amounts to 59,049 stalks or heads of grain. 

The ten coverings will require about thirty weeks or 
less, according to the climate. It is said that this method 
of cultivation requires no watering, that the air, having 
free access to the roots, provides the moisture and gases 
necessary for the growth of the plant. It is difficult to 
believe all this— that a single seed could thus produce 
seventy pounds of grain, and that at the same ratio an 
acre of land be made to produce forty-five tons of grain. 
Assuredly, as our text suggests, when the Lord's time shall 
come he will be well able to call for the increase of the 
grain for the benefit of the world of mankind, whom he so 
loved as to redeem and for whom the blessings of restitution 
are shortly to be made available.— Acts 3:19-21. 



R4432 : page 213 

"MY GRACE IS SUFFICIENT FOR THEE" 

-ACTS 19:23; 20:1. -AUGUST 22- 

Golden Text:— "And he said unto me, my grace is 
sufficient for thee; for my strength is made perfect 
in weakness."— 2 Cor. 12:9. 

FOR two years and three months St. Paul had actively 
engaged in the service of the Truth at Ephesus, 
the Gateway or Eye of Asia Minor. He was about 
ready to leave and had already sent word to the Churches 
enroute, which he had established, informing them of his 
journey and of the fact that a famine had recently prevailed 
in Palestine and that he purposed taking to the 
Christians at Jerusalem a present of money from their 
fellow-believers in the Gospel and fellow-members in the 
Body of Christ in Gentile lands. However, the Lord was 
pleased to permit the great Adversary to stir up persecution 
and riot against the Truth and especially against the 
Apostle just on the eve of his departure. As the Apostle 
declares, "We know that all things work together for good 
to those who love God, to the called ones according to his 
purpose;" hence, we may be sure that God saw some good 
that could be accomplished by permitting this panic of 
persecution and that otherwise he would not have permitted 



"FAITH MAY FIRMLY TRUST HIM, COME WHAT MAY" 

Ephesus was one of the greatest cities of that time. This 
may be judged from the fact that just at the entrance of 
the harbor stood one of the "seven wonders of the world," 
an immense statue of "Diana of the Ephesians"— the deity 
of Ephesus and indeed of Asia Minor. To her shrine 
thousands of people came, as opportunity offered, believing 
that they received a special blessing from her, which 
affected favorably the prosperity of their homes. Her 
blessing was supposed to greatly increase the flocks and 
herds and the birth of children. Unlike the other (virgin) 
Diana, this one was represented to be the mother of all 
things living, fecundity being her special blessing. Of 
course, the fame of this great idol attracted general attention, 
and those who could not go to Ephesus to worship 
at the shrine of this image were pleased to purchase from 
merchants certain charms or amulets, which consisted of 
small copies of her shrine wrought in silver. The business 
of making these shrines grew as the people of that region 
learned to desire her blessing and to offer her worship. 
In the Apostle's day the business of making these shrines 
of various sizes out of silver was immense, employing 
hundreds, perhaps thousands. 

A man named Demetrius was the representative or head 
of a silversmith's guild or union. He, becoming incensed 
against the propaganda of the Apostle and the early Church 
at Ephesus, aroused his fellow-craftsmen by a stirring 
speech, in which he pointed out the great prosperity of 
their city through this idol, and how they themselves had 
prospered by the making of her shrine. Then he painted 
a black picture of how the prosperity would shortly die, 
as a result of the preaching of this man Paul. He called attention 
to the fact that it was not merely at Ephesus that 
this new religion, opposed to the worship of Diana, was 
spreading, but that it prevailed throughout all Asia Minor 
amongst people who might be expected to place orders 
with them for shrines. With a wonderful cunning, he combined 
with this thought of the duty of supporting their 
city religion that of the duty also of looking out for their 
pocketbooks. Who can think of stronger grounds of argument 
with people in general? That he was successful in 
arousing the prejudices and creating a riot causes us no 
wonder. The whole city was in an uproar in the very tenderest 
spots, religion and worldly prosperity. 

The Adversary, no doubt, helped on the matter, with the 
result that the people were shortly in a frenzy of despair, 
as though the feared collapse for their religion and their 
prosperity were already upon them. The home of Paul was 
known; so thither the mob rushed, seeking the chief factor 
in the impending troubles. In the Lord's providence St. 
Paul was absent. Aquilla and Priscilla, who kept the home, 
were there and, although not arrested, evidently were loyal 
to the Apostle and to the cause to the very last degree. 



Thus the Apostle, subsequently writing respecting them, 
remarked that they endangered their necks for the sake of 
the Truth. As working people and home-keepers they were 
not molested; but two assistants of St. Paul found in the 
home were taken by the mob. They hurried them to the 
theatre, or place of public entertainment, whose capacity, 
we are told, was 56,000 persons, indicating that Ephesus 
must have been an immense city. St. Paul, learning of the 
commotion, would have courageously entered into the thick 
of the trouble in defense of his friends and, above all, in 
defense of his Master and his message. But wiser counsels 
prevailed and St. Paul remained away. The brethren 
suffered him not, believing that his presence would have 
accomplished nothing with people in so unreasonable a 
state of mind and St. Paul agreed with them, because no 
other course would have been the wise or proper one. 

The Lord, however, did not neglect the two brethren who 
were arrested, Gaius and Aristarchus. The town clerk 
came to their assistance and with words of wisdom dispersed 
the mob. This official was not interested in the 
Gospel of Christ and its service, but he was interested in 
the doing of his duty as an officer of the city. He pointed 
out to the mob that they had become unduly excited; that 
they and everybody knew the greatness of Diana, and that 
one Jew or many Jews could not injure her great fame. 
And then he concluded, Seeing that these things cannot be 

R4432 : page 214 

gainsaid, ye ought to be quiet and to do nothing rash, for 
ye brought hither these men, which are neither robbers of 
temples nor blasphemers of our goddess. If, therefore, 
Demetrius or his companion have any matter against these 
men, the law courts are open. Let them accuse one another. 
In other words, let us mind our own business and 
not allow ourselves to be unduly excited over a matter of 
no moment. Besides, he pointed out to them that, while 
there were lawful assemblies provided for them, the present 
one was an unlawful one, which if it were reported to 
the Government at Rome, might bring disrespect to the 
city and perhaps cause it to lose some measure of its 
eminence. With this he dismissed the assembly. 

PRINCIPLE AND LACK OF PRINCIPLE 

Notice the contrast between the chief actors in the 
account of this lesson and those mentioned in the preceding 
one. In that case many people, realizing that they 
had been working in conjunction with the powers of evil— 
of demons— brought their books of magic, etc., and burned 
them, as a result of the influence of the Gospel message 
upon their hearts. They not only stopped the practice of 
the black art; they not only refused to use the books 
of magic; but they refused to sell them to others, lest they 
should do injury to them. They were willing, glad, to 
suffer financial loss and be thought foolish by their neighbors, 



rather than to do injury to others, after they had 
come to a true realization of the situation. On the contrary, 
the chief actors in this lesson were moved to a 
frenzy and to riotous conduct by their love of money— their 
fear lest they should suffer loss. Evidently it was not their 
respect for religion, but their love for filthy lucre which 
prompted their actions. Moreover, the religion of this 
goddess was a demoralizing one. Hence we see the 
stronger contrast between those who raised a riot in order 
to perpetuate idolatry and sensuality and to bring money 
to their own purses and those, on the contrary, who are 
ready to sacrifice their earthly interests rather than do 
harm, and in order that they may do the more good. 
Verily there is a power, a wonderful power, in the religion 
of Jesus, our Redeemer. 

It is to be noted that the Apostle and his co-laborers 
were not guilty of the charge of which they were accused 
—blaspheming the goddess of Ephesus. Here we have 
a point of importance and a valuable lesson. St. Paul elsewhere 
said, "Let none of you suffer as an evil-doer nor as 
a busy-body in other men's matters." It was not necessary 
for the Apostle to say one unkind word in reference to the 
goddess Diana. His commission was to preach the good 
tidings of great joy— not to quarrel with false gods, or 
their worship. The persecution was therefore for right-doing. 
There is a lesson here for us, too. It is not necessary 

R4433 : page 214 

for us to do or say a single unkind word or act towards 
our friends in Babylon. It is not necessary for us 
to tirade against their systems or doctrines. We have 
plenty to do in setting forth the Gospel message. Of 
course, the Apostle did not fail to call attention to the fact 
that Diana was merely the work of men's hands and not, 
as claimed, a divinity. So we may properly enough set 
forth to our friends that there is but the one true Church, 
which was organized by our Lord, established at Pentecost, 
and that all other churches, therefore, are merely human 
systems. But it is not our privilege to tirade against these 
churches, as we learn some of the dear friends are inclined 
to do. The command, "Speak evil of no man," may properly 
be applied also to religious systems. Particularly 
those who recognize the foundation of Christianity in the 
redeeming merit of the death of Christ, and that favor and 
teach morality, if nothing more, should be let alone by us. 
In Divine providence the appointed hour will come, the 
Scriptures assure us, when everything which can be shaken 
will be shaken and overthrown in the great "time of 
trouble." Against that evil day we warn men that they 
repent and develop meekness and righteousness; "it may 
be that they shall be hid in the day of the Lord's anger." 
Undoubtedly the Lord has permitted sectarianism for some 
wise purpose, even as he has permitted the Gentile governments 
to hold sway until the end of the times of the Gentiles. 
Let us not interfere with the fulfillment of the 



Divine purposes. Let us be content to fulfil our mission 
of assisting the brethren, building them up in the most 
holy faith and telling the good tidings to the meek and 
such as manifest an ear to hear. 

THE LESSON OF OUR GOLDEN TEXT 

This is a wonderful text. Our Lord's words therein expressed 
applied, we may be sure, not only to St. Paul, but 
to all of us who are of the one Body and energized by its 
one spirit. Doubtless St. Paul's experiences in connection 
with his thorn in the flesh were given to him and recounted 
in the Scriptures largely for the benefit of ourselves and of 
all who, from his day until now, have been suffering under 
peculiar experiences, trials, whose necessity and value 
were not clearly discerned. 

When St. Paul, blinded by the great light which accompanied 
his conversion, finally received the Lord's forgiveness 
and the restoration of his sight in considerable 
measure, he doubtless bore patiently with the continued 
weakness of his eyes, considering it a proper chastisement 
for his wrong course as an opponent of the Anointed One 
and an injurious person in respect to the Body of Christ, 
which is the Church. The measure of his afflictions which 
remained helped the Apostle, doubtless, to appreciate very 
distinctly how close is the relationship between the Church 
and her Lord, as members of the one sacrifice, as explained 
in the Lord's Words, "Why persecutest thou me?" 

However, as weeks and months and years passed, and 
the Apostle found his defect of vision a great burden, he 
doubtless wondered why the Lord should permit any 
measure of the ailment to continue. Well did he know 
that it would be as easy for Divine power to give him 
perfect sight as not. Indeed, he had evidence along this 
line continually— the power of God in healing the sick- 
so that handkerchiefs and napkins which he had blessed 
were sent for from far and near, and carried with them 
Divine blessing and healing. Evidently the Apostle reasoned 
that after he had suffered awhile in this affliction 
it would be removed. He may even have surmised that 
God wished to bring him to the point of humbly asking for 
its removal. 

St. Paul explains to us that he did request healing— the 
removal of this grievous affliction or "thorn." He tells us 
that he did this three times. There is a point in connection 
with the matter which apparently up to that time he 
had not discerned clearly, namely, that the healing of his 
eyes would be so much of restitution blessing. But St. 
Paul, like the others of us, had been called of the Lord not 
to restitution, but to sacrifice; as he himself explained the 
matter to others, "I beseech you, therefore, brethren, by 
the mercies of God, that ye present your bodies a living 
sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto God, which is your reasonable 
service." (Rom. 12:1.) Knowing that the blessings 
of God were passing through him to others, he wondered 
that some might not have been for himself. He had yet 



to learn that the gifts conferred to him were for the 
worldly and not for the saints, who had consecrated to 
sacrifice. He had yet to learn that, if permitted of the Lord 
to take back his consecration to sacrifice, it would mean 
his letting go proportionately of the spiritual blessings and 
favors which God bestows upon us when we sacrifice 
earthly things. 

TWO WAYS OF ASSISTING US 

It would not have been right for St. Paul to have been 
encouraged in a wrong course, in harmony with his prayers 
for healing. Hence, those prayers were refused. True, 
the Lord has granted similar requests from many who 
knew no better than to ask such favors. But with the great 
Apostle the matter was different. Like his Lord he was 
an example to the flock and hence it was not appropriate 
to grant his petition. However, what God did do not only 
furnished a lesson to St. Paul, but a blessed lesson to us, 
his brethren, throughout the Gospel Age. 

While it was not proper to remove the burden from the 
Apostle in answer to his prayer; while God saw a special 
way in which this thorn in the flesh would be specially 

R4433 : page 215 

helpful to him in the development of the holy Spirit, nevertheless 

his prayer could receive an answer still more effective, 

still more blessed, in a different way. Instead of removing 

the difficulty, the Lord promised the more grace, 

the more strength, the more endurance to meet the difficulty, 

to overcome it, to compensate for it. This was 

really much better for St. Paul in every way than if his 

prayer had been answered. We do not know, neither did 

he know, how necessary to the preservation of his humility 

and usefulness in the service was that "thorn in the flesh." 

We may know assuredly, however, that the giving to him of 

more grace was the greater blessing; because the grace of 

the Lord is helpful in all things, in all of life's interests, 

while the taking away of the thorn would have been merely 

a relief in the one line. No wonder the Apostle, when he 

understood the situation, cried out, "Most gladly therefore 

will I rather glory in my infirmities, that the power 

of Christ may rest upon me."— 2 Cor. 12:9. 

There have been blessed lessons for all of the Lord's 
dear people throughout the Gospel Age in these experiences 
of St. Paul. We have various thorns in the flesh, 
various difficulties, various trials; some of them mental; 
some physical; some well understood by others; others 
unknown except by ourselves. What a comfort it has been 
to many to have the Lord's assurance that what trials and 
difficulties he does not remove from us, he permits for 
wise and loving purposes. These, he assures us, will all 
work together for our good. Of these he declares, "My 
grace is sufficient for thee; my strength is made perfect 
in weakness." 



Taking this, the Apostle's viewpoint, dear fellow-servants 
of the cross, let us take all of our experiences in good 
faith, realizing the truth of these words, that our weaknesses, 
our imperfections, our frailties, so far from working 
injury to us, will, under the Lord's supervising care, enable 
him to supplement the more our willing endeavors 
with his strength. 



R4438 : page 215 

HEROISM 

It takes great strength to train 
To modern service your ancestral brain; 
To lift the weight of the unnumbered years 
Of dead men's habits, methods, and ideas; 
To hold that back with one hand, and support 
With the other the weak steps of new resolve! 
It takes great strength to bring your life up square 
With your accepted thought, and hold it there, 
Resisting the inertia that drags back 
From new attempts to the old habit's track. 
It is so easy to drift back— to sink- 
So hard to live abreast of what you think! 

It takes great strength to live where you belong 
When other people think that you are wrong; 
People you love, and who love you, and whose 
Approval is a pleasure you would choose. 
To bear this pressure, and succeed at length 
In living your belief— well, it takes strength- 
Courage, too. But what does courage mean 
Save strength to help you face a pain foreseen; 
Courage to undertake this life-long strain 
Of setting yourself against your grandsire's brain; 
Dangerous risk of walking alone and free, 
Out of the easy paths that used to be; 
And the fierce pain of hurting those we love 
When love meets truth, and truth must ride above. 

But the best courage man has ever shown, 
Is daring to cut loose, and think alone. 
Dark are the unlit chambers of clear space 
Where light shines back from no reflecting face. 
Our sun's wide glare, our heaven's shining blue, 
We owe to fog and dust they fumble through; 
And our rich wisdom that we treasure so, 
Shines from a thousand things that we don't know. 
But to think new— it takes a courage grim 
As led Columbus over the world's rim. 
To think— it costs some courage— and to go- 
Try it — it taxes every power you know. 

It takes great love to stir a human heart 



To live beyond the others, and apart; 

A love that is not shallow, is not small; 

Is not for one or two, but for them all. 

Love that can wound love for its higher need; 

Love that can leave love though the heart may bleed; 

Love that can lose love, family and friend, 

Yet steadfastly live, loving to the end. 

A love that asks no answer, that can live 

Moved by one burning, deathless force— to give! 

Love, strength and courage; courage, strength and love- 

The heroes of all time are built thereof. 

-C. P. S. Gilman. 



R4433 : page 215 

WRESTING THE SCRIPTURES 

"They that are unlearned and unstable wrest... the 
Scriptures to their own destruction."— 2 Pet. 3:16. 

AN instance in point is found in the columns of a 

journal, the editor of which was once an earnest 

co-laborer with us in the promulgation of the 

Harvest Truth. While still assenting to the fact that we 

have been in the Harvest for thirty-five years and that it 

will shortly end, he tells his readers that he apologizes to 

God that for nearly eighteen years he has been preaching 

what he now believes to be serious error, namely, that 

the Church of Christ has a share in her Redeemer's sufferings, 

a share with him in his sacrifice as members of 

his Body, filling up that which is behind of the afflictions 

of Christ— suffering with him that they may also reign 

with him, becoming dead with him that they may also 

live with him on the spiritual or heavenly plane. 

This Editor now calls all this darkness, and evidently 
thinks that just at the close of the Harvest he has struck 
the match and lighted a fresh lamp which shows that the 
path he was previously traveling was a wrong one and 
the light which previously shone on his pathway was of 
the Adversary. He has not yet given up all of the beautiful 
Harvest Truths, but we may reasonably expect that 
with this repudiation of the foundation of all spiritual 
hopes he will shortly conclude that everything that he 
saw on coming out of Babylon was a delusion, and that 
he will return fully to the "outer darkness" of Babylon. 
"If the light that is in thee become darkness, how great 
is that darkness," said our Master. 

Said Editor seems to have become sour towards us 
personally, for some reason unknown to us. The alienation 
or bitterness of spirit presumably led to a desire to 
find fault with us. And since our personality is sunk in 
the service of the Truth, personal antagonism finding no 
other course led to an attack upon the truths which we 
present. How much the Adversary had to do with twisting 



and warping of judgment we do not know. How 

much others may be responsible by reason of over-encouragement 

or evil suggestions we do not know. But 

R4434 : page 215 

we do believe that the Lord will not allow any outside 
influence to separate from himself and his Truth any 
whose hearts are loyal to him. 

This case is not parallel to the one of which our Lord 
said, "Forbid him not: for there is no man which shall 
do a miracle in my name, that can lightly speak evil of 
me. For he that is not against us, is on our part." 
(Mark 9:39,40.) This is a case of direct opposition— a 
direct attack upon the Harvest Work, which he had been 
serving for years— a direct attack upon the very doctrine 
which, next to the Ransom, lies close to the foundation of 
our hopes. This erstwhile Brother is now seeking to 
disrupt the Harvest Work to the best of his ability. He 
would have the Lord's people everywhere follow him into 
outer darkness under the delusive cry, "We were all 
blinded and misled by 'The Watch Tower;' but now, 
Eureka! I have fortunately found the true light which 

R4434 : page 216 

the Lord was anxious to give us earlier in the Harvest 
but did not succeed in getting to us until now near the 
close." 

But, dear readers, we need have no fear of any disruption 
in the Lord's work from that quarter, or from 
any other. If this Harvest message and its service be of 
God it cannot be overthrown. If it be not of God we 
would be glad to have it overthrown, that we and others 
might be delivered from error. Oh, how the Adversary 
would like to convince us that our present Lord had 
served us with poisonous food and that we should straightway 
leave his table and go elsewhere to satisfy our 
hunger and thirst for righteousness and Truth. These 
and other efforts will be successful merely to the extent 
of sifting out those not worthy of the Truth. The 
others who remain will be stronger than ever, by reason 
of the agitation of the subject of the Covenants, Sin-offerings, 
etc. 

THE COMMUNION CUP 

Twenty-nine years ago we were publishing some features 
of Present Truth respecting the Second Coming of 
our Lord, the time of Harvest, the Millennial Age, the 
Times of Restitution; but up to that time we had been in 
a measure of confusion, darkness, respecting the heavenly 
and the earthly promises. We saw that the Church 
had promise of heavenly and spiritual nature and glory. 
We saw also that the promises to the world were seemingly 
of an earthly nature, that they would build houses 



and inhabit them, plant vineyards and eat the fruit of 
them, etc. We had not fully discerned why this distinction 
of natures and were inclined to wonder why we 
could find nothing in the Scriptures to intimate that at 
the close of the Millennium the world would be granted 
the heavenly nature. 

It was about that time, 1880, that the Lord drew our 
attention to other features of his plan previously unseen 
by us and, so far as we are aware, unseen by others 
since the days of the Apostles. We realized that this 
further light was Harvest light for the ripening of the 
wheat, and by no means an evidence of greater wisdom 
or ability in Bible interpretation on our part. The due 
time had come and the unfolding came with it. The 
Master who had already been serving us brought forth 
from the storehouse "things new and old," respecting 
the Covenants and the Atonement sacrifices. We were 
astonished at the length and breadth and height and 
depth of the Divine Plan and set them forth in a pamphlet 
entitled Tabernacle Shadows of the Better Sacrifices. 

It was through those Tabernacle Shadow blessings that 
the Lord showed us how and why the Church of this 
Gospel Age has been called to heavenly glory while the 
Divine purpose respecting mankind in general is restoration 
to human perfection with everlasting life to all the 
willing and obedient— to be granted to the faithful in 
the close of the Millennial Age, when they shall have 
reached human perfection and the "paradise restored" 
shall have been extended to the whole earth. 

We then understood for the first time the meaning of 
the Apostle's words respecting the "Hidden Mystery," 
namely, that close, intimate relationship between Christ 
and his faithful followers, the "more than conquerors." 
It was then that we understood the Apostle's words, 
"God hath given Christ to be the Head over the Church, 
which is his Body," and "We are members in particular 
of the Body of Christ." "This is a great mystery; but I 
speak concerning Christ and the Church." Oh, yes, this 
is indeed a hidden mystery— that the Church is completely 
separated from the world and offered a great 
prize of glory, honor and immortality, the Divine nature. 
But we came to see, also, that this prize was offered on 
certain sacrificing conditions— not merely upon condition 
of faith, though faith is the basis of all our hopes. This 
"high calling" proffered is justification from sin as the 
reward of faith, but it additionally held out the promise 
to the justified that if they would suffer with Christ as 
his members, they should also be glorified together with 
him in his heavenly Kingdom and be with him and sit 
upon his throne and share his glory. 

Now we began to understand why the way during this 
Gospel Age should be made so "narrow," so difficult, 
while the Lord promised to make the way to eternal life 
a broad, "high way" during the Millennium. Ah, yes! all 
is clear from this standpoint, and the Apostle's words 
were full of meaning to us as we read, "I beseech you, 



therefore, brethren, by the mercies of God, that ye present 
your bodies a living sacrifice, holy and acceptable 
unto God, which is your reasonable service." (Rom. 12:1.) 
Now we saw the two steps; first, justification by 
faith, and secondly, an entrance into this grace of the 
"high calling" by being begotten of the holy Spirit. As 
expressed by St. Paul, "Therefore being justified by faith, 
we have peace with God through our Lord Jesus Christ: 
by whom also we have access by faith into this grace 
wherein we stand, and rejoice in the hope of the glory 
of God," which is to be revealed in our Lord and in us 
as his members in his Kingdom. Now we know why St. 
Paul was so anxious to fill up a measure of the afflictions 
of Christ and we were stimulated also to follow his example, 
filling up a share of Christ's afflictions, which he 
left for us. Now we know what St. Paul meant when he 
said, "Let us go forth therefore unto him without the 
camp, bearing his reproach."— Heb. 13:13. 

We perceived from this last text that he referred to the 
sacrifices of the Day of Atonement mentioned in the context 
and in which he says that the bodies of those beasts 
whose blood accomplished sin atonement were burned 
outside the camp. The type shows that the first of 
these sacrifices was the bullock and the second the Lord's 
goat (Levit. 16); that the priest first killed the bullock 
provided by himself, and afterward killed the goat provided 
by the Congregation of the Children of Israel. We 
saw clearly enough that the bullock represented our 
Lord's sacrifice and that the only other sacrifice burned 
outside the camp was the goat, and hence that the Apostle 
must have referred to us, the Church, the members of 
the Body of Christ. 

This has been the basis of our presentations to the 
Church for these twenty-nine years. We consider it the 
only key to all the wonderful harmonies of the Divine 
Word, as they are now in our possession by the Lord's 
favor. We have no doubt whatever that our great Adversary 
would like to take from us this valuable key to 
the Divine Plan, which alone explains the "mystery" of 
this Gospel Age, which is the Church and her special call 
—to the privileges of sacrifice now and the privileges of 
glory by and by. The Apostle made no mistake. 

Not anything of the merit belongs to us. Now, and 
first and last and all the time we have shown that the 
merit belongs to our dear Redeemer, who, by reason of 
the "body prepared" for him for the sacrifice of death, 
was able to become the justifier of all who trust in him. 
Our justification came by faith in his blood, and hence 
any merit and all merit would be his, not merely on that 
account, but also because our begetting of the holy Spirit 
was based upon our full consecration to be dead with 
him. 

THE THINGS NO LONGER SEEN 

These are the things said Editor tells us that he no 



longer sees— that our sufferings as members of the Body 
of Christ are part of His sufferings. All this he now 
claims is a mistake. That we are to reign with him because 
we suffer with him is claimed to be an error. Some 
day if he will tell us we shall be glad to know any other 
reason why we do suffer and with whom else we suffer; 
what we do sacrifice and for what we sacrifice and what 
useful purpose our sacrifice will ever accomplish. Possibly 
some may find ways of applying these Scriptures, but 
we are sure they will find no interpretations satisfactory 
to our minds other than that we have already found connected 
with the "mystery." Our friends in the nominal 
churches have wrestled with these Scriptures for centuries 
in a kind of hazy bewilderment, not knowing 

R4434 : page 217 

how to intelligently apply them and not understanding 
the "mystery," because the due time for its unfolding did 
not come prior to the Harvest. 

THE BLOOD OF THE COVENANT 

This erstwhile co-laborer now assaults us and charges 
that we have committed the sin unto death, in connection 
with this application of the Scriptures— because we claim 
that we suffer with him; that we share in his sufferings 
(Christ's) and not some other suffering. If this position 
is true we have been under the Second death condemnation 
for twenty-nine years and this co-laborer has been 
under it for eighteen years. Yet those years were the 
most blessed of our experience and, we presume, also of 
his. And this doctrine during these years has been the 
"key" to the "Mystery of God," which has brought more 
Christians to a full and deep consecration to the Lord 
than anything else ever known since the Apostle's day. 

There certainly is plenty of inconsistency connected 
with the position of this Brother, and with that of all 
others who ever leave the light of Present Truth. For 
instance, the Scriptures intimate clearly enough that any 
who ever commit this sin unto death cannot be renewed 

R4435 : page 217 

unto repentance, seeing that they have crucified the Lord 
afresh and put him to an open shame. (Heb. 6:6.) If, 
then, this doctrine of the Church's participation with our 
Redeemer in his sacrifice as his "members" is the "counting 
of the blood of the Covenant an unholy thing," how 
could this Brother claim that, after eighteen years of such 
delusion and Second Death worthiness, he has now escaped 
such a condemnation and obtained a special blessing 
from God and a special privilege to light a new torch 
and to call the Lord's sheep in an opposite direction? 

But let us examine the ground of this serious charge 
respecting which this Editor waxes eloquent, saying, "We 



do not know any consideration on which we would occupy 
their position. Oh, that we had ten thousand trumpet 
tongues to warn those who accept this latest of the last-day 
delusions. It is a test! Who will be on the Lord's 
side?" We agree that it is a test and that it will fully 
discover those who are on the Lord's side; those who will 
share of his cup, share in his sufferings— none others will 
share in his glory. 

Notice the Scriptures which this new light-bearer assures 
us condemn all who have been believing that they 
were sharing the sufferings of Christ as the condition by 
which they might hope to share his glory future. It 
reads, "If we sin willingly after that we have received a 
knowledge of the Truth, there remaineth no more sacrifice 
for sins, but a certain fearful looking for of judgment, and 
fiery indignation, which shall devour the adversaries. He 
that despised Moses' law died without mercy under two 
or three witnesses; of how much sorer punishment, suppose 
ye, shall he be thought worthy who hath trodden 
under foot the Son of God, and hath counted the blood of 
the Covenant wherewith he was sanctified, an unholy 
thing, and hath done despite unto the Spirit of grace."— 
Heb. 10:26-29. 

This marvelous exegete lifts his hands in horror and, 
pointing at this Scripture and then at us and the thirty 
thousand or so who similarly believe, he intimates that he 
has gotten out of this Second Death condition and that he 
is willing to help all of us out, if we will follow him, and 
subscribe for his Journal. On the contrary, the very 
Scripture he quotes tells that there is absolutely no hope 
for the class described in these verses, because "there remaineth 
no more sacrifice for their sins." They consumed 
their share in the merit of Christ's sacrifice. 

The Apostle speaks of wresting or twisting the Scriptures 
and it may easily be surmised that a considerable 
amount of wresting and twisting of this Scripture needs to 
be attempted in the endeavor to make it serve this Editor's 
purposes. He lays all his stress upon the words, 
"Counted the blood of the Covenant wherewith he was 
sanctified an unholy thing." To serve his purpose he 
has twisted the Scripture thus, "Has counted the blood of 
the Covenant wherewith he was sanctified a thing shared 
by a number." The attempt is to prove that all who 
claim to have fellowship with Christ in his death or, as 
the Apostle says, "to be dead with him," "to be baptized 
into his death," thus participate in the blood of the New 
Covenant, which Jesus is sealing with his own blood 
and in which he invites us to be partners and share— all 
these are guilty, according to this indictment, based upon 
this Scripture, of "treading under foot the Son of God 
and counting the blood of the Covenant wherewith they 
were sanctified an unholy thing." 

This expositor has lost his bearings altogether. The 
Apostle tells us that we were justified through faith in 
the blood of Jesus and he here speaks of those who had 
gone on after justification through the blood of Jesus to 



sanctification through the blood of the Covenant. What 
is the difference between justification and sanctification 
and between the blood of Jesus which justifies and the 
blood of the New Covenant which sanctifies? 

We answer that there is a great difference— two distinctly 
separate transactions are thus brought to our 
attention. Nowhere in the Scriptures are we said to be 
justified by a New Covenant or by any Covenant; nor 
by the blood of the New Covenant; nor by the blood of 
any other Covenant. We are justified by faith— faith 
in the blood of Jesus as our Redeemer. Our justification 
comes as soon as we accept the great fact that we were 
sinners and that Jesus gave his life for our redemption 
and accept our share in that redemption by faith. It is 
only those who are thus justified by faith in his blood 
that are invited to become his disciples, his followers, his 
joint-sacrificers and his joint-heirs in glory, as members 
of the great Prophet, Priest, King, Judge and Mediator, 
who will come in power with great glory as soon as the 
last member of his Body shall have been perfected 
through a participation in the sufferings of Christ. Let 
us keep in memory the fact that only the justified are 
called to this "high calling," this great privilege of participation 
in Christ's Covenant, the blood of the New 
(Law) Covenant. This being true, it will be readily 
seen that the Apostle is referring to this consecrated 
class— "sanctified through the blood of the Covenant." 

Get the thought that our Redeemer, "the man Christ 
Jesus," laid down his life that he might seal the New 
(Law) Covenant with Israel and through Israel with the 
world. He consecrated his earthly life and laid it down 
in death with this in view. His ignominy and death are 
symbolically called his cup, of which he drank. He 
offers a portion during the Gospel Age to justified believers, 
proposing that if they drink the cup with him, 
if they suffer with him, he will accept such as "members of 
his Body." The Father will beget them of the holy Spirit 
and in due time they shall be born from the dead in "his 
resurrection," as his glorious Body and sharers with 
him in the work of dispensing the New (Law) Covenant 
blessings to Israel and to the world. 

All who accept his proposition are counted in with 
him as messengers of the Covenant or servants of the 
Covenant— those whose lives have been devoted, consecrated, 
sacrificed with a view to the establishment of 
this New (Law) Covenant, by which the Christ, including 
the Church, as the Seed of Abraham, will bless Israel and 
all the families of the earth. The Apostle says, "We are 
made able ministers of the New (Law) Covenant"— that 
is to say, qualified servants of that Covenant. Part of 
our service we perform at the present time in serving our 
great Head and the fellow-members of his Body, "edifying 
one another and building one another up in the most 
holy faith." (Jude 20.) But in a larger sense of the word 
we are being qualified or made able servants of the 
New (Law) Covenant by present experiences, which we 



shall put to effective service when the New (Law) Covenant 
shall go into force and the Millennial Age be 
inaugurated. 

We trust that we have made clear the fact that our 
consecration, our sanctification, our acceptance of the 
Lord, our sacrificing with him, and our final glorification 
with him, are all in connection with the great Work 

R4435 : page 218 

which he has undertaken, namely, the mediating of the 
New (Law) Covenant between God and mankind in general. 
We were called out from mankind in general, from 
the world, for these very purposes— that we might be 
made members of this "mystery" class, the Mediator's 
Body. Hence our sanctification was in connection with 
"the blood of the New (Law) Covenant." Had it not 
been for the New Covenant and our invitation to share 
in its mediation with our Redeemer, there would have 
been no present Call to glory and honor and immortality 
and joint-heirship in the Kingdom. Hence, when 
the Apostle is speaking of those who "count the blood 
of the Covenant a common thing," we should understand 
that he meant that some who desert the Lord, renounce 
his teachings, renounce their consecration, do disrespect 
to this special call to joint-heirship. The Apostle explains 
that this is because they do not sufficiently appreciate 
the value of this consecration, the value of this 
"blood," the privilege of sharing with Christ in his sacrifice. 
They count the statement, To be dead with him, an 
ordinary thing. They lose sight of its real value. They 
lose sight of what they really undertook to do when they 
made a consecration unto death. They lose sight of what 
it meant to present their bodies living sacrifices. Having 
changed towards the Lord, they no longer count their 
covenant to be dead with him as a sacred obligation, 
but rather as an ordinary matter, a common thing. 

PROVING IT BY THE GREEK 

The Brother whose inconsistency of argument we are 
criticising tells us that his contention is supported by the 
Greek text— that the Greek word rendered unholy in 
Heb. 10:29, koinos, really should be translated "a thing 
shared by a number." He would apply this to us and all 
who see with us; because we say that the blood of Christ, 
the cup of Christ, is shared by a "little flock" of Christ's 
disciples, who become dead with him, suffer with him 
during this Gospel Age. Our answer is that the Brother 
has not dipped deeply enough into the Greek. The Greek 
word which would have suited his purpose is koinonia, 
which signifies partnership, or literally, participation, as 
defined by Strong's Unabridged Dictionary. The same 
dictionary defines koinos to mean common, defiled, unclean. 
In other words, while the thought of participation 
is in both of these words, the one has the unclean thought 



connected with it, while the other has the clean and pure 
thought of partnership. Manifestly the thought we present 
of participation with Christ in the sufferings of this 
present time and his glory to follow is not the common 
or unclean thought of koinos, but the partnership and 
participation thought of the other Greek word, koinonia. 
This is our answer to the charge and to the misinterpretation 
of the Scriptures to support it. 

But let us look a little further in the same direction and 
see what we find. We turn to 1 Cor. 10:15-17 and hearken to 
the Apostle saying, "I speak as to wise men; judge ye 
what I say. The cup of blessing which we bless, is it not 
the communion of the blood of Christ? The bread which 

R4436 : page 218 

we break, is it not the communion of the Body of Christ? 
For we, being many, are one bread and one Body; for we 
are all partakers of that one bread." This passage is very 
plain and clear as it stands in the English, but when we 
point out the Greek word twice rendered communion, in 
respect to the blood and in respect to the Body of Christ, 
the passage becomes doubly forceful. This Greek word is 
koinonia, which signifies partnership, literally, 
participation. 

Here the Apostle tells us that all the members of the 
Body of Christ have koinonia, participation in the blood of 
Christ, of the one cup, and in the Body of Christ, the one 
loaf now being broken, that through the operation of the 
New (Law) Covenant sealed with his blood, Israel and the 
world may be fed with the bread of life. Of course no 
one can be convinced against his will, but we hold that all 
of the Lord's people enlightened under his Spirit should 
be able to see that the Apostle commends, approves, endorses, 
that which said Editor condemns and by twisting 
of the Greek, endeavors to make out to be the basis of his 
own Second Death condemnation and yours and ours. 

BLINDED BY WILFULNESS 

We have pointed out for years that on the same night in 
which our Lord was betrayed he instituted a Memorial of 
his own death, substituting it for the Jewish Passover 
Supper and setting forth the bread and cup, as representing 
his flesh and blood, as instead of that of the 

passover lamb, saying, This do as often as ye do it in remembrance 
of me— not in remembrance of the lamb, nor 
of the type, as in Egypt, but looking forward and recognizing 
the antitype. He wished them to realize him as 
the lamb and the Church as the first-born saved during 
the night of this Gospel Age, and ready to go forth in the 
morning of the Millennium, typified by Aaron, the high 
priest, his sons, the under-priests and the tribe of Levi, 
their servant-associates, typified on the other hand by 
Moses, the great Law Giver and Mediator. As it is written, 
"For Moses truly said unto the fathers, A prophet 



shall the Lord your God raise up unto you of your 
brethren, like unto me; him shall ye hear in all things, 
whatsoever he shall say unto you. And it shall come to 
pass, that every soul, which will not hear that prophet, 
shall be destroyed from among the people."— 
Acts 3:22,23. 

God raised up Jesus to be the Head of this great antitypical 
Mediator. And during this Gospel Age he is 
raising up the Church of the First-borns as members of 
his Body. Shortly the whole will be complete, and then, 
as the great Mediator of the New (Law) Covenant, this 
antitypical Mediator will seal that Covenant with his 
blood, with the merit of his sacrifice, which he is now 
passing through the Church, which is his Body, permitting 
us to share in his sufferings, that we may also share 
in his glory. 

This share of Christ's sufferings is symbolically represented 
in his "cup," styled the blood of the New Covenant, 
New Testament, New Will. By his death the 
Lord surrendered his earthly rights to seal that New 
Covenant and by permitting justified believers to join 
with him in his sufferings, he permits us to share as his 
Body members in this sealing of the New (Law) 
Covenant. 

Consequently when he passed the disciples the "cup" 
he did not mean them to understand that the drinking of 
that cup meant their justification. They were already 
justified. Already he had said to them, "Now ye are 
clean through the word I have spoken unto you." "Ye are 
not of the world, even as I am not of the world." By 
passing the "cup" to them, saying, All of you drink of 
it, and, Drink ye all of it, he meant, I thus symbolically 
give you the privilege of sharing in my sufferings, which 
are symbolically represented in this cup. I am laying 
down my life to seal that New (Law) Covenant long 
promised of the Father and, if you would be members of 
the Spiritual Seed of Abraham, now is your opportunity. 
You are already justified by faith. My death will make 
that effective to you and you will be sprinkled from all 
consciousness of evil. All that was preparatory, and 
with a view to giving you this opportunity of sharing in 
my cup of ignominy, of death, of woe, of sacrifice. If 
you suffer with me, if you drink of my cup, you shall sit 
with me in my throne. If you do not drink of my cup 
you shall not sit with me in my throne. 

All Christ's faithful members who partake intelligently 
of the bread, understand it to mean not only our Lord's 
broken body, but also the broken body of his Church, as 
St. Paul explains. And similarly the "cup" was both 
Christ's blood or sacrifice and ours if we accept it at his 
invitation and partake with him. As to our argument in 
respect to our sharing the Lord's cup, this Brother was 
apparently so anxious to get rid of it that he declared in 
so many words that our Lord did not drink of it. Let 
us see whether Jesus drank of one cup representing one 
set of sufferings and gave his followers another cup representing 



a different kind of sufferings. Is this true? 

R4436 : page 219 

What say the Scriptures? We read particularly, "The 
Lord Jesus, the same night in which he was betrayed, 
took bread, and when he had given thanks, he brake it, 
and said, Take, eat; this is my body, which is broken for 
you; this do in remembrance of me. After the same 
manner also he took the cup, when he had supped, saying, 
This cup is the New Testament in my blood: this do ye, 
as oft as ye drink it, in remembrance of me."— 
ICor. 11:23-25. 

The records in the four Gospels leave the matter of our 
Lord's drinking of the cup indefinite, though they clearly 
intimate that he first drank and then gave to his disciples. 
But the Apostle Paul, as above, makes the matter 
positive. 

Furthermore, notice our Lord's words to the two disciples 
who requested special nearness to himself on his 
Throne in the Kingdom. He said, "Can ye drink of the 
cup that I shall drink of? and be baptized with the 
baptism that I am baptized with?" When they assented 
their willingness he assured them that he would see to 
it that they should have the opportunity and thus gain a 
seat in the Throne, though he could not tell them how 
near to himself they would be, since this would be arranged 
of the Father. Have we any doubt as to what 
cup he meant and what baptism? Surely not, because 
the Master's cup was that of suffering, ignominy and 
death. Ours must be the same "cup," his cup, else we 
shall have neither part nor lot in his Kingdom glory. ~ 
Mark 10:38-40. 



R4436 : page 219 

THE DUAL FEATURE IN RACHEL 

IN our February 15th issue, page 63, questions re the 
Covenants, 6-8, we did not, it seems, express ourself 
so that all could understand our meaning; hence we 
now add a few words. 

The Sarah Covenant represents the Divine promise in its 
entirety as a Grace or Faith Covenant. As St. Paul explains 
in Gal. 4:22-28 her child of promise represented The 
Christ, Head and Body, the great antitypical Prophet, 
Priest, King, Judge and Mediator between God and men— 
the world of mankind in general. Sarah had but the one 
child, and hence the earthly seed of Abraham or any other 
could not be represented by her. But God had promised 
Abraham an earthly seed, as well as a heavenly. His seed 
was to be "as the stars of heaven and as the sands of the 
sea," the Apostle explains: "that the promise might be 
sure to all the seed, not to that only which is of the Law, 



but to that also which is of the faith of Abraham." Abraham's 
seed according to the Law was cut off entirely, and 
must get its blessing through the spiritual seed— The 
Christ, Head and Body. The Spiritual Seed lays down in 
sacrifice all earthly rights, bequeathing these or willing 
them by testament or covenant to natural Israel— thus 
sealing for natural Israel the "New (Law) Covenant." 
This was in order that the natural seed may, during the 
Millennial Age, become the Seed of Abraham— as the sands 
of the seashore. And into the same Covenant as members 
of Israel, may come whosoever will of the Gentile nations. 
Thus the Apostle declares that eventually, according to 
Divine promise, Abraham will be "a Father of many nations." 
All of these will be blessed by The Christ, the 
Mediator of the New (Law) Covenant, under which they 
will be permitted to come back into harmony with God 
and obtain eternal life through obedience to its Law. It is 
in accord with this that we read in the same epistle, 
Romans 11:27-31, that fleshly Israel, under that New 
(Law) Covenant, will "obtain mercy through your mercy" 
—the mercy of The Christ, the mercy of the Spiritual Seed 
of Abraham.-Gal. 3:29. 

The Apostle gives us to understand that after the Abrahamic 
Covenant was confirmed through Isaac, his two 
sons became in a measure typical characters, Esau, the 
elder, representing natural Israel, and Jacob, the younger, 
representing spiritual Israel of this Gospel Age, to whom 
the Abrahamic blessing has come. Similarly Jacob in due 
time had the Abrahamic Covenant confirmed to him; and 
his two children, by his wife Rachel, seem to typify the 
fact that there will be two classes of spiritual Israelites, 
represented by Joseph and his younger brother Benjamin. 
We need not rehearse the various evidences that Joseph 
was a type of The Christ, Head and Body. We remember 
how he was hated of his brethren, sold into captivity, 
suffered various abuses for righteousness sake, yet took 
all of his trials faithfully. We remember how he was taken 
from the prison to be next to Pharaoh in the throne, and 
there became the dispenser of the food which kept the 
Egyptians and the Israelites alive through the seven years 
of famine. We have already noticed how beautifully many 
of these features fit as types to the antitype, which will 

R4437 : page 219 

soon be revealed. Christ, both Head and Body, must be 
brought out of the great prison-house of death before the 
exaltation to the Kingdom and glory and honor will be 
effected and the work of feeding the world with the bread 
of life will begin. Joseph, the life-giver of Egypt through 
that bread of life, was unquestionably a type of the greater 
Life-Giver, The Christ, Head and Body. 

Joseph had but one brother of the same mother, but he 
had ten half-brothers. Our thought is that those ten half-brothers 
represent the Jewish people, who will very shortly 
be brought before the exalted Christ and be given a share 



in the great feast which will come to them from his table. 
It will be remembered that Benjamin, Joseph's full brother, 
was with the other ten when the feast was made, but that 
Joseph sent to Benjamin as his portion five times as much 
as any of his brethren received. Benjamin, to our understanding 
represents the "great company," the foolish virgins, 
otherwise called the virgins, the Bride's companions, 
who will follow her into the presence of the King.— 
Psa. 45:14,15. 

There is another reason for considering Benjamin a 
prefigure of the "great company." It is this: his name, 
Benjamin, signifies "son of my pain." He was born in sorrow 
and travail, even as the "great company" will "come 
up out of great tribulation." His mother died in giving 
him birth, as we expect the spiritual feature of the Abrahamic 
Covenant to pass away entirely with the change of 
those who will constitute the "great company." It is our 
thought that the Ancient Worthies belong to this same 
class and, as already suggested, that they will reach the 
spirit plane in the time of trouble at the end of the Millennial 
Age. 

We are loath to give any explanation of types not directly 
or indirectly referred to in the New Testament. 
These types seem to us to be not directly but indirectly 
implied by the New Testament teachings already referred 
to. Those who cannot receive this interpretation are entirely 
welcome to have as their own any better interpretation, 
or none at all, as they see fit. Indeed, we might remark 
that this is true of all that we write. Hence, should 
any cease to see eye to eye with us, they have full right 
to their own opinion, without any need for a quarrel with 
us. If they find new and better light our sentiment towards 
them is, God bless you. We are glad if you have 
something that will do you more good than that which we 
present. If we thought that there were anything better, 
we, too, would want it. But, on the contrary, we are fully 
content with the leadings and blessings, the enlightenments, 
the spiritual food and refreshments which our present 
Lord has spread before us as his family. It is so 
satisfactory a portion that we could not think of looking 
for anything more or different. For long years we hungered 
and thirsted and searched and finally, when we found the 
satisfactory portion, we knew it. It satisfied our longings 
as nothing else could do. The time we have to spare 
from the eating of such food and the dispensing it to 
others we have full use for in giving thanks to the Father 
of Light, who has brought us out of darkness into his 
marvelous light, wherein we greatly rejoice. 



R4437 : page 220 

PROPER AND IMPROPER STATEMENTS 
A subscriber to this Journal writes us inquiring, Is this 



right? and quotes a recent utterance of one of the Pilgrims 
in the following words: 

"I can endorse Brother Russell's views on the New Covenant, 
but cannot see that the term 'Mediator' has the 
restricted significance he attaches to it. He probably 
thought the term applicable only to one who would mediate 
a Covenant, whereas the Greek word really means one 
in the middle. Thus Young gives it, 'a middle man,' 
and Strong, 'a go-between.' This surely describes Christ's 
position towards us in justification. (Rom. 5:1,2; Heb. 7:25.) 
It even looks to me as if an Advocate was a mediator, 
a go-between. 

"However, Christ does not mediate a Covenant for his 
Church. He mediates the matter of making their sacrifice 
a possibility, just as the Jewish priest acted as a mediator 
when the sacrifice was brought to him; he stood between 
God and offerer in the presentation. 

"I really think Brother Russell has the thought in his 
mind this way, even though he limits the meaning of the 
term. And I cannot but believe that if the broad meaning 
of the word mesites was brought to his attention he would 
acquiesce." 

We answer, No! such a statement was not right! It was 
wrong! It produced a false impression! We are much 
surprised that any Pilgrim would so express himself. Such 
an expression would certainly have the effect of arousing 
the suspicion of our friends, while no doubt the opponents 
of the Harvest Work would appreciate it. Instead of 
stating himself as opposed to Brother Russell's presentations 
on the Mediator and being sure that by and by 
Brother Russell would see his expressed position and 
surely agree with it, the Pilgrim should have realized that 
this was neither the wise nor the truthful presentation. 
What he hoped to gain by such an expression we know not. 

According to his own statement he should more wisely 
and more truthfully have expressed himself about as 
follows:— 

"I fully agree with Brother Russell's presentation in the 
'Watch Tower' respecting the Mediator. He therein stated 
that our English word Mediator is quite broad enough to 
cover the work done by our Redeemer for the Church; 
but that the Scriptural usage of the word Mediator confines 
it to a mediator of a Covenant. Hence, to be in accord 
with the Scriptural usage we will do wisely to use the word 
Mediator in the same restricted sense— only in connection 
with a Covenant. It is wise for us to use the Bible term 
Advocate when referring to our Lord's work for the Church. 
See the 'Watch Tower' April 1, '09, page 106, column 2, 
paragraph 3." 

Again we repeat that the usage of a word in the Bible 
should guide us in our use of it. If the word Mediator were 
loosely used in the Bible in respect to any and all kinds 
of service between God and the Church, then we, too, 
might so use it. But as soon as we find out that it is not so 
used, we should desist from such a use of it and use it 
only in harmony with the Biblical usage. This is why we 



no longer use the word Mediator in respect to our Lord's 
various and valuable services for the Church, and refer to 
him as the Bible does— as "the Mediator of the New 
(Law) Covenant," but as our "Advocate with the Father." 

That New (Law) Covenant is for natural Israel and the 
remainder of the world, and not for the Church of this 
Gospel Age, which Church is the Body of Christ, the Body 
of the great King, Mediator, Judge and Priest. 

Only one text containing the word Mediator could be in 
doubt, and it only until the right interpretation is suggested. 
The text is— "There is one God and one mediator 
between God and men, the man Christ Jesus, who gave 
himself a ransom for all, to be testified in due time."— 
1 Tim. 2:5,6. 

The Apostle does not here refer to the Church, but to the 
world. Of the Church Jesus said, "Ye are not of the world, 
even as I am not of the world." The Apostle tells us that 
Jesus is the Mediator between God and the world— men. 
He is not mediating now, but, as the Mediator is getting 
ready to deal with the world in the Father's stead. He is 
now performing the sacrifice of atonement— accepting the 
willing offerings of believers and counting their sufferings 
as his own, even unto death. Shortly, with these his members, 
added, this great Mediator will present the blood 
which will seal the New (Law) Covenant. And then the 
blessing of Israel and all the nations by restitution opportunities 
will begin. Note the context. The Apostle is not 
discussing the Church, but the world— "kings and all in 
authority." 

When did our Lord become the Mediator of the New 
(Law) Covenant or a mediator in any sense? Not when he 
was born the babe of Bethlehem! Not when baptized at 
Jordan! but when he had sacrificed to the finish and was 
raised from the dead to be a Prince and a Savior, as the 
Head of the Spiritual Seed of Abraham. That entire Seed 
will be the Mediator when all the sacrificing will be finished 
and the entire Church glorified. 

But look again! In the Old Testament this "Messenger 
of the Covenant" is mentioned in Malachi 3:1. And the 
mention of a New (Law) Covenant in Jeremiah 31:31 implies 
a mediator for it. Nevertheless the scroll of Divine 
purpose was still sealed and in the hand of Jehovah, up to 
the time that the Lamb had been slain. Not until after he 
was slain was it proclaimed, Worthy is the Lamb that was 
slain to receive glory and honor, etc., and the scroll.— 
Rev. 5:1-12. 

The explanation is that God prophetically foretold that 
he would find one worthy of this great honor of being 
Abraham's Seed and Mediator of the New (Law) Covenant. 
However, it was left to our Lord still to demonstrate his 
worthiness to be that one— that Mediator. Nor was his 
trial a mere farce! He was in an agony in Gethsemane 
lest he had failed to make his calling and election sure. 
Do we not read, "He offered up strong crying and tears 
unto him who was able to save him out of death, and was 
heard in regard to the thing which he feared"? (Heb. 5:7.) 



And is it not the same with his members— the members 
of the Mediator? He who foreknew Jesus foreknew us also 
by Jesus. Were we not "chosen in him from before the 
foundation of the world"? Hence the exhortation to us, 
also, to make our calling and election sure. 

R4438 : page 220 

Nor does the Church need either a mediator or a Covenant 
for her justification. She is justified by faith, not by 
works of the Law either under the Old Law Covenant or 
under the New (Law) Covenant. As it is written, "Abraham 
was justified by faith"— and so were all the Ancient Worthies, 
of whom it is written, "They had this testimony, that 
they pleased God." This testimony to their justification 
was given long before Jesus was born. And similarly, before 
Jesus died, he testified, "The Father himself loveth 
you." If God loves us and we love God, what need is there 
for a mediator between lovers? See how we were justified. 
-Rom. 4:22-24; Gal. 3:14. 

Indeed our Lord's testimony is that all called during this 
Gospel Age come first to the Father and then to the Son. 
We read: "No man can come unto me, except the Father 
which sent me draw him." 

Let us settle the matter in our hearts that our call is to 
become members of the Mediator between God and the 
world— the antitype of Moses, the mediator of the Law 
Covenant. This antitypical Moses has been in process of 
raising up for nearly nineteen centuries. (Acts 3:22,23.) 
Our Redeemer's death is the "surety" for us, his members, 
and for the New (Law) Covenant.— Heb. 7:22. 

If our correspondent is in communication with the Pilgrim 
Brother whom he quotes, we trust that he will call his 
attention to this, our reply. We prefer not to inquire for 
his name. 



R4438 : page 221 

LIKE UNTO JANNES AND JAMBRES 

"NOW as Jannes and Jambres withstood Moses, so 
do these also resist the truth: men of corrupt 
minds, reprobate concerning the faith. But 
they shall proceed no further: for their folly shall be 
manifest to all men, as theirs also was. But thou hast 
fully known my doctrine, manner of life, purpose, faith, 
long suffering, charity, patience, persecutions, afflictions, 
which came unto me at Antioch, at Iconium, at Lystra; 
what persecution I endured; but out of them all the Lord 
delivered me. Yea, and all that will live godly in Christ 
Jesus shall suffer persecution. But evil men and leaders 
astray shall wax worse and worse, deceiving and being 
deceived. But continue thou in the things which thou hast 
learned and hast been assured of, knowing of whom thou 



hast learned them."— 2 Tim. 3:8-14. 

We are asked whether or not this Scripture is applicable 
to the present time; and, if so, how we shall understand 
the expression, "Men of corrupt minds"? Shall we look 
for these amongst moral reprobates? 

We reply that we should understand this Scripture to 
be applicable at the present time. We should be able to 
find classes today corresponding to Jannes and Jambres. 
The Apostle distinctly says in introducing these words, 
"This know also that in the last days [of the age] perilous 
times shall come." Undoubtedly the Apostle meant that 
we should look for the fulfillment of his declaration in 
the "harvest" or end of the Gospel Age. 

We are not to expect these leaders astray in the Church 
to be moral lepers, reprobates. Assuredly Satan would 
be too wise to use such as his tools, knowing that he could 
effect his purposes better through those who outwardly, at 
least, would be moral and religious. Notice that the 
Apostle did not say reprobate as respects morals, but 
reprobates as respects the faith. It does not say men of 
corrupt morals, but does say men of corrupt minds— men 
whose minds have become perverted, changed, altered, as 
respects the Truth. He who does not see any fulfillment 
of this prophecy and who yet believes that we are living 
in the close of the Gospel Age should certainly at once begin 
to look for them and endeavor to locate them. 

This passage, in harmony with many other Scriptures, 
assures us of the trials of faith to be expected in this, our 
day. Remember the Apostle's words respecting the fire of 
this day, which shall try every man's work, of what sort 
it is— gold, silver, precious stones, wood, hay, stubble. Remember 
the Prophet Malachi's declaration that in this 
time the special Messenger of the New Covenant would 
sit as a refiner and purifier of silver. Remember the 
Prophet David's explanation of our day with its arrows, 
pestilences, stumbling blocks, etc., and the declaration that 
a thousand would fall at our side. 

Let us not forget either our Lord's positive assurances, 
that he would keep his very own, his elect— those making 
their calling and election sure. Remember the declaration 
respecting this elect Body of Christ that a thousand 
shall fall at thy side, ten thousand at thy right hand, but 
it shall not come nigh thee, because thou hast made the 
Lord thy refuge and habitation. The shielded ones will be 
those who live very near to the Lord— not only outwardly, 
but in their heart experiences. These very elect have the 
assurance that God will give his messengers charge concerning 
them, so that the feet shall not be dashed against 
the stumbling stone, but be borne up, lifted higher by the 
Divinely appointed agencies of Jehovah.— Psalm 91. 

Remember again the assurance of the Apostle that although 
this day shall come upon many "as a thief and as a 
snare," and that they should not escape the snares, nevertheless 
the faithful would not be in darkness. Remember 
our Lord's assurances that although trials and difficulties 
are to be expected which would deceive, if it were 



possible, the very elect, yet it will not be possible to deceive 
the very elect. So close will they be in sympathetic 
fellowship with the great Shepherd that they will discern 
his voice and not be deceived by others, of the Jannes and 
Jambres class.— Mark 13:22. 

Remember also the Apostle's words, "Take unto you the 
whole armor of God, that ye may be able to withstand in 
the evil day, and, having done all, to stand." (Eph. 6:13.) 
He pictures the armor, the protection that would be granted 
to a certain class— the helmet, the breastplate, the shield, 
the sword of the spirit. He expressly indicated that these 
defences would be provided for "the evil day" with which 
our age would close. He specially advised that while this 
armor was available to all of God's people and to be had 

R4439 : page 221 

for the putting on, nevertheless only those who will put it 

on will be safe. Why so, is it asked? We reply that this 

is one of God's tests by which he would prove our love, 

our devotion, our loyalty to him. Those of little love will 

be careless respecting the details of the Divine Plan of 

the Ages. "They will not have time" to search the Scriptures. 

They will not be disposed to make use of the agencies 

which God will use for providing this armament in 

this evil day. They will have preference for some sectarian 

brand of armor or insist that it must come from 

some particular quarter, or refuse to wear any armor that 

they have not manufactured for themselves, or refuse assistance 

in putting on the armor of light. 

All such objections, we may be sure, would mean to the 
Lord disloyalty, headiness, self-will, lack of humility, etc., 
incompatible with the conditions of his "call." He is looking 
for those who humble themselves, and who are glad to 
have his Truth at any cost, and whose hearts, long famished, 
hunger and thirst for the Truth, and who know the 
Shepherd's voice, and who find in his message that which 
"satisfies their longings as nothing else could do." These 
will gladly accept the armament and by becoming faithful 
students will make it their own— will put it on. These 
will be kept while others will fall at their side. 

Those who fall away after once having been partially enlightened, 
for the most part, are those who never properly 
applied themselves to know, to understand the Divine Plan. 
Their disobedience to the words of the Lord through the 
Apostle, their neglect to put on the armor, proved that they 
are not of the class whom the Lord prefers in the present 
"election." 

On the other hand it must not surprise us either, that 
some, after wearing the armor, they tell us for eighteen 
years and preaching to others its value and necessity, 
should put it off now, in the closing hours as it were. And 
now, while the Enemy is about and the fight in progress, 
they assure us that this armor is proving unreliable, that 
they themselves have been deceived and have deceived 
others and that they now have taken it off, exchanging it 



for a new kind of their own make and brand. We are 
sorry for such. 

Doubtless there were many people in Moses' day who 
were not at all in sympathy with him and his presentations, 
but who let him alone and hindered him not. Jannes 
and Jambres, on the contrary, specially opposed Moses and 
sought to bring to naught the force of his presentations to 
Pharaoh and the Egyptians, by imitating his doings to a 
certain degree. It is not known if these two men were 
Hebrews or not. Their names are nowhere else mentioned 
in the Scriptures, though they are mentioned in the Jewish 
Talmud, where the Hebrew names given justify the inference 
that they were Hebrews who, to curry favor with 
Pharaoh or to add to their own fame, resisted Moses and 
his presentations of Divine Truth, seeking to nullify the 
influence of the latter. Have we not some similarity in 
the conditions of the present day? Are there not some 
whom St. John describes as having gone out from us because 
they are not of us? Do not these, instead of assisting 
with the Harvest Work, now seek by every power they 
possess to oppose it, to nullify it, to belittle its influence? 
But St. Paul declares that they shall not go far in this 
opposition until "their folly shall be made manifest," as 
that of Jannes and Jambres was— by their failure to hinder 
the Lord's work. 

Let us leave such matters with the Lord to reward and 
to rectify in his own time and way. Let us seek by patient 
perseverance in well-doing, loyalty, faithfulness, to make 
our calling and election sure. 



R4439 : page 222 

"WEEP NOT FOR ME," BUT "WATCH AND PRAY" 

We give an extract from a letter just received from a 
brother who was active in opposing the Vow, and our 
answer, for the benefit of all our readers. We are glad 
to note the loving solicitude of our friends on our behalf, 
and surely deeply appreciate the fact that more prayers 
ascend for us daily than probably were ever received at 
the throne of heavenly grace for any other person who 
ever lived. The knowledge of this is a constant source 
of strength and encouragement for which we continually 
thank God, making mention of all of his dear Israel in 
our prayers. However, dear friends, do not become so 
absorbed in thought and prayer for us that you will 
neglect to follow the Master's advice to also Watch and 
Pray for yourselves. 

EXTRACT FROM A LETTER 

(a.) A Test of Faith— that this time of inspection was 
being delayed; 
(b.) A Test of Brotherly Love— a tendency to smite or 



lord it over his fellow-servants; 

(c.) A Test of Loyalty— eating and drinking with the 
drunken, becoming drunk as Luke says. 

Brother, are you being tested along those lines? If 
that is too blunt or embarrassing a question, I rescind it, 
but the matter weighs pretty heavily upon my heart, and 
if you are, I want to let others know and exhort them 
to special prayer along those lines. 

We replied as follows: 
DEAR BROTHER KELL:- 

Your favor of the 1 1th reaches me on my return. 
Thanks for its words of caution and kindness. I occupy 
a peculiar position, dear brother— opposed by the hosts 
of Babylon and surrounded by a small company of friends 
who, by reason of the Truth, have their senses exercised 
to such an extent as makes them the most critical people 
in the world. The world, the flesh, the devil and Babylon 
I make no particular effort to please. I am delighted 
to use every legitimate opportunity to serve and to please 
the "brethren." But I must not wonder at it if I fail 
to please all of them all the time. My resolution, therefore, 
is and has long been, to do my best to please the 
Lord and to leave it to him to keep all his true sheep 
from stumbling over my imperfections or through their 
own awkwardness and combativeness. 

I note your three queries and am happy to tell you 
that none of them is embarrassing. My faith, my brotherly 
love and my loyalty to the Lord and his Word, I 
would not boast of, though I rejoice that, by the grace 
of God, I am what I am in this respect. 

Having so little trouble along these lines myself, yet 
having them brought to my attention frequently by dear 
and well-meaning brethren, has led me to philosophise 
upon the subject. My conclusion is that these dear brethren 
are judging me by themselves and that, knowing 
their own trials and difficulties, they sympathetically suppose 
that I am similarly afflicted. Indeed some of them 
have plainly intimated that if they occupied my position 
they would surely be away off on all of these points, and 
hence marvel if I would not be. 

I take no credit to myself, dear brother. I had the 
good fortune to be born with the organ of self-esteem 
very small and, whatever my character is, I am pleased 
to credit any good to the grace of him "who loved us 
and bought us with his precious blood." 

Hastily your brother and servant in the Lord. 



R4439 : page 222 

ABRAHAM'S THREE WIVES 

A CORRESPONDENT objects to our suggestion that 

Keturah, Abraham's third wife, represented the 

New Covenant, as his secondary wife, Hagar, represented 



the Law Covenant, and his primary wife, Sarah, 
represented the Covenant of Grace, "the New Jerusalem, 
the mother of us all," the mother of the promised seed, 
Isaac, typical of Christ Jesus the Head and the Church his 
Body, as the Apostle declares in Galatians 3:29; 4:28. 

The objection is that Keturah was not a wife, but a concubine 
or secondary wife, and that Abraham had several 
of these, according to Genesis 25:5,6, where we read, 
"Abraham gave gifts to the sons of his concubines." The 
claim further is that Abraham was already old at the time 
of Isaac's birth and that the probabilities are that he had 
several concubines while Sarah was still living. 

We reply that there is always room to speculate in contradiction 
to the plain statements of Scripture; so that the 
worldly-wise and all who lack faith in the Divine record 
will have abundant opportunity to stumble themselves. 
The Scripture record is clear to the effect that Abraham's 
companion, fully recognized as his wife and joint-heir, was 
Sarah, and that her son was specially recognized as Abraham's 
heir. As for Hagar and Keturah, the record is similarly 
explicit— that they bore children to Abraham— the 
former with Sarah's consent and as her special representative, 
the latter after Sarah's death. Whether these two 
women be termed secondary wives or concubines matters 
nothing and we need not quibble over a point of no consequence. 
Evidently concubine is the name which preferably 
describes the relationship of these two women to 
Abraham. And this was eminently proper, since it was 

R4440 : page 222 

evidently the Divine intention, as declared by the Apostle, 
that Abraham himself should be a type of the Almighty, 
Sarah a type of the Abrahamic Covenant, and her son 
Isaac a type of The Christ, the Messiah, the Prophet, 
Priest, Mediator, King, Judge, through whom the blessing 
of the Almighty should ultimately proceed to all the families 
of the earth. The Apostle carries out this figure by 
showing that Hagar, the bondwoman or concubine, represented 
the Law Covenant, and that her child Ishmael represented 
the Jewish people, born under that Law Covenant. 
The Apostle shows that they could not be both children 
of the bondwoman and children of the free woman. He 
shows that the Jews, in order to become united to Christ 
and members of the spiritual Isaac, the heir of all, must 
become dead to the Law Covenant and be married to 
Christ, begotten of the holy Spirit; otherwise they could 
have neither part nor lot in the spiritual Seed of Abraham. 
The Apostle does not carry the figure on and declare that 
Keturah typified the New (Law) Covenant. We believe 
that this omission was of Divine intention, because the 
time for this particular feature of the Divine program to 
be clearly understood was not yet due. 

One thing, however, can be clearly seen by all who have 
the eyes of their understanding open and their spiritual 
senses exercised, and that is that Isaac did not have two 



mothers. It was the same Sarah who from the first was 
recognized by Abraham as his mate and only full and 
proper wife, who for so long was barren, but who finally 
bore Isaac, the seed of promise. Similarly the Sarah Covenant, 
which was barren for centuries, at our Lord's First 
Advent bore him as the Antitypical Seed of Abraham. 
Then also the Hagar or Law Covenant and her child, the 
Jewish nation, were "cast out." In the Apostle's figure of 
Galatians 4:28 he represents the spirit-begotten, faithful 
overcomers of the Church, as members of the Antitypical 
Isaac, the Spiritual Seed of the Sarah Covenant. "We, 
brethren, as Isaac was, are the children of the promise." 
In the picture he gives us in Galatians 3:29 the Apostle 
presents the Church as the Bride of Isaac and his joint-heir 
—now betrothed and in the end of the age to be married 
to him, and to enter into his mother's tent— to 
enter into all the blessings and privileges that belong 
specially to this great Covenant which God made with 
Abraham and which he confirmed with an oath. 

The record in Genesis 24:67 and 25:1 shows that after 
Sarah's death Abraham took Keturah as his wife— not, 
however, as taking the full place of Sarah as his joint-heir, 
as the word wife in olden times evidently signified. She 
was accepted as his companion in a secondary sense without 

R4440 : page 223 

disparagement to the first wife Sarah and her son 

Isaac, to whom Abraham "gave all that he had." We submit 

that Keturah is a very proper figure of the New (Law) 

Covenant, as Hagar was of the old Law Covenant. It is 

not the Oath-bound Covenant, which relates to the Spiritual 

Seed, which becomes heir of all. As the Law Covenant was 

no part of the original one, but merely an addition to it— 

so likewise the New Covenant is an addition to the Oath-bound 

Sarah Covenant. As the children of Hagar and the 

children of Keturah did not inherit the original promise, 

so neither will those who inherit the New Covenant be 

fellow-heirs with those who inherit as members of Isaac 

or as his bride and joint-heir. 

We therefore deny that it is possible for anybody to be 
logically, truthfully or Scripturally a child of two Covenants 
or two mothers at the same time. And on the other 
hand we urge the reasonableness of the proposition that 
if the Law Covenant was represented as a mother and a 
concubine wife the New (Law) Covenant, to take its place, 
should also logically appear as a concubine wife. We also 
urge upon the attention of all that the word "New" implies, 
as the Apostle suggests, that another had become old 
and ready to vanish away. It was not the original Oath-bound 
Covenant which vanished away, but the Law Covenant. 
Hence the New Covenant did not take the place of 
the original or Sarah Covenant, but is to take the place of 
the old Law Covenant as a New (Law) Covenant under a 
new Mediator, superior to Moses.— Acts 3:22,23. 

The query is raised, Was not our Lord the child or seed 



of two Covenants or two mothers, since we read that he 
was "born under the Law (Hagar) Covenant" and the 
Apostle teaches that he was the Seed of the original or 
Sarah Covenant? 

We answer, No ! If our Lord Jesus had kept the Law 
Covenant merely and had not consecrated his life, had not 
sacrificed it, he might thus have had eternal life as an 
earthly being. Then truly he might have claimed to be 
Abraham's seed and heir of all earthly things. But, then, 
he could not have been the promised seed; for the promised 
seed was to "bless all the families of the earth"— implying 
the resurrection of the dead. This blessing ability 
could be our Lord's not by keeping the Law and becoming 
Hagar's wonderful son, but by sacrificing all of the 
earthly blessings proffered by the Hagar Covenant, accepting 
instead the spiritual privileges of the Sarah Covenant. 
Let us get clearly in mind that it was not the "man Jesus," 
but the "new creature" Jesus who became heir of all and 
who liveth to bless Israel and all nations. Similarly only 
such believers as have become New Creatures, begotten of 
the holy Spirit, are members of the great Prophet, Priest, 
King, Mediator and Judge which God is now raising up as 
the Seed of Abraham to bless the world. 



R4440 : page 223 

SAMPLES OF INTERESTING LETTERS 

BELOVED BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

I want to express to you the rejoicing in my heart 
in that you are safely back from your European trip, 
and that you were so richly blessed amongst our dear 
brethren across the water. I could almost fancy myself 
there with you from the vivid presentations of your letters 
as published in "The Watch Tower." 

Also I want to tell you of the great blessing I have 
experienced from the renewal of the Vow. When I took 
that Vow last year I had not given much thought to the 
matter and consequently took it in rather a half-hearted 
way. I took it more in the sense of a resolution on my 
part than as a promise or covenant. I read in the "Tower" 
of great blessings coming to the hearts of those who had 
taken the Vow and wondered why I was not much happier 
too. Thinking over the matter carefully and prayerfully, 
it occurred to me that there is a difference between a 
resolution and a promise; that a resolution involved only 
myself, whereas a promise involves two parties— the Lord 
and myself. As I have said, I had taken the Vow with 
more or less half-heartedness, thinking I did not need to 
concern myself about certain parts of it, which I felt 
quite confident did not apply in my case. 

Dear Brother, it was those certain parts I needed most 
to be on guard against and did not know it. Where I 
felt especially strong there was I weakest, and I thought 



of the similarity in Paul's case. The Lord allowed me to 
come into a severe mental chastisement. For days I was 
most miserable, most unhappy. Finally it dawned on my 
mind that I had not rightly taken the Vow. I prayed 
earnestly for divine guidance and took the Vow anew, and 
this time with whole-heartedness and went to sleep peacefully. 
Early on the morrow— before breakfast— my 
prayer received answer. God's blessing came suddenly 
and pronouncedly. My heart gave as it were a mighty 
bound. My soul filled with rejoicing. I felt like shouting 
aloud. I never was so happy in my life. There is now in 
my heart a peace that passes all previous comprehension 
of heavenly bliss. I know of a surety now that God wants 
his children to take that Vow. Nothing in the nature of 
argument or reasoning to the contrary could have any 
effect on my mind. As Paul of old has said, "I know." 
My experience in this connection is wonderful. Such a 
change of blessing from comparative misery I could not 
have believed possible. Oh, that all the dear saints could 
realize the blessedness resulting from the proper taking 
of the Vow that I have realized from its renewal in the 
proper attitude of heart. 

Pray for me, brother, as I pray for you and the Bethel 
family and all of like faith. The Lord bless you for 
giving me the opportunity to get so close to the Lord. 
Thank God for the Vow. 

Your brother in Christ, 

J. A. BOHNET. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

I have been feasting on the fat things God has been 
providing for the "household of faith" out of his storehouse, 
things both new and old in this harvest time. 
When I first came to the table which God has been 
pleased to appoint you steward of I was spiritually 
starved. I had sat at many other tables, and while I 
had been stimulated by the wine of Babylon I was 
hungry for solid food, and, thank God, I found just 
what I was hungering for when I received Present 
Truth. I am now able to "give a reason for the hope 
that is within me." 

Dear Brother, the spiritual food God has empowered 
you to provide the "household of faith" in due season 
satisfies me fully, and I have come to realize that God 
is using one channel through which he is serving us 
who have made a covenant with him by sacrifice. 

R4441 : page 223 

So when the Vow came out, although I had never 
realized any danger to myself from the fallen angels, I 
did not hesitate in making it mine, knowing that it 
must be "meat in due season"; and so it has proved to 
me. Within a month after taking the Vow I was tried 
along those very lines, and if it had not been for my 



Vow I should very likely have had my curiosity 
awakened and perhaps have fallen into a snare of the 
Evil One. 

Although I may not fully understand some of the 
deep spiritual things being served us, I know God is 
providing the food through his own appointed way and 
it must be good and wholesome. 

Dear Brother, there are thousands like myself who 
are feasting and growing strong on the good things God 
is providing us through you; many you may never hear 
from or of until we all meet beyond the vail. We pray 
for you. 

I am your brother in his service, 

FRANK W. MAIN,-Mich. 



page 224 

PUBLIC MINISTRIES OF THE TRUTH 

UNDER THE AUSPICES OF PEOPLES PULPIT 
ASSOCIATION OF BROOKLYN, N.Y. 



ONE-DAY LOCAL CONVENTIONS ADDRESSED BY THE 
EDITOR OF THIS JOURNAL AS FOLLOWS: 

RE RATES TO ST. JOSEPH (MO.) CONVENTION 

As yet the railroads have declined to grant any reduction 
in the fares to St. Joseph, but we still hope to receive some 
concessions from the Southwest. If none is granted in the 
end, we suggest that friends in parties purchase mileage books 
which will give them a two-cent per mile rate. This will be 
equivalent to fare-and-one-third in three-cent per mile territory. 

TOLEDO, OHIO, AUGUST 3-5 

Sessions in Memorial Hall, Cor. Ontario and Adams Sts. 
Program provided for Tuesday and Wednesday; Brother 
Russell to be present on Thursday the 5th, with meeting for 
the Public at 8 p.m. Subject, "Man's Past, Present and 
Future in the Light of the Bible." 

BROOKLYN, N.Y., AUGUST 8 

SANDUSKY, OHIO, AUGUST 15 

SYRACUSE, N.Y., AUGUST 22 

WATERTOWN, N.Y., AUGUST 29 



page 226 

STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES 
"MILLENNIAL DAWN" 
THESE STUDIES ARE RECOMMENDED TO STUDENTS AS VERITABLE "BIBLE KEYS. 
PRICES ARE NET AND BARELY COVER THE COST OF PRODUCTION. 
WHEN DELIVERED BY COLPORTEUR THE COST AND PRICE ARE INCREASED. 

SERIES L, The Plan of the Ages, gives an outline of the divine plan 
revealed in the Bible, relating to man's redemption and restitiution: 
386 pages, in embossed cloth, 25c. (IS. l/2d.). India paper edition, 75c. 
(3S. l-l/2d.). 

This volume has been published as a special issue of our journal— 
at the extremely low price of 5c a copy, in any quantity, postage included. 
(To foreign countries, 9c.) This enables people of slender 
purse to herald far and wide the good tidings in a most helpful form. 

SERIES II., The Time is at Hand, treats of the manner and time of 
the Lord's second coming, considering the Bible Testimony on this 
subject: 370 pages, in embossed cloth 25c. (IS. l/2d.). India paper 
edition, 75c. (3S. l-l/2d.). 

SERIES III., Thy Kingdom Come, considers prophesies which mark 
events connected with the "Time of the End," the glorification of the 
Church and the establishment of the Millennial Kingdom; it also contains 
a chapter on the Great Pyramid, showing its corroboration of the dates and 
other teachings of the Bible: 384 pages, in embossed cloth 
25c (IS. l/2d.). India paper edition, 75c. (3S. I-l/2d.). 

SERIES IV., The Day of Vengeance, shows that the dissolution of the 
present order of things is in progress, and that all the panaceas offered 
are valueless to avert the predicted end. It marks in these events the 
fulfilment of prophecy, noting specially our Lord's great prophecy of 
Matt. 24, and Zech. 14:1-9: 660 pages, in embossed cloth 30c. (IS. 3d.). 
India paper edition. 85c (3S. 6-l/2d.). 

SERIES V., The At-one-ment Between God and Man, treats an all-important 
subject— the hub, the center around which all the features 
of divine grace revolve. Its topic deserves the most careful and 
prayerful consideration on the part of all true Christians: 507 pages, in 
embossed cloth 30c. (IS. 3d.). Indea paper edition 85c (3S. 6-l/2d.). 

SERIES VI., The New Creation, deals with the Creative Week, Genesis 
1 and 2, and with the Church, God's "New Creation." It examines 
the personnel, organization, rites, ceremonies, obligations and 
hopes appertaining to those called and accepted as members of the 
body under the Head: 740 pages, in embossed cloth 30c. (IS. 3d.). 
India paper edition, 85c (3S. 6-l/2d.). 

The above prices include postage. 

IN FULL LEATHER BINDING, gilt edges, the set (6 vols.) $3.00, 
(12S. 6d.), plus postage 60c (IS.). 

Is also published in foreign languages as follows: in German, six vols., 
in Swedish Vols. 1, 2, 3, 5 and 6; in Dano-Norwegian, three vols.; 
in Greek three vols; in French, two vols.; in Hollandish, Spanish, 
and Italian, one vol. each; bound in cloth, uniform with English edition, 
prices the same; in Polish, condensed edition, one vol., 10 cents. 



page 225 

SEMI-MONTHLY 



VOL. XXX AUGUST 1 NO. 15 
A.D. 1909--A.M. 6037 



CONTENTS 

Views from the Watch Tower 227 

International Conciliation 227 

Spiritism Conquering Scientists 227 

Jewish College in Palestine 228 

Law Righteousness and Faith Righteousness 228 

"The Greatest of These is Love" 229 

New Creatures Only Appealed to 230 

Our Heavenly Home (Poem) 231 

Wandering into "Outer Darkness" 231 

The Single Eye of Love 232 

"Mind the Same Things" 233 

Deliverance from the Adversary 234 

Some Interesting Letters 237 

Brooklyn Bethel Hymns for September 239 

Berean Studies on the Atonement 239 

page 226 

PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY 
CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
"BROOKLYN TABERNACLE," 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, N.Y., U.S.A. 

Foreign Agencies:— British Branch: 24 Eversholt St., London, 
N.W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, Barmen. Australasian 
Branch: Equitable Building, Collins St., Melbourne. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:— All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 
and in touch with the Studies, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, DANISH AND ITALIAN EDITIONS. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N.Y., POSTOFFICE 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA 



RATES FROM ST. LOUIS TO ST. JOSEPH (MO.) 
CONVENTION 

The Missouri Pacific Railway has granted fare-and-a-third 
rates from all of their stations, except where two-cent per mile 
rate is now in force. Friends from St. Louis expect to 
be leaving that city in a special coach on the morning 
of July 28th at 9 o'clock. Any desiring to join the party had 
best notify Mr. L. M. Nance, 3659 Russell Ave., St. Louis, 
Mo., so that plenty of car room may be arranged for. 

RE BROOKLYN CONVENTION 

We had hoped to be in position to announce in this issue 
particulars regarding the proposed Brooklyn or nearby convention 
expected to be held about September 4th to 12th. 
Details in next issue. 

THE WEEKLY SERMONS 

We trust that our readers who are taking newspapers 
which publish "Pastor Russell's Sermons" weekly will not 
forget to encourage the editors by post-card, referring briefly 
to some feature specially enjoyed or to the sermons in general. 
If you miss a paper or if a sermon fails to appear, send a post-card 
at once stating your disappointment and explaining that 
you subscribed solely for the sake of Pastor Russell's sermons, 
which are so different from all other sermons. 



1st Volume Spanish DAWN is now in stock. 



R4441 : page 227 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER 



INTERNATIONAL CONCILIATION 
(EXTRACT FROM AN ADDRESS BY HON. ELIHU ROOT) 



"THERE is a peculiar situation created when a diplomatic 

question arises between two countries. It 

is the duty of the diplomatic representatives to 

argue each the cause of his own country; he cannot turn 

his back upon an opponent in that friendly contest and 

state to his countrymen the weakness of his own position 



and the strength of the other side's position, and it is 

one of the great difficulties of peace-making and peace-keeping 

that the orators, the politicians, the stump 

speakers, aye, often the clergymen of each country, press 

and insist upon the extreme view of their own country, 

and impress upon the minds of the great masses of people 

who have not studied the question, the idea that all 

right is upon one side and all wrong upon the other side. 

"If you would help to make and keep peace, stand 
behind the men who are in the responsible positions of 
government, ready to recognize the fact that there is 
some right on the other side. 

"War comes today as the result of one of three causes: 
either actual or threatened wrong by one country to 
another, or as the result of a suspicion by one country 
that another intends to do it wrong, and upon that suspicion, 
instinct leads the country that suspects the attack, 
to attack first; or, from bitterness of feeling, dependent 
in no degree whatever upon substantial questions 
of difference, and that bitterness of feeling leads to 
the suspicion, and the suspicion in the minds of those 
who suspect and who entertain the bitter feeling, is justification 
for war. It is their justification to themselves. 
The least of these three causes of war is actual injustice. 
There are today acts of injustice being perpetrated by 
one country upon another; there are several situations in 
the world today where gross injustice is being done. I 
will not mention them, because it would do more harm 
than it would good, but they are few in number. 

"By far the greatest cause of war is that suspicion of 
injustice, threatened and intended, which comes from 
exasperated feeling. Now, feeling, the feeling which 
makes one nation willing to go to war with another, 
makes real causes of difference of no consequence. If 
the people of two countries want to fight, they will find 
an excuse— a pretext— find what seems to them sufficient 
cause, in anything. Questions which can be disposed of 
without the slightest difficulty between countries really 
friendly, are insoluble between countries really unfriendly. 
And the feeling between the peoples of different 
countries is the product of the acts and the words of 
the peoples of the countries themselves, not of their government. 
Insult, contemptuous treatment, bad manners, 
arrogant and provincial assertion of superiority are the 
chief causes of war today." 

SPIRITISM CONQUERING SCIENTISTS 



We reiterate our warnings re all that disregard the 
Divine assurance that the dead are dead and that resurrection 
is their only hope. The Bible alone gives us the 
key to Spiritism's power, showing that it is by the fallen 
angels, demons, who personate the dead so as to deceive 
mankind and to favor various falsities and superstitions 



built upon the error that the dead are alive. The Bible 
also foretells that at this time the wise men of the world 
will be deceived. Note the evidence of this in the following 
item which is going the rounds of the press:— 

"Mme. Blavatsky was exposed in India by a strenuous 
Australian investigator, Richard Hodgson, who afterward 
settled down in Boston, where he became head of the 
old American branch of the British Society for Psychical 
Research, and where also he met Professor James, who 
took him to see Mrs. Piper. Dr. Hodgson studied this 
woman for eighteen years and she convinced him that 
telepathy, automatic writing and communication with the 
dead were bona fide phenomena. To give her a special 
test, Dr. Hodgson arranged a unique course of experiments, 
in which he was aided by Dr. James H. Hyslop, 
professor of logic and ethics at Columbia. 

MASKED HIMSELF AND DISGUISED VOICE 

"The professor masked himself and disguised his voice 
during his visits to her, and while she lay unconscious, 
with her head upon a pillow resting on a table, her hand 
wrote out messages alleged to come from his father. 
She converted Hyslop to the spiritistic hypothesis, and 
his announcement of the fact made a stir in the scientific 
world. He and Hodgson formed a compact that whoever 
died first would communicate with the other, and Professor 
Hyslop expressed some time ago his satisfaction 
that he has received messages from Hodgson since the 
latter's death. 

LOMBROSO AND FLAMMARION CONVERTED 

"Across the deep no less a proportion of thinking men 
have turned their thoughts in the same direction. 
Caesare Lombroso, the great Italian criminologist and 
anthropologist, after having studied the medium, 
Eusapia Paladino, has announced his belief in disembodied 
spirits, although he does not indorse the theory 
of the return of the dead. Professor Charles Richet, of 
the Faculty of Medicine, Paris, is a French leader in 
psychical research work and claims to have photographed 
the spirit of a Spanish soldier, while Camille 
Flammarion, the French astronomer, is now an aggressive 
convert to Spiritism. He says that he has proved that 
such phenomena as the movement of chairs without contact 
and the suspension of heavy tables in space are bona 
fide. 

R4441 : page 228 

"No less than an ex-prime minister has recently been a 
leader of the ghost hunters of England, where he recently 
served as president of the Society of Psychical Research. 
He insists that science cannot explain the psychic 
wonders which he has witnessed. While he headed the 



society it made a special investigation of 350 cases of 
aparitions of the dying in England and Wales, and of 
these fifty-two cases were accepted as beyond the laws 
of chance or the possibility of fraud. 

EDITOR STEAD NOW A MEDIUM 

"William T. Stead has become a medium, so he now 
says— a writing medium, not one of the tambourine and 
trumpet band. At first the noted editor accepted telepathy 
and claimed to have written down the thoughts of 
living men many miles away. Then, of late years, he 
alleges, he has gotten into close communion with the 
dead. But it is only this year that he claims to have 
developed automatic writing, his right arm becoming impassive 
while its fingers guide a pen over paper on which 
appear letters from his son, the brilliant young writer, 
William, who died a year ago last Christmas eve. Mr. 
Stead claims that this writing appears without his exercising 
any will power to either hold the pen or move it. 

SIR OLIVER LODGE NOW A SPIRITIST 

"If the English-speaking public was surprised to hear 
that Mr. Stead had strayed thus far into the spiritualist 
camp, it was startled to learn a few months ago that Sir 
Oliver Lodge, head of the University of Birmingham, 
had announced his belief in such communication with 

R4442 : page 228 

those beyond the grave. In a recent journal of the 
Society for Psychical Research he has given details of 
messages which he claims to have received from dead 
members of the society through the pen of a writing 
medium." 

SUGGESTION A POTENT WEAPON 



"The spread of Eddyism and the Emmanuel movement 
merely emphasises the fact that we have another potent 
weapon at our command," said Dr. William H. Dieffenbach, 
of New York, in his annual presidential address to 
the National Society of Physical Therapeutics, affiliated 
with the American Institute of Homeopathy, which was 
recently in session in Detroit. 

"The use of suggestion to patients," continued the 
doctor, "should be studied and taught as should every 
other agent promising relief in the cure of the sick." 

SCIENTIFIC INVESTIGATIONS 



"I have careful records of about five hundred death-beds, 
studied particularly with reference to the modes 
of death and the sensations of the dying. Ninety suffered 
bodily pain or distress of one sort or another, 
eleven showed mental apprehension, two positive terror, 
one expressed spiritual exaltation, one bitter remorse. 
The great majority gave no sign one way or the other; 
like their birth, their death was a sleep and a forgetting." 
—Prof. Ossler. 

JEWISH COLLEGE IN PALESTINE 



Jacob Schiff, the New York banker, has placed $100,000 
at the disposal of the Central Jewish Relief League 
toward establishing a technical college for Jews in Palestine. 
The college is expected to attract Jews from all 
parts of the world. It will be located at Haifa. 



R4442 : page 228 

LAW-RIGHTEOUSNESS AND FAITH-RIGHTEOUSNESS 

ALTHOUGH the Church is not developed under a 

Law Covenant— neither the old Law Covenant 

nor the New (Law) Covenant— nevertheless 

it is being measured by the Divine Law standard; as 

the Apostle says, The righteousness of the Law is fulfilled 

in us who are walking not after the flesh but after the 

Spirit. -Rom. 8:4. 

The Jew under the Law Covenant was unable to be 
justified because unable to keep the letter of that Law, 
and because Moses, the mediator of that Law Covenant, 
had no merit or grace to contribute to the people which 
would excuse them from the letter of the Law and make 
the spirit of that Law available for their justification. 

The New (Law) Covenant, like the old one, will require 
obedience to the letter of the Law of God, and not 
merely to its spirit. The rule of that Covenant will be, 
"He that doeth these things shall live by them." What 
advantage, then, will accrue under the New (Law) Covenant 
above and beyond that which the Jew enjoyed under 
the old Law Covenant? 

We answer, The difference will be that the New (Law) 
Covenant will have the better Mediator, who will have the 
right during the existence of the Millennial Kingdom to 
instruct, and chasten, and reward, and assist, and uplift 
all who will be obedient to him, so that by the close of 
the Millennial Age all who desire eternal life, all who appreciate 
righteousness, or who could be made to appreciate 
it, will have been brought up to that perfect condition 
mentally, morally and physically which Adam enjoyed 
but lost by sin, and which Christ redeemed by the sacrifice 



of himself. 

The mediation will last for the thousand years, and at 
its conclusion the world will be turned over to the jurisdiction 
of the Heavenly Father— Christ will "deliver up 
the Kingdom to God, even the Father." (1 Cor. 15:24.) 
They will be delivered up perfect, mentally, physically, 
morally, and be all that Adam was, plus the experiences 
received through the reign of evil and through the subsequent 
reign of righteousness. Thus the old Law Covenant 
and the New (Law) Covenant have special points of 
similarity, and we see the difference between the two to 
be, as St. Paul points out, that the New (Law) Covenant 
has the better Mediator, who is able to cancel the sins 
that are past and to take away the stony heart, and by 
restitution processes restore the heart of flesh. Additionally, 
he will instruct mankind to that condition where 
they can if they will keep the Divine Law perfectly, both 
in letter and in spirit. 

This was lost sight of in the dark ages. The real object 
of this Gospel Age— the selection of the members of the 
antitypical Moses, the antitypical Mediator of the New 
(Law) Covenant— the mystery— became obscured. No 
future age for the blessing of Israel and the world was 
acknowledged. Instead the New Covenant was considered 
as but another name for the Abrahamic Covenant, to 
which, instead, it is to be an addition. 

THE CASE WITH US IS DIFFERENT 

The Covenant under which we become Abraham's Seed 
—i.e., the Abrahamic Covenant (the Sarah Covenant), 
had no law provision and no mediator. It was a one-sided 
Covenant, and needed no mediator. It was made 
with one who believed God, who was justified by his 
faith, and whose faith was tested by obedient works to the 
extent of his ability. To this tested, proved man, Abraham, 
God gave the great promise, "In thee and in thy 
Seed shall all the families of the earth be blessed." This 
was the Covenant to which was added the oath of confirmation. 
That promise and that oath become our strong 
consolation, our anchorage of hope, because we have become 
united to Christ as his members— members of the 
Spiritual Seed of Abraham, which is to bless natural 
Israel and the world by the long-promised New (Law) 
Covenant, of which we are being made able ministers or 
servants. 

To Christ the original Covenant came with the Law 
"added," and he inherited by obedience to the Law. He 
is now accepting us separate and apart from the Law on 
condition of faith and obedience to the extent of our 
ability. To us the righteousness of the Law is counted 
as fulfilled when we walk, not after the flesh, but after 

R4442 : page 229 

the spirit of the Law, because we thus give evidence that 



if we had perfect ability we would keep the Divine Law 
perfectly. And we who have been accepted as members 
of the Body of Christ have entered into a covenant of 
sacrifice as respects the earthly nature, and to be copies 
of our Redeemer to the extent of our ability— in heart, 
in will, and, so far as possible, in deed. 

After testing us thus, if found faithful, God will accept 
us fully and grant us spirit bodies like unto our 
Redeemer's. It is thus, as New Creatures in Christ, that 
we may be the Spiritual Seed of Abraham, and members 
of the Body of the great Mediator, the great Prophet, 
Priest, King and Judge, who during the Millennial Age, 
under the New (Law) Covenant sealed with his blood, 
shall establish righteousness in the earth, and lift up the 
willing and obedient of humanity out of sin, degradation 
and death to harmony with God and everlasting life. 

Is it asked, Under what Covenant is the Royal Priesthood, 
the Church of the First-Born, justified? We answer, 
under no covenant. Our justification, like that of 
Abraham, is by faith. As it is written, "Abraham believed 
God and it was counted unto him for righteousness. 
Now it was not written for his sake alone that it (righteousness) 
was imputed to him, but for us also to whom 
it shall be imputed, if we believe on him who raised up 
Jesus, our Lord, from the dead; who was delivered for 
our offenses, and was raised again for our justification." 
-Rom. 4:3,23-25. 

St. Paul in this connection points out that Abraham 
was not justified because of his circumcision, for he was 
justified by faith and reckoned righteous before he was 
given the seal of circumcision. Likewise, he was not 
justified by the Covenant made with him, but the Covenant 
was made with him because of his faith, and his 
justification through faith. And thus it is also with all 
of us who are counted Abraham's Seed. After being 
justified by faith, we are granted the privilege of becoming 
dead with Christ, and thus becoming members of 
his Body, the spiritual Seed of Abraham, whose circumcision 
is that of the heart.-Gal. 3:29. 



R4442 : page 229 

"THE GREATEST OF THESE IS LOVE" 

-I COR. 13:1-13.-AUGUST29.- 

Golden Text:— "And now abideth faith, hope, 
charity (love) these three; but the greatest of these 
is charity"— love.— 1 Cor. 13:13. 

THE Church at Corinth had been founded for nearly 
five years and had enjoyed a wide range of experiences 
and Divine providences. St. Paul, in addressing 
them this epistle, was evidently considering well 



their needs and seeking to minister to the same the 

Divine message of grace and truth. The Apostle may not 

have realized how great a work he was doing and how far-reaching 

would be the scope of his instructions. Perhaps 

it was better for himself that he did not know how important 

was his service to the entire Church of the Gospel 

Age, as the mouthpiece of his Lord. Such a knowledge 

might have been too much for him and might have made 

him heady, the very condition of things the Lord was 

warding off by permitting him to still have the "thorn in 

R4443 : page 229 

the flesh," considered in our last lesson. 

The Apostle had been discussing God's "gifts" to the 
early Church, which, to them, took the place of other 
blessings now enjoyed. They had no Bibles, as we have; 
no concordances or helps in Bible study. They needed 
the miraculous "gift of tongues" to draw them together 
once a week to consider the message of the Lord. They 
needed that the message should come in this miraculous 
way, in order that it might be the better appreciated by 
them and be of the Lord and not of themselves. Then, 
too, this made opportunity for another gift, "the interpretation 
of tongues." Thus by the various gifts they 
were drawn together and edified and built up, until such 
times as the books of the New Testament gradually accumulated 
and, after the death of the Apostles and the 
consequent cessation of the "gifts," these Divine providences 
of the written Word were quite sufficient, yea, 
better everyway, as the Apostle sets forth in this lesson. 

In this epistle St. Paul has been gradually leading the 
minds of his readers up to a higher appreciation of the 
blessings they enjoyed. In the chapter preceding our 
lesson he calls attention to these various facts and the 
oneness of the Church, and the Divine intent that each 
member should love and cooperate with the other. He 
pointed out to them that they were putting rather too 
high a value upon the "gift of tongues." That, while 
this "gift" had its proper place in the Church as a blessing, 
a still higher lesson lay in the ability to present 
Truth in a well-understood tongue or language. He declared 
himself able to speak with more tongues than any 
of them, and yet pointed out that he preferred to speak 
in the tongue which would be understood by his hearers. 
Finally in his argument he came to our present lesson 
and gave it as a climax to his hints preceding. 

THE TONGUE OF LOVE SUPERIOR TO ALL 

Boldly the Apostle sets forth a great Truth, which has 
come to be more and more recognized amongst Christian 
people everywhere, and that in proportion to their development 
in the character-likeness of their Redeemer, 
in proportion to their development as children of God. 
St. Paul sets forth that not knowledge, not wisdom, not 



talents, not "gifts" of any kind are the things most to be 
sought for, but Love— because God is Love, and because 
all who would be pleasing to God must develop this 
character, this disposition, and because, according to the 
Divine Law, none will ever have full Divine approval or 
eternal life on any other plane of being, without the full 
establishment in the heart, in the character, of this Divine 
quality— love. Therefore "Love is the fulfilling of the 
Law." 

In St. Paul's forceful language, if he had all the tongues 
of earth and of heaven and could speak them with perfection 
and charming rhythm, these would still not constitute 
a proof of his harmony with God and his acceptance 
to life eternal. Should he do all this in a perfunctory 
manner, even to the extent of speaking of the 
Divine character and in the interests and welfare of his 
fellows, he might still have no heart in the matter, but be 
merely like a sounding brass or a tinkling cymbal. The 
argument is that tongues, therefore, were not to be esteemed 
as a proof of Christian character. 

Next he argues respecting prophecy, oratory and the 
understanding of mysteries and knowledge and the possession 
of mountain-moving faith, and he asks, Would 
these abilities not signify a glorious development and a 
full acceptance with God and an assurance of life eternal? 
He answers us, No, any of these or all of these abilities, 
precious as they are, in the Divine estimation would have 
no value whatever, would profit us nothing, unless mixed 
with love and based upon love. How his argument exalts 
this love quality before our minds ! He proceeds to say 
that although all of our goods were given to feed the 
poor and though, as martyrs, our bodies should be burned 
at the stake, if the motive, the sentiment, behind the giving 
and behind the endurance of martyrdom were not 
love, there would be no reward— it would profit us 
nothing. 

LOVE'S CONSTITUENT ELEMENTS 

To those of the Lord's people who have never studied 
out what love is— what are its elements, its constituent 
parts, the Apostle's suggestions here will seem like a 
revelation. He enumerates nine ingredients: 

R4443 : page 230 

(1) Patience— "Love suffereth long;" 

(2) Kindness— "And is kind;" 

(3) Generosity— "Love envieth not;" 

(4) Humility— "Love vaunteth not itself; is not 
puffed up;" 

(5) Courtesy— "Doth not behave itself unseemly;" 

(6) Unselfishness— "Seeketh not her own;" 

(7) Good Temper— "Is not easily provoked;" 

(8) Guilelessness— "Thinketh no evil;" 

(9) Honesty— "Rejoiceth not in iniquity, but rejoiceth 



in the Truth." 

What a wonderful world this would be even with all of 
its aches and pains physical, if every member of our race 
were perfect in these qualities enumerated! However, it 
would be a useless waste of time to weep over what we 
have not, or to unnecessarily chide our neighbors and 
friends because they, like ourselves, are not perfect in 
love. Indeed, the more we come to understand the teachings 
of God's Word, the more of sympathy we may have 
with the poor "groaning creation." In one sense of the 
word our sympathies are all for this glorious standard 
which the Apostle holds up before us. We cannot sympathize 
with the evil, the error, the wrong. It is uncongenial 
to us. But, understanding the situation, we can 
sympathize with our fellows and with ourselves, as being 
in a fallen condition, in which none of us can do the 
things which we would. 

The Scriptural key to the situation is that as a race we 
were born and shapen in iniquity and in sin did our 
mothers conceive us. The calamity of sin, imperfection 
and death affecting us morally, mentally and physically, 
has injured the whole world and made us what the Apostle 
describes a "groaning creation." How this knowledge of 
the facts of the case possessed by so few, understood and 
appreciated by so few, should tend to make these few a 
peculiar people in their loving sympathies and kindnesses 
towards their fellows in distress! Alas, the difficulty is 
that even these few who know these facts from the Divine 
Word have selfishness so ingrained in their constitutions, 
and are so oppressed by the cares of this life that 
their sympathies are often not all that they should be. 

NEW CREATURES ONLY APPEALED TO 

It is for these reasons that the Scriptures do not address 
the natural man— because his mind is so sodden 
with selfishness that his eye of pity and his ear of sympathy 
are well nigh closed. Instead of appealing to the 
natural man in general, the Scriptures represent that the 
Lord specially draws some possessed of certain qualities 
of heart and mind, and specially leads these to a knowledge 
of the Redeemer, leaving it open with them to accept 
or to reject the offer of Divine grace and forgiveness. 
Such as respond are still further enlightened and, if 
further responsive, they are treated as justified because of 
their faith in Jesus and his blood; then are granted 
further to them special opportunities, and exhortations to 
make a full consecration of themselves to the Lord and 
his service forever— unto death. If they still respond and 
make this consecration they then have come to the place 
where the Lord is pleased to reckon them dead to earthly 
things, according to their profession, and to beget them 
of the holy Spirit and the glorious promises of his Word, 
and to count them as New Creatures in Christ— as members 
of the Redeemer's Body, which is the Church. 

Now they have reached the stage where, as children of 



God, they must go to school and develop in knowledge and 
in character— to be made actually fit, prepared, suitable, 
for eternal life and a share with their Redeemer in his 
Kingdom. 

THE LESSONS OF THE SCHOOL 

When we enter the School of Christ, the lesson, as a 
whole, set before us is expressed in the Great Teacher's 
words, "Be ye like unto your Father which is in heaven." 
The same thought is presented to us in the Apostle's 
words when he assures us that God has predetermined 
that only such as become copies of his dear Son— in character 
likeness— can be his joint-heirs in the promised 
Kingdom. We did not know that so much was required 
when we entered the School of Christ. We did not understand 
all that we did when we made our consecration even 
unto death in the service of righteousness. However, no 
advantage was taken of us; for what was presented to us 
and what we did consecrate to do, includes everything in 
our power and no more— even unto death. So, then, no 
lesson that can come to us is beyond our covenant or 
agreement to perform. 

The Apostle in the spectrum of love given us in this 
lesson is delineating the various parts of this one great 
lesson of Christ-likeness, which is God-likeness. He is 
pointing out what constitutes such a character as God 
desires we shall have, and such as God has predetermined 
we must have, in order to be worthy of the gift of God, 
eternal life through Jesus Christ our Lord. 

LOVE VIEWED IN COMPARISON 

It beareth all things; believeth all things; hopeth all 
things; endureth all things. Its elements of patience and 
gentleness are love in the sense of willingness to bear, to 
endure under all sorts of opposition, wherever it sees a 
proper subject for its sympathy. It believeth all things 
in the sense that it is not given to doubt, to disbelieve, to 
impugn the motives and truthfulness of its fellows. Only 
after full and convincing proofs to the contrary will it 
cease to exercise faith. Love hopeth all things in the 
sense that it desires a blessing for all with whom it is in 
contact and is continually striving, in harmony with its 
desire, to do them good. Love endureth all things in the 
sense that it cannot be quenched wherever there is anything 
that it can properly exercise itself upon. These 

R4444 : page 230 

qualities viewed from another standpoint might be interpreted 
thus: "Beareth all things," as enduring pressure 
on every side without being crushed; "Believeth all 
things" as being full of faith in the Divine promises and 
arrangement, doubting nothing; "Hopeth all things" in 
the sense that this perfect love toward God enables the 



heart to be full of confidence toward the Almighty One, in 
whose love it reposes; "Endureth all things" in the sense 
that the soul that is united to the God of Love by the link 
of love cannot be crushed, cannot be overcome, because 
this is the Divine will, the Divine arrangement. God will 
not suffer such to be tempted above that they are able to 
bear, but will, with every temptation, provide a way of 
escape. 

The Apostle institutes a comparison as between love and 
some of the "gifts" which the Corinthian brethren properly 
estimated highly. He would have us all see how infinitely 
higher Love is than any of these gifts in which 
the early Church rejoiced. Love is not a gift, but a 
growth, a fruitage which must be developed in the garden 
of our souls and be tended with much care, in order 
to its proper development. He says that Love never 
faileth; but that other things will fail, namely, the power 
of prophesy or oratory, the gift of tongues, knowledge, 
etc. These would lose their value as the changing conditions 
would comparatively do away with their necessity. 
Prophesying would be done away with, the gift of 
tongues would cease, and knowledge would vanish. The 
Apostle's argument is that these things would all come 
to an end necessarily, when perfection would come in, 
because all of our gifts and talents are imperfect. Surely 
with our glorious "change" in the First Resurrection and 
with the ushering in of the Millennium our conditions 
would be so different that many things highly esteemed 
in the lesser light and under the unfavorable conditions 
of the present would then be valueless. Just so flints 
were once valuable for the striking of a light, but are 
now never used, being supplanted by matches, electric 
lights, etc. Many of those gifts, however, including the 
gift of tongues, perished long before the morning light of 
the Millennium— ceased shortly after the death of the 
Apostles, because those gifts were imparted only by the 
Apostles. 

Next the Apostle compares the gifts of the Spirit with 
the fruitage of the Spirit and shows that the former, in 

R4444 : page 23 1 

contrast with the latter, were as the toys of childhood in 

comparison with the valuables of manhood. "When I was 

a child, I spake as a child, but when I became a man I 

put away childish things." So the gifts of tongues, interpretation 

of tongues, etc., were given to the Church in its 

infancy and served useful purposes then, but might well 

be put away as the Church emerged from infancy to the 

strength and development accruing from a greater knowledge 

of God's great Plan. The milk of the Word and the 

strong meat of the Word were intended by God to develop 

the members of the Body of Christ, until they all 

come to the stature of manhood in Christ. The more advanced 

the Christian, the more surely would he know 

that the gifts of the Spirit were merely like a childish 



plaything to be supplemented by the fruits of the Spirit, 
much more valuable to the Church in its developed 
condition. 

St. Paul points us further to the fact that we are living 
not merely for the present, but specially for the future; 
and that whatever we can develop here which will last 
us into the eternal future, must certainly be the most 
important matter for us to acquire. He would have us 
see that most important thing to the Christian— love— 
the Love which he has described. Our knowledge, 
tongues, etc., of the present time are only mere shadows 
of the great powers which will be ours, if we attain to the 
glorious blessings of the First Resurrection. Whatever 
clearness of sight we have at the present time we shall 
then find but darkness in comparison with that full light of 
the glorious morning-time. Where now we see as 
through an obscure glass, then we shall see face to face. 
Now we know in part; then we shall know as we are 
known. 

FAITH, HOPE AND LOVE 

St. Paul would have the Church see that faith, hope and 
love, three fruits of the Spirit, are far superior to all the 
"gifts" of the Spirit of any kind, because these will abide 
all through the age. Until the Millennial morning we 
shall need faith; we shall need hope; we shall need love. 
We cannot get along without them. We cannot make any 
progress in the footsteps of Jesus without them. But if 
we seek to contrast these imperfect qualities amongst 
themselves, he points out that the chiefest of these is 
love. Why the chiefest? Because it is the Divine quality 
without which, with all the other qualities possessed, we 
should still be unsatisfactory to God. It is the quality 
which will persist to all eternity. We shall always need 
to have love, if we abide in Divine favor. As for faith 
and hope, excellent qualities though they be, the time will 
come when they will be swallowed up by sight, by 
fruition, by the actualities of the glorious condition of 
fellowship with the Lord. But Love will never fail. 
Amongst all the graces of the Spirit it stands supreme 
and eternal. 

Only because of serious misconceptions of Love is it 
necessary or even proper for us to remind our readers, in 
the Apostle's words, that this love quality is not merely 
a form of loving words, nor merely kind words and smiles, 
but that it goes deeply into our natures and includes our 
deeds and our heart sentiments.— 1 John 3:18. 



OUR HEAVENLY HOME 

To little children "home" is that dear place where Mother is, 
Where every wound doth ever find the healing kiss of love, 
And little sobbing hearts are soothed to rest upon her breast. 



In later years that dear word "home" awakes the precious 

thought 
Of loving wife and happy little ones, and peace and rest,— 
A refuge sweet where outside cares and worries cannot come. 
And when the sun of life is sinking in the west we dream 
Of "home" as that blest gathering place where often 

through the year 
Our children, and their children, come with wealth of grateful 

love, 
That makes our hearts forget the pain and toil of former 

years. 

But to the Christian, though the earthly loves be near and 

dear, 
The thought of "home" belongs to that most heavenly place 

where God, 
And Christ, and all the holy angels are, where sorrow finds 
No place, and every longing heart is fully satisfied; 
Where we shall love and serve him perfectly, and meet 

again, 
Nor ever part from fellow-pilgrims on "the narrow way;" 
Where we shall sit with Christ upon his throne, and bless 

with peace 
And joy the whole creation, groaning now in pain and tears! 

And year by year the golden chain grows longer, that doth 

draw 
Us closer to our heavenly home, as one by one, "the priests" 
In silence pass beneath "the vail"— each one an added link. 
Ah, then, to gain an entrance to that blest abode, shall we 
Not count the present things but "loss and dross," and 

lightly touch 
Each object that might hold our heart's affections to this 

earth,— 
For where our treasure is, e'en there our hearts will also be! 
-G. W. Seibert. 



R4444 : page 23 1 

WANDERING INTO "OUTER DARKNESS" 

IN the Scriptures the "outer darkness," the darkness 
of the world, is frequently mentioned in contrast 
with the inner light, the light of truth, as Divinely 
revealed. Thus our Lord said, "Blessed are your eyes, 
for they see, and your ears, for they hear." And the 
Apostle reminds us that we were translated out of darkness 
into God's marvelous light. The world in general 
is represented as lying in darkness, as being unable to 
see the light of Truth. Thus again we are told that the 
light shineth in darkness, but the darkness comprehendeth 
it not. Some of the world are asleep, and hence 
see not the light, while others are very much awake to 
worldly aims and worldly ambitions and schemes, but 



thoroughly blind to the Divine purposes. 

To a certain class who have certain characteristics of 
mind, God is pleased to reveal the light, and to guide 
them by that light in the right pathway. Such as see 
and improve the opportunity and walk in the way are 
called "the children of the light," while others who go 
contrary are called the "children of darkness." Addressing 
some of these children of the light, our Lord said, To 
you it is given to know the mysteries of the Kingdom of 
God, but to outsiders all of these things are spoken in 
parables and dark sayings, that seeing they might not 
see, and hearing they might not understand.— Luke 8:10. 

While it is true that this power to understand is 
"given," yet it is not given indiscriminately; it is given 
only to those of certain character. To these alone the 
light is profitable; to others it would be more or less injurious 
at the present time. We may well thank God, as 
Jesus did, that for the time being the Divine purposes are 
hidden from the wise and prudent and revealed only to 
the "babes." For others to have the light would mean 

R4445 : page 23 1 

injury to themselves, if not a disordering of the Divine 
purposes and arrangements. As, for instance, St. Peter 
tells us that those who crucified the Lord did so in ignorance, 
in blindness, in darkness, "for had they known, they 
would not have crucified the Lord of glory;" even though 
their hearts might have been no better, they could have 
regulated their conduct by the greater knowledge and 
thus the Divine purpose, that Christ should be crucified 
by them, the just for the unjust, would have been 
defeated. 

In Matthew 6:22,23, our Lord gives us a suggestion 
respecting the condition of heart and what it has to do 
with our ability to see or not to see Divine truths. He 
says, "If thine eye be single, thy whole body shall be full 
of light; but if thine eye be evil, thy whole body shall be 

R4445 : page 232 

full of darkness." And then he adds, "If the light that 

is in thee be (become) darkness, how great is that darkness!" 

Evidently our Lord is using the natural eye and 

the natural body as an illustration to draw our attention 

to the higher eyes of understanding and their power to 

bless and to guide and to control the interests of the 

body. 

A single eye would seem to signify singleness of purpose, 
or of heart intention toward God, because in the 
succeeding verse our Lord calls attention to the fact that 
there are but the two masters— good and evil, righteousness 
and sin, God and Satan. Those who are under the 
power of Satan completely are blinded; as St. Paul tells 
us, The god of this world hath blinded the minds of all 
those who believe not, lest the glorious light of Divine 



goodness should shine into their hearts. (2 Cor. 4:4.) 

The only ones who are not blinded are those who are the 

servants of God, and the degree of their clearness of 

vision depends upon the singleness of their eye, their 

singleness of heart, their singleness of purpose, their 

loyalty to the one Master, to the principles of his government, 

etc. 

All who have seen the light of "present truth" have 
therefore reason to be specially congratulated on having 
passed from darkness to light, on having been delivered 
from the Kingdom of darkness to the Kingdom of God's 
dear Son, from the dominion of Satan as his servants to 
be disciples of Christ and servants of God. St. Peter 
speaks of our translation out of darkness into his marvelous 
light. St. Paul says, We are not of the night, nor 
of the darkness. St. John says, In him is no darkness at 
all. Again, Darkness is past, and the true light now 
shineth, but he that hateth his brother is in darkness. 

THE SINGLE EYE OF LOVE 

The point we are establishing is, that as our natural 
bodies are edified by good eyesight, so as New Creatures 
we have clearness of spiritual vision in proportion as we 
have loyalty to the Lord and the enlightening influence 
of his spirit of holiness, the spirit of love. 

The question arises, Is it possible for any of us, after 
passing from darkness into the Lord's marvelous light, to 
again get into the dark— to go out of the light? The 
Scriptures answer that it is possible. They tell us that 
in certain instances God will force people out of the light 
into the "outer darkness" common to the world in general; 
that disloyalty to the Lord and to the principles of 
his teaching tends in this direction. 

We might suppose that those who should thus be cast 
into "outer darkness," either suddenly or gradually, would 
be greatly distressed, but, on the contrary, we have 
every reason to believe that the world in "outer darkness" 
is not greatly distressed by its darkness, but rather, 
as our Lord suggests, "loves darkness rather than light"; 
because it is in an evil condition; because it has not the 
Spirit of the Lord, the spirit of love. The inference, therefore, 
is plain that those who go out of the light into 
darkness will feel as contented as those who have never 
come into the light of "present truth"— who even are 
boastful in respect to the darkness and very unkind in 
their criticisms of the light— hating the light. 

In the Scripture quoted above, under the figure of a 
single eye, the Lord pictures the singleness of purpose 
and of heart which must characterize all who become his 
disciples indeed, or children of light. He even intimates 
that those who lose this singleness of heart, singleness of 
eye, singleness of purpose, and then go into darkness, are 
in some respects in a grosser darkness than are others 
who have never seen the light. He says, "If the light 
that is in thee become darkness, how great is that darkness!" 



Our experience fully corroborates this. Those 

who have once been in the light of the Lord's countenance, 

and in the light of the Divine Word, and who lose 

this, seem to be in a condition much more to be regretted 

than that of the world in general who have never had 

their eyes of understanding opened. None others in the 

world seem capable of such violations of the spirit of 

love, the spirit of truth, the spirit of righteousness, the 

spirit of justice. They seem to be capable of saying and 

doing and thinking more mean, uncharitable, wicked 

things, than before they were enlightened. 

We have tried for years to see the philosophy of this 
fact which has been painfully manifest to us on various 
occasions, and we believe we have found the correct explanation 
of it as follows:— 

THE WORLD-STANDARD VS. NO STANDARD 

The natural man guides his conduct, words and 
thoughts considerably by the conduct and words of his 
fellowmen. The strongest appeal to the natural man is, 
What would Mr. Brown, or Mr. and Mrs. Jones, or Mr. 
and Mrs. Smith think of such words, or such conduct? 
This measuring of themselves with others of the same 
character and standing, and the gauging of conduct by 
that of others whom they respect, seem to be the only 
standard by which the world walks. It sees not clearly 
the principles of righteousness, justice, truth and love. 

But when true conversion to the Lord takes place, 
when the eyes of understanding become opened, new 
standards appear before the opened eyes of understanding. 
The Master's word is heard, saying, "Be ye like 
unto your Father which is in heaven," and "Be ye followers 
of me," and "Take my yoke upon you and learn 
of me." Some see cross-eyed, endeavoring to serve two 
masters, and to walk according to two standards— to be 
pleasing to the Lord, and also to walk according to the 
earthly standards as formerly. But this is found to be a 
very unsatisfactory course; it has neither Divine approval 
nor the approval of worldly friends. Those of single 
eye, of single purpose, say within themselves to the 
contrary, 

"To my Lord I must be true 
Who bought me with his blood." 

These soon learn that the world is in darkness, and 
that to walk with the world, and according to worldly 
standards, would mean to fail to progress from grace to 
grace, from knowledge to knowledge, and from glory to 
glory, under the leadings of the Master, who instructed 
us to walk in his steps. Hence these of the single eye cut 
loose entirely from the worldly standards which formerly 
were their guides, and they look to the Lord, and, so 
looking, have the very best of guidance, the very highest 
standard imaginable. Looking unto him, copying Jesus, 
they come more and more to appreciate the lengths and 
breadths and heights and depths of Divine love and 



justice, and seek more and more to be transformed in all 
their words and thoughts and doings into harmony with 
the glorious pattern which their single eye entitles and 
enables them to clearly see. How blessed is their condition! 
Instructed by the example of the Lord and by 
his word of grace and truth they are rising daily to 
newness of life in the character-likeness of their Redeemer, 
and becoming fit for the heavenly Kingdom and 
for the glorious resurrection change. 

THE LORD WILL JUDGE HIS PEOPLE 

The Divine purpose is not only to call out the single-hearted, 
the single-eyed, and to instruct and guide them, 
but also to test and to prove them. Thus we read, The 
Lord your God doth prove you to know whether ye do 
love the Lord your God with all your heart and with all 
your soul. (Deut. 13:3.) The test of obedience is the 
divine law— supreme love for God and absolute justice to 
your neighbor— to love him as ourself. Additionally, the 
consecrated have the New Commandment to love one 
another as the Redeemer loved them— to the extent of 
sacrificing, laying down anything and everything on behalf 
of each other, for each other's welfare and assistance. 
If this test be faithfully endured, it means that the 
individual has not only reached the mark of perfect love, 
but has stood tests thereat and has demonstrated his 
worthiness of eternal life under Divine terms and conditions. 
But if these tests be not endured, it means the rejection 
of the individual from the light, and that he will 
go from the light, so that the things which were once 
light to him will appear dark, and the things of darkness 
will appear right, just, proper. 

R4445 : page 233 

It is not for us to complain, therefore, of these trials 
and testings which the Lord declares to be necessary; it 
is not for us to insist that those whom we love must be 
maintained in the light and ultimately be accepted to the 
Kingdom. It is rather for us to show our obedience to 
the Lord, to demonstrate our love for him with all our 
heart, and mind, and soul, and strength by acquiescing in 
the Divine arrangements and judgments. The Lord is 
selecting the members of the Bride class. He has given 
us the privilege of being co-laborers with him in this 
work, but merely along the lines of his instruction. With 
him is the decision. If they do not maintain the single 
eye, the singleness of heart, the singleness of purpose, 
loyalty to God, to the principles of righteousness, justice 
and love they cannot continue to be his disciples; they 
cannot continue in the light; they must go into "outer 
darkness." 

If any fail to go on in the development of the spirit of 
love, the spirit of holiness, the spirit of God, they will 
surely retrograde, and the light that is in them will become 



darkness— great darkness. Instead of the spirit of 

love exemplified by our Lord, who laid down his life for us, 

R4446 : page 233 

a spirit of hatred, envy and malice will come in; a spirit 
of murder which, although hesitating to do outward violence 
and come under the ban of the law, will not hesitate 
to assassinate character and to say all manner of evil 
against those toward whom they become embittered. By 
such fruits ye shall know them. Such thorns do not grow 
on the grapevine, nor on the fig tree. 

The philosophy of their course is this: When they lose 
the spirit of the Lord, the spirit of justice and of love, of 
kindness, and mercy, and truth, they lose the Lord's supervision, 
direction and control. And having previously discarded 
the rules and influences which control the world 
in general, they are without any guidance or restraint in 
respect to their course of life. Hence they not only act 
contrary to the Divine standards, but violate the principles 
of justice and decency, in word and conduct, that assist 
and guide the world in general. It is for this reason 
that those who once go out of the light of Present Truth 
can think, and say, and do, more mean and contemptible 
things than can the worldly who still retain helps to order 
and decency by having in mind what their fellows in life 
would think of their course, their words and conduct. 

WALK AS CHILDREN OF THE LIGHT 

In conclusion, then, we urge that all who have been 
once enlightened, and made partakers of the holy Spirit, 
who have tasted of the good Word of God, and the powers 
of the age to come— we urge these to be zealous, to maintain 
the standing to which they have already attained. 
We urge that they be conformed to the character-likeness 
of God's dear Son; that they be perfected in love, that 
they put off all of these: anger, malice, hatred, envy, 
strife; for if any of these be retained, they will tend to 
blindness and "outer darkness." More than this, we urge 
that they put on all of these graces of the Lord's Spirit: 
meekness, gentleness, patience, longsuffering, brotherly 
kindness, love. These will strengthen and develop the 
character-likeness of the Redeemer which God has predestinated 
must be attained by every one who will be 
accepted as a member of the Bride of Christ. And then 
the Apostle suggests, If we do these things we shall never 
fail, but an entrance shall be ministered unto us abundantly 
into the everlasting Kingdom of our Lord and 
Savior Jesus Christ. 



R4446 : page 233 

"MIND THE SAME THINGS" 



"Now I beseech you, brethren, by the name of our Lord Jesus 
Christ, that ye all speak the same thing, and that there be no 
divisions among you; but that ye be perfectly joined together 
in the same mind and in the same judgment. For it 
hath been declared unto me of you, my brethren,... 
that there are contentions among you."— 1 Cor. 1:10,11. 

SO accustomed have we become to differences of 
opinion that many of God's children have come 
to feel that if there is perfect unity of thought, 
of mind, it must surely betoken a wrong condition, a 
subserviency. In the words quoted above the Apostle 
Paul shows that he is not in agreement with any such 
sentiments. He is criticising such a sentiment. Doubtless 
there were "Independents" in the Church then, as 
there are today, some who set themselves up as teachers, 
and boast of their independent thinking, boast that they 
do not agree with the "Dawns" and "Towers" on certain 
features of Truth, and by implication give the impression 
that they should be the more highly thought of 
on account of this independence. 

It is not for us to judge of their motives and intentions, 
but we believe they are deceived, and working more 
injury to the cause of the Lord than they probably are 
aware. The Apostle's conception of Divine Truth as 
above set forth was that all who are speaking and teaching 
should speak and teach the same things; and elsewhere 
he says that we should all mind the same things. 
He goes into the subject in considerable detail, and 
shows wherein the differences have been fostered, and 
wherein is the error. He points out that these conditions 
are the result of a party spirit, a sectarian spirit, 
one claiming to be of Paul, another of Apollos, another 
of Peter, etc., whereas they all should have recognized 
the error of such a course— all should have recognized 
that Christ is not divided, and that his Gospel is not discordant, 
but that it is one glorious, harmonious message 
of Divine revelation. 

Are we asked how it would be possible for "many men 
of many minds" to view Divine Truth in exactly the same 
light? And are we pointed to the various creeds of 
Christendom which contradict each other on so many 
points of doctrine? Our answer is, that these divisions of 
sectarianism are all evidences of the truth of the Apostle's 
words quoted at the head of this article. The sectarian 
spirit has torn the Word of God to pieces. The 
Spirit of Christ, which would have preserved the unity of 
the Body, the Church, in the bonds of peace, was neglected, 
and a spirit of "independence" was fostered until 
the result is— Babylon, confusion. 

The remedy is the one which we have sought to present 
in all of the Society's publications, namely, the ascertainment 
of the mind of Christ, the spirit of the truth, 
by the acceptance of the entire Word of God, and the 
bringing of every interpretation into alignment with it, 



and the rejection of everything found contrary to it. 

The questions of the hour, which may as well be faced 
one time as another, are these: Have we who believe 
in "Present Truth" greater mental acumen and greater 
ability in the interpretation of the Word than all of our 
forefathers for eighteen centuries? Or, are we living in 
the glorious epoch which is designated the harvest time? 
And is not the Lord to receive the credit for having 
brought to our attention the harmonies of the Divine 
Word? 

We believe that all who have a proper conception of 
"Present Truth" realize it to be indeed the Divine Plan 
of the Ages, and realize, too, that it is so far above and 
beyond the natural man's ability that it would be a 
miracle for him to construct such a theory— the most 
stupendous miracle of which we have any knowledge. 
If its discernment now is not of man, nor by man, but 
by the holy Spirit, then the holy Spirit should be looked 
upon as the Teacher and not the human instrumentality 
through which the presentation has been made to the 
Church. And if this be accepted as a reasonable and 
truthful solution of the matter, is it not equally true 
that the "independent thinker" and the "independent 
teacher" is more likely by his independence to lead into 
darkness than to lead into further light? 

It is surely in vain that we pray in the hymn, "Be 

R4446 : page 234 

thou my teacher, Lord," if in practice we give no heed to 
the Lord as the Teacher, but, on the contrary, encourage 
great independence of thought, and encourage the suggestion 
that anybody could strike a spiritual match which 
would give greater light and throw the Divine Plan of 
the Ages into the shadowy back-ground. 

Whoever believes this to be possible cannot believe 
that the Divine Plan is the Truth— the true plan of God. 
It cannot satisfy his longings as nothing else could do, 
else he would not be longing for or seeking for something 
further, an independent and special light. Rather, 
he would be so over-awed with the wonderful grace of 
God in the light of Divine Truth, which had percolated 
through the blindness of his previous superstitions and 
given him the light of the knowledge of the glory of 
God, that he would be bowed down in humility and gratitude. 
He would fear to lift his eyes even for a moment 
from the beatific vision lest a single feature should be 
missed. Nor could he rationally expect to find a grander 
one, if he has really seen and really tasted the riches of 
God's grace and truth, as now made manifest to the 
saints. 

The only explanation that at all fits or explains present 
conditions, and the present bright-shining of the Divine 
Word, is that given us by the Master himself. He assured 
us that at his second coming he would make himself 
known to those who would be at that time his true, 



loyal, faithful servants. He assured us that he would 

gird himself, become their servant, and cause them to 

sit down to meat, and bring forth to them from the 

treasuries of Divine Truth things new and old. (Luke 12:37.) 

This is the only explanation of the wonderful 

light on the Divine Plan now shining; the only explanation 

of the bounties that crowd the table of the Lord's 

faithful ones. Meat to eat indeed have they of which 

the world knoweth not. 

The Lord is proving us to see to what extent we recognize 
him as the giver of all good; to what extent our 
hearts are feeding upon the Truth; to what extent they 
are being nourished spiritually; and to what extent in 
others there is merely a feverish excitement and dissatisfaction, 
and looking for something new. We may 
be sure that to those who are in this dissatisfied condition 
Satan will present himself as a messenger of light, offering 
them other food and other light— "newer and better." 
We may be equally sure that God will be pleased 
to permit him to bring such delusions upon his people 
to prove them, to test them. 

Our Lord's parable of the wheat which fell on the 
highway and was devoured by the birds of the air, and 
on the stony ground where the earth was shallow and 
the sun of persecution wilted it, and on the thorny 
ground and was choked by the cares of this life, and on 
the good ground where it brought forth thirty, sixty and 
an hundred fold, has fulfilment in our day as well as in 
the past. Truth tests the character, and God desires that 
it should do so. We must see to it that whatever we 
might have been by nature, by God's grace our hearts 
shall be in a productive condition, and that if possible 

R4447 : page 234 

we shall be of those who bring forth a hundred fold. 

Only those who take heed to the Lord's Word and 
cultivate its spirit, and recognize the Master, and his 
providential leadings and care, and the feeding of the 
flock, will be ready to mind the same things, and be able 
to bring forth much fruit, and to gain the Kingdom. 

Since writing the foregoing we have received inquiries 
from several quarters on matters closely allied to this 
subject and give our responses herewith: 

(1) What shall the Lord's sheep do when those who 
have been leading them object to references to and quotations 
from Dawn-Studies in the church meetings, at 
which there is otherwise full liberty of expression? The 
specious claim is that this is "man worship, or book-worship," 
and that God's people should use God's Book 
only— the Bible. 

We reply that the answer which should be openly made 
is this: We are unable to see the difference between 
hearing a teacher expound orally and having his teachings 
in printed form read or quoted by another. If 
teaching by the printed page is wrong, then all teaching 



is wrong. If it is not unreasonable for us to hear with 
respect the words of one who claims ability to assist 
us in the right understanding of God's Word, it cannot 
be unreasonable for us to hear the words from these 
books which already have actually and truly taught us 
nearly all that we do understand of God's Word. If we 
ever conclude to have only the one human channel of 
instruction our decision will be to stick firmly to the 
one God has used and blessed to our enlightenment rather 
than to an oral teacher, who thus shows his opposition to 
the agency God has owned, used and blessed to us. To 
do otherwise would be not only unwise but dishonoring 
to the Giver of all good. 

(2) Our chosen class-leader or Elder is a clever 
brother, and yet we often think his expositions slightly 
in error— different from our own views drawn largely 
from our study in the light of the Towers and Dawn-Studies. 
When we call the Elder's attention to the matter, 
he generally replies that it is a good while since he 
read the Dawn-Studies and, that as for the Towers, he 
really is too busy to read them. What would our duty 
as a class be in this case? 

We reply that there are two duties to be considered: 

(a) The duty towards the leader or Elder would be to 
tell him in love and kindness that according to his own 
statement he is "overcharged with the cares of this 
life," and that it is your duty toward him to excuse 
him from the leading of the class that he may have 
proper time for personal study and development. 

(b) The duty toward the class would be to set as leader 
of its Berean Lessons a naturally less talented brother 
possessed of more time for study or more zeal for Truth. 
Elect him Elder and then all turn in and help him by 
studying well the questions for each lesson. We feel 
sure that the Lord will bless this courage and loyalty to 
the principles of his Word. 

Remember that we and our forefathers have had Bibles 
and attempted to have Bible studies, Bible classes, etc., for 
centuries, without gaining much wisdom or light as a result. 
Did the light which you now enjoy come to you by 
"independent Bible study"? We doubt it! 

What are the "Dawn-Studies" but the Bible arranged 
topically, with citations for every point and paragraph? 
Is it not probable that the great Adversary who delights 
to pose as an angel of light and an upholder of the 
Bible is really deceiving some of our dear friends— attempting 
to gradually draw them away from the great 
light which our Lord has now provided for us all, back 
to the methods in vogue before the true light shone upon 
our pathway? 



R4447 : page 234 

DELIVERANCE FROM THE ADVERSARY 



BROTHER C. T. RUSSELL:- 

Dear Sir.— Yielding to an impulse I am writing to you, 
baring the present thoughts and intents of my heart before 
him who knoweth them all and who— O wondrous 
grace— careth for me even after all these years that I 
have been in the hands of the Adversary who beat and 
pounded and plucked me bare while I cried, Oh, my God, 
why hast thou forsaken me? I trust you will bear with 
me while I recall the past and try to explain how I got 
so far out of harmony with the "Watch Tower Society" 
and the spirit of the truth. I had been a very close 
student of scriptures and a "come-outer" since 1875; your 
chronology in Vol. III., M.D., was just suited to my mind 
and I began to study the subject closely. I saw a chance 
to differ from you and sent my findings to a brother in 
the Truth who rather liked them and encouraged me to 
study and write some more. 

Now this was all lawful, and it helped me much because 
I had arrived nearly at the same conclusion as 
you, but the thought that I could successfully cope with 

R4447 : page 235 

Brother Russell in his findings on chronology had puffed me 
up considerably, and I felt that I might be able to find 
other flaws. At this time you called for such as were 
"in fullest harmony" with M.D. and W.T. teachings, 
who had some talent in the way of leading meetings, 
that they might be sent here and there under the name of 
Pilgrims and representatives of W.T. office at the society's 
expense. I had not the least talent in that direction, 
so I could not feel slighted at not being invited. 

At this point, and through hints dropped by others, I 
became fearful that Brother Russell was seeking to draw 
around us the lines of sectarianism and bind me within 
a society where "fullest harmony" with the teachings of 
M.D. was to be the test of the Lord's approval. 

I rebelled against this with what to me seemed righteous 
indignation, and right here the Adversary got me. 
I know it was here because I am not ignorant of his 
method of attack, as you will see further on. 

Some unclean demon appealing to me through my 
righteous hatred of sectism gave me the mental suggestion 
that Bro. R. was trying to place himself over us, 
and this demon kept suggesting these words— "I will 
not have this man reign over me." This was not a passing 
thought, it was a suggestion applied to my mind 
over and over again, and while I was not sure of this 
at that time I am positive now because of my experience 
with these evil spirits. 

I then began to lose interest in the Truth and tried to 
save myself by writing continuously on subjects differing 
from Bro. R., while I longed for something to inspire 
me and take the place of the "Watch Tower" but found 
nothing. 



This was the demon's opportunity, and he began to 
torment me at my work. If I put something down I 
could not find it when I wanted it. Everything went 
wrong; business was a failure, debts piled up, and I was 
now fighting mad. Let me pass over the rest of this 
sad experience; it would only give you pain if I should 
relate it here. I come now to the time I became personally 
acquainted with four unclean demons. I had 
heard that they were in darkness as to the Truth, but I 
found that they knew the Scriptures and Brother Russell 
better than I. I merely mention here a few things, such 
as discussing Scripture with them and English translation 
of Greek words. 

The subject turned to the "Seventh Trumpet" and "the 
strong delusion that should deceive even the very elect 
if it were possible." They represented themselves as the 
angels of the seventh trumpet sent forth with the Truth 
of God for the Elect and to save them from the strong 
delusion with which Spiritualists were to deceive the whole 
world by their wonderful feats. 

The intense inquisitiveness in my make-up that made 
a close student of me had now got me into communication 
with demons through reading Spiritualistic books 
and papers, together with that longing desire for the 
spiritual. Nevertheless I still held on to the Truth and 
was proof against all these vain sophistries that make 
for "outer darkness," and I prayed God in desperation 
to take me out of the depravity into which I had fallen. 
How I longed to be a Christian and back in the sunshine 
of God's love once more. I even apologized for God's 
favor on the ground that he might use me in the other 
age, exhibiting me as a miracle of his glorious grace for 
the encouragement of the depraved. 

It is now more than a year since I began to find my 
way back into the favor of God through continuously 
watching and praying. It has been a wonder to me how 
God could ever look upon me again with the least desire. 
The thought seems to answer this, that it was not on my 
account but on account of the great love wherewith 
our Heavenly Father loved his only begotten by whom 
and for whom all things were created. John speaks of 
those who manifest the Spirit of Christ in love for the 
brethren that in such God's love is made perfect. He 
loves them for what they are, and this love seems to be 
that kind referred to by the Apostle in these words— 
"Keep yourself in the love of God." 

I feel grateful to God for the encouragement he has 
given me, and his tender care over me has been wonderful. 
He has led me back over the same lines of Truth 
and has granted me, seemingly as a tonic, to see new 
beauties in the Truth I had learned so that they come to 
me with new relish as when I first received them. Just 
so you have found new beauty in the Truth on the 
Covenants. Without unlearning anything you have added 
greatly to the Truth as a whole, and I have entered 
into your joy. 



Dear Brother, I wish I could say something as a warning 
to others, not because you do not see the danger to 
those who seem to have the contentious spirit, but because 
I have had such a sad experience. I feel anxious 

R4448 : page 235 

to put the brethren on the alert that they might judge 
themselves and weed out any little root of bitterness 
in their heart so that they may escape the chastening 
of the Lord. 

If those brethren who are just a little fearful for the 
Lord's work in your hands could only realize how the 
hosts of darkness are pressing them and watching for an 
occasion to slip in a mental suggestion; appealing to 
their honor here, that they might find an entrance there! 
We read that "the angels of the Lord are encamped 
around them that fear him to deliver them." May it 
not be reasonable at least that the Lord has withdrawn 
his bodyguard at this crucial time that the soldiers of 
the cross might all the more place their reliance in "the 
sword of the spirit" and "the shield of faith"? 

Realizing that the time is short, there is every reason 
that we give heed to what we have already learned. The 
command at San Juan Hill— "Every man watch out for 
himself," is appropriate at present, and he who insists on 
his comrade keeping step with him is in greater danger. 

You have what is termed a "Vow." I do not know 
much about it, only I read the one in last "Tower" and will 
say that it expresses exactly my heart's desire and prayer 
to God. The paragraph on the opposite sex is very timely 
in view of the great power which Satan has taken to 
himself, so that the members of Christ may refrain from 
every appearance of evil lest the powers of darkness 
gain an advantage. 

Now I want to put myself on record here, and feel 
that my experience justifies the claim that I know whereof 
I speak. It is this. The closer one is living to the 
Lord, the more will he love Brother Russell and the Truth 
which he stands for, the more love will he have for the 
brethren, and, as a consequence, the more God will 
love him. 

If this "Vow" be intended to bring the Church of God 
into closer fellowship with each other, that they be of 
one mind and one spirit, then the present is the providential 
moment to use this "Vow" as it is intended. It is 
well to have the sheep disposition and to flock closely together 
in time of danger. 

I have written this with a full heart and eyes moistened, 
but not with the hopeless tears of Esau, because the 
Spirit of the Lord is with me and has caused me to hope 
when there was no hope, and with God's help I feel encouraged 
to take up the lines where I let them slip and 
press forward to the mark of the prize, and where it 
will be the very law of my nature to walk in the paths 
of righteousness and peace. 



Yours very sincerely, ALEX. ALLAN. 

R4448 : page 236 

DEAR BROTHER ALLAN:- 

Your letter made me glad. I rejoice with you that you 
are recovered from "the snare of the fowler." Surely it 
is true that "we wrestle not with flesh and blood merely, 
but with wicked spirits in high positions," possessed of 
great intelligence and wily. What your letter expresses 
we have often wished to say to the dear friends, but have 
hesitated lest, instead of doing them good as we desire, 
we might do them harm by giving them even a flimsy excuse 
for saying that we endeavored to throttle their liberties. 
Alas! how few realize what a dangerous thing 
liberty is— how carefully it must be used for our benefit 
and how easily it might be misused to our eternal danger. 
Because God created us free agents; because this is part 
of his likeness; and because, additionally, ambition must 
be a part of every progressive individual, therefore this 
free agency and ambition in conjunction bring us all 
under tests of character. And the greater our abilities, 
the more our talents and the wider our influence, the 
stronger the power of ambition may become. Then comes 
the test. Will this laudable ambition be subject to the 
Divine will— thoroughly consecrated to do the Lord's will 
even unto death? 

If our devotion to the Lord be absolute, fully in control 
of our thoughts and words and doings, our liberty 
and largest ambition will be rightly directed and eventuate 
in blessings to ourselves and to others. But if the 
Divine will be not first and absolutely in control of our 
wills the more ambition and the more liberty we have the 
greater will be our danger. Where the Lord is not reverenced, 
obeyed with all the heart, mind, soul and 
strength, some one else has an influence in our hearts, 
husband or wife, parents or children or, more than probably, 
self. We cannot be "overcomers" except as our 
hearts are absolutely loyal to the Lord, with self-will and 
every other will subjected to the Divine will. This is the 
lesson of life to those who would come off conquerors. 
How we rejoice with you, dear Brother, that, although 
you were nearly vanquished in this struggle, you have 
finally, by God's grace, recovered your balance. 

It is not to be wondered at that the more prominent 
brethren have the more severe trials along this line. It 
must not surprise us if, in this evil day into which we 
have entered, we should find a considerable number of 
those possessed of talents or influences stumbling. Of 
this condition of things the Apostle forewarns us, saying, 
Be not many of you teachers, knowing that he who is a 
teacher will experience the more severe trials. (James 3:1.) 
The deflection of some recognized as teachers will 
cause special trials to others not teachers and will prove 
to what extent they have a personal relationship to the 
Lord through an individual consecration to him and 



through his instructions by his Word and the prophecies 
—in the School of Christ. We fear that too many are in 
this attitude of leaning on others whose fall might bring 
them disaster. 

It is because we have long recognized this principle 
that, in all of our writings, we have presented the Lord's 
message as his message, and not as our own; giving the 
chapter and verse for every doctrine. If any are leaning 
on us or on anything but the Lord's Word for guidance, 
we believe that the fault is not traceable to our 
teachings. We have striven to bring all the members of 
the Body into direct personal contact with the Head. 
While not ignoring the value of books and sermons, we 
have, nevertheless, urged upon all the necessity of proving, 
to the extent of their ability, every item of Truth 
which they receive. Notwithstanding this we fear that 
many of our dear readers lean upon us and upon others. 
We fully know that we are in the evil day and that the 
armor which the Lord provided is to be put on individually 
by each one of his faithful soldiers of the cross. 
We will use our shield, breastplate, helmet and sword in 
the defence, as much as possible, of all of the Lord's 
people; but each must see to it that he puts on this armature 
for himself. The great King of the Universe has 
provided it. The great Captain of our salvation, Jesus, 
has invited us to put it on. We, as a corporal, merely 
call attention to the Captain's order. Whoever is negligent 
will surely rue it. 

The time for adjusting this armor is very short. The 
battle is on now. Many are falling at our side. What 
we do should be done quickly, energetically, systematically, 
thoroughly. It is important that we help others to 
the extent of our ability, but still more important according 
to the Divine will, that we should take heed to ourselves 
and make our own calling and election sure. It 
has been our observation that some who have come into 
the Truth quite recently are much more clear in it and 
have the armor better adjusted and are able to use the 
"sword of the spirit" better, than some who have been 
in the Truth for five, ten and even twenty years. Indeed 
some who have been long in the Truth seem less skillful 
today in the use of the armor than they were years ago. 

Why is this? And what is the remedy? The answer 
is a simple one, manifest to all. Divine providence has 
furnished to the people of God at this time an outline of 
the Divine Plan and a detail of Bible doctrines such as 
God's people have never before had in their possession. 
Without claiming any inspiration for the "Studies in the 
Scriptures" we surely may claim a Divine supervision in 
respect to the matter which they contain and the time of 
their presentation. Whoever admits that we are in the 
Harvest time at all— that we have been in it since 1875— 
must acknowledge this also. The Lord promised that at 
this time he would cause his people to sit down to a 
bountiful repast of spiritual food and that he would be 
their servant and bring forth to them "things new and 



old." (Luke 12:37.) All who recognize these things 
must recognize these "Studies in the Scriptures" as being 
identified with the fulfillment of that promise. If they 
are not, how has the promise been fulfilled? It will not 
do to say that the "Divine Plan of the Ages" and the 
general elucidation of Divine Truth through those volumes 
is merely one man's opinion. That would be giving 
too much honor to any man. No one who understands 
these things can possibly believe that any man 
could fabricate a theory which puts all other theories of 
this and every other day completely into the shadow, as 
a tallow dip in comparison to the most wonderful are 
lights of our day. 

Neither is there reason or sense in the attempt of 
some to claim that these "Scripture Studies" are merely 
a rehash of what has been believed for centuries. True, 
they present the doctrines of Election and Free Grace, 
Baptism, etc., etc., but not as they were nor as they 
are discordantly believed. These books discuss the 
Bible's presentations and set them in order as showing 
their relationship to each other, as one harmonious whole 
as never before presented. They are opposed by those 
who cannot refute them. We repeat, then, that "Studies 
in the Scriptures" are either of the Lord's providence or 
else they are a fraud, and at the same time one of the 
greatest miracles. 

The secret of the clearness and power of some who 
have come recently into the Truth can be traced to the 
fact that they have been diligently using these Divinely 
provided helps for Bible study. On the contrary many 
of those who today are less clear in the Truth than they 
were years ago owe their loss of spiritual vigor and 
clear perception of the Truth to the fact that they have 
neglected this Divine provision for their needs. They 
have followed the worldly thought— that, having digested 
what some other man has thought, believed and 
taught, they should break fresh ground for themselves, 

R4449 : page 236 

in hope of bringing forth still brighter jewels from the 
Divine Word. Some of these diggers have searched long 
and carefully, but have found nothing, brought forth 
nothing, that has specially sparkled as a gem of truth 
before the eyes of the Lord's people. Some of them have 
sought far and near for other fruits and viands for the 
table of the Lord's family, but have added little, if anything, 
to that which the great Provider has set before 
us of "things new and old." Some of their new dishes, 

R4449 : page 237 

new viands, set before the Church have proved to be 
unhealthful, indigestible, visionary, and calculated to give 
a fever, rather than real spiritual strength. Others failing 
of their ambitions in these directions have become 



destructive and have uttered what some of the friends 
have styled a "Midnight Howl," against the food that the 
Lord has prepared, against his service of his people, etc. 
They cannot approve his management of the Harvest 
work; and although admitting that the time is short now 
for a radical change they feel they must take it in hand 
for him or everything will come to naught. "He that sitteth 
in the heavens shall laugh: The Lord shall have them 
in derision."— Psa. 2:4. 

All these things are tests, dear Brother, and the sooner 
we realize this fact, the better for us. We have no fear 
that the great Shepherd now present with his sheep and 
gathering these who know his voice out of all the various 
pens of Christendom, will suffer the wolves to stampede 
his flock, or to devour them. Has he not said, "The 
Father who gave them me is greater than all and none 
can pluck them out of my Father's hand"? 

The lesson to us all is, "Humble yourselves under the 
mighty hand of God that he may exalt you in due time." 
Let us not be heady, high-minded and worldly-wise, but 
humble, teachable and full of faith in the Divine promises, 
which are so rapidly fulfilling and culminating. 

Very truly your servant in the Lord, 

C. T. RUSSELL. 



R4449 : page 237 

SOME INTERESTING LETTERS 

DEAR PASTOR RUSSELL AND CO-LABORERS :- 

It is a real pleasure to me that I am permitted to 
write to you as one interested in the Truth and the 
harvest work. I praise God that he has found me 
worthy enough to understand those glorious truths revealed 
through you to us. 

I began my reading after Thanksgiving Day and 
found that I was prepared to receive instruction as I 
went from book to book, and, consecrating myself, I 
have taken my place in the ranks to do whatever he 
requires. 

I find many who are glad to know about Restitution, 
the Resurrection and "The Plan" in general. 

I was very much surprised today when a friend told 
me that one of my acquaintances wondered if I had become 
a Christian Scientist, as my health seemed so 
much improved of late, and was glad she was informed 
that I am a follower of the humble Jesus, and 
that the wonderful peace that follows the knowledge of 
our God's real love for the world, silencing all my 
questions, is responsible for my improved physical condition. 

Some of my friends are chagrined that I do not now 
hustle for the church society. If they could only experience 
the happiness that husband and I find in the 
pure, simple Christian life they would understand. I 



pity them and they pity us. They think so much physical 
suffering has weakened my mind along religious 
lines. 

Now about the Vow. Of course I have taken it and 
am stronger for it. Every feature of it appeals to me 
as a strong help in this "evil day." 

I am sending $1.80, for which please send me the 
six volumes of DAWN-STUDIES, TABERNACLE SHADOWS 
OF THE BETTER SACRIFICES, THE BIBLE VS. THE EVOLUTION 
THEORY and some tracts. 

I am leaving the request for Pilgrims for an older 
member of our band to look after; but I must tell you 
that Brother Johnson's visit here did a vast amount of 
good. Am sure we can get a larger number next time. 
We under-laborers can tell the story, but you can tell 
it so much better and so much more thoroughly. 

Yours in the One Hope, 

MRS. A. M. VAN HORN,-Mich. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

I thank you for the spirit you are manifesting in 
this testing time; it is quite a strength to me, and no 
doubt to others who are noting your stand for Truth 
while manifesting the right spirit of Love. Our Brother 
Paul also had many trials, and we see in 2 Cor. 1:14, 
that as he was rejoicing, those who were noting his 
trials and how he walked in them, were themselves 
stimulated to do likewise. As he said in another place, 
"Follow me, even as I follow Christ." 

Many of the churches that I visit are in trials of one 
kind or another and I am rejoicing with them, for I 
know the Lord is dealing with them and that these trials 
are such as we all need to put on brotherly love and all 
the Christian graces. 

May the blessed Lord enable each of us to be 
rightly exercised thereby (Heb. 12:6-13), and endure the 
corrections in doctrine and in character, that our 
heavenly Father may still deal with us as with sons. 

Your Brother in his service, 

S. D. SENOR. 



DEAR BROTHER:- 

After due consideration and prayerful thought on 
the matter, I want to register my name as one having 
taken the Vow, as I do not see anything in it that I cannot 
heartily endorse; and I also want to add my thanks 
to what has already been said to you for all the light 
I have received through your works; and I also want 
you to know how much I do enjoy the TOWER, especially 
the little helps you give to us who have made this sacrifice. 

With prayers for your continued blessing in the 
work, I remain, 



Your sister in his dear name, 

MRS. F. W. MAIN, -Mich. 



TO THE BROOKLYN TABERNACLE:- 

While riding on the subway train one day recently, 
a young man handed me your paper, "THE PEOPLES PULPIT, 
and as I am a Christian and trying to live as God 
would have me, the little paper seemed to make me 
feel as though I could help others through it. Therefore, 
please find enclosed 20 cents for two subscriptions 
to be sent to me. 

I am yours in the Lord, 

LOUIS TINES,-N.Y. City. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

I again send you the little poem which I composed and 
sent to you about fourteen years ago, when I was located 
at Guttenberg, la. I little thought at that time that the 
ability to "receive" it would prove a sifting of those who 
had once been enlightened. 

My constant prayer for you is that you may fulfil those 
conditions which shall enable you to continue to give 
meat in due season to the household of faith. 

Your brother in Christ, ALVAH F. ROGERS. 

THE HIDDEN MYSTERY. 

Wondrous mystery, long concealed, 
Unto us has been revealed. 
Herald wide the gracious story, 
"Christ in you, the hope of glory!" 
Christ in you, the world's sore need, 
Christ in you, the promised Seed. 
Canst receive it? Then thou art 
Of the Christ, indeed, a part. 

R4449 : page 238 

July 5th, 1909. 
DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

My new route sheet has been received, and I am looking 
forward with much pleasure to resuming my pilgrimage 
after this brief period of rest. I never get tired thanking 
the Lord for the wonderful privilege that has been 
granted me the last eight years of spending all my time 
in such a direct form of service. And should it be his 
will nothing could give me greater joy than to continue 
to seek to glorify him in this way to the very end of my 
course. 

It has been a source of pain to me to note so many inclined 
to put such extreme and unscriptural interpretations 
upon some of your recent statements, especially on 



the subject of the Covenants. I have given the subject a 
most thorough investigation and am satisfied, perfectly 
satisfied, that you are right in applying the New Covenant 
to restitution times. 

The consideration of the Covenants from this standpoint 
has brought me one of the greatest blessings I have had 
since coming into the light of "present truth," while 
probably a score or more of passages which were rather 
vague have received an illumination which has meant 
much to me. Other passages which were always quite 
clear have taken on new depths of meaning; for instance, 
the typical value of the recorded history of Abraham 
has had depths of significance added to it that we once 
never dreamed of. 

It has assisted me to see why the Word of God so 
frequently speaks of God's promise to Abraham as a 
"Covenant." When God says death he means death, and 

R4450 : page 238 

yet it always seemed that when he said Covenant he did 
not mean a Covenant at all, but merely a promise. I 
had frequently wondered at this, but it is all clear now. 
I see it was a Covenant; but, as you have always expressed 
it, an Unconditional Covenant, since God attached 
no conditions to it for Abraham or for us to observe. 
But he determined what he would do under that Covenant, 
and then left it with Abraham as to what he 
would decide to do in view of such a promise on the 
part of God. It was one of the respects in which this 
Covenant differed from the Law Covenant, for that was 
a Covenant of bondage (Gal. 4:24), saying, You must 
do this, or you must not do that. But this Abrahamic 
Covenant was a Covenant of liberty, it being left to the 
liberty of each as to what he would do in view of God's 
oath-bound promise. But only those who are willing to 
sacrifice all are accepted of the Lord as joint-covenanters 
with him. This is why he says in Psalms 50:5, "Gather 
my saints together unto me; those that have made a 
Covenant with me by sacrifice." 

Likewise I can now understand how that Covenant was 
barren for over two thousand years. It was barren as 
respects producing anything in Abraham's life that would 
not have been produced anyway. When God made that 
Covenant with Abraham his loyalty to the Lord had been 
so decided that we have no reason to suppose that God's 
agreement prompted Abraham to do anything he would 
not have done even if this Covenant had not been made. 
But beginning with the Lord Jesus, a result followed 
the coming into covenant relationship which had never 
occurred before; a begetting to a new nature. At last 
the barren state of that Covenant was past, and, in the 
words of Isaiah and of Paul, we hear that Covenant 
personified and called upon to rejoice, "Sing! O barren, 
thou that didst not bear."— Isaiah 54:1. 

So to me it is as clear as day that we are not under 



a New Covenant, but under a Covenant as old as the days 
of Abraham, far older than the Law Covenant; but which 
has at last been redeemed from its barren condition. 

And when the Covenant that was typified in Sarah has 
finished its travailing, and has brought forth the Isaac 
class, Christ and the Church (Gal. 4:28), then the people 
of Israel, the Ishmael seed, will be regathered for their 
blessing. (Micah. 5:3. Note preceding and following 
verses also.) 

I fear that I am making my letter too lengthy, but my 
heart is filled with gratitude to the gracious Lord who 
not only sent his Son to be the propitiation for our sins, 
but who has additionally taken us into his confidence 
and revealed to us so much of the wonderful arrangements 
he has for the blessing and uplifting of our race. 

Trusting that the Heavenly Father may ever find you 
in that same faithful and humble attitude as of old, so 
that to the end of the harvest season he may use you in 
the edifying of his people, and assuring you that, in 
harmony with the sentiments of our Vow, I remember 
you specially at throne of grace every day. I remain, 

Yours by the Grace of God, 

BENJ. H. BARTON,-Pilgrim. 



DEAR BROTHER IN CHRIST:- 

I had thought to write you before you left on your trip 
abroad, but was prevented. I am taking this, my first 
opportunity, to write you and let you know that you had 
our prayers and sympathy while away. We feel thankful 
to our heavenly Father that he has permitted you to return. 
We all miss you when we know you are away from 
headquarters. We feel so thankful that we know and 
can see how the Lord has used you and is still doing so. 
The Truth is becoming clearer and more precious to me. 
My sincere desire is to keep very close to the Master. 
When we see so many that once loved the Truth walking 
no more with us it makes us want to be more careful 
and watchful. 

My husband and I have noticed since we have been 
here that so many that are confused on these subjects 
have not been reading as they should. I am so glad 
that there has been just one source from which we can 
get pure food. Otherwise how much confusion there 
would still be for the true child of God. We would still 
be as we were in Babylon. 

Our meetings with the Allegheny Church are very helpful. 
There is such a good spirit. We all miss you and 
all the office force so much. There are many friends 
here; some that have always been of the quiet kind 
seemingly, but loyal to the Lord and to you as the servant 
of God. We have been with you in your late trials 
and have suffered with you. We rejoice that you have 
been victorious so far. We feel that the Lord is on your 
side and our side. 



I am longing for the time when we shall be united to 
our Living Head and begin the blessing of all. I am 
trying to embrace every little opportunity, and it seems 
I can be a help to some that are in need. I want to be 
ready always to be of any service that I can. May the 
dear Lord continue to bless and help you is my prayer. 

With Christian love from my husband and self I am, 
as ever, 

Yours in the one hope, LEONORA T. FOLL. 

P.S.-We love the Vow more and more. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

Being one of the Lord's poor, and, noticing on date of 
wrapper of "Watch Tower" (June, '09) that my time has 
expired, I ask you to send me "The Watch Tower" for another 
year. I am now in my 64th year. About eight 
years ago I broke down from hard overwork as a traveling 
salesman and was discharged as an honest, faithful 
man, but too old ("we want younger men") and ever 
since they have refused to employ me, and I have not been 
able to secure remunerative employment since. 

On my way home on July 5, 1901, the tract, "Do You 
Know?" fell into my hands. Although I had been a 
member of the Baptist Church since November, 1877, 
and in good standing, too, I was not fully satisfied and 
had investigated about everything sectarian. Nothing 
satisfied me so much as the light revealed in this tract. 
It is as full of truth as an egg is full of meat, and the 
deeper I have investigated Present Truth, the better I 
love it, and while I am poor in this world's goods, health, 
etc., I am doing what I can for the Lord's cause, both within 
and without. Have distributed over 30,000 tracts during 
the last eighteen months. It was a Tract that led 
me into The Truth. 

Your brother in the Lord Jesus, 

GEORGE W. PLEASANTS,-Mo. 

R4450 : page 239 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

I am becoming convinced that some whom we have 
counted "of us" (who seem to be drawing back unto 
perdition) have never been begotten of the Spirit at all, 
but are simply justified. Although claiming consecration 
they seem never to have completely consecrated, but to 
have harbored a "hope" that somehow God would not 
accept their offer and restitution might still be theirs. 
These say they do not believe any one can really know 
he is begotten of the Spirit. To me this explains an 
otherwise inexplicable situation. Having never been "begotten 
again" they cannot see some of the mysteries of 
the Kingdom. This relieves me greatly— for if they had 
seen and fallen away into blindness, their condition would 
seem hopeless. I am happier than I was, for I was 



secretly grieving— contrary to commandment. 

Every word of opposition I have read or heard in regard 
to "Tabernacle Shadows" has served to make your 
presentations clearer to me. For years I have read this 
precious, priceless little book just before Passover time. 
This year I read it twice. I am now more convinced than 
ever before that you, as our shepherd, by the Lord's 
grace, are leading us in green (nourishing) pastures, beside 
still waters— where the peace of God rules in our 
hearts— predominant over the tribulation in the world 
that confronts us. For sixteen years I have read and rejoiced 
in the marvelous truths brought out in "Tabernacle 
Shadows"— and now my soul magnifies the Lord as my 
faith rests on so sure and steadfast a foundation— God's 
holy Word. 

Again (although it seems needless) let me express my 
confidence and trust in you and assure you of my abiding 
love and appreciation along with my continual prayers 
for you and the great work you represent. I thank our 
Father for the clear exposition of the Covenants which he 
has enabled you to make. 

To me the Vow also is precious, an honorable emblem 
of our holy, heavenly fraternity. 

Pray for me, dear Brother. We are not without trials, 
but in these we rejoice, if by their means we may attain 
the desired goal— the coveted immortal crown. 

Yours in the holiest and happiest of bonds, the love 
and service of the King of Kings. H . 

page 239 



BROOKLYN BETHEL HYMNS FOR SEPTEMBER 



After the singing of the hymn the Bethel Family listens 
to the reading of "My Vow unto the Lord," then joins in 
prayer. At the breakfast table the MANNA text for the 
date is read and questions and comments considered. 
Finally, just before leaving the table, the MANNA comment 
is read. Desiring that all share the blessings, we 
commend the plan to others. The hymns for Sept. are 
indicated below to permit all who so desire to join with us: 
(1) 280; (2) 147; (3) 130; (4) 224; (5) 72; (6) 240; (7) 312; 
(8) Vow; (9) 25; (10) 152; (11) 114; (12) 131; (13) 324; 
(14) 12; (15) 255; (16) 29; (17) 95; (18) 328; (19) 167; 
(20) 208; (21) 300; (22) 333; (23) 307; (24) 235; (25) 231; 
(26) 79; (27) 61; (28) 197; (29) 136; (30) 199; (31)- 



page 239 

BEREAN STUDIES ON THE ATONEMENT 



THE TEXT-BOOK USED FOR THIS COURSE 
IS SCRIPTURE STUDIES, SERIES V (E)* 

Questions on Scripture Study V.— Man 
for whom Atonement was made 

SEPTEMBER 5 

(1) What two general views are there in response to 
the question, "What is man that God is mindful of him?" 
And what is the proper basis of our information on this 
subject? And, Why is that information provided? P. 301. 

(2) Explain these two popular theories— the "Orthodox" 
and the "Scientific." P. 302-304. 

(3) What is the importance of an understanding of 
what man is, as related to the subject of the Atonement 
for man's sins? P. 302, top. 

(4) Why should we ignore the two general views and 
accept the Bible testimony respecting the nature of man? 
P. 304, par. 3. 

(5) Cite some texts frequently misunderstood and misapplied 
on this subject and show their true meaning. 

P. 305-307. 

SEPTEMBER 12 

(6) Is man, as scientists claim, an animal? And what 
is the meaning of the word animal? P. 307, par. 2. 

(7) What is the relationship or comparison as between 
man and the lower animals— beasts, birds, fishes, etc.? 
And did man receive a special spark of Divinity at first 
or at conception or at any time? P. 307, par. 3,4. 

(8) What theory is built upon the assumption that a 
Divine spark comes to each human being? 

(9) How do the Scriptures recognize man— of how 
many parts or elements? 

(10) Is the body the soul? Is the spirit the soul? 

Explain what is meant by the spirit of life. Show distinctions 
between the human spirit of life and the spirit 
of life in the brute. P. 308, 309. 

(11) Is each human being separately and specially 
created by the Almighty? Is God, therefore, responsible 
for the birth of idiots and for the general unbalance and 
imperfection of the human family, or what is the explanation? 
P. 309. 

(12) Did God implant a Divine spark which the human 
imparts to his offspring, or what is the secret of man's 
superiority over the beast? P. 310. 

SEPTEMBER 19 

(13) Give a little dissertation on the spirit of man— 
what the word implies. P. 310, also 172. 

(14) Compare and contrast the spirit of man with the 
Spirit of God. P. 311. 



(15) The spirit-begotten, the Church of the First-born, 
are during this Gospel Age spoken of as in the 

Spirit, spiritual, possessed of a new mind or a new spirit, 
etc. Explain the meaning of these words and show the 
difference between these and the remainder of mankind, 
the natural man, in this respect. P. 311. 

(16) Give illustrations of the use of the word spirit 
in the New Testament and classify them and explain 
them. P. 312, 313. 

SEPTEMBER 26 

(17) What can we say of the word spirit in respect to 
mankind in the Old Testament? P. 314. 

(18) Cite the Scriptures of the Old Testament referring 
to the spirit of life or animation and explain these. 

P. 314-317. 

(19) Cite the Scriptures of the Old Testament in 
which "ruach"— spirit— is used to signify mind or will. 
P. 318, 319. 

(20) Explain the Scriptural use of the Hebrew word 
Neshamah, the breath of life. Cite the Scriptures and 
analyze them. P. 319, 320. 



*Five years ago DAWN-STUDIES, VOL. V., was reset, and 
unfortunately the type was not exactly same size as before; and 
hence page for page they differ. The references given in these 
Berean Studies apply to the present edition, a copy of which 
postpaid will cost you but 30c. But keep your old edition, for 
unfortunately the new Bible Helps refer to its pages. 



page 240 

PUBLIC MINISTRIES OF THE TRUTH 

UNDER THE AUSPICES OF PEOPLES PULPIT 
ASSOCIATION OF BROOKLYN, N.Y. 



ONE-DAY LOCAL CONVENTIONS ADDRESSED BY THE 
EDITOR OF THIS JOURNAL AS FOLLOWS: 

BROOKLYN, N.Y., AUGUST 8 

Morning Rally and Testimony Meeting at 10:30 o'clock. 

Discourse by Brother Russell at 3:00 p.m. Evening meeting 
for the interested at 7:30 o'clock; this will be a Question 
Meeting. Visiting friends cordially invited. 

All meetings will be held in the Brooklyn Tabernacle, Nos. 
13-17 Hicks street. Convenient to all cars and ferries— close 
to the old bridge terminus. 



Baptismal services will be arranged for if requested on 
first Sunday of any quarter. 

SANDUSKY, OHIO, AUGUST 15 

Both Sessions in the Opera House, Cor. Water and Jackson 
Sts., one square west of the Columbus St. dock, where 
most of the excursion trains come in. 

Morning Rally at 10:00 o'clock for Praise, Prayer and 
Testimonies. Discourse for the interested at 1 1:00 o'clock. 
Meeting for the Public at 2:30 p.m. Subject, "Where are 
the Dead?" 

As there is no regular class at Sandusky the co-operation 
of surrounding classes would be very much appreciated. 
Address Mr. S. Kuesthardt, Port Clinton, Ohio. 

SYRACUSE, N.Y., AUGUST 22 

WATERTOWN, N.Y., AUGUST 29 



page 242 

STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES 
"MILLENNIAL DAWN" 

THESE STUDIES ARE RECOMMENDED TO STUDENTS AS VERITABLE "BIBLE KEYS. 

PRICES ARE NET AND BARELY COVER COST OF PRODUCTION, 

WHEN DELIVERED BY COLPORTEURS THE COST AND PRICE ARE INCREASED. 

SERIES I., The Plan of the Ages, gives an outline of the divine plan 
revealed in the Bible, relating to man's redemption and restitution: 
386 pages, in embossed cloth, 25c. (Is. l/2d.) India paper edition, 75c. 
(3s. l-l/2d.). 

This volume has been published as a special issue of our journal— 
at the extremely low price of 5c. a copy, in any quantity, postage included. 
(To foreign countries, 9c.) This enables people of slender 
purse to herald far and wide the good tidings in a most helpful form. 

SERIES II., The Time is at Hand, treats of the manner and time of 
the Lord's second coming, considering the Bible Testimony on this 
subject: 370 pages, in embossed cloth, 25c. (Is. l/2d.) India paper 
edition, 75c. (3s. l-l/2d.) 

SERIES III., Thy Kingdom Come, considers prophecies which mark 
events connected with the "Time of the End," the glorification of the 
Church and the establishment of the Millennial Kingdom; it also contains 
a chapter of the Great Pyramid, showing its corroboration of the 
dates and other teachings of the Bible: 384 pages, in embossed cloth, 
25c. (Is. l/2d.) India paper edition, 75c. (3s. l-l/2d.) 

SERIES IV., The Day of Vengeance, shows that the dissolution of the 
present order of things is in progress, and that all the panaceas offered 
are valueless to avert the predicted end. It marks in these events the 
fulfilment of prophecy, noting specially our Lord's great prophecy of 
Matt. 24 and Zech. 14:1-9: 660 pages, in embossed cloth, 30c. (Is. 3d.). 
India paper edition, 85c. (3s. 6-l/2d.) 

SERIES V., The At-one-ment Between God and Man, treats an all-important 



subject— the hub, the center around which all the features 
of divine grace revolve. Its topic deserves the most careful and 
prayerful consideration on the part of all true Christians: 507 pages, 
in embossed cloth, 30c. (Is. 3d.) India paper edition, 85c. (3s. 6-l/2d.) 

SERIES VI., The New Creation, deals with the Creative Week 
(Genesis 1 and 2), and with the Church, God's "New Creation." It examines 
the personnel, organization, rites, ceremonies, obligations and 
hopes appertaining to those called and accepted as members of the 
Body under the Head: 740 pages, in embossed cloth, 30c. (Is. 3d.) 
India paper edition, 85c. (3s. 6-l/2d.) 

The above prices include postage. 

IN FULL LEATHER BINDING, gilt edges, the set (6 vols.) $3.00, 
(12s. 6d.), plus postage, 60c. (Is.). 

Is also published in foreign languages as follows: German, six vols., 
in Swedish Vols. 1, 2, 3, 5 and 6; in Dano-Norwegian, three vols.; 
in Greek, three vols.; in French, two vols.; Hollandish, Spanish, 
and Italian, one vol. each; bound in cloth, uniform with English edition, 
prices the same; in Polish, condensed edition, one vol., 10 cents. 



page 241 



SEMI-MONTHLY 
VOL. XXX AUGUST 15 NO. 16 
A.D. 1909-A.M. 6037 



CONTENTS 

The Seed of Abraham and Its Work 243 

The Scroll in the Divine Hand 243 

The Promised Seed 244 

Messiah the Redeemer 244 

The Hidden Mystery 245 

The Blood of the New Covenant 246 

The Necessity for the New Covenant 247 

Our Western Convention Tour 248 

Our Greeting (Poem) 251 

"Take Heed to Yourselves and the Flock" 25 1 

"Preaching the Kingdom of God" 252 

Grievous Wolves and Perverse Talkers 253 

As an Example to the Flock 254 

"With Jesus and Learned of Him" 254 

General Convention 255 

page 242 

PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY 
CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
"BROOKLYN TABERNACLE," 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, N.Y., U.S.A. 

Foreign Agencies:— British Branch: 24 Eversholt St., London, 



N.W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, Barmen. Australasian 
Branch: Equitable Building, Collins St., Melbourne. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:— All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 
and in touch with the Studies, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, DANISH AND ITALIAN EDITIONS. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N.Y., POSTOFFICE 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA 



R4450 : page 242 

HUNGARIAN (MAGYAR) VOLUNTEER MATTER 

We now have Hungarian literature (PEOPLES PULPIT) for 
free distribution. There are 16 pages of matter, translated 
from recent English tracts. It will be remembered that there 
are thousands reading Magyar in all the principal cities of the 
Eastern and Central States. Order as many as you can use. 

SUBSCRIBERS FOR PEOPLES PULPIT 

A convenient way for the friends desiring to subscribe for 
Peoples Pulpit would be by classes. Moneys intended to be 
sent us as Tract Fund donations might be so used if agreeable 
to you. One member of the class could act as its agent 
and order the papers for the class, but all to be sent to one 
address. His letter should be addressed to PEOPLES PULPIT 
and should enclose subscription money and be a business 
letter such as could be understood by the Postoffice Examiner. 

Subscriptions in Canada and Foreign countries are not 
solicited, as the rates would be double on account of postage. 

Prices will be as follows:— Single copies, per year, 12 cents; 
club rate, to one address, 3 copies, 25 cents; 12 copies, $1.00; 
25 copies, $1.50; 50 copies, $2.50; 100 copies, $4.00; 300 copies, 
$10. 



NEW SUPPLY OF WATCH TOWER BIBLES 

Nos. 1918, 1928 and 1948 

For description and prices see October 1, 1908 TOWER. 



R445 1 : page 243 

THE SEED OF ABRAHAM AND ITS WORK 

DIVINE foreknowledge is one of the great lessons 

which God will impress. God would have us 

know that every feature of his plan was premeditated, 

forearranged from before the foundation of 

the world. He would have us recognize the fact that he 

is working all things according to the counsel of his own 

will, according to fixed rules, and principles which are 

unchangeable. This lesson is one of the principal objects 

served by a Divine revelation; a secondary object is the 

blessing of a certain class in sympathetic accord with 

God by giving them in advance such information respecting 

Divine purposes as would enable them to rejoice 

therein and to cooperate therewith. 

THE SCROLL IN THE DIVINE HAND 

A beautiful word-picture of this Divine foreknowledge 
and prearrangement is given us in the fifth chapter of Revelation. 
There Jehovah, the Emperor of the Universe, 
is pictured upon the throne, and in his hand a 
written scroll, sealed with seven seals. That sealed 
scroll represents the Divine plan which God purposed in 
himself from before the foundation of the world, but 
which he had revealed to no one, no, not to the angels, 
neither to the Son. (Matt. 24:36.) In a word, all that 
has occurred since creation— the permission of sin, the 
fall, the Covenant with Abraham, the Law Covenant with 
Israel, the coming of Jesus, the Pentecostal blessing, the 
gathering of members of the Church— all these things 
were foreknown to the Father and provided for. Additionally, 
that scroll contains a record of all that is 
happening now, and all that will occur throughout the 
Millennial Age, down to its very close— down to the time 
when every creature in heaven and in earth and under 
the earth shall ascribe praise, honor, glory and dominion 
to him that sitteth upon the throne and to the Lamb 
forever.— Rev. 5:13. 

In the picture John notes a proclamation made 
throughout heaven and earth, inquiring for anyone 
worthy of the great honor of having this scroll of the 
Divine purpose committed to his care— to be opened, to 
be executed in harmony with the Divine purpose. He 
looked to see who the worthy one might be, but none 
was found worthy. Then he wept. It seemed to John 



too bad that God should have some great, wonderful 
purposes which might come to naught because no one 
was worthy to be the Divine executor in respect to the 
plan. But his tears were checked by the angel, who 
said, "Weep not: Behold the Lion of the tribe of Judah, 
the Root of David, hath prevailed to open the book, and 
to loose the seven seals thereof." And John said, "And 
I beheld, and, lo, in the midst of the throne. ..stood a 
Lamb as it had been slain." And to the Lamb was 
given the scroll. Then all the angels of God worshiped 
the Lamb, saying, Thou art worthy to receive glory, 
and honor, and dominion, and might, and power, etc. 

Applying the picture, we see the signification. Until 
our Lord was slain, until he had given his life as man's 
redemption price, there was no being in all the universe 
worthy to be the executor of the Divine purposes. By 
our Lord's loving obedience to the Father's will— even 
unto death, even the death of the cross— he proved himself 
loyal to the last degree. Him the Father raised 
from the dead, and when he had ascended up on high 
the proclamation went forth, Let all the angels of God 
worship him. He is the Lamb of God who was slain, 
and by his death redeemed a condemned world of mankind, 
and merited the Father's confidence that to him 
might be entrusted every feature of the Divine program. 
"He is worthy." From that time on, every feature of 
the program would be under his supervision and he 
would open the seals and see to the execution of every 
feature of God's gracious purposes. He had promised 
his Church that whatsoever things the Father would 
reveal to him, he, in turn, through the holy Spirit and 
by his providences, would reveal to his faithful ones, 
to those walking in his footsteps of full consecration. 

THE GOSPEL BEFOREHAND 

St. Paul speaks of the Gospel's having been preached 
beforehand to Abraham, saying, "In thy Seed shall all 
the families of the earth be blessed." Here was a vague 
statement of the Divine purpose, relating to the blessing 
itself as an acorn would be related to an oak tree. 
Similarly, seed-thoughts respecting coming blessings had 
previously been given, though with much less definiteness. 
Directly after the fall God had declared that the 
Seed of the woman should yet bruise the Serpent's head. 
In other words, he foretold that evil should not always 
triumph. Again, through the Prophet Enoch a seed-thought 
had been given in his prophecy, "Behold, the 
Lord cometh with his holy myriads, to execute judgment." 
But to Abraham the message was so much 
more explicit as to make it worthy to be termed a part 
of the Gospel, a part of the good tidings now more 
fully made known unto us who are in Christ Jesus. 

Abraham no doubt expected that Isaac, the son of 
promise, would be "the Seed," or the offspring, through 
whom the blessings would come; but when Isaac was 



grown and nothing wonderful was accomplished through 
him, God confirmed to him, and subsequently to Jacob, 
his son, the same Abrahamic promise, assuring them 
that "the Seed" was still future, and implied that the 
promise meant a nation instead of an individual— a 
nation of Abraham's Seed, Abraham's children. And 
this feature of the Divine arrangement was made manifest 
at Jacob's death, when the blessing was passed on 
from him, not to only one of his children, but to all of 

R445 1 : page 244 

them collectively. There he pronounced them a nation 
of twelve tribes, and indicated that to them as a whole 
descended this Abrahamic promise— that they, as the 
Seed of Abraham, inherited the promise, "In thy Seed 
shall all the families of the earth be blessed." 

This promise held that nation together for all the 
centuries down to Christ— yea, it still holds them together 
as a peculiar people, separate from all the other 
nations of the world. St. Paul and the other Apostles 
refer to this repeatedly. St. Paul says, Our twelve tribes 
instantly (incessantly) serving God, hope to come to 
the fulfilment of this Abrahamic promise— the blessing 
of all the families of the earth through them.— Acts 26:7. 

THE LAW COVENANT WAS ADDED 

As St. Paul points out, the Law Covenant was added 
to the Abrahamic Covenant so far as the nation of 
Israel was concerned— to continue until the promised 
Seed should come. He is particular to add that the 
Law Covenant itself did not disannul or make invalid 
the original Covenant, which was of Grace and not of 
Law. (Gal. 3:17.) He was particular also that we 
should see that the Law Covenant "made nothing perfect" 
—it accomplished no real reformation or restitution. 
It did, however, set forth in types and allegories 
some wonderful lessons illustrative of great Divine 
principles of truth and righteousness— lessons which 
were beneficial to the Jewish nation, natural Israel, and 
also to the Gospel Church, which constitutes spiritual 
Israel. 

During the period from the death of Jacob to Christ, 
while the Law made nothing perfect, a few of that 
nation, exercising faith above and beyond the Law Covenant, 
were blessed by the underlying Abrahamic Covenant. 
These the Apostle enumerates in Hebrews 11. 
They had this testimony, that they died in faith, and 
that thus "they pleased God," although they did not 
by obedience to the Law Covenant secure the blessing 
which it proposed. Those faithful ones will get through 
Christ what the Law Covenant could not give them, for, 
because of inherited weaknesses, they were unable to 
fulfil the requirements of the Law Covenant. 



THE PROMISED SEED 

Let us keep in mind that the Law Covenant was added 
to the Abrahamic Covenant because of transgression— 
to show to the Israelites and to all the impossibility of 
an imperfect man's keeping the Divine Law, and also 
to manifest in due time our Lord Jesus, who, born 
under the Law Covenant, kept its provisions faithfully. 
By so doing, says the Apostle, Christ "magnified the 
Law Covenant and made it honorable." Previously it 
might have been claimed that the Divine Law was too 
rigorous and that nobody could possibly keep it; that 
it would be impossible for a man to love God with all 
his heart, all his mind, all his being, all his strength, 
and his neighbor as himself. But when Jesus did this, 
and did more in sacrificing himself, the just for the unjust, 
it demonstrated the fact that God had not given 
an impossible Law; it demonstrated that the fault lay 
with mankind; that they had lost the original perfection 
with which the Creator had endowed them. 

We read that our Lord was born under the Law 
Covenant "that he might redeem those who were under 
the Law" Covenant. So far as other peoples were concerned, 
he might have been of any other nation and 
redeemed Adam and the remainder of the world, but 
in order to preserve equitably to Israel the special blessing 
of God's Covenant with Abraham it was necessary 
that Christ should be of that nation, "born under the 
Law, that he might redeem those who were under the 
Law." That nation had been separated from the other 
nations of the world for the very purpose of giving the 
illustrations already referred to, and God would see to 
it that they should not be disadvantaged by reason of 
his having used them thus. The blessed opportunities 
offered them under the Law Covenant through the 
typical sacrifices, etc., lifted them above the other nations 
and gave them, as it were, a second trial for 
eternal life. In common with the remainder of mankind 
as children of Adam they had one trial and one 

R4452 : page 244 

condemnation through him; and then, under the Law 
Covenant arrangement and its mediator, Moses, another 
trial for eternal life was granted to that nation; but 
it was lost because none of them did keep or could 
fulfil the requirements of that Law Covenant. The day 
was saved for that nation as respects that Law Covenant, 
by which they were bound, by the fact that Christ became 
a Jew and by obedience to the Law Covenant 
gained all of the rights which it held out. 

The rights gained were earthly rights— human perfection, 
an Eden home, fellowship with God and the 
dominion of earth; as recited by the Prophet, "Dominion 
over the beasts of the field, the fishes of the sea, and 
the fowls of the air." Had Christ kept these rights, 



which were properly his through obedience to the Law, 
he could indeed have brought a great blessing to the 
Jews, instructing them along the lines of health and 
morals; and through Israel these blessings and instructions 
might have been imparted to all other nations. 
But as the race was under Divine sentence of death, it 
would not have been possible for Jesus to give mankind 
perfection of mind or body. The blessings of the 
Seed of Abraham in that event would have been very 
limited indeed, and then only to such as would exercise 
faith and obedience similar to the faith and obedience 
which Abraham exercised. 

MESSIAH THE REDEEMER 

Instead of keeping the earthly rights which his special 
birth and obedience to the Law made possible to him, 
Jesus, in harmony with the Father's program, sacrificed 
these earthly rights at once— as soon as he reached 
manhood's estate, 30 years. He gave up all earthly 
rights and interests and privileges. His consecration 
was complete; he symbolized it by a water immersion 
at Jordan. The Father accepted it, and forthwith gave 
him the begetting of the holy Spirit to a new nature. 
For the three and one half years of his earthly ministry 
our Lord persistently sacrificed his earthly life and every 
earthly interest, finishing the sacrifice at Calvary when 
he cried, "It is finished." On the third day thereafter 
the Father raised him from the dead to a newness of 
life— again on the spirit plane of being. This was the 
reward for his obedience to the Father's will in the 
sacrificing of his earthly rights and privileges as the 
perfect man. 

So, then, as the glorified one in his resurrection, 
Messiah was a spirit being, "partaker of the Divine 
nature," and had at his command all those earthly rights 
and privileges which he had sacrificed, which he laid 
down in death in obedience to the Father's will. He had 
these now as a possession, as an asset which he might 
dispense, which he might give to others. 

Let us not lose the thread of the thought: The Law 
Covenant promised earthly life and earthly blessings and 
earthly dominion— those which Adam had lost. Whoever 
would keep the Law should have these. Christ 
Jesus, as the keeper of the Law, had the right to these 
and laid them down. And now, being exalted, it is these 
earthly blessings and earthly rights which he has to 
dispense— to the Jew, or to all mankind, or to such an 
elect or select number of mankind as he may please, and 
as will be in accord with the Father's program outlined 
in the scroll sealed with seven seals. 

When the Israelites found that Moses could not give 
them eternal life, and that even under David and Solomon 
they did not reach the pinnacle of power and influence 
in the world to bless mankind, they might well 
have been discouraged. Hence God, through the prophets, 



sent them further enlightenment to the effect that 

they could never accomplish the Divine purpose of blessing 

the world except as he would send them a Messiah, 

an Anointed One, a King and Priest after the order of 

Melchizedek. When Messiah should come as the great 

Priest, and the great King, he would be able to do for 

R4452 : page 245 

them under a New [Law] Covenant what Moses and 
Aaron had not been able to do for them under the old 
Law Covenant. 

It was in connection with this promise of Messiah that 
God told his covenanted people that he would replace 
the Law Covenant under Moses by a new and better 
Law Covenant under Messiah, the antitype of Moses. He 
said: "It shall come to pass, saith the Lord, after those 
days, that I will make a New Covenant with the house 
of Israel and with the house of Judah; not according to 
the [Law] Covenant which I made with them when I 
took them by the hand to lead them out of Egypt, but 
I will make a New Covenant with them, and their sins 
and their iniquities will I remember no more, and I will 
take the stony heart out of their flesh, and I will give 
them a heart of flesh, and I will write my Law in their 
inward parts."— Jer. 31:31. 

Israel was looking for this glorious Messiah greater 
than Moses, who would introduce to them and put them 
under a better, a New (Law) Covenant, and under more 
favorable conditions by which they would more fully accomplish 
the Divine purposes in their own hearts, and 
be prepared, qualified, to introduce those blessings to all 
the families of the earth, as they had been expecting to 
do from the beginning. 

THE HIDDEN MYSTERY 

We can see a reason why the Lord kept secret from 
the Jews in general his identity; for, as the Apostle 
Peter says, "had they known they would not have crucified 
the Lord of glory." They did it in ignorance. 
(Acts 3:17.) We can see it was necessary that Christ 
should die; that he should lay down his earthly rights 
and earthly life and receive of the Father the higher 
life, and a spiritual realm, in order that he might have 
the earthly blessings to give, to dispense to Israel and 
to the world. We can see that otherwise no blessings 
of a permanent and eternal character would have been 
possible; hence, as our Lord explained to the disciples 
after his resurrection, "It was necessary that Christ 
should suffer and (then) enter into his glory." 

Now the question arises, What disposition will the 
risen and glorified Jesus make of these earthly rights 
which in his death he had secured by his sacrifice of 
them? The most reasonable, the most natural thought 
to us would be: Surely having consecrated the earthly 



rights he will confer these upon Natural Israel: He will 
at once become King and Priest to that nation, and in 
harmony with their hopes cherished for more than sixteen 
centuries he will exalt Israel as a nation. He will 
open their eyes. As the prophets have declared, "They 
shall see out of obscurity"; and "They also that pierced 
him shall mourn," and he will "pour upon them the 
spirit of prayer and supplication."— Zech. 12:10. 

But Jesus did nothing of the kind. Instead of so 
doing, he cast off the nation of Israel, saying, "Your 
house is left unto you desolate." He did not establish 
for them the New Covenant; he did not bless them at all. 
They have been the most outcast nation of the world for 
the nearly nineteen centuries since they crucified him. 
No wonder the Apostle asks, Has God cast away his 
people whom he foreknew?— the people to whom he made 
the promises and covenants?— the people whom he encouraged 
in every way to believe that they were his 
special people and would be specially used by him in 
carrying the blessings of the Divine Law and instruction 
to all nations? Has God set aside all his promises? 

We shall see presently that God has not in any degree 
abandoned his original program as respects the nation of 
Israel— "the seed of Abraham" according to the flesh and 
according to the Law Covenant. Here comes in "a 
Mystery," as St. Paul explains. This Mystery he declares 
was hidden from previous ages and dispensations, and is 
now made manifest only to the saints, to the holy ones 
taught of God. It is still a Mystery to Israel after the 
flesh. It is still a Mystery to the world of mankind in 
general; for the world knoweth us not, even as it knew 
not the Master. The world does not perceive that God is 
selecting a "Little Flock" to be with Christ, members of 
his mystical Body— members of the spiritual Seed of 
Abraham. 

THE MYSTERY SHALL BE FINISHED 

In his last symbolic message to the Church, the Lion 
of Judah, who received the scroll of the Divine purpose, 
informs the saints, to whom it is "given to know the Mystery 
of the Kingdom of Heaven," that the Mystery shall 
be finished; but not until the days of the voice or sounding 
of the seventh trumpet— in the end or close of this 
Gospel Age and the dawn of the Millennial Age. Whoever 
is interested may profitably search the Word respecting 
this Mystery class, its calling, its selection, its 
testing, its completion, its glorification; but only those 
who are begotten of the holy Spirit will be able to understand 
in the sense of fully appreciating these "deep things 
of God" which "God has revealed unto us (the Mystery 
class) by his Spirit, for the Spirit searcheth all things, 
yea the deep things of God."— 1 Cor. 2:10. 

This Mystery class is composed of such as have the 
faith of Abraham and the obedience of Abraham— beginning 
with our Lord and continuing from Pentecost down 



to the close of this Gospel Age. It is upon these that 
Christ's blessing of forgiveness, reconciliation, and earthly 
favors lost by Adam and redeemed by himself were 
conferred. 

Call to mind that he has something to give away- 
earthly rights and privileges which were his by virtue of 
his keeping the Law Covenant. Those were not spiritual 
rights and privileges which he secured through keeping 
the Law, but earthly ones only. He got his spiritual 
and higher privileges and honors as a reward for the 
sacrifice of himself. What he has to give to us therefore 
is not spiritual life and honors and dominion, but 
the earthly. These come to us in the nature of a bequest. 
The earthly life and the earthly rights which Jesus 
sacrificed are willed or bequeathed to all those of the 
faith and obedience of Abraham. But here comes another 
feature of this Mystery. It is not enough that we 
have the faith of Abraham and his loyalty to righteousness; 
an additional matter is necessary. All who would 
become sharers of this gift of Christ must now, in addition 
to faith and obedience to righteousness, take up 
their cross and follow Christ as the Captain of their salvation; 

R4453 : page 245 

they must walk in his footsteps in the narrow way 

of self-sacrifice, even unto death. Any who do not thus 

will and thus covenant cannot be his disciples now, whatever 

blessing they may obtain by his grace later on. He 

is now, during this Gospel Age, making a special selection 

of a special class, "elect, precious." These he 

styles his Bride, members of his Body, the Royal Priesthood, 

his Jewels. These various names indicate his high 

appreciation of this specially called class. 

THROUGH THE SPIRITUAL TO THE NATURAL 

Let us keep in memory the Apostle's words that "God 
hath not cast off natural Israel whom he foreknew" and 
to whom pertained the promises, the giving of the law, 
etc.; he has merely turned them aside temporarily during 
this Gospel Age, that in the interim he may develop a 
spiritual Israel, a Royal Priesthood, a Holy Nation, a 
Peculiar People, to be the Bride of Messiah, or otherwise 
his "Members." This "Mystery" is working no disadvantage 
to the Jew, but really is a further step in the 
Divine program in fullest accord with the original Covenant 
made with Abraham. The seed of Abraham was to 
be of two parts: (1) As the stars of heaven and (2) as 
the sands of the seashore. The Mystery class developed 
during this Gospel Age are the Spiritual Seed, symbolically 
pictured as the stars of heaven, while the natural 
seed of Abraham is yet to become as the sand of the seashore. 
The Apostle refers to both of these seeds (Rom. 4:16) 
—"Not to that only which is of the Law, but to 
that also which is of the faith of Abraham; who is the 



father of us all." The old Law Covenant brought not 
forth the seed to Abraham, but the New (Law) Covenant 
will bring forth many children— as the sand of the seashore. 
The only children of Abraham thus far developed 

R4453 : page 246 

are those who are the Seed of Abraham according to faith. 

As we have already seen, all of Christ's blessing goes 
to this faith class, the "Mystery" class, according to a 
program which the world does not understand, but with 
certain conditions attached which obligate all who receive 
this blessing to become dead to earthly aims and hopes 
and ambitions, and thus as members of the Body of Christ 
to have fellowship in his sacrifice of the earthly things 
that they may have fellowship and share with him in the 
heavenly part of the blessings of the Abrahamic Covenant. 
"If we suffer with him we shall also reign with him; 
if we be dead with him we shall also live with him." 
"To him that overcometh will I grant to sit with me 
in my throne."— 2 Tim. 2:11; Rev. 3:21. 

THE DEATH OF THE TESTATOR 

The Apostle explains that no will or testament or 
bequest is of validity so long as the testator liveth. 
Whatever covenant or agreement may be had, it awaits 
a final sealing or completion by the death of the testator. 
The Apostle applies this to Christ. By his death Jesus 
passed on to us, the Church, the benefit of his merit; 
namely, the earthly rights or "justification" to all that 
was lost in Adam and redeemed by the precious merit 
of Christ's sacrifice finished at Calvary. In accepting 
these earthly blessings we, as his members, agreed to 
the terms: namely, that we also surrender our rights to 
these as servants or "ministers of the New (Law) Covenant" 
—that these earthly blessings secured by our 
Lord's obedience and death should thus pass through us 
and still be the Redeemer's asset to be given to Israel, 
under Israel's New (Law) Covenant. 

The fact that Israel is still outcast from God's favor 
is merely an evidence that the Body of Christ is not yet 
completely sacrificed, for bear in mind that the Covenant 
is of no validity until the death of the testator. The 
Lord Jesus, the primary testator, has accepted believers, 
as "members of his Body," and he is working in them 
by his holy Spirit to will and to do the Father's good 
pleasure— that they may lay down their lives in sacrifice, 
filling up that which is behind of the afflictions of 
Messiah. As soon as the last member of the Church 
shall have died as a member of his Body, the New (Law) 
Covenant with Israel will be sealed— sealed with the 
blood of the testator, the death of the testator, the death 
of the Christ, Head and Members. 

Meantime the resurrection change of the Church as 
the Body of Christ will have brought the Testator as 



a whole to the plane of glory, honor and immortality. 
On this plane the Christ, Jesus the Head, and the Church, 
his mystic Body, will be in antitype the great Prophet, 
the great Priest, the great King, the great Judge, the 
great Mediator between God and mankind in general. 
Then will come the time promised in the Scriptures 
when this Great One, this Glorified One, the Seed of 
Abraham on the spiritual plane, will begin the work of 
blessing all the families of the earth, under the conditions 
of the New (Law) Covenant, to be made with Israel first. 

THE BLOOD OF THE NEW COVENANT 

Our Lord when discussing his sacrificial sufferings, 
referred to them as his "Cup." In the Last Supper, the 
memorial of his death, referring to this Cup symbolically, 
he said, "This is the blood of the new testament, which 
is shed for many for the remission of sins: drink ye 
all of it." (Matt. 26:27,28.) That Cup, which symbolized 
our Lord's death, our Lord's sacrifice of his earthly 
rights, was sufficient of itself to have sealed the New 
Covenant. He needed not to ask the Apostles, or us, 
or anybody, to become his disciples and to share his 
sufferings, to share his Cup, and to share the rewards 
of these— his glory, honor and immortality. But he 
passed the Cup along, passed the merit to us; or, rather, 
passed the merit of his sacrifice through us, his disciples, 
his followers. He did this because it was a part of the 
Divine program; for, as St. Peter declares, "The God and 
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ hath begotten us." He 
who foreknew Jesus foreknew us also by Jesus. This was 
no change of the Divine program. It was surprising to 
us merely because it was a Mystery not previously made 
known— that we should be made fellow-heirs with Christ 
in the sufferings of this present time and in the glory 
that shall follow. 

However some may oppose this and claim that we do 
not drink, do not partake of the sufferings of Christ, the 
Scriptures leave no doubt about the matter. They declare 
of the symbolic Cup that Jesus, after he had supped, 
gave it to his disciples, saying, "Drink ye all of it"— not 
only must all partake of my Cup who would be my 
disciples, but drink all of it, leave none of it. The drinking 
of the Lord's cup, the sharing of his sacrifice, must 
all be accomplished during this Gospel Age; none of it 
is to be left for the future. There will be no sufferings 
of Christ during the Millennium; there will be no drinking 
of this Cup. By that time "the glory to follow" 
will have been ushered in, and under the reign of 
righteousness thus instituted there will be no sufferings 
for righteousness' sake, but only for evil doing, because 
the reign of righteousness will have commenced. 

Let us remember, moreover, the Lord's words to the 
other disciples who made special request that they might 
sit with him in his throne, the one on his right hand and 
the other on his left. He said, "Ye know not what ye 



ask; can ye drink of the Cup that I drink of?" Only 
those who drink of his Cup may sit with him in his 
throne; only those who share in the sufferings of Christ 
will share in his glory, honor and immortality; only those 
who are thus partakers with him are members of the 
Spiritual Seed of Abraham, through which the blessings 
will pass to the Natural Seed in due time, and through 
them to all the families of the earth. "If ye be Christ's 
(his disciples indeed), then are ye Abraham's Seed and 
heirs according to the promise"— according to the highest 
feature of that promise, the spiritual feature.— 
Gal. 3:29. 

"MERCY THROUGH YOUR MERCY" 

We have already shown from the Scriptures that it is 
part of the Divine program that the natural seed 
of Abraham shall receive its blessings through the Spiritual 
Seed— Messiah the Head, the Church his Body. We 
have already shown that this Great One is to be the 
Mediator of the New (Law) Covenant, which will bring 
to Israel actually the blessings hoped for under the old 
Law Covenant, of which Moses was the mediator. We 
have seen how and why this Spiritual Messiah, Head and 
Body, will be able to do for Israel and all who come 
under that New (Law) Covenant far better things than 
Moses, mediator of the old Law Covenant, could do. We 
have seen that the New Mediator has something to present 
to Justice on behalf of Israel— something to give to 
Israel; namely, earthly blessings, earthly rights, earthly 
restitution to all that was lost in Adam. We see that 
these were secured by Jesus through keeping the Law; 
that he surrendered them, or sacrificed them in his 
obedient death, and that he gave them to the household 
of faith during this Gospel Age on condition that these 
earthly blessings should not be retained but sacrificed by 
all whom he would accept as his members. Now we see 
that it is these same earthly blessings that are to be dispensed 
during the Millennial Age, first to Israel and, 
secondly, to all people under the New (Law) Covenant. 

Notice how the Apostle Paul states this matter clearly 
and concisely in few words in Romans 1 1:25-36. There 
he tells us that we should think not of Israel as being 
cast off forever, but merely disfavored of God for a 
limited period— during the time of the calling and approving 
and acceptance of the elect number of spiritual 
Israel, whose first members were gathered from the Jewish 
nation and whose completeness is to be made up 
from amongst the Gentiles. He tells us that when this 
elect number of Spiritual Israel is complete, God's favor 
will return to Natural Israel, "Jacob," and then "All 
Israel shall be saved"— recovered from the blindness 
and stumbling which came upon them when God thrust 
them aside until first Spiritual Israel should be gathered. 
The Apostle explains that then God will fulfil his promise 
to Israel: "For this is my Covenant unto them, when I 



R4454 : page 247 

shall take away their sins." Thus the Apostle shows 
that the New (Law) Covenant promised to Israel, in 
which their sins will be cancelled and remembered no 
more, comes at the close of the Gospel Age and not at 
its beginning. 

THE DELIVERER MUST BE BORN 

The Apostle explains (vs. 26) that before the New 
(Law) Covenant with Israel could become effective the 
Deliverer must come out of Zion; for it will be he that 
shall turn away ungodliness from Jacob. Zion is another 
name for the New Jerusalem, of which the Apostle 
says, She is the mother of us all. Zion was typically 
represented in Sarah, Abraham's wife, who was the 
mother of Isaac. Isaac was a type of Christ— of Jesus 
the Head and the Church his Body; as the Apostle declared, 
"We, brethren, as Isaac was, are the children of 
promise"— the Seed of Abraham. (Gal. 4:28.) Zion 
was again typified by Rachel, Jacob's wife, and the two 
classes of the Church were represented in her two sons, 
the first of whom, Joseph, was a child of promise, the 
second the child of tribulation— Benjamin. Joseph, who 
came to the throne of Egypt through much tribulation, 
typified the Christ, Head and Body. Benjamin, his brother, 
born of the same mother, the same Covenant, did 
not reach the throne, but typified the "great company" 
class, who will have a special relationship and nearness 
to the Deliverer. Benjamin's name, "Son of my pain," 
(Benoni), shows his identity with the "great company"; 
his mother died in the travail of his birth. 

This is again expressed by the prophecy which says, 
Before she (Zion) travailed, she brought forth; before 
her pain came, she was delivered of a man child. Who 
hath heard such a thing? Who hath seen such things? 
Shall the earth be made to bring forth in one day? Or 
shall a nation be born at once? For as soon as Zion 
travailed, she brought forth her children. Shall I bring 
to birth (the Head) and not cause to bring forth? (the 
Body)-Isa. 66:7-9. 

Zion brought forth the Lord, the Head of the Church, 
the Head of the Great Deliverer, eighteen centuries ago. 
Very shortly all the members of his Body will come 
forth, similarly born from the dead in the "first resurrection. 
Thus shall a nation be born at once to the spirit 
plane, "a Royal Priesthood, a Holy Nation, a Peculiar 
People"— distinctly separate from all others of God's 
creatures, partakers of the divine nature, higher than 
angels and men. Then in a great time of trouble the 
"Great Company" will be born to the spirit plane, though 
not to the throne and not to the divine nature. Thus 
the spiritual children of Zion will be complete, and the 
blessing will turn to natural Israel. 



The Deliverer born out of Zion, the Christ, with the 
"Great Company" as servants or ministers of the great 
God, shall begin the work of blessing "Jacob"— natural 
Israel. Discerning these things, it is for all who have 
named the name of Christ, for all who have been accepted 
as members of his Body and inducted into this "Mystery," 
to be earnest, to be zealous, in making their calling and 
election sure, that they may not only come into the Body 
of Christ, but by obedience to the instructions of the Head 
they may abide in him and grow in grace and in his 
character likeness, and be prepared for birth to the plane 
of glory, that they may have a share in the work of the 
Kingdom, making effective to Israel and to the world the 
New (Law) Covenant for the blessing of all the families 
of the earth. 

THEY ARE NOT ALL ISRAELITES 

The blessings of the New (Law) Covenant are distinctly 
shown to be Israelitish. But this will not hinder 
these blessings from extending to all nations and peoples 
and kindreds and tongues. By circumcision of the heart, 
all who will may come into the Holy Nation which Israel 
will then be. Thus it is written in the prophets, "The 
Law shall go forth of Zion (the heavenly Kingdom), and 
the Word of the Lord from Jerusalem" (the earthly 
phase of the Kingdom). "And many nations shall come, 
and say, Come, and let us go up to the mountain of the 
Lord, and to the house of the God of Jacob; and he will 
teach us of his ways, and we will walk in his paths." 
(Micah 4:2.) Thus all through the Millennial Age Abraham's 
seed will be increasing, in harmony with the prophecy, 
"I have constituted thee a father of many nations." 

But it would be a mistake for us to suppose that God's 
blessing under the New (Law) Covenant will come to the 
seed of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, merely along fleshly 
lines. On the contrary, we are to suppose that the blessing 
of the New Covenant will apply first to Abraham and 
his natural seed who had his characteristics of faith and 
obedience, and who were developed or proved in the past. 
St. Paul refers to these, saying, "These all died in faith, 
without having received the things promised them, God 
having provided some better thing for us (the Church, 
Spiritual Israel), that they without us should not be made 
perfect. "-Heb. 11:40. 

"They shall obtain mercy through your mercy," as the 
Apostle explains. (Romans 11:31.) It will, of course, 
be God's mercy, but through Jesus Christ, and it will of 
course be the mercy of Christ Jesus, but through the 
Church— "your mercy." Thus will the blessings of God 
be passed on. The blessing coming to the Ancient Worthies 
will not be for themselves alone, but be passed 
on by them in turn to all who will come to the faith and 
obedience of Abraham. Undoubtedly at first this class 
will consist chiefly of the natural Israelites, but later, as 
we have shown, it will consist of many people, of many 



tongues, and of many nationalities. All of these, enlightened 
by the great Sun of Righteousness, will be brought 
to know the great Messiah, and to understand the principles 
of righteousness involved in the laws of the great 
Jehovah. These the new Mediator will most clearly set 
forth, until every knee shall bow and every tongue confess, 
until "the knowledge of the Lord shall fill the whole 
earth as the waters cover the great deep, and until there 
shall be no need to say to the neighbor or to the brother, 
Know thou the Lord, because all shall know him from the 
least unto the greatest of them, saith the Lord." 

THE NECESSITY FOR THE NEW COVENANT 

If the Abrahamic Covenant was all-comprehensive, and 
included all the blessings which God intended, why was it 
necessary or expedient to add either the old Law Covenant 
or the New (Law) Covenant? We have already considered 
the value of the old Law Covenant as an addition 
to the Abrahamic Covenant, hence now we confine ourselves 
to the consideration of the advantage gained by the 
addition of the New (Law) Covenant. 

When we read that "Without faith it is impossible to 
please God," and that Abraham pleased God by reason of 
his faith, we may know assuredly that none could be 
acceptable to God as Abraham's seed except such as had 
similar faith to his. Additionally, as God tested Abraham's 
faith, and obliged him to prove it by works of 
obedience, so we may be sure it would be with all who 
ever will be acceptable to God— that as Abraham's seed 
they also should have faith attested by works. 

The comparatively few who exercised faith, and 
wrought righteousness in harmony therewith, up to the 
time of Christ, are reviewed by the Apostle in Hebrews 1 1 . 
These were few indeed as compared with the millions 
of their time. These alone, therefore, could be 
counted as participants in God's favor because of Abrahamic 
faith and obedience. During the Gospel Age a 
similarly small class has been gathered out of every 
nation, people, kindred and tongue— called by the Gospel 
message, and tried and proved by the narrowness of the 
way of obedience. These consecrated ones, and no 
others, of this age could be acceptable to God for his 
blessing of eternal life, because these alone manifested 
the faith and the obedience exemplified in Abraham. 

So, then, we see that if Christ, after redeeming the 
world, had merely sought out of it such as could exercise 
Abrahamic faith and obedience, and had blessed these 
with eternal life, the sum total of his work would have 
been comparatively small. He would have been on the 
spiritual plane and the others would have received from 
him the blessing of restitution, and nothing more. 

R4454 : page 248 

LENGTH AND BREADTH 



But note the breadth and length and height and depth 
of the Divine Wisdom and Grace, which provided a more 
stupendous plan. Under its provisions the "Little Flock" 
become joint-heirs with Christ in the heavenly Kingdom 
as the Royal Priesthood, and the "Great Company" become 
the spiritual assistants of that Priesthood— the 
antitypical Levites. And, additionally, by the New Covenant 
arrangement the great Prophet, Priest, King, 
Judge, becomes the Mediator between God and the world 
of mankind in general. He will not deal with them 
merely on the basis of faith, because in their fallen condition 
few indeed could be benefited thereby, because few 
could exercise the necessary faith and obedience. Indeed, 
as we have seen, the majority of those capable 
of exercising faith and obedience have already been 
found. The New Covenant takes over Israel through 
the Ancient Worthies and incidentally all of that nation 
and all of every nation willing, under the enlightening 
influences of the Millennial Kingdom, to come into accord 
with the Mediator and to be taught of him. He will 
enforce obedience, to the intent that the fallen and degraded 
members of the race may learn what righteousness 
is and what justice and love are. He will exemplify 
to them the rewards of obedience and the penalties of 
disobedience, that they may learn the benefit of righteousness 
—and all come to a knowledge of God, not by faith 
merely, but by demonstrations. It will be after the 
Millennial Kingdom shall have lifted mankind out of 
degradation and sin, out of imperfection of mind and 
morals, that their final testing will come. 

God's law will stand forever. Only the willing and 
obedient will be partakers of the grace of life eternal; 
all others will die the "Second Death." But we have 
every reason to believe that as a result of the Millennial 
Kingdom, the reign of righteousness, the restitution work, 
the enlightenment of mankind, the bringing of all to a 
knowledge of the Truth, many will learn righteousness 
and become servants thereof, and in full accord with 
the Divine Law: come to love God with all their heart, 
with all their mind, with all their being, with all their 

R4455 : page 248 

strength, and their neighbor as themselves. 

Thus we see how much more can be accomplished by 
the Seed of Abraham, the Christ, Head and Body, through 
the method adopted by the sealing of the New (Law) 
Covenant, and the establishment of the Kingdom, than 
could have been accomplished without the New Covenant, 
under the Abrahamic Covenant alone with its terms of 
faith and obedience. 

Is it any wonder that after having pictured this matter 
of the rejection of natural Israel, the gathering of 
Spiritual Israel, and the subsequent giving of God's 
blessings through Spiritual Israel to reclaim natural 



Israel, the Apostle should become enthusiastic? Is it 
any wonder that he concludes with the exclamation, "O 
the depth of the riches, both of the wisdom and knowledge 
of God! how unsearchable are his judgments, and 
his ways past finding out!" Who knew of this wonderful, 
deep, hidden plan of Jehovah? Who counseled him 
to make it thus? The Apostle's conclusion is that such 
depths of wisdom and knowledge and grace prove that the 
plan of God is superhuman; that no man ever thought 
out this plan. As the heavens are higher than the earth, 
so are God's ways higher than man's ways! Of him, 
and through him, and by him, are all these things, and 
to him be glory forever! 



R4455 : page 248 

OUR WESTERN CONVENTION TOUR 

AT WASHINGTON CITY 

OUR first stop was Washington City. Several of the 

Baltimore friends joined our train as we passed 

through their city, while others preceded us on an 

earlier train— in all about twenty. We had a very enjoyable 

time and were very cordially greeted, not only by the Washington 

City friends, but by representatives from Alexandria, 

Annapolis, and various surrounding cities and towns. Our 

discourse was from the text, "The fear of the Lord is the 

beginning of wisdom." We endeavored to point out the importance 

of reverence to the Lord as an element of Christian 

character. We showed that it was necessary that we 

should reverence before we had a desire to come to the 

Lord, and that it is still necessary to us after we become 

acquainted with him. This reverence necessarily increased 

as our knowledge of God increased— as we accepted his 

gift of justification, through faith in the precious blood. 

Our reverence increased with every step of our progress, 

with every increase of our knowledge of our Heavenly 

Father's character. Thus reverence with each of us should 

have been in proportion to our progress in grace, until 

finally, overwhelmed with an appreciation of God's goodness 

to us, we were ready to hear with appreciation and to 

obey the Apostle's exhortation, "Present your bodies living 

sacrifices, holy and acceptable to God and your reasonable 

service."— Rom. 12:1. 

We endeavored to point out that every failure on our 
part after reaching consecration and Divine acceptance and 
begetting of the Holy Spirit would be because of a loss of 
reverence or of a failure to continue to grow therein. We 
intimated, for instance, that neglect of Bible study and 
prayer implies a loss of reverence, or a deficiency of reverence. 
Likewise a failure to heed the Divine Word, which is 
able to make us wise unto salvation, or a neglect to assemble 
ourselves as Divinely exhorted would mean a lack 



of reverence for the Divine wisdom which gave the exhortation. 
We admitted that carelessness on the part of the 
Church in respect to the election of its servants, whereby 
sometimes unsuitable brethren were chosen to be the Lord's 
mouthpieces, was the result of a lack of reverence for the 
Lord, for had he been properly reverenced his instruction 
on the subject would have been more particularly sought 
and more carefully followed. We endeavored to show also 
that the various deflections from the Gospel message might 
be safely attributed to an insufficiency of reverence for 
the Lord's Word, which allowed self-seeking ambition to 
draw aside from the narrow way of humility and service 
and self-sacrifice. In a word, practically every difficulty 
with which God's people have to contend is the result of 
an insufficiency of reverence. 

On the other hand, those who by nature have the mental 
qualities of reverence large have a difficulty in an opposite 
direction, namely, they are disposed to reverence persons 
and things unduly. Some reverence antiquities and, applying 
this along religious lines, they reverence too highly old 
religious systems. Some reverence wisdom and human 
ability and are in danger of "worshiping the creature more 
than the Creator," because the creature is visible and near, 
while the Creator is unseen except by the eye of faith. 

Thus we reached the conclusion that the naturally irreverent 
have much to study and develop in respect to reverence 
for God and his mighty works and his brethren and 
everything that is good. Reverence for the Lord can neither 
begin too soon nor ever be too great. It should discern 
Divine wisdom and providences in all of our affairs, present 
and future. Reverence guides to the narrow way and keeps 
us therein and encourages us step by step to make our calling 
and election sure— to the glory, honor and immortality, 
which God hath in reservation for those that love him. 

The dear friends bade us a hearty adieu, giving many expressions 
of their love, and of their interest in the Convention 
tour, and in all the dear friends whom we would meet 
en route and who they hoped would be greatly blessed, 
comforted and cheered. A good night's rest at the home 
of Brother and Sister Pyle prepared us for our journey to 
Piedmont, Ala. A number gathered at the depot to bid us 
adieu and one Colporteur, having concluded to take advantage 
of the Piedmont Convention, accompanied us on the 
same train. 

R4455 : page 249 

PIEDMONT, ALABAMA 

At Atlanta, Ga., several friends joined us en route for 
Piedmont. We had a delightful season of refreshment and 
fellowship and arrived in due course at Piedmont. The 
Convention had already been opened. Considerable rain had 
fallen, but the friends reported that there had been no 
dampening of their ardor; that the Convention already had 
been a most delightful season of Christian fellowship and 



that some of the testimonies given had been amongst the 
richest they had ever heard. Our stay was for the day 
only, but the Convention continued four days. Brothers 
Wright, Senor and Stevens with others serving spiritual 
refreshment. 

About two hundred, gathered from various parts of Alabama, 
Georgia, Florida, and Tennessee, were in attendance. 
Our address to the friends of the Truth was an exhortation 
to a proper appreciation of the Divine guidance of the harvest 
work, in its every particular. We pointed out that 
those who cannot recognize anything special in the harvest 
work and the harvest message were distinctly at a disadvantage 
and would not be likely to hold out to the end. On 
the other hand those are specially blessed whose faith enables 
them to realize that we are now in the harvest time 
and that the harvest message which we have received into 
good and honest hearts is the Divinely appointed "meat in 
due season" intended for our strengthening. Our realization 
of the Lord's supervision of his own work helps to keep 
us humble in mind and in conduct. It also helps to keep us 
trustful, and looking to the Lord, and waiting on him for 
direction in respect to the future. It hinders us from feeling 
that a great amount of responsibility rests upon us. It 
thus deters us from rushing in where angels fear to tread. 
Instead of feeling like Uzzah of old, that we must steady the 
Ark or otherwise everything would go wrong, we may have 
fullest confidence in God and his still greater interest in his 
work, and his wisdom as to how it should be conducted and 
his omnipotent power in making all things work together 
for the accomplishment of his own good purposes. Twenty-four 
symbolized their consecration by water baptism. 

The session for the public crowded the auditorium beyond 
its capacity. Piedmont is a small city, about two 
thousand population, including children. We must 
have had nearly all of the adult population, therefore, in 
our attendance of about seven hundred. We were glad 
of the assurances of the friends of the Truth that they 
had been refreshed and encouraged, and hoped that some 
impression was made upon the public also. 

As we boarded the evening train for Memphis a large 
crowd of the dear friends, gathered at the station, sang, 
"God be with you till we meet again." 

THE MEMPHIS CONVENTION 

We had a grand time at Memphis. Here we were met by 
Dr. Jones and party in two Tourist Sleeping Cars, the party 
numbering about fifty. One of the sleepers had a kitchen 
served by a proficient culinary chef. We joined the party, 
a reservation having been already made. 

To this Convention came friends of the Truth from a considerable 
area. It was certainly a very enjoyable Convention 
and one long to be remembered. Our stay was for only 
one day. Brother Rutherford remained, with others, to 
serve the spiritual food on the following day. Our addresses 
here were along the same line as at Piedmont and here also 



there was a good turnout of the public, to the number of 

about five hundred. The dear friends were extremely cordial 

in welcoming us. A general dinner for all was served 

at noon and a luncheon in the evening. The chicken roosts 

must have suffered a considerable depletion in providing 

the bountiful repast. Everything that could be thought of 

was done for our comfort, and we trust and believe that correspondingly 

the dear Memphis friends received from the 

Lord a rich blessing upon their own hearts. 

R4456 : page 249 

Our farewells brought tears to many eyes, and many requests 
to be remembered at the Throne of Grace, and assurances 
that we were remembered, yea, many times a day, 
in their petitions. Our night's journey brought us to New 
Orleans on Sunday morning. 

NEW ORLEANS, LOUISIANA 

A prayer and testimony meeting of the friends in the local 
Church had preceded our arrival, and many of the friends 
were at the depot and gave us a very warm reception. They 
apologized for the heat of the weather, reminding us, however, 
that they with us had experienced a more intense heat 
at the St. Paul convention. We assured them that to have 
received a cool reception would have been a disappointment 
to us anyway. 

Our discourse to the interested, many of you already have 
read in the public prints, although certain matter of special 
interest to the local congregation was added. The evening 
topic, for the public, was, "Where are the Dead?" We had 
a fine, cool auditorium and the attendance was excellent, 
the season of the year and the aristocratic character of the 
city being considered. About six hundred were present. 
Our topic received the closest attention and, we trust, 
proved timely and helpful to some. In any event we committed 
the results to the Lord with prayer that the effort 
might be blessed to the good of those who were fully his in 
that city. 

HOUSTON, TEXAS 

A night's ride brought us to Houston, Texas, our next 
stopping place. Our party numbered about fifty, and we 
were met by a Houston delegation of about the same number, 
who stood in line and greeted us with hearty handshakes 
and expressions of welcome as our party passed in 
review before them the full length of the station room and 
out into the street. Soon we were at the auditorium, where 
still others awaited and greeted us. A praise, prayer and 
testimony meeting proved very refreshing to us spiritually 
until one o'clock, when all were invited by the Houston 
friends to a generous dinner, a sumptuous repast indeed, 
most bountifully provided and most entertainingly served. 

At 3 p.m. we addressed the household of faith, particularly 



seeking to make clear "the mystery hidden from 
past ages and dispensations, but now made known unto 
the saints," namely, the fellowship of the Church, the 
"members of the Body of Christ," the "Bride class" in 
the sufferings, the sacrifices and the death of Christ the 
world's Redeemer;— the world's great Prophet, Priest, 
King, Mediator and Judge. We sought to prove that 
only by sharing in our Lord's sufferings have we any 
hope of sharing in his glorious reign of blessing for the 
uplifting of the world. 

Our evening topic for the public was the "Thief in 
Paradise, the Rich Man in Hell and Lazarus in Abraham's 
Bosom." We had an excellent attendance, very attentive, 
numbering about six hundred. At the conclusion of the 
service, there were indications that some had been deeply 
impressed with certain features of the Divine Plan. The 
friends had the magazine edition of "Scripture Studies," 
Series First, for sale at 5 cents per copy. The public 
were invited to take them and to hand the price to the 
ushers at the door. About one hundred copies were thus 
placed in the hands of readers, besides hundreds of free 
copies of the "Hell Tower." 

Once more we bade adieu to loving hearts, with mutual 
good wishes and prayers for Divine blessing, taking the 
midnight train for San Antonio. Brother Rutherford followed 
us at Houston, no doubt with good effect. 

SAN ANTONIO, TEXAS 

Our train arrived in good season. We were most cordially 
received by the local friends and some who had 
come to meet us from the surrounding country. One 
brother and his wife came a distance of seventy-five 
miles by wagon; another a distance of six hundred miles 
by rail, and so on. Our personal comforts were carefully 
attended to at the home of Sister Frost. We did 
not attend the morning service for prayer and testimony, 
but sought to conserve our strength for the afternoon 
and evening meetings. Through others we learned that 
the morning session was one of great profit, many of the 
dear friends overflowing with praise and gratitude and 
love to God for his merciful providence in granting to 

R4456 : page 250 

them a knowledge of the Present Truth. We met them 
in the afternoon and surely their faces and their words 
of greeting manifested as strongly as could be done the 
intensity of their love to the Lord and their high appreciation 
of his merciful provision for us as his people 
in this Harvest time. 

Our afternoon discourse was from the words of our 
Lord to the disciples who asked him that they might 
sit, the one on his right hand and the other on his left 
hand in his Kingdom, to which request he replied, "Are 
ye able to drink of the cup that I shall drink of, and to 



be baptized with the baptism that I am baptized with?" 

We endeavored to show the value of the glorious offer 

now being made to the Lord's people of sharing his 

throne and his glorious work of the Millennium as his 

members, as his "bride," and joint-heirs of his glory, 

honor and immortality. Then we pointed out the meaning 

of the Lord's expression, "Are ye able to drink of 

the cup that I shall drink of?" We showed that it was 

the same cup that our Lord drank of, no other that we 

must share; and that we must drink all of it, and that 

thus we must "fill up that which is behind of the afflictions 

of Christ." We pointed out that this is the same 

as the Lord meant by the sacramental cup— which we 

must share if we would share with him in the blessing 

of all the families of the earth. In other words, this cup 

of self-denial and self-sacrifice with Jesus signifies our 

participation in the blood of the New Covenant— in providing 

the wherewithal for the sealing of the New Covenant. 

We pointed out, however, that the value of the 

"cup" was in our Lord's merit, that it is his cup, and 

that we are merely favored with the privilege of participation 

with him in his sacrifice, which has all the merit, 

all the blessing power. 

Then we looked at the other feature or condition and 
saw that it did not refer to water baptism, but to the 
real baptism in Christ's death. We examined the difference 
between his death, in which we were to share, and 
the Adamic death, in which all mankind share. We 
pointed out that Adamic death was a penalty for sin, but 
that Christ's death was a sacrifice for sin. We pointed 
out that by being children of Adam we were sharers in 
his penalty, death, and that we must be justified or freed 
from that before we could accept a proposition to become 
dead with Christ. We showed that we were freed from our 
share in Adamic death by faith in the blood of Christ, so 
that thus being justified we should present our bodies living 
sacrifices and become dead with Christ, for only "if 
we suffer with him shall we also reign with him." 

Here we saw the wonderful Divine privilege granted to 
the Church in this Gospel Age, and to her alone, namely, 
a share in this "mystery," this hidden thing that the 
world knoweth not and which only the saints know. The 
appreciation of this mystery even the saints will lose, 
unless their hearts are loyal and obedient to the Lord; 
for obedience is still better than sacrifice in God's sight. 
At the conclusion of the service an opportunity was offered 
for water baptism to those who had already made 
a consecration to the Lord by a baptism into his death 
through consecration, and who were striving to carry 
out that consecration by loyalty to the Lord. Thirteen 
responded and later were buried in the likeness of his 
death and raised in the likeness of his resurrection. 

We started next morning for Los Angeles, leaving to 
Brother Rutherford and others the carrying on of the 
San Antonio Convention another day— praying for the 
dear friends a rich blessing from the Giver of every good. 



More friends joined us here and a third car was added 
to the equipage, the party in all numbering sixty. How 
much the dear friends enjoyed the fellowship with each 
other on this journey may better be imagined than described. 
They are not all wealthy. Indeed, few of them 
have more than the necessities of life with merest comfort. 
Some in one manner and some in another, however, 
had succeeded in raising the money for this Convention 
tour in the hope that the fellowship of so many and the 
refreshment, temporal and spiritual, of the journey itself 
might compensate them. Wednesday, Wednesday night 
and Thursday were consumed in the journey from San 
Antonio to Los Angeles. The ride was a hot and dusty 
one, though less so than on the occasion of our previous 
tour. The friends apparently made good use of the time 
in Christian fellowship, discussing the Word, singing 
songs of praise, etc., while the Editor and stenographer 
in the end of one of the cars made ready this report, answered 
letters and prepared "Watch Tower" matter. 

LOS ANGELES, CAL., CONVENTION 

Our train was nearly four hours late, so that we missed 
the afternoon meeting of July 16th. We were in good 
season, however, for the well-advertised meeting for the 
public in the evening. The auditorium was crowded, 
about thirteen hundred being present. We had excellent 
attention, our topic being, "Where Are the Dead?" So 
large an attendance was surprising, because at the same 
time a remarkable parade was in progress and apparently 
engrossed the attention of everybody. It should be remembered 
that the Convention had already been in session 
for a day with Brother Sullivan one of the principal 
speakers. The Convention attendance was good, about 
300, including some from nearby towns. The meetings 
of the 17th began at 9 o'clock with a testimony meeting. 
From 10:30 until 12:15 the Editor held a Question Meeting. 
The questions were remarkably good and, we 
trust, satisfactorily answered. A free luncheon was provided 
for all who remained to it and apparently it was 

R4457 : page 250 

much enjoyed, not only for the good things upon the 
table, but also for the fellowship afforded. 

At 3 p.m. we addressed another goodly audience of the 
interested, numbering about three hundred. Excellent 
attention was given to our remarks, based upon 
Romans 11:29-32. 

We pointed out from our text that the mercy which the 
Apostle assures us is yet to come to natural Israel under 
their Covenant— the New (Law) Covenant— is to be not 
only God's mercy and through Christ, but also the 
Church's mercy— "your mercy." We traced the hopes 
of Israel and their disappointment in connection with the 
development of spiritual Israel and showed how, eventually, 



the New (Law) Covenant will bring them all the 
blessings and honor originally anticipated. We showed 
also the high honor conferred upon the Church in becoming 
the members of the Body of the great Mediator 
of the New Covenant— sharers with our Redeemer in his 
great Work of sealing and executing the New Covenant 
for the blessing of natural Israel, and through them "all 
the families of the earth." 

We called attention to the fact that only by drinking of 
our Lord's cup and sharing his baptism, his death, could 
we have shared with him in his great and glorious work. 
Opportunity was then offered to any who had made full 
consecration of their lives to the Lord, "even unto death," 
to symbolize their consecration by water baptism. Eighteen 
responded and several subsequently declared they 
had almost reached the point, but concluded to wait a 
little longer and still more thoroughly count the cost before 
taking the step, which they realized to be a great 
privilege. 

Our party numbered about seventy as we left Los 
Angeles in three tourist cars. While waiting for a start 
the crowd on the platform and those in the cars sang 
hymns of praise to the Giver of all good and bade each 
other Good-bye, again and again. Quite a number had 
moist eyes as they thought of the pleasure enjoyed during 
the Convention, and that while we might not meet 
again on earth we have the glorious prospect of the 
heavenly reunion in the General Assembly. 

THE OAKLAND CONVENTION 

We arrived at Oakland just in time for the Sunday 
afternoon service. About fifty of the dear friends met us 
at the station. We had most hearty greetings and repeated 
expressions of Christian love. 

R4457 : page 251 

The afternoon meeting for the public was held in the 
First Presbyterian Church. It was crowded, the audience 
being estimated at eighteen hundred or more. We 
had most profound attention, our topic being, "Where 
Are the Dead?" We were told that at least twenty ministers 
of the city were in attendance. The depth of interest 
may be gauged by the fact that nearly one thousand 
were present at the night service, which was very little 
advertised except by announcement at the afternoon meeting. 
The evening service was a Question Meeting for the 
Public, and brought out an interpretation of our Lord's 
words to the thief on the cross, the rich man and Lazarus, 
etc., apparently to the satisfaction of the hearers. 

On Monday morning we gave a discourse on the privileges 
of the Harvest Work— Colportage, Volunteering, Sharp-shooting 
etc. In the afternoon following the praise service 
we discoursed on baptism from the text, "What shall I 
render unto the Lord for all his benefits? I will take the 



cup of salvation and call upon the name of the Lord." A 

deep solemnity pervaded the audience and many eyes were 

moist. At the conclusion of the discourse opportunity was 

given for a symbolization of baptism and thirty-four responded, 

all adults, males and females in about equal numbers. 

At 7:30 p.m., after a few remarks, we had a Love 

Feast. It was a most inspiring occasion. About six hundred 

participated. As they filed past and shook hands with us 

many were the expressions of faithfulness to the Lord for 

our privileges and the determinations to be faithful and 

loyal to him to the end of the journey, and to meet with 

him in the Kingdom to part no more. Many with tears in 

their eyes asked to be remembered in prayer and said that 

they had special trials, special difficulties and special besetments 

in the narrow way. We sought to assure all that 

the Lord exercises a protecting care of the sheep, and 

hence that our success lay in our own hands, because he is 

faithful to do all that he has promised. 

An automobile took us rapidly to the station, while the 
congregation waited to hear Brother Rutherford, whose 
discourse was to complete the Convention. We remarked 
that the Convention began the day before our arrival, with 
a Testimony Meeting, followed with a discourse by Bro. 
Sullivan. Our party in the special cars left later at midnight. 
We hastened ahead, so as to give an entire day at 
Portland and for fear the train might be delayed, because 
of the heavy traffic towards Seattle. 

PORTLAND, OREGON 

A journey of two nights and a day brought us to Portland 
on Wednesday morning, July 21st. At the station we met a 
goodly number of the friends of the Truth. After breakfast 
with them we repaired to the auditorium and soon a most 
interesting praise and testimony meeting was under way. 
Our testimonies unitedly were to the goodness of God in all 
of life's affairs and especially in respect to the Truth— that 
we had been favored with the knowledge of it. Next came 
dinner. In the afternoon by request we had a question 
meeting which lasted for about two hours and developed 
some very interesting subjects which, we trust, were profitable 
to us all. After another intermission for refreshments 
we had an evening service for the public. The house 
was crowded to its capacity with an audience which gave 
us the closest attention for two hours, while we discoursed 
on the "Past, Present and Future of Mankind in the Light 
of the Bible." Then came our leave-taking and we resumed 
our journey. The total number in our special cars 
was now increased to eighty-nine. Nearly all of the Portland 
friends went to the Seattle Convention, because it 
afforded opportunities for meeting larger numbers of the 
friends and for spending several days in spiritual fellowship. 
They did not join our party because our accommodations 
were already full. The Portland One-Day Convention 
will long be remembered by many of us as a season 
of refreshment. 



OUR GREETING 

To all aboard the Gospel Train, 
And all the friends along the road, 
Who gather in convention halls, 
Beloved! Greetings in the Lord! 
Pen Argyl's little company, 
The Bangor brethren, just a few, 
Your brothers at Roseto Town, 
All join in Christian love to you. 

We'd dearly like to go along; 
And at this wondrous feast sit down; 
But Father knows our means are small, 
So, as we go our daily rounds, 
Our loving wishes follow you; 
Our spirits rise with yours in prayer, 
We pray, "God speed the Gospel Train," 
And leave you in our Father's care. 

For in His holy Word, we read, 
His angels minister to men, 
Those who shall heirs of glory be: 
Oh, what a shining escort, then, 
Attends your way, by day, by night; 
Defending you from every foe! 
Lie down, and sleep in perfect peace, 
While guardian angels come and go. 

And as you view God's mighty works, 
Think of the perfect earth to come; 
When in its robes of living green 
It stands, man's everlasting home. 
In that blest Restitution time, 
Eden shall reach from pole to pole; 
While everything with breath, will praise 
Our God, while endless ages roll. 

There's one Convention, brethren dear, 
Which we have set our hearts upon. 
No lack of time, or means, or ways, 
Shall keep us from that Final One; 
When in the New Jerusalem, 
The First-borns of the Kingdom come, 
From north, and south, and east, and west; 
And Christ shall bid them "Welcome home. 

If we have on the wedding robe, 
That wondrous robe of shining white; 
If we've embroidered it with care, 
In all the colors of the light; 
If we've been faithful to our vows, 
To sacrifice our little all; 



Then, we shall be of those who meet 
In Heaven's Grand Convention Hall. 

Oh, brethren! let us faithful be! 

The time is short; let us press on. 

Oh, we would not be left behind, 

When all the Sons are gathered home! 

We know not how we'll travel yet, 

By water, fire, or by air: 

We only know, if we're approved, 

When that time comes we'll all meet there. 

So once again we say, "God speed." 
In love, our hearts go out to you; 
We pray, "The Father's will be done" 
In all you say; in all you do. 
As onward, then, you wend your way, 
O'er mountain, valley, hill and plain, 
May God bless you and all you meet, 
While traveling on the Gospel Train. 
R. F. D. 



R4458 : page 251 

"TAKE HEED TO YOURSELVES AND THE FLOCK" 

--ACTS 20:2-38-SEPTEMBER 5.- 

Golden Text:— "I can do all things through 
Christ, which strengtheneth me."— Phil. 4:13. 

WHEN St. Paul fled from Ephesus, after the rioting, 
he made a tour of the European Churches 
which he had founded. Passing through Macedonia 
to the city of Corinth he came by vessel again to 
Miletus, about fifty miles south of Ephesus. He was 
accompanied by representatives of several of the churches 
of Asia Minor. He was en route for Jerusalem, for 
whose poor at his suggestion collections had been made 
in the four provinces in which he had been preaching. 
Seven delegates accompanied him, representatives of the 
Church at Thessalonica, Berea, Derbe and Ephesus. 
These visits are supposed to have consumed several 
months of time, and now, at Miletus, he would have his 
final opportunity of bidding goodby to the Elders of the 
Ephesus Church. The vessel on which the party were 
to go to the Jerusalem port was detained indefinitely at 

R4458 : page 252 

Miletus, so word was sent to the Elders at Ephesus and 
they came to Miletus. 

Our lesson specially calls to our attention the Apostle's 
address to these Elders. We are not to understand 



this as a boastful statement, but rather as a plain rehearsal 
of matters which his hearers would fully concede 
and of which he boasted nothing. The rehearsal 
was given, not for his own sake, not as indicating personal 
vanity and self-praise, but with a view to quickening 
the recollection of his hearers and making the lesson 
of the hour more impressive upon them. He reminded 
them that for the space of three years they had known 
him intimately, the manner of his life, his devotion to 
the Lord, to the service of the Truth and to the service 
of the brethren. He reminded them of his humility of 
mind; that he had not been with them as a boaster; that 
his conduct had not been haughty and overbearing; that 
he had not sought to "lord it" over the Church, but on the 
contrary, he had endured amongst them many trials and 
difficulties with the Jews, with "false brethren." 

They knew of his work, his endurance and of his 
holding back nothing from them that would be helpful 
to them; that he had taught them both publicly and 
privately as circumstances opened to him opportunities. 
He had testified both to Jews and to Greeks that there 
is only the one Gospel of Christ, to be accepted through 
faith and turning away from sin. By calling attention 
to these elements of his own character he was laying the 
foundation for his subsequent exhortation to them that 
they should copy his zeal, his fidelity. He had been a 
faithful overseer or bishop, watching over their interests. 
He had been a faithful pastor, guiding their welfare 
and seeing to their nourishment in spiritual things. 
Knowing the truthfulness of these presentations and having 
the whole situation in mind, they would be the 
better prepared to receive from such an one his parting 
exhortation— the great lesson which he had to give 
them. 

"BOUND IN THE SPIRIT" 

He informed the brethren that although possessed of 
his physical liberty he felt a bondage or restraint upon 
his mind that he could not shake off; that he must go to 
Jerusalem; that this was the Lord's providence for him; 
and that at the same time he received assurances from 
others through the "gifts" that bonds and imprisonment 
awaited him at Jerusalem. Then he adds these courageous 
words: "But none of these things move me; neither 
count I my life dear unto myself, so that I might finish 
my course with joy, and the ministry, which I have received 
of the Lord Jesus to testify the Gospel of the 
grace of God. And now, behold, I know that ye all, 
among whom I have gone preaching the Kingdom of God, 
shall see my face no more." The Apostle had become 
apparently more intimately acquainted with the Ephesus 
Church than with any of the others. Apparently it was 
one of the most flourishing of them all. He had, by the 
Lord's providence, spent more time with them, and evidently 
the results procured justified the prolonged stay. 



Partings between friends are always grievous. And 
parting with no hope of seeing each other again this side 
the veil is a doubly severe ordeal. 

"PREACHING THE KINGDOM OF GOD" 

Incidentally we note the message which the Apostle 
delivered and which he here particularly emphasizes as 
the Gospel of Christ— "preaching the Kingdom of God." 
It is right that we should recognize that this is the same 
Gospel which we are preaching today, or, if not, that we 
are not preaching aright. The grace of God was manifested 
in the gift of his Son, that he, by the grace of 
God, should taste death for every man. The grace of 
God was further manifested in an outline of how the 
death of Christ was designed to bring blessings to our 
race: 

(1) By ultimately establishing a Kingdom under the 
whole heavens for the rule of mankind; for the suppression 
of sin and death; for the uplifting of those 

bound by these enemies. 

(2) As a precedent to that general blessing to the 
world, for which we pray, "Thy Kingdom come; thy will 
be done on earth as it is done in heaven," the Divine 
proclamation first calls out the "little flock" to be joint-heirs 
with their dear Redeemer in that Kingdom. Thank 

God that these precious truths, respecting the grace of 
God and the Kingdom of God, so long covered and hidden 
from our sight by the traditions of the dark ages, 
are now coming forward, are now being revealed by the 
enlightenment of our eyes by the Spirit— that we might 
know the things that are freely given us of God, and 
that thus we might be assisted in making our calling 
and our election sure! 

No wonder the Apostle could add the forceful words, 
"I testify unto you this day, that I am pure from 
the blood of all men; for I have not shunned to declare 
unto you all the counsel of God." What he preached to 
the Church at Ephesus during his three years' stay 
amongst them is surely the same message which, by 
Divine arrangement, has come down to us in his epistles 
addressed to the various churches. We note that St. 
Paul's message contained not one word respecting eternal 
torment, which is no part of the Divine Plan. Surely 
from these epistles we now assent that St. Paul was very 
patient in reproving, instructing, encouraging the Lord's 
dear people. He was much used of the Lord because he 
had given himself so thoroughly to the Lord. 

Herein we note the difference between the operation of 
the holy Spirit of God and the operation of the unholy 
spirits, the fallen angels. In both cases the control increases 
in proportion as the individual relinquishes his 
own will. Fortunately for humanity we all possess an 
inherent dread of self-surrender. Had it not been for 
this natural tendency, this natural self-will, doubtless 
the whole world today would be obsessed by the evil 



angels, or, at least, more largely under their control. 
Even amongst spirit mediums there is generally only a 
partial yielding of the will and an urging by the spirits 
toward a full self-surrender. Spirit mediums, however, 
are freely warned through their journals and books that 
there is great danger in a complete surrender of the 
will, lest an evil spirit gain full possession— obsess the 
medium. Alas! poor mediums! They know not that all 
of the spirits which communicate through them are evil 
spirits, demons, fallen angels, who, at times, personate 
human beings and represent themselves as our dead 
friends. 

Not even husbands and wives dare fully to surrender 
to each other their wills without danger of injury. Nor 
should parents seek to coerce their children to a condition 
of entire will-lessness. To whatever extent they 
do this they injure the child, detract from its personality 
and make it a more easy dupe for the fallen angels. 

The One, the only One, to whom we dare submit our 
wills fully, completely, is the Lord. He invites this full 
submission of the will to him; and we, in his name and 
as his ambassadors, may freely invite our children, our 
friends, our neighbors, to this same full submission of 
their hearts to the Lord. The more fully consecrated the 
will the greater the submission, the more blessed should 
be the experience— the greater the usefulness in the 
Lord's service. This is the substance of St. Paul's exhortation, 
"Be ye filled with the Spirit," sanctified, set 
apart wholly unto the Lord. In proportion as this condition 
of consecration or will submission is attained— 
in such proportion we may be used of the Lord as his 
mouthpieces, his instruments, ready for his service, the 
service of the Truth, the service of the flock. St. Paul 
was a noble example of such a full self-consecration to 
the Lord; of such a filling with the Spirit; of such an 
emptying of self-will; of such a deadness to the world, its 
will, its plans, its service. 

No wonder the Apostle was able to assure the brethren 
that they might follow him, as he was following Christ. 
Christ was filled with the Father's Spirit. St. Paul, a 

R4458 : page 253 

loyal follower in his footsteps, had a similar filling experience 

though of smaller capacity. And all who will 

live godly in Christ Jesus must similarly be filled with 

his Spirit, the will of Christ, the will of the Father— and 

be dead to earthly ambitions. The Apostle's thought in 

calling the elders was to impress upon them that, like 

himself, they not only were consecrated to the Lord, but, 

as teachers in the Church, they had a double responsibility 

—in respect to themselves and in respect to the 

Church of which the Lord had made them overseers. 

Notice his words, "Take heed therefore unto yourselves 
and to all the flock in the which the holy Spirit hath 
made you overseers (bishops) to feed the Church of 



God, which he purchased with the blood of his own 
(Son)."-V. 28. 

Several points in this are worthy of careful attention. 
The revised version, quoted above, says, "In the which 
the holy Spirit hath made you bishops," thus agreeing 
that the general Scripture statement that the elders of 
the Church are not over the Church in the sense of a 
superior, or "clergy," class, but in the Church— members 
of it— overseeing members, assisting members, by appointment 
of the Lord through the channel of the Church. 
Note the two points: 

R4459 : page 253 

(1) They needed to take heed to themselves and to 

take heed to the flock. Whoever attempts to do shepherding 
in the Church will need, first of all, to watch 
himself lest he fall into temptation, for, as the Apostle 
declares, Those who accept the position of Elders in the 
Church, pastors, overseers, are exposed to special trials, 
special difficulties. They need primarily to take heed to 
themselves, lest, having preached to others, they themselves 
become castaways. 

(2) Those who accept the ministry or service of the 
Church as Elder-Brothers under the Divine regulation 
should realize that they have assumed a weighty 
responsibility respecting which they must "give an account 
to God." (Rom. 14:12.) This does not mean fault-finding 
with the brethren. It does not mean merely 

preaching to them; nor merely visiting the sick and 

counseling the troubled. It means an oversight, a care 

of all the interests of the congregation and the individuals 

of it in their every detail. Those who are over-charged 

with the cares of this life are not in a condition, 

in any sense of the word, to accept the responsibilities 

of this service in the Church of the living God 

and should not be invited to do so; should not be voted 

for as Elders. Only those who seek first the interests 

of the Lord's Kingdom and the righteousness which it 

represents are in any sense or degree properly suited 

to such service in the Church. They should consider it 

a part of their responsibility to notice how the dear 

brethren and sisters are progressing, especially in their 

spiritual interests. They should feel it a part of their 

duty to warn, to encourage, to assist all of these, as opportunity 

may offer. 

It is not the prerogative of all the brethren and sisters 
in the Church to endeavor to set each other right, 
unless it be in some personal matter specially related to 
themselves; then Matt. 18:15 should be strictly followed. 
An Elder, however, by his very election, has 
been asked to take such an oversight of the affairs of the 
congregation, to give such advice, to give such reproofs, 
as the nature of the case may seem to demand— in meekness, 
remembering himself also, lest he should be 
tempted, if not along the same lines, then possibly along 



some other line of temptation. He, too, of course, should 
follow Matt. 18:15. 

GRIEVOUS WOLVES AND PERVERSE TALKERS 

The Apostle, by way of impressing this duty of oversight 
upon the elders, reminds them that the Lord purchased 
this flock with the precious blood of the Lamb of 
God and that this value in the Lord's sight should be so 
deeply impressed upon their minds that they would be 
willing to lay down their lives for the brethren in any 
service which they could render. 

Emphasizing the caution already given, the Apostle 
prophetically declared that there would be great need 
of their taking heed to themselves, because of their own 
selves, of the flock itself, and especially amongst the 
Elders, men would arise speaking perverse things, to 
draw away disciples after them; desirous of being leaders, 
they would not hesitate to produce a schism or division 
in the Church to help along their ambition. The 
word perverse (here) in the original signified distorted, 
twisted. The thought is that those who begin to lose 
the Spirit of the Lord, begin to lose their clearness of 
appreciation of the Truth. As personal and selfish ambitions 
cloud their vision they see the Scriptures more 
vaguely and feel free to twist or distort them to make 
them support their ambitious sentiments. How true the 
Apostle's words; how great a danger there is along these 
lines, especially to the Elders, the overseers of the flock! 
Evidently selfish ambition is one of the greatest of foes 
with which they must contend. 

Nor do these ambitions suddenly germinate, bloom and 
bear fruit; the process is a gradual one and hence the 
more dangerous, the more deceptive, the less likely to 
have our notice. How important then that all of the 
Lord's flock, and especially the elders, take heed to themselves 
and scrutinize their conduct, and, above all, the 
motives lying behind their deeds! Let us remember that 
absolute purity of the will is essential. Every admixture 
of selfishness, however little, is a poisonous virus which, 
if unchecked, would lead to the Second Death. "Take 
heed to yourselves," is the admonition, for, the Apostle 
goes on to say, that of their own selves should men 
arise telling truths in a distorted fashion, for the purpose 
of drawing away disciples after them; for the purpose of 
being leaders in the flock; for the purpose of having 
praise and honor of men. Ah, how dear the price— the 
loss of Divine favor and of eternal life! 

"Grievous wolves" are ferocious wolves. For a time 
they may deceive the sheep by an outward manner and 
outward profession, covering their wolfish nature. They 
and the outward conduct by which they deceive are 
Scripturally designated, "Wolves in sheep's clothing." 
The Shepherd certainly knows their character before it 
becomes manifest to the sheep; but the docile, innocent 
sheep are deceived until these wolves begin biting and 



devouring and scattering the flock. The howls of anger, 
malice, hatred, envy and strife are noted in the Scriptures 
as "works of the flesh and of the devil"— not works of 
righteousness and peace and love, the Spirit of the Lord. 
The wolf does injury with his mouth and so do these— 
slandering, backbiting and doing every evil work. 

St. Paul warned the Elders of the Ephesus Ecclesia 
what to expect, and his words are true. Hymenaeus and 
Alexander, Phygellus and Hermogenes, and Philetus are 
mentioned by name. (1 Tim. 1:20; 2 Tim. 1:15; 2:17.) 
The same principles are still at work. The same warning 
still needs to be heeded. Indeed, the Scriptures in general 
imply that the severest experiences along these same 
lines are due to come upon the Church in "the evil day" 
with which this Gospel dispensation will close. 

"NIGHT AND DAY WITH TEARS" 

"Therefore watch, and remember, that by the space 
of three years I ceased not to warn every one night and 
day with tears." Here are two points set before us; 
first, the duty of the Elders of the Church to watch 
against these evils so graphically portrayed; to watch 
for the interests of the flock as against the wolves; to 
watch to give the wolves as little opportunity as possible 
to tear the flock and backbite them, and to warn the 
sheep lest any of them, becoming inoculated with the 
rabies of the wolves, should display signs of hydrophobia 
and begin backbiting one another, with the usual 
symptoms of hydrophobia— with an apparent thirst for 
water (Truth) yet a refusal to drink it. 

Second, the elders are to watch also against 
those sure to arise "of your own selves." Proper 
watching will begin with our own hearts, 
saying, Lord, is it I? And proper watching will 

R4459 : page 254 

in time discern such characters as Hymenaeus 

and Philetus and, following the Apostle's example, will 

expose them— not from any feeling of bitterness towards 

them, but in the interests of and for the protection of 

the flock. St. Paul reminds the brethren that such was 

his own course— one of great watchfulness, interest, care, 

over them and over all the Churches of Asia Minor. The 

expression, "Night and day with tears," shows us clearly 

that the great Apostle felt properly the weight of responsibility 

resting upon him as a servant of God and an 

ambassador of the King of kings and an over-shepherd 

and overseer of the Lord's flock— as a "minister of the 

New Covenant," delegated by the Great Head to assist in 

calling out those who will be the members of his Body, 

for their instruction and building up in the "most holy 

faith," that eventually they might all come to the full 

measure of the stature of manhood in the Body of 

Christ, as the great Mediator, Prophet, Priest and King of 



the world. 

DIVINE ASSISTANCE PROVIDED 

The exhortation closed thus, "And now, brethren, I 
commend you to God, and to the word of his grace, 
which is able to build you up, and to give you an inheritance 
among all them which are sanctified." The 
Apostle's thought seems to have been that his words, 
his earnest exhortation, might not only awaken them, 
but have them to inquire as to what defences could be 
depended upon for the crisis thus pointed out. He draws 
attention to the fact that God, the great Center of all 
our blessings, from whom comes every good and perfect 
gift, is on our part, is on the part of all those who are 
seeking to cooperate with his arrangements. By way of 
further explanation he mentions the Scriptures, the 
Word of God's grace, the Gospel message. He tells them 
that they, and we also, may be assured that the Word of 
God is able to build us up, to give us the necessary development 
of character, of heart and head, and to give us 
ultimately a share in the great inheritance which God 
has in reservation for all those who are sanctified by this 
message. 

Let us lay this well to heart: neglect of God's Word of 
grace, neglect of his promises means a deficiency of 
strength to bear the trial which is our portion. It means 
also the opening of the door for Satan to put light for 
darkness and darkness for light for our confusion. It 
means that those who will not give strict heed in following 
might be unable to distinguish between the bleating 
of the sheep and "the midnight howl" of the wolf; might 
be unable to distinguish between those who are holding 
fast and blowing on the trumpets of the Lord's Word and 
those who are seeking to cause divisions amongst the 
sheep and speaking perverse things— misrepresenting 
facts, that they might divide the flock and draw some 
after themselves. 

Let us make no mistake. It is a question of inheritance 
or no inheritance, amongst them which are sanctified. 
He who is faithful in that which is least, acknowledges 
the Lord and his provisions in connection with all of his 
blessings, temporal and spiritual, will be prepared to look 
forward with continued zeal and will receive the Shepherd's 
care accordingly. On the other hand, those who do 
not appreciate the "meat in due season" and the special 
provisions of this Harvest time— these will not be prepared; 
these will quite likely be deceived by those who 
endeavor to deceive them and draw them aside to 
themselves. 

R4460 : page 254 

AS AN EXAMPLE TO THE FLOCK 

St. Paul had already pointed out that the lesson of the 



law was that the ox that threshed the corn should be 

allowed to have a share of it for his nourishment; and 

that similarly those who minister to the Church in spiritual 

things legally, justly, should have a share in the 

temporal blessings of those whom they serve. He had 

also pointed out that if he had served the Church 

spiritual things of immeasurably more value to them than 

earthly things, it would be a small thing indeed for the 

Church to minister to his temporal needs. But, while 

noting these as points of equity, which should be observed 

by the Church, he did not require these things of them. 

It would be to their advantage to see these matters in 

their proper light and to act accordingly. But if they 

did not see their privileges in serving him and other 

ministers of the Truth in temporal matters, he perceived 

that this offered him a still larger opportunity for self-sacrifice, 

self-denial in the service of the Truth. Their 

neglect he did not resent, saying, You have refused me 

temporal necessities, I will refuse you spiritual comforts. 

On the contrary, his reasoning was this: These dear sheep 

need the spiritual blessings and I am so glad that I am 

privileged by the Lord to be his servant in dispensing 

them. The more it may cost me in the way of self-sacrifice, 

self-denial, the more it will evidence to the 

Lord my love for him, for his Truth, for his flock, and 

the more I will have of the Great Shepherd's favor, because 

I will be more like the great Redeemer, who bought 

the sheep by the sacrifice of himself. 

On these lines the Apostle proceeds to call attention to 
his course— not boastingly, but for their advantage, that 
they might be the better able to discern what would be 
the proper character of an under-shepherd of the Lord. 
He says, "I have coveted no man's silver or gold or apparel." 
He was not serving them for the accumulation 
of wealth, nor to secure the comforts of the present life. 
He coveted their hearts. He coveted the pleasure of 
bringing them into relationship with the great Head of 
the Church as members of his Body. He appreciated his 
privileges as a minister of the New Covenant along these 
lines— preparing the members of the Body of Christ, the 
Mediator, and helping them to make their calling and 
election sure to the glorious things promised in the 
Word. 

He continues, "Yea, ye yourselves know, that these 
hands have ministered unto my necessities, and to them 
that were with me." Apparently some of those who were 
of St. Paul's company had no trade or could find no 
profitable employment, while the Apostle's trade of sail-making, 
tent-making, was apparently a lucrative one, 
furnishing employment in the various seacoast cities 
visited. Apparently the others were largely dependent 
upon this leader for things temporal, as well as things 
spiritual. He had never complained. He did not now 
complain. He merely drew their attention to the proper 
course which he believed he had followed, which he believed 
was pleasing in the sight of the Lord. He commended 



to them a similar spirit of love for the Lord and 

love for the flock and love for the Truth— to the self-sacrificing 

degree. Thus they might be faithful stewards 

of God's mercy, faithful overseers of his flock. His own 

form of stating the message is summed up thus, "I have 

showed you an example, how that so laboring ye ought 

to support the weak, and to remember the words of the 

Lord Jesus, how he said, It is more blessed to give than 

to receive." 



R4460 : page 254 

"WITH JESUS AND LEARNED OF HIM" 

HOW much is told in the few words respecting 

Peter and John, and what their opponents 

thought of them, in the expression, "Now, 

when they saw the boldness (courage) of Peter and 

John, and perceived that they were unlearned and ignorant 

men, they marveled; and they took knowledge of 

them, that they had been with Jesus"!— Acts 4:13. 

One of the remarkable things connected with the 
"present truth" is its effect upon those who receive it- 
its transforming effect, its renewing effect. As the Lord 
foreknew and foretold, the Gospel message has not specially 
appealed to the rich, the learned or the great. These 
feel themselves above the Master's teachings and are 
comparatively satisfied with their conditions. They are 

R4460 : page 255 

led to believe that God would give them a preference any 
day over the ignorant, the stupid, the ignoble. Thus they 
do not so much and so deeply feel their need of spiritual 
healing from the Good Physician. 

The Gospel message takes hold chiefly upon those less 
favored in the present life. And this is true as well of 
the special features of Present Truth as of the general 
features of the Gospel message. In every case, however, 
the marked effect of the Gospel of Christ is manifested 
where it is received into a good and honest heart. It 
lifts up. It gives courage instead of fear. It gives hope 
instead of despondency. It gives an aim and object in 
life, instead of brutish stupidity. It cultivates the will 
and manifests itself in the intelligent expression of the 
eye, in the alertness of the step, the increased deftness 
of the hand, and loosing of the tongue to speak of the 
Lord and his grace. 

Our enemies take note of all these things, and frequently 
marvel at the intelligence on every subject of 
those who for a little time have been students of the 
Divine Plan of the Ages as presented in the six volumes 
of "Scripture Studies," and in the columns of this journal. 
This is well. We are glad of it. Yet there is a 



danger here. If the spirit of self-satisfaction, or pride 
of knowledge of the Scriptures, or of ability to present 
the Divine Plan, be cultivated, it may mean spiritual 
injury. 

It is well that with us as with the Apostles our adversaries 
should take note of our courage; that we have 
the courage of our convictions; that we fear the Lord 
only, and that our highest aim is to deliver forth the 
good tidings of great joy to all who have the hearing ear. 
Here, however, we wish to call attention more particularly 
to the importance of the second feature mentioned in the 
Scripture quoted, namely, that they took knowledge of 
them that they had been with Jesus; that they were his 
disciples, learners in his school. This, truly, is the important 
thing for us— to learn of Jesus, to become copies 
of our Master. 

All of our readers will bear us witness that we give 
due weight to doctrinal knowledge of the divine character 
and plan as set forth in the Divine Word. But while emphasizing 
all of this, and contending for its absolute 
necessity to growth in grace, we feel the necessity of 
continually urging upon the Lord's followers those features 
of the Master's teaching which constitute more particularly 
his spirit, his disposition. The sum of these is 
called Love. As of our Heavenly Father it is declared 
that "God is love," so love also is the special characteristic 
of our Redeemer, who was the image, the very reflection 
of the Father. 

The analysis of love, as given by the Apostle, may be 
understood to be an analysis of the divine character as 
exemplified in our Lord Jesus— meekness, gentleness, patience, 
longsuffering, brotherly kindness— love. And 
since all his followers are invited to become disciples, or 
learners, under him as their teacher, it follows that all 
who learn of him will gradually attain to these same elements 
of his character. 

How could we better proclaim our relationship to him? 
How could we better recommend to others the School of 
Christ? How could we better show forth the praises of 
our Master than by living out his example, representing 
his character before men? Is not this the significance of 
his injunction, "Let your light so shine before men that 
they, seeing your good works, may glorify your Father 
which is in heaven"? It is proper, indeed, that we let our 
doctrines shine out before men, but it is specially important 
that we let the character of Christ shine out. It 
is specially important that the doctrines and the character 
shall correspond and co-attest each other. 

We remember our Lord's words, "By this shall all men 
know that ye are my disciples, if ye have love one to another." 
This was the new commandment that we should 
love one another as he has loved us— with a pure, unselfish 
love which thinketh no evil, vaunteth not itself, 
is not easily offended, and seeketh not its own, selfishly 
—the love which lays down time, energy, and even life 
itself, for the brethren. 



We may never become entirely satisfactory to ourselves 
in thought, word and deed while in the flesh; and we may 
never, therefore, be entirely satisfactory either to others; 
but we can, we should, we must, and by the grace of God 
let us each resolve that we will, attain to all of this so 
far as our hearts are concerned. Nothing short of this 
will be satisfactory to our Lord, to whom we are "betrothed" 
as members of the chaste, virgin Church. If 
we fail to come up to this reasonable, possible, standard, 
we will fail to make our calling and election sure to a 
place in the Bride Company. But if we do these things, 
if at heart we are at this standard, and are daily seeking 
to live it to the best of our ability, the heavenly Bridegroom 
will rejoice to own us as members of his elect. 
Oh how much depends upon our learning this lesson! 
"If ye know these things, happy are ye if ye do them." 



R4461 : page 255 

GENERAL CONVENTION 



SARATOGA SPRINGS, N.Y., AUGUST 31 TO SEPT. 3--HUDSON 
RIVER TRIP ON CHARTERED STEAMER, SEPT. 4. 
BROOKLYN, N.Y., SEPT. 5, 6 

WE HAVE concluded to have the Convention at Saratoga 

Springs, N.Y., with steamboat excursion to 

Brooklyn. This, we believe, will be much more enjoyable 

than to have the Convention at Brooklyn. Our thought 

is to have a Four-Day Convention at Saratoga Springs 

from Tuesday, August 31st, to Friday, September 3d, 

and on Saturday, September 4th, to enjoy fellowshipping 

on one of the famous steamboat trips on the Hudson 

River, arriving in good season to secure necessary accommodation 

for Saturday night. On Sunday, September 

5th, the Academy of Music, the largest and finest auditorium 

in Brooklyn, will be used for the three sessions, 

morning, afternoon and evening. Monday, the 6th, will 

be devoted to visiting the headquarters of the Watch 

Tower Bible and Tract Society, the Brooklyn Tabernacle 

and Bethel Home. 

Saratoga has long been regarded as one of the finest 
summer and health resorts in the United States. Its 
immense Convention Hall seats five thousand people and 
is admirably suited for our General Convention. The 
acoustic properties of the building make it easy for 
speakers to be heard in any part of the auditorium. 

Tickets should be purchased to Saratoga Springs, N.Y., 
making careful inquiry as to lowest rate applicable from 
your own station. Special concession on the basis of the 
certificate plan on account of the Watch Tower Bible 
and Tract Society's Convention will probably be obtained, 
in which event full fare will be paid on going trip, and 
certificate receipt furnished by the agent, which will entitle 



holder to return fare at reduced rate. 

All believers in the Atonement by the Precious 
Blood will be welcomed if they have the Spirit of Christ. 
But "grievous wolves," "backbiters," "slanderers" and 
"contentious" persons are not invited. Should such attend 
these or any meetings of Truth people, they should 
be treated so Scripturally as to make them ill at ease 
and very unhappy at these Love Feasts. Mark the Apostolic 
delineations and admonitions and be of good courage 
in obeying the same. Read Jude 10-12 and Romans 16:17 
and Philippians 3:17. 

Reasonable terms for boarding and lodging have been 
secured. None should count on an expense of less than 
$1.25 per day, and of course at good hotels it would be 
considerably more. 



page 256 

PUBLIC MINISTRIES OF THE TRUTH 

UNDER THE AUSPICES OF PEOPLES PULPIT 
ASSOCIATION OF BROOKLYN, N.Y. 



ONE-DAY LOCAL CONVENTIONS ADDRESSED BY THE 
EDITOR OF THIS JOURNAL AS FOLLOWS: 

SYRACUSE, N.Y., AUGUST 22 

Morning Rally for Praise and Testimony at 10 o'clock. 
At 1 1 a.m. discourse for the interested. 

Session for the Public at 3 p.m. Subject, "The Thief 
in Paradise, the Rich Man in Hell, and Lazarus in Abraham's 
Bosom." 

For further particulars address Mr. Oscar Ochsner, 207 
S. Avery Av. 

WATERTOWN, N.Y., AUGUST 29 

Morning Rally for Prayer, Praise and Testimony at 10 
o'clock. Discourse for the interested at 1 1 a.m. 

Public meeting at 3 p.m. in the Opera House. Topic, 
"Where Are The Dead?" Other particulars from Mr. P. J. 
Earl, Watertown, N.Y. 



page 258 

STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES 
"MILLENNIAL DAWN" 

THESE STUDIES ARE RECOMMENDED TO STUDENTS AS VERITABLE "BIBLE KEYS. 

PRICES ARE NET AND BARELY COVER COST OF PRODUCTION, 

WHEN DELIVERED BY COLPORTEURS THE COST AND PRICE ARE INCREASED. 

SERIES I., The Plan of the Ages, gives an outline of the divine plan 
revealed in the Bible, relating to man's redemption and restitution: 
386 pages, in embossed cloth, 25c. (Is. l/2d.) India paper edition, 75c. 
(3s. l-l/2d.). 

This volume has been published as a special issue of our journal— 
at the extremely low price of 5c. a copy, in any quantity, postage included. 
(To foreign countries, 9c.) This enables people of slender 
purse to herald far and wide the good tidings in a most helpful form. 

SERIES II., The Time is at Hand, treats of the manner and time of 
the Lord's second coming, considering the Bible Testimony on this 
subject: 370 pages, in embossed cloth, 25c. (Is. l/2d.) India paper 
edition, 75c. (3s. l-l/2d.) 

SERIES III., Thy Kingdom Come, considers prophecies which mark 
events connected with the "Time of the End," the glorification of the 
Church and the establishment of the Millennial Kingdom; it also contains 
a chapter of the Great Pyramid, showing its corroboration of the 
dates and other teachings of the Bible: 384 pages, in embossed cloth, 
25c. (Is. l/2d.) India paper edition, 75c. (3s. l-l/2d.) 

SERIES IV., The Day of Vengeance, shows that the dissolution of the 
present order of things is in progress, and that all the panaceas offered 
are valueless to avert the predicted end. It marks in these events the 
fulfilment of prophecy, noting specially our Lord's great prophecy of 
Matt. 24 and Zech. 14:1-9: 660 pages, in embossed cloth, 30c. (Is. 3d.). 
India paper edition, 85c. (3s. 6-l/2d.) 

SERIES V., The At-one-ment Between God and Man, treats an all-important 
subject— the hub, the center around which all the features 
of divine grace revolve. Its topic deserves the most careful and 
prayerful consideration on the part of all true Christians: 507 pages, 
in embossed cloth, 30c. (Is. 3d.) India paper edition, 85c. (3s. 6-l/2d.) 

SERIES VI., The New Creation, deals with the Creative Week 
(Genesis 1 and 2), and with the Church, God's "New Creation." It examines 
the personnel, organization, rites, ceremonies, obligations and 
hopes appertaining to those called and accepted as members of the 
Body under the Head: 740 pages, in embossed cloth, 30c. (Is. 3d.) 
India paper edition, 85c. (3s. 6-l/2d.) 

The above prices include postage. 

IN FULL LEATHER BINDING, gilt edges, the set (6 vols.) $3.00, 
(12s. 6d.), plus postage, 60c. (Is.). 

Is also published in foreign languages as follows: German, six vols., 
in Swedish Vols. 1, 2, 3, 5 and 6; in Dano-Norwegian, three vols.; 
in Greek, three vols.; in French, two vols.; Hollandish, Spanish, 
and Italian, one vol. each; bound in cloth, uniform with English edition, 
prices the same; in Polish, condensed edition, one vol., 10 cents. 



page 257 



SEMI-MONTHLY 
VOL. XXX SEPTEMBER 1 NO. 17 
A.D. 1909--A.M. 6037 



CONTENTS 

Our Western Convention Tour 259 

The Seattle Convention 259 

The St. Joseph Convention 261 

"The Will of the Lord be Done" 265 

"Sons and Daughters Shall Prophecy" 266 

"Weep and Break Mine Heart" 266 

How to Decide the Lord's Will 267 

Highly Honored Mnason 267 

Be Patient, Brethren (Poem) 268 

Early Missions and Present Ones 268 

Bible Students' Convention 268 

Brother Russell's Sermons Weekly 269 

Brother Jones' Convention Reports 269 

Standing at the Mark 270 

Berean Studies on the Atonement 271 

page 258 

PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY 
CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
"BROOKLYN TABERNACLE," 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, N.Y., U.S.A. 

Foreign Agencies:— British Branch: 24 Eversholt St., London, 
N.W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, Barmen. Australasian 
Branch: Equitable Building, Collins St., Melbourne. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:— All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are not 
only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually and 
in touch with the Studies, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, DANISH AND ITALIAN EDITIONS. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N.Y., POSTOFFICE 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA 



HYMNS OF DAWN IN LEATHER BINDING 

These are now in stock in elegant leather binding, 
stamped in gold, at $1.00 per copy, postpaid. 

R4460 : page 258 

SIX BOOKLETS BOUND UNDER ONE COVER 

For further convenience to the friends we have had the 
booklets giving outlines of Chart Discourses, treatise on Our 
Lord's Return, Tabernacle Shadows, Spiritism, Hell and 
Evolution bound in one volume, uniform with the SCRIPTURE 
STUDIES and with the Cloth "Helps." Price 50 cents, postpaid. 

R4482 : page 258 

BLUE PRINT CHART ON SOFT CLOTH 

We have the Blue-print Chart of the Ages, 36 inches by 
60 inches, on soft cloth, which can be folded without breaking 
and which can be carried conveniently in the pocket- 
Si. 00 postpaid. 

Likewise the Chronological Chart, 42 inches by 92 inches, 
also on soft cloth, at $1.50 each, postpaid. 

page 258 

VOLUNTEER MATTER 

If you have not received your full order of this year's 
Volunteer literature, PEOPLES PULPIT NO. 3, containing 
"Where are the Dead?" discourse, please advise us at once, 
stating definitely quantity desired. 

Volume 1, India Paper, is temporarily out of stock. 



R4461 : page 259 

OUR WESTERN CONVENTION TOUR 

THE SEATTLE CONVENTION 

OUR train reached Seattle Thursday morning, July 
22nd, and the four days of our stay will surely 
long be remembered by all who participated in 



the blessings of this Convention. The weather was 
ideal; the arrangement excellent; and the cheap railroad 
rate brought many friends living within a radius 
of five hundred miles. One brother eighty-three years 
old told us that he had come a distance of over two 
thousand miles. The friends were very warmly enthusiastic 
and gave many evidences of great love for 
the Lord, for the Truth and for each other. As our 
company of ninety alighted at Seattle station we were 
greeted by approximately one hundred and fifty, who 
welcomed us warmly in the name of the Lord and his 
children. We returned the salutations and quickly realized 
that we were in the loving company of the Lord's 
brethren. 

The Convention opened at 10:30 o'clock. Brother 
Acheson, of the Seattle class, as its representative, greeted 
us and assured us of the love of the local Church and 
of their happiness in having us with them. Following 
this, Brother Baker, speaker for the friends of the entire 
Northwest, greeted the Convention tourists, assuring us 
that the friends of the extensive district which he represented 
were of one heart and mind in thanking us for 
our coming, and in anticipation of Divine blessing for the 
Convention, and laden with prayers for Divine benediction 
upon the services which were to be held. 

Next, as the President of the Watch Tower Bible and 
Tract Society, we greeted all the dear friends in attendance 
at the Convention, assuring them all of our Christian 
love and good wishes and that we were pleased to 
be in their midst and to receive their welcome and to 
return to them our cordial greeting. We assured them 
of the Society's endeavors at all times and under all 
circumstances to look out for the interests of the Lord's 
flock and to do everything in our power to aid the dear 
sheep to a full appreciation of the length and breadth 
and height and depth of the love of God. We then 
introduced Brother J. F. Rutherford as the permanent 
chairman of the Convention, which was opened with a 
testimony meeting, at which many hearts unburdened 
themselves, telling of their love for the Lord and the 
Truth; how in Divine providence the Truth had first 
come to their attention; how they had been growing in 
grace and knowledge; how their love for the Lord and 
for the brethren kept increasing; how they realized the 
closing of the age and that the harvest would soon be 
past and the summer of Divine favor soon ended, and 
how they were striving by Divine grace "to make their 
calling and their election sure."— 2 Pet. 1:10. 

Following a praise service in the afternoon we addressed 
the Convention from the text, "Who hath known 
the mind of the Lord, or who hath been his counsellor?" 
(Rom. 1 1.32.) We outlined the Divine Plan as outlined 
in the Scriptures, beginning with Satan's deflection, and 
showing the testing of the angels in connection with 
man's fall, and the lessons of man's fall and redemption 
and restitution and final test. We endeavored to make 



clear that obedience to God is the ultimate test by which 
all of his creatures on any plane will be tried. None but 
the obedient shall have eternal life. All of the disobedient 
shall be destroyed. We endeavored to note 
what the Divine injunctions are which must be obeyed, 
and found that they include faith, humility and loyalty, 
and these out of a pure heart inspired by love, and that 
this love not only relates to the Father and Son, but 
must be a general element of character applicable to all 
men and in proportion as they are in accord with the 
Divine character and applicable also even to the new 
creation. 

In the evening after praise service Brother O. L. 
Sullivan addressed the Convention. We did not have the 
pleasure of hearing the address, having accepted an invitation 
to visit a Brother and a Sister, residing at 
Everett, who were physically unable to attend the Convention. 
We were most cordially received and found 
that they were rejoicing in the Truth and strong in the 
Lord. The Brother is eighty-seven years old and physically 
in a most deplorable condition, but his heart is 
happy and his face bright, because of the light of the 
knowledge of the Lord which had shined into his heart. 
His affliction is of a rheumatic character and has affected 
his joints, so that the slightest movement of them is 
with intense pain. Cheerfully and patiently he told me 
that he was waiting for the Lord's time for his "change," 
and that his entire consolation is the Truth. The dear 
Brother who took us to see him remarked that whenever 
he felt discouraged or in any wise inclined to murmur 
he took a little run up to see this Brother, with the 
result that he always concluded that in comparison he 
had no difficulty, no trials, no pains, and that if this 
dear Brother can praise the Lord under such conditions 
not a murmur or a sigh should escape those who are in 
a more favored condition, except the sigh of sympathy. 

Friday morning we had another praise and testimony 
meeting, after which Brother F. A. Acheson, of Seattle, 
gave what was reported to be a very interesting discourse. 
In the afternoon we conducted a Question Meeting 
for over two hours and greatly appreciated the 
questions, which indicated breadth and depth of thought. 
In the evening one of the local brethren, Brother W. A. 
Baker, addressed the Convention, evidently much to its 
satisfaction. 

Saturday, July 24.— The day opened with a testimony 
meeting, reported to have been most interesting, and this 
service was followed by a discourse by Brother J. A. Bohnet, 
of which we heard excellent reports. We regretted 
inability to be present when others were speaking, but 

R4461 : page 260 

our time, in harmony, we believe, with the Divine will, 
was given to private appointments with friends who had 
particular and private matters to discuss. In the afternoon 



we gave a discourse on Baptism, its import and its 
symbol, following which eighty were immersed, forty-three 
brethren and thirty-seven sisters. In the evening 
we had a symposium on the gifts and graces of love, 
nine dear brethren participating to the pleasure and profit 
of the Convention. 

Sunday, July 25.— The meetings of this day were 
held in New Armory Hall. Brother J. F. Rutherford 
spoke in the forenoon, the congregation being composed 
chiefly of the friends of the Truth, to the number of 
about five hundred. His text was Malachi 3:2, the 
particular point of the discourse being the trials of the 
present time— Who will stand? and, What assistances 
the Lord has provided for them. 

The afternoon service was specially for the public, our 
topic being, "Where are the Dead?" A large and very 
intelligent audience was present— residents of Seattle, 
and people from all parts of the world attending the 

R4462 : page 260 

Seattle Exposition. The crowd was estimated at 4000. 
We had closest attention and in conclusion many were 
the warm greetings and expressions of joy, hope and 
pleasure connected with the "good tidings of great joy 
which shall be unto all people." The evening session was 
a love feast, when we said farewell to one another and 
"God bless you. Let us hope to meet again in the Great 
Convention on high, where we surely shall be if faithful 
to him who called to us out of darkness into his marvelous 
light." Probably one hundred accompanied our party 
to the train. Those on board and those on the platform 
united their hearts and voices in sweet songs, "Blest be 
the tie that binds," "God be with you till we meet 
again," etc. 

AT SPOKANE, WASHINGTON 

Our train arrived in time for the appointed meeting 
at 3 p.m. About twenty of the dear friends met us in 
the depot as representatives of the congregation. We 
were escorted to the hall, where about one hundred others 
were waiting. In other words the total number of 
friends gathered was in the neighborhood of one hundred 
and fifty— including a goodly number from surrounding 
towns. We had a most enjoyable season of fellowship 
together for about two hours. We received the greetings 
of the local congregation through Brother Field and 
assured the brethren of our love and our appreciation 
of the privilege of being with them. 

Our address was from the text, "Keep thy heart with 
all diligence, for out of it are the issues of life." We 
endeavored to show that the testings of the Lord are all 
along the line of fitness for life eternal or death eternal; 
that so it will be with the world during the Millennium 
and that so it is with the Church at the present time. 



We endeavored to make clear that it is the heart condition 

that the Lord is inspecting; that according to 

the loyalty or disloyalty of the heart will be the decision. 

The loyal shall have eternal life through Jesus Christ 

our Lord; and the disloyal, the wages of sin, death 

eternal. We pointed out the numberless privileges and 

favors and blessings and advantages every way which, by 

the grace of God, we have enjoyed. All these are indications 

that God is for us; that he desires that we 

shall make our calling and election sure; and hence 

that the whole responsibility for success or failure rests 

with us and depends upon our loyalty to him, our keeping 

of our hearts in a proper relationship to God. We 

showed that this keeping, to be successful, must be done 

with all diligence, because the world, the flesh and the 

Adversary are continually offering to us seductive temptations 

to disloyalty, which must be resisted. The Lord 

permits these temptations, because he desires to test us, 

to prove us. "The Lord your God doth prove you, 

whether or no ye do love the Lord your God with all 

your heart."— Deut. 13:3. 

The evening session was for the public, the topic 
being, "The Thief in Paradise; The Rich Man in Hell; 
Lazarus in Abraham's Bosom." A very intelligent audience 
was present and gave close attention for two hours. 
The number was estimated at fifteen hundred. From the 
meeting we went direct to our train, accompanied by a 
considerable number of the friends. 

BUTTE, MONTANA 

On the arrival of our train we were met at the depot 
by about twenty friends of the Truth, eight of them local 
residents and the remainder from nearby towns, who 
escorted us to the meeting hall, where we addressed the 
friends from the text, "You hath he quickened, who were 
dead in trespasses and sins."— Eph. 2:1. 

We endeavored to show something of the difference 
between the dead world and the quickened "new creature" 
in Christ Jesus, to whom all things have become new. 
The world, in ignorance and superstition, has little conception 
of the object of its creation. Eating, sleeping, 
working, and endeavors to have pleasure constitute the 
sum total of life for the few years of earthly existence 
to the masses. Added are fears respecting the future- 
horrors and torment of mind lest the next life should 
be worse than the present one. On the contrary, the 
Christian has much advantage everyway, not only as 
respects future prospects, but as regards the present living 
also. To him there comes an object for living, a purpose, 
an end to be sought, a heavenly ambition. Additionally 
we showed that the figure or illustration here 
used is that of a human embryo. After begettal must 
come the period of quickening, of energizing; otherwise 
there would be no life, no growth, no preparation for 
birth. Thus the Christian, begotten of the holy Spirit 



through the message of the Lord, must reach the quickening 
stage, the vitalizing period, the stage of activity, 
so surely as he makes progress. In this condition of 
activity he must still progress and become strong and 
ready for the birth of resurrection, that he may share 
with the Lord in the glory, honor and immortality of the 
First Resurrection and be born from the dead, incorruptible. 

In the evening we had a service for the public, but only 
about three hundred and fifty were present. These, however, 
gave excellent attention to our discourse on "Where 
are the Dead?" At the conclusion the free literature 
was eagerly taken and some expressions were made which 
indicated that a considerable degree of interest had been 
aroused in the minds of several. Here appeared a man 
who had heard the Seattle discourse. He declared that 
he had been all over the world and that, after hearing and 
examining all religions in existence, he had become an 
infidel, until at Seattle for the first time he had heard 
God's Truth and was promptly fully converted to faith 
in the great Author of the Divine Plan of Ages. 

After the public meeting a number of the friends accompanied 
us to the railway station and we started on 
our journey for Denver. 

DENVER, COLORADO, CONVENTION 

A ride of two nights and nearly two days brought us 
to Denver in time for an afternoon meeting Thursday, 
July 29. The Denver Convention had already commenced. 
A good Testimony Meeting had greatly refreshed 
the friends already gathered and assisted in 
making them acquainted with each other. The total 
attendance of the interested was about three hundred. 

Our discourse for the afternoon was based upon the 
text, "The Fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom." 
(Psa. 111:10.) This we treated as upon a previous 
occasion, emphasizing the fact that as our coming to the 
Lord was inspired by reverence for him so our faith in 
Christ was based on reverence for God's message of 
grace. Then consecration followed, a result of further 
reverence. Then reverence aided in perfecting our 
sacrifices and kept us back from presumptuous sins 
and helped to fix the characters God had predestinated 
should alone be acceptable to the elect. In such faithful 
ones personal ambition will not only be subjected to 
the Divine arrangement, but will be crushed out, "mortified," 

R4462 : page 261 

eradicated, and the highest ambition of the heart 
will be that expressed by our Lord, "I delight to do 
thy will O my God; yea, thy Law is written in my 
heart." (Psa. 40:8.) Such delight in sacrifice in the 
Lord's service and never forget that obedience is still 
more highly prized of the Lord than sacrifice. Such the 
Lord will keep by his own power, "As the apple of his 



eye," "In the hollow of his hand." (Deut. 32:10.) 
Nothing shall by any means injure these. All things 
must work for good to these. Even their weaknesses 
and blemishes shall not stumble them, because their 
hearts being loyal, their unintentional imperfections are 
covered by the Lord's grace and will be made to serve 
them as stepping stones instead of stumbling stones. 
Should they lack in talent or education, the Lord will 
make up to them such deficiencies in his own way. He 
stands pledged to do so through Christ, because they 
are members of his Body. 

Thursday evening meeting was for the public, the 
topic being, "Where are the Dead?" Over one thousand 
were present, filling the First Christian Church, and 
several hundred were turned away. We had the closest 
attention and trust that some were profited. 

On Friday morning at 10:30, following a praise service, 
we conducted a Question Meeting for the interested. 
Many of the questions were deeply interesting and important 
and indicative of study in the Truth. A number 
of them related to the Covenants, sin-offering, etc., and 
indicated that the dear friends were thinking considerably 
along proper lines. The attendance was about four 
hundred. 

Shortly after noon we were obliged to bid the friends 
goodby and proceeded onward to the St. Joseph Convention. 
If the program we outlined was followed the 
afternoon service was a discourse on baptism by Brother 
Frank Draper and was followed by symbolic baptism in 
water (25 were immersed we since have learned) and 
then in the evening by a Praise and Testimony service. 
On Saturday Brothers F. L. Hall and CM. Hunt delivered 
addresses, and on Sunday Brother Frank 
Draper and Brother F. L. Hall were the speakers. The 
closing session was a symposium on Love, participated 
in by several of the brethren. 

THE ST. JOSEPH CONVENTION 

We preceded the excursion party and reached St. 
Joseph Saturday morning, July 31. The Convention 
had already been under way two days with Brother 
Rutherford as chairman. Brother S. D. Senor gave the 
opening address of welcome, which was responded to 
by the chairman. Then followed a most interesting 
praise and testimony meeting. The friends seemed very 
early in the Convention to reach a goodly degree of 

R4463 : page 261 

spiritual fervor. On Friday a.m. Brother S. D. Senor 
gave an address. In the afternoon Brother P. S. L. 
Johnson spoke and was followed in the evening by 
Brother Raymond. Brother G. B. Raymond spoke on 
Saturday afternoon and Brother J. F. Rutherford in the 
evening. 



At the time of our arrival on Saturday morning the 
Praise and Testimony Service, already under way, had 
just reached its conclusion. We stepped upon the platform 
while the dear friends were singing that precious 
hymn, "Blest be the tie that binds our hearts in Christian 
love." The scene was very affecting. Many eyes 
were moist and the entire congregation, estimated at 
800, seemed deeply affected by the occasion and the 
appropriate words they were singing. We joined 
heartily with the friends in the singing and then addressed 
them from the text, "The blessing of the Lord, 
it maketh rich; and he addeth no sorrow therewith."— 
Prov. 10:22. 

We showed that the blessing of the Lord had not 
made rich the world, but would do so in God's due time. 
We pointed out that the blessing of the Lord had made 
father Adam rich, but that the sin of disobedience had 
spoiled his blessing and brought upon him instead the 
sentence of the curse of death. Next we showed the 
promise of new blessings in the Divine Covenant with 
Abraham and that the knowledge of this coming blessing 
means refreshment and joy to all who can see it and 
hear it with the eyes and ears of faith. We traced the fulfilment 
of the promise in Christ and the Church and noted 
how rich the Divine blessing is to all who will receive 
even the present foretaste. We concentrated attention 
upon the thought of the fulfilment of the Divine promises 
in God's due time— how the blessing of the Lord in the 
end would make the Church rich indeed, to the extent 
of the Divine nature and glory and honor and immortality 
promised to those who will be then joint-heirs with 
the Lord Jesus in his Millennial Kingdom and his work 
of blessing to the world. 

We pointed out the truth of the statement of our text, 
"He addeth no sorrow therewith." We showed that the 
sorrows are not of the Lord's providing or adding, but 
come as a result of sin and imperfection and that in 
proportion as we reverence the Lord and seek to walk 
through life close to him, in that same proportion we 
shall avoid the sorrows which come from outside sources. 
We noted also the fact that it is the Divine intention that 
those who would live godly should suffer persecution, but 
that such persecution is not of the Lord, though permitted 
by him, and that with his grace in sufficient supply 
we may be enabled to "glory in tribulation also." 

We pointed out the Divine order for all these blessings: 
that our Lord Jesus, born under the Law Covenant 
as well as under the Abrahamic Covenant, was thus 
obligated to keep the Law, and did so perfectly; and that 
thus he was declared to be the one perfect man through 
whom accrued all blessings to us from the Lord, including 
the opportunity of becoming members of "Abraham's 
Seed." (Gal. 3:29.) By fulfilling the Law Jesus 
was entitled to everything that father Adam had 
originally possessed as a perfect man, everything he had 
lost through disobedience. Thus Jesus was entitled to 



everlasting human life and fellowship with the Father- 
entitled also to be the Ruler or King of earth and to all 
the earthly dignity and honor from God which this implied 
—having dominion over the beasts of the field, the 
fowls of the air and the fish of the sea, as well as over 
the fallen race. Had our Lord chosen to exercise those 
earthly rights he might indeed have blessed the world 
to a considerable degree through wise laws and regulations 
respecting diet, etc., etc. But his empire would 
still have been subject to death, because the death sentence 
would still be hanging over Adam and his posterity. 

Such a blessing was just about what the Jews had 
expected as a result of the Abrahamic promise. They 
awaited the Messiah, who, as their Instructor and great 
King, would rule and guide and bless them and ultimately 
extend that rule and blessing to all the families 
of the earth with generally favorable and uplifting influences. 
God, however, had higher plans for mankind. 
For "as the heavens are higher than the earth, so are 
God's plans higher than man's plans and his methods 
higher than man's methods."— Isa. 55:9. 

In harmony with the Divine plan our Lord Jesus, instead 
of keeping the earthly life and empire to which 
he had a right as the obedient heir of the Law Covenant, 
sacrificed it— laid it down in death. This was the 
Father's proposition— that if he would show his faith 
and obedience to the extent of fully sacrificing the earthly 
life and rights the Father would raise him up by 
power Divine from the dead, not to earthly conditions 
again, but to heavenly conditions— "Far above all principality, 
and power, and might, and dominion, and every 
name that is named." (Eph. 1:21.) It is the Father's 
proposition that being thus exalted he might still possess 
the earthly rights which he had sacrificed— possess them 
as an asset or valuable possession which he might give 
away for the blessing of Adam and his race, whose lives 
and earthly rights were forfeited by sin. We showed 
that our risen, glorified Lord had in his possession when 
he ascended up on high enough of blessing to mean the 
restoration of Adam and every member of his race, or as 
many of these as he might choose to apply this benefit 

R4463 : page 262 

to. Christ's one sacrifice was sufficient for all if so applied. 
We requested all to notice that the blessings 
which Jesus had to give away were earthly blessings, 
earthly life, earthly power, earthly Paradise, etc., and 
not heavenly things. 

THE NEW COVENANT 

We reminded the friends that the Israelites under the 
Law Covenant had been hoping for these great earthly 
blessings from Messiah. At first they thought that 
Moses should be the great Deliverer, through whom they 



would get the wonderful blessings. But as they perceived 
that Moses and all of their race were dying, they 
to some extent realized that their (Law) Covenant was 
not bringing them the great blessings they had anticipated. 
Then the Lord sent to them through the prophets 
assurances that he would make a New (Law) Covenant 
with them after certain days, thus implying that the 
(Law) Covenant in which they had trusted was not 
wholly satisfactory and could not accomplish for them 
what they needed. They, of course, knew that if they 
would have a New Covenant, it must also have a 
mediator. And the Lord, through the prophets, indicated 
that the great Messiah would be that Mediator. 
The Lord spoke of those things yet future as though they 
already were. He spoke of them prophetically. Thus 
also our Lord was referred to as the Lamb of God slain 
(in the Divine purpose) from the foundation of the 
world. Similarly Jesus, before his birth, was mentioned 
prophetically as the Mediator of the New Covenant- 
neither the Covenant itself, nor its mediator, being in 
existence, except in the promise of God. God said to 
Israel— "Behold, I will send my Messenger,. ..even 
the Messenger of the Covenant, whom ye delight in [the 
servant or Mediator of the New Law Covenant for whose 
coming you are so desirous]. But who may abide the 
day of his coming? and who shall stand when he appeareth? 
for he is like a refiner's fire, and like fuller's 
soap. "-Mai. 3:1,2. 

We pointed out that even though Israel slew the Redeemer 
it was done ignorantly and that our reasonable 
expectation might have been that after our Lord had 
finished his sacrifice at Calvary and had ascended up on 
high and appeared in the Father's presence, his appearance 
would have been for Israel, as the Mediator of the 
promised New Covenant— to make application of his 
blood as the sealing of that New Law Covenant. Thus he 
would have given to Israel the right of earthly life, earthly 
honor, earthly dominion, which he had a right to through 
keeping the Law, but had sacrificed so that he might 
give it to Israel, and through Israel to all the families 
of the earth. But to our surprise he did nothing of this 
kind. Instead of showering the blessing of restitution 
upon natural Israel he did the very reverse. He said 
to them, "Your house is left unto you desolate. Ye shall 
not see me henceforth, till ye shall say, Blessed is he 
that cometh in the name of the Lord"— at his second 
coming as the King of glory, the great antitypical King, 
Priest and Mediator between God and men— between God 
and the world. (Matt. 23:38,39.) The Apostle declares 
that Israel was blinded, but he equally assures 
us that their blindness will not last forever, and that 
Divine favor will return to them under their New 
Covenant. 

What did our Lord do with those earthly rights, earthly 
honors, earthly life privileges, etc., which were his to 
bestow? We remember that it is written, that "He 



ascended up on high, there to appear in the presence of 
God for us"— for the "household of faith," the antitypical 
Levites, including the antitypical priests. We called 
attention to the apparent incongruity of this, namely, 
that the Church is hoping for spiritual blessings, glory, 
honor and immortality on the spiritual plane, and not 
hoping to get earthly rights, earthly life, etc., such as 
Jesus had to bestow. We pointed out, however, that the 
offer made to the Church is from the Father, who, co-operating 
with our Lord Jesus, has given us who are now 
called a similar invitation to that which was given to our 
Lord Jesus. Our Lord Jesus tenders to us first the 
earthly rights and blessings which he acquired through 
obedience to the Law and which, by virtue of his sacrifice, 
he has now to give away. He offered them all to us 
—to the "household of faith" of this Gospel Age, but 
conditionally and not otherwise. The conditions are that 
we shall, as he did, agree to sacrifice these earthly rights, 
to abrogate them, to lay them down, to die to those 
earthly restitution rights and privileges and honors. In 

R4464 : page 262 

so doing we shall be following the example of our Lord, 
walking in his footsteps, and be obeying his Word, and 
shall be accounted worthy of a share with him in the 
heavenly glory, honor and immortality, and in his 
Millennial reign. 

Explaining the proposition to us the Master says that 
we may first of all count ourselves justified by faith- 
justified freely from all sin, as though we were actually 
perfect. But this justification by faith is merely 
granted to us for a purpose and for a time— to 
furnish us the opportunity for sacrificing those 
earthly rights. And whosoever does not use the opportunity 
and make the consecration, his justification will 
lapse— will amount to nothing. If, however, any desire 
to be his disciple and to follow his leading, to share in 
his death, to share in his sacrifice, to be dead with him, 
that disciple may have the assurance of participation with 
him in the heavenly state, condition and glory. "If any 
man will be my disciple, let him take up his cross and 
follow me," "and where I am there shall my servant be." 
In line with this the Apostle exhorts all believers, all 
members of the household of faith, to present their bodies 
living sacrifices, counted as "holy," justified freely from 
sin through the merit of the blood of Jesus, which makes 
them "acceptable" sacrificers and enables them to become 
joint-heirs with Christ in the heavenly glory on the same 
terms and conditions that the Father granted to their 
Redeemer.— Rom. 12:1. 

We thus saw that by this Divine program the merit of 
Christ's death, earthly rights, restitution privileges and 
honors will pass through the Church without the slightest 
diminution; for all that the Church receives by faith 
through Christ must be laid down again in sacrifice. So, 



then, at the close of this Gospel Age, the merit of Christ 
will be neither more nor less than at the time he died; 
but, in God's providence, that merit will meantime have 
been used as the basis or condition upon which the 
"elect" Church shall have been lifted, not only out of sin 
and death conditions, but out of earthly conditions altogether 
—to heavenly conditions, to the divine nature. 
We paused a moment to consider with the Apostle the 
wonderful wisdom of God and to say with him, Who 
knew the mind of God in advance or who was his adviser 
in this wonderful, economical, judicial, loving and generous 
arrangement by which we, the "elect" of this Gospel 
Age, receive grace upon grace or favor upon favor 
and are permitted to share with our Lord in his great 
work of blessing the world of mankind with an uplift, 
social, mental, moral and physical? 

"MERCY THROUGH YOUR MERCY" 

Then we inquired, What next will Christ do with this 
merit of his own sacrifice? We hearkened to the Apostle, 
who explains this entire matter in Romans 11:25-33. He 
assures us that Israel was not cast off forever, but 
merely until we Spiritual Israelites shall first have been 
sought and found, polished and fitted and brought to 
perfection. Then "all Israel shall be saved" from the 
blindness which God sent upon them at the beginning of 
this age. By that time the Deliverer shall have come out 
of Zion. The Head, our Lord Jesus, was brought to the 
birth more than eighteen centuries ago. His Body, the 
Church, is now being born in the end of this Gospel Age 
by having share in "his resurrection."— Phil. 3:10,11. 

Israel and the world have been waiting for the development 
of this great Deliverer— Jesus the Head and 
the Church his Body. This is the great antitypical 
Mediator like unto Moses, of whom Moses said, "A 
prophet the Lord our God shall raise up unto you of your 

R4464 : page 263 

brethren, like unto me." (Acts 3:22.) The Head was 
raised up nearly eighteen centuries ago. The Body is now 
being raised up and, with the "change" of the feet members, 
the antitype, Mediator, Priest and King of the 
world will stand forth. We are not left to doubt as to 
how and when and where the blessing will begin. The 
Divine blessing is to reach the world of mankind through 
Israel and under their New Covenant. They have been 
blinded and turned aside, waiting for the Deliverer- 
waiting for the Mediator. Shortly he will be completed. 
His first work will be to pass to the credit of the New 
Covenant that same "precious blood" which, during this 
Gospel Age, has blessed and comforted the Church and 
opened for us the way to joint-heirship with the Redeemer 
through sacrifice. 
The blood of Christ represents his sacrificed life and all 



the earthly rights represented therein. His right to the 
earthly life, by his obedience to the Law, is still his asset 
or merit, passed through the Church, which is his Body. 
It now becomes the blood of the New (Law) Covenant, the 
basis of reconciliation between God and Israel. It seals 
that Covenant, which, through Israel, shall extend the 
privilege of eternal life to every nation, people, kindred 
and tribe. This blood of the New Covenant our Lord 
invites his Church to share in, saying, "Drink ye all of 
it." And again, "Are ye able to drink of the cup that I 
shall drink of?" Except we partake of the merit of his 
flesh and are thus justified by the merit of his sacrifice, 
and unless additionally we share in "his cup" as partakers 
of his blood, "his death," his sacrifice, we have 
no life in us. Sharing with him in his cup, partaking of 
his sufferings of this present time, buried with him by 
immersion into his death, we shall be associated with him 
as members of the Mediator in the work of dispensing the 
blessings of that New Covenant, under its terms, to whosoever 
wills to accept them. 

"Oh glorious hope of heavenly love! 

It lifts us up to things above; 

It bears on eagle-wings. 

It gives our joyful souls a taste 

And makes us even here to feast 

With Jesus, priests and kings." 
We note the Apostle's comments further. In verse 27, 
still speaking of Israel, he says, "This is my [New] 
Covenant unto them when I shall take away their sins." 
We pointed out that the Apostle could have referred only 
to the New Covenant promised to that nation, and the 
fact that their sin should be taken away at the time when 
that Covenant is sealed— made operative. St. Paul continues, 
declaring that natural Israel was treated as God's 
enemy and turned aside during all this Gospel Age- 
that we might have the privilege of becoming members 
of the Spiritual Seed of Abraham under the original, 
primary Covenant. St. Paul points out that as soon as the 
Church, the Deliverer, shall have come out of Zion and 
their New Covenant has begun to operate the effect will 
be, not only to "save" them from their blindness, but 
also to "turn away their ungodliness." 

We noted especially that St. Paul declares of natural 
Israel, blessed under its Covenant, that "They shall obtain 
mercy through your mercy." We pointed out that 
this does not signify that the mercy to Israel, the earthly 
seed under the New Covenant, will not be Divine mercy, 
nor does it signify that it is not the mercy of the Lord 
Jesus Christ. On the contrary, it will be of the Father 
and by the Son and through the Church. "They shall obtain 
mercy through your mercy." We reminded the 
friends that every good and perfect gift cometh down 
from the Father of Lights and that every blessing comes 
to us by his representative, our Lord Jesus Christ, and 
that we, the Church, are by and through him. Hence, 
the expression, "They shall obtain mercy through your 



mercy," is merely bringing to our attention the fact that 
the Divine purpose is to honor the Church by passing 
through her the Divine blessing, which from of old had 
been promised to the natural seed of Abraham. 

A FATHER OF MANY NATIONS 

We pointed out that in Ezekiel 16:45-60 the Lord 
clearly indicates that his dealing with the outside nations 
will be through natural Israel. Referring to the 
Sodomites and to the Samaritans the Lord used these 
two nations as illustrations of the other nations of the 
world and how they are received to Divine blessing, saying, 
"I will give them unto thee for daughters [to be 
instructed], but not by thy Covenant." Their Covenant of 
that time was the Law Covenant of Sinai. But the 
Covenant under which these are to be given to them 
will be their New (Law) Covenant— instituted by the 
better Mediator— the Christ, Head and Body. 

We showed that thus all the nations of the world will 
be privileged to come back into harmony with God under 
Israel's New Covenant. This would imply that to have 
the benefit of the New Covenant they must become 
Israelites indeed, with true circumcision of the heart. 
Thus Abraham will become gradually "a father of many 
nations." We reminded the friends of the prophecy 
which declares that after the time of trouble and after 
the Ancient Worthies shall have been established as the 
rulers of natural Israel, and after God's blessing and the 
New Covenant shall have begun to operate toward them, 
the other nations of the world will begin to take notice. 
Sin and death will still be reigning amongst them, but 
they will behold in Israel the beginning of the reign of 
righteousness unto life eternal. Then they will say to 
each other, "Come, let us go up to the mountain of the 
Lord's house"— let us come into line with the Divine 
government established in Israel; Israel's great Lawgiver 
then will be our Teacher also and we will walk 
in the paths which he directs; for the Law shall go forth 
from Mount Zion [the glorified spiritual Church] and 
the word of the Lord from Jerusalem, the earthly representative 
of the heavenly dominion.— Micah 4:2. 

SATURDAY AFTERNOON 

Brother Coward was on the program for Saturday afternoon, 
but the excursion party did not arrive in time 
to permit him to serve. Instead the congregation of the 

R4465 : page 263 

Convention was greatly edified by a Berean Scripture 
study conducted by Brother P. S. L. Johnson. Since the 
congregation was too large to be treated as one general 
class, Brother Johnson called for the Elders of various 
congregations to indicate themselves, and then asked 



them to come forward and sit together in the front rows. 
He conducted the Berean study with these, asking them 
the questions and drawing out from one and another the 
proper answers to them. It is hoped that the lesson 
was very helpful and that the custom of using these 
Berean Lessons will grow in the future as they have been 
doing for some time past. We request that the Pilgrim 
brethren shall give one sample of the Berean Scripture 
Study at each point visited. Through these the dear 
friends at every place may have extremely helpful, profitable 
and interesting meetings. The classes using these, 
we believe, are making the best of progress. 

After a Praise Service at 7:30 p.m., we conducted a 
Question Meeting at which some excellent queries were 
presented, which showed that many of the dear friends 
were thinking earnestly and deeply on the features of 
the Divine Plan. True, many of the questions are already 
answered in the "Dawn-Studies" and some of these 
we preferred to reply to by referring to the reading matter, 
assuring all that the answers would be more satisfactory 
than would be possible for us to make in the 
few moments at our disposal. On the whole the meeting 
was a good one. 

SUNDAY, AUGUST 1 

The Sunday morning topic at 8:30 was baptism and 
its import. We addressed the friends with all the earnestness 
of which we were capable, explaining the True Baptism 
and how it differs from many erroneous theories 
respecting it. Following the service those desirous of 
symbolizing in water their burial or baptism with Christ 
into his death were invited to come forth, and after 
being questioned, were given the righthand of fellowship 

R4465 : page 264 

in "the Church. ..whose names are written in heaven." 
Ten street cars were waiting to carry the large audience 
to a not distant lake, where thorough arrangements had 
been made in advance for serving the friends. One 
hundred and twenty-six (126) adults were baptized 
symbolically in water. It was a deeply impressive 
occasion, the surroundings all favoring. 

Our afternoon topic was an address to the public— 
"Where Are the Dead?" It had been very thoroughly 
advertised and a splendid audience, estimated at 4,500, 
was present. The closest of attention was given, some, 
notwithstanding the great heat, standing throughout the 
service of two hours' length. In the evening, after a 
praise service, Brother Johnson again addressed the 
Convention. 

On Monday morning from 8:30 to 10:30 the friends 
enjoyed a very delightful season of refreshment in the 
praise and testimony meeting. Promptly at 10:30 we 
addressed the Convention. After explaining that Brother 



Jones would deliver a discourse in the afternoon, and 
that a Symposium on Love would be the last meeting of 
the Convention in the evening, we in a sense drew the 
Convention to a close, giving a vote of thanks to the 
brethren of the congregation for the favors received at 
their hands in connection with the very wise and helpful 
arrangements provided for our comfort; and also 
to the Business Men's Club, which had, through their 
local committee, granted us the use of the fine Auditorium 
in which we were meeting. We called to mind the 
blessings of the Lord in connection with the Convention 
and how we owed to him more than to all others thanks 
and praise and reverential service. We reminded all that 
from him cometh every good and perfect gift; to whom 
we should render all the service of our being. We considered 
the improbability of our ever all meeting again 
this side of the vail, but the possibility of our all meeting 
with the Lord, if faithful, beyond the vail. Our 
hearts looked forward yearningly to the "General 
Assembly of the Church of the Firstborn." We considered 
the loved ones who had gone before, and the 
dear ones who, in the spirit of their minds, were with 
us at the Convention, although unable to be with us in 
person; and the fact that we would soon part; and 
the blessed assurance that when the new conditions 
should be reached there would be no more such uncertain 
partings to those who should be found worthy to a 
share in the fellowship Divine. While longing for the 
"change" and that the trials of life shall be ended, and 
while trusting to hear the Master's "Well done!" we 
resolved to be patient and to remember that a true 
reverence for the Lord forewarns us that we should 
wait patiently for his time, and meantime accept his 
providences as being for our highest welfare. 

Following this the Pilgrim brethren were called to 
the front and to each one was given a plate of bread. 
Then the Elders of the local Church were called to the 
front, with the Pilgrim brethren on either hand. Then 
the Colporteurs were called and, to our surprise, 
responded to the number of nearly two hundred. Then 
the congregation was given opportunity to pass along the 
line and greet us all with a handshake, that they might 
interchange with us a word of God-speed while we shook 
hands and bade each other Goodbye! The congregation 
meantime sang familiar hymns, while those participating 
in the fellowship were often moved to tears. It was a 
blessed and most affecting experience and surely many 
will long remember it and be strengthened by it to know 
and to do the Father's will. The service closed with a 
word of prayer commending us all to the Father's protecting 
care and remembering the loving ones everywhere 
not permitted to be with us. We were then taken to 
dinner and afterward in an automobile to the railway 
station. Some of the dear friends were there for a final 
adieu. The afternoon ride and then all night and until 
noon of the next day brought us to Aberdeen, S.D. 



ABERDEEN, S.D., CONVENTION 

The Aberdeen Convention met on August 1 under 
Brother G. H. Draper as chairman. He addressed the 
Convention with greetings from the local Church and 
vicinity and was responded to on behalf of the Society 
by Brother Henry Hoskins, Sr., in suitable terms. Then 
followed a hearty Praise and Testimony Meeting until 
noon. In the afternoon Brother Hoskins addressed the 
Convention. In the evening after a praise service Brother 
George Draper gave a discourse. Monday morning was 
fully given over to praise and testimony on the part of 
the dear friends attending the Convention, who were 
chiefly from North and South Dakota and Minnesota. 
Many of them spoke of it as being their first Convention 
and told how precious the Truth is to them and how 
much they enjoyed meeting others of like precious faith 
and experiencing the fellowship of kindred minds so like 
to that above. 

Brother George Draper delivered a discourse on 
Consecration, following which opportunity was afforded 
for symbolic immersion for those who desired to avail 
themselves of it. Sixteen were immersed. In the evening, 
following a praise service, Brother John Hoskins 
gave a discourse. 

TUESDAY MORNING, AUGUST 3 

Brother Henry Hoskins, Sr., addressed the Convention 
and we arrived in time for a short discourse before dinner 
in the nature of a greeting and exhortation. The afternoon 
discourse, which had been advertised, was well 
attended by the public. Our topic was, "The Overthrow 
of Satan's Empire." We had an excellent hearing, especially 
considering the fact that it was a week day 
afternoon and quite warm. The attendance was estimated 
at between six and seven hundred. The other sessions 
of the Convention showed an attendance of about two 
hundred. In the evening at 6:30 p.m. we addressed 
the friends of the Truth from the text, "Be careful for 
nothing, and in everything give thanks." We endeavored 
to show how secure God's people are and that, while they 
are all the time to exercise the fear of reverence, proper 
fear will cast out all other fear and that the more we 
know of the great Creator the more we shall appreciate 
his faithfulness and his ability and willingness to fulfil 
his good promise to make all things work together for 
good to us, because we love him, because we are seeking 
to make our calling and election sure. We endeavored 
to show that those who keep their hearts thoroughly 
loyal to the Lord and their earthly all upon the altar of 
sacrifice have no cause for murmuring or complaining, 
because our Lord is willing to make his grace abound 
to all that are his and because the privileges of service 
and sacrifice are our assurances of coming glory, honor 



and immortality, and because without these "sufferings 
of Christ" we cannot be "his members." 

We exhorted the dear friends to encourage all of the 
Lord's people everywhere to rejoice, whatever their 
earthly condition may be— in sickness, in poverty, in 
wealth, in honor, in dishonor— because they are his and 
because the King of Glory is supervising their experiences. 
"Behold, what manner of love the Father hath 
bestowed upon us, that we should be called the sons of 
God," "And if children, then heirs; heirs of God, and 
joint-heirs with Christ; if so be that we suffer with him, 
that we may be also glorified together." (1 John 3:1; 
Rom. 8:17.) Even in tribulation, the Apostle assures 
us, we may triumphantly rejoice. However, it requires 
some maturity of faith and of reverential trust to permit 
of rejoicing in tribulation. We exhorted all to grow in 
grace and in knowledge and suggested the illustration of 
St. Paul and Silas in the prison with their hands and 
feet fast in the stocks and their backs wounded and 
lacerated from scourging. We remarked that if they 
were able to sing praises unto God under those conditions, 
so we, under the same promises and inspired by the 
same hopes, may likewise rejoice in tribulation. We rejoice 
that, under Divine providence, we are in preparation 
for the Divine Kingdom and that, under the supervision 
of our Heavenly Lord, all things are working together 
for our good, permitting us to rejoice therein and in the 
glorious hope of being with him soon. 

R4466 : page 265 

We closed the address with some words of comfort 
and cheer and reminders of the time when we all hoped 
to meet our Lord and each other and all the faithful in 
Christ Jesus in the heavenly Kingdom. Then came our 
love feast, which closed the Convention. It was a blessed 
season and our hearts melted and flowed together. We 
experienced oneness in fellowship in the Body of Christ 
in the Church and rejoiced therein and in each other's 
love, with best wishes and hopes for each other indicated 
by word and grasp. 

A number accompanied us to the train. On the platform 
we had further blessed intercourse and parted 
while singing to each other and to the Lord hymns of 
praise and gratitude. Soon we were speeding on our 
way towards St. Paul, Minn., where we arrived an hour 
late and found about forty of the friends on the platform 
awaiting us. We had barely time to shake hands and to 
make connections, but did so, thanking God for the spirit 
of love and oneness which unites all the children of 
peace. As we parted, songs of thankfulness ascended 
from both hearts and lips to the Giver of every good gift. 

One of the Milwaukee friends boarded our train before 
we reached their city and prepared us to meet about 
twenty-five of the Milwaukee Class, who greeted us on 
the platform during the ten minutes stop. We had a 



delightful experience with them. Some told us of their 
intention to attend the Saratoga Springs Convention, but 
one dear Sister, asked if she were coming, said, "No, I 
cannot come; but I am in hopes to meet you at the great 
Convention on High and I am living in hope of that." 
Surely the dear friends everywhere manifest the Spirit 
of the Truth and show forth its fruitage in their words 
and conduct. 

Arrived at Chicago we found that the dear friends 
there had arranged for a meeting. We fell in line with 
the program and spoke to them for thirty-five minutes. 
Many of them then accompanied us to the depot, including 
five who accompanied us to the Toledo Convention. 
Again we had very affectionate farewells, "God 
bless you's," etc. About forty were united in heart and 
voice in song when the train started. 

THE TOLEDO CONVENTION 

We arrived at Toledo Thursday morning, August 5. 
A committee met us at the depot and escorted us to 
breakfast and, later on, to the meeting-place. The Convention 
had already been in session for two days with 
a large degree of interest manifested on the part of all. 
A baptism discourse and service arranged had been conducted 
on the morning of our arrival. It was reported 
a very solemn and impressive occasion. An even one 
hundred were immersed. The whole number of friends 
at the Convention was about six hundred. 

In the forenoon we had a Question Meeting and the 
questions were good and to the point and the service 
interesting. This service was followed by a Love Feast, 
in which the six Pilgrims present participated and 
about one hundred and twenty Colporteurs, ranged on 
either side of them, while at the very center of all 
stood the four Elders of the Toledo congregation. The 
friends filed past as usual, extending their greetings by 
hand and voice, seeking to encourage each other to faithfulness 
and zeal in the Lord's cause. It was a happy 
occasion. The afternoon session consisted of a discourse 
by Brother Dr. L. W. Jones. During the afternoon 
we had a "trouble corner" which, we trust, resulted 
in the helping of some over difficulties and perplexities. 
The evening service was for the public and gave a 
large attendance— about eleven hundred. We had closest 
attention while we endeavored to present "The Past, 
Present and Future of Man from the Bible Standpoint." 
En route to the depot refreshments of ice cream soda 
were supplied and soon goodbyes were said and we were 
off for Pittsburgh, five accompanying us. 

THE PITTSBURGH GATHERING 

We had extreme pleasure in meeting the dear friends 
of Pittsburgh and vicinity, their faces bringing back to 
us pleasant memories of bygone days. The Bible House 



Chapel was packed even into the entryway. We assured 
the dear friends that we had had the Lord's blessing 
and precious and repeated spiritual feasts during the 
Convention tour, but that no meeting gave us greater 
pleasure than the present one, and that while our heart-love 
is broad and deep towards all of the Lord's dear 
flock, we will ever think with loving interest of the dear 
ones of Allegheny. We then gave a discourse in which 
we endeavored to set forth certain features of the 
Divine Plan which, we hope, were helpful to our dear 
hearers— relative to the Covenants, tracing the same back 
to father Abraham and into the glorious consummation 
at the close of the Millennial Age. The meeting closed 
at 9:10 p.m., but we soon found that we had not left a 
sufficiency of time for saying Goodbye and, as the dear 
ones discovered that we must go without greeting them, 
in order to catch our train, we were "most kindly 
mobbed," and tried to satisfy them by shaking with both 
hands. We finally reached the sidewalk and then the 
depot, to find that a considerable crowd had gathered 
there, where fresh adieus were said. Saturday's rest at 
Brooklyn prepared us for Sunday, another enjoyable 
One-Day Convention. 

AT BROOKLYN, AUGUST 8 

The forenoon service consisted of a Prayer, Praise and 
Testimony Meeting, which was well attended and the 
testimonies were full of fervency of spirit. It was good 
to be there. Such of the congregation as were from 
outside the city and had never had a meal at "Bethel" 
were invited to embrace the opportunity and take dinner 
with us. About forty responded, the Bethel family joining 
with the remainder of the congregation in a luncheon 
in the Tabernacle chapel. 

The afternoon service was well attended for a mid-summer 
day, about six hundred being present. For 
nearly two hours we discussed with them the Word of 
the Lord found in Isaiah 40:1, "Comfort ye, comfort ye 
my people, saith your God." At the conclusion we were 
told that the difficulty with the service was that it was 
not long enough. Our evening luncheon was participated 
in by about two hundred. Then came the evening service 
of praise from 7 to 7:30, followed immediately by a 
Question Meeting attended by about four hundred, who 
gave the closest attention. The questions were excellent. 



Our attention is drawn to the fact that in preparing 
the San Antonio Convention we omitted the notice of the 
public service on the evening of July 13. It was held 
in the Opera House, and was in every way successful so 
far as we can judge. The edifice was crowded and the 
attention excellent. We spoke for about two hours on 
"Where Are the Dead?" The literature was taken freely 



at the conclusion of the service. About thirteen hundred 
were present. 



R4466 : page 265 

"THE WILL OF THE LORD BE DONE" 

--ACTS 21:1-17.-SEPTEMBER 12.- 

THIS lesson indicates to us how the Apostle and 
others of the early Church were subjected to 
difficulties, disappointments and opposition, as we 
of today are. The fact that the Lord's power was with 
them, the gifts of tongues, of miracles, of healing, the 
casting out of devils, etc., was offset by the other fact 
that their course of life was not, by any means, smooth. 
Even when on missions of mercy and peace, even when 
not doing evangelistic work, they were directly battling 
with the Adversary and his forces of darkness. Leaving 
Miletus, St. Paul and his companions were dependent on 
natural laws and regulations. No swift yacht happened 

R4466 : page 266 

to sight them and take them on board and carry them to 
their destination. Instead, they were obliged to take a 
cargo sailboat, which stopped here and there in the interest 
of its business, quite regardless of the important 
Jew and his eight companions aboard. Truly surprised 
will some of these sailors be when, by and by, during the 
Millennium, they will come forth and be brought to a 
knowledge of the Truth and learn that once they had the 
privilege of carrying the noble St. Paul. We may be sure 
that any acts of kindness performed to him or his companions 
will be duly remembered and rewarded, in 
harmony with our Lord's promise that a reward shall 
be given to those who give even a cup of cold water to 
even one of the least of his disciples. 

We are to remember that "the world knoweth us not, 
even as it knew him not." If humble of mind we shall 
not expect great things for ourselves or special attentions 
from those with whom we are in company— nor from the 
Lord should we expect miracles. Rather we should 
esteem that a miracle of the Lord's grace is manifested 
in us— in the favor which has brought to us the good 
tidings and the privilege of being its servants— ambassadors 
of God. Besides, under these conditions, walking 
by faith and not by sight, we shall doubtless make better 
progress as New Creatures in character development than 
if the Lord carried us along on flowery beds of ease without 
storm, without opposition, without difficulties. The 
difficulties call forth faith and draw our hearts to the 
great Fountain of blessing, and thus are amongst the 
"all things" working for our spiritual welfare. 



While the ship was unloading her cargo at Tyre, St. 

R4467 : page 266 

Paul and his companions looked up some of the Truth 
people, with whom they had evidently a special season 
of fellowship during the seven days of waiting. This 
reminds us of how the Lord's followers in the present time 
love to meet the Pilgrims on their journeys and how the 
Pilgrims with yearning hearts seek for those who know 
and love the Redeemer, "Even as many as the Lord our 
God has called." Here the Apostle got a message from 
some of his friends urging him not to go to Jerusalem; 
but he continued his journey, nevertheless. When leaving 
the friends of Tyre, men, women and children accompanied 
them to the ship, for the city evidently was at a little 
distance from the dock. Then on the beach together, in 
communion with the Lord and with each other, they asked 
a blessing upon those who went and upon those who 
remained. How this reminds us further of present experiences 
and the love, the fellowship, the interest which 
we have in each other— stronger than any earthly tie! 

A stop of another day afforded another opportunity to 
meet the brethren at Ptolemais— another One Day Convention, 
we may be sure! The next stopping place was at 
Caesarea, at the home of Philip, the Evangelist, who was 
one of the seven deacons chosen at Jerusalem— the martyr 
Stephen being another of the seven selected for the care of 
the temporalities of the Church at the time when an unsuccessful 
attempt at communism was permitted of the 
Lord as a demonstration of the inexpediency of such 
an arrangement in the Church. 

Incidentally, it is mentioned that Philip had four virgin 
daughters "which did prophecy," but just what is signified 
by this we may not surely know. We are not to assume 
hastily that these four young women were public teachers 
in the Church, in the face of the Apostle's clear statements 
on the subject. They may have had some public occupation 
along the lines of public speaking or teaching— possibly 
they were school teachers. The teaching of that time 
was not, as now, through the study of books, but by oral 
presentations or prophecy. We prefer to understand the 
passage in this light and in harmony with the general 
teaching of the Scriptures, which everywhere commits to 
the brethren the public teaching in the Church. 

"SONS AND DAUGHTERS SHALL PROPHECY" 

The marginal reference in our common Bible identifies 
this reference to these four virgins with the prophecy of 
Joel, "Your sons and daughters shall prophecy; your old 
men shall dream dreams, your young men shall see 
visions." We see no connection between the prophecy and 
this statement respecting Philip's four daughters. Indeed, 
there is not even a suggestion that they had made a consecration 
of themselves to the Lord or received the holy 



Spirit. The fact that they were virgins would imply 
nothing of this kind. Incidentally, it may be well for us 
here to point out in few words what we do understand the 
words of the Prophet Joel to signify. 

St. Peter identifies the prophecy as a whole with the 
Pentecostal blessing upon the Church ten days after our 
Lord's ascension. This does not mean, however, that 
the prophecy was fulfilled as a whole there. St. Peter 
says this which they witnessed was that, or a portion of 
that of which the Prophet Joel spake. Is there any indication 
that the holy Spirit was poured out upon the sons 
and daughters of believers at Pentecost? None whatever! 
It came only upon the consecrated believers themselves. 
Do all the young Christians who receive the holy Spirit 
have special experiences in seeing visions? And do all 
old, experienced Christians have special experiences in 
dreaming dreams? Assuredly not! Properly not! The 
prophecy divides into two parts; one relating to this 
Gospel Age and the other relating to the Millennial 
Age. The Lord hid the understanding of the matter to 
some extent by referring to the Millennial Age blessings 
first and to this Age and its blessings afterward. 

The two ages and their blessings are distinguished, 
therefore, by the expressions, "In those days," as 
signifying the Gospel Age, and "After those days," as 
signifying the Millennial Age. We are still in the Gospel 
Age, styled "In those days." And we still have the blessings 
promised in this Age, namely, the bestowment of 
the holy spirit upon God's servants and handmaidens 
regardless of age, sex or national distinction. This blessing 
began at Pentecost and will close with the anointing 
of the last member of the Body of Christ. Then will begin 
the other part of the blessed promise, namely, "After 
those days I will pour out my spirit upon all flesh." This 
blessing surely does not apply to the present time; and 
just as surely it will have fulfilment under the ministration 
of the Millennial Kingdom. Then will come the 
time when "Your sons and your daughters shall prophecy," 
shall teach. That will not be a teaching in the Church, 
nor of the Church, but a teaching of the world by the 
world, under the supervision of the glorified Christ on the 
spirit plane, and the perfected Ancient Worthies on the 
human plane as the earthly representatives of the heavenly 
Kingdom. 

Now notice the expression, "Your old men shall dream 
dreams and your young men shall see visions." We 
prefer a different translation, which, we believe, gives the 
intended thought, namely, "Your young men will see the 
glorious visions (of Restitution, blessings, etc., in process 
of fulfilment) of which your ancient men dreamed (the 
things respecting which they vaguely hoped and dimly 
understood and greatly longed for)." 

"WEEP AND BREAK MINE HEART" 

Agabus was possessed of the spirit of prophecy, after 



the manner of the ancient prophets, so that he foretold 
future events. He was well known to the Church. It was 
he who had prophesied the great famine throughout the 
world, which came to pass in the days of Claudius 
Caesar. (Acts 11:28.) He came to Caesarea while St. 
Paul was there, and, taking St. Paul's girdle, bound his 
own hands and feet and declared that the holy Spirit 
testified that thus the Jews at Jerusalem would bind St. 
Paul, the owner of the girdle, and deliver him to the Gentiles. 
This prophecy was fully in harmony with other 
predictions of harm to the Apostle. No wonder, then, 
that his friends who accompanied him and others at 
Caesarea urged him to forego the visit and thus escape 
the harm indicated to be performed if he went. Ordinarily 
we would have supposed that the advice was good 
and that it were not wise to go into difficulty. But St. 
Paul apparently had some other advice from the Lord, 

R4467 : page 267 

under which he was operating— something compulsory 
upon him, which led him to brave anything to fulfil his 
duty. We are not to think of the Apostle as stoically, 
coldly going into this trouble. Such a thought is dismissed 
when we notice his reply to his insistent friends. Full 
of feeling for them, as well as for himself, he replied, 
"What mean ye to weep and to break mine heart? For 
I am ready not to be bound only, but also to die at 
Jerusalem for the name of the Lord Jesus." Heroic 
words! Noble sentiments! Faithfulness personified! 

Evidently the Lord was testing the Apostle, developing 
in him character, stability, faithfulness. Not that he did 
not have these qualities before, but that all these experiences 
would tend to deepen and fix that character. 
He intimates to us that he went to Jerusalem under a 
vow, under some solemn pledge to the Lord, in faithful 
performance of some duty. The question now was, Would 
he keep this vow? Would he fulfil the obligation or 
would he be turned aside from it by fear of what man 
might do to him or by the entreaties of friends? We 
rejoice in the Apostle's spirit, in his faithfulness, his 
courage. Since he understood it to be the Lord's will 
that he should go to Jerusalem, he knew that the Father 
would overrule all things, in harmony with the counsel of 
his own will. 

Apparently his visit to Jerusalem was opportune, we 
might say necessary, to the cementing of the "household 
of faith," and to the assisting of some of them to a 
clearer position in regard to the obligations of the Law 
and the liberty from the Law to those who accepted 
Christ. Besides, from this place the Lord had ordained 
that the Apostle should go to Rome to declare his name 
there also, in the political capital of the world; and that 
he should first declare the Gospel to Agrippa and Festus 
and other notables, and through them be called to the 
special attention of the Emperor and others in authority 



at Rome. It was quite proper that the Apostle's friends 

desisted from further entreaty. First, because they recognized 

that he was doing the will of the Lord; and because, 

in the second place, further effort would evidently 

fail to move him from his purpose— prove fruitless. 

Third, because they were making it still harder for him 

to bear, breaking his heart. 

Let us all remember that all of the Lord's special 
dealings with his people during this Gospel Age are with 
a view to developing them in character, not only good 
character, but fixed character. It is not sufficient that 
we accept Christ, nor sufficient that we should 
preach him to others. To be fit for the heavenly Kingdom 
we must develop characters in harmony with our 
Lord— gentle, yet firm; sweet, yet strong. This is signified 
in the terms of our discipleship. We are to copy 
our Teacher, who is also our Redeemer. We are to 
let his light shine. It is important that we see this fact. 
The difficulty apparently with the majority of people is 
that they do not see and do not understand the purpose 
of life; hence valuable opportunities and precious 
lessons are wasted upon them. 

Mr. Marden has recently said, "I know a man whose 
accomplishments have been the marvel of all who knew 
him, who in his boyhood made the resolution: Let every 
occasion be the great occasion, for you cannot tell when 
fate may be taking your measure for a larger place.' 
If he was in school, he kept thinking, I must not skip 
the hard problems, for they may rise up in my manhood 

R4468 : page 267 

and testify against my faithfulness as a boy, and 
may defeat me. I must see an opportunity in every 
lesson and cultivate a habit of overcoming, a habit of 
faithfulness and accuracy.'" 

This is merely an elaboration of what the Good Book 
says, "Do with thy might what thy hand findeth to do, 
for there is neither wisdom nor knowledge nor device 
in the grave whither thou goest." And again, "He that 
is faithful in that which is least will be faithful also in 
that which is greater." 

Difficulties in the way would not prove that it is not 
the right way. Bunyan's Pilgrim, in traveling toward 
the heavenly city, found the Hill of Difficulty in his way. 
And our Lord forewarned all who would walk in his 
steps that their pathway must, of necessity, be full of 
tribulation— testings. The reward is to them that overcome. 
There could be no overcoming unless there were 
difficulties. 

HOW TO DECIDE THE LORD'S WILL 

The Apostle does not tell us the basis of his confidence 
in doing the will of the Lord in going to Jerusalem, but 
we may be sure that he had substantial reasons for believing 



that he was walking in the Lord's way. His entire 
character shows us that he would be too cautious, 
as well as too faithful, to go in any direction contrary 
to the Divine will. 

As to how we may decide as to what is and what is 
not the Lord's way for us, we find that the rule which 
George Mueller tells us he followed is so nearly the one 
which we follow ourself that we take pleasure in quoting 
it:~ 

"I seek in the beginning to get my heart in such a 
state that it has no will of its own in regard to a given 
matter. Nine-tenths of the difficulties are overcome 
when our hearts are ready to do the Lord's will, whatever 
it may be. Having done this, I do not leave the 
result to feeling or simple impression. If I do so, I make 
myself liable to a great delusion. I seek the will or 
Spirit of God through, or in connection with, the Word of 
God. The Spirit and the Word must be combined. If 
I look to the Spirit alone, without the Word, I lay myself 
open to great delusions also. If the holy Spirit guides us 
at all, he will do it according to the Scriptures, and never 
contrary to them. Next, I take into account providential 
circumstances. These often plainly indicate God's will, 
in connection with his Word and his Spirit. I ask God 
in prayer to reveal his will to me aright. Thus by the 
prayer to God, the study of the Word, and reflection, I 
come to deliberate judgment according to the best of my 
knowledge and opportunity, and, if my mind is thus at 
peace, I proceed accordingly." 

HIGHLY HONORED MNASON 

In due time the Apostle and his companions started 
for Jerusalem. We read, "We took up our carriages, 
and went up to Jerusalem." This word carriages is not 
now generally in use. It is old English and signifies 
baggage or luggage; bag, baggage; lug, luggage; carry, 
carriage. 

Mnason of Cyprus, for a long while a disciple, with 
whom the travelers lodged at Jerusalem, met the travelers 
at Caesarea and with some of the brethren at the 
latter place accompanied them to Jerusalem. They were 
a happy company of probably a dozen, yet a fearful company, 
in view of their expectation that something would 
surely befall their beloved Brother, the Apostle Paul— 
because, "If one member of the Body suffer, all the 
members suffer with it." Arrived at the home of 
Mnason still other brethren welcomed them, though 
the regular meeting and official greeting did not come 
until later through St. James, who seems to have been 
the chief or spokesman amongst the brethren. 

Mnason evidently appreciated his guests and enjoyed 
the privilege of their entertainment. But how much his 
joy must have been subsequently enhanced we can only 
imagine. The future years of the Apostle's life, his 
prominence before the Church, the blessings that went 



from him to all in a public way, must have been with 
him, also, in the course of daily life and have blessed its 
amenities. While it was a great honor to entertain the 
Lord, as Lazarus and Mary and Martha did at Bethany; 
a great honor to entertain the Apostle as Mnason 
did, it is also a great honor today to entertain any 
of the Lord's disciples, whether weak and little or notable 
in the eyes of the world. Every Christian must have 
this desire, if he have the brotherly love. And each one 
who entertains a prophet may expect a prophet's reward 
—a reward in proportion to the honor of the 
prophet in the sight of our Great King, whose ambassadors 

R4468 : page 268 

we all are. While it would be far greater honor, in 

one sense, to entertain the Lord himself than to entertain 

any of his brethren, nevertheless personal attention 

to our Redeemer being impossible he has assured us that 

he will accept any and everything done to the least of his 

brethren, as done to himself. 



BE PATIENT, BRETHREN 

We sometimes wonder why our Lord doth place us 
Within a sphere so narrow, so obscure: 

That nothing we call work can find an entrance; 
There's only room to suffer, to endure. 

Well, God loves patience! Souls that dwell in stillness, 

Doing the little things or restful quite, 
May just as perfectly fulfil this mission; 

Be just as useful in the Father's sight, 

As they who grapple with some great evil, 
Clearing a path that every eye may see, 

Our Saviour cares for cheerful acquiescence 
As much as for a busy ministry. 

And yet he does love service— where it is given 
By grateful love that clothes itself in deed; 

But work that's done beneath the scourge of duty, 
Be sure to such he gives but little heed. 

Christ never asks of us such heavy labor 
As leaves no time for resting at his feet; 

The waiting attitude of expectation- 
He ofttimes counts a service most complete. 

He sometimes wants our ear— our rapt attention— 
That he some sweetest secret may impart. 

'Tis always in the time of deepest stillness 

That heart finds deepest fellowship with heart. 



Then seek to please him, whatsoe'er he bids thee- 
Whether to do, to suffer, to lie still; 

'Twill matter little by what path he led us 
If in it all we sought to do his will. 

J. C. LARDENT. 



R4468 : page 268 

EARLY MISSIONS AND PRESENT ONES 

--REVIEW LESSON.--SEPTEMBER 19.- 

Golden Text:— "So Mightily Grew the Word 
of God and Prevailed."— Acts 16:20. 

AT FIRST it may strike some minds as peculiarly out 
of order that we should institute a comparison 
between missionary journeys of the Apostle Paul 
and Pilgrim-missionary work at the present time in which 
we are privileged to engage. Nevertheless we see many 
strong resemblances. 

(1.) St. Paul's labors were during the Harvest time of 
the Jewish Age. The mission was to the Jew first. The converts 
were largely from amongst them. Secondarily he 
told the good tidings of the Kingdom to the Gentiles. We 
are in the Harvest time of the Gospel Age. We preach 
the harvest message of this dispensation to those who are 
professedly God's people, not with the expectation of bringing 
all Christian people to see the glorious features of the 
Divine Plan, but with the hope of finding amongst them 
such as have the hearing ear and of interesting them and 
ripening them for the garner. We, likewise, go outside of 
nominal Spiritual Israel to the Gentiles, to the worldly, 
when our message to Christians fails to bring results. 

(2.) Now, as eighteen centuries ago, the laborers in the 
Harvest field, whether as Colporteurs or Volunteers, go 
forth bearing the precious seed of Truth, the Gospel of the 
Kingdom, for those who have the ears to hear. A few in 
every place may be found. In some places the results are 
tongue-lashings and exclusions, ostracism and scorn. In 
other quarters the message is more favorably received. 
Evidently now, as then, all who are anxious to serve the 
Truth find opportunity to suffer for the Truth's sake, for 
righteousness' sake. Now, as then, all the dear laborers 
in the harvest field may note the Lord's providential care 
over them and his direction in the interests of the harvest 
work. Now, as then, we have much to encourage, as well 
as to discourage. Now, as then, there are surprises to the 
Lord's people in respect to where the Truth will be received 

R4469 : page 268 

and where it will be rejected. For instance, we 

have good word of the progress of the light in "darkest 



Africa," while frequently we have evidences that some of 

the scribes and Pharisees and Doctors of the Law of our 

day are not worthy of Present Truth. Now, as then, the 

Lord's providences seem to tell us that bonds and imprisonments 

and difficulties await us, if we continue active, 

faithful, zealous; but now, as then, the faithful of the 

Lord's people are not deterred by these experiences, but, 

with the Apostle, say, "We are willing, not only to be 

bound, but to suffer death for Christ's sake." 

Our Golden Text seems likely to have a partial fulfilment 
in a parallel way very soon. The message is gathering 
impetus day by day. Although opposed by various 
blinded ones in Babylon and by false brethren from our 
midst and by ravenous wolves in sheep's clothing with 
back-biting tactics and midnight howls, nevertheless the 
Truth is prospering. 

It would be a mistake, however, to suppose that the 
Truth will soon, or ever, become popular while the Prince 
of this world is free to oppose it and to stir up bitter envyings 
and strife against it and to blind the minds of so 
many. 

The lesson for us is, Faithfully onward, Christian 
soldiers, battling for the Lord, for the Truth, for the 
brethren— against sin and selfishness! 



R4469 : page 268 

BIBLE STUDENTS' CONVENTION 

SARATOGA SPRINGS-BROOKLYN 
-AUGUST 31 -SEPTEMBER 6 

SOME time ago we announced that the final 
General Convention for the year 1909 might be 
expected at Brooklyn. Subsequently, under 
what we believe was Divine providence, we were led to 
arrange that the main part of the Convention shall be 
held at Saratoga Springs, N.Y., for four days, beginning 
August 31. Then on September 4 the Convention party, 
which will probably number two thousand, will come 
down the Hudson River on one of its palatial steamers. 
The daylight ride will permit of seeing some of the most 
interesting scenery in the world; and, still better, permit 
Christian fellowship amongst some of the most interesting 
people in the world— Bible Students, "whose lamps 
are trimmed and burning." 

The steamer will be due to reach New York City at 
6:30 p.m. September 4. Sunday may be considered the 
last of the Convention proper. Its program will be a 
full one, beginning at 10:30 a.m. with intermissions for 
dinner and supper. All meetings will be held in the 
Brooklyn Academy of Music, the largest auditorium of 
the Borough, located on Lafayette avenue. The next 
day, September 6, "Labor Day," will afford opportunity 



for visiting "Brooklyn Tabernacle" and "Bethel" and 
such other points of interest as the friends may think 
proper. 

A large attendance is anticipated, but it is very desirable 
that we know in advance whom we may expect. 
Saratoga Springs is a famous Summer Resort, known the 
world over. It has plenty of fine hotels, whose rates 
range from three dollars to five dollars per day. And 
there are plenty of such hotels also in Brooklyn. Such 
of the friends as desire accommodations of this kind 

R4469 : page 269 

need not write to us on the subject. But all who desire 

accommodations at less prices should do so— giving particulars, 

stating sex, and if colored. Such as desire to 

occupy one room should so state. A 50c. per night 

lodging will mean two in a smaller room or four in a 

larger room. A good room for two would cost at least 

75c. each. A good room for one would cost at least 

one dollar per night. Meals and luncheons will be arranged 

for at from 15c. to 25c. upward, so that you can 

take your choice. No one should think of attending the 

Convention at a cost of less than $ 1 .25 per day. Hotel 

accommodations with meals, $1.25, $1.50, $2.00 per day. 

page 269 

Be sure to let us engage your lodging, both at Saratoga 
Springs and at Brooklyn, unless you wish to go to 
a high-priced hotel. Send us full particulars at once. 

R4469 : page 269 

RAILROAD AND STEAMBOAT FARE 

The Railroad Trunk Lines Association have granted us 
a special rate of one fare and a half to Saratoga and 
return, certificate plan. Bring certificate. However, tickets 
from points west of Buffalo, N. Y., and Pittsburgh, Pa., 
may be had at a still less rate, namely, one fare and a 
third on the regular Saratoga Excursion. We presume 
that the same rates will apply on all roads south of Washington 
City. Friends from Canada and the northern States 
may find it cheaper to buy New York City Excursion 
with stop-over at Schenectady, NY., with side-trip 
from there to Saratoga Springs. All railroad tickets 
from Albany to New York are available for passage on 
the Hudson River steamboat September 4. 

page 269 

Friends from New York and vicinity can go cheapest 
via the Hudson steamers, day or night, $2, connecting 
by electric cars at Troy or Albany 60 cents. The return 
boat trip we supply for $1.25 from Albany. 



R4469 : page 269 

SPIRITUAL PROFIT HOPED FOR 

It is hoped that in many respects this will be one of 
our grandest Conventions— thus far. Such of the Lord's 
dear people as possess his Spirit of Love and Obedience 
to the Truth, such as desire to follow on in the same 
narrow way that the Lord has hitherto led us by his 
Word and its Spirit, will be cordially welcomed by the 
Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society, under whose auspices 
the Convention will be held. "Grievous wolves" 
with their "midnight howl" are surely not wanted at the 
Convention or elsewhere. It would be too much, however, 
to expect of such the meekness, gentleness and 
unobtrusiveness characteristic of the true sheep, hence, 
as the Scriptures inform us, we may expect at the Convention 
and everywhere to find "wolves in sheep's clothing," 
seeking an opportunity to backbite the sheep and to 
inoculate them with the virus of their own rabies. We 
urge, therefore, that all of the Lord's sheep who attend 
the Convention shall come to it so filled with the spirit 
of Truth— meekness, gentleness, patience, long-suffering, 
brotherly kindness, Love— that they will have no sympathy 
for the works of the flesh and the devil— anger, 
hatred, envy, malice, strife. We read that when the 
sons of God came together Satan also came with them; 
this is still true. He still presents himself as an angel 
of light to deceive and to lead into darkness those whom 
he can influence. 

Satan still "works in the hearts of the children of 
disobedience." Let us all, therefore, beware of this 
spirit of disobedience in our hearts— of any alienation 
from the Lord or disposition to insubordination to his 
Word and providential leading. The sentiment of our 
hearts should be, "I delight to do thy will"; thy will, 
O Lord, not mine, be done— in thy time and through 
whatever channels thou art pleased to use. "I beseech 
you, brethren, mark them which cause divisions and 
offences, contrary to the doctrine which ye have learned; 
and avoid them. For they that are such serve not the 
Lord Jesus Christ, but their own interest; and by good 
words and fair speeches deceive the hearts of the unsuspecting 
-Rom. 16:17. 



R4470 : page 269 

BROTHER RUSSELL'S SERMONS WEEKLY 

Friends have sent us samples of the "Red Rose Magazine," 
which has recently been publishing Brother Russell's 
sermons. The publication is a different class than that 
usually styled a "magazine" in the United States. We agree 



with the friends that it cannot be recommended as a family 

paper. The Lecture Bureau which supplies the sermons has 

been notified to discontinue the service with the close of the 

contract, September 18. We understand that the same publishers 

issue "The Weekly News" and that it is more of a 

family newspaper: possibly the sermons may appear in the 

latter journal. Look out for them and act accordingly. In 

any event be careful to follow our advice set forth in DAWN-STUDIES, 

VOL. VI.— Be careful of your reading matter and 

of that which you place in the hands of your family. Weekly 

papers generally publish "stories" and "sporting news." To 

this we cannot object. We do object to the sermons appearing 

in papers wholly given over to stories and in no sense 

newspapers. 

The friends of the Truth will be glad to know that more 
than three hundred newspapers in the United States and 
Canada are now publishing sermons. We trust that they 
will be encouraged by you all in proportion to their general 
worthiness and especially because of the sermons, and that the 
editors will receive frequent commendations and encouragements. 
The "Peoples Pulpit" for June contains a list of such 
of these papers as give us a clubbing rate and special price. 
Give these the preference and send subscriptions to us. Colporteurs 
(who give all their time to the work) taking new 
subscriptions under this clubbing proposition will receive a 
credit of 50 cents each on account, as an allowance for the 
time they may spend in this branch of the service. "Watch 
Tower" subscribers who have already prepaid for the year 
may send the difference and obtain the other papers. 



R4469 : page 269 

BROTHER JONES' CONVENTION REPORTS 

For some time past our dear Brother Dr. L. W. Jones, 
2024 Washington Boulevard, Chicago, has been getting out 
Convention Reports. We are confident that he has the best of 
intentions in respect to this matter. He informs us that he receives 
many letters indicating that the friends of the Truth are 
both interested and profited by the reading of these. On the 
contrary, some of the Pilgrim brethren tell us that they believe 
that any good results from these reports are more than 
offset by the fact that the dear friends who read them correspondingly 
neglect the reading and re-reading of the DAWN-STUDIES. 
They point out that the latter, being connected, 
logical treatises of the entire plan, are more necessary and 
more helpful than any oral presentations could be. We 
much incline to agree with this thought. It is our experience 
that those who keep up a regular daily reading of twelve 
pages of "Scripture Studies" and thus go through the entire 
six volumes every year are the most thoroughly rooted, 
grounded and built up in the most holy faith— the best established 
in the teachings of the Bible. 

Being perplexed we have in the past followed our usual 



custom of simply letting alone all publications which do not 

emanate from our office— Bibles, Concordances, etc., excepted. 

This year, however, the matter of publishing the Convention 

Reports reached a crisis when our dear Brother Jones assured 

us that he would not continue to get them out except with 

our approval, although he had already received some subscriptions. 

Put thus to the test we were in a quandary and 

decided to endorse the issue for 1909, to the extent of announcing 

it in these columns and to look for the Lord's further 

leading in respect to the matter. 

In harmony with the foregoing we hereby notify the friends 
that Brother Jones is preparing a Convention Report, 1909, 
which will include the different Conventions connected with 
our Convention Tour of the Far West just ended, and also 
include the Saratoga-Brooklyn Convention, elsewhere more 
particularly announced in this Journal. It is proposed that 
the Report shall give more or less detailed reports of the 
discourses at the different Conventions and photo-engravings 

R4469 : page 270 

of the speakers and of the Brooklyn Tabernacle and Bethel. 
It will be in magazine form, somewhat like the "Watch 
Tower" in size, but of more pages. The price will be One 
Dollar. Orders may be sent to the Society or to Brother 
Jones, as above— preferably to the latter, as thereby the freight 
will be saved and the trouble of mailing them. 



R4470 : page 270 

STANDING AT THE MARK 



WE HAVE heretofore suggested what we now wish 
to further, if possible, emphasize; namely, the 
fact that there is a Divine standard of holiness, 
of righteousness, which, if it be not attained, will mean 
our non-acceptance by the Lord as members of his Elect 
Church; and, more than this, our unfitness for eternal 
life upon any plane. This standard of character, or mark 
of perfection, as we have pointed out, is not a standard 
or mark of fleshly perfection, because the Lord accepts 
amongst his consecrated disciples those of various degrees 
of mental, moral and physical degeneracy. The 
justification which he provides makes up for the blemishes 
of each, for the more blemished as well as for the less 
blemished. The robe of his righteousness imputed is as 
necessary to the noblest as to the most degraded, and 
renders the latter as acceptable as the former. 

From this standpoint it is recognized that the heart, 
the renewed mind, the renewed will, is the spirit-begotten 
New Creature which is on trial before God. It has 
professed a thorough consecration to righteousness and 
opposition to sin, a complete deadness to it, and a 
determination to mortify, to deaden, the will of the flesh 



to the extent of its ability. From the very start this 

condition is pleasing and acceptable to the Lord. Nevertheless, 

it is Scripturally represented at first as being 

merely a "babe" condition, according to one illustration, 

and according to another merely a "begotten" condition. 

Progress must be made, character must be developed, and 

then, further, it must be tested. "Not every one who 

saith, Lord, Lord, shall enter the Kingdom." Not every 

one who professes consecration, and newness of life, and 

self-sacrifice in the interests of truth and righteousness, 

can be accepted as a joint-heir with Christ. Time must 

be given for development and for proving. 

Love for God they have, from the very outset. But it 
is not love of the highest type. As already shown, it is 
largely, if not entirely, duty love. The "babe" in Christ 
must feed upon the sincere milk of the Word, that he 
may grow strong. As the spiritual food is appropriated, 
and spiritual exercise is taken, strength of character 
comes in, the eyes of our understanding open more widely, 
and lengths and breadths and heights and depths of the 
Divine character are discerned which were not visible 
at the first. This brings us to a higher type of love for 
God— a love for his glorious character. 

Meantime, also, a sympathetic love for the world is 
gradually developing in the spiritual "babe." As the 
principles of the Divine character are seen and appreciated, 
the New Creature begins to apply these to everything 
in life, and hence increases in sympathetic love 
toward man and beast, friend and foe. Another element 
of love is gradually attained also: At first the "babe" in 
Christ loves some of the brethren— the nobler, the 
gentler, the better educated ones, etc.; but gradually, as 
the Divine character is discerned, and the Divine love 
becomes shed abroad in the heart, this love broadens out 
so that it includes every member of the family of God 
and every member of the fallen race— yea, even enemies. 
With this development comes spiritual activity, called in 
the Scriptures quickening— "You hath he quickened." 
This quickening implies activity in the service of God, 
and the service of the brethren, and if outside opportunity 
beyond this permit, it would mean an activity in 
the service of all needing assistance such as we could 
give. 

The Christian life here illustrated, which began as 
a "babe in Christ," has by this time reached the standard 
of manhood in Christ, and is at the Mark of Perfect 
Love— for God, for the brethren, for the neighbor and 
for the enemies. Not until this point shall have been 
reached could such a person be considered fit for heaven, 
or for eternal life on any plane. 

We are to bear in mind that there is no development in 
heaven, and hence perfection of character must be attained 
by the saints before they die. And, similarly, 
the world during the Millennium must attain this perfect 
development before the close of the age in order to 
be fit for eternal life according to the Divine promise 



and standards. 

Is it asked to what extent will this standard of perfect 
love in the heart manifest itself in the flesh? We 
answer, that during the Millennial Age it will manifest 
itself perfectly in the flesh, for the world then will be 
judged according to the actual attainments in their 
flesh, and perfection by restitution will be not only 
possible, but required. But as for us of the Gospel Age, 
we who are being judged not according to the flesh but 
according to the spirit, to what extent will the new mind, 
the new nature, when at the Mark of Perfect Love, be 
able to govern and control the flesh? Our answer is, that 
the degrees of control will vary much, according to the 
degrees of imperfection with which the mortal body is 
afflicted. 

The only standard which we can set forth is 
that the new nature, new mind, new will, would be very 
regretful, very sorrowful, in respect to any laches, or 
errors, of its mortal body. The Lord would know (and 
perhaps the brethren also to some extent) of the New 
Creature's endeavor to control the mortal body by the 
degree of its grief in connection with every error, and 
its continually renewed effort to bring every power of 
the body, and even every thought, into complete subjection 
to the will of God in Christ. Any sympathy with 
sin is an evidence that the New Creature is not 
at the Mark. And no sympathy with sin, but constant 
endeavor for righteousness, is evidence that it is at the 
Mark. 

Some may be at this Mark for a longer and some for 
a shorter period. Our Lord was surely at it from the 
beginning of his ministry. He was tested there, while 
at the Mark of perfect love. All the besetments of the 
Adversary and of the world failed to move him from 
that position of perfect love. He laid down his life 
at this Mark. St. Paul was surely at this Mark for many 
years before his actual death. He was continually laying 
down his life for the brethren, continually serving 
his enemies and praying for them; and surely he was 
continually loving and serving the Lord with his every 
power and talent. 

No Christian should be satisfied with a long delay in 
reaching the Mark. The milk of the Word should be received, 
its strength should be appropriated, spiritual 
sight and spiritual energy should quickly follow, and 
strong meat of Divine Truth should speedily bring 
to full maturity the Christian character. And once attained, 
it should be held at any cost through all the trials 
and difficulties which the Adversary, and the world, and 
the flesh, might be permitted to bring against us. The 
severest temptations come after we have reached the 
Mark— temptations to slackness in service of God; temptations 
to withhold parts of our sacrifice; temptations 
to deal unkindly, uncharitably, unlovingly with 
the brethren, or unjustly with our neighbor, or ungenerously 
with our enemies. All of these must be resisted as 



we prize our eternal life, as we prize the promise of joint-heirship 

and fellowship with our Redeemer in His 

Kingdom. 

Whoever sees this subject clearly must realize that as 
a Christian he has to do with a great proposition which 
will thoroughly test his loyalty, his courage, his zeal, 

R4470 : page 271 

his love. He will need to remember the Lord's comforting 
assurances of grace to help in every time of need 
if he would come off a victor and not be dismayed, nor 
have his courage beaten down by the Adversary's attacks. 



page 271 

BEREAN STUDIES ON THE ATONEMENT 

THE TEXT-BOOK USED FOR THIS COURSE 
IS SCRIPTURE STUDIES, SERIES V (E)* 

Questions on Scripture Study V.— 
Man for whom Atonement was made 

OCTOBER 3 

(1) When we read, Man became a living soul, why is 
there so much difficulty in understanding the expression? 
Page 320. 

(2) Give the Methodist Bishop's definition of a soul, 
and say whether or not it fairly represents the so-called 
"orthodox" view of the subject and elaborate the same. 
P. 321. 

(3) What foundation is there for such fanciful 
speculations? P. 321, par. 2; P. 322, par. 1. 

(4) Man has a body and he has a spirit; but has he a 
soul or is he a soul? P. 322. 

(5) What is the meaning of the word soul as found 
in the Scriptures? P. 322, par. 3. 

(6) Has a soul a soul, or Is a soul a soul? and Why? 
What say the Scriptures respecting lower animals and the 
soul qualities? P. 323. 

(7) Give illustrations from the Scriptures respecting 
the application of the term "living soul" in the lower 
animals, and explain why this is hidden from the ordinary 
English reader. P. 323. 

OCTOBER 10 

(8) Quote and cite ten passages of Scripture in which 
the word "soul" is applied to the lower animals. Pp. 324, 
325. 

(9) Does the fact that all animals, tadpole or whale, 
mouse or elephant, are souls imply a future life for these 



by resurrection or otherwise? P. 326, par. 1,2. 

(10) In what does the difference between human souls 
and brute souls consist? P. 326, par. 3,4. 

(11) If the power to reason is shared to some extent 
by the lower animals as well as man where shall we 
draw the line between the brute soul, which has no future 
hope, and the redeemed human soul, which has a future? 

(12) What are and what are not the real differences 
between those lower animals and mankind? P. 327, 
par. 1,2,3. 

OCTOBER 17 

(13) What theologians teach that the human soul is 
indestructible, and where is their authority for the 
assertions? 

(14) What do the Scriptures teach on this subject? 
Cite proof texts. P. 328, par. 1. 

(15) What is implied in the Scriptural suggestion that 
some "sleep in Jesus"? Explain this matter in the light 
of the Scriptures. P. 328, par. 1,2,3. 

(16) How does "sleep" represent the condition of the 
dead? Is it claimed that those in eternal torment are 
asleep and oblivious to it, or that any sleep in Purgatory, 
or that they sleep in heaven? If not, in what sense do 
they sleep? P. 329, par. 1,2. 

(17) Was the original death penalty a sleep for a 
limited period of time from which there would be an 
awakening? If not, why is this expression "sleep" used 
in the Scriptures in reference to the death state? P. 330, 
par. 1. 

(18) Is the Second Death to be everlasting? and is it 
styled in the Scriptures a "sleep"? If not, why not? 

P. 330, par. 1,2,3,4. 

(19) Explain the difference between Adamic death 
and Second death, giving detailed Scriptural proof texts, 
etc. Pp. 331,332. 

(20) What two difficulties have tended to blind the 
Bible student respecting the subject of the soul? P. 333, 
par. 2. 

OCTOBER 24 

(21) Have we additional assistance in our search for 
the Truth on the subject today? If so, where are some 
of the assistances? P. 334, par. 1. 

(22) How many times does the word "soul" occur in 
the Old Testament translated from the Hebrew word 
neh-phesh? P. 334, par. 2. 

(23) Is this word neh-phesh always translated by the 
same English word in the Bible? If not, in how many 
different ways is it translated? P. 334, par. 2. 

(24) State the different words in which neh-phesh is 
translated in our Bible and how many times each. P. 334, 
par. 3. 

(25) In the New Testament, where the Greek word 



psuche is used to express the thought of sentient being 
or soul, and which corresponds to the Hebrew word 
neh-phesh, how many times does the word psuche occur 
and how is it translated? P. 335, par. 1. 

(26) Are these various translations and mistranslations 
alike helpful or alike injurious? P. 335, par. 2. 

(27) Which translations most seriously confuse the 
mind? Quote the passages. Give citations and show the 
proper meaning. Pp. 335-338. 

OCTOBER 31 

(28) Explain the signification of soul and ghost in 
comparison and state if there is danger of error in supposing 
the body to be the soul— showing from the 

Scriptures that they are not the same. P. 338, par. 9,10. 

(29) Take the account of man's creation in Genesis 
and explain the process of his creation according to 
the Scripture— his various parts and his completion as a 
soul. P. 339. 

(30) Is man's superiority to the brute the result of a 
better spirit or a better body or a better soul, or what? 
P. 340, par. 1. 

(3 1) In the light of the foregoing give the definition 

of human soul. Show the effect of death upon it. P. 340, 
par. 2. 

(32) Is it the body or the life or the soul that dies? 
Give proofs of your answer. P. 341, par. 1,2. 

(33) Illustrate the human body, life and soul, by a 
candle, its lighting and its extinguishment. Pp. 342, 343, 
par. 1. 



*Five years ago DAWN-STUDIES, VOL. V., was reset, and 
unfortunately the type was not exactly same size as before; and 
hence page for page they differ. The references given in these 
Berean Studies apply to the present edition, a copy of which 
postpaid will cost you but 30c. But keep your old edition, for 
unfortunately the new Bible Helps refer to its pages. 



page 272 

PUBLIC MINISTRIES OF THE TRUTH 

UNDER THE AUSPICES OF PEOPLES PULPIT 
ASSOCIATION OF BROOKLYN, N.Y. 



GLASGOW (SCOTLAND) CONVENTION 
-IN THE- 
LANGSIDE HALLS, CROSSMYLOOF, 



September 25, 26, 27, 1909. 

Bro. J. Hemery, the Society's British Representative, will 
serve the Convention as Chairman. Applications for lodgings, 
rates, etc., should be made to Bro. G. Mackenzie, 61 Glencairn 
Drive, Pollokshields, Glasgow. 

Visiting friends will be heartily welcomed. 



BROOKLYN TABERNACLE EVERY SUNDAY 



Preaching at 3:00 p.m. Praise service at 7:00 p.m.; 
Berean Bible Study at 7:30 p.m. Convenient to New York 
via Subway, and Jersey City via P.R.R. Annex Ferry. 



page 274 

STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES 
"MILLENNIAL DAWN" 

THESE STUDIES ARE RECOMMENDED TO STUDENTS AS VERITABLE "BIBLE KEYS. 

PRICES ARE NET AND BARELY COVER COST OF PRODUCTION, 

WHEN DELIVERED BY COLPORTEURS THE COST AND PRICE ARE INCREASED. 

SERIES I., The Plan of the Ages, gives an outline of the divine plan 
revealed in the Bible, relating to man's redemption and restitution: 
386 pages, in embossed cloth, 25c. (Is. l/2d.) India paper edition, 75c. 
(3s. l-l/2d.). 

This volume has been published as a special issue of our journal— 
at the extremely low price of 5c. a copy, in any quantity, postage included. 
(To foreign countries, 9c.) This enables people of slender 
purse to herald far and wide the good tidings in a most helpful form. 

SERIES II., The Time is at Hand, treats of the manner and time of 
the Lord's second coming, considering the Bible Testimony on this 
subject: 370 pages, in embossed cloth, 25c. (Is. l/2d.) India paper 
edition, 75c. (3s. l-l/2d.) 

SERIES III., Thy Kingdom Come, considers prophecies which mark 
events connected with the "Time of the End," the glorification of the 
Church and the establishment of the Millennial Kingdom; it also contains 
a chapter of the Great Pyramid, showing its corroboration of the 
dates and other teachings of the Bible: 384 pages, in embossed cloth, 
25c. (Is. l/2d.) India paper edition, 75c. (3s. l-l/2d.) 

SERIES IV., The Day of Vengeance, shows that the dissolution of the 
present order of things is in progress, and that all the panaceas offered 
are valueless to avert the predicted end. It marks in these events the 
fulfilment of prophecy, noting specially our Lord's great prophecy of 
Matt. 24 and Zech. 14:1-9: 660 pages, in embossed cloth, 30c. (Is. 3d.). 
India paper edition, 85c. (3s. 6-l/2d.) 

SERIES V., The At-one-ment Between God and Man, treats an all-important 
subject— the hub, the center around which all the features 
of divine grace revolve. Its topic deserves the most careful and 



prayerful consideration on the part of all true Christians: 507 pages, 
in embossed cloth, 30c. (Is. 3d.) India paper edition, 85c. (3s. 6-l/2d.) 

SERIES VI., The New Creation, deals with the Creative Week 
(Genesis 1 and 2), and with the Church, God's "New Creation." It examines 
the personnel, organization, rites, ceremonies, obligations and 
hopes appertaining to those called and accepted as members of the 
Body under the Head: 740 pages, in embossed cloth, 30c. (Is. 3d.) 
India paper edition, 85c. (3s. 6-l/2d.) 

The above prices include postage. 

IN FULL LEATHER BINDING, gilt edges, the set (6 vols.) $3.00, 
(12s. 6d.), plus postage, 60c. (Is.). 

Is also published in foreign languages as follows: German, six vols., 
in Swedish Vols. 1, 2, 3, 5 and 6; in Dano-Norwegian, three vols.; 
in Greek, three vols.; in French, two vols.; Hollandish, Spanish, 
and Italian, one vol. each; bound in cloth, uniform with English edition, 
prices the same; in Polish, condensed edition, one vol., 10 cents. 



page 273 

SEMI-MONTHLY 
VOL. XXX SEPTEMBER 15 NO. U 
A.D. 1909--A.M. 6037 



CONTENTS 

Views from The Watch Tower 275 

The Roman Catholic Reply to Christian Science. 275 

Nocturnal Hallucinations— "Wake Up!" 277 

Clearer Light to be Expected 277 

The Charges Against Us 278 

"Confess Your Faults One to Another" 278 

Our Reply to a Letter 280 

Filling Up Sufferings— for the Church 280 

The Father's Drawing and the Son's Drawing. ...281 

Explanations and Corrections 282 

Impossible to Deceive the Elect 283 

"Christ is Come" (Poem) 284 

Self-Restraint in Liberty 284 

Varying Degrees of Love 285 

Interesting Letters 287 

page 274 

PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY 
CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
"BROOKLYN TABERNACLE," 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, N.Y., U.S.A. 

Foreign Agencies:— British Branch: 24 Eversholt St., London, 
N.W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, Barmen. Australasian 
Branch: Equitable Building, Collins St., Melbourne. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:— All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 
and in touch with the Studies, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, DANISH AND ITALIAN EDITIONS. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N.Y., POSTOFFICE 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA 



TENNESSEE, ARKANSAS, MISSISSIPPI 

Friends of above States are advised that the Memphis 
Scimitar is now publishing Brother Russell's sermons regularly 
—in the daily as well as the weekly. 

Clubbing price with "Watch Tower" $3.50 for daily, $1.25 
for weekly. If already a "Watch Tower" subscriber, remit 
the difference to us. Subscriptions for your friends may be 
ordered at the same rate. Advise such friends to be expecting. 



BROOKLYN BETHEL HYMNS FOR OCTOBER 



After the singing of the hymn the Bethel Family listens 
to the reading of "My Vow unto the Lord," then joins in 
prayer. At the breakfast table the MANNA text for the 
date is read and questions and comments considered. 
Finally, just before leaving the table, the MANNA comment 
is read. Desiring that all share the blessings, we 
commend the plan to others. The hymns for Oct. are 
indicated below to permit all who so desire to join with us: 
(1) 16; (2) 144; (3) 19; (4) 136; (5) 280; (6) 230; (7) 229; 
(8) 296; (9) 32; (10) 119; (11) 293; (12) 191; (13) 279; 



(14) 324; (15) 172; (16) 9; (17) 179; (18) 204; (19) 141; 

(20) 307; (21) 29; (22) 7; (23) 325; (24) 1; (25) 79; 

(26) 208; (27) 328; (28) 155; (29) 273; (30) 312; (31) 113 



R4471 : page 275 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER 
DR. AKED'S CONGRATULATIONS 



THE CHURCHES may now add to Mr. Rockefeller's 
responsibility for the taint of wealth, that through 
his university he has tainted the nation's theology. 
George Burman Foster has finally been ousted from 
membership in the Chicago conference of Baptist 
ministers. 

But he still remains a member and a minister of that 
denomination, as well as the professor of comparative 
religions in what is generally known as Mr. Rockefeller's 
Baptist University. It was a merry war, filled with 
expletives and unchurchly heat, which ended Mr. Foster's 
ministerial affiliation. 

But now comes Dr. Aked, pastor of the Fifth Avenue 
Baptist church of New York, "the Rockefeller church," 
and agrees with the professor, though he can see no 
excuse for a book dealing with the fundamental tenets 
of the Christian religion, and "dashed off in thirty days," 
like a best seller. 

He approves, however, of its purpose, which he says 
was to supplant the foundations of the faith of our 
fathers with something unbelievers may believe, but 
which more likely was to put cash in a purse that felt 
a money hunger. 

Dr. Aked also congratulates "the whole church of 
God" upon the admission to the Presbyterian ministry 
of three young men who refused to accept the birth of 
Christ as miraculous, or the story of Adam and Eve 
as told in Genesis, or some of the miracles of the New 
Testament as authentic. He calls them "young men 
who think and are prepared to advance in the fulness of 
Christian thought and Evolution." 

— Duluth News Tribune. 

THE ROMAN CATHOLIC REPLY TO CHRISTIAN 
SCIENCE 



"Current Literature," presents briefly the Roman Catholic 
reply to Christian Science, as set forth by the Rev. 
L. A. Lambert, LL.D., as per the following extract- 
According to Mr. McCrackan, "Christian Science 



teaches that there is but one God, a God who is Infinite 
Spirit and Creator, the universe, including man, consisting 
of an infinite number of expressions of this One 
Spirit." This conception of God seems to approach the 
Christian concept; but actually, Dr. Lambert contends, 
it is something very different. As he puts it: 

"You say, 'God is Infinite Spirit.' Why not say an Infinite 
Spirit? Why persist in avoiding the individual article 
an? You say, 'God is Infinite Creator,' but in the 
same sentence you deny that he is Creator when you say 
the universe, man included, consists of an infinite number 
of expressions of the One Spirit, or God. If by 'expression 
you mean that the universe, with all its phenomena 
of changes and individuations, is only subjective 
changes and evolvements of the Deity, you should say it 
frankly, as the Pantheists do, and take your place among 
them, and drop the word Creator from your philosophy. 
If you mean by the word Creator what Christian philosophy 
means by it— the production by God, from nothing, 
of things distinct from himself— you should drop the 
term 'expression' and use the word Creator. Exact science 
does not tolerate the use of both these terms in the 
same sense. Not the least objection to Christian Scientists 
is their misuse or vague, non-committal use of terms; 
it is characteristic of all their literature." 

Christian Science, Mr. McCrackan asserts, "does not 
deny the existence of the universe. It does not question 
the reality of a single object in the universe. But it 
teaches that this reality is an expression of mind, and not 
matter." But this statement, Dr. Lambert holds, is a 
mere subterfuge. "There can be no doubt," he observes, 
"that Christian Science denies the reality of the universe 
in the sense that Christians affirm it. In saying it is an expression 
of mind they deny its creation; in saying it is not 
matter they contradict the common sense of mankind." 
The argument proceeds: 

"Christian Science denies the real existence of the typewriter 
by means of which Mr. McCrackan wrote his letter, 
and the paper on which he wrote it, and the train that 
brought it to us. All these, it tells us, are mere mental 
expressions, having no real existence outside of and distinct 
from the Divine Mind. The bullet that entered the body of 
President McKinley was only an idea of a bullet existing 
in the Divine Mind, as was also the President, and the assassin 
who killed him, and the chair in which the assassin 
sat to receive the idea of a death shock from an idea of 
electricity, is only the idea of a chair, existing nowhere but 
in the Divine Mind. And the human mind that believes in 
the material reality of the bullet that killed, and the wretch 
who shot it, and the chair that he sat in, and the electricity 
that killed him, is, according to Christian Science, a mind 
victimized by delusions and hallucinations. The assassination 
was, in reality, only a clash of incompatible ideas in 
the Divine mind, and one of them went down into the idea 
of a grave, which also exists only in the Divine Mind; 
and the idea of a government of the State of New York 



sent the other antagonistic idea to the Divine idea of a 
grave. And the idea of the world will continue to revolve 
—in the One Mind— as heretofore." 

From this fantastic statement of the implications of 
Christian Science, Dr. Lambert passes on to an affirmation 
that the new creed is sheer Pantheism. The very essence 
of Pantheism, according to his definition, is the denial of 
the creative act. "Those who hold to that ism," he remarks, 
"do not say that God is in matter, but that all that 
is, is God; that all the phenomena of which we are conscious 
are but the visible unfolding or evolvement of the 

R4471 : page 276 

Divine nature, as the rose unfolds itself, all unconscious of 
what it does; and this universe, as seen by us, is to God 
what the surface of the ocean is to the ocean, whose waves 
and bubbles rise and fall back into it, never ceasing in all 
their changes to be a part of it. Pantheism looks on the 
universe and all its changes— including thought— as phases 
or forms of the Divine Being, evolving and ever to evolve 
or unfold, by a fatal necessity." But this is precisely what 
Christian Science teaches. Addressing himself directly to 
Mr. McCrackan, Dr. Lambert says: 

"As you deny the existence of all spirits except the Infinite 
Spirit, and deny the existence of the material world 
also, there remains nothing in existence but the Infinite 
Spirit; hence you can, by the term 'expression,' mean only 
some form, state or change of this Spirit Himself. The term 
'expression,' then, in your sense, clashes with creation; it 
goes further, and denies creation, leaving nothing but subjective 
change, development or evolvement of the Infinite 
Being. This is Pantheism pure and simple. You may not 
intend this, but it is the inevitable conclusion from your 
Christian Science principles. 

"You confirm this conclusion when you say: 'The only 
real universe is mental. Things are thoughts.' That is, 
thoughts in the mind of God. If things are nothing more 
than thoughts, existing only in the Divine Mind, then things 
—this universe— are eternal, for God's thoughts are eternal 
and unchangeable. Consequently, there never has been a 
creation; for, had there been, there would be something 
more than thoughts. There would be thoughts plus their 
realization in time and space by the creative act. You see, 
then, that when you deny the existence of everything but 
thought, you deny creation. It will not do to say that God 
created his thoughts, for that would necessarily imply that 
he had to do something— create— before he could think— a 
supposition too absurd for a sane mind. To say, therefore, 
that only divine thoughts exist is to deny creation and fall 
into Pantheism. While you hold such views you should 
eliminate the term 'creation' from your Christian Science 
vocabulary; it has no place there whatever. 

"In contrast with this is Christian philosophy, which 
teaches that from all eternity the archetypes, patterns or 
exemplars of all things that have real, substantial existence 



were in the Divine mind, as the plan of a yet unbuilt palace 
is in the mind of the architect, and that by the creative 
act of Divine Omnipotence copies or replicas of these eternal 
archetypes were brought from nothing into real being, 
separate and distinct from their Creator. Here it will be 
seen that the creative act is the mark of distinction between 
Christian teaching and Pantheism in all its forms, including 
Christian Science as one of its forms." 

Proceeding to an examination of the Christian Science 
attitude toward evil and "mortal mind," Dr. Lambert quotes 
this statement of Mr. McCrackan's: 

"The use of the word 'Mind' in Christian Science deserves 
special notice. Spelled with a capital M it is synonymous 
with Spirit. Thus God is spoken of as Mind or Spirit. 
Spelled with a small letter, mind is used to designate that 
human mind which rises in rebellion against the Divine 
Mind— that mortal mind which attempts to counterfeit the 
Immortal Mind. This Mortal Mind is the 'carnal mind,' 
spoken of by Paul, and is the fruitful source of all sin and 
sickness. It is— not to put too fine a point upon it— the 
lying serpent, the devil, which tries to separate man from 
his Creator." 

This method of distinguishing the Divine Mind from the 
human mind is credited by Dr. Lambert with originality, if 
with nothing else. But it leads, he thinks, to an identification, 
rather than a differentiation, of the two kinds of mind. 
For if the Divine Mind is all, how can the existence of 
mortal mind be even imagined? To quote verbatim: 

"The logical conclusion is that the human mind, alias 
mortal mind, alias the lying spirit, alias the devil, is an expression 
or mode of the Divine Mind. It cannot be anything 
separate and distinct from the Divine Mind, since according 
to the writer above quoted, what ever is not that Mind 
or a mode of it is absolute nothingness. A further conclusion 

R4472 : page 276 

is that sin, sickness, the spirit of rebellion and counterfeiting, 

the lying serpent and the devil, are in and of the 

Divine Mind and have no existence outside of it. They are 

all, therefore Divine in their nature, as the Mind of which 

they are but an expression or mode is Divine. The Universe, 

including man, is only an eternal thought existing 

in the Divine Mind, having no corresponding external reality. 

All the evils of this life of our conscious existence, 

sin, sickness, pain and death, are only ideas in the Divine 

Mind! Such, it seems to us, is the god whom the Christian 

Scientists call Infinite Love, Perfection and Truth!" 

There is, we are told, no escape from this dilemma. 
Either "mortal mind" was created by God, or it was not. 
According to Christian Science, it was not. The sole remaining 
alternative is that of an uncreated mind apart from 
God. Dr. Lambert says: 

"You tell us that this being was not created by God. As 
it could not create itself it is, therefore, eternal, because 
uncreated. You have then an eternal liar eternally facing 



and defying God; one the origin of good, and the other the 
origin of evil. This dualism is the necessary result of what 
you say of mortal mind. It is Manichaeism, that combination 
of Magism and Buddhism that was condemned by the 
Christian Church in the third century." 

In his consideration of the therapeutic methods on which 
so much of the success of Christian Science rests, Dr. Lambert 
has little or nothing to say of the results accomplished. 
He makes some telling points, however, against the theories 
that underlie the methods. When Mr. McCrackan 
urges, "It does not appear that Christ and the Apostles 
taught that God healed the sick by material means," he replies: 
"Neither does it appear that they taught that God 
appeased the hunger of the hungry by material means. 
There was no need to teach what everybody understood 
and believed. The fact that our Lord and his Apostles 
did not contradict the common and universal belief is the 
best possible proof that the belief corresponded with the 
truth." He goes on to argue: 

"When the deaf, the dumb, the blind and the paralyzed 
came to him to be healed, what more opportune time could 
there be to correct the errors of their mortal minds 
by telling them that their diseases were only in their deluded 
minds and not in their bodies, for they had no bodies 
to be diseased, no ears to be deaf, no eyes to be blind, no 
limbs to be paralyzed. Instead, however, of talking in this 
Christian Science vein, our Lord received the sick and 
treated the diseases they complained of as real bodily diseases, 
and used his supernatural power to miraculously 
heal them. The leper said: Lord, if Thou wilt Thou 
canst make me clean.' And Jesus put forth his hand and 
touched him, saying, I will; be thou clean,' and immediately 
the leprosy was cleansed.— Matt. viii. 3. No 
suggestion here of error of the leper's mortal mind. All 
is real, both the leprosy and the miraculous cure." 

The Christian Science theory of healing, it is contended, 
can not claim a New Testament basis. It involves its exponents, 
moreover, in a dilemma almost as bewildering as 
that raised by the theory of "mortal mind." For Christian 
Scientists, be it remembered, teach that the material body, 
even when eaten by cancer or tortured by pain, has no real 
existence outside of mind, and that as existing in the mind 
it is a delusion, a phantom lie told by the mortal mind to 
itself. They teach that the testimony of the five senses, 
which bear witness to the reality of our material bodies 
and the material universe about us, is not good testimony, 
for it has to be constantly corrected. And yet they at the 
same time claim— in proof of their doctrines— that they 
have effected many cures. Dr. Lambert points out: 

"Now these three positions make it necessary for the 
Christian Scientists to answer the following questions: How 
can their claim to have healed diseases be proved? How 
can they get their evidence present to our consciousness, or 
before the court of our mind, except through the senses? 
And if we cannot rely on the testimony of our senses how 
can we know that the cures they claim to have effected are 



real cures and not delusions?" 

In illustration of his point, Dr. Lambert offers the following 
short dialogue: 

"Christian Scientist:— We have cured many diseases. 

"Christian:— Give us a case in proof. 

R4472 : page 277 

"Christian Scientist:— Well there is the case of John 
Doe, who had a cancer on his cheek. You see, it is now entirely 
healed. Nothing but a scar remains. 

"Christian:— It would seem so, and I would be inclined 
to believe it were it not that you have told me that my 
senses are not to be trusted. My senses are the only means 
by which I can know that the cancer has been healed. Now, 
as you say they deceive me, I cannot say on their testimony 
that I know anything about the cure which you speak of. 
Therefore, until you admit that my senses are credible 
witnesses, I cannot admit any of your claimed cures. 

"Christian Scientist:— But I can bring many other cases. 

"Christian:— But the same difficulty remains as in the 
cancer case. Before your cures can be proved to me you 
must admit that my senses are reliable witnesses, and if 
they be reliable enough to prove your cancer cure they are 
equally reliable when they tell me that the cancer was a 
real one and that the body it was on is a real material body, 
and not a mere idea existing in some mind. You cannot use 
the testimony of the senses to prove your claimed cures, 
and reject it when it disproves your doctrine. It is good in 
either case, or it is good in neither." 

The attempt to give Christian Science philosophy a Christian 
purpose, direction and end is pronounced by Dr. Lambert 
utterly futile. "It is the antithesis of Christianity," he 
says. He sums up the whole matter thus: 

"Christian Science is a revulsion against gross materialism. 
It is the opposite extreme. Materialism denies the existence 
of everything that is not matter: Christian Scienceism 
denies the existence of everything that is not spirit or 
mind. They are both errors, equidistant from the truth, 
which is that both material and spiritual beings exist." 



R4472 : page 277 

NOCTURNAL HALLUCINATIONS-" WAKE UP!" 

IN A recent issue we mentioned a Brother in Australia, 
once tenderly referred to in these columns as "our 
beloved son Timothy," who has apparently gone 
blind respecting spiritual things. We noted that he had 
broken out into print to proclaim that for seventeen years, 
as he now sees it, he labored under the delusions of our 
teachings, and to apologize for having done his best to 
re-echo the same. Poor man! We wonder if his wife 
induced him to write so foolishly? Yet all those seventeen 



years both he and his wife have proclaimed were 
the most blessed years of their Christian experience, the 
years of their best growth in grace and knowledge. Now 
they declare that what they then believed was the very 
key to the Divine Plan of the Ages, was a false key- 
namely "the mystery"— that the Church, the Body of 
Christ, is to be sharer with her Lord in his glory, by 
virtue of being privileged "to partake of his sufferings," 
"to be dead with him"; "For if we suffer with him, we 
shall reign with him; if we be dead with him, we shall 
live with him." This "mystery," this key to the understanding 
of the Divine Plan, they now declare to be the 
rankest error— so rank that it makes the Editor of this 
journal and the thousands rejoicing in this Truth and 
the light which it sheds upon the Divine Word amenable 
to the Second Death. 

It is truly remarkable what a twist can come into the 
human mind when once it cuts loose from the cord of 
Truth saying, "Let us break their bands asunder and cast 
away their cords from us." Fancying that they have 
themselves gotten out of Second Death conditions (from 
which it is impossible to renew anybody), they are now 
intent upon helping all of "The Watch Tower" readers 
out of this same Second Death condition; reasoning, 
doubtless, that if they could escape after seventeen years, 
others who have come in more recently might have as 
good a chance; but of course there would be no chance 
for the Editor of "The Watch Tower" left alone. Poor 
him! 

Still filled with this notion, the same Brother and 
Sister have issued a leaflet entitled, "Wake Up!" Having 
gotten "awake" themselves they are anxious to 
awaken others— to what? Presumably to the condition 
they were in seventeen years ago, when first they 
came into the light of Present Truth shining from 
this Journal and its subsidiary publications. We assure 
this dear Brother and Sister that seventeen years ago, 
and since, all in our power has been done to awaken 
them and all of the dear "household of faith" everywhere. 
We believe that they were awakened and that now they 
have gone asleep again and are merely dreaming in their 
sleep— having a nightmare experience. Would that we 
knew how to properly awaken them, that they might 
comprehend their present experience as nocturnal hallucinations. 
We wish to say again, however, that if anybody 
knows of a better interpretation of God's Word 
than that which we present, we advise him by all means 
to accept it. More than this, if anyone has thoroughly 
examined our presentations of the Divine Plan and does 
not find his heart and his head at rest and his longings 
satisfied as nothing else could do, we advise him or her 
to search further. As for ourself, we can only say that 
we are so satisfied with the Divine Plan that we could not 
part with a single feature of it. During the thirty-five 
years of the harvest time in which we have been proclaiming 



R4473 : page 277 

these truths, we have had nothing to discard, 
nothing to reject as erroneous. On the other hand, our 
pathway, as promised, has been shining more and more 
as it led onward. No steps have needed to be retraced. 
We have no expectation that the Lord leads his people in 
a wrong way for thirty-five years, nor for seventeen 
years, and will then need to wake them up to retrace 
their steps. On the contrary, "Our King is marching on!" 
and all who are following him will continue to find that 
he leads in a right way and that their "pathway shineth 
more and more unto the perfect day." 

CLEARER LIGHT TO BE EXPECTED 

Someone may ask, Do you, then, claim infallibility and 
that every sentence appearing in "The Watch Tower" 
publications is stated with absolute correctness? Assuredly 
we make no such claim and have never made 
such a claim. What motive can our opponents have in 
so charging against us? Are they not seeking to set up 
a falsehood to give themselves excuse for making attacks 
and to endeavor to pervert the judgments of others? 
Did Moses or Aaron or Joshua or David or Solomon or 
any of the prophets ever make such a claim for themselves? 
Or would anybody make such a claim for them? 
The very suggestion is absurd. The most we could claim 
for the best of them would be that they were loyal to 
God in their hearts, that they sought to do his will and 
to be guided by his Word and providences, and that God 
did make use of them in one way and another for the 
service of his cause and the blessing and instruction of 
his people. What need would we have to claim more 
than this for "The Watch Tower"? 

In the above we are not instituting comparisons as to 
the degree of use or usefulness of the parties named. 
Some the Lord used more and some he used less. Some 
made fewer mistakes and others more. We are merely 
pointing out the unreasonable position taken by our opponents. 
The degree of their heart disloyalty to God and 
unbrotherliness toward us, which impels them to make 
such unkind and untruthful presentations, is not for us 
to determine. They are not our servants. We are 
neither responsible for their utterances, nor competent to 
determine the degree of their sin or the proper punishment 
therefor. They profess to be servants of Christ, 
as do we, and to the Master each of us must give an account. 
Nay, since we are in the day of accounting, it is 
but proper for us to understand that each one is now 
giving an account and that the Lord is saying to each, 
"Out of thine own mouth will I judge thee." (Luke 19:22.) 
The merciful, kind, loving, may expect mercy; 
they are of the kind to whom the Lord has promised the 

R4473 : page 278 



riches of his grace. The unmerciful, the bitter, the hard, 

the cruel, may not expect mercy. They have not the 

heart development which would make them proper subjects 

for mercy. They are in that condition which, for 

their own good, will necessitate their being cast into the 

outer darkness of the world, where shortly there will be 

much wailing and chagrin and gnashing of teeth and disappointment 

in the great time of trouble with which this 

age will close. This tribulation will be with a view to 

melting their hearts and sweetening their characters; or, 

failing of this, will mean to such the Second Death. 

THE CHARGES AGAINST US 

Our opponents make various claims inconsistent one 
with the other. Let us examine these criticisms:— 

(1) They claim that we have improperly applied 
Matthew 24:45, etc., to "The Watch Tower" publications 
and that, upon that assumed authority, we have sought to 
take away the liberties of the Church and to "lord it" 
over God's heritage. We reply, Not so. Not until our 
Sept. 15 issue, were even the counter claims re Matt. 24:45, 
presented in these columns. Those applications 

were made by our enemies as something they could 
combat. And the more they have combatted their supposed 
man of straw, the more they have shown up their 
own impotence and the truth of the proposition they 
wished in advance to discredit. Thus our opponents have 
called attention to a matter which our modesty would 
have hindered our mentioning. The more they have attacked 
our position the larger is the number who have 
realized its truthfulness. 

(2) When the above argument goes against them our 
opponents next declare that if "The Watch Tower" be 
recognized as "that servant" of Matthew 24:45, then 
they believe that verses 48-5 1 should be expected to have 
fulfilment upon us. The wish of their minds is father 

to the thought— that they see the dreadful things of 
these verses fulfilled in us. By hook or crook they must 
seek to prove that "The Watch Tower" now claims that 
the Lord delay eth his coming. They must try to prove 
that "The Watch Tower" is smiting its "fellow-servants" 
and gluttonously eating and drinking with drunken 
Babylon. An evil mind and a large imagination can prove 
anything to its own satisfaction, just as the scribes and 
Pharisees, at our Lord's First Advent, accused him of 
being a gluttonous person and wine bibber, keeping company 
with prostitutes and the lower orders of society, with 
which they would have nothing to do. Just so they 
claimed that he was "Beelzebub, the Prince of devils." 
He was charged with blasphemy and executed as a criminal. 
His words to us forewarn us to expect similarly 
false accusations and cruel treatment, for "the servant 
is not above his Master." To these charges we reply:— 
We are by no means affiliating with Babylon and no 



one appreciates that fact or would substantiate our claim 
more thoroughly than Babylon herself. We have not 
smitten the brethren. The files of "The Watch Tower" 
for thirty years prove this. Even our enemies are referred 
to in kindly and generous terms. On the contrary, 
those acquainted with the facts know that both publicly 
and privately "false brethren" have smitten us on both 
cheeks, as well as backbitten us, slandered us and done 
everything mean and contemptible and contrary to the 
Spirit of the Lord. We have committed our case to the 
Lord; or, rather, we have recognized that our case is 
the Lord's. We are confident that we are doing his will 
in not rendering evil for evil nor slander for slander, but 
contrariwise, blessings in return for injuries. We continue 
to do all in our power to hold forth the Truth in 
its glorious beauty, that, peradventure, not only its 
friends will be the more charmed and blessed, but that 
possibly some of its enemies may be recovered from their 
folly. 

To the charge that we have boasted and that we have 
sought and are seeking to bring the people of God under 
bondage to human systems, we reply: These charges are 
surely false, so far as our heart is concerned, as the Lord 
knows our heart. It is wholly his for use in his service 
for the promulgation of his Truth, for the blessing of 
his people. Moreover, we believe that all the facts of the 
case viewed by any conscientious mind, fully, thoroughly 
and permanently contradict the claims of our opponents. 
Our publications continually set before God's people the 
Divine standard, the Bible. They uphold it as no other 
writings in the world do. They appeal to it on every 
occasion for the answer to every question for the instruction 
of God's people in every particular, as no other 
publications do, so far as we are aware. If there are any 
other publications on earth which so clearly set forth the 
rights of the Church as against all popes, bishops, clergy, 
and their enslaving tendencies, we have no knowledge of 
them and would be gratified to see them and to know 
that others have either equaled or surpassed our efforts 
to have God's people know the Truth, that the Truth 
should make them free. 

Indeed, we have wondered if our faithfulness to the 
Church in pointing out the liberties and authority of the 
ecclesia, and that pastors, elders and deacons are the 
servants of the Church, and not her lords, may not be the 
very reason why some of the elders and leaders amongst 
them seem especially opposed to "Scripture Studies," 
Vol. VI. Some instances have been brought to our attention 
in which the liberties of the Church have been 
usurped by the leaders who, wishing to maintain the 
usurpation, have tried to hinder the Lord's flock from 
hearing the Shepherd's voice telling them their proper 
course from "The Watch Tower." It is not for us to 
judge any. "The Lord will judge his people." It is for 
us to forewarn all with whom we have influence that the 
nearer they get individually, and as classes and Churches, 



into exact harmony with the teachings of the Lord's 
Word, in that same proportion will they be ready and 
able to stand the crucial tests that are upon us now. 

May we suggest that to our understanding the special 
trials of this "hour of temptation" begin with the leaders 
and progress more and more amongst those who have 
been called out of darkness into God's marvelous light? 
Later on this will reach the clergy of the nominal Church 
and its laity, and eventually, the wholly unregenerate 
masses. The Apostle's words represent well our own 
sentiments toward all with whom we have influence, 
namely, "Remember, that by the space of [thirty] years 
I ceased not to warn every one night and day."— 
Acts 20:31. 

"CONFESS YOUR FAULTS ONE TO ANOTHER" 

It is charged against us that our teachings on vital 
truths have changed and that still we are sending out to 
the public "Scripture Studies" which give forth our 
former teachings and that thus we are guilty of dishonesty. 
Our opponents ought to be glad if this were true, 
for they give the impression that they agree with the 
publications as they are going forth, but would disagree 
with them if they were changed. This is another case 
of "deceiving and being deceived." Our opponents wish 
for something to quarrel about and to charge against us; 
so they seize upon this matter, which we will shortly 
show is a subterfuge, and misrepresentation, whether 
from misunderstanding or not is not for us to judge. 
It will be noticed, however, that so far from loving the 
"Scripture Studies" and trying to buy up a whole 
edition of them in their present form and before 
any changes are made, these opponents have no love 
for the "Scripture Studies," are not circulating them 

R4474 : page 278 

at all, and many of them have been adverse to them for 
some time and merely awaited an opportunity and an 
excuse for striking a murderous blow at "The Watch 
Tower"— "that servant." 

The fact is that we are teaching no new doctrine and 
disowning no old doctrine. And we debated for a time 
whether or not it would be worth while at all to make 
the very few changes in "Scripture Studies" necessary to 
bring them up to the light of the present moment. We 
finally concluded that it would be wise to make these 

R4474 : page 279 

few changes. We did not think worth while to mention 
the trifling changes to those who are readers of "The 
Watch Tower," but since the subject has been brought up 
by our opponents we shall take pleasure in showing forth 
the slight changes that have been deemed expedient. Our 



readers will be surprised to note their nothingness. Our 

opponents, anxious to justify themselves and to scatter 

error and to interrupt the harvest work (which they cannot 

do), have seized upon these points of clearer light 

and sought to make out of them something great, revolutionary, 

opposed to everything before presented; opposed 

to Christ; opposed to the Ransom; opposed to everything 

that is good and holy. To effect this end they are 

ready to twist and turn and double upon their own track 

times out of number. Their "midnight howl" might well 

be, "Anything for a cudgel wherewith the beat 'that servant,' 

and to kill him, as far as spiritual influence is concerned, 

and to get possession of the Vineyard!" 

Perhaps it would be dignifying these opponents too 
much to ask if they are amongst the princes who counsel 
together and at whom "the Lord shall laugh and have 
them in derision."— Psa. 2:2-4. 

We have always held that Jesus is the Mediator of the 
New Covenant. We have always held that the Church is 
the Body of The Christ. We have always held that the 
New Covenant will go into effect with Israel and with the 
world through Israel at the Second Coming of our Lord, 
after the Church shall have gone up into Mt. Zion— into 
the spiritual Kingdom in the power of the First Resurrection 
—"His Resurrection." We have always held that 
this Mediator, Jesus the Head, and the Church his Body, 
will stand between God and the world of mankind during 
the Millennium— that the world will have no intercourse 
with God, the Father, until after the Messiah, the Mediator, 
"that great Prophet," antitypical of Moses, shall have 
accomplished for Israel and the world all the blessed 
provisions of the New Covenant. We are still holding 
and still teaching all these things. 

We have always held that the Church, as the Body of 
Christ, partakes with him of Divine favor on the spirit 
plane as heirs of the Abrahamic Covenant— not as heirs 
of the Law Covenant, nor as heirs of the New Covenant. 
(Gal. 3:29.) We still hold this. We have always held 
and still hold that natural Israel cannot attain to Divine 
blessings under the Law Covenant and that the privileges 
and hopes of that Covenant all passed away when Jesus 
inherited all of its blessings and rights at his death and 
in his resurrection. We have held and still hold that the 
Law Covenant, although devoid of any power to give life 
or blessings to the Jew, is still a bondage upon that people 
and will continue upon them, and that the only way 
that they can get out from under its sentence of death is 
either by accepting Christ as their husband now, and becoming 
his associates in the spiritual Kingdom as members 
of the Church, or else by participating as a nation in 
the blessings of the New Covenant, which will be opened 
to them at our Lord's Second Advent, when the Church is 
complete and when the New Covenant will go fully into 
effect. 

What, then, is the difference?— what then the enlightenment 
on the pathway which we now see and to which 



our opponents find an opportunity for declaring hostilities 
long rankling in their bosoms? This: Recognizing 
that the New Covenant will during the Millennium bless 
Israel and all nations with Restitution privileges, human 
perfection, etc., we formerly assumed that in some sense, 
which we could not explain, its influence came in advance 
to the Gospel Church during this Age, giving us justification 
or Restitution to human rights through faith, instead 
of actually, as the world will have these during the 
Millennium. This view was essentially right, but not in 
every particular. The fact is that, as the Scriptures say, 
we are "justified by faith," and not by any Covenant. 
The New Covenant has nothing whatever to do with 
justification by faith. Under it the glorified Christ will 
grant to Israel and the world, not a reckoned restitution, 
but an actual one, through works which they will be 
assisted to perform.— Rev. 20:13. 

We now see still more clearly than before that the 
New Covenant and its Mediator is the Divine provision 
between God and the sinful world only. We see that 
God, during the present age, is calling for a special class 
who have the eye of faith, the ear of appreciation and 
the heart of obedience— "even as many as the Lord your 
God shall call." He calls no others than these. By his 
providences and his Word he calls them to accept Jesus 
as their Redeemer, through whom alone by justifying 
faith the Father may deal with them, and accept them 
as "members of the Anointed." Through faith in the 
Redeemer (not through any Covenant) he offers these the 
privileges of consecrating their reckoned earthly rights 
and their share in the resurrection or restitution blessings 
coming to the world. He proposes that such as accept 
this arrangement may be counted in with Christ as 
sharers in his sufferings and as dying as his members, 
and may be rewarded with a share with him on the 
heavenly plane as members of the promised Seed 
of Abraham. When now we look at the Lord's Word 
we find that we were confusing our vision by trying to 
apply the New Covenant to ourselves and by supposing 
that it had anything whatever to do with justification 
by faith or that justification by faith needed any 
Covenant. 

We can see now that the New Covenant is not in 
operation yet; hence the Mediator of the New Covenant 
is not performing his work under that Covenant yet. 
His first work will be to seal the Covenant. We saw before 
that all the blessing, all the resurrection life, all the 
future opportunities to any member of Adam's race 
must come through the precious blood of Christ and 
that it, therefore, must contain the value which will 
ultimately seal the New Covenant and secure its blessings 
to Israel and the world. We still see this, but we 
see that our Lord, instead of at once applying his blood 
to seal the New Covenant, did something very different. 
He applied it for the sins of the "household of faith," 
who, during the Gospel Age, would believe in him and 



make consecration of themselves to the Father's service 
and be begotten of the holy Spirit. For over eighteen 
centuries his blood has been efficacious for these and for 
these alone and has brought to these and to these alone 
reckoned restitution rights. Israel did not receive actual 
restitution because their New (Law) Covenant, which 
provides for this, has not yet been sealed. 

Evidently the New Covenant was not sealed at our 
Lord's First Advent, although Jesus there, as "the 
Mediator of the New Covenant," shed his precious blood, 
necessary to its sealing. Yet Jesus surely has not given 
up the office of Mediator of the New Covenant which 
he undertook. He has not refused to apply his blood to 
the sealing of the New Covenant. He is merely doing 
something else first, in harmony with the Father's will 
from before the foundation of the world.— 2 Pet. 1:2,3. 

Jesus, the Mediator of the New Covenant, tarries before 
he mediates that New Covenant, to gather together 
the "very elect," who are to constitute his members, his 
Body, his joint-heirs, in the Millennial glory and mediatorial 
work. He is the Messenger or servant of the 
New Covenant and each one of the Church now being 
called and chosen becomes an underservant and 
messenger of the New Covenant. As St. Paul declares, 
"He hath made us able ministers (servants) of the New 
Covenant." (2 Cor. 3:6.) This work of qualifying the 
Church, the members of the Body of the Mediator, prepares 
them for a future service in helping Israel and 
the world under and through the terms of the New 
Covenant. And additionally St. Paul and the other 
Apostles and each of the Lord's faithful ones are ministers 
or servants of this New Covenant now, in that they 
are engaged, as the Lord's mouth-pieces, in calling the 
members of the Body of Christ, and engaged also as the 
Lord's representatives in edifying one another and building 
one another up in the "most holy faith," preparing 

R4474 : page 280 

one another as members of the Body of the Mediator, 
the Body of Christ, to be associated with him in the 
work of his Mediatorial Kingdom of a thousand years. 

Surely there is no change, no casting away of any item 
of Truth, in connection with these matters. On the 
contrary, the whole subject of the New Covenant is still 
further clarified by our seeing that it has nothing whatever 
to do with the justification of the Church— that it 
is still future; that it has not yet been sealed; that on 
the contrary, the offer to our Lord's followers is that 
they may partake with him of his cup, of his sacrifice, 
of his suffering. Our sharing with him as members of 
the Body of the great Prophet, Priest, King of the world 
and Mediator of the New Covenant, under which Israel 
and the world will be blessed, is made dependent upon 
our having share with him in his sufferings. This explains 
why the blessings of the world did not begin 



eighteen centuries ago. This explains why Israel was 
cast off and its New Covenant not entered into for all 
these centuries. (Jer. 31:31.) This explains why restitution 
could not come to Israel and through Israel to the world 
until the Second Coming of Christ, when the "elect" number 
of his followers would have drank his cup of suffering 
of sacrifice, of self-denial. "If we suffer with him, 
we shall also reign with him; if we be dead with him we 

page 280 

shall also live with him." If we be justified by faith 

R4474 : page 280 

in his blood, and be accepted as members in his Body 
through consecration unto death, we then shall be members 

R4475 : page 280 

of the Spiritual Seed of Abraham, through whose 

mercy natural Israel shall obtain mercy and become the 

earthly Seed of Abraham under the New Covenant arrangement 

and be used in dispensing the blessings of God 

to all the families of the earth. See Romans 1 1:25-36. 

It is charged that to deceive and to mislead, "The 
Watch Tower" made a false quotation in its issue of 
January 1, 1909, page 12, quoting, "This is the blood," 
instead of "This is my blood." This objection is far-fetched. 
As is well known, the different Gospels 
state our Lord's words in slightly different form. Luke 
says, "This cup is the New Covenant in my blood, which 
is shed for you." (Luke 22:20.) Mark says, "This is 
my blood of the New Covenant, which is shed for many." 
(Mark 14:24.) Matthew says, "This is my blood of the 
New Covenant, which is shed for many." (Matt. 26:28.) 
What is the difference between these expressions, the 
blood of the New Covenant, and, my blood of the New 
Covenant? Is not Jesus' blood the only one that could 
be meant? This is exactly our contention, that the cup 
represented our Lord's sufferings and that he gave it to 
his disciples, saying, "Drink ye all of it"; Divide it 
amongst yourselves. Our contention is that it was 
Jesus' cup of which he drank and that he gave it to his 
disciples to finish— that thus symbolically we were invited 
to be partakers of the sufferings of Christ.— 
2 Cor. 1:5-7. 

It is our opponents who deny that the Lord drank of 
the cup— that it was his cup. They, not we, claim that 
he drank of one cup and we of another— that his sufferings 
were of one kind and ours of a different character. 
We have pointed out their error, citing them to I Cor. 10:16, 
"The cup of blessing which we bless, is it not the 
communion, [Greek, Komonia, participation] of the 
blood of Christ"— the sacrifice of Christ? And again, 
"After the same manner also he took the cup, when he 



had supped, saying, This cup is the New Testament in my 
blood." (1 Cor. 11:25.) It is our contention that is 
supported by these Scriptures. They show that the cup 
represented the blood, the death, the sacrifice of Christ, 
whose purpose or intention is the sealing of the New 
Covenant; and they show that our Redeemer invited us 
to participate with him in that cup of sacrificial death. 
Such objections are merely dust-throwing. The text 
means the same thing exactly whichever way it is read, 
for Christ's blood is the blood, the only blood, by which 
the New Covenant can be sealed. And it is this blood, 
this merit, which shall ultimately seal the New Covenant, 
that our Lord now passes through us, the Church, members 
of his Body— permitting us to drink of his cup, that 
we may also participate in his glories. Thus he said to 
the disciples who desired to sit upon the Throne, "Are 
ye able to drink of the cup that I shall drink of?" 
(Matt. 20:22.) Our Lord there indicated clearly that 
none will ever sit with him in the Throne except those 
who share with him in his sacrifice— not a different cup, 
not a different sacrifice. As to how the my was changed 
to the we may never know, as the matter passed through 
the hands of the stenographer, the type-setter and proof 
reader. But we emphasize the fact that no violence was 
done and that our argument would have been better 
served by the my than by the the, as that is just what 
we are upholding, that we share with our Lord in his 
cup. 

OUR REPLY TO A LETTER 

The opposing Brother and his wife want to know why 
we did not answer at length a not very kindly-worded 
letter received from them. We did answer the letter in a 
kindly way; that we hoped might be most helpful to 
them. We did not write a book, nor even a pamphlet, 
thinking or hoping that by the time their letter had 
reached us their minds would have clarified to some extent, 
and that no answer would really be necessary. 
The fact is that when the heart gets soured spiritual 
truths and harmonies lose their beauty— no amount of 
explaining will prove satisfactory. The heart that is 
contentious and that sitteth in the seat of the scornful, 
is not in a condition to receive the blessings of the Lord. 
On the contrary, we read, "The meek will he guide in 
judgment and teach his way." We quote below from 
our letter, to show that we did not neglect this Brother's 
spiritual interests, but treated him according to the 
best wisdom granted to us of the Lord. The closing 
paragraphs of our letter, dated November 24, 1908, 
read:— 

"Dear Brother, were I to judge of your heart from 
the phraseology of this letter alone, I should be inclined 
to suppose that your faith in the Lord and in Present 
Truth had wholly lost its anchorage. The intimations 
of your letter would seem to imply either that the Lord 



had nothing whatever to do with what we call the 

Harvest and the Harvest Work, and that the whole 

matter is an error and a fraud, or else that you had 

gradually been reaching a very severe judgment of his 

poor methods of conducting an unwise selection of instruments 

for it and that you feel half inclined to tell 

him so, and to give him pointers all along the line, 

whereby he might profit and not let his work go to 

smash before the Harvest time is ended. 

"Dear Brother, I love you and nothing herein is written 
in any harsh or unkind spirit, but quite to the contrary, 
to, if possible awaken you to a realization of the 
fact that you are in a very dangerous attitude of mind 
—that after years of faithfulness and devotion you are 
in danger of making shipwreck within sight of the 
heavenly port. Dear Brother, search your heart diligently 
with the candle of the Lord's Word and find and 
destroy anything that may be there in the nature of 
leaven. We are surely in the "hour of temptation," and 
the principal tests upon us will be faith and love— faith 
in the Lord, the Supervisor of the Work, and faith in all 
those who are truly his— and who love the Lord and the 
Brethren. 

"I assure you of my continued love and interest for 
yourself and wife and all the members of the Lord's 
family, everywhere, and remain, 

"Your brother and servant in Christ." 

FILLING UP SUFFERINGS-FOR THE CHURCH 

We have applied to the Church as a whole the Apostle 
Paul's words respecting himself (Col. 1:24) to 
show the participation of the Apostle and of all the 
fellow-members in the Body of Christ in the sufferings 
of our Head. He says, "I Paul. ..fill up that 
which is behind of the afflictions of Christ in my flesh 
for his Body's sake, which is the Church." We have 
called attention to the fact that when all the sufferings 

R4475 : page 281 

of the Church, the Body of Christ, are complete, the 
blood of that sacrifice, antitypically sprinkled in the 
"most holy," will be on behalf of and in cancellation of 
the sins of "the people" (Leviticus 16:15), "The sins 
of the whole world." We have pointed out specifically 
that all the merit was in our Lord Jesus, typified by the 
bullock sin-offering, and that the Church's share in the 
"better sacrifices," represented in the Lord's goat sin-offering, 
is of grace and not of merit. 

Our opponents think they find an objection to this in 
that portion of the text quoted above, which says, "for 
his Body's sake, which is the Church." They say, "The 
Watch Tower" declares that the merit of the sacrifice of 
the "Lord's goat," those accepted as members of Christ's 
Body, will be sprinkled upon the mercy-seat for the 



cancellation of the people's sins, while St. Paul says his 
sufferings were for the Church. We reply that there is 
no conflict here. The sufferings of Christ came to him 
in connection with his services to the Church; and the 
sufferings of the members of his Body come to them 
similarly in the service of the Church; but as to what 
application of this merit the High Priest will make is 
another matter. The Scriptures show us that the merit 
of his own sacrifice, "the bullock," was sprinkled or 
applied on behalf of the antitypical priests and Levites 
and that his secondary sacrifice of the flesh of those 
accepted as his members, "The Lord's goat," will be 
applied "for the people." In other words, the Church 
is exhorted, "We ought also to lay down our lives for 
the brethren." This is our Lord's new commandment to 
us. But as to how he will apply the merit of this part 
of his sufferings in cancellation of the sins of the people 
is explained to such of us as can understand "the mystery." 
Our knowing or not knowing how the High 
Priest applies his own blood, passed through the Church, 
has nothing to do with the fact that it will be applied 
"for the sins of the people." 

THE FATHER'S DRAWING AND THE SON'S DRAWING 

It seems difficult to make sufficiently lucid for some, 
the fact that while all of Adam's race are sinners, "children 
of wrath," nevertheless they are of two classes— 
(1) Those who have eyes and ears to discern the Lord's 
provision of mercy in Christ and whose hearts are 
obedient to the same, and (2) others whose ears and 
eyes are closed to the message of grace and whose hearts 
are rebellious. The first of these, amenable to God's 
grace, are drawn now by the Father— "even as many as 
the Lord your God shall call." These, because not 
rebellious, are drawn to Jesus for faith-justification. He 
becomes their Advocate and they, begotten of the holy 
Spirit, are at once sons of God. 

The second class, "carnally minded," rebellious, "not 
subject to the law of God," cannot be dealt with in the 
same manner. For them God has provided the Millennial 
Kingdom of Christ, which shall put down rebellion by 
force, bind Satan and scatter the powers of darkness and 
flood the world with the true knowledge of the Lord. 
The world for a thousand years will be under what is 
termed "Martial Law." In other words, it will be under 
a Mediatorial Kingdom whose mission will be to establish 
harmony between God and men— between God 
and the world, from which the Church will have been 
previously selected. By the close of the Mediatorial 
Kingdom peace and harmony will be established, and 
then, as a pacified province of God's great Empire, it 
will be turned over to Jehovah. In other words, the 

R4476 : page 281 



world will require 1000 years to reach that peace with 

God which the elect class of this age reaches almost instantly, 

by faith similar to Abraham's.— James 2:23. 

Abraham needed no Mediator to justify him. He was 
"justified by faith," and so are we. (Rom. 5:1.) But 
Abraham did need a Redeemer, and so do we— Jesus 
Christ the righteous, who died for our sins and through 
faith in whose blood we have remission of sins. (Matt. 26:28; 
Acts 10:43.) In Bible usage the word Mediator is 
always used in connection with a Covenant. Moses was 
the Mediator of the Law Covenant; Jesus is the Mediator 
of the New (Law) Covenant, under the terms of which 
he will shortly establish his Mediatorial Kingdom for 
the blessings of Israel and the world.— Jer. 31:31; Ezk. 16:60,61; 
Rom. 11:27,31. 

Abraham needed no Advocate; but we need one: not 
to secure forgiveness of original sin, but as our Head to 
represent our every interest as New Creatures. Because 
of ignorance, and weakness, and having the treasure of 
our spirit-begetting in earthen vessels, we as sons of God 
could not hope to make good our consecration vows. We 
need an Advocate and have been provided one— "Jesus 
Christ the righteous," "who ever liveth to make intercession 
for us"— as new creatures, his members. 

In view of these indisputable facts is not the Scripture 
teaching reasonable when it declares that the 
Heavenly Father, during this age, "draws" or "calls" 
such as he chooses for "members of the Body of Christ" 
—the Prophet, Priest, King and Mediator of the Millennial 
Age? And is it not equally reasonable that we 
are told that during the Millennium Christ will "draw 
all men unto himself"— whether they hear or forbear? 

We reiterate, therefore, that all the drawing thus 
far done from the time of our Lord to the present has 
been done by the Heavenly Father himself— not by a 
mediator nor by an advocate. It is our Lord himself 
who declares, "No man can come unto me except the 
Father which sent me draw him, and he that cometh 
unto me (by the Father drawn) I will by no means cast 
out" (reject). (John 6:44,37.) Our Lord followed the 
same thought when he declared that he is the Vine, we 
the branches, and the Heavenly Father the Husbandman, 
and that this Vine, the Church, is of the Father's own 
right hand planting— separate and distinct from the 
world. Jesus gave the same thought in the parable 
which represents the Heavenly Father as making a Marriage 
Supper for his Son, and sending forth his servants 
to invite the bidden ones. When those already bidden 
did not satisfactorily respond the Father sent forth other 
servants into the highways and hedges that the banquet 
feast might be provided with guests. The same lesson 
is taught by our Lord's words, "My Father, which gave 
them me, is greater than all; and no man is able to 
pluck them out of my Father's hand."— John 10:29. 

The same lesson is typically taught in Abraham's sending 
his servant Eliezer to select a bride for Isaac. Abraham, 



the type of God, sent his servant, the type of the 
holy Spirit, to select a Bride, type of the Church, for his 
son Isaac, type of Jesus. Rebecca needed no mediator 
between herself and Abraham, for she came at his call 
and was guided by his servant. She was related to 
Abraham before her invitation to become Isaac's bride, 
just as all those invited to become the Bride of Christ by 
the Father's invitation were previously related to him 
as members of the "household of faith." The marriage 
took place after Abraham's agencies for the selection of 
the Bride had accomplished their work. So now, with 
the completion of the Divine selection of the Church, will 
come the Heavenly Bridegroom to receive her to himself, 
in the field near the antitypical well, Laharoi. Later 
she will be presented before the Heavenly Father and 
the holy angels and will become the Bride-Consort of her 
Lord, her Head, her Redeemer. 

Then the lifting up of Christ will be complete. Unto 
him "every knee will bow, of things in heaven and things 
in earth," the Church also acknowledging him her Lord, 
her Head. Then will come the time when the exalted 
One, Head and Body, will fulfil his promise, "I, if I be 
lifted up, will draw all men unto me." (John 12:32.) 
The drawing will continue throughout the Millennial 
Age, until every member of the race shall have felt its 
influence and impetus and all the willing and obedient 
shall have been blessed, uplifted, restored to perfection. 
We do not claim that our Lord's lifting up to the glory 
of power was separate or apart from his being lifted up 
on the cross. On the contrary, "no cross no crown." We 
hold that our Lord and subsequently his members attain 

R4476 : page 282 

to the position of glory by the "narrow way" of the cross 
of self-sacrifice; and that without this experience he 
would have had no authority or power to draw and uplift 
the world of mankind. In other words, the right of 
the Christ in glory to seal the New Covenant and to be 
its servant or Mediator, through whom all the families 
of the earth will be blessed, is based upon his sacrificial 
death. Truly "the prophets spake of the sufferings of 
The Christ [Head and Body] and of the glory that 
should follow." 

Our Lord was lifted up on the cross that he might have 
the right to draw all men, but he was lifted up to resurrection 
glory that he might have the ability to draw all. 
The two thoughts are logically inseparable.— John 12:32. 

In harmony with this we read of the Father's address 
to the Anointed, "Ask of me and I will give thee the 
heathen for thine inheritance and the uttermost parts 
of the earth for thy possession." (Psalm 2:8.) St. Paul 
points out to us that the fulfilment of this will be at 
our Lord's Second Coming, after the Father shall have 
drawn the Church; after Christ shall have justified them, 
and the Father shall have begotten them by the holy 



Spirit, and they shall have finished their course and 
been accounted worthy to attain to joint-heirship with 
their Redeemer as members of the Spiritual Seed of 
Abraham. Nothing can be plainer to those whose eyes 
of understanding are opened to appreciate the "Mystery." 
The whole creation is groaning and travailing in pain 
together until now, waiting for the manifestation of the 
sons of God; waiting for the shining forth of the Sun of 
Righteousness; waiting for the drawing work of the 
great Mediator between God and the world to begin and 
to proceed to its glorious accomplishment. 

EXPLANATIONS AND CORRECTIONS 

In our issue, Z.'94, p. 349, we said, "The Jewish converts 
could scarcely realize the greatness of the change 
from the Law Covenant to the New Covenant." Instead 
of new we should have said grace Covenant, meaning the 
original Abrahamic Covenant, typified by Sarah. (Gal. 3:29; 
4:28.) In the same article we remarked that 
Gentiles needed no longer to become Jews, but had access 
to God through Christ and [as ministers of the N.C. to 
participation in the mediation of] the New Covenant in 
his blood. This is a correct statement. The only reason 
for the calling of the Gentiles during this Gospel Age 
to be associated with Christ is that we may thus share 
with him in his blood of the New Covenant— his sacrifice, 
and subsequently share with him in putting that New 
Covenant with Israel into force during the Millennium. 

Again in "The Tower" of '93, p. 372, we said, "Let 
us look at the Church under the New Covenant. Her 
relation to the New Covenant is during the Gospel Age. 
But to her the covering mercy of that Covenant is not to 
permit time to reach physical, mental and moral perfection, 
but to give her a standing before God, where she 
can offer herself to God a living sacrifice, holy and acceptable 
to God, through the merit of Christ— under the 
merciful provisions of the New Covenant." This is not 
a proper statement, as we now see the matter. The 
essence of it all is true enough, namely, that through 
Christ the Church has a reckoned perfection and standing 
before God, an opportunity to offer herself a living 
sacrifice, holy and acceptable to God through the merit 
of Christ. The only mistake is in the added words, 
under the merciful provisions of the New Covenant." 
This thought came down to us from the dark ages and 
was a mote hindering our vision. We now see that the 
Bible says nothing whatever about the Church being 
"under the merciful provisions of the New Covenant." 
God's merciful provisions for the world are all in that 
New Covenant, but not so with the Church. His provision 
for his called and drawn is Scripturally styled 
"justification by faith." Nothing here is changed or 
abandoned. The Church's justification is the same, and 
the New Covenant stands as ever, but in its proper place 
—a Covenant or arrangement by which the world will 



receive its blessing during the Millennium. 

In the same connection, p. 373, we said, "The New 
Covenant is absolutely necessary with its provision of 
the covering of our sins by the merit of our Redeemer's 
sacrifice." And again, "Our Lord gave himself a Ransom, 
a corresponding price, a substitute, for all, but he 
represents before the bar of Justice since the Resurrection 
only those who come unto God by him, under the 
gracious terms of the New Covenant, sealed or ratified 
by his death." The essential thoughts here are correct. 
The only error was in assuming that the New Covenant, 
which belongs to the next age, had anything to do with 
our justification, which is purely by faith in the blood 
of Christ. 

Similarly, following the common error and neglecting 
the direct statement of the Bible, we wrote in "The 
Tower," 1901, p. 182, "Meantime throughout the Gospel 
Age the Lord's people, by the eye of faith, beheld the 
great High Priest as their Mediator who ever liveth to 
make intercession for us." We should have used the 
Scriptural term Advocate instead of the word Mediator. 
Again we said, "They are accepted with the Father, not 
directly, but indirectly, 'accepted in the beloved,' who 
is our intercessor, our Mediator." Again, instead of 
Mediator we should have said Advocate. We used the 
word Mediator in a loose, unscriptural manner, as others 
still do. We had not then noticed that the term Mediator 
in Scriptural usage is always connected with the mediation 

R4477 : page 282 

of a Covenant. Jesus is the Mediator of the New 
Covenant and, as St. Paul points out in Hebrews 12:24-28, 
we shall in the end of the age, as his Church 
complete, in the General Assembly of the Firstborn, 
come to him, the Mediator of the New Covenant, as his 
Bride and Joint-heirs in carrying out its blessed provisions 
for the uplift of Israel and the world. 

Our Covenant is the original Abrahamic Covenant, 
the Oath-Bound Covenant, which God consummated four 
hundred years before the old Law Covenant. It needed 
no mediator, has no mediator, because, as the Apostle 
points out, it has no contingencies to be mediated. God 
promised that in his own time and way he would develop 
the Seed of Abraham. He has about accomplished 
this. "No man taketh this honor unto himself, but he 
that is called of God." (Heb. 5:4.) Our Lord Jesus was 
called first and responded loyally for the joy that was 
set before him. The Heavenly Father is now calling the 
members of the Body— "as many as the Lord your God 
shall call." These, holy and acceptable through Christ's 
sacrifice, he will soon "raise up with him" as participants 
in the Spiritual Seed. Then, with the Anointed complete 
and ready, the New Covenant promised centuries ago to 
Israel will go into effect. 

Note another case in which we used the terms New 



Covenant and Mediator improperly, though the thought 
behind was, and still is, entirely correct. We said, "If 
anyone lose his relationship to Christ through the loss 
of his faith in the precious blood or through the loss of 
the holy Spirit through wilful sin, such an one falls out 
of the protection, the care, the covering, of Jesus." That 
is all right, but we erroneously added the Mediator of 
the New Covenant. True, Jesus is the Mediator of the 
New Covenant, but, to bring in the fact here seems to 
imply that his mediatorship and the New Covenant have 
something to do with the Church. This is a mistake. 
Those words in bold type added nothing to the articles 
and injure them not at all by being omitted now. 

In "The Tower" of '02, p. 223, we said, "It is nearly 
nineteen centuries since the New Covenant was sealed 
with the precious blood of our Mediator." We there 
said something for which there is no Scripture and 
hence something we should not have said and which we 
now properly correct. The New Covenant is not yet 
sealed. The blood of Jesus— the merit of his sacrifice— 
which will eventually seal the New Covenant at the end 
of this age, is now being otherwise used. It has been 
applied to the Church for her Justification, in order that 
she might have justified human rights to sacrifice and 
thereby might come into membership in the Body of 
Christ, the great Mediator, the antitype of Moses, whom 

R4477 : page 283 

God has been raising up during this Gospel Age. (Acts 3:23.) 
So far from telling us that Christ sealed the 
New Covenant, the Scriptures tell us the very reverse, 
namely, that he became the "surety" of it. (Heb. 7:22.) 
A sealed Covenant needs no "surety," but an unsealed 
Covenant does need a "surety." Thus we have a little 
more light upon the subject— not contradictory of any 
teaching or principle of Christian faith or practice, but 
further explanatory of the Divine purposes and 
arrangements. 

In our issue of 1906, p. 26, we said, "Our Lord Jesus 
in his own person has been the Mediator between the 
Father and the 'household of faith' during this Gospel 
Age." This statement is incorrect. No Scripture so declares. 
It is a part of the smoke of the dark ages which 
we are glad now to wipe from our eyes. As already 
shown in this article we now see more clearly than ever 
how no man can come unto the Son during this Gospel 
Age except drawn by the Father, and that none will be 
in the elect Church except "as many as the Lord your 
God shall call," and as shall then make their calling 
and election sure, "for no man taketh this honor unto 
himself"— neither the High Priest nor the under-priests 
nor the Levites. We are all called of God to be his 
agents as the Spiritual Seed of Abraham in mediating 
the New Covenant for the blessing of natural Israel and 
the world. 



IMPOSSIBLE TO DECEIVE THE ELECT 

The great hour of temptation foretold in the Psalms 
and prophecies and by our Lord and the apostles, "The 
hour of temptation shall come upon all them that dwell 
upon the face of the whole earth," is upon us and, as 
the Apostle suggests, the question is not, "Who shall 
fall," but, "Who shall be able to stand?" Or, as stated 
through the prophet of old, "Who may abide the day 
of his coming, and who shall stand when he appeareth? 
for he is like a refiner's fire, and like fullers' soap. And 
he shall sit as a refiner and purifier of silver; and he 
shall purify the sons of Levi (the 'household of faith') 
and purge them as gold and silver, that they may offer 
unto the Lord an offering in righteousness."— 
Mai. 3:2,3. 

The Scriptures tell us that the angel of the Lord encampeth 
round about them that reverence him for their 
deliverance or protection. They intimate also that Satan 
and the fallen angels are very desirous of invading our 
minds and hearts and bodies with evil suggestions. To 
a greater or lesser extent we must surely believe that 
Divine providence through the human will has raised a 
considerable barrier for the protection of the natural 
man from the evil spirits. Otherwise, surely through 
evil promptings and obsessions, the world centuries since 
would have gone mad under such infernal impulsings. 
We may be sure, however, that as the Adversary specially 
opposed the Lord, so he marks out and specially assaults 
the faithful members of his Body— and the greater their 
prominence the more severe would naturally be the 
attack. "We are not ignorant of his devices," nor of 
the fact that "we wrestle not against flesh and blood, 
but against wicked spirits in influential positions." (Eph. 6:12.) 
Without Divine assistance surely all would be 
led captive at his will— misled, ensnared by him who 
puts darkness for light and endeavors to show the light 
to be darkness. 

Our thought is that for the testings of this hour the 
Lord permits the Adversary to come very close to the 
tempted, so that the slightest inclination in their hearts 
towards evil would quickly put them in contact with the 
adverse influence of the Adversary. No wonder, then, it 
is the hour of temptation! No wonder all except the 
saints, the "very elect," will be unable to stand! The 
saints, as they find the close approach of the Adversary, 
will draw nearer and nearer to the Lord and feel restful 
and content only "under the shadow of the Almighty." 
And they will thank God for any help at hand, such as 
the Vow, which he may send to assist them into the 
"secret place of the Most High." As for those who come 
under the power of the Adversary we can only expect 
that their hearts and minds will become more and more 
perverse. Not only may we expect that they will "speak 
perverse things to draw away disciples after them," but 



we are to remember further that "many shall follow 
their pernicious ways, by reason of whom the Truth 
shall be evil-spoken of. "-Acts 20:30; 2 Pet. 2:2. 

What may we not expect if the Lord in the closing 
hours of this age shall permit the Adversary and his 
supporters, through Hypnotism, Spiritism, etc., to come 
close to humanity and overcome the barriers of the will, 
which hitherto has been man's protection! What might 
we not expect as the result— anger, malice, hatred, envy, 
strife and general devilishness, inaugurating a time of 
trouble such as never was since there was a nation— 
every man's hand against his brother and neighbor! 

The following are the changes made in "Studies in the 
Scriptures" to harmonize with the foregoing presentations 
on the subject of the New Covenant, its Mediator, 
and the Church's justification by faith and acceptance as 
the Seed of Abraham under the original Oath-Bound 
Covenant of Grace: 

VOLUME I. 

Page 1 13, line 16, "who hath sealed the Covenant with 
his own precious blood," changed to, "whose precious 
blood is to seal the Covenant." 

Page 130, line 7, "Under the New Covenant the members, 
changed to, "Under the Covenant of Grace members." 
Last line, "(in this life or the next)" changed to, 
"(in the Millennial Age)." 

VOLUME II. 

Page 69, line 5, "sealed or," changed to, "secured." 

VOLUME III. 

Page 298, line 8, "but only for the remnant selected 
from the twelve and the residue selected from among 
the Gentiles," changed to, "It must first be sealed by the 
blood (death) of the Mediator— Head and Body, from 
Jews and Gentiles." 

Page 342, lines 17, 18, 3416 inches, changed to, 3457 
inches to agree with later accurate measurement, would 
seem to mark 1915. The former figures were "paper 
measure" from Piazzi Smith's illustration supposed to 
have been drawn to a scale, but found inaccurate. 

VOLUME V. -later paging. 

Page 28, line 15, "by divine prearrangement sealed," 
changed to, "made possible the sealing of." Lines 20 
and 21, "The New Covenant had been sealed," changed 
to, "the redemption had been secured." Next to last line, 
"which sealed," changed to, "for sealing." 

Page 121, line 34, "sealed the New Covenant," changed 
to, "opened up a new way of life"! Line 39, "New 
Covenant," changed to, "precious blood." 



Page 139, line 29, "New," changed to, "Oath-bound." 

Page 243, line 32, "reckoned," changed to, 
"thenceforth." 

Page 426, line 26, "his own sacrifice, his own death 
as," changed to, "his own death (and his members) for." 

Page 455, line 31, "was made," changed to, "becomes." 
Line 34, "and having sealed," changed to, "that 
he might seal." Line 35, "made," changed to, "make." 

VOLUME VI. 

Page 88, line 13, "the call of this Gospel Age could 
not be promulgated or effected until our Lord had sealed 
the New Covenant with his blood," changed to, "the call 

R4478 : page 283 

of this Gospel Age could not be promulgated until first 

our Lord by his death had become 'surety' for the New 

Covenant."— Heb. 7:22. 
Page 109, line 11, "New," changed to, "Grace." 
Page 168, line 5, "sealed," changed to, "secures." Line 

7, "reconciliation with him through this Redeemer, and 

his sacrifice only," changed to, "fellowship with our Redeemer 

in his sacrifice and reward." Line 13, changed 

to, "privilege of communion in Christ's blood." 
Page 227, line 3, "New," changed to, "Grace." 
Page 228, line 15, "New," changed to, "Grace." Line 

16, "it, who," changed to, "the Law, but." 

R4478 : page 284 

Page 285, line 3, omit "six." 

Page 357, line 30, "sealed," changed to, "suretied." 
-Heb. 7:22. 

Page 358, line 16, "sealed, ratified," changed to, 
"suretied."— Heb. 7:22. 

Page 362, line 26, "New," changed to, "Grace." 

Page 392, line 29, changed to, "the high priest who 
made the sacrifice." 

Page 397, line 27, "sealed," changed to, "suretied."— 
Heb. 7:22. 

Page 401, line 25, "New," changed to, "Abrahamic." 
Line 26, omit, "sealed and." 

Page 432, lines 1 1 and on from bottom, changed to, 
"received him as the antitypical Moses. As they were 
baptized into Moses in the sea and in the cloud, the acceptance 
of Christ, as instead of Moses, would imply 
that they were in Christ, as members of his Body, under 
him as their Head, and through association with him, 
ministers of the New Covenant, of which the complete 
glorified Christ, Head and Body, will be the Mediator."— 
Acts 3:23; 2 Cor. 3:6. 

Page 434, line 13, "Mediator," changed to, "Surety." 
Heb. 7:22. Line 14, add, "which they engaged to serve." 
-2 Cor. 3:6. 



Page 461, line 4 from bottom, "was sprinkled upon," 
changed to, "is efficacious for." 

We recommend the friends to note the above changes 
in their volumes of "Scripture Studies." We submit to 
any honest mind that the changes, while trifling, are 
very helpful; but that they in no sense or degree affect 
our faith in the fundamentals of God's Word— that our 
Lord Jesus' death is the basis of all hope for both the 
Church and the world; that all the merit of redemption 
proceeds therefrom; that the privilege of sharing in our 
Lord's sacrifice, and subsequently in his Millennial glory, 
is "the Mystery" respecting which some never were 
permitted to see, and concerning which others are now 
evidently being blinded; that shortly Abraham's natural 
seed will be saved from their blindness and become the 
beneficiaries of the New Covenant and share the work 
of dispensing Divine mercy to all the families of the 
earth. This is God's Covenant with them— they shall 
obtain (Divine) mercy through your mercy.— 
Romans 11:27-32. 

We close this article as we began it, with the suggestion 
that the dear friends who are shouting "Wake up ! " 
are merely experiencing a nightmare. They have gone 
to sleep and their confused notions are merely "nocturnal 
hallucinations," which would be amusing to us did we 
not realize the seriousness of their condition. In their 
somnambulism they are in danger of falling from all 
the precious things which they and we had hoped they 
might attain. Those who have any influence with persons 
in this condition should use every energy to wake 
them up. Nevertheless let no harsh or unkind word be 
uttered, either to them or in respect to them. The present 
is a time of trial, of testing of character and of faithfulness, 
not only for them, but for all who have named 
the name of Christ. 



R4478 : page 284 

SELF-RESTRAINT IN LIBERTY 

-I COR. 10:23-33. -SEPTEMBER 26.- 

Golden Text:— "Let every one of us please his neighbor 
for his good to edification."— Rom. 15:2. 

WE KNOW not to what extent intemperance and 

other vices prevailed in the Apostle's day. In 

a general way the Church is cautioned, warned 

against every form of vice, of sin, of intemperance. 

These are questions which might have been discussed 

with Jews and Gentiles entirely irrespective of religion. 

These are not the questions discussed in this lesson. Indeed, 

the Scriptures say little respecting the grosser 

vices, because the Apostle addressed Christians and not 



the worldly. Note the address of each of the epistles— 
To the believers, the "household of faith," the "saints." 
These, having left the world, having turned their backs 
upon sin and debauchery of every kind, needed not to be 
specially exhorted along the lines of vices. There were 
other questions more important to the saints and these 
the Apostle discussed. 

Our lesson specially relates to a religious difficulty of 
that time. The Gospel teaching was that idols were 
nothing, and hence that offering of meat to these idols 
could do no harm to the meat. At the same time a 
question of principle was involved. Idolatry was so general 
at that time that it had become the general custom 
to offer upon the altar of sacrifice to their gods certain 
parts of the animals and the remainder might be taken 
by the sacrificer to eat at his home, or it might be given 
to the priests, or it might be sold in the market-place. 
Indeed, much of that which was contributed to the 
priests found its way to the markets. The public in general 
being fully in sympathy with this custom, were glad 
to purchase these meats, and they were in general use. 
When the question of the eating of these meats came up, 
some had much difficulty while others had none; the consciences 
of the former rebelled against their eating what 
had been offered to idols. 

We can certainly sympathize with those who had 
trouble with their conscience in this way, even though 
we clearly see that the idols, being of stone or wood, 
could do the meat no injury. However, this was one of 
the burning questions of that time. Its discussion by the 
Apostle implies this. We can readily see that whoever 
would violate his conscience would injure his spiritual 
welfare and interests, regardless of whether the thing 
was right or wrong. We can readily see, too, how one 
might influence another. The brother of strong mind, 
discerning the situation, might eat with impunity; while 
his neighbor, less strong in mind, might be influenced 
by his example to eat, to the injury of his conscience. 
And, as a result of doing violence to his conscience he 
might be led out of the way altogether. This is the 
thought the Apostle had in mind in writing the lesson of 
today. 

The essence of this lesson is that the Christian, by 
Divine arrangement, has a great deal of liberty to do 
good, to do everything that is proper, to do everything 
that will not injure himself or a brother or a neighbor. 
But he has no liberty to do wrong— no right to do anything 
that would injure himself or his brother or his 
neighbor. In other words, our liberties, while apparently 
absolute, are really limited. All the Thou shalt nots of 
the Law are removed, but the essence of that Law still 
remains, briefly comprehended in the statement, Thou 
shalt love the Lord thy God, and thy neighbor as thyself. 
The Christian is at liberty to do anything that does 
not conflict with this basic Law of his new nature— the 
Law of Love. This appears upon first sight to be a great 



liberty, but, on closer examination, it is found to give us 
much less liberty than others exercise, as they think, with 
propriety. Not only does the Law of Love thus control 
us, because that is the Divine standard of justice, but 
additionally, God has accepted us in covenant relationship 
with himself under the Abrahamic Covenant, under Christ 
our Head, the Mediator of the New (Law) Covenant. 
Under this Covenant agreement with the Lord we are 
firmly bound to more than the Law or justice requirement; 
we are bound to sacrifice our rights and privileges, 
in the interests of others. 

Below we furnish an arrangement of St. Paul's various 
expressions, touching this general subject, compiled by 
Prof. Wells: 

With what weapons and in what spirit Christians should 
gain the victory. 

R4478 : page 285 

1. STAND BY YOUR PERSONAL LIBERTY. 

Ye, brethren, were called for freedom.— Gal. 5:13. 

Why is my liberty judged by another conscience?— 
1 Cor. 10:29. 

Whatsoever is sold in the shambles, eat, asking no question 
for conscience's sake: 

For the earth is the Lord's, and the fulness thereof.— 
1 Cor. 10:25,26. 

2. BUT CONTROL YOUR LIBERTY BY THE LAW OF LOVE. 

All things are lawful, but not all things are expedient. 
All things are lawful, but not all things edify.— 
1 Cor. 10:23. 

Destroy not with thy meat him for whom Christ died.— 
Rom. 14:15. 

Let no man seek his own, but each his neighbor's 
good.-l Cor. 10:24. 

But take heed lest by any means this liberty of yours 
become a stumbling-block to the weak.— 1 Cor. 8:9. 

Overthrow not for meat's sake the work of God. All 
things indeed are clean; howbeit it is evil for that man 
who eateth with offence. 

It is good not to eat flesh, nor to drink wine, nor to do 
any thing whereby thy brother stumbleth.— Rom. 14:20,21. 

Use not your freedom for an occasion to the flesh, but 
through love be servants one to another. 

R4479 : page 285 

For the whole law is fulfilled in one word, even in this: 
Thou shalt love thy neighbor as thyself.— Gal. 5:13,14. 

3. KEEP YOUR CONSCIENCE PURE. 

Happy is he that condemneth not himself in that thing 



which he appro veth.— Rom. 14:22. 

Each one of us shall give account of himself to God.— 
Rom. 14:12. 

4. CONSIDER THE EFFECT UPON THE CONSCIENCES OF OTHERS. 

But if any man say unto you, This hath been offered in 
sacrifice, eat not; for his sake that showed it, and for 
conscience's sake: 

Conscience, I say, not thine own, but the other's.— 
1 Cor. 10:28,29. 

Let us not therefore judge one another any more; but 
judge ye this rather, that no man put a stumbling block 
in his brother's way or an occasion of falling.— Rom. 14:13. 

5. THE PRACTICAL CONCLUSION. 

Wherefore, if meat causeth my brother to stumble, I 
will eat no flesh forevermore, that I cause not my brother 
to stumble. -1 Cor. 8:13. 

Even as I also please all men in all things, not seeking 
mine own profit, but the profit of many, that they may 
be saved.— 1 Cor. 10:33. 

THE TEMPERANCE QUESTION 

As already noted, the Apostle is not discussing a worldly 
question, but one applicable to the Church only. However, 
the same principle may not improperly be applied 
still more broadly to the world and the Christian's relationship 
to mankind in general along the lines of temperance. 
It is not sufficient that we appreciate our own liberties. 
We have a still further responsibility towards those 
who are not so strong or not so clearly informed as ourselves 
—a responsibility that we will not wish to pass by 
if our hearts are in tune with the spirit of Divine love. 
The Apostle gives us a lesson, saying that we should "do 
good to all men, especially to them that are of the household 
of faith." This thought can be well applied to the 
last verse of our lesson (33), "I please all men in all 
things, not seeking my own profit, but the profit of many, 
that they may be saved." 

If every Christian could apply these words of the Apostle 
truthfully to himself, the effect upon the world would 
be magical— suddenly energizing. They would see in 
Christians a renouncement of their own tastes and preferences 
in the interests of others, a principle which the 
world could very thoroughly enjoy and very quickly grasp. 
Should all those now enjoying Present Truth resolve to 
live henceforth, even in the spiritual affairs of life, up to 
the standard of the Lord, what an influence it would 
bring, what an influence would extend from their words, 
their thoughts, their deeds! Then the Church would become, 
indeed, a shining light in the world! It is for us 
to take our stand with the Lord and wait patiently for 
him to bring to us more than compensating blessings in 



his own good time and way. The Vow is assisting many to 
do this. He who does not learn to sacrifice his own will, 
his own preferences, in the interests of others, will never, 
we fear, have that preparation of character which the Lord 
demands of those who shall be joint-heirs with himself 
in the Kingdom. 



R4479 : page 285 

VARYING DEGREES OF LOVE 

THE article in a recent number of this journal entitled, 

"There Is a Sin Unto Death," appears to 

have created a very profound impression upon 

many of our readers. We are glad of this: "To be forewarned 

is to be forearmed." The central thought of that 

article suggested that possibly in the past we had underestimated 

the number who will eventually be remanded 

to the Second Death by the great Judge. It calls attention 

to the fact that none could reasonably and properly 

be acceptable to God and receive his blessing of eternal 

life except as they should first attain his character likeness. 

Because "God is love" this is the standard for all 

whom he will acknowledge as his children on either the 

heavenly or the earthly plane of perfect existence. The 

Divine Law, "Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all 

thy heart, mind and strength and thy neighbor as thyself," 

must be fully complied with. The Church of this 

Gospel Age must reach this glorious standard in the spirit 

of their minds, in their hearts; the imperfections of their 

flesh being covered by the grace of God through their 

faith in Christ. The world during the Millennial Age 

must reach the standard of that perfect law actually. 

More than this, after the standard or mark is reached the 

Lord demands that character in harmony with this standard 

shall become fixed. To accomplish this, besetments 

and trials and testings are permitted and are especially 

severe, crucial, after this mark has been attained. "The 

Lord your God doth prove you, whether you do love the 

Lord your God with all your heart or no." 

These premises our readers in general will recognize 
as sound, Scriptural and logical. It follows, therefore, 
that all who do not attain this standard of character cannot 
have the gift of God, eternal life through Jesus 
Christ our Lord. Fortunately this trial for life or death 
eternal is not now upon the world of mankind in general, 
but only upon the Church. Nor is it upon the Church 
nominal, but merely upon those believers who have made 
consecration of themselves and been begotten of the holy 
Spirit. If these shall fall away, "There remaineth no 
more sacrifice for their sins," the Apostle declares. Let 
us be glad that it is not ours to judge the hearts of our 
brethren. We are glad to wish well to all and to hope 
that the great Judge may see grounds for excusing many 



of the blemishes of the brethren, which are manifest to 
us, and of our blemishes manifest to them. The Scriptures 
declare that the Lord judgeth the heart and not the outward 
appearance. It is ours, therefore, to hope all things 
favorable and to even doubt nothing, except as we may 
see evil fruitage in those claiming to be brethren— fruitage 
of conduct and spirit positively contrary to the Word and 
Spirit of the Lord. Even then we are not to bring against 
them any railing accusation, but to leave them in the 
Lord's hands. 

With our most generous thoughts, however, we cannot 
blind ourselves to the fact that not many amongst the 
Lord's professedly consecrated followers give strong evidence 
of being at the mark of perfect love toward God 
and their fellow-beings. The Apostle intimates that for 
such we should fear and, bringing home the lesson, we 
should fear for ourselves— "Let us fear lest a promise 
being left us of entering into his rest any of us should 
seem to come short of it."— Heb. 4:1. 

In view of the strictness of this Divine test and our 
own inability to see it lived up to by many and our carefulness 

R4479 : page 286 

and fear for ourselves, we can only hope that the 
great majority of professed Christians have never really 
been spirit-begotten and are not, therefore, subject to this 
searching test of character in the present life. Indeed, it 
seems rather remarkable that some of those who recently 
have "gone out from among us because they are not of 
us," seem to have their contention, partially at least, along 
these very lines: they dispute that any are spirit-begotten, 
or that God has made the path to glory a narrow one of 
self-sacrifice, or that the sufferings of Christ, the Head, 
are to be shared by the Church, the members of his Body. 
Such a position on the part of those once begotten of 
the holy Spirit and who have tasted the good Word of 
God and the powers of the coming age would seem to 
indicate a blindness which would imply the loss of the 
illumination of the holy Spirit, as they had once enjoyed 
it. And this would imply the Second Death. Let us 
prefer, however, to suppose that they never were really 
enlightened— never were really begotten of the holy 
Spirit; that they had merely made a consecration to God 
to live moral lives and to forward his cause— without 
making a full surrender in the proper Scriptural manner 
—laying down life and everything at the Lord's feet, 
"presenting their bodies living sacrifices, holy and acceptable 
to God and their reasonable service." Instead 
of understanding spiritual things they may merely have 
been repeating spiritual precepts, without true 
comprehension. 

Here we are reminded of a conversation that we once 
had with a lady. She said, "My husband has made full 
consecration of himself to the Lord and professes to be 
begotten of the holy Spirit and to see various teachings in 



"Millennial Dawn," "Tabernacle Shadows," etc., which, in 
connection with the Bible, give him a great illumination 
respecting the Divine will. I, on the contrary, have 
never made such a consecration, yet I can understand 
those same spiritual things. How do you account for it?" 
In reply we outlined the type: the Court of the Tabernacle 
with its Altar representing faith in the forgiveness 
of sins through Christ's sacrifice; the Laver representing 
the putting away of the filth of the flesh, etc. We reminded 
the lady that the tabernacle stood in this Court 
yet was separated from it by the first vail or curtain, 
which represented the death of the human will in complete 
consecration to the Divine will. We said to her, 
According to your own statement, you are outside that 
curtain. You have never yet made a full consecration of 
your all to the Lord. Your husband has made such a 
consecration, has experienced such a death of his will 
as is represented by passing under that curtain, and he 
has arisen on the other side of it a New Creature, begotten 
of the holy Spirit. He tells you what he sees— the 
golden walls of the Tabernacle proper, the heavy Curtain, 
or second vail, separating between the Holy and the 

R4480 : page 286 

Most Holy, the Table of Shew-bread, the Golden Candlestick 
whose light illuminates everything, the Incense 
Altar from whence proceeds the sacrifice of incense and 
prayer beyond the Second Vail into the Most Holy to 
cover the mercy-seat. You give attention to your husband's 
descriptions of these things; you have them all in 
mind; yet you do not see in the same particular sense 
and degree in which he sees. You are trusting to his 
word, in which you have absolute confidence. He is 
trusting in the everlasting actualities with which he is 
directly associated. 

May it not be that many more are in this condition 
than have plainly told us so? Surely we have now come 
to the time when all who have not made an actual, bona-fide 
consecration of their lives to the Lord— a full and 
complete surrender of their wills— will be separated from 
the consecrated ones. "The Lord your God doth prove 
you, whether ye love the Lord your God with all your 
heart or no." 

"STAR DIFFERETH FROM STAR" 

Another question arises: Since it is evident that all 
must reach the standard of perfect love, in order to 
attain everlasting life on any plane, what would be the 
test by which the different degrees of glory will be 
awarded, as suggested by the Apostle's assurance that, 
"as star differeth from star in glory," so also will it be 
in the resurrection of the Church? 

We reply that since the very least one admitted to 
eternal life must have reached the mark of perfect love, 



it follows that these different degrees of reward will 

represent different degrees of loving zeal on the part of 

those after they shall have reached the standard of 

perfect love. For instance, St. Paul was not merely 

anxious to attain the fruits and graces of the holy Spirit; 

he was not merely willing to suffer with Christ, if need 

be; but his zeal led him beyond this— to glory in tribulations 

also; to rejoice to be accounted worthy to suffer 

for the cause of his Lord; to rejoice to lay down his life 

for the brethren. He was not only glad to have fellowship 

in Christ's sufferings and to drink of his cup, but 

he had so much zeal that he rejoiced if he could get more 

than his portion, more than his share. He was on the 

alert for opportunities for service. If others used them, 

well. If he could stir up the love and zeal of others, 

well. But if he found some work undone which he 

might accomplish, he delighted to do it. Well did he say 

that we might take him as an example in following after 

our Lord Jesus. Surely we may conclude that he will be 

one of the brightest shiners in the heavenly Kingdom 

and that in following his example we also may become 

more and more pleasing to our Lord— not by wildly 

beating the air, but with wisdom and prudence and faithfulness 

doing those things which the Lord had indicated 

would be pleasing in his sight, as evidencing our loyalty 

to him, his brethren and his Truth. 

IS LOVE THE ONLY TEST? 

Another inquires, "Is love the only test?" We find 
that some of those who have opposed the Vow and now 
are gradually becoming more and more opposed to the 
various features of the Truth are quite bitter, malicious 
and strifeful; but we know a few of them who at least 
have a form of meekness and who on this very account 
seem to exercise the more power to create discord, because 
some of the friends reason that he or she cannot 
have forsaken the Lord nor been forsaken by the Lord, 
else they would not have so kindly a manner. My question 
is, Is love (gentleness) the sole test of our membership 
in the Body of Christ? 

Our answer is, No and Yes. No, it is not the only test 
as viewed by the ordinary mind, unguided by the Scriptures. 
Do we not know worldly people who are very 
kindly disposed and moral and gentle and patient and 
generous? Do we not know Christian Scientists and 
many others, whom we believe to be thoroughly out of 
relationship to the Lord and entirely cut off from the 
leadings of his Spirit, possessing these same traits of 
character— some of them to an admirable degree? From 
this standpoint we must answer the question negatively 
and say that more than such a love and willingness must 
be looked for as a test of character and relationship to 
the Lord. 

But there is another viewpoint given us in the Scriptures, 
and from it we may answer this question— Yes, 



Love is the only standard or test of relationship to the 

Lord and to the brethren. Let us elaborate. Gentleness, 

meekness and patience are indeed elements of the 

holy character, the holy mind, which the Lord will develop 

in us: but they are not the sum of this character 

which we call love. They are only twigs or branches, as 

it were, on the great tree of Christian faith and fellowship 

—twigs and branches which are duplicated to some 

extent on other trees and on other vines than that of "the 

Father's righthand planting." 

In giving his command the Lord did not specify, first 
meekness, gentleness, etc., but, "Thou shalt love the Lord 
thy God with all thy heart, mind, soul, and strength." 
Hence the first test of relationship to the Lord is that of 
faithfulness to him and to his Word. "If they speak not 
according to this word, it is because there is no light in 
them."-Isa. 8:20. 

R4480 : page 287 

So, then, in looking for Christian brotherhood we 
should begin at the beginning and look for loyalty to 
God and to our Lord and to the Gospel message and to 
the brethren. Meekness, gentleness, patience, etc., are 
commendable qualities in any one, but they prove nothing 
of themselves. Does not the Apostle call attention to 
this when he says that some, with feigned words and 
smooth speeches, would make merchandise of you; that 
is to say, would use you for their own advantage, to 
prosper their own designs and ambitions? Is not this the 
same thought expressed by another Apostle who exhorts 
us that we should not love in word merely, but in 
deed and in truth? (1 John 3:18.) These words intimate 
that some do love merely in word— feigned words 
and smooth speeches. The real evidence of the sincerity 
or truthfulness of our love, as the Apostle points out, is 
evidenced by our deeds and not merely by smooth words. 
With the smooth words we should look for that zeal for 
God and for his Truth which would demonstrate its sincerity 
by looking out for and serving the interests of 
the Truth, by evident effort to control words and acts, in 
harmony with the interests of the Truth. Our Lord Jesus 
honored the Truth greatly when he made it identically 
himself, saying, "Me and my Word." Whoever, therefore, 
honors not the Lord's Word, and serves it not, lacks 
that evidence of love for the Lord himself. 

The Lord puts the least of his disciples as his personal 
representative, assuring us that kindness done, or evil 
deeds done, or evil words spoken, in respect to the least 
of his followers, are counted as said or done to himself. 
Whoever vows to love the Lord with all his heart, mind, 
being and strength and to be zealous for his service will 
of necessity be on the lookout for the Lord's brethren, 
even the least of them— to honor them, to serve them— 
and certainly not to stumble them. Whoever, therefore, 
lends himself to stirring up strife and dissension in the 



Church, which is the Body of Christ, furnishes this evidence 
that he has not the Lord's Spirit; that he is "none 
of his;" that whatever smooth speeches and honeyed 
words he may use are merely deceptions and do not 
make known, but on the contrary hide the real sentiments 
of his heart. 

In addition to the honeyed words and smooth speeches 
some add honeyed deeds and little attentions, in order 
that they may have the better opportunity for injecting 
the poison of asps, which is under their lips. (Rom. 3:13.) 
These honeyed words and deeds are the baits 
behind which is fastened the hook of slander, evil-speaking, 
evil insinuations, etc., by which they foster 
discord and stir up anger, malice, hatred, envy, strife 
and other works of the flesh and the devil. 

How dwelleth the love of God in these? How love 
these the Lord with all their heart, mind, soul and 
strength and their neighbor as themselves? Not at all. 
They are in the very gall of bitterness and bonds of iniquity, 
as the Apostle declares— however they may 
measurably deceive their followers and themselves to 
the contrary. 

It is for each of God's people to be so filled with his 
holy spirit— with love for the Lord and for all the 
glorious attributes of his character— that he will be 
proof against such tools of the Adversary and, so far 
from having fellowship with them he will instinctively 
shun them, even as the Scriptures declare. We are to 
"Love righteousness and hate iniquity" and to "have 
no fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness." 
Rather we should reprove them, not necessarily by word, 
but certainly by conduct, by having no fellowship with 
them, because we are of another spirit, the spirit of life, 
the spirit of peace, the spirit of truth, the spirit of 
brotherhood, the spirit of the Lord. 



R4480 : page 287 

INTERESTING LETTERS 

BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY, GENTLEMEN:- 

I have through the kindness of a friend here, a Methodist 
minister, been allowed the grand privilege of reading 
your first volume, entitled, "The Divine Plan of the 
Ages," and was very much impressed with it. Its ideas 
so nearly concur with my own that I am very anxious to 
have more of the light and beg to enclose herewith check 
covering the cost of the remainder of the books and "The 
Watch Tower." 

I look forward to the arrival of "The Watch Tower," 
as I am very anxious to keep in touch with present-day 
happenings in relation to the Scriptures and feel that it 

R4481 : page 287 



will be a source of light to me at all times, as the books 
have and will be. 

I wish to say that I have never been a Church member 
and have been called an infidel on account of my non-belief 
in a Father who could torture throughout eternity 
people created by him in his own likeness when they were 
born in sin and were so weak. The first glimpse of the 
"Divine Plan" made me feel that I was not entirely alone 
in my belief and that the coming of the Saviour could be 
looked forward to with great longings and happiness instead 
of misery, separation, torture, etc., to some probably 
who were dear to us. 

I am a young man, a deep reader and have until finding 
your books been unable to secure much consideration 
from the ministers of the (sect) churches, as all of them 
left the impression upon me that one must be a member 
of some church to be saved. 

Will you please forward books and paper promptly, as 
I do not wish to miss a single enlightening point, and 
have a dear wife and mother I am so anxious shall see 
the great light as I see it. 

Yours very truly, E. M. VIQUESNEY-Ga. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

In the early '90's, being a great reader of all kinds of 
literature— history, Biblical and profane books of all 
kinds— my wife thought she would purchase me an unusual 
book, and bought me a copy of Millennial Dawn, 
Vol. 1. I was interested in Prof. Totten, of Yale, in his 
prophecies in reference to the books of Daniel and 
Revelation, and subscribed for the "Christian Herald" 
to read what he had to say. So I read Millennial Dawn 
at that time, but some influence was against me, and for 
years the book lay in my library unopened. Last summer 
at one of our Baptist meetings down here, I heard a 
clergyman speak about the Russellites and their belief 
as being damnable heresy. It was a new name to me. 
I asked about these people; who they were, and tried to 
get some further light, reasoning that there must be 
something extra about these people to be so condemned. 
I had often read of Gamaliel's advice to the high priest 
and tried to follow it by granting all movements a reasonable 
hearing. I came home from the meeting, and 
asked my wife if she knew where that old book she had 
bought for me years ago was. We looked it up. I began 
to read it. I was ripe for it. I got tired looking 
up your references to the Bible and took the book as 
written. Not having the necessary money to buy the 
other five volumes at that time, I did the next best thing. 
I went right into the Bible as never before. I would to 
God I had not wasted all these years, but had done so 
at first. 

Patiently bear with me, as I am full of this good news. 



I live in the country on an R.F.D. route. Some one 
threw a little pink tract in the box. God's blessings on 
him! I read every word; then it was up to me to find 
out who put it there. I made careful inquiry and found 
a fellow by the name of Mr. Nunally, living about four 
miles away, who had a reputation as being a saint; just 
the fellow I was looking for. I drove over and got what 
I wanted. I am now near the end of Vol. 6, which has 
stirred me up to write to you. I must have the monthly 
paper as soon as I can get it. It is a severe trial for me 
to ask you to give me credit for the same until I can pay 
for it and also for "The Tower." 

WM. BENNETT,-- Va. 



page 288 

PUBLIC MINISTRIES OF THE TRUTH 

UNDER THE AUSPICES OF PEOPLES PULPIT 
ASSOCIATION OF BROOKLYN, N.Y. 



ONE-DAY LOCAL CONVENTIONS ADDRESSED BY THE 
EDITOR OF THIS JOURNAL AS FOLLOWS: 

WOODSTOCK, ONT., SEPTEMBER 11, 12, 13 

Request has come from the friends in this vicinity for 
meetings on Saturday the 1 1th and Monday the 13th, in connection 
with the Sunday meeting on the 12th, at which 
Brother Russell will be in attendance, with a morning session 
for the interested at 1 1:00 o'clock, and an afternoon meeting 
for the Public at 2:30 o'clock. 

Visiting friends will be heartily welcomed. 



BROOKLYN TABERNACLE EVERY SUNDAY 



Preaching at 3:00 p.m. Praise service at 7:00 p.m.; 
Berean Bible Study at 7:30 p.m. Convenient to New York 
via Subway, and Jersey City via P.R.R. Annex Ferry. 



page 289 

STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES 
"MILLENNIAL DAWN" 

THESE STUDIES ARE RECOMMENDED TO STUDENTS AS VERITABLE "BIBLE KEYS. 

PRICES ARE NET AND BARELY COVER COST OF PRODUCTION, 

WHEN DELIVERED BY COLPORTEURS THE COST AND PRICE ARE INCREASED. 

SERIES I., The Plan of the Ages, gives an outline of the divine plan 
revealed in the Bible, relating to man's redemption and restitution: 
386 pages, in embossed cloth, 25c. (Is. l/2d.) India paper edition, 75c. 
(3s. l-l/2d.). 

This volume has been published as a special issue of our journal— 
at the extremely low price of 5c. a copy, in any quantity, postage included. 
(To foreign countries, 9c.) This enables people of slender 
purse to herald far and wide the good tidings in a most helpful form. 

SERIES II., The Time is at Hand, treats of the manner and time of 
the Lord's second coming, considering the Bible Testimony on this 
subject: 370 pages, in embossed cloth, 25c. (Is. l/2d.) India paper 
edition, 75c. (3s. l-l/2d.) 

SERIES III., Thy Kingdom Come, considers prophecies which mark 
events connected with the "Time of the End," the glorification of the 
Church and the establishment of the Millennial Kingdom; it also contains 
a chapter of the Great Pyramid, showing its corroboration of the 
dates and other teachings of the Bible: 384 pages, in embossed cloth, 
25c. (Is. l/2d.) India paper edition, 75c. (3s. l-l/2d.) 

SERIES IV., The Day of Vengeance, shows that the dissolution of the 
present order of things is in progress, and that all the panaceas offered 
are valueless to avert the predicted end. It marks in these events the 
fulfilment of prophecy, noting specially our Lord's great prophecy of 
Matt. 24 and Zech. 14:1-9: 660 pages, in embossed cloth, 30c. (Is. 3d.). 
India paper edition, 85c. (3s. 6-l/2d.) 

SERIES V., The At-one-ment Between God and Man, treats an all-important 
subject— the hub, the center around which all the features 
of divine grace revolve. Its topic deserves the most careful and 
prayerful consideration on the part of all true Christians: 507 pages, 
in embossed cloth, 30c. (Is. 3d.) India paper edition, 85c. (3s. 6-l/2d.) 

SERIES VI., The New Creation, deals with the Creative Week 
(Genesis 1 and 2), and with the Church, God's "New Creation." It examines 
the personnel, organization, rites, ceremonies, obligations and 
hopes appertaining to those called and accepted as members of the 
Body under the Head: 740 pages, in embossed cloth, 30c. (Is. 3d.) 
India paper edition, 85c. (3s. 6-l/2d.) 

The above prices include postage. 

IN FULL LEATHER BINDING, gilt edges, the set (6 vols.) $3.00, 
(12s. 6d.), plus postage, 60c. (Is.). 

Is also published in foreign languages as follows: German, six vols., 
in Swedish Vols. 1, 2, 3, 5 and 6; in Dano-Norwegian, three vols.; 
in Greek, three vols.; in French, two vols.; Hollandish, Spanish, 
and Italian, one vol. each; bound in cloth, uniform with English edition, 
prices the same; in Polish, condensed edition, one vol., 10 cents. 



page 289 



SEMI-MONTHLY 
VOL. XXX OCTOBER 1 No. 19 
A.D. 1909--A.M. 6038 



CONTENTS. 

The Saratoga Convention 291 

"That Servant" and "His Fellow-Servants" 292 

"Ruler of All His Goods" 293 

Our Position on the Subject 293 

Our Comprehensive Consecration Vow 294 

Christ's Ambassador a Prisoner 295 

The Fear of Man— a Snare 295 

Rest in God's Will (a Poem) 296 

The Wrath of Man Overruled 296 

"Thou Shalt Not Speak Evil" 297 

Itinerary for Tour Through Maritime 

Provinces 298 

"Offended Because of Me" 298 

"The Sheep Shall Be Scattered 299 

A Reply to Bro. McPhail's Tract 300 

The Truth in Asia Minor 302 

Some Interesting Letters 302 

page 290 

PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY 
CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
"BROOKLYN TABERNACLE," 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, N.Y., U.S.A. 

Foreign Agencies:— British Branch: 24 Eversholt St., London, 
N.W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, Barmen. Australasian 
Branch: Equitable Building, Collins St., Melbourne. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:— All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 
and in touch with the Studies, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, DANISH AND ITALIAN EDITIONS. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N.Y., POSTOFFICE 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA 



"SCRIPTURE STUDIES" IN THE KARATOL 
EDITION. 

For the convenience of friends desiring a pocket edition 
of the DAWN-STUDIES for use on street cars, etc., and not 
caring to invest so much as would be required for the India 
paper edition, we have prepared a limited number (Karatol 
edition) of each of the six volumes. The size of the volumes 
is four and one-eighth inches by six and three-eighth inches 
and the combined thickness of the six volumes is three and 
five-eighth inches. The prices to WATCH TOWER subscribers 
is uniform with the prices of the cloth edition, shown in 
opposite column. 

GERMAN VOLUNTEER LITERATURE 

This is excellent literature for Volunteer purposes; both 
tracts and TOWERS. Order all you can use judiciously amongst 
your German neighbors and friends. 

SWEDISH AND NORWEGIAN VOLUNTEER 
MATTER 

We still have an ample supply in both languages for Volunteer 
purposes. 

VOLUNTEER MATTER IN DUTCH 

We have a large supply of the "Do You Know?" tract 
in the Hollandish language for use among your Dutch neighbors 
and friends. 

WATCH TOWER BIBLE 

No. 1918 is temporarily out of stock. 



R4481 : page 291 

THE SARATOGA CONVENTION 

AS WE had expected, quite a number of the dear 
friends pronounced this last Convention "the best 
yet!" For our own part they are all so enjoyable 
that we find it difficult to express a preference. 



About 1,500 to 1,800 attended; and about 500 more 

came to Brooklyn only. We cannot recall any previous 

Convention at which such absolute harmony prevailed. Saratoga 

is in many respects an ideal city for such a gathering; 

it is quiet, healthful, has hotel capacity for thousands and a 

splendid Auditorium. The friends were made comfortable 

at $1.25 to $1.50 per day by special arrangement. Each Convention 

teaches us something along these lines. 

But our special feasting was on the heavenly food and 
fellowship divine. Thirty dear brethren participated and 
their topics were timely and well chosen. We trust and 
believe that no hungry soul went away unfed. Several ministers 
of various denominations attended continuously and 
some of them expressed themselves as deeply interested and 
reading the "SCRIPTURE STUDIES" and determined to prove as 
true Bereans what they had heard. 

Saturday's ride down the Hudson River on the steamboat 
Hendrick Hudson was a unique experience. Nearly 
four thousand people were on board; about one-half of them 
were our Convention people. It seemed the Lord's providence 
that we should thus use the regular steamer rather 
than charter a smaller and less palatial craft for our exclusive 
use. Besides, as we had surmised, the opportunities 
for presenting the Truth to others were considerable, and 
the dear friends improved them wisely, we believe. 

The river views are grand; but the dear friends were so 
full of faith-views of the heavenly shore that earthly scenes 
were quite secondary to the majority. The time was spent 
in fellowship-talks along Truth lines, and in singing with 
hearts and lips melodies to our Redeemer and our Father. 

The Sunday services at Brooklyn were all held in the 
Academy of Music, and opened with a Praise and Testimony 
Meeting at 10 o'clock. It was good to be there, but difficult 
to describe. The feelings of the friends ran deep as they 
told of their thankfulness to God for the Truth, and how 
much it had changed the current of their entire lives. The 
Vow also was lauded as a blessing from God which had 
brought more of blessing than words could tell. It had 
brought them nearer to the Lord than ever before, and had 
given them a realization of the Lord's nearness and special 
watch care. 

At 1 1 o'clock Brother Russell spoke on "The Value of 
Toil," as reported in the newspapers. Additionally he made 
some special reference to the value of service— the value of 
toil to the Church. He noted that the Lord could get along 
entirely without our aid, but permitted us to serve and sacrifice 
for our spiritual development. He noted also the rest 
of spirit which all laborers in the vineyard should enjoy continually. 
Luncheon followed, some going to restaurants and 
some partaking of a free luncheon in side rooms of the Academy 
of Music. 

At the afternoon session a discourse was delivered by 
Brother Rutherford. His topic was, "Preaching the Kingdom 
of Heaven." It was ably handled and well received. Following 
it came another interval for supper— served as at noon. 

In the evening after a praise service Brother Russell addressed 



the assembly on "Baptism and Its Import." On 
Monday opportunity was granted for symbolic immersion in 
water, and one hundred and twenty-two availed themselves 
of the privilege. The baptistry of the Central Baptist Church 
was used. 

Monday (Labor Day) witnessed a Love Feast from 7:30 
a.m. until 11 p.m. at the "Bethel" (the home). Coffee, 
sandwiches, fruit and cake were served by the sisters to hundreds 
who inspected the home. The large parlor, in which 
President Abraham Lincoln in the dark hours of the Civil War 
interviewed Rev. Henry Ward Beecher and enlisted his co-operation 
in presenting to the British public the true issues 
of the war as being for or against slavery, etc., was an 
object of much interest. Our study also was a place of great 
interest to all. We sat at our desk by request and there 
greeted the Brethren and Sisters as they passed. We took 
fresh occasion to apologize for our fine quarters; so much 
better than the Lord and the Apostles enjoyed and so much 
better than we deserve. We explained afresh what had already 
been particularized in THE WATCH TOWER (March 1, 
page 68) concerning the peculiar providences which put us 
in possession of this fine property at a less cost than very 
inferior ones were obtainable— at about one-fourth what our 
large family's car-fare alone would have cost. 

At the Brooklyn Tabernacle there were busy scenes all 
day. Imagine two thousand people passing between the Tabernacle 
and the Bethel and seeing both from top to bottom. 
No wonder the residents of the intervening four blocks were 
amazed! What could so greatly interest those happy-looking 
people! Ah! "None but his loved ones know." We trust 
that a favorable impression for the Truth was made upon 
the people of a large section of Brooklyn, for about 1,700 of 
our friends were quartered amongst them. Do we always 
remember, dear friends, that we are living epistles of the 
Truth, known and read of many who will not read our printed 
messages? If this thought could be always with us, how 
careful it would make us be of our words and deeds. 

While we were giving the right hand of fellowship to 
the candidates for immersion at the Baptist Church, Brother 
Cole was addressing the Colporteurs in Brooklyn Tabernacle. 
Later, at 11 a.m. and at 3 p.m. and at 8 p.m., we addressed 
changing audiences in the Tabernacle. Of course, the Sunday 
services were the best attended (about 2,500, nearly all 
friends), although no special advertising was done. Some 
assured us that Monday was the very best day of all and 
that undoubtedly this Convention far surpassed all others. 
We believe we also must assent to this latter expression. 



R4482 : page 292 

"THAT SERVANT" AND "HIS FELLOW-SERVANTS" 

THE application to us of Matthew 24:45 some fourteen 
years ago, styling us "that servant," came 



not from us, but from one who is now our bitter 
enemy and who claims that while we did occupy such 
position we have forfeited it, lost it, to a successor. We 
have taken no part in the discussion which followed. 
The bruiting of the matter amongst our readers came 
from our opponents. We have refrained from any allusion 
to that particular Scripture, except upon two occasions 
when it seemed necessary: (1) In our general 
treatise of the entire twenty-fourth chapter of Matthew 
in "Dawn-Studies," Vol. IV., Chapter XII.; and (2) 
when this passage occurred in one of the International 
Sunday School Lessons. Of late, however, the violent 
opposition of our enemies has aroused many of our 
friends to an examination of the subject. As a result, 
the question has become an important one in the 
Church. Our friends insist that this Scripture indicates 
that in the end of this Gospel Age the Lord would use 
not many channels for the dissemination of the Truth, 
but one channel, and that it would be the privilege of 
others of the Lord's faithful ones to be "fellow-servants" 
(co-laborers). They insist that the facts connected with 
this harvest time abundantly substantiate this interpretation. 
They hold that all of them received their knowledge 
of Present Truth directly from the Watch Tower 
Bible and Tract Society's publications, or indirectly 
through those who have received their enlightenment 
through this channel. They are glad correspondingly to 
co-operate as "fellow-servants" with the Society's work, 
believing that thereby they are following the leadings 
of the Divine Providence, as well as the instructions of 
the Divine Word. They believe that such as do otherwise, 
oppose the Divine Word, antagonize the harvest 
work, and will bring injury upon themselves. 

Our opponents are often bitter and sarcastic after 
taking the antagonistic position. They retort that the 
expression "that servant" should be understood to mean 
all the members of the Church of Christ, and that the 
expression, "his fellow-servants," is meaningless, because 
it refers to the same class. They declare that although 
it is true that they got their first enlightenment 
respecting the value of Christ's death as a "Ransom for 
all," and their first knowledge of the "Times of Restitution 
of all things," and their first appreciation of the 
"high calling," and their first knowledge of the Parousia 
and the harvest time of this age, and their first knowledge 
of the fulfilment of prophecies in connection with 
this harvest time, and their first understanding of the 
nature of man and the work of redemption, atonement 
and regeneration from this Society's publications, nevertheless 
they are of the opinion that all of these things 
were previously published by others, and they are seeking 
to find the books. They claim further that to apply 
this Scripture to us would signify that we are infallible. 

Our friends reply that the Society has never made any 
claim to infallibility; that its publications are not written 
in that style; that they merely lay before their readers 



the Scriptures and show their meaning from the Scriptures, 
and leave the lesson or conclusion with each reader's 
own judgment. Further, they declare that if any 
book or set of books presents the Divine Plan of the 
Ages and the Scriptural interpretations set forth in the 
"Dawn-Studies" and other publications of the Society, 
they have never seen them, never heard of them, and do 
not believe that they exist, but would pay a handsome 
price for the loan of a copy. They point out that "The 
Watch Tower" never claimed to have originated the doctrines 
of Election and Free Grace, Justification and 
Sanctification, Restitution, Baptism, etc. They point out, 
indeed, that it is well known to everybody that thousands 
of books have been published on these subjects, some of 
them centuries ago; but they also point out that none 
of these subjects was ever presented as now in the 
Society's publications; that these presentations of the 
past, instead of being enlightening, darken the understanding 
and confuse the head and heart and contradict 
each other, and that, on the contrary, all of these subjects 
in the Society's publications, are harmonized and unified 
as none would ever have supposed to be possible. 

They point out that to attribute this harmony to human 
wisdom or to accident would be absurd; that it would 
be giving too much honor to any human being to suppose 
that after eighteen centuries of Christian conflict, 
passion and persecution because of inharmonies of understanding, 
any human being without special Divine 
aid should now arise who could at one moving of the 
wand, as it were, bring harmony and reason, beauty and 
light out of and into every part of God's Word. They 
declare that such a view would be much more difficult 
to take than that which they have adopted, based upon 
their understanding of Matthew 24:45 and co-related 
events of this harvest time. They declare that, to their 
judgments, there is no other interpretation of the facts 
before us than that presented in our Lord's promise; 
that at the appropriate time in the end of the age, in the 
time of his presence, he would bring forth from the storehouse 
of Grace, Wisdom and Truth things "new and old," 
and that he would select at that time one special channel 
through which those blessings would be called to the 
attention of the household of faith— indicating also that 
a privilege would be granted to others who might join 
the service as "fellow-servants." They point out that 
such as have thus become "fellow-servants" have been 
blest and used in the harvest work, whilst others opposing 
have gone into the "outer-darkness" of nominalism 
as respects "harvest" truth and its service. 

They point to the fact that many ministers and Bible 
students repudiate and condemn the Society's publications 
on the very score that it is absurd to expect at this 
day a complete harmony of the teachings of the Bible, 
which have been fought over by the learned of the 
Church for centuries, and refuse, therefore, to examine 
the Divine Plan of the Ages, preferring to turn to the 



Evolution theory and Higher Criticism views of the 
Bible, saying that it consists of a parcel of "old wives' 
fables," which cannot be harmonized with themselves 
nor with reason. 

Our opponents, unable to answer, are made correspondingly 
angry. Some of them fight the Society's publications 
publicly, while they study them privately for 
Scriptural interpretations which they can parade as their 
own and as proof that the Lord is not using one channel 
only, "that servant," for the bringing forth of the meat 
in due season to the household of faith. Others, more 
crafty, indirectly discourage the use of the Society's 
publications while, in a sense, praising them, and, if 
questioned, are obliged to acknowledge that the Society's 
literature was the channel through which the Lord sent 
them practically all that they know about the Bible and 
the Divine purposes. They seek to turn the minds of the 
enlightened ones in another direction by telling them 
that "each should dig" the jewels of Divine Truth for 
himself; that the Society's publications merely gave them 
the start on which now they should improve, so that 
eventually its teachings would be far in the background. 
These disloyal "fellow-servants" suggest further that 
there is danger of worshipping the Society and that to 
avoid so doing it is practically necessary to give it a kick 
or to turn their backs upon it. They say, Let us have a 
Bible study, but let us exclude the Society's publications! 
Let us give the impression that we are great 
Bible students and teachers who dug these Truths for 
ourselves. But let us put the matter more plausibly and 
more humbly by claiming that our only desire is to 
exalt God's Word and to study it alone! 

Our friends reply that they are in no danger of worshiping 
the Society or anybody else; that their experience 
in man-worship and sect-worship are things of the 
past. They declare that they were led out of those 

R4482 : page 293 

forms of idolatry and into the proper reverence and worship 
of God and his Word by the Society's publications 
and no others, and that they have never heard of any 
teachings which, in so clear and unmistakable language, 
guard the Lord's people against every form of man-worship, 
sect-worship, etc., and that no others so fully 
and thoroughly set forth the rights and liberties of the 
Lord's people as against the enslaving tendencies of the 
great Adversary and bishops, ministers and elders. They 
hold that Vol. VI. of "Dawn-Studies" is disliked on this 
very account by some who are desirous of "lording it 
over God's heritage." They point out that they themselves 
and their forefathers for generations had Bible 
classes and Bible studies all to no purpose until the 
Lord, in due time, sent them the "Bible Keys," through 
the Society. They point out that to ignore this leading 
of the Lord and to exclude from their study of the Bible 



the teacher sent of the Lord would be to dishonor the 
Lord who sent the same and to reject His helping hand; 
and that the only result that could be expected of such 
a course would be a gradual loss of light— a proportionate 
loss of the holy Spirit, the Spirit of the Truth, and 
eventually to reach the "outer darkness" of the world 
and the nominal-church, from which they were rescued 
by the Truth. They declare that this would correspond 
to a sow returning to her wallowing in the mire and the 
dog to his vomit, as the Apostle declares. They declare 
that to take such a course, to them would mean a lack 
of appreciation of having been called out of darkness 
into this marvelous light, a lack of appreciation of the 
light of "the day star" promised by the Lord as a 
precursory of the glorious sunrise of the new dispensation. 

R4483 : page 293 

-2 Pet. 1:19. 

They point out further that the "Dawn-Scripture 
Study" Volumes are practically the Bible itself in an 
arranged, systematic form; and that it is this very 
systematization of the Bible which brought them to their 
present enlightenment and joy in the holy Spirit. They 
declare that wranglings and speculations and guesses 
respecting things not revealed in God's Book are what is 
often styled "Bible study," and that they are afraid of 
these and desire to keep close to the Lord and to the 
message which they believe that he has sent to them, 
and that, therefore, they prefer to study the Bible in the 
light and under the leading of the "Berean Studies" and 
the "Studies in the Scriptures," and to look for further 
light in the same direction and without expecting special 
revelations to their own brains or from a variety of 
directions. They declare that there are no other writings 
or teachings which can compare with the Society's 
in loyalty to the Bible, and that it is their decision, therefore, 
to hold fast to that which they have already attained 
and to beware of "divers and strange doctrines," 
fanciful interpretations, manufactured types, symbols 
and private interpretations. 

"RULER OF ALL HIS GOODS" 

Our opponents are ready to admit that the Lord has 
used the Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society as his 
channel or servant in forwarding the harvest message 
in a most remarkable degree— in a manner and to an 
extent hardly to be believed and never equaled— in many 
tongues and at the hands of many "fellow-servants," 
Colporteurs, Pilgrims, Volunteers, etc. They admit that 
there is no question that a remarkable service has been 
rendered, and hence that it is indisputable by any who 
believe that there is a harvest work in progress and that 
the Society has been a servant of the harvest message in 
a most profound and peculiar sense, even if they dispute 



that it has fulfilled Matthew 24:45, as being "that servant." 

Our friends, on the other hand, point out 

that very rarely, indeed, is there any quarrel or 

dispute over the privilege of being a servant, and that 

never in the world's history before has this passage 

been applied, and that very few would be 

either desirous of being "that servant" or capable of 

fulfilling that service. They point out that a servant is 

known by his service, and that if the service be shown 

to have been performed, the title of servant is an appropriate 

one, although one not generally coveted. Those 

who have laid claims to being "some great one" have 

styled themselves in some fantastic manner Messiahs, 

Elijahs, prophets, etc., but amongst these none has ever 

been found to claim the title of "servant," nor to rejoice 

specially in service— particularly not without money 

and without price, but merely from love for the Lord, 

love for the Truth and love for the brethren. 

But, retort the opponents, while we do not deny the 
service rendered, yet if we grant the application of Matthew 24:45 
to be correct, then we are forced to apply 
the other part, the context, which says, "Verily I say 
unto you, he shall make him ruler over all his goods." 
That would mean that the "fellow-servants" and the 
"household of faith" in general might not expect to receive 
their spiritual meat from any other quarter than 
"that servant." We are opposed to this thought and 
hence opposed to the entire matter. 

Our friends reply that it is with the Lord and with no 
one else to determine who and when and what shall be 
provided for the "household of faith"; and for him 
equally to decide whether he will send that spiritual 
food through one channel or through many channels. 
They urge that all who are hungering and thirsting after 
Truth, all who are looking to the Lord for their supply, 
all who are in a proper attitude of mind, meek and 
teachable, will be ready to say, "Lord, thy will be done 
in thy way! To thee we are indebted for every blessing, 
every mercy, every ray of light, and we prefer to receive 
it as thou dost prefer to dispense it! We have no 
wish or will to express! Our prayer is, Thy will be done!" 
They further urge that the opponents consider that the 
harvest message has been going forth for thirty-five 
years, and that if the Lord should change his program 
and his channel of sending the Truth at this late day, 
it would be very remarkable— less reasonable to suppose 
than that he would continue to use "that servant." They 
urge, furthermore, that all who cut loose from the Society 
and its work, instead of prospering themselves or 
upbuilding others in the faith and in the graces of the 
spirit, seemingly do the reverse— attempt injury to the 
Cause they once served, and, with more or less noise, 
gradually sink into oblivion, harming only themselves 
and others possessed of a similarly contentious spirit. 

OUR POSITION ON THE SUBJECT 



From the first we have urged that this subject be not 
allowed to produce contention or bitterness of spirit. 
Let each reach his own conclusions and act accordingly. 
If some think that they can get as good or better provender 
at other tables, or that they can produce as good 
or better themselves— let these take their course. All 
who feel dissatisfied with the spiritual food which our 
great Master has privileged us to send broadcast to 
every nation should certainly be looking anywhere and 
everywhere for something better. Our wish for them 
is that they might find something better. If we were 
dissatisfied ourselves, or if we knew where something 
better could be obtained, we certainly at any cost would 
seek it. And how could we find fault with others for 
doing what we ourselves would do? Rather let us bid 
them God-speed in their search for something more satisfactory. 
With many of us the case is the reverse of 
this, for, with the poet, we say 
"I had sought the world around 
Peace and comfort no more found." 

In the Divine Plan of the Ages we found something so 
far above our own conception and the conceptions of all 
others that we at once realized it to be God's Plan, of 
which he declares truly, "As the heavens are higher than 
the earth, so are my ways higher than your ways and 
my plans higher than your plans." (Isa. 55:9.) We 
realize instinctively what a pearl of great price we have 

R4483 : page 294 

found— a matchless pearl— and that it would be the 
height of folly to look for any other that would compare 
with it. With the poet we declare, 
"It satisfies our longings 
As nothing else could do." 

We confess, therefore, that we are not searching for 
other plans of the ages. At very most we look for 
additional scintillations of light which will make more 
harmonious and more beautiful than ever the great Divine 
Plan, which first stood clearly revealed to us in 1880. 

We urge upon all those who do see eye to eye with us 
that, instead of quarreling with those who want something 
new or something better or something different, 
we merely let them go their way while we give special 
heed to the development of the fruits and graces of the 
holy Spirit in our own hearts and lives, and to the further 
dissemination of the glorious message to those who 
have the hearing ear. If from time to time the Lord 
shall permit Satan to sift his Church "like wheat," let 
us remember that our great Advocate's assistance in 
proper measure and power will bring to all who are 
loyal at heart the needed grace and strength for every 
temptation. He will not suffer such to be tempted above 
what they are able to bear, but with the temptation permitted 
will provide a way of escape. We must expect, 



however, that these sittings of the wheat are not only 
permitted but intended to separate some, and it is not 
for us to murmur or complain against Divine Providence 
in this matter. "The Lord giveth and the Lord taketh 
away. Blessed be the name of the Lord!" Even though 
those who are being "sifted" have been very dear to us, 
as St. Peter and the other apostles were to the Lord, it 
is for us to humble ourselves under the mighty hand of 
God.-l Pet. 5:6. 

On the other hand, while remembering the Scriptural 
injunction to "mark them which cause divisions... 
and avoid them" (Romans 16:17), we should not allow 
any bitterness respecting them to enter our hearts or to 
escape our lips or our pens, no matter what they may say 
or do against us. "See that no man render evil for evil 
nor railing for railing, but contrariwise." Let us be like 
our Lord who, when reviled, reviled not again. As we 
see some going blind respecting precious truths which 
they once saw clearly, it will properly grieve our hearts 
for them. But we are to remember that the Lord's 
Cause will lose nothing; that it is in the hands of the 
Omnipotent One, who is able to make all things work 
together for the fulfilment of the counsel of his own 
will— his glorious purposes. Would we smite the blind? 
Surely not! Then neither should we by act nor word be 
unkind to those who are "going out from us, because 
they are not all of us"— those who in this hour of temptation 
are being smitten down by the arrows of the Adversary 
because, from the Lord's standpoint, not deemed 
worthy of the necessary succor.— 1 John 2:19. 

The three important lessons for the Lord's faithful to 
be sure that they have learned are these: (1) That meekness, 
humility, is of primary importance, not only to gain 
an entrance into the Lord's family, but also to maintain 
a place therein. (2) That obedient faith, abiding trust, 
is an indispensable quality, not only for the eternal 
future, but also for the maintenance of our proper relationship 
to the Lord in the present life. Without it we 
would wander and be uncertain in all our course. With 
it we may abide in meekness under our Lord's protecting 
care. (3) Love, the essence and sum of all the 
graces, must rule in our hearts richly, abundantly. A 
proper love for God will not only keep us very meek, 
very humble, very teachable, but will also give us great 
faith, great confidence in him and an attitude of heart 
which he will be pleased to guide aright. A love for the 
brethren will make us meek and gentle and willing to 
lay down our lives in their interest. If we know these 

R4484 : page 294 

things, happy are we if we do them. 

But while we are willing that others should go anywhere 
and everywhere to find food and light to their 
satisfaction, strange to say, those who become our opponents 
take a very different course. Instead of saying in 



the manly fashion of the world, "I have found something 
which I prefer; goodbye!" these manifest anger, malice, 
hatred, strife, "works of the flesh and of the devil" such 
as we have never known worldly people to exhibit. They 
seem inoculated with madness, Satanic hydrophobia. 
Some of them smite us and then claim that we did the 
smiting. They are ready to say and write contemptible 
falsities and to stoop to do meanness. 

We say to ourself, O my soul, come not thou into 
their counsels and schemes. Abstain from them. Make 
the Lord, even the Most High, thy refuge and habitation, 
and fellowship thou with the saints of the Most High, 
who are meek and lowly of heart and whom he shall lead 
in his ways. "Blessed is the man who walketh not in the 
counsel of the ungodly, and standeth not in the way of 
sinners, and sitteth not in the seat of scorners, but whose 
delight is in the Law of the Lord." 



R4484 : page 294 

OUR COMPREHENSIVE CONSECRATION VOW 

MANY are writing us that they took the Vow 

months ago, when first it was suggested. We 

are glad to have all names at any time. Our 

opponents are boasting that as less than seven 

thousand names have as yet been reported as Vowers, 

it follows that the majority of our many thousand 

readers are opposed to it. We do not believe this true, yet 

cannot dispute the logic of the argument. All not for the 

Vow are apparently against it. Our belief, nevertheless, is 

that those who have taken the Vow are experiencing a great 

spiritual uplift therefrom, a greater nearness to the Lord, and 

consequently a greater safety in this evil day. It is our confidence, 

too, that the Lord will make the Vow plain to all of 

his faithful in due time and that many more, if not all the 

true-hearted, will ultimately take it and share the blessing. 

Notice that nearly all who are going blind on the Covenants 

and the Sin-Offerings are such as are opposing the Vow. Of 

course, we believe it to be of the Lord's providence and 

"meat in due season" at this time, else we would not present 

it in these columns. 

Some have gotten the erroneous idea that this Vow is 
more stringent than our original Consecration Vow of Baptism 
into the Death of Christ. On the contrary, nothing 
could be more comprehensive or tight than our Vow to be 
dead with Christ to all sin and alive with him to all righteousness. 
This includes every act, word and thought fully in 
accord with the will of our Lord to the extent of our ability. 
The Vow suggested for a year past is less comprehensive; but 
it specifies certain outward forms recognized as safe and 
such specification is found to be helpful. 

It is the new Creature that is bound both by the Consecration 
Vow and also by the supplemental Vow of specifications. 



If the New Creature fail in the latter Vow, he 
surely has failed in the original comprehensive Consecration 
Vow. What should he do upon realizing a shortcoming? He 
should follow the Apostle's admonition and come courageously 
to the throne of heavenly grace, to obtain mercy and find 
grace to help in future times of need. "The blood of Christ 
cleanseth us (new creatures) from all sin"— cleanses our 
robes. It was efficacious for us as men, justifying us and 
bringing us the privilege of joining with our Lord in his 
sacrifice, and it avails for all the weaknesses and imperfections 
of our flesh after we become "new creatures." This 
supplemental Vow demands so much less of us than our 
original Consecration Vow that all should be able to keep 
it, both in letter and in spirit, we believe. But if, perchance, 
a moment of severe temptation temporarily overwhelmed us 
and we failed to observe the Vow as fully as we desired, we 
should promptly go to the throne of grace for forgiveness, 
for the cleansing of every spot and wrinkle. 



R4484 : page 295 

CHRIST'S AMBASSADOR A PRISONER 

-ACTS 21:27-39.-OCTOBER 3.- 

Golden Text:— "Thou, therefore, endure hardness, 
as a good soldier of Jesus Christ."— 2 Tim. 2:3. 

ST. PAUL, accompanied by Luke and Trophimus of 
Ephesus, Aristarchus of Thessalonica, Sopater of 
Berea, Secundus of Thessalonica, Gaius of Derbe, 
Timotheus of Lystra and Tychicus of Ephesus, arrived at 
Jerusalem Friday, May 27, A.D. 57. He was returning from 
his third missionary tour amongst the Gentiles. He had been 
absent seven years. As we have seen, the Lord had permitted 
forewarnings to reach him that he might expect trouble- 
bonds and imprisonment— in the Holy City. However, this 
noble ambassador for Christ, undeterred, had now arrived. 
He and his associates, it will be remembered, brought with 
them money collections from the Churches in Asia Minor for 
the Church at Jerusalem, which, apparently, was in a measure 
of financial distress. 

Their reception on their first day was apparently of a 
private and personal character, but on the next day, which 
was probably the Day of Pentecost (Acts 20:16), the Apostles 
and leading brethren came together to receive St. Paul and 
his company in a more formal manner. St. James, brother 
(or cousin) to our Lord, was apparently the recognized leader 
in the Jerusalem Church. No mention is made of the other 
Apostles. Probably some of them were absent, engaged in the 
work at other points. St. Paul recounted his missionary tour 
amongst the Gentiles and the Lord's blessing upon his ministries 
of the Truth, notwithstanding the tribulations permitted. 
We may presume also that at the same time the collections 



were turned over. 

THE FEAR OF MAN--A SNARE 

The brief record indicates that the brethren at Jerusalem 
were considerably perturbed by St. Paul's presence with them. 
Not merely did they fear for his personal safety, but also 
lest his coming might stir up persecution against them all. 
His activity and persistency made him well known to the 
Jews in the influential part of the world in which he had 
been laboring. The Jewish custom that the zealously religious 
come frequently to Jerusalem to celebrate religious 
festivals kept the Jerusalem Jews in touch with the religious 
interests of the whole world. St. James and his associates 
realized that in all probability Jews from Ephesus, Athens, 
Thessalonica, Berea, etc., might be present celebrating the 
Pentecostal feast. They knew that St. Paul's activities had 
already been reported, and that some, even of the Christian 
believers, were troubled at his reported teaching— that the 
Law was dead and that no one needed to pay any further 
attention to it. They urged St. Paul to contradict these partial 
misconceptions by going into the Temple and associating with 
some brethren who had taken the Nazarite Vow. They did 
not suggest that St. Paul take this Vow, but that he be 
present with these brethren, as a recognition of the propriety 
of what they did, and that he bear their expenses, 
which included not only the shaving of their heads and 
burning of the hair, but also the cost of sacrificing for them 
four animals each. 

St. James and the leaders of the Church evidently understood 
St. Paul's position properly enough. He taught the 
Gentiles that it was not necessary for them to become Jews 
nor to obey the Jewish ritual, but that, instead of looking 
for God's favor through the types and shadows, they should 
look to Christ and his antitypical fulfilments of the requirements 
of the Law. He taught that the Law could not save 
either Jew or Gentile, but that only faith in Christ could 
bring the soul into relationship to God. He taught that while 
certain blessings of God yet remained for the Jew (Rom. 1 1:37), 
God during this Gospel Age is selecting a Spiritual 
Seed of Abraham from both Jews and Gentiles. He taught 
also that if any one, Jew or Gentile, attempted to keep the 
Law, with a view to thus meriting eternal life, such would 
surely lose it; because "by the deeds of the Law shall no flesh 
be justified in God's sight." Nothing in all this, however, 
really interfered with St. Paul's doing just what St. James 
and the others urged him to do for the four men under the 
Nazarite Vow. The shaving of their heads and the offering 
of sacrifices in demand of the Law governing their Vow, in 
no sense of the word interfered with or attempted to add to 
the merit of Christ's sacrifice. Nevertheless in our judgment 
a more courageous course might have been pursued. Apparently 
the very method taken to ward off public opposition 
merely served to arouse it. Let us not forget, however, that 
the Lord could have ordered the matter otherwise; could 
have overruled the matter differently had he chosen. Let us 



remember that the Lord foreknew that tribulations would 
assail the Apostle Paul, and had foretold them. Those who 
are in close relationship to the Lord have his assurance that 
all their steps are ordered of him and that all things shall 
work together for good to those who love God and who 
have been called according to his purpose. What a comfort! 
What a consolation this is to all of the Lord's people! No 
wonder such may have quiet, rest, peace, even in times of 
storm and trouble! 

R4485 : page 295 

CONCESSION TO PREJUDICE UNSUCCESSFUL 

The scheme to have St. Paul appear as partially endorsing 
the Law seemed successful for several days, but when the 
seven days were nearly expired he was recognized by Jews 
who had come from Asia. They had seen the Apostle with 
the Greek, Trophimus, and jumped to the conclusion that 
the latter was one of the four men whose heads were shaved. 
This would have been a grievous offence from the Jewish 
standpoint. Only Jews were allowed within the sacred precincts 
of the Temple, outside of which was a Woman's Court 
and also a Court of the Gentiles. A stone fence separated 
these two apartments and constituted what the Apostle elsewhere 
alluded to as the "middle wall of partition." (Eph. 2:14.) 
This wall was four and one-half feet high, and on it was a 
tablet which has recently been found by the Palestine Exploration 
Society which reads, "No man of alien race is to 
enter within the balustrade and fence that goes around the 
Temple. If any one is taken in the act, let him know that he 
has himself to blame for the penalty of death that follows." 
St. Paul was charged with this offence and not the Greek 
who was supposed to have been misled by the Apostle. It 
was on this score that St. Paul's life was in danger from 
the mob which speedily gathered at the cry of the Asiatic 
Jew that the Temple was being profaned. 

While the mob was beating the Apostle, seeking to kill 
him, a chief Captain or Colonel of the Roman soldiers in 
the Castle Antonio close by the Temple became aware of the 
tumult and hurried to the scene with a troop of soldiers. 
The beating ceased. The people, who had not learned to 
respect the majesty of the Roman Law, had become amenable 
to its military forces. 

The Apostle was chained by each arm to a soldier. The 
commandant, endeavoring to ascertain the cause of the tumult 
and unable to understand the conflicting testimonies, remanded 
the prisoner to the castle. But the mob, disappointed 
that they had lost the opportunity of taking his life, made 
a mad rush to get him from the soldiers or to kill him while 
under their charge. What a spirit of murder can be aroused, 
and suddenly, too, in the hearts of not only Jews, but Gentiles! 
And how often we find in the pages of history that such 
violence and unreason have been manifested in the name of 
and in defense of various religions! How utterly foreign 
to all of this is what St. Paul designates "the spirit of a 



sound mind"— the spirit of reason, justice— not to mention 
the spirit of generosity, loving kindness and tender mercy! 
As the seeing of the foolishness and the brutishness of a 
drunken person should act as a great temperance lesson in 
every right-minded man and woman, so such a scene as this, 
whether recognized by our natural eyes or mentally seen 
through the printed page, should be a lasting lesson against 
anything so brutish and unreasonable. Let every instance of 
religious bigotry and fanatical violence speak to our hearts a 
lesson in the opposite direction, and fix in us resolutions that, 

R4485 : page 296 

by the grace of God, we will never be thus foolish, thus 
wicked; but contrariwise will become the more gentle and 
kind and Christ-like, as the days go by. 

The oncoming of the mob led the soldiers to press one 
against the other so as not to lose their prisoner, and thus 
the Apostle was lifted off his feet and carried by the soldiers 
up the stairway. 

The courage of this ambassador of Christ and his readiness 
to take advantage of every opportunity to tell the message 
of his Master was here wonderfully exemplified. We might 
have supposed that from the beating received from the mob 
and the more or less rough treatment in getting to the castle 
door any ordinary man would have been cowed with fear 
and excitement. But it was here that St. Paul, cool and collected, 
requested of the commander the privilege of speaking 
to the people, intimating, no doubt, that they had misunderstood 
what he was doing and that in a few words he might 
be able to pacify them. The officer was astonished, for the 
Apostle spoke Greek fluently. He thought likely that he was 
"that Egyptian" mentioned by Josephus, who, a short time 
before this, had gathered a large body of discontented Jews, 
to whom he represented himself as Messiah, and who, as his 
followers, gave the Roman authorities considerable trouble. 
St. Paul answered that he was a Jew of an honorable city 
and requested again the privilege of speaking to the people, 
which was granted. Promptly the Apostle preached Christ. 
No doubt he considered his thrilling experiences well repaid 
by the privileges of that moment— the privilege of telling a 
considerable concourse of people about Jesus; that he was 
the Messiah promised in the Law and the prophecies; that 
his sacrificial death constituted the redemption sacrifice for 
father Adam's forfeited life, and, incidentally, the redemption 
price for all of his children, who died under his sentence. 
Surely also he noted that now Messiah is calling a spiritual 
class of "first fruits" to be his associates in the Millennial 
Kingdom and that shortly Israel and all the nations will experience 
the privileges and blessings of that Kingdom. Surely 
he pointed out, also, that now is the acceptable time; that 
now is the time to make our calling and election sure to the 
chiefest, the spiritual part of the Abrahamic Covenant. 

Paul proceeded to tell them of his missionary tours and 
how many of the Gentiles were receiving the message gladly 
and giving their hearts to the Lord in full consecration. But 



so strong was the Jewish prejudice that the mere mention of 

the going of this great blessing upon equal terms to the Gentiles 

re-enkindled the flame of hatred and violence, and their 

shouts and jeers rent the air. The Roman Colonel, perplexed 

at the situation, concluded that where there was so much opposition 

there must be some grounds for it. "Where there is 

much smoke, there must be some fire." And so he commanded 

that the Apostle must be whipped until he confessed 

what he had done wrong that created such a tumult and 

promised reformation. At once the command began to be 

fulfilled. They began to bind St. Paul to a bent whipping 

post. But the latter brought the proceedings to a quick termination 

by inquiring, "Do you think it lawful to punish a 

Roman citizen before he has had a trial?" The Colonel 

ordered him released at once, for already he had exceeded 

the law in the matter. He took the Apostle's word for it 

that he was a Roman citizen; for to claim this and to have 

it found to be an untruthful claim would have meant sure 

death. The Apostle was held a prisoner for trial. 

There are several further lessons for us here. While not 
condemning the Jews harshly for their selfish, bitter feeling 
of opposition to the Gentiles, let us notice how much injury 
this bitterness and selfishness worked to the Jews themselves. 
Had it not been for this wrong spirit doubtless many others 
of that time might have been quite ready to hear the Gospel. 
The lesson to us, therefore, should be to put away meanness, 
selfishness, enmities, bitterness, out of our hearts, out of our 
minds, out of our conduct and words; and instead to put on 
the spirit of our Lord Jesus Christ— a spirit of meekness, gentleness, 
patience, long-suffering, brotherly kindness, love. 

Another lesson for us is that when undergoing trials and 
difficulties, however unjustly and however much we realize 
that they could not come to us without the Lord's permission, 
nevertheless we are at liberty to use any legitimate 
means for our own assistance and deliverance— even as St. 
Paul took advantage of his Roman citizenship. God had 
provided him in advance with that measure of protection and 
it would have been culpable negligence on his part not to 
have used it and to have expected the Lord to deliver him 
in some miraculous manner. 



REST IN GOD'S WILL 

How sweet to feel God's will is best, 
And in this precious thought to rest; 
To know, whatever may betide, 
'Tis best, for He is by our side! 

Oh, how it helps us bear the pain, 
Oh, how it makes us strong again! 
The cold and gloom of darkest night 
It fills with warmth and heavenly light! 

To those who take His will as best 



He grants His perfect peace and rest, 
And ever gives them day by day 
His grace sufficient on the way. 

Then why should hearts grow weak or faint? 
Why should we ever make complaint? 
Let us press on with upturned face, 
And follow where we cannot trace! 

--G. W. SEIBERT. 



R4485 : page 296 

THE WRATH OF MAN OVERRULED 

--ACTS 22:30; 23:25. -OCTOBER 10.- 

Golden Text:— "I will say of the Lord, He is my refuge, 
and my fortress: my God; in him will I trust."— Psa. 91:2. 

THE day after the riot and St. Paul's rescue by the soldiers 
the Roman Commandant, Lysias, perplexed, 
called together the Jewish Sanhedrin, that they might 
pass upon Paul's case; for by this time he had recognized 
that the point of dispute was a religious one, and that his 
only duty was to preserve peace. Thus Paul was afforded 
another opportunity to witness the Gospel to the Jews— to 
their most learned body, to their most influential Court of 
Seventy. Perhaps the Apostle began to realize by this time 

R4486 : page 296 

that his trying experiences were furnishing him with superior 
opportunities as a herald of the Gospel. Looking back with 
the eye of faith we can realize that this is always so; that 
the Lord is, as from the first, supervising his own work. 
But only in proportion as we know what the Lord's work is, 
can we have and use the eye of faith. We must see that the 
Divine program is not to attempt the conversion of the world 
at the present time, but to leave that for the future, to be 
accomplished by Christ's Millennial Kingdom. We must see 
that his work during the present age is merely that of selecting 
or electing the Church, to be his Bride-Consort in 
his Kingdom— his associate in the great work which will then 
be accomplished for the world in general. 

As St. Paul realized the opportunity granted him of addressing 
the leaders of his nation, he sought to make wise 
use of it. Hence the earnestness of his countenance. "Looking 
steadfastly" at his audience, he began by reminding them 

R4486 : page 297 

of his faithfulness as a Jew. He had been ever a model citizen, 

never lawless. He addressed the council as "Brethren," 

thus putting himself on an equality with them, both in respect 



to religious zeal and general learning. Indeed, it is 
quite generally supposed that at the time of the stoning of 
Stephen, Paul, then Saul of Tarsus, was a member of the 
Sanhedrin. 

"THOU SHALT NOT SPEAK EVIL" 

The address which St. Paul had planned to deliver was 
interrupted by the High Priest's saying, "Smite him on the 
mouth!" This was a special mark of indignity and a protest 
against the words uttered. Our Lord declares, "The darkness 
hateth the light." It is not unfair to assume that the 
High Priest felt his own course in life specially condemned 
by St. Paul's words. Josephus charges Ananias with having 
been a hypocritical grafter of the baser sort, but so crafty 
that the public in general esteemed him. Suddenly checked 
in his speech the Apostle shouted, "God shall smite thee, 
thou whited wall!" The prophecy came true. Within two 
years Ananias was deposed, within six years he met a horrible 
death, his own son being associated with his assassins, 
who drew him from his hiding place in a sewer and slew him. 

The term "whited wall" was applied to ordinary graves 
which were covered with a stone slab bearing the inscription. 
These were whitewashed frequently, so as to be easily discernible, 
lest any traveler should tread upon them, and, according 
to Jewish ritual, be defiled. The pure, glistening 
white of the stone was beautiful, but beneath was corruption. 
The strength of the symbol as representing hypocrisy is 
manifest. Some who heard the Apostle replied, "Answerest 
thou God's High Priest so?" St. Paul rejoined, "I wist not, 
brethren, that he was the High Priest; for it is written, Thou 
shalt not speak evil of the ruler of thy people." It will be 
remembered that the Apostle never fully recovered his eyesight 
after being struck blind on the way to Damascus. Imperfect 
vision as a "thorn in the flesh" the Lord refused to 
relieve him of, but assured him that in compensation he 
should have the more of Divine grace, which answer to his 
prayer the Apostle gladly accepted. It is possible, therefore, 
that he did not discern the High Priest, or that he did not 
know that the indignity was suggested by him. It is claimed 
by some that Ananias had usurped his office and hence the 
Apostle's words may have meant that he did not recognize 
that the true High Priest was present. The latter view is 
implied by the fact that St. Paul did not apologize for his 
words, but merely showed that he fully recognized the Divine 
Law that rulers should not be slandered. 

This is a good rule for every one today. The tendency 
to speak evil of dignitaries, to belittle them, to caricature 
them, is a prevalent sin, which is doing much more to undermine 
good government than the funmakers seem aware. Undoubtedly 
there are times and ways for protesting against 
things and methods with which we do not fully agree. But 
the people of God should pre-eminently stand for law and 
order, with as much justice as may be obtainable, waiting for 
absolute justice until the King of kings shall take his Millennial 
Throne. His command to us meantime is that we 



"be subject to the powers that be" and "follow peace with 
all men, so far as lies in us"— so far as is possible. 

Incidentally we remark that some are even disposed to 
speak jestingly of the Lord and the Scriptures. This is a 
dangerous practice. "The reverence of the Lord is the beginning 
of wisdom;" and it must continue in us and increase 
as the years go by, if we would make our calling and election 
sure to the glorious things which God has in reservation for 
them that love him and reverence him. 

ST. PAUL AS A GENERAL 

The smiting of the prisoner, and his retort, interrupted 
at its beginning the hoped-for presentation of the Gospel. 
The Apostle perceived that the prejudice against him was 
such that no speech of his could affect his hearers. They 
were dominated by the high priest, whose lack of justice 
had found so early a manifestation. Like a general, finding 
his front attack useless, he wheeled his forces and, by a 
flank movement, captured the sympathies of fully one-half 
of his auditors; and at the same time he secured an opportunity 
for showing that the doctrine he preached was the 
logical outcome of the faith of all of the large sect called 
Pharisees. He did this by shouting out, "I am a Pharisee; the 
son of a Pharisee; and I am being persecuted because of my 
belief in the doctrine of the resurrection." This was all strictly 
true. The word Pharisee signifies a person professing entire 
sanctification to God. And St. Paul had never ceased from 
this attitude. His experiences on the way to Damascus had 
changed his course of conduct, but had not changed his attitude 
of heart, which, from the first, was loyal to God "in 
all good conscience." 

The Apostle well knew that the Sanhedrin was about 
equally divided between the ultra-orthodox, holiness-professing 
Pharisees and the agnostic and higher-critical Sadducees, 
who numbered amongst them many of the most prominent 
Jews, including priests. The effect of his shout was 
instantaneous. The Pharisees took his part as one who believed 
in some respects as they did, although they could not 
endorse all of his teachings. As between the infidel Sadducees 
and an out-of-the-way Pharisee they promptly espoused 
the cause of the latter. A tumult ensued, some seeking 
to take his life and others to protect it. Again Caesar's soldiers 
needed to intervene between warring factions of the 
people of God. How sad a scene! How pitiable that those 
who possess much advantage every way as Jews under Divine 
instruction should so sadly neglect the lessons of the Divine 
Law in respect to justice and each other's rights, not to mention 
the instruction, "Thou shalt love thy neighbor as thyself!" 
How pitiable it is that the same is sometimes true 
amongst Christians possessed of still higher appreciation of 
the Divine standards and under covenant vows to lay down 
their lives for the brethren, and indeed exhorted that they 
cannot win the prize they seek unless they reach the point 
of loving their enemies! 

True, fisticuffs are not popular in our day amongst civilized 



people, but cannot even greater cruelty be accomplished 
by the tongue than by the hand? And is it not true that 
many, even amongst those who have named the name of 
Christ and taken upon them consecration vows to do his 
will, bite and devour one another under the influence of the 
Adversary's spirit— "anger, malice, hatred, envy, strife." As 
we see these things shall we not learn a valuable lesson, 
which will enable us the better to glorify our Father in 
heaven? 

Back at the castle in safety the Apostle was doubtless 
wondering in what manner the Lord had been glorified by his 
latest experience. Often it is thus with ourselves. But where 
we cannot trace the Lord's providences and see the outcome 
we have all the better opportunity for experiencing the faith 
which can firmly trust him, come what may. The castle Commandant 
was evidently learning that his prisoner was no 
common character, one who was calm and alert, dignified and 
humble and self-possessed, while his opponents were the reverse 
of all these, thus evidencing to the unprejudiced mind 
that the Apostle was probably in the right of the controversy. 
This change in his attitude towards St. Paul was manifested 
by his kindly treatment of the latter's nephew, who had heard 
that forty professed religionists, forgetful of the Divine Law, 
"Love thy neighbor as thyself," had bound themselves to 
each other by an oath that they would neither eat nor drink 
until they had killed St. Paul, a man who had done them no 
harm, but who, on the contrary, had merely endeavored as 
wisely as possible to do them good. At the instance of his 
mother, St. Paul's sister, the lad had gained access to the 
castle and explained the plot to his uncle, who sent him 
to Lysias, the Commandant. The latter took the boy by the 
hand to a private place, heard his story and dismissed him, 
telling him to keep the matter quiet. He perceived that he 
was in conflict with at least one-half of the influential of 
Jewry, and that his wisest course would be to put his prisoner 
under the protection of the governor, Felix, at Caesarea. Accordingly 
that very night at 9 o'clock two hundred infantry, 
two hundred spearmen and seventy cavalry took the Apostle 

R4486 : page 298 

to new quarters, where as an ambassador in bonds he would 
have fresh opportunity for representing his great Master. 

Lessons for us are God's providential care, and how this 
operates towards his faithful ones, such as the Apostle and 
all who have "made a covenant with him by sacrifice." The 
incident shows how God prefers to use natural means rather 
than supernatural agencies, and how all should be on the 
alert to serve the Lord's cause at any moment and every 
moment. God's purposes will be accomplished, but happy is 
the man or woman or boy or girl accounted worthy of the 
privilege of any service to the Lord or to the least of his 
disciples. Let us, then, be continually on the lookout, in an 
inquiring attitude of mind, desirous of knowing the mind of 

R4487 : page 298 



the Lord in every matter. As for the Apostle, he doubtless 
learned a lesson which we all may profitably consider; namely, 
that while having full confidence in the Divine will, it is ours 
to reasonably and properly protect our own lives and interests, 
as well as those of others. 

The Golden Text is very impressive in connection with 
this lesson. Whether they and others recognize the fact or 
not, those who have the Lord for their refuge and fortress 
have a superhuman care and protection. 



R4487 : page 298 

ITINERARY FOR TOUR THROUGH MARITIME PROVINCES 

Lv. New York, N.Y., Wednesday, October 6 

(N.Y..N.H.&H.) 12:00 night 

Arr. Boston, Mass., Thursday, " 7 

(N.Y..N.H.&H.) 6:57 a.m. 

Lv. Boston, Mass., Thursday, " 7 

(Dom.At.S.S.Line) 2:00 p.m. 

Arr. Yarmouth, N.S., Friday, " 8 

(Dom.At.S.S.Line) 7:00 a.m. 

Lv. Yarmouth, N.S., Saturday, " 9 

(Dom.At.R.R.) 9:40 a.m. 

Arr. Berwick, N.S., Saturday, " 9 

(Dom.At.R.R.) 1:50 p.m. 

Lv. Berwick, N.S., Sunday, " 10 

(Drive) about 8:00 a.m. 

Arr. Kentville, N.S., Sunday, " 10 

(Drive) about 10:00 a.m. 

Lv. Kentville, N.S., Monday, " 11 

(D.A.R.&S.L.) 6:00 a.m. 

Arr. Halifax, N.S., Monday, " 11 

(D.A.R.&S.L.) 9:06 a.m. 

Lv. Halifax, N.S., Monday, " 11 

(Intercol.R.R.) 5:00 p.m. 

Arr. Sydney, C.B.I. , Tuesday, " 12 

(Intercol.R.R.) 5:30 a.m. 

Lv. Sydney, C.B.I. , Tuesday, " 12 

(Intercol.R.R.) 11:30 p.m. 

Arr. Truro, N.S., Wednesday, " 13 

(Intercol.R.R.) 9:10 a.m. 

Lv. Truro, N.S., Wednesday, " 13 

(Intercol.R.R.) 5:35 p.m. 

Arr. Charlottetown, P.E.I., Thursday, " 14 

(Via Point du Chene) 11:40 a.m. 

Lv. Charlottetown, P.E.I., Friday, " 15 

(P.E.I.R.R.) 7:45 a.m. 

Arr. Somerside, P.E.I., Friday, " 15 

(P.E.I.R.R.) 9:50 a.m. 

Lv. Somerside, P.E.I., Friday, " 15 

(Ferry) 

Arr. Point du Chene, N.B., Friday, " 15 



(Ferry) 

Lv. Point du Chene, N.B., Friday, " 15 

(Intercol.R.R.) 1:10 p.m. 

Arr. Moncton, N.B., Friday, " 15 

(Intercol.R.R.) 2:00 p.m. 

Lv. Moncton, N.B., Friday, " 15 

(Intercol.R.R.) 2:10 p.m. 

Arr. St. John, N.B., Friday, " 15 

(Intercol.R.R.) 5:20 p.m. 

Lv. St. John, N.B., Saturday, " 16 

(Maine Cent.R.R.) 6:25 a.m. 

Arr. Boston, Mass., Saturday, " 16 

(Maine Cent.R.R.) 9:00 p.m. 

SPECIAL RATES from Boston to Yarmouth, Berwick, 
Kentville, Halifax and Truro and return to Boston, $14.00; 
to Sydney $5.00 additional. Friends intending this Convention 
tour will please advise at once I. I. Margeson, Westwood, 
Mass., that accommodations, state rooms, etc., may be secured. 



R4487 : page 298 

"OFFENDED BECAUSE OF ME" 

"Then saith Jesus unto them, All ye shall be offended because 
of me this night; for it is written, I will smite the Shepherd, 
and the sheep of the flock shall be 
scattered abroad."— Matt. 26:31. 

WE ARE NOT to understand this Scripture to teach 
that God directly smote the Shepherd, but rather 
that he permitted the Adversary to smite 
him. As our Lord said, "The Son of Man indeed goeth, 
as it is written of him, but woe unto that man by whom 
he is betrayed." Judas was a free moral agent, and only 
by entertaining evil thoughts respecting the Master did 
his heart get more and more out of the way until the last 
barrier of his will surrendered, and then "Satan entered 
into him" in the sense of having full control of a willing 
tool. 

Little is told us of Judas, except that at heart he was 
selfish and mercenary. Doubtless he became a follower 
of Christ with more or less of sincere motives. He saw 
the miracles; he knew of their genuineness. He was one 
of the twelve whom Jesus sent forth endued with power 
to heal diseases, to cast out devils, etc. He knew there 
was no fake connected with it, but that the power of God 
through Jesus had for a time exercised itself through 
himself and the other Apostles miraculously. But apparently 
his heart was less attracted by our Lord's purity 
of life and holiness of teaching and self denials, and 
more attracted by the glorious prospects which Jesus held 
forth in the promises that those who followed him in his 
time of trial and rejection of men should ultimately sit 



with him on his throne, ruling and judging the twelve 
tribes of Israel. 

Judas allowed the natural selfishness of his nature to 
specially covet the honors and glories promised, rather 
than to appreciate the principles of righteousness and 
truth illustrated in our Lord's life and teachings. Note 
the difference in the sentiment expressed by James and 
John. While not forgetting the honors promised, their 
especial thought was love for the Lord and a desire to be 
near him and to be associated in the glorious work of the 
Kingdom, in the uplifting of Israel and all the nations. 
The loving disciple who leaned on Jesus' breast at the 
Memorial Supper evidently thought less of the glories 
of the Kingdom than of the nearness to the Master when 
making the request that he and his brother might sit on 
the throne of the Lord, the one on his right hand and the 
other on his left. 

The selfish propensities are generally larger in proportion 
than the nobler ones in all mankind, and consequently 
under present conditions they are likely to be the more 
active ones in all of us. Hence our need continually of 
setting our affections on the higher things, the nobler 
things, and to this end the necessity of having before our 
minds continually the glorious character of our Lord and 
our heavenly Father— their justice, their love and mercy— 
that we may be copies of God's dear Son, and like unto 
our Father which is in heaven. Judas failed to develop 
such noble qualities, and, instead, cultivated the baser 
qualities in connection with his calling to discipleship. 

R4487 : page 299 

He thought of the throne and the honors attached thereto 
until everything else seemed of little advantage. 

This being so, he was critical of the Master, and fault-finding 
From his standpoint, Jesus was carrying on the 
campaign for the throne in an improper manner; he 
should have been more worldly-wise; he should have done 
this, and should not have done that. Instead of reproving 
the Pharisees he should have cajoled them, or at least 
have said nothing against them. Instead of criticising the 
multitude that desired to make him a king, and withdrawing 
himself from them, to meet Judas' conception of wisdom 
he should have spoken sympathetically to them and 
made capital out of the occasion. Instead of speaking to 
the multitudes in parables and dark sayings, he should 
have come down to their comprehension and explained 
to them about his Kingdom, and how he intended to establish 
it. 

Judas could see no sense, we may be sure, in our Lord's 
dark saying, "Except ye eat the flesh of the Son of Man 
and drink his blood, ye have no life in you." After that 
saying many of his followers remarked, "This is a hard 
saying, who can believe it?" and walked no more with 
him. Surely Judas must have been offended on that occasion. 
From his standpoint Jesus was balking all of his 



prospects, and the hopes of the Kingdom were going glimmering 
more and more every day. The Lord was becoming 
more pessimistic, and instead of talking about the 
Kingdom and the throne was telling how the Jews would 
shortly take him and crucify him. 

Judas began to feel that if he had been deceived in this 
matter, and was not to sit upon the throne as at first expected, 
he had best be "feathering his nest" financially in 
advance, so that however matters might go with the Master 
and the others, he would not have made such a failure 
as they. With this in view, doubtless he had sought 
to be the treasurer of the little band, and had appropriated 
to his own profitable uses whatever surplus was from time 
to time contributed. The basis for this assumption is 
found connected with the story of the anointing of Jesus 
at Bethany, when Mary produced a very costly perfume 
and therewith anointed our Lord. It was Judas who 
murmured at this waste, and remarked how much good 
might have been done with this money in providing for 
the poor. Not that he cared especially for the poor, but 
that he was a thief and carried the treasurer's bag for 
the disciples, and appropriated to himself from what was 
put therein.— John 12:6. 

GAIN INSTEAD OF GODLINESS 

This selfish spirit not only led him to rob the Lord 
and his fellow-disciples, but eventually led him to think 
of how he could obtain money from the priests for the 
betrayal of the Master. And of course there must have 
been some reasonable philosophy in his mind in connection 

R4488 : page 299 

with the matter, and not merely a cold-blooded deal 
to put Jesus to death— not merely cold-blooded murder. 
When selfishness has control of the heart it works all 
manner of deceitfulness to the mind as respects motives, 
intentions, etc. And this is true whether the ambition be 
for money or for name and fame. Doubtless Judas 
reasoned that he could make the money out of the transaction 
without working any injury to the Lord. Jesus could 
again, as on previous occasions, "pass through their 
midst" without any daring to touch him. Perhaps Judas 
reasoned further that his course would awaken the Master 
and bring matters respecting the Kingdom to a head, one 
way or the other; that Jesus, finding himself in the hands 
of his enemies, would either assert his great power and 
assume his kingly authority, or else his weakness and 
fraudulent claims by which he had deceived his disciples 
and others would be exposed. 

By such subtle reasonings and deceptions the Adversary 
was able to lead the disloyal mind, the selfishly ambitious 
heart, into wrong paths. As we realize this, and 
how the same Adversary still operates along similar lines, 
we may well fear to come in any degree under his power 



or misguiding influence. Not many of us would dare to find 
fault with the Lord and his methods directly, but we could 
still do so indirectly. He who then supervised the affairs 
of himself and his disciples on earth, now supervises the 
same from his glorious heavenly station. While fault cannot 
be found with the words of Jesus directly, fault can 
still be found with his message through those whom he 
uses as his mouthpieces. And while the Master himself 
cannot be betrayed to his enemies, for pieces of silver 
or other earthly advantages, or in satisfaction of other 
earthly ambitions, "his brethren" can thus be dealt with. 

We have the Master's word, that whatsoever injury shall 
be done in word or in deed to one of the least of his little 
ones, it is the same in his estimation as though it were 
done to himself; and it were better for that man that a 
millstone were hanged about his neck and that he had 
been cast into the depths of the sea; better because in 
that event there would have been a future prospect for 
him during the Millennial Kingdom, whereas, having been 
once enlightened, having once tasted the heavenly gift, 
having once been under the influence of the holy Spirit, 
and then to completely fall away, there would remain no 
more for him an interest or share in the heavenly gift- 
in the redemption which is in Christ Jesus. Having received 
his share of it, he misused it, and can have no further 
interest in it. 

Judas was thus made acquainted with the heavenly gift 
and the powers of the age to come, not by direct reception 
of the same as experienced at Pentecost, but by the indirect 
blessing which came upon the twelve through our 
Lord's special impartation to them of the power of the 
holy Spirit, by which they were enabled to work miracles 
in his name. 

"THE SHEEP SHALL BE SCATTERED" 

We must never lose sight of the fact that the harvest 
of the Jewish Age was completely under Divine supervision 
and control. The Lord willed that severe testings 
should come to the sheep through the Master whom they 
loved and revered. Those testings were necessary. 
"Through much tribulation shall ye enter the Kingdom." 
The way to glory must be the way of the cross— a narrow 
way— and there must be something permitted which would 
serve to make the way narrow; hence the permission of 
evil, the permission of a measure of liberty to Satan, and 
the permission of a measure of liberty to ambitious men. 

It is not for us to become bitter toward Satan or any of 
those who develop an ambitious and injurious spirit similar 
to his. In so doing we would be cultivating in ourselves 
that which would be injurious to us. On the contrary, 
all the opposition of Satan and those who have his 
characteristics should exercise upon us an opposite spirit. 
We should pity them, while detesting their methods. We 
should be ready to do good to them, while loathing their 
course. We are not to render evil speaking for evil 



speaking, nor insinuation for insinuation, nor anger for 
anger, nor malice for malice, nor hatred for hatred. 

On the contrary, as the Apostle suggests, even Michael, 
though higher in power, durst not bring against Satan a 
railing accusation, but merely said, The Lord rebuke thee! 
So it should be with us: Instead of attempting to take 
vengeance upon our adversaries, we should commit our 
way and theirs to the Lord's keeping, and trust that in 
due time he will rebuke the Adversary and all who have 
his spirit and follow his course. He will know how to 
make proper allowances for head and heart. He it is 
who has said, "Vengeance is mine, I will recompense, 
saith the Lord." 

"OFFENDED BECAUSE OF ME" 

So far as our Lord's personality was concerned, we may 
be sure there was no cause of offense in him; he did 
nobody harm, but did everybody good. It was his doctrines 
that offended the people, and not his personality; 
nevertheless, their resentment was against his personality 
rather than against his doctrines, which were too 
strong for them to attack. 

On one occasion we remember when they took up stones 
to stone him, Jesus expostulated with them, saying, I have 

R4488 : page 300 

done a good work and ye all marvel. Why, then, are you 
about to stone me? They answered that it was not for 
anything personal, but because of his doctrine. The Adversary 
deluded them, and made the words of him who 
spake as never man spake to appear false and God-dishonoring, 
whereas they were very true. 

Our Lord said, "Marvel not if the world hate you; ye 
know that it hated me before it hated you. If ye were 
of the world, the world would love its own. But now ye 
are not of the world, because I have chosen you out of the 
world, therefore the world hateth you." This implies that 
in proportion as we follow closely in the Master's footsteps 
our experiences will be proportionately similar to 
his. We shall be hated, not because of evil deeds to others, 
but because whoever is out of harmony with the truth 
of God's Word will be out of harmony with those who 
speak the truth, and verily think that they do God a service 
in opposing them. 

Notice also that the world that will hate you is not the 
heathen world, not the Gentile world, but the worldly who 
pose as God's people. This was so with Jesus. He 
preached, not to the Gentiles, but to the holy nation of 
the Jews, God's consecrated people. And those who hated 
him and delivered him unto death were of his own nation, 
and even Judas of his own disciples. So we also should 
expect, in harmony with our Lord's words, that the worldly 
who will hate us will be the worldly-spirited ones, adversaries 
prominent in the Church, and some of them, perhaps, 



close to us as fellow-disciples. 

Seeing these things in advance, being thus fore-warned, 
shall we not be fore-armed, so that none of these experiences 
may move us from our constancy and faithfulness? 
Let us remember the Apostles of old, and how the smiting 
of the Shepherd affected them, and scattered them, and 
confused them, so that of the two who followed him at all 
one in terror denied him with cursing, while the other, 
the loving disciple, viewed the Master sympathetically, 
but afar off. 

Our Lord had forewarned them, and had instructed them 
how they might have been better prepared for this trial, 
but they had not heeded his words, "Watch and pray, lest 
ye enter into temptation." Hence in the moment of temptation 
they were overwhelmed, scattered. The lesson to 
us is that we should watch and pray, and by faith draw 
very near to the Master, and be full of confidence in the 
Divine plan, and remember the assurance that all things 
are working together for good to them that love the Lord, 
to them that are called according to his purpose. 

Watching and praying will cultivate confidence and faith 
in God, and preserve us from the trepidation and fear and 
stumbling which will surely upset many others; because 
from this standpoint of faith we shall know how to apply 
in our own time and under our own circumstances our 
Lord's words to Pilate, "Thou couldst have no power at all 
over me except it were permitted of my Father." God is 
still at the helm, and is still working all things according 
to the counsel of his own will. It is for us to come close 
to the Lord and to wait for the development of his plan 
with absolute confidence and fearlessness— except in the 
sense that we should fear to leave undone anything 
directed in his Word. 

Thus our Lord feared in Gethsemane, and in due time 
received Divine assurance and the strengthening of his 
heart, and the calm rest and peace which properly accompanied 
that assurance. So it will be with us "after 
that we have suffered awhile" and our faith has been 
properly tested, the Lord will give us succor and "grace to 
help in every time of need." 



R4488 : page 300 

A REPLY TO BROTHER McPHAIL'S TRACT 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL: -Grace and peace be 
multiplied unto you in these trying times, is my 
prayer. Thinking that a few words from one who 
has been long in the way and a close student of 
your presentation of the Gospel Truths, and from one who has 
been with you in spirit through all your severe and fiery 
trials and labor of love for these many years since before 
the first volume of DAWN was published, might be cheering 
and have a tendency to strengthen the prophet's hands, I will 



send you a few lines. 

Little did I realize or know in what way or through 
what instrumentality the Adversary was going to make his 
attack, and when I had shaken hands with you the second 
time at Put-in-Bay, and had looked into your smiling but 
care-worn face, in an instant I felt the extent of the trials 
through which you had passed; how you had taken joyfully 

R4489 : page 300 

the spoiling of your goods; how you had suffered the loss 
of all things that the world counts gain, and yet I could see 
that you were among those of the Lord's rich ones, rich in 
faith, having Godliness with contentment, which the Apostle 
says is great gain. As I realized all this, I also felt that 
the battle for Truth was not all over, but that there was 
more to follow. I said to you: "God bless you, Brother 
Russell; God bless you; the Enemy is coming in like a 
flood." Do you call to mind how soon after that convention 
the Enemy began to show his colors in the ranks of the 
Lord's consecrated? But, praise his name, the Lord has 
fulfilled his Word. He has lifted up a standard against the 
assaults of the Adversary and the Lord has still a remnant 
of his faithful color-bearers, who have been tried in the fire, 
veterans and victors in many a hard-fought battle, who are 
well equipped and prepared for the conflict against all the 
opposers of truth and righteousness that the prince of darkness 
can muster. Loyal Soldiers of the Cross, having on 
the whole armor of God, well clothed and well fed, strong 
in the Lord and in the power of his might, following in 
the footsteps of the Captain of our Salvation! We can do 
all things, endure all things, through Christ who strengthens 
us, even to running through a troop or leaping over a wall. 
They have learned the music and know the Gospel's joyful 
sound, and keep step to the notes. 

I am sending you herewith a copy of the letter I wrote 
to Brother McPhail. It explains my attitude toward this 
new departure and snare of the Adversary. No doubt the 
Lord of the Harvest has permitted this delusion for wise 
purposes; but as I remarked in a testimony meeting lately 
at the Saginaw Convention, when the testimonies seemed to 
be drifting too much on the line of Brother Russell's trials 
and burdens, they need not borrow so much trouble about 
Brother R., for he is in the Lord's hands; and as long as 
he is faithful to his stewardship, the Lord will take care of 
him and he will have a good time fighting the good fight 
of faith for the joy that is set before him, in spite of all the 
opposing forces of Satan. We esteem Brother Russell very 
highly for his work's sake and labor of love for the members 
of Christ's Body and should bear him continually to 
the throne of grace in the arms of faith, that the Lord may 
continue to guide him by the spirit of wisdom and a sound 
mind in the dispensing of the meat, from the storehouse of 
Divine truth, to the household through the various instrumentalities 
that the Lord is using. Hold up the prophet's 
hands in any way you can. Having done this, cast all your 



care upon the Lord, knowing that he doeth all things well. 
Leave it there and stop worrying about Brother R. "Let 
not your heart be troubled," saith the Master. "Martha, 
Martha, thou are careful (i.e., worried) and troubled about 
many things." 

Now, dear Brother, just one or two things more to which 
I wish to call your attention. Is there not a parallelism 
between the stumbling of some of the Lord's disciples mentioned 
in John 6:52-68 and the stumbling now taking place? 
In the 53d verse our Lord says, "Except ye eat the flesh 
of the Son of Man and drink his blood ye have no life in 
you." Does not this apply to the consecrated spirit-begotten 
Church, drinking of the sufferings of Christ even unto 
death, the sacrificial Cup, members of Christ's Body? Are 

R4489 : page 301 

they not the only ones that have any life in them? Is not 

this strong meat? Those disciples who fell away said, 

"This is a hard saying, who can hear it?" Is it not so in 

the closing time of this harvest? Are not some who have 

been following along and who were co-laborers, now stumbling 

at the Word, being disobedient and declaring by word 

of mouth and printed page that the suffering of the Church 

as a sin-offering by the High Priest of our profession is a 

hard saying and will have none of it? 

Now, lest I weary you or take too much of your time, I 
will close. I am getting old and nervous and have to write 
with pencil and have my letter copied. And now, Dear 
Brother, if you never receive another line from me while I 
tarry this side of the vail, rest assured that I shall remember 
you continually at the throne of Grace that the keeping 
power may be with you to the end of your pilgrim journey; 
and at last, when your last battle shall have been fought and 
the last victory won and your crowning day shall be ushered 
in, may you hear the welcome voice saying, "Well done, 
good and faithful servant, enter thou into the joy of thy 
Lord." Pray for me that I may, by God's grace, meet you 
there. 

Faithfully yours in the One Hope and service, 
BYRON WILCOX. 

DEAR BROTHER McPHAIL:- 

I received your booklet on the Covenants and Mediator. 
I have read and re-read it prayerfully and carefully, and 
must say I disagree with you entirely on the points of the 
doctrines as set forth by you and the other brethren who 
hold the same (I believe) unscriptural views. 

I shall only point out to you briefly and to the point a 
few of the unscriptural statements and try, with the Lord's 
help, to call your attention to some strange and inconsistent 
things that you and Brother Henninges have done, in the 
hope that you may see the error and make your escape from 
the snare of the Adversary; for I still recognize you as a 
brother, and love you dearly and continue to pray for you. 

You are the first "Pilgrim" brother I ever met; I think 



about eighteen years ago. At that time you were the only 

traveling Pilgrim. I have met you many times since and 

have been greatly blessed through your ministry of the 

Truth. Now, dear Brother, at the time I first met you the 

TABERNACLE SHADOWS had been published, explaining the 

types, etc. You and Brother Henninges were familiar with 

and well posted on the TABERNACLE SHADOWS as explained 

by Brother Russell; and as far as I can judge, you continued 

to preach in harmony with those views as set forth 

in that booklet for eighteen years. Then, suddenly, just in 

the closing time of the harvest, you get your eyes opened 

to see the whole teachings in regard to the Lord's goat, the 

scape-goat, the red heifer, and almost everything in the 

TABERNACLE SHADOWS as set forth by Brother Russell, as a 

myth, an error. Is it not strange that the Lord did not 

reveal this to you brethren sooner? And now you claim 

that Brother Russell is the one that has changed his teachings. 

He is, and has always been teaching in perfect harmony 

with the views as set forth in the TABERNACLE SHADOWS. 

I shall not now go into details in reference to some of your 

citations and misapplications of WATCH TOWER and DAWNS. 

It seems sufficient to see that you repudiate almost all the 

Gospel truths you had held and publicly taught for eighteen 

years. This of itself is sufficient to cast suspicion on your 

whole presentation. 

On page 38 of your booklet you ask, if these sinners, 
enemies, etc., could become saints and members of the 
Church, joint-heirs with Jesus Christ without a mediator, 
why cannot the world in the Millennial Age attain to human 
perfection without a mediator. A seemingly foolish question 
for a Bible student to ask, and very easily answered 
from the Scriptural standpoint, because it is not in harmony 
with God's eternal plan and purpose. Again, you ask, if 
any member of this sinful race can be accepted by God 
without a mediator, why is a mediator needed at all? Let 
me ask you, dear Brother, if Abel had a mediator. How 
about the cloud of Old Testament worthies mentioned in 
Hebrews 11? Were they under the New Covenant? Were 
they justified by virtue of a Covenant then in operation? 
Did they have a mediator? No! Will they come forth in the 
resurrection of the just to perfect human life? Certainly. 
They were justified by faith and fought it out on the faith 
line and came off victors. Their faith, from God's standpoint, 
pointed forward to the Ransom. They were justified 
by faith; and by obedience to that faith they will come forth 
perfect human beings to be used of God in bringing the 
blessings of the New Covenant when in operation to the 
world, under the rule of the Mediator— the Church, Head 
and Body. 

Now, how about the household of faith at the present 
time? How are we justified and to what kind of life are 
we justified? Therefore, being justified by virtue of the 
New Covenant and the mediator of the New Covenant. Oh, 
no, Paul! That is not what you say. We are getting the 
thing all mixed up. Someone else says that! "Therefore, 
being justified by faith, we have peace, etc." Oh! I see; we 



are justified the same today as Abraham was— by faith; 
no mediator there; no covenant there! To what life are we 
justified? Human life, perfect human life, purchased by the 
Ransom. Have we this when we are justified? No; it is 
only reckoned to us. Are we going to be perfect human 
beings like those old-time worthies in the resurrection? No; 
that is not God's purpose with us. He has "provided some 
better thing for us." We are justified for a purpose; to be 
used on a higher plane of being in the age to come. We 
do with our humanity what our Forerunner, the High Priest 
of our profession, did with his— give it up as a sacrifice, 
through his merit, acceptable to God. Now, from that time, 
the time of consecration, we are under a covenant, and not 
before. 

What covenant are we under? I answer, the same as 
our Forerunner. What covenant was he under? A covenant 
of sacrifice. For three and one-half years he was under 
that covenant, until he cried on the cross, "It is finished." 
He was begotten in the Abrahamic Covenant at his baptism. 
In his Resurrection, he was born from the same covenant, 
and became the Head of the Seed typified by Isaac. So, 
the Church, which is his Body, are under a covenant, a 
covenant to sacrifice, reckoned in with the Head as members 
of his Body, through his merit and offering acceptable 
to God. All justification is based upon the Ransom given 
at Calvary. Now, we can see why or in what sense, the 
Church are members of his sacrificial Body, and are being 
"baptized for the dead," joint-sacrifices, sharing his sufferings, 
joint-heirs; "Gather my saints together unto me, them 
that have made a covenant with me by sacrifice." (Psalm 50:5.) 

R4490 : page 301 

"A covenant with ME," with HIM— a fellowship 
covenant. 

Now we can see the force and harmony of these Scriptures. 
"Planted together in the likeness of his death," 
"drinking of his cup," "counted as sheep for the slaughter"; 
"baptized for the dead." The man Christ Jesus was the 
first sheep slaughtered, the Lamb of God, who bore our 
sins— the sins of the sheep for the slaughter, and also, the 
sins of the whole world. But God's great plan purposed 
other sheep for sacrifice, through the merit of the one who 
ransomed all. This Lamb of God was in God's eternal purpose 
slain from the foundation of the world; so his followers, 
who are crucified with him, were sheep for the 
slaughter, chosen in him before the foundation of the world. 
(Eph. 1:4.) All this is clearly taught in the TABERNACLE 
SHADOWS. But from your viewpoint these Scripture teachings 
are meaningless. There is no place for them in the 
teachings of yourself and Brother Henninges. 

Your explanation on Page 10, "What is meant by being 
under a covenant?" I believe, is correct. Now, is the Church 
under more than one covenant? I think that your answer 
would be negative. If so, the Church is not under the New 
Covenant, for it is clearly stated in the Scriptures, that the 



Lord's saints are under a covenant of sacrifice, as I have 
already cited. You failed to explain anything in regard to 

R4490 : page 302 

the Church's Advocate. Does the Church have a mediator 
and an advocate both? If so, for what reason? 

Again, on page 15, your thoughts are set forth in regard 
to Abraham, and, of course, you would be obliged to include 
other Old Testament Worthies who had no mediator, 
and because they had none, if we hold the view that the 
Church has none, etc., then because Abraham and others, 
Abel, Enoch, etc., had no High Priest, then, of course, the 
Church has none; and the Church has no Head because they 
had none; and so on. This is very unsound reasoning. 
Were those old worthies offering their justified humanity 
as a sacrifice to God, acceptable to God through the merit 
and ransom finished at Calvary? If not, your reasoning and 
conclusions fall flat with no foundation to stand on. 

Again, on page 25, you refer to Hebrews 12:22,25. 
You say that instead of taking the Apostle at his word and 
believing what he says that "Ye are come," we are asked 
to believe that it means, "Ye are coming." Now let us see 
how your reasoning and conclusions look in viewing some 
other passage of Scripture given by the same Apostle: "If 
ye then be risen with Christ, etc." (Col. 3:1.) According to 
your view, Paul made a mistake, for we are not risen with 
Christ as yet, except by faith, and shall not be until we 
pass beyond the vail into the anti-typical Sarah's tent. So, 
in regard to the Scriptures you refer to and the conditions 
and things spoken of, we have come by faith to that glorious 
epoch or condition referred to, but it is still in the 
future. We behold it in faith and by faith we bring it 
nigh. You remember Abraham saw the same; he saw it 
and was glad. Now, dear Brother, there is much more I 
might say, but will not at this time. 

Hoping and praying that you may see light in God's 
light on these important doctrines, I exhort you in the words 
of Paul to Timothy, "Take heed to thyself (keep the big 
Scotchman under), and to the doctrine, continue in them, 
and by so doing thou shalt save both thyself and them that 
hear thee." I shall be pleased to hear from you at any time. 

Faithfully your Brother in the One Hope as long as I 
can see you are on the ransom. BYRON WILCOX. 



R4490 : page 302 

THE TRUTH IN ASIA MINOR 

BELOVED BROTHER IN OUR BLESSED KING:--I consider 

it my Christian duty to make known to you and to 

all who elsewhere love our Savior in truth, that 

I heard about you and your love for the Lord and 

for his work, through your books, which we have had in our 



language, the Greek, now for two and a half years. I am 
sending you this letter because I believe that you will rejoice 
with me. 

In the month of March, last year, I received from one 
of the Lord's children, who lives in Crete, some books and 
tracts of the MILLENNIAL DAWN. By reading I found in them 
the truth, for which I was hungry and thirsty. So I accept 
it because it is the true Gospel of Jesus. 

When the preacher of the Protestant Church, of which 
I was a member, heard that I had accepted these truths and 
that I had written to have more books forwarded for the 
purpose of distribution, he explained before the Church that 
these books are not Christian, and that I must neither read 
them nor give them to others. I replied that the Word of 
God says, "Prove all things and hold fast that which is 
good." (I. Thess. 5:21.) Whereupon they persecuted me, for 
I had become an "heretic"; and about two weeks after that 
time they put me into prison on the charge that I was 
writing objectionable letters and passing them into the 
American College for Girls. Then the court of Smyrna sent 
me as an exile to my native country, which is in Epiros, 
Turkey. I was in prison ten days; and after this they sent 
me as an exile through Macedonia. In all these tribulations I 
was very glad, because it was my blessed King's will. I saw 
that there in Macedonia he had something to do through 
me; and about three months were spent ministering according 
to his will. 

I want to let you know that about ten persons, who are 
Armenian Christians, speaking the Turkish language, are 
ready to buy some MILLENNIAL DAWN literature. So this 
year I shall try by the Lord's help to print something of 
the Truth in the Turkish language for them. All those who 
accept the DAWN truths here in Smyrna are about thirty 
persons, but every day I meet those who are hungering for 
the Truth as it is in Christ. 

I am a Greek, my age is 25, my native country is the 
"Conitza," Epiros, Turkey. I have been living here in 
Smyrna for seven years, and I speak about six languages- 
Greek, English, Turkish, Albanian, and a little Hebrew and 
French. 

My love to all the friends, G. M.— Smyrna. 

OUR REPLY 

DEAR BROTHER M.:~ 

I am glad to have your letter of the 7th of June and 
to note therefrom that you are not only at liberty, but back 
in your own land and actively engaged again in the proclaiming 
of the glad tidings. It rejoices me to learn that so many 
as thirty of the Asiatic Turks have received the good tidings. 
Give them my greetings, please. We have a pamphlet on 
the subject of Hell in the Syrian language; order if you can 
use any of these. Although we have none too much money for 
the demands, we feel led of the Lord to render you some assistance 
for the work you are engaged in. Please use it as 
wisely and carefully and as much to the Lord's glory as 



possible, and please also let us have a report respecting its 
expenditure. Enclosed find draft. 
Yours in the love and service of our dear Redeemer, 
C. T. RUSSELL. 



R4490 : page 302 

SOME INTERESTING LETTERS 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

Grace and peace be multiplied unto you through Jesus 
Christ our Lord. 

Now, dear Brother, I come to you through letter with 
a heart full of repentance, after having been before the 
Lord, for having in the past spoken evil and listened to evil 
concerning you, my Brother. Now, dear Brother, I want 
first to ask your forgiveness for opposing the Truth you have 
so faithfully given out, which as I now see, was the true 
"Meat in due season." 

The first thing that started me was listening to evil 
speaking. Now I see it was disobeying God's holy will, and 
going against his Word. Secondly, I opposed the Vow 
most bitterly, which I now see is one of the most essential 
things of this Gospel Age; that is, at this time— "the time 
of the end." Now, dear Brother, as soon as I opposed the 
Vow openly, it was, as I now see, as though a dark glass 
or film came over the eyes of my understanding, and I could 
not see the light. I began to disagree on the Covenants, 
the Sin-offering, and also on the subject of the Mediator, 
and, in fact, I was going farther and farther away, all 
because I did not listen to the Apostle's injunction, "Study 
to show thyself approved unto God, a workman that needeth 
not to be shamed." I got lazy and did not study hard enough. 
Oh, Brother, if I could only help the others, who are in the 
condition that I was in, to see how essential it is to keep 
on studying, and to keep in full harmony with the channel 
that the dear Lord is using! With God's help I am now 
doing my best to show others what I have now got, and 
that it is the Truth which I unconsciously gave up for error. 
But thanks be to our Heavenly Father, he has brought me 
to see the error of my ways, by using a dear Brother to 

R4490 : page 303 

show me and prove to me from the Scriptures that I was 
on the wrong course. 

Now, dear Brother, I had been praying that I might 
see the Truth, and get to know if I was right or wrong. 
I prayed for days, and the dear Lord has now given me 
back the Truth. 

I took the Vow and made it truly mine on the 29th of 
July, and went straight to bed. I cannot tell how joyful and 
peaceful I was when I got up in full harmony with my 



R4491 : page 303 

Lord and Master, and with all the sons of God. 

I ask again, will you please forgive me for all I have 
done against you? My Brother, I feel ashamed to ask you 
such a favor, but I know the dear Lord has forgiven me, 
so with this comfort I also ask you. 

May the dear Lord bless you more and more abundantly 
and keep you faithful unto death, and also those dear fellow-laborers 
in the office with you. 

I am now your loving Brother in Jesus Christ, 
TOM HARRISON. 



page 303 

BELOVED BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

A few words of testimony as to the many benefits the 
Vow has brought me. We thank God for it and for the 
disposition that enabled us to voluntarily appropriate this 
newer and fuller definition of our original consecration 
Vow; and oh, the sweetness and preciousness of the consequent 
closer fellowship and walk with God is beyond power 
of expression! Only the new mind revelling in the joys of 
the spirit can appreciate it. 

True, the result of striving to the best of our ability to 
fulfil its various provisions, and one to be reasonably expected, 
was an increase of temptations and tests along lines 
of greatest weaknesses, but rather than yield to discouragement 
or a repudiation of this sacred obligation, we determined 
by the Lord's assisting grace to brave the struggle, 
knowing the effect would be a greater fortification on many 
weak points, which heretofore had not been resisted as they 
might have been. 

Never before have we had such an exalted conception 
of our privileges as New Creatures. 

Never before have we appreciated what an active, living, 
energetic principle the Lord's Word is, "bringing every 
thought captive to the obedience of Christ." Never before 
(we say it humbly) have we felt so efficient in appropriating 
the strength and grace of the precious Word to the overcoming 
of the fleshly mind with its deceptive, seductive 
reasonings and restraints upon the noble, pure and good in 
thought and motive, and thus allowing the holy impulses 
and promptings of Divine Love to spring forth and more 
abundantly bud and blossom into the beautiful "graces of 
the Spirit." 

How we yearn and pray that the dear friends may all 
eventually see the privilege of voluntarily making the Vow 
their own, in an entire dependence upon the Lord and his 
assisting grace promised for every time of need! Accept 
heartiest greetings and Christian Love from your Brother 
in the Master's service, CARL F. HAMMERLE. 



R4491 : page 303 

DEAR PASTOR RUSSELL:- 

To you it was graciously given on behalf of Christ, not 
only to believe into him, but also to suffer on his account. 
(Phil. 1:29— Diag.) I take the liberty, dear Brother, to write 
you a few lines to express my gratitude and praise to the 
dear Father for the blessings that have been and still are coming 
to me through the light of "Present Truth." Surely the 
Lord has caused us to sit down to a glorious feast! 

I was very much impressed with the article, "Wresting 
the Scriptures," which appeared in the July 15th TOWER; 
and especially with the position the party referred to took 
regarding Hebrews 10:29. I do not see how he could take 
the position he does regarding this word rendered "unholy." 
I have consulted a Greek and English Lexicon, by Donnegan, 
concerning this word "Koinos," and he defines it thus, "common, 
"unclean," "prohibited food," "defilement from eating" 
such food"; all the definitions, as can be readily seen, contain 
the thought of "unholy"; not any thought of "partnership," 
as the party would have us believe. 

Concerning our participation in the suffering of Christ, 
as members of his Body, I think the Apostle Paul shows 
us a most conclusive argument in Ephesians 5:31,32, where 
he states, "For this cause shall a man leave his father, and 
his mother, and shall be joined unto his wife and they too 
shall be one flesh. This is a great mystery; but I speak 
concerning Christ and the Church." 

When we take this verse, together with what Jesus said 
in John 6:5 1, "My flesh I give for the life of the world," 
we can see the great privilege the Church has, to be counted 
in as a part of that "flesh"; as Paul States, "They two shall 
be one flesh. ...I speak concerning Christ and the Church." 

It is our Lord who is sacrificing his "flesh." All the 
merit belongs to him. 

Surely it is a marvelous favor to be associated with our 
dear Lord as members of his Body; as Paul again states, 
"joint-heirs with Christ, if so be that we suffer with him, that 
we may also be glorified together."— Rom. 8:17. 

May the Father's richest blessings rest upon you in 
abundance, comforting and strengthening you in this "evil 
hour," is the prayer of your Brother. 

In the bonds of Love, E. G. BERRY. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

I have been looking back over the twelve months that 
have elapsed since my formal registration of the Vow; and 
feel constrained to write and acknowledge the great blessing 
it has proved in this time. This last year has been by far 
more fruitful in its harvest of spiritual blessings and privileges 
than the previous seven of my association with the 
glorious Harvest work. I confess, however, that the first 
perusal of the Vow did not impress me favorably, for the 



flesh at once put forward the objection that it was a very low 
moral standard for a Christian. How subtle the old mind; 
how crafty its sophistries, and what cunning objections it 
will raise when it discerns some definite action being taken 

page 303 

to bring it the more completely into subjection to the Divine 
Will! 

R4491 : page 303 

Several months ago I was led to still further "mortify" 
the flesh by adding another feature to my Vow, suggested 
by yourself at the Nashville Convention, "to never murmur 
nor complain at any of the Lord's providential leadings." 
The year has not been without its trials and testing, but 
the resultant peace, and the confident assurance that every 
incident was working out the Father's blessed will, has been 
like oil on troubled waters. "When he giveth peace, who 
then can make trouble?" 

You have my deepest sympathy, dear Brother, in every 
trial and heartache. How true it is that they who are 
teachers, even in a small way, must receive heavier trial! 
But how thankful am I that the Lord has promised to keep 
all those that trust in him! So I am confident that he will 
permit you to glorify him by finishing the work which he 
has given you to do. How glorious to know that the prayers, 
on one another's behalf, of the consecrated thousands, are 
now ascending in one grand, uninterrupted chorus to the 
Giver of every good and perfect gift, for the needed grace 
to lovingly submit to all the provings of the Lord as he 
seals our hearts and minds against the day of our 
deliverance. 

Yours in the bonds of Christian love, 

WM. A. BAKER. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

Have considered and prayed over the Vow for many 
months, and at the beginning of the year took it with slight 
modifications, as a Resolution, continuing to ask Divine 
guidance. The result has been a further opening of the 
eyes of my understanding, and I feel I can now take the 
Vow with a full and proper appreciation. We continue to 
be thankful for your recent fellowship and help. May the 
Lord's richest blessings be yours. Pray for me. 

Your Sister by his favor, CORRINE C. SHERMAN. 



page 304 

PUBLIC MINISTRIES OF THE TRUTH 



UNDER THE AUSPICES OF PEOPLES PULPIT 
ASSOCIATION OF BROOKLYN, N.Y. 



ONE-DAY LOCAL CONVENTIONS ADDRESSED BY THE 
EDITOR OF THIS JOURNAL AS FOLLOWS: 

BROOKLYN, N.Y., SEPT. 19. 

Morning Rally and Testimony Meeting at 10:30 o'clock. 

Discourse by Brother Russell at 3:00 p.m. Evening 
meeting for the interested at 7:30 o'clock; this will be a 
Question Meeting. Visiting friends cordially invited. 

All meetings will be held in the Brooklyn Tabernacle, Nos. 
13-17 Hicks street. Convenient to all cars and ferries— close 
to the old bridge terminus. 

Baptismal services will be arranged for, if requested, on 
first Sunday of any quarter. 

NEW BRUNSWICK, N.J., SEPT. 26. 



BROOKLYN TABERNACLE EVERY SUNDAY 

Preaching at 3:00 p.m. Praise service at 7:00 p.m.; 
Berean Bible Study at 7:30 p.m. Convenient to New York 
via Subway, and Jersey City via P.R.R. Annex Ferry. 



page 306 

STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES 
"MILLENNIAL DAWN" 

THESE STUDIES ARE RECOMMENDED TO STUDENTS AS VERITABLE "BIBLE KEYS. 

PRICES ARE NET AND BARELY COVER COST OF PRODUCTION, 

WHEN DELIVERED BY COLPORTEURS THE COST AND PRICE ARE INCREASED. 

SERIES I., The Plan of the Ages, gives an outline of the divine plan 
revealed in the Bible, relating to man's redemption and restitution: 
386 pages, in embossed cloth, 25c. (Is. l/2d.) India paper edition, 75c. 
(3s. l-l/2d.). 

This volume has been published as a special issue of our journal— 
at the extremely low price of 5c. a copy, in any quantity, postage included. 
(To foreign countries, 9c.) This enables people of slender 
purse to herald far and wide the good tidings in a most helpful form. 

SERIES II., The Time is at Hand, treats of the manner and time of 
the Lord's second coming, considering the Bible Testimony on this 
subject: 370 pages, in embossed cloth, 25c. (Is. l/2d.) India paper 
edition, 75c. (3s. l-l/2d.) 

SERIES III., Thy Kingdom Come, considers prophecies which mark 
events connected with the "Time of the End," the glorification of the 
Church and the establishment of the Millennial Kingdom; it also contains 



a chapter of the Great Pyramid, showing its corroboration of the 
dates and other teachings of the Bible: 384 pages, in embossed cloth, 
25c. (Is. l/2d.) India paper edition, 75c. (3s. l-l/2d.) 

SERIES IV., The Day of Vengeance, shows that the dissolution of the 
present order of things is in progress, and that all the panaceas offered 
are valueless to avert the predicted end. It marks in these events the 
fulfilment of prophecy, noting specially our Lord's great prophecy of 
Matt. 24 and Zech. 14:1-9: 660 pages, in embossed cloth, 30c. (Is. 3d.). 
India paper edition, 85c. (3s. 6-l/2d.) 

SERIES V., The At-one-ment Between God and Man, treats an all-important 
subject— the hub, the center around which all the features 
of divine grace revolve. Its topic deserves the most careful and 
prayerful consideration on the part of all true Christians: 507 pages, 
in embossed cloth, 30c. (Is. 3d.) India paper edition, 85c. (3s. 6-l/2d.) 

SERIES VI., The New Creation, deals with the Creative Week 
(Genesis 1 and 2), and with the Church, God's "New Creation." It examines 
the personnel, organization, rites, ceremonies, obligations and 
hopes appertaining to those called and accepted as members of the 
Body under the Head: 740 pages, in embossed cloth, 30c. (Is. 3d.) 
India paper edition, 85c. (3s. 6-l/2d.) 

The above prices include postage. 

IN FULL LEATHER BINDING, gilt edges, the set (6 vols.) $3.00, 
(12s. 6d.), plus postage, 60c. (Is.). 

Is also published in foreign languages as follows: German, five vols., 
in Swedish Vols. 1, 2, 3, 5 and 6; in Dano-Norwegian, three vols.; 
in Greek, three vols.; in French, two vols.; Hollandish, Spanish, 
and Italian, one vol. each; bound in cloth, uniform with English edition, 
prices the same; in Polish, condensed edition, one vol., 10 cents. 



page 305 



SEMI-MONTHLY 
VOL. XXX OCTOBER 15 No. 20 
A.D. 1909-A.M. 6038 



CONTENTS. 

Have "The Watch Tower" Teachings 
Changed? 307 

Afflictions of Christ for Church and World 308 

The Passover and Atonement Sacrifices 308 

The Sin of the World 309 

The Ransom-Price and the Sin-Offering 309 

Is There Merit in Our Sacrifices? 310 

Our Merit Not Demanded by Justice 311 

"Jesus' Blood" and "the Blood of the 

New Covenant" 311 

One Mediator, Jesus 312 

The Abrahamic Covenant Not the New 
Covenant 313 

A Conscience Void of Offense 316 

Preaching Christ to the Rulers 318 



Berean Studies on the Atonement 319 

page 306 

PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY 
CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
"BROOKLYN TABERNACLE," 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, N.Y., U.S.A. 

Foreign Agencies:— British Branch: 24 Eversholt St., London, 
N.W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, Barmen. Australasian 
Branch: Equitable Building, Collins St., Melbourne. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:— All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 
and in touch with the Studies, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, DANISH AND ITALIAN EDITIONS. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N.Y., POSTOFFICE 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA 



READERS OF THE SERMONS IN THE NEWSPAPERS 

Do not neglect to encourage the papers publishing Bro. 
Russell's sermons— by post-card or letter, telling of your appreciation. 
And if any omit the sermon, even once, write your 
regrets and also advise us. 

NEW EDITION SWEDISH HYMN BOOKS 

"Morgansanger"— new edition, cloth bound, at 15 cents; 
Morocco-cloth at 20 cents each. 

MISSIONARY ENVELOPES 

New envelopes are now to be had at the same price— 



25 cents per 100, postpaid. These are of excellent paper and 
have half-tone cut of all six volumes of SCRIPTURE STUDIES 
on the front, and cut of the HEAVENLY MANNA on the back. 

PLEASE DO NOT 

Send one and two-cent stamps as remittances for orders, if it 
is at all possible to obtain larger denominations. 

Dawn-Studies, Vol. I, Spanish, is in stock. 

Please address all letters to us at Brooklyn, N.Y.; 
the Allegheny, Pa., office is closed. 



R4491 : page 307 

HAVE "THE WATCH TOWER" TEACHINGS CHANGED? 

DO THE changes recently made in the teachings of 

THE WATCH TOWER respecting the Covenants affect 

any of the fundamentals of doctrine, or any 

of the features of the Divine Plan of the Ages as 

previously recognized and presented in SCRIPTURE STUDIES, 

Vols. I. to VI.? 

If the word change be understood to signify a repudiation 
of anything once held as truth, then we deny that any 
change has occurred in our teaching. As we pass along a 
roadway over hill and dale, there are continual changes in one 
sense of the word— changing scenes— but such do not imply 
a change in the traveler's course— a retracing of his steps. 
So the "pathway of the just is as a shining light" and those 
who follow it find it shining "more and more unto the perfect 
day." They will not need to say, as some have said recently, 
"For seventeen years we thought we were in the right way, 
but now must retrace our steps and go back to where we then 
began, and take a different path." Such as were in the right 
path of shining light and stay therein will never need to say, 
"We once thought TABERNACLE SHADOWS OF BETTER SACRIFICES 
the most clear and only satisfactory solution of the subject in 
the world, but now we must retrace our steps and must repudiate 
all that we ever believed respecting the antitypical 
Atonement Day and its better sacrifices. We must go back 
and count all of those years as worse than wasted." 

In this sense of the word change, THE WATCH TOWER 
publications have been unchangeable from the first until now. 
What is spoken of as a "change" should not be properly so 
termed. Nothing is changed. Every step of the journey has 
been right— not one step needs to be retraced or otherwise 
repudiated. This is one of the evidences of Divine leading— 
of our Lord's supervision of the Father's work during the 
time of his presence. 

As recently shown in THE WATCH TOWER, our presentations 
on the subject of the Covenants to-day are in fullest 
accord with those we made a quarter of a century ago. What 



then is it that our opponents call a "change"? Merely the fact 
that from the first we used the term New Covenant too slackly 
—while we claimed that while it belonged to the future, to the 
Millennial Age, it would not be operative to Israel and the 
world until then. 

We nevertheless held (unscripturally as we now see) that 
our justification was somehow connected with that New Covenant, 
although we could not explain how or why we should 
be under two covenants. We still see the necessity for our 
justification. We still see that it is based upon our Lord's 
sacrifice. We still see that our share in it is obtained by 
faith— that we are "justified by faith." But now we see that 
the New Covenant has nothing whatever to do with this faith 
or with our justification, and that no Scripture so teaches. 
Have we lost anything? No. We merely cast aside as useless, 
unscriptural, unnecessary, the thought that our justification 
had anything whatever to do with the New Covenant. 
We now see the force of the Bible presentation of the subject 
—that we are justified by faith— "faith in his blood"— faith in 
the sacrifice of Jesus, the Just for the unjust. We now see 
that the New Covenant is promised— not to us, but to Israel 
and all men. We have turned aside from nothing of any 
value to us. We have all the actualities which we ever had, 
and, additionally, the light shines the brighter upon our 
pathway. 

As an illustration: Suppose you were walking into the 
country to a friend's home and an umbrella were given you 
to carry to him. Suppose that in the journey you thought 
that you needed the umbrella either for rain or shine and 
carried it over you. Suppose that by and by you discovered 
that you did not need its covering and let it down and carried 

R4492 : page 307 

it to your friend for whom it was intended. Would that 
signify that you had lost your way or changed your path or 
retraced your steps? Assuredly not! 

Similarly the Church are "able ministers of the New 
Covenant," preparing it, carrying forward its various interests 
to present them to Israel and the world in due time. If for 
a time we with others thought that Covenant for our use on 
the way, and got under it, or supposed ourselves under it, 
was it wrong or a change of our way or path when we got 
free from the supposition that we needed that New Covenant? 
Assuredly not! The "twelve stars" (Rev. 12:1) shed the 
more light upon our pathway by reason of our getting from 
under the unscriptural delusion. 

But have we cast away the New Covenant? By no means. 
We are still "able ministers (servants) of the New Covenant" 
—still carrying it forward for Israel and mankind— serving it 
all the more faithfully because the more intelligently, the more 
Scripturally. Note well that the "change" of doctrine is on 
the part of those who are opposing us— they have already so 
changed their course that they are blind to many of the 
previous things they once saw. They are losing "the secret 
of the Lord" (Psa. 25:13), "the mystery"— revealed only to 



the saints and hidden from all others.— Col. 1:26. 

But, says another, has not THE WATCH TOWER "changed" 
so that now it denies Jesus as the Mediator between God and 
men? Does not this mean a repudiation of the ransom and 
a denial of the necessity and fact of the Atonement? Would 
not this signify a renouncement of Jesus as the Savior or 
Redeemer? And would not this be a great "change" indeed? 

Yes, indeed; those would be great changes, surely. But 
THE WATCH TOWER has made no such changes in its teachings. 
Such misstatements are merely a part of the Midnight 
Howl, designed of the Adversary to stampede the true sheep. 
Our opponents, blinded by the Adversary (and possibly attempting 
"to draw away disciples after themselves"), are 
"howling" and skiting "dust" to cause confusion amongst the 
Lord's consecrated people. God permits it as a test of the 
loyalty of his people and their faith in him as the Shepherd 
of the flock. 

THE WATCH TOWER still teaches that all of Adam's children 
are sinners and all under death-sentence. It still teaches 
that there is none other name than that of Jesus, given under 
heaven or among men, whereby we must be saved— through 

R4492 : page 308 

faith in his blood— in his sacrifice— in his ransom-price— in his 

atonement for sin. Can any one believe more than this respecting 

the efficacy of the precious blood? Where did our 

opponents learn of the significance of the ransom-price and 

the philosophy of the Atonement between God and men, than 

in THE WATCH TOWER publications? What have our opponents 

written on this subject, or what has ever been written 

on this subject, that as strongly teaches the value of the 

precious blood and its necessity as the price of salvation for 

the Church and the world? We challenge presentation of 

proof on this subject. 

THE WATCH TOWER, as ever, teaches that our Lord Jesus 
is the great Prophet, Priest, King, Judge and Mediator for 
Adam and his race, whom God appointed to this service from 
before the foundation of the world. We still teach that he 
will fulfil all those offices by the close of the Millennium. 
We still hold, since 1880, that the Church is a special class 
"called" to be "copies of God's dear Son" as his Bride and 
joint-heir in all his offices toward "men," the world. We still 
hold that these are members of the great Prophet, Priest, 
King, Judge, Mediator; that figuratively our Lord Jesus is 
the "Head" and the Church his "Body." We still hold that 
in the Divine purpose this special class was foreknown, as 
well as Jesus, from before the foundation of the world. (Rom. 8:29; 
I. Pet. 1:2.) We still hold that this is the Mystery hid 
from previous ages and now made known only to the saints, 
as a special favor through the Word and by the holy Spirit. 

Wherefore, then, the "howl" against us? Because we 
emphasize, to those permitted to see the "Mystery," what the 
Scriptures clearly teach, namely, that God deals in a special 
manner with the elect Church, different from his dealing 
with the world; because those of us who ever were rebellious 



have surrendered, and because we desire righteousness 

and truth, and can and do exercise justifying faith in 

Jesus' meritorious sacrifice. These sacrifice their restitution 

life-rights and by a consecration vow to the Lord become 

dead as men and alive as "new creatures," "members in particular 

of the Body of the Christ"— the great Prophet, Mediator, 

King, Priest and Judge of the world. 



R4492 : page 308 

AFFLICTIONS OF CHRIST FOR CHURCH AND WORLD 

ST. PAUL writes, "I fill up that which is behind of 

the afflictions of Christ in my flesh, for his Body's 

sake, which is the Church." (Col. 1:24.) How 

should this text be understood in harmony with 

the thought that the Church is represented in the sacrifice of 

the Lord's goat, whose blood was sprinkled "for all the 

people"? 

We are to "lay down our lives for the brethren" (I John 3:16) 
in serving them, but the merit of that sacrifice and its 
application at the end of this age, at the close of the antitypical 
Atonement Day, is a different matter. The merit of 
the sacrifice— Jesus' merit passed through his "Body"— when 
presented to Justice on the Mercy Seat by the High Priest 
is quite another matter from the spending of the strength. 
Who will claim that the Apostle in this text meant that he or 
we could do sacrifice for the Church's sin? Our Lord will 
properly apply the merit as his own "for the sins of all the 
people." 

The same principle holds true in respect to our Lord's 
sacrifice. He did not lay down his life day by day in the 
service of the world, but in the service of God's peculiar 
people Israel, and especially in the service of such of those 
as evidenced that they were "Israelites indeed, in whom was 
no guile." 

Although the merit of Christ's sacrifice (after being 
passed through the Church selected from Jews and Gentiles) 
is ultimately to be applied for the cancellation of "the sins of 
the whole world," he did not in any sense or degree lay down 
his life in serving the world. He said to his disciples, "Ye 
are not of the world, even as I am not of the world." (John 17:16.) 
And in sending them forth to preach the Gospel he 
charged them not to go to the world, saying, "Go not into the 
way of the Gentiles and into any city of the Samaritans enter 
ye not; for I am not sent save to the lost sheep of the house 
of Israel." In a word, then, it matters not to Justice how our 
Lord's life was consumed or laid down— instantly, or during 
three and one-half years— it was a sacrifice or giving up of certain 
earthly rights belonging to him— an asset, a virtue, a 
price which he, as a New Creature, was privileged to dispense 
and did give to us, the "household of faith." Likewise the 
"household of faith," being justified through the merit of 
Jesus' sacrifice presented to Justice, was invited to become 



dead to earthly rights with him— to sacrifice restitution rights 
and privileges. It matters not how, in God's providence, our 
lives may be spent or in what kind of service they are consumed 
—at the wash-tub, in the store, in the pulpit, or otherwise; 
the restitution rights are sacrificed and those rights in 
the end will be made available to natural Israel and to the 
world under the New Covenant arrangement. "They shall 
obtain mercy through your mercy." (Rom. 11:31.) We are 
to have no preference as to how our sacrifice will be accepted 
of the Lord; but, if different doors are opened to us, we 
should follow the Apostle's exhortation and, as far as possible, 
"do good unto all men, especially unto the household 
of faith," "laying down our lives for (in the service of) the 
brethren." We have nothing to do, as sacrificers, with how 
our Lord, the great High Priest, will ultimately apply those 
restitution privileges which we sacrifice in the sealing of the 
New Covenant. 

THE PASSOVER AND THE ATONEMENT SACRIFICES 

What is the relationship between the sacrificed Passover 
lamb and the Atonement Day sin-offering? 

These types view sin-atonement from two different standpoints. 
As we have frequently heretofore shown, Jesus the 
Lamb of God was the antitype of the Passover lamb. The 
Passover, observed by the Jews yearly in the spring, memorialized 
the passing over or saving of the firstborns of Israel at 
the time when all the other firstborns of Egypt were slain 
by Divine decree. The death of that lamb, which typified 
the death of Jesus, was therefore not for all the people, 
but merely for the firstborns who were passed over "in 
that night." The "household of faith" are Scripturally 
represented as "the Church of the firstborns" and that night 
typified this Gospel Age, when gross darkness covers the 
earth and will continue to cover it until the Sun of Righteousness 
with healing in his beams will arise, ushering in 
the Millennial Day. Then there will be a general deliverance 
of all Israelites from bondage to Egypt, the world. 
In other words, when the Millennial morning shall be 
ushered in, the passed-over Church will alone have been 
spared or passed over or been delivered from death by the 
efficacy of the blood of the Lamb. However, the general 
deliverance of the people resulted, and so deliverance will 
come to all who will accept it during the Millennium. Only 
the Church are being passed over now. The general deliverance 
of the world will be in order soon. That deliverance 
could not in God's order take place without first the 
passing over of the firstborn. Thus we see that the typical 
Passover Lamb is our Lord Jesus alone and that we, his 
Church, his members, are not at all represented in that 

R4493 : page 308 

lamb and its death. Thus the Apostle says, speaking of 
that Lamb, our Lord Jesus, "Christ our sacrifice is slain; 
therefore let us keep the feast." 



The Day of Atonement sacrifices were Divinely placed 
exactly at the opposite end of the year, apparently to disassociate 
the two types. They give a detailed illustration 
of the work of atonement, so far as God is concerned. As 
shown in TABERNACLE SHADOWS the Day of Atonement as 
a whole represented the entire Gospel Age— "the acceptable 
day" of sacrifice. The bullock, which represented the 
priest, was the type of our Lord Jesus in the flesh. Its 
sacrifice typified his death, "the Just for the unjust." The 
application of its blood was efficacious for the members 
of the High Priest's family— the under-priests, "himself," 
his Body, and for his entire "house," the house of the 

R4493 : page 309 

tribe of Levi. It applied to none other. Then came the 
second sacrifice of the Atonement Day— "the Lord's goat." 
It was not sacrificed for the priest nor for his house, but 
for "all the people." It represented Christ's Bride, the 
Church. It and "the scape-goat" were supplied by the 
people and therefore represented mankind in a general 
way, while the bullock was furnished by the priest and 
represented Jesus' flesh— "a body hast thou prepared me" 
"for the suffering of death." The Lord's goat was treated 
just as the bullock was treated— just as we are assured 
that the Bride class must suffer with Christ and have 
similar experiences to his. At the close of the Atonement 
day of sacrifice, otherwise called "the acceptable year of 
the Lord," and, again, "Now is the acceptable time," the 
time in which God will accept us as sacrifices— the blood 
of "the Lord's goat" was sprinkled in the Most Holy as 
was the blood of the bullock. The antitype of this will 
be at the close of this age, when the merit (blood) of 
Christ, passed through the Church, will be applied on the 
Mercy Seat "for the people"— atoning for their sins and 
sealing the New (Law) Covenant and its Mediatorial 
Kingdom. 

Both of these animals represented the High Priest: 
the bullock, our Lord and Head, and the goat, his Body, 
the Church. When the high priest sprinkled the blood of 
the bullock, it represented "his own blood," the merit of his 
own sacrifice. He applied it for us, not for the world; 
hence only believers and not the world in general have 
had the blessing secured by our Lord's sacrifice, thus far. 
Meantime, according to Divine intention, the Church has 
been gradually in process of selection— according to 
willingness in sacrificing earthly interests— walking in the 
footsteps of our Lord; filling up the sufferings of Christ; 
laying down their lives for the brethren. Our presentation 
of ourselves to the Lord was at the door of the tabernacle, 
as represented by the tethering of the goat there. 
Thus we offered ourselves and, when we were accepted, 
our sacrifice as the Lord's goat class began. This acceptance 
was indicated by the killing processes. Henceforth 
we ceased to be men and were recognized on a new plane 
as "members of the Body of Christ," without any headship 



of our own. Consequently, when at the end of the 
Day of Atonement sacrificing the antitypical High Priest 
shall make a further presentation of the blood of the goat 
upon the mercy-seat, it will be "his own blood" in two senses 
of the word: 

(1) It will be his own in the sense that all the merit 
was originally his and appropriated to us in order that we 
might have the opportunity to share with him in sacrifice. 
The sacrificial merit merely passed through us, "the Lord's 
goat" class. We were favored by the privilege accorded 
of "suffering with him that [in due time] we might be also 
glorified together with him." It is not necessary to question 
whether our sacrifice could add anything to the merit 

of the transaction, because no more merit was necessary 
than that which our Lord had and which he applied on 
our behalf. 

Undoubtedly there is a merit in the Church's work, 
else the Scriptures would not so indicate. But if we were 
actually perfect instead of reckonedly perfect, it would 
still be true that only one man was directly condemned by 
Justice and hence the death of only one man was needed 
to constitute the ransom-price of the whole world. Justice 
does not object to the extra sacrifice, however. Yea, 
Justice has promised a great reward to the 144,000 joint-sacrificers 
—that they may become joint-heirs with Christ 
Jesus, their Lord and Head. Justification is a free gift 
from God through Jesus our Lord; but "the high calling" 
is everywhere classed as a reward of merit intended only 
for "him that overcometh"; "They shall walk with me in 
white, for they are worthy," although when drawn by the 
Father to the Son we were "sinners," "defiled," "children 
of wrath"; but ye are washed, ye are sanctified— but ye 
are justified in the name of our Lord Jesus and by the 
spirit of our God."— I. Cor. 6:11. 

"That which God has cleansed call not thou unclean." 
While God called "the mean things," he does not leave 
them thus, but justifies by faith in Christ, and sanctifies 
by the Truth, by giving them opportunity to share in 
Christ's sacrifice; to share in Christ's "cup" of the blood 
of the New Covenant shed for them and for many; to 
share Christ's baptism into death; thus to learn obedience 
even unto death in the school of Christ; and finally to 
share in his glory, honor and immortality— the divine 
nature. 

The cleansing of justification by faith is for the very 
purpose of cleansing us that we might be acceptable sacrifices 
on his altar. See Malachi 3:3; Rom. 12:1. 

(2) The blood (merit) which our Lord will apply as 
soon as the Church shall have finished her share in his 
sacrifice will be "his own blood," in the sense that he accepted 
or adopted us as his members, we losing our personality 

in the transaction in the same manner that a bride 
loses her name and her individuality at marriage. All that 
we have and are belong to the great Bridegroom, and we 
are delighted that he is pleased to count us in with himself 
in any sense of the word in connection with his sufferings 



of this present time, and the glories which will follow. 
"THE SIN OF THE WORLD" 

John the Baptist declared of Jesus, "Behold the Lamb 
of God which taketh away the sin of the world!" The 
type of the Passover shows the death of the lamb only in 
connection with the firstborn of Israel. Its blood on the 
doorposts was for the protection of the firstborn, and not 
for the remainder of Israel. Since the firstborn represented 
"the Church of the firstborn" now in process of 
selection, and since the others of Israel represent those 
of the world who will ultimately be saved from the bondage 
of Pharaoh and Egypt (typifying Satan, sin and present 
worldly conditions), how can we apply John's words, 
namely, "Behold the Lamb of God which taketh away the 
sin of the world?" 

If there were no other Scriptures on the subject, we 
would be at a loss to know how to understand the discrepancy. 
However, other Scriptures show us that the 
Church of the Firstborn, passed over in this night of this 
Gospel Age, will be the Church of Glory soon. Then, 
under the headship of Christ, it will constitute a Royal 
Priesthood, which, during the Millennial Age, will bless 
mankind with assistance, instruction and uplifting influences 
of every kind. The Lamb of God has not yet taken 
away the sin of the world. He began to lay down the 
ransom-price at his baptism at Jordan. He finished this 
at Calvary. He ascended up on high with that price in 
his hand, so to speak, and presented it not for the world 
but for the Church. As the Apostle declares, "He ascended 
up on high there to appear in the presence of God for 
us"— for the household of faith— for the antitypical priests 
and Levites. Other Scriptures show us that the merit of 
Christ when passed through the Church will be made 
available in the end of this age for the sin of the world. 
Thus and then the Lamb of God will take away the sin of 
the world— in God's due time and order. 

The separateness of the types is here again duly noted: 
Moses was not one of the firstborns, but Aaron, his 
brother, was. In this type, therefore, Moses does not 
appear. Subsequently while all the passed-over ones were, 
by Divine direction, exchanged for the tribe of Levi, the 
priestly tribe represented those firstborns, and Aaron, the 
high priest, became the representative of our Lord, the 
High Priest of our profession or order. 

THE RANSOM-PRICE AND THE SIN-OFFERING 

How should we distinguish between the ransom-price 
and the sin-offering? 

The ransom price relates to the valuable thing itself, 
namely, the blood or death of Christ— a ransom price sufficient 
for the payment of the penalty of one member of 
the human family or of all, as it may be applied. The sin-offering 
shows the manner in which the ransom-price is 



applicable or effective to the cancellation of the sins of 

the whole world. As already shown, under Divine arrangement, 

R4493 : page 310 

the ransom-price was first made effective 

toward the Church and justified freely every believer in 

an acceptable attitude of mind— an attitude of consecration 

to be a loyal follower of the Lord Jesus. Secondly, 

at the end of this age, the ransom-price having been applied 

to the Church and used by her and laid down in death 

again, will be available in the hands of the great High 

Priest as the sin-offering, the Atonement price for the 

sins of the whole world— aside from the household of 

faith already justified through its merit. 

Let us give an illustration: Suppose a man possessing 
property valued at $ 10,000. Suppose a number of friends 
of his had been kidnapped and were held as hostages by 
bandits, a ransom-price of $10,000 being demanded for their 
release. Suppose that our friend sold his $10,000 property 
and got the cash with a view to paying their ransom-price. 
That cash would be the ransom-price for the liberation 
of his imprisoned friends. No less sum would do. 
No greater sum was necessary, for one or for all. The 

R4494: page 310 

selling of the property and the getting of the ransom-money 
into his possession would not constitute a satisfaction 
for his friends. That must come later. At his 
convenience he could take this ransom-price and apply it 
for one of the captives or two or more, or even for all. 
The application of the money, whether in one portion or 
in different portions at different times, corresponds to the 
presentation of the sin-offering on behalf of sinners. 

When the property was sold its money value was the 
ransom-price of those sinners, even though not applied. 
So Jesus gave himself, surrendered his life as a ransom-price 
sufficient for the sins of the whole world, and in the 
interest of the world of mankind. This work he began at 
Jordan and finished three and a half years later at Calvary. 
The moment he died the ransom-price was complete, was laid 
down. But this value was not turned over to Justice and 
made applicable to mankind when Jesus died, nor three 
days later when he arose from the dead, nor forty days 
later when he ascended up on high. A little later, after 
he had ascended on high, he appeared in the presence of 
God for us (for the household of faith) as our Redeemer, 
our Advocate, our great High Priest. He had in his possession 
the merit of his own sacrifice, the ransom-price, 
and there and then he offered it on our behalf. This is 
shown in the type by the High Priest taking into the 
Most Holy the blood of the bullock, which represented 
his human sacrifice, the ransom-price which he possessed. 
He took that blood or ransom-price into the "most holy" 
and there sprinkled it upon the Mercy Seat and before 



the Mercy Seat, thus applying it for us (for his Body, the 
"little flock") and for his house— the household of faith. 

As we have heretofore shown, this value or ransom-price 
is freely applicable to every conservative believer 
giving reckonedly earthly rights, perfection and privileges. 
But these are given to us conditionally, upon our covenant to 
sacrifice them, after the example of our Redeemer, our 
Lord. When we agreed to thus sacrifice we were 
accepted as members of his "Body." We there lost our 
identity with humanity and were begotten of the holy 
Spirit, and were thenceforth recognized as New Creatures 
in Christ Jesus— "members in particular of the Body of 
Christ," sharing with him now the privileges of the Holy 
(the light of the candlestick, the shew bread, and the 
privileges of the golden altar) with the agreement that in 
due time, as "his members," we shall pass beyond the 
veil into the Most Holy, to be thereafter with the Lord. 
That time will mark the completion of "his resurrection"— 
the First Resurrection. Thereafter the great High Priest, 
Head and Members, in glory, in the Most Holy, will offer 
his second sacrifice, namely, his ransom-price sacrificially 
passed through his Church, his Body. The merit of the 
Head having thus passed through the members of the 
Body is virtually the same sacrifice as the first one, but 
now is ready to be applied afresh. The type (Lev. 16) 
shows this application as "the blood of the Lord's goat," 
and that it was applied on behalf of "all the people." 

Thus with the end of this age Christ will offer to 
Justice (represented in the Mercy Seat) full satisfaction 
for the sin of the world— the Adamic sin. This will be 
acceptable to the Father and forthwith the entire world 
will be turned over to the great Messiah, Prophet, Priest, 
King, Judge, Mediator between God and mankind— that he 
may do with them as he wills. In harmony with the Father's 
arrangement, our Lord will at once begin to exercise the 
functions of his offices, including those of Mediator of 
the New Covenant. Israel, cast off, will be reclaimed. 
"The law shall go forth from Mt. Zion (spiritual Israel) 
and the Word of the Lord from Jerusalem (the Kingdom 
on the earthly plane). The blessing of the Lord 
will eventually reach all the families of the earth through 
Israel. "The knowledge of the Lord shall fill the whole 
earth." The blessings of restitution, identified with the 
new Mediatorial Kingdom, may be attained by all mankind 
by their acceptance of the New Covenant conditions— 
by their becoming Israelites indeed. 

IS THERE MERIT IN OUR SACRIFICES? 

Is there or is there not a value and merit in the 
sacrifice which the Church is invited to participate in, in 
harmony with the Apostle's words, "I beseech you therefore, 
brethren, by the mercies of God, that ye present your 
bodies a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto God, which 
is your reasonable service?"— Rom. 12:1. 

We are accustomed to say that we are saved from 



wrath and made the children of God, not for any work or 

merit or righteousness on our part, but purely, solely, by 

the grace, the favor, of God; and that any attempt on our 

part to proffer to the Lord good works, would be rejected 

by him, because as "children of wrath" we can do no work 

that God could accept, being sinners and under just condemnation. 

Hence the forgiveness of our sins, our reconciliation 

to the Father, must be purely and solely upon the 

grounds of Jesus' merit and sacrifice— his ransom sacrifice. 

This is all exactly true and just as we have presented 
it for years, and as we still hold and present it. This 
grace, this forgiveness, this reconciliation, is what we 
Scripturally term "justification by faith"— not by works! 
However, after being justified by faith, after being reckoned 
of God as freed from Adamic imperfection, through 
the applied merit of our Redeemer, we are on a new footing 
entirely, where we may do works acceptable to God, 
and, more than this, where we are required to do those 
works. Cancellation of sin, the legal covering of our 
blemishes, is made operative to us only when (acting upon 
our faith justification) we become followers of our 
Redeemer and covenant to walk in his steps. Then we 
received the begetting of the holy Spirit and started as 
embryo New Creatures, as prospective members of the 
Body of Christ, the Royal Priesthood. "No man taketh 
this honor unto himself, but he that is called of God, as 
was Aaron." (Heb. 5:4.) But when we responded to the 
Divine "call" and entered into a covenant of sacrifice with 
Christ (Psalm 50:5) to be dead with him, to suffer with 
him, and when the holy Spirit was received as God's acceptance 
of this contract, thenceforth works, self-denials, 
sufferings, faithful endurance, were expected, yea, were 
required. 

Everyone who thus becomes a branch in the True Vine 
obtains a possession without works, without merit of his 
own; but, having become a branch, it is required of him 
that he should bring forth fruit. Did not our Lord explain 
this matter, saying, "I am the true vine, and my Father 
is the husbandman. Every branch in me that beareth not 
fruit he taketh away (cuts it off from fellowship in the 
Vine); and every branch that beareth fruit, he purgeth it, 
that it may bring forth more fruit." (John 15:1,2.) So 
our justification was through faith a free gift from God 
through Christ Jesus our Lord; but from the moment of 
our sanctification it has been our privilege to bring forth 
fruit and to labor while it is called today and to be servants 
and ambassadors of God. We are God's servants doing 
a preparatory work in the interest of the New Covenant 
which God hath promised from long ago, and of which 
our Lord Jesus, at his death, became a surety or guarantor 
(Heb. 7:22), and which is soon to be sealed with the merit 

R4494: page 311 

of his sacrifice, "his blood," after it shall have served its 
present purposes of justifying the household of faith and 



thus giving them the opportunity of suffering with Christ 
and of entering into his glory. In a word, those justified 
by faith and sanctified in Christ Jesus are required to 
work out their own salvation with fear and trembling, 
while God works in them by his holy Spirit, the promises 
of his Word and his providences. 

There is, therefore, according to the Scriptures, in 
God's sight a labor, a work, a sacrifice, possible for the Church 
and a merit in the faithful performance thereof. Of our 
Lord Jesus it is written, "A body hast thou prepared me" 
"for the suffering of death." (Heb. 10:5.) The bodies of 
believers born in imperfection, by reason of the fall, are 
not fit for sacrifice. With our minds we desire to do the 
will of God, but our bodies are imperfect. Instead of preparing 
for us special bodies for sacrifice the Lord provides 
through Jesus' sacrifice a justifying merit which 
covers, in his sight, all the blemishes and imperfections 
of those who have the spirit of loyalty and obedience and 
who undertake the consecration vow as members of the 
Body of Christ. The Body of Jesus, specially prepared 
for the sacrifice, was holy, harmless, undefiled, separate 
from sinners. Our bodies are made holy and acceptable 
to God, not actually, nor by a covenant, nor by a 
mediator, but by a Redeemer, "through faith in his blood." 

The merit in our Lord was that of the willing mind, 
the obedient heart which delighted to do the Father's will, 
in the perfect body in which it was tested to "obedience 
even unto death, even to the death of the cross." With 
us also, the thing that is meritorious in the sight of the 
Father is the willing mind, the obedient heart, though in 
an imperfect body, reckoned perfect through faith in the 
precious blood. We are assured that our trial, our testing, 
will not be according to our flesh, but according to our 
renewed wills, minds, hearts. The various members of 
the Body of Christ vary greatly as respects physical conditions, 
blemishes, heredity, environment, etc. In every 
case the Divine tests are not to prove our flesh, which is 
conceded to be actually imperfect and unworthy, but 
which is ignored in this testing and counted dead. It is 
thus as New Creatures that God is testing, and to us he 
says, "Ye are [reckonedly] not in the flesh, but in the 
Spirit, if so be that the Spirit of God dwell in you." (Rom. 8:9.) 
And again, "Wherefore henceforth know we no 
man after the flesh." (2 Cor. 5:16.) God knows us according 
to the spirit, the will, the heart, the intent. 

R4495 : page 311 

It is the New Creature which does acceptable works 
which will be rewarded in the Kingdom. And the rewards 
will vary as shown by our Lord's parables of the Pounds 
and the Talents; and as shown in the Apostle's words, 
"As star differeth from star in glory, so also will be The 
Resurrection, the Church Resurrection. In conclusion 
then— as men we cannot commend ourselves to God by 
any works possible to us, because we are all imperfect and 



our works would be imperfect. But as new creatures our 
willing services and sacrifices are "holy and acceptable to 
God" and our reasonable service. 

OUR MERIT NOT DEMANDED BY JUSTICE 

If, then, it be true that the Church has a merit as a 
New Creation; that her sacrifice is holy and acceptable in 
the sight of God, why should we declare that all the merit 
of the redemptive plan is the merit of Jesus, and that no 
portion of that merit which secures the cancellation of 
the world's sin is from the Church? 

It is not because the sacrifice of the Church has no 
merit, but because that merit is not needed, and therefore 
not called for, in Divine arrangement, that it is not thus 
acceptable. Our Lord's sacrifice was a sufficient price for 
the sins of the whole world; and it pleased the Father to 
allow that one sacrifice to be efficacious for the sins of 
the whole world, instead of allowing merit of ours to 
commingle with it. The commingling of the merit 
of the Church with the merit of the Lord might 
be misunderstood by angels or men to signify that the 
merit of Jesus was insufficient and needed to be supplemented 
with the merit of the sacrifice of the Church. It 
was because not needed, because, in the Divine arrangement, 
only the one man, Adam, was on trial— only he was 
directly sentenced to death. None of his race was so 
sentenced. We all merely share in the effects of his death 
sentence. 

When in due time God sent forth his Son with a 
specially prepared body to be Adam's Redeemer, the merit 
of his sacrifice was sufficient as an offset for Adam's sin, 
and hence sufficient to cover all the effects of that sin in 
Adam's race. There was, therefore, in our Lord's sacrifice 
a sufficiency of merit for the sins of the whole world. 
Before using it for the world, before applying it for the 
sealing of the New Covenant, with Israel and all nations 
through Israel, our Lord Jesus, in harmony with the 
Divine program from before the foundation of the world, 
used this merit upon the household of faith, "Even as 
many as the Lord your God shall call." (Acts 2:39.) After 
giving us the benefit of it and requiring it of us again he 
(and we associated with him) will apply his merit on 
behalf of "all the people." We with him, and under him 
as our Head, will be the great Mediator between God and 
men— the world— the Mediator of the New Covenant of 
which we are now, with him, ministers and servants engaged 
in the preparatory operations. It pleased the Father, 
and therefore pleases all who are in harmony with him, 
that in our Lord Jesus all fulness should dwell— that the 
full credit of the redemptive work should thus be in him, 
and that the merit of our sacrificing should not be counted 
in, as it is not necessary. As all things are of the Father, 
so, according to his purpose, all things shall be of the 
Son, and we by him, and the world by him. 



"JESUS' BLOOD" AND "THE BLOOD OF THE NEW 
COVENANT" 

The Scriptures repeatedly mention the fact that we 
are justified by faith in his blood— in the blood of Jesus. 
They also speak of the blood of the Covenant wherewith 
we were sanctified." (Heb. 10:29.) And again in Hebrews 13:20,21 
we read, "Through the blood of the everlasting 
Covenant make you perfect." How shall we understand 
this? Do these Scriptures all three refer to the same thing? 

No, these Scriptures do not refer to the same thing. 
The first one relates to us as natural men, sinners, before 
we made our consecration to the Lord and became New 
Creatures. We, as members of the fallen race, were first 
justified by faith through the merit of Christ's blood. 
This justification lifted us from the plane of sin and death 
condemnation, to a standing with God of life and harmony. 
From this standpoint we were invited to become joint-sacrificers 
with Jesus Christ our Lord— sharers with him 
in his great work for mankind, namely, the sealing of the 
New Covenant with his blood, and ultimately the blessing 
of the world during the Millennium under the conditions 
of that New Covenant. So, then, it was after we had been 
justified by faith in the blood of Jesus that we were 
sanctified, set apart, consecrated through or in connection 
with "the blood of the New Covenant"— by our consecration 
to be dead with Christ, to be buried with him by 
baptism into his sacrificial death— to drink of his cup of 
suffering, ignominy, shame, death— to partake of or share 
his blood— set apart or devoted to the serving of the New 
Covenant for Israel and the world. It was on account of 
our entering into this great engagement that the Heavenly 
Father sanctified us or set us apart, separated us from the 
world by begetting us to a new nature through his holy 
Spirit. "Ye are not of the world, even as I am not of the 
world."— John 17:16. 

The text cited in the last question, "The blood of the 
everlasting Covenant make you perfect," refers not to a 
perfecting of the flesh— not to anything which refers to 
us as natural men. It refers to us as New Creatures who 
have been begotten of the holy Spirit because, after we 
were justified through faith in the blood of Jesus, we presented 
our bodies living sacrifices, holy and acceptable to 
God as part and parcel of our Lord Jesus' sacrifice and, 

R4495 : page 312 

under his Headship, to be associated with him in his sacrifice 
for the sealing of the New Covenant; and by and 
by to be associated with him in the glorious work of establishing 
that New Covenant, after it shall have been 
sealed for the blessing of Israel and the world. It is 
through our obedience to our Sacrificial Vow to "be dead 
with Christ" as joint-sacrificers in connection with the 
sealing of the New Covenant that we may become members 
of his Body, the Vine. It is this sacrificing with him 



which will make us perfect as New Creatures and give us 
a share with our Lord in his glory, honor and immortality. 
Thus we see that justification by faith in the blood of 
Jesus is the first step, by which believers separate themselves 
from the world according to the will of God; and 
that participation with our Lord in his sacrifice is the 
second step of sanctification. There could be no such 
step of sanctification, no perfecting as new creatures of 
the "divine nature" had it not been that God granted us 
the privilege of sharing with our Lord in his sacrificial 
death, in his work of sealing the New Covenant with his 
blood. 

The majority of Christians, of course, have gone no 
further than the first step of justification through faith in 
the blood of Jesus. Failing to go on, to "present their 
bodies living sacrifices" and to thus share with Christ in 
his sacrificial death, they are not privileged to understand 
"the mystery of God" (Rev. 10:7), which is "Christ in you 
the hope of Glory" (Col. 1:27)— your membership in the 
Body of Christ, your share with him in present sufferings 
and future glory. 

When the disciples James and John said to the Master, 
"Lord, grant that we may sit, one on thy right hand, and 
the other on thy left hand, in thy Kingdom," they were 
already consecrated, in the sense of agreeing to take up 
the cross to follow after Jesus in the narrow way. But 
the Father had not yet accepted their consecration, and 
set them apart, and did not do so until Pentecost. Our 
Lord Jesus, therefore, addressed them not as New Creatures, 
but as justified men, when he answered their request, 
saying, "Ye know not what ye ask! Can ye drink 
of the cup that I drink of and be baptized with the baptism 
(into sacrificial death) that I am baptized with?"— 
Mark 10:37,38. 

Here we see that drinking of the cup— drinking and 
partaking of the blood of the New Covenant shed for us 
and for all for the remission of sins and being baptized 
with Christ's baptism into a sacrificial death— was a wholly 
different matter from justification by faith. They were 
already justified by faith, but could not sit on the throne 
unless they would be sanctified by participation in Christ's 
death. 

ONE MEDIATOR, JESUS 

St. Paul declares that there is "one Mediator between 
God and men, the man Christ Jesus, who gave himself a 
ransom for all." (I. Tim. 2:5,6.) Should we understand this 
one Mediator, the man Christ Jesus, to refer to the complete 
Christ, Head and Body, as when the Apostle declares 
that the Church shall ultimately "come unto the 
full stature of a man in Christ?" (Eph. 4: 13.) And again 
he declares that God is selecting some from amongst the 
Jews and some from amongst the Gentiles, "that of the 
twain he might make one new man."— Eph. 2:15. 

We admit that such an interpretation as the question 



suggests has considerable force, and that much could be 
said in its favor, inasmuch as the Apostle tells us that 
God, who foreknew our Lord Jesus, foreknew us also, and 
hence foreknew the share he had provided for the Church 
in the "filling up of that which is behind of the afflictions 
of The Christ." 

However, this is not the interpretation of this text 
which appeals to the Editor as being probably the Apostle's 
thought. While the matter is concededly an open question, 
we prefer the thought that the Apostle by the words, 
"The man Christ Jesus, who gave himself," refers to our 
Lord Jesus personally and not at all to the Church, his 
Body. We hope to give in our next issue a thorough 
examination of this text. 

ABLE MINISTERS OF THE NEW COVENANT 

In what sense was our Lord Jesus "the Messenger of 
the Covenant" and in what sense are we the "able ministers 
(or messengers) of the New Covenant"?— Mai. 3:1; 
2 Cor. 3:8. 

Our Lord was the Messenger of the New Covenant 
by a divine promise. Israel was aware that their Law 
Covenant under its Mediator Moses had not brought to 

R4496 : page 312 

them the long-expected blessings implied in the Abrahamic 
Covenant. God had promised that at a future time he 
would make a New Covenant with them (Jer. 31:31), thus 
implying that they were right in not expecting much from 
the Law Covenant. Of course, a New Covenant would 
imply a new mediator for that Covenant. This Moses 
himself had foretold, saying, "A prophet (teacher, mediator) 
shall the Lord your God raise up unto you of your 
brethren like unto me" (but greater). (Acts 3:23.) They 
understood that this great Prophet or Mediator would be 
Messiah, and they consequently longed for and delighted in 
the prospect of his coming. 

This is the thought behind Malachi's prophecy, "He 
shall come, even the Messenger of the Covenant, whom 
ye delight in." Of course at that time our Lord had not 
yet become the messenger or servant of the Covenant, 
hence this was merely a prophecy respecting his future 
work. He became the Messenger or Servant of the New 
Covenant at Jordan, when he consecrated his all unto death 
as the ransom-price for the world (its application in due 
season). He there began to serve the New Covenant by 
providing the price, the blood, which should ultimately 
seal the New Covenant or make it effective. The laying 
down of his life was not the sealing of the Covenant, however, 
but merely a preparatory work. He there became 
the "surety" or guarantor that in due time the New 
Covenant would be sealed and made effective. In his sacrifice 
of himself our Lord was serving a Covenant not yet 
sealed, but merely promised or guaranteed. 



Similarly the Lord is now gathering his Church, a 
"little flock," to be members of the antitypical Prophet, 
Priest, King, Judge, Mediator between God and the world 
of mankind during the Millennium. These called, chosen, 
spirit-begotten, are "able ministers of the New Covenant," 
after the same manner as their Lord— walking in his steps. 
They minister or serve the New Covenant as an attorney 
serves in drawing up an agreement or Covenant. It will 
not be a Covenant until sealed, but, while it is in process 
of preparation it is spoken of as a Covenant and, in writing 
the agreement, the attorney is serving that agreement by 
putting it into shape, arranging for its sealing, etc. So 
Christ and his members are able or qualified ministers or 
servants of the New Covenant which God has promised 
and in which the hope of Israel and the world is centered. 

In what way do Christ and the Church now minister 
for or serve that New Covenant? In various ways: 

(1) In gathering the members of the Body of the 
great Mediator. 

(2) In learning and teaching to others the lessons 
necessary to qualify for the position. 

(3) In preparing the blood with which it is to be 
sealed— "his blood," "Jesus' blood," appropriated first to 
the Church and ultimately, after having served its purpose 
in the justification of the Church, to be passed on 

for the blessing of the world through the sealing of the 
New Covenant with Israel. 



BROOKLYN BETHEL HYMNS FOR NOVEMBER 

After the singing of the hymn the Bethel Family listens 
to the reading of "My Vow unto the Lord," then joins in 
prayer. At the breakfast table we consider the MANNA text: 
(1) 332; (2) 293; (3) 60; (4) 66; (5) 313; (6) 146; (7) 
52; (8) 4; (9) 5; (10) 162; (11) 79; (12) 222; (13) 291; 
(14) 209; (15) 130; (16) 279; (17) 93; (18) 325; (19) 
144; (20) 113; (21) 210; (22) 229; (23) 12; (24) 95; 
(25) 62; (26) 105; (27) 273; (28) 246; (29) 153; (30) 
24; (31) 315. 



R4496 : page 313 

THE ABRAHAMIC COVENANT NOT THE NEW COVENANT 

WHAT answer should we give to those who are now 

endeavoring to "teach" that the Abrahamic Covenant, 

which had no mediator, was merely a 

promise on God's part and not a Covenant at all? 

They claim that God's promise to Abraham was merely a 

preliminary statement and that the New Covenant was sealed 

and made effective by the death of our Lord Jesus, and that 

he, as the Mediator of the New Covenant, mediates first between 



God and the Church, and that during the Millennial 

Age, he will mediate further between God and the world of 

mankind. 

It seems scarcely worth while to make any answer at 
all to such an unreasonable and unscriptural presentation 
of the matter so far as "teachers" are concerned. However, 
bold statements and misapplied texts sometimes 
carry weight with the unstable and Scripturally unlearned; 
hence we feel justified in examining this question publicly. 
As for the claim that a promise is not a Covenant, 
that is doubtless true in a legal sense, as between men. 
So an attorney would say that a mere promise without 
consideration would be of no binding force in the human 
courts of law, because men's minds and plans are subject 
to change; and that any man may change his intentions 
and not be held responsible for his change, if there were 
no binding agreement or covenant or consideration given. 
But surely this is not true of any promise of God, who 
cannot lie, whose promise cannot be broken. God's promise, 
therefore, is most absolutely a covenant and binding 
agreement. All the weight of Divine veracity binds it. 
But, lest human weakness and unbelief should doubt the 
Divine Word, God condescended to make his promise a 
Covenant in the most binding and authoritative manner 
conceivable. He bound his promise with an oath. 

The Scriptures over and over again refer to God's 
words with Abraham, not only as a promise, but as a 
Covenant. As, for instance, before it was made, God 
said to Abraham, Come out of thine own land into a land 
that I will show thee, and I will make a Covenant with 
thee. It was in harmony with that promise that Abraham 
removed to the land of Canaan, where God declares that 
he did make a Covenant with him, to the effect that in 
his seed all the families of the earth should be blessed. 
The prophet tells us that that Covenant was confirmed 
three times to Abraham with an oath— again to Isaac and 
again to Jacob. (See Gen. 17:19; 22:18; 26:4; 28:14.) This 
which the Apostle styles The Promise (particular and 
special above all promises) is also called a Covenant thirteen 
times in the Book of Genesis alone, besides numerous other 
references which anyone can find with a concordance. 

It seems strange indeed that a desire to establish a 
theory could warp the judgment of any Christian Bible 
student to such an extent that he would endeavor to ignore 
the greatest of all imaginable Covenants on record— the 
Covenant on which all of our hopes as Christians depend. 
Hearken to the Apostle Paul's estimation of this Covenant 
as stated in Hebrews 6. Urging the Israelites to patience 
and faith that they might inherit the promises, St. Paul says, 
"For when God made promise to Abraham, because he could 
swear by no greater, he sware by himself,. ..for men 
verily swear by the greater and an oath for confirmation is 
the end of all strife. In this matter God, desiring more 
abundantly to show unto the heirs of the promise the immutability 
[the unchangeableness] of his counsel [or purpose], 
confirmed the promise by an oath; that by two immutable 



things, in which it is impossible for God to lie, we might have 
a strong consolation, who have fled for refuge to lay hold 
upon the hope set before us." The Apostle thus shows that 
the Abrahamic Covenant (without a mediator, because it was 
unconditional) was firmly bound in a manner that would be 
satisfactory even amongst men, namely, by an oath. 

How much more convincing is God's oath, making sure, 
unchangeable that basic Covenant made with Abraham, assuring 
the heirs of the promise ("us") that ultimately all mankind 
will receive a blessing, and that it would come through 
us. (Gal. 3:29.) The Apostle tells us that that oath was intended 
of God for us rather than for Abraham, to give us 
strong consolation, that we might lay hold firmly of the hope 
set before us in that promise— that Abrahamic Covenant. He 
adds (v. 19) that we have this hope as an anchor of the soul 
sure and steadfast within the veil, whither Jesus has entered 
as our forerunner, to whom we are approaching— as members 
to our Head. He is the Head of that Seed of promise. We, 
the members of his Body, will shortly follow him beyond the 
veil and share his glorious work of blessing the nations, beginning 
with Israel, under a New Covenant. We, as the 
adopted members of the Body of Christ, are directly the 
beneficiaries of the original Covenant, whose other features 
of blessing the world will all be worked out through us— 
under the New Covenant arrangement with Israel. 

Surely there is no consistency or reason in ignoring this 
great Oath-bound Covenant made in Abraham's day, consummated 
by the Divine oath. If it were not a Covenant, 
or if, as a Covenant, it was not ratified or made operative 
until the days of Jesus, why should the Apostle say that the 
Law Covenant was added to the Abrahamic Covenant 430 
years after the Abrahamic Covenant was made? Evidently 
St. Paul considered the Abrahamic Covenant well established, 
for he adds that the Law Covenant afterwards instituted 
could not disannul the Abrahamic Covenant (Gal. 3:17). 
It must have been a thoroughly completed Covenant, 
firmly bound with the Divine oath, else the statement that it 
could not be disannulled would be an untruth. 

Hearken again to St. Paul's discussion of the matter with 
the Galatians. He says, "This I say, that the Covenant, that 
was confirmed ("previously ratified"— Strong's Lexicon) before 
of God in Christ, the Law [Covenant], which was four 
hundred and thirty years after, cannot disannul, that it should 
make the promise of none effect." As showing the inferiority 
of the Law Covenant in comparison to the Old (original) 
Abrahamic Covenant, St. Paul tells us (Gal. 4:22-31) that 
Abraham's two wives, Sarah and Hagar, were allegorical; 
that the son of Sarah represented The Christ, the Church, 
Head and Body, while the son of Hagar represented the 
nation of fleshly Israel. He says, "Which things are an 
allegory: for these are the two Covenants; the one from the 

R4497 : page 313 

Mount Sinai, which gendereth to bondage, which is Hagar, 
which corresponds to Jerusalem which now is, and is in bondage 



with her children." On the contrary, he declares that 
Sarah corresponds to Jerusalem which is above and free, 
the mother of us all. He adds, "We, brethren, as Isaac was, 
are the children of the promise." (V. 28.) It required nearly 
seventeen centuries for the development of Hagar's son, 
Fleshly Israel, under the Law Covenant. The Son of Sarah 
[the original or Abrahamic Covenant], has already been more 
than eighteen centuries in process of development. Through 
him all nations shall be blessed. He secured earthly-life-rights 
by his obedience; he sacrificed or laid these down at 
Calvary; he during this age has made them available to his 
"Body," and soon will again have laid them down sacrificially. 
Then he will be ready to give them as a legacy to Natural 
Israel and the world.— Rom. 11:31. 

Israel realized the value of this Covenant made with 
Abraham: it constituted the basis of all their hopes and faith 
and trust. They supposed that the Law Covenant needed to 
be added to it, and therefore they accepted it as an amendment; 
but they continually trusted, hoped, in the original 
Covenant, as St. Paul says, "Unto which promise our twelve 
tribes, instantly serving God, hope yet to come." (Acts 26:7.) 
It was after Israel had become discouraged with their inability 
to keep the Law that God encouraged them, by assuring 
them that he would make a New Covenant with them, 
which would operate more favorably— more to their advantage. 
And so he will. By the end of this Gospel Age, after 
having selected the Spiritual Seed of Abraham, the New 
Covenant with Israel will go into effect. As it is written, 
"This is my Covenant with them, when I shall take away 
their sins. The Deliverer (Mediator, Prophet, Priest, King) 
shall come out of Sion (the Gospel Church) and shall turn 
away ungodliness from Jacob (natural Israel)."— 
Rom. 11:26,27. 

Undoubtedly then we may assure all who have the hearing 
ear, that the Gospel Church is not the seed of two 
mothers or Covenants, but of one, and that that one is the 
Sarah Covenant, the old, original, oath-bound Covenant. 
Sarah had but one child, Isaac, who typified The Christ, 
Head and Body— the heir of all. "We, brethren, as Isaac 

R4497 : page 314 

was, are the children of the promise"— heirs of the great 
privilege of blessing all the families of the earth, as members 
of the great antitypical Mediator of Israel's New Law Covenant, 
which will displace and supersede the old Law Covenant. 

"AFTER THOSE DAYS I WILL MAKE A NEW 
COVENANT" 

In Jeremiah 31:33 we read, "after those days," as setting 
a date for the New Covenant. Why is this? And what days 
must precede the making of the New Covenant? 

God foretold that if Israel would be faithful he would 
bless them in every sense of the word, but that if they would 
walk contrary to him, he would walk contrary to them and 



chastise them "seven times for their sins." (Lev. 26:28.) 
This expression in this connection is, with variations, repeated 
three times. In one instance the word "MORE" is used. "I 
will chastise you seven times more for your sins." The 
Hebrew word rendered more, according to Strong's translation, 
would properly be rendered "continuously." 

This threat of punishment we interpret to mean, not 
that the Lord would give Israel seven times as much punishment 
as they should have, but that he would punish them 
seven times (seven years) more (continuously) for their sins. 
These seven times or seven years were not literal years 
surely, for they received more punishment than that on numerous 
occasions. The seven times we interpret as symbolical 
years, in harmony with other Scriptures— a day for a year, 
on the basis of three hundred and sixty days to a year. Thus 
the seven times would mean 7 x 360, which equals 2520 literal 
years. And the word more or continuously would signify that 
this period of 2520 years would not be the sum of all their 
various years of chastisement at various "times," but this 
experience of 2520 years of national chastisement would be 
one continuous period. 

Next we should ask, Has there been such a continuous 
period of disfavor in Israel's national history? The answer 
is, Yes. In the days of Zedekiah, the last king to sit upon 
the throne of the kingdom of the Lord, the Word of the 
Lord concerning the matter was, "O, thou profane and 
wicked prince, whose time has come that iniquity should 
have an end: Take off the diadem! Remove the crown! 
I will overturn, overturn, overturn it [the crown, the kingdom] 
until he comes whose right it is, and I will give it unto 
him." (Ezek. 21:25-27.) This period of 2520 years, or seven 
symbolic times, will expire, according to our reckoning 
(DAWN-STUDIES, Vol. II., Chap. IV.) in October, 1914. In other 
words, the period of Gentile times, of Gentile supremacy in 
the world, is the exact parallel to the period of Israel's loss 
of the kingdom and waiting for it at the hands of Messiah. 

Messiah at his First Advent found them unready as a 
nation to be his bride, to share with him as the Spiritual Seed 
of Abraham, and it has required, as God foreknew and foretold, 
all of this intervening period to select Spiritual Israel, the 
royal priesthood, the "holy nation," the "peculiar people," the 
Body of Christ, the Body of the Mediator between God and 
mankind. 

These are the "days" referred to in Jeremiah's prophecy 
respecting the New Covenant, "after those days"— after the 
"seven times" of Israel's chastisement will come the time of 
God's favor under the New Covenant, with its better Mediator 
—the great prophet, Priest, Mediator, Judge and King- 
Jesus the Head and the Church his Body, Jesus the Bridegroom, 
and the Church his Bride and joint-heir. 

Note how this corresponds to a nicety with St. Paul's 
explanation in Romans XL He points to the fact that all of 
God's blessings were in the Abrahamic Covenant, which as 
a root had developed Israel as a nation— the seed of Abraham 
according to the flesh. The living Israelites were branches 
of that olive tree (vs. 16-21). Had they been in the right heart 



condition, "Israelites indeed," they would as a whole have 
been accepted by Christ as his members— allowed to remain 
members or branches in the olive tree, which represented 
Abraham's Spiritual Seed. But they were not ready, and 
hence all except the few who became Spiritual Israelites were 
broken off, because of unbelief. During this Gospel Age the 
places of the broken off branches have been filled by called 
and chosen ones of every nation, people, kindred and tongue. 
Thus Spiritual Israel has become the "holy nation" or kingdom 
class, under the headship of Messiah, as his prospective 
Bride or Body or Royal Priesthood. 

The Apostle reminds us (vs. 25-29) that Israel's rejection 
from Divine favor is not perpetual, but merely in respect to 
this High Calling to membership in the Spiritual Seed of 
Abraham, membership in the Body of Messiah, the great 
antitypical Prophet, Priest, Mediator, King, who, when complete 
in the end of this age, will begin the great work of 
blessing all the families of the earth. The Apostle assures 
us that in the Divine Plan Israel will have a share in that 
work of blessing the world, but on a lower plane than that 
of the Spiritual Seed. They, as the natural seed of Abraham, 
will be the first to receive blessings from the glorified 
Mediator under the New Covenant which will be made directly 
with that nation, as foretold by the Prophet Jeremiah (3 1:3 1) 
—"after those days" of the sealing of that Covenant by the 
great Mediator with his blood. 

St. Paul refers directly to this New Covenant to be made 
with Israel at the end of this age (v. 27), saying, "This is 
my Covenant unto them (natural Israel), when I shall take 
away their sins." (Rom. 11:27.) The taking away of their 
sins is a necessity for them, before they can receive this New 
Covenant, because God makes no Covenant with sinners. 
Israel's sins were not cancelled by our Lord when he ascended 
up on high and appeared in the presence of God for us— 
according to the type sprinkling the blood on the Mercy Seat 
for the sins of those for whom it was applied— us, "the household 
of faith"— not them, not Israel in the flesh, nor any 
others, than "us." 

According to the type a second sin-offering was to be 
made; "the Lord's goat" was also to be sacrificed by the 
Priest and its blood sprinkled upon the Mercy Seat, not for 
the household of faith, but "for all the people." That Lord's 
goat, as we have seen, typified the Church, the Body of 
Christ, made acceptable for sacrifice through the merit of 
Christ's blood and sacrificed by our High Priest throughout 
this Gospel Age. We delight in this sacrifice and "present our 
bodies living sacrifices, holy, acceptable to God, and our reasonable 
service," because we are assured that if we suffer 
with him, and be dead with him in his sacrificial death, we 
shall also live with him and reign with him in his Mediatorial 
Kingdom, which will bless Israel and the world.— Rom. 12:1. 

This same expression, "after those days," occurs in 
connection with Joel's prophecy of the outpouring of the 
holy Spirit. Through him the Lord declares the ultimate 
pouring out of the Divine blessing, the holy Spirit, upon all 
flesh; but he informs us that it will be "after those days." 



It is still future; hence here is another evidence that this expression, 

"after those days," signifies after the completion 

of the work of the selection of the Church— the Bride of the 

Messiah— the Mediator, the Christ. The Lord proceeds to 

say through the prophet that his holy Spirit would first be 

poured out upon his special servants and handmaidens, "during 

those days." And it has been so: ever since Pentecost, 

the holy Spirit has been for the servants and handmaidens of 

the Lord, and for no others. It cannot reach the others— 

the world of mankind in general— until "after those days." 

The same thought is expressed by the Apostle when he says 

that "our Lord is a propitiation [a satisfaction] for our sins 

[the Church's sins— throughout this Gospel Age], and not 

for ours only, but also for the sins of the whole world" [in 

due time].— I John 2:2. 

R4498 : page 314 

This secondary application of the merit of our Lord upon 
the Mercy Seat, on behalf of the world, corresponds to the 
second sprinkling of the blood on the Atonement Day— "the 
blood of the Lord's goat"— "his own blood" "on behalf of all 
the people," sealing for them, consummating, the New 
Covenant. 

Why has the New Covenant been so long delayed? We 
reply that, although it was promised centuries before Christ, 
it did not become an assured fact until our Lord Jesus died. 
His death was sufficient to have sealed that New Covenant 
and at once to have brought in restitution blessings 
to Israel, and through Israel to the world in general, if the 
Redeemer, when he ascended on high, had so applied the 
merit of his sacrifice. But it is evident that he did not so 
apply it; first, by the fact that Israel's restitution did not 

R4498 : page 315 

begin there, and has not begun yet, and will not begin until 
"after those days." Secondly, it is proven by the other fact 
that the merit of Christ's sacrifice, which was not given to 
Israel for the sealing of Israel's New [Law] Covenant, was 
given to another class, to a new nation, to Spiritual Israel, 
and has been applicable to and brought manifest blessings to 
her during all these centuries of the Gospel Age. 

So, then, in the Scriptural language, that which our Lord 
did do in connection with the promised New Covenant between 
God and Israel at his first advent, was that he became 
a "surety" and guarantee for its later fulfilment. (Heb. 7:22.) 
From that time, therefore, the New Covenant may be considered 
as assured or legislated or guaranteed, but not put 
into force, because, as the Apostle declares, a testament or 
will is of no binding force until the death of the testator. 
In harmony with the Divine Plan the Redeemer applied the 
merit of his sacrifice to a special class "called" and "drawn of 
the Father" during this Gospel Age, to be members, to join 
with him in his sacrifice. These were to receive of his fulness, 
his merit, as the atonement for their sins, and then they 



were to drink of his blood or share in his death, that his 
blood or the merit of his sacrifice might as a blessing pass 
through them and permit them by sacrificing restitution blessings 
to attain the divine nature and glory. (2 Peter 1:4.) 
None of these may keep the blessing of restitution privileges. 
Each was obliged in advance to pledge his life in sacrifice 
with his Lord before his final acceptance and begettal of the 
holy Spirit to joint-heirship with the Head in his glory, honor 
and immortality. So then the reason that the New Covenant 
promised in Jeremiah's day and assured by our Lord's death 
has not yet gone into effect and become operative in restitution 
blessings to Israel and the world is, that the death of the 
testator has not yet been fully accomplished; for the testator, 
through whom Israel will get that great blessing of the New 
Covenant, is not our Lord Jesus alone, but The Christ, Head 
and Body. 

To this agree the words of the Apostle again, namely, that 
natural Israel will "obtain mercy through your [Spiritual 
Israel's] mercy." (Rom. 11:31.) The laying down of the 
restitution rights received by us from the Lord through faith 
in his blood is our sacrifice of the same, the dying of the 
Testator's Body. (2 Cor. 4:10.) Israel is to be the beneficiary 
of this testament, this legacy, this will, the merit of 
which is all as Jesus said, "in his blood," in his cup, which 
we must drink. 

BAPTIZED INTO MOSES--BAPTIZED INTO CHRIST 

If the Church are to be members of the great Mediator, why 
are not Israel, who were baptized into Moses, (I Cor. 10:1,2) 
thus made members of the Mediator of the Law Covenant? 

The Divine arrangement which used Moses, Aaron, the 
tribe of Levi and all Israel as types is complex, so that the 
unlearned and unstable are in danger of wresting them to 
their own injury. Whoever will begin with the Passover 
type of the deliverance of the first-born and proceed with the 
history of the typical people down to the time when they 
entered Canaan and then turn to the death of Christ as the 
antitypical Passover lamb and attempt to parallel the experiences 
of the Church and the world with the experiences 
of Israel, will find himself thoroughly confused until he comes 
to understand that in Israel a number of types mingled and 
overlapped. 

For instance: Recognizing the Passover lamb as typical 
of our Lord Jesus and his death; and recognizing the first-born 
of Israel spared "in that night" as typical of Spiritual 
Israel, we know that "that night" typified this Gospel Age. 
We know also that the following morning typified the Millennial 
morning. The deliverance of Israel through the Red 
Sea would therefore seemingly typify the final deliverance 
of the whole world of mankind from the bondage of sin and 
death, typified by Pharaoh and his army. Similarly the overthrow 
of Pharaoh's army would seemingly represent the ultimate 
destruction of Satan and every evil influence at the close 
of the Millennial Age. That was the end of that type. 

With the end of that type another began; for the march 



of Israel toward Mt. Sinai, where they entered into covenant 
relationship with the Lord, typified the approach of the Gospel 
Church and of the whole world to the condition of things 
pictured by St. Paul in Hebrews 12— the end of this Age, 
and a time of trouble and the establishment of the New [Law] 
Covenant with Israel for the blessing of all the families of 
the earth. And following this, the wilderness journey constitutes 
still another type representing God's people and the 
failure of many to enter into his rest, because of lack of faith. 
Subsequently the smiting of the rock by Moses and his not 
being permitted to enter the promised land is yet another type. 
The crossing of Jordan is still another type. The appointment 
of Joshua, the new leader, instead of Moses, is still 
another type. The falling of the walls of Jericho is still 
another type. Israel's conquering the various enemies in the 
land of Canaan is still another type. 

Coming back now to the first-mentioned of these types— 
the one which began with the killing of the Passover lamb, 
the sprinkling of its blood, the eating of its flesh during "that 
night" in which the firstborns were passed over and spared— 
we notice that the feature of the type which has to do with 
"the Church of the Firstborn" and this Gospel Age was passed 
before the time when the Israelites as a nation were baptized 
into Moses in the sea and in the cloud. Consequently that 
baptism into Moses evidently pictured, not the baptism of the 
Church of the Firstborn into Christ's death, but the baptism 
of the whole world of mankind into Christ's life during the 
Millennium. 

The Church passes from justification of life into sacrificial 
death with the Lord to become members of the Mediator's 
"Body." But the Israelites passed through the sea 
and the cloud, not into death, but into liberty— into freedom 
as a nation. That baptism into Moses evidently therefore 
represented the deliverance of the groaning creation into the 
liberty wherewith Christ proposes to make free all who will 
come unto him in response to his drawing during the Millennial 
Age. Thus the Apostle tells us that, as Jesus already 
is the Head of the Church, which is his Body, so ultimately 
he will be the Head of all creation, because it is the will of 
God "to gather together in one all things under one Head."— 
Eph. 1:10. 

This we have sought to illustrate in the Chart of the 
Ages in DAWN-STUDIES, Vol. I. In the pyramid of that chart 
we show our Lord Jesus the Head, the Church his Body, the 
Great Company, Fleshly Israel restored, and ultimately all nations 
brought under the one Headship. The same thought 
that the world will become Christ's in the possessive sense is 
expressed by St. Paul. When telling of the resurrection he 
says, "There shall be a resurrection of the dead, both of the 
just and of the unjust— Christ the firstfruits; afterwards they 
that are his at (during) his presence." (I Cor. 15:23.) The 
Apostle expresses the same thought that the world will be 
brought under the control and under the name of Christ, saying, 
"In whom the whole family of God, both in heaven and 
in earth, is named."— Eph. 3:15. 

So then in this type of Israel's being baptized into Moses 



we have a suggestion of what belongs to the Millennial Age, 
but no suggestion whatever appertaining to the Church of 
the Firstborn during this Age— no suggestion of a baptism 
into Christ's sufferings and death. Indeed, nowhere in that 
type is the association between the Head and the members 
shown. It merely pictures to us the Lamb of God slain, and 
our privilege of being spared or passed over from death into 
life in this Gospel Age— before the general deliverance of 
mankind from the power of sin and death. 

MUST ADAM FIRST BE REDEEMED? 

Accepting the Scriptural presentation that "By one man's 
disobedience sin entered into the world, and death as a result 
of sin, and thus death passed upon all men, for that all 
are sinners" (Rom. 5:12-19); accepting also the declaration 
of Scripture, "As by man came death, by man also comes 
the resurrection of the dead" (I Cor. 15:21); also the assurance 
that "As all in Adam die, even so all in Christ shall be 
made alive" (I Cor. 15:22), shall we understand that Adam 
must first be redeemed and atoned for before any of his 
children can receive reconciliation? If so, should we understand 
that Adam was included amongst the believers, the 
household of faith, on whose behalf Jesus, our great High 
Priest, appeared and made satisfaction for sin when he appeared 
in the presence of God for us? 

R4498 : page 316 

Most assuredly we should not! St. Paul did not mention 
Adam in his list of Ancient Worthies in Hebrews 1 1 . On the 
contrary, our expectation for Adam is that as a man of the 
world class, "all people," his sin will be atoned for in the 
end of this age, when the great High Priest shall antitypically 
sprinkle his blood on the Mercy Seat for the sins of 
the whole world, "all the people," as at the beginning of this 
age he made atonement for our sins— the Church's. Our 
expectation also is that Father Adam will be one of the last 

R4499 : page 316 

to be awakened from the sleep of death and be brought forth 
to the privileges, blessings, opportunities and testings of the 
Millennial Age. 

Our thought is that the restitution blessings will begin 
with the generation living at the time of the inauguration of 
the Mediator's Kingdom; that it will deal first with these and 
bring them to a measure of recuperation before beginning 
with any of those who sleep in the dust of the earth; and 
further that those of the sleepers who went down into death 
most recently will be the first to come up, while those who 
went down first will be the last to come up. In other words, 
the first shall be last and the last shall be first. Our thought 
is that quite probably the awakenings of the world will be in 
response to the prayers of their friends during the Millennium; 
and that those living at any time will be specially interested 



in praying for such as were their acquaintances or 
relatives. We can see no reason why Father Adam should 
take any precedence in connection with the work of redemption. 
While it is true that he was the man through whom 
sin and death entered the world, nevertheless amongst the 
thousands of millions of his children he has no pre-eminence 
in the sight of Justice, whose record respecting humanity we 
understand to be: One man's sin— penalty, Death. 

Likewise, although our Lord Jesus is the one who paid 
our penalty, yet Justice in her records would probably 
take no particular note of that fact, but would merely enter 
the record, One holy, harmless, undefiled man died and made 
appropriation of the merit of his death for the household of 
faith. Later we may assume the records of Justice read, The 
merit of the one man who died, the Just for the unjust, which 
was appropriated to "the household of faith," having been laid 
down again sacrificially, is now applied again— this time "on 
behalf of all the people" not included in the first application. 

The sacrifice of the man Christ Jesus was sufficient for 
the sins of the whole world, and that ultimately it will be 
made available for the cancellation of the sins of the world 
is because Justice in the condemnation merely sentenced 
Father Adam as a man and has paid no attention to his children 
in the way of separate condemnation, but counted them 
all as members of the one man. Hence the death of Jesus 
could have been applied for anyone of Adam's race, or for any 
number of them, or for all of them, including Adam. And 
this last will be the ultimate result. 



R4499 : page 316 

A CONSCIENCE VOID OF OFFENSE 

-ACTS 24.-OCTOBER 17.- 

Golden Text:— "Herein do I exercise myself, to have always 
a conscience void of offense towards God and towards men." 

FELIX, the Roman governor, received St. Paul a prisoner. 
His enemies, the high priest and other Jewish 
rulers, hastened from Jerusalem to Caesarea, thirsting 
for his blood. They brought with them a Roman 
lawyer, Tertullus. His knowledge of Roman usage and his 
skill as a pleader would, they hoped, enable them to prove 
that St. Paul was a dangerous character— a sort of anarchist. 
Felix was the judge. There were no jurors. Tertullus made 
his charges and confirmed them by witnesses from Jerusalem. 

Shrewdly the Roman attorney complimented the governor 
along the lines of his hitherto efficiency in preserving the 
peace and putting down every form of insurrection and maintaining 
quiet and order. This very completely paved the way 
for the lawyer's request that the governor should continue 
this praiseworthy course and rid the land of an obnoxious 
trouble-maker— the Apostle. Witnesses were produced who 



testified respecting the first tumult in the temple and also respecting 
the one of the following day in which the Sanhedrin 
became divided into two parts, and a general uproar ensued. 
The Apostle was credited with being a ringleader of a sect 
called Nazarenes, and it was claimed that he made trouble 
the whole world over amongst both Jews and Greeks. 

This was his case. He charged that the prisoner was 
guilty of sacrilege— that he had defiled the temple, and the 
inference was deducible that he had caused rioting within the 
holy sanctuary. The witnesses were produced to prove that 
these charges were true. 

The governor motioned to the Apostle that he was at 
liberty to answer the charges. St. Paul opened his defense 
by remarking that he was gratified that his judge had been 
on the bench for some time and was well acquainted with 
Jewish customs; that he would understand, therefore, what 
a novice could not, why the Apostle had come to Jerusalem 
to worship after the manner of the Jews, to celebrate one of 
their religious festivals. He came not to raise an insurrection, 
but to worship, and no witness had testified, nor was it 
true, that he was found in the temple even disputing or 
gathering a crowd; neither did he do these things in the 
synagogues, nor anywhere; neither could his enemies prove 
the things of which they accused him. This, his answer, was 
logical and complete. Still the governor could not understand 
why there should be such a commotion under the circumstances; 
hence it was necessary for the Apostle to explain 
that the Jews had an antipathy against him, because of his 
different belief and not because of any wrongdoing. 

"A RESURRECTION OF THE JUST AND UNJUST" 

St. Paul avowed that he had experienced no change in 
his Jewish belief— that he still believed the teachings of the 
Law and the writings of the prophets; and that he still held 
to the fundamental Jewish doctrine of the necessity of a resurrection 
of the dead, and that thereby God's blessing should 
ultimately come to Israel and through Israel to all the families 
of the earth. And, continued the Apostle, I exercise 
myself, discipline myself, train myself, to keep my conscience 
pure, free from violation of Divine and human laws. This 
was a grand testimony. The force of it should have had 
weight, not only with the governor and the prosecuting attorney, 
but also with the Jews, who murderously sought the 
Apostle's life, because of a little difference of opinion on 
religious questions. What a lesson we have here! A Roman 
governor and judge of not too savory a reputation; a prosecuting 
attorney willing, regardless of justice, to sell his 
talents for money; the Jewish high priest, typical of the great 
Messiah, associating himself with those who were endeavoring 
to pervert justice and to destroy one "of the sale of the 
earth"! 

Our Lord foretold that some of his disciples would stand 
before kings and princes, but that they should not be dismayed, 
for he would stand by them to give them aid. 
How literally this was fulfilled in St. Paul's case! How evidently 



the Lord stood by him and gave him the suitable words! 
He proceeded to explain that he brought alms to his nation, 
the offerings of Gentiles, who had heard his message of the 
grace of God. Certain Jews from Asia found him purified in 
the temple, but without cry or tumult. Those Jews should 
have been brought as witnesses, or those who were making 
the charges against him should have been specific— should 
have said what he did tumultuously in the temple, or what 
wrongdoing they found in him on the day following the 
mob, when before the Sanhedrin. Only one thing could they 
charge, namely, that he cried out while standing amongst 
them, "Touching the resurrection of the dead I am called in 
question this day." Surely the governor could not think 
that in this there was anything akin to rioting or anarchy. 
The prisoner had been quite in the right, while those accusing 
him had been in the wrong. 

R4499 : page 317 

The Apostle's testimony shows us that in all of his 
preaching he laid special stress upon the doctrine of the 
resurrection of the dead— the just and the unjust. Alas, that 
in our day this doctrine has been measurably lost sight of. 
Few Christians ever think of the resurrection. Few have 
ever heard a sermon on that subject. Why is this? We 
reply that it is because a great error has come in amongst 
Christian people in respect to the condition of the dead. 
According to both Catholics and Protestants only the saintly 
are fit for heaven at death. Both agree that only finished 
characters could properly be admitted there. Both agree to 
our Lord's words respecting the Kingdom, "Few there be 
that find it." Our Catholic friends tell us that nearly all 
heathens, Catholics and Protestants go to Purgatory, where 
terrible sufferings for centuries will purge them of sin and 
prepare them for heaven. Many Protestant friends tell us 
that they do not see even this hope— that from their standpoint 
only the "little flock" go to heaven, and all the great 
mass of mankind, unprepared for the presence of God, must 
be sent somewhere and that the only place for them is a hell 
of eternal torture, from which there will be no escape. We 
need not quarrel with either party. Both views are too horrible 
to be reasonable or just, not to mention loving! 

We prefer to go back to the words of Jesus and the 
Apostles and to note that, according to their teachings, the 
dead are really dead and that their only hope is, as the 
Apostle expresses it, a resurrection hope, "the hope of the 
resurrection of the dead, both of the just and of the unjust." 
It is not the resurrection of the body that the Bible teaches, 
but a resurrection of the soul, and that "God will give it a 
body" at the time of the awakening. (I Cor. 15:38.) We 
could wish that all Christian people would arouse themselves 
to a fresh study of the Scriptures: that the doctrine of the 
resurrection of the dead should be given its proper place: and 
that thus much of the fog of "the dark ages" might be gotten 
rid of— fog which has troubled us, saddened our hearts and 
turned many away from God and the Bible— into infidelity. 



R4500 : page 317 
RIGHTEOUSNESS, TEMPERANCE, COMING JUDGMENT 

The governor-judge, after hearing both sides, set aside 
the case until Lysias, who made the arrest, should be heard. 
Meantime St. Paul was given great liberty, the real status 
of his case being evidently quite clearly understood by the 
governor. 

Subsequently Felix, evidently much impressed by the 
Apostle's demeanor, called for him again at a time when his 
wife, a Jewess, was present. He wished her to hear the 
Gospel message, which somehow seems to have appealed to 
him as reasonable. St. Paul doubtless reviewed much of his 
previous testimony, and then reasoned respecting a coming 
judgment or trial— that eternal destinies are not fixed, as a 
result of the present life. Assuredly he pointed out that 
God had appointed a day of trial or judgment for the world 
of mankind— the Millennial day, a thousand years long. 
In it the whole world of mankind shall have a full trial 
as to worthiness or unworthiness of perfection and life 
everlasting. The obedient shall be blessed, uplifted, raised up, 
up to perfection. The wilfully disobedient shall be destroyed 
in the Second Death. If then the trial of the world is in the 
future age, and if in the present time God is merely electing 
or selecting the Church to be the Bride of his Son and his 
Joint-Heir in the Kingdom, which is to bless the world, how 
could these matters have any special influence upon Felix and 
his wife? In two ways: 

(1) It might influence them to accept Christ and seek 
to be of the "elect" Church. 

(2) Knowing of their future trial they should know also 
that the words and deeds of the present life have much to 

do with the status of the individual when awakened from the 

tomb. The vicious, the hypocritical, the self-righteous, the 

wanton, the profligate, degrade themselves and increase the 

number of steps that will be before them in the Millennium. 

On the contrary, every good deed, every victory gained, 

every practice of moderation, would make the individual correspondingly 

the better prepared for the next life. Every 

generous deed of the present life makes its impress upon the 

character and will bring proportionate blessings in that Millennial 

Judgment Day. On the contrary, every evil deed, 

every violation of conscience, will surely receive its "stripes" 

or just punishments. 

As Felix listened he was conscience-stricken. According 
to this theory he would have much to give account for as 
one of the "unjust" in the resurrection. The Apostle said 
nothing about fiery tortures, which an intelligent mind must 
repudiate as unreasonable, but his argument was all the 
stronger without these. His forceful argument was, "A just 
recompense of reward, both for the just and the unjust." The 
Apostle was dismissed with the memorable words, "Go thy 
way for this time; when I have a more convenient season I 
will call thee." Time and again Felix called for the Apostle, 



but never apparently did he find his heart in a sufficiently 

mellow and humble condition to accept the Apostle's message 

and surrender to the Lord. A lesson in this connection for 

us all is that we should do promptly whatever we realize to 

be our duty. St. Paul remained a prisoner two years, comfortably 

provided for, preparing for the further services of 

his important life, and writing several epistles. 



R4500 : page 317 

BRO. RUSSELL'S ITINERARY THROUGH MARITIME PROVINCES 

Lv. Boston, Mass., Thursday, Oct. 7 

(Dom.At.S.S.Co.) 1:00 p.m. 

Arr. Yarmouth, N.S., Friday, " 8 

(Dom.At.S.S.Co.) 7:00 a.m. 

Lv. Yarmouth, N.S., Saturday, " 9 

(Dom.At.R.R.) 9:40 a.m. 

Arr. Middleton, N.S., Saturday, " 9 

(Dom.At.R.R.) 1:16 p.m. 

Lv. Middleton, N.S., Saturday, " 9 

(Dom.At.R.R.) 2:48 p.m. 

Arr. Berwick, N.S., Saturday, " 9 

(Dom.At.R.R.) 3:31 p.m. 

Lv. Berwick, N.S., Saturday, " 9 

(Dom.At.R.R.) about 9:30 p.m. 

Arr. Truro, N.S., Saturday, " 9 

(Dom.At.R.R.) about 12:00night 

Lv. Truro, N.S., Monday, " 11 

(Intercol.R.R.) 6:00 a.m. 

Arr. Halifax, N.S., Monday, " 11 

(Intercol.R.R.) 8:45 a.m. 

Lv. Halifax, N.S., Monday, " 11 

(Intercol.R.R.) 5:00 p.m. 

Arr. Sydney, C.B.I., Tuesday, " 12 

(Intercol.R.R.) 5:30 a.m. 

Lv. Sydney, C.B.I., Tuesday, " 12 

(Intercol.R.R.) 11:30 p.m. 

Arr. Pictou, N.S., Wednesday, " 13 

(Intercol.R.R.) 8:30 a.m. 

Lv. Pictou, N.S., Wednesday, " 13 

(Str. Northumberland) 4:20 p.m. 

Arr. Charlottetown, P.E.I., Wednesday, " 13 

(Str. Northumberland) about 8:30 p.m. 

Lv. Charlottetown, P.E.I., Friday, " 15 

(P.E.I.R.R.) 7:45 a.m. 

Arr. St. John, N.B., Friday, " 15 

(Intercol.R.R.) 5:20 p.m. 

Lv. St. John, N.B., Saturday, " 16 

(Maine Cent.R.R.) 6:25 a.m. 

Arr. Boston, Mass., Saturday, " 16 

(Maine Cent.R.R.) 9:00 p.m. 

Lv. Boston, Mass., Sunday, " 17 

(B.&A.R.R.) 8:30 a.m. 



Arr. Worcester, Mass., Sunday, " 17 

(B.&A.R.R.) 9:36 a.m. 



R4500 : page 318 

PREACHING CHRIST TO THE RULERS 

-ACTS 25:6; 26:32.-OCTOBER 24.- 

Golden Text:— "I know whom I have believed and am 
persuaded that he is able to keep that which I have 
committed unto him against that day."— 2 Tim. 1:12. 

THE Roman governor, Felix, of Judea, was succeeded 
by Festus, and, willing to curry favor with the Jews, 
he left Paul a prisoner, although confessedly he had 
found him not guilty of any infraction of the Roman 
law and was persuaded that his enemies were frantically 
jealous of him. The two years of St. Paul's imprisonment 
doubtless afforded excellent opportunities for his mature study 
of the Divine Plan set forth in the Scriptures. 

Festus, the new governor, went at once to Jerusalem, the 
center of his province, there to become acquainted with the 
chief men of the people, amongst whom he must preside as 
governor and judge. St. Paul's enemies were on the alert 
to accomplish against him through the new governor what 
they failed to do with Felix. However, after setting forth 
the arguments of Tertullus to prejudice his mind, they feared 
to have a trial before him, because of the weakness of their 
cause. Hence they proposed to Festus that after all the 
dispute with St. Paul was more along religious than civil 
lines, and that therefore the desirable thing would be that 
he should be delivered to the Sanhedrin at Jerusalem for 
trial, according to the Jewish law, and drop the charges 
against him before the Roman Court. Meantime the plans 
had been matured whereby in the name of God and religion 
and the "good of the cause" the Apostle was to be assassinated 
on the journey. Alas that such criminal injustice cannot be 
charged against the Jews of that age alone, but that in every 
age and in almost every religious system the mental unbalance 
is such that in the heat of the moment atrocious crimes have 
been advocated and perpetrated in the name of God and holiness! 
What lessons we may learn from these excerpts of 
history! When will mankind learn that as justice is the 
foundation of the Divine Government, everything contrary 
thereto must be displeasing to God? Recently the civilized 
world celebrated the birth of that great and good man, John 
Calvin; yet all were shocked afresh as we remembered that 
his hand signed the death-warrant which led Servetus, a fellow-Christian, 
to the stake. When will we learn that the 
results of injustice will be more injurious to the doer than 
to the done? "Justice and judgment are the habitation of 
thy throne. "-Psa. 89:14. 



ST. PAUL, FESTUS AND AGRIPPA 

The governor placed the proposition of the Jews before 
St. Paul, asking him (because he was a Roman citizen) 
whether he were willing to accept a discharge as respected 
the Roman Court and to stand trial before his own countrymen. 
The Apostle, realizing the situation, promptly declined 
the offer and instead appealed his case to Rome, his privilege 
as a Roman citizen, which could not be denied him. But as 
the governor in sending a prisoner to Rome was expected to 
prefer charges, Festus was puzzled to know what charges, if 
any, he could formulate against the Apostle. 

Shortly the ceremonies of Festus' inauguration took place 

R4501 : page 318 

in Caesarea, and King Agrippa of Galilee did his respects by 
attending, his wife Bernice accompanying him. As Agrippa 
and his wife professed the Hebrew faith, Festus, who had no 
knowledge thereof, embraced the opportunity to have their 
assistance in formulating charges against St. Paul, whose 
crime, if any, could be understood from the Jewish standpoint. 
Hence before these and the chief captains of the military 
forces and the prominent citizens, the Apostle was called 
to give his version of the enmity of his people against him. 

Thus a fresh opportunity for the preaching of the Gospel 
before people of prominence was afforded the Apostle. And 
his appeal to Caesar's Court would mean an introduction of 
himself and of the religion which he represented before the 
highest authority in the world. Thus does the Lord mysteriously 
work the counsel of his own will and cause the 
wrath of men to praise him. And thus does he put before 
his faithful servants fresh opportunities to serve his cause. 
How much every faithful follower of Jesus should be encouraged 
by this to faithfulness, to singleness of heart, to 
the improvement of every opportunity, realizing the Lord's 
supervision of the work and of his service. 

As a true gentleman, St. Paul opened his speech before 
these earthly dignitaries by complimenting King Agrippa as 
much as he truthfully could— on the fact that he would be 
heard by one who was expert in all Jewish matters. He 
pointed to the fact that his course of life from youth was well 
known in Jerusalem and throughout the Jewish nation. Many 
of them could witness if they would to his strictness as a 
religionist. "And now," he declared, "I am standing on trial 
for my hope in the promise which God made unto our fathers 
—a promise which all Jews are hoping will have fulfilment. 
Nevertheless it is for this hope's sake that I am accused by 
the Jews." The hope of Israel centered in God's oath-bound 
Covenant to Abraham, "In thy Seed shall all the families of 
the earth be blessed." St. Paul was preaching that this promise 
was in process of fulfilment; that Jesus, as the Son of 
God, by obedience to the Law and by his sacrifice of his 
earthly rights, had become the Head of this promised Seed 
of Abraham by his resurrection to the plane of spirit glory, 
honor and immortality. He was teaching that since Pentecost 



the Lord was selecting both from Jews and Gentiles a "little 
flock," to be Messiah's bride and joint-heir, members of the 
Spiritual Seed of Abraham; and that when this selection shall 
have been accomplished, the great Messiah, Head and members, 
in glory will set up the long-promised Kingdom of God. 
Its blessing will come first to natural Israel for their restitutional 
uplifting, and subsequently will extend through Israel 
to "all the families of the earth." 

Surely St. Paul pointed to the prophecies which tell of 
the sufferings of Messiah and of the glories that will follow. 
The Jews all knew of the sufferings of Jesus and the sufferings 
of his followers, but they disputed his resurrection to 
glory and that his followers would by and by share his resurrection 
change. The whole dispute between himself and the 
Jews was in respect to whether or not Jesus arose from the 
dead. If he did not arise the Jews were right. No valid 
hopes could be built upon a dead man, however good he 
might have been. If he arose, St. Paul and the followers of 
Jesus were right, because his resurrection to glory should be 
considered a demonstration of Divine approval and of the 
Messiahship which he claimed and of his Kingdom to come 
in due time. 

He explained how once he also had opposed Jesus and 
persecuted his followers, shutting them up in prison and 
giving his vote with others for their death. He had compelled 
them to blaspheme Jesus to escape sufferings and in 
his madness had extended his energies from Jerusalem to outside 
cities. He explained the Revelation of the Lord, given 
him near Damascus— the light above the brightness of the 
sun, and the voice saying, "Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou 
me?" "I am Jesus whom thou persecutest." He explained 
the commission he then received, that he was to preach to 
the Gentiles as well as to the Jews, the resurrection of Jesus, 
the gathering of his elect members and in due time the establishment 
of his Kingdom; and that all should repent and 
turn to God. It was for these things that he was in bondage 
and his life in jeopardy, until he was obliged to appeal to 
Caesar's tribunal. He pointed out that the sufferings of Christ 
had been foretold by the prophets and that Jesus acknowledged 
persecutions of his followers as being of himself— his 
members. 

"THOU ART BESIDE THYSELF" 

The governor heard with amazement the recital and, interrupting, 
then said, "Thou art beside thyself. Much learning 
doth make thee mad." But St. Paul replied, "I am not mad, 
most noble Festus; but speak forth the words of truth and 
soberness: King Agrippa knoweth of these things." Thus it 
is still. From the worldly standpoint the true follower of 
Jesus is branded a fanatic, a fool, unbalanced. But from the 
Christian's standpoint the view is reversed— the worldly are 

R4501 : page 319 

unwise and money-mad. The worldly see merely the earthly 



things, the transitory. The Christian sees with the eye of 
faith glory, honor and immortality and a share with the 
Redeemer in the privileges of the Millennial Kingdom, which 
is shortly to bless the world with a reign of righteousness, 
in fulfilment of the Lord's prayer, "Thy Kingdom come. 
Thy will be done on earth as it is done in heaven." 

St. Paul appealed to Agrippa: Did he not believe the 
prophecies cited? The reply of the king is a matter of dispute 
—whether he said, "With a little more time and eloquence 
you might persuade me to be a Christian," or whether he said, 
"Do you think that in so brief an argument you could make 
of me a Christian, with all that that word means of discredit?" 
St. Paul's reply favors the former interpretation: "I would 
to God that not only thou, but also all that hear me this day, 
were both almost, and altogether such as I am, except these 
bonds." 

A nobler sentiment, a broader spirit of charity, in a 
prison, falsely accused and unjustly restrained, cannot be 
imagined. Only those who have been with Jesus and learned 
of him could thus exemplify the sympathy and moderation 
which he taught. Oh, that all of Christ's disciples might 
learn also to be meek and lowly of heart and find rest to 
their souls, for who can doubt that St. Paul, the prisoner, 
with his glorious hopes, was happier every way than any 
of those who heard him? 



page 319 

BEREAN STUDIES ON THE ATONEMENT 

THE TEXT-BOOK USED FOR THIS COURSE 
IS SCRIPTURE STUDIES, SERIES V (E)* 

Questions on Scripture Study V.— 
Man for whom Atonement was made 

NOVEMBER 7 

(1) Is there such a thing as a spirit soul? If so, explain 
the difference between it and the human soul, and give the 
illustration of the candle. P. 343, par. 2. 

(2) Describe the resurrection processes and show how 
the personal identity or soul will be restored, while the flesh 
will not be restored. P. 338-343, par. 3. 

(3) Is there danger of a miscarriage so that the resurrected 
ones would fail to identify themselves? And would 

the danger be any the less if the same particles of matter were 
miraculously preserved, readjusted and quickened? Must we 
not in any event depend upon Divine power only. P. 343, par. 3. 

(4) Is there any suggestion of the Scriptures to the 

effect that the bodies which go down to the tomb will be restored 
atom by atom? What says the Apostle? 

(5) Quote the Apostle's words on this subject and explain 
the matter. P. 343, last par. 



(6) In what sense does the "breath of life" return to 
God who gave it? 

(7) In what sense did God give the spirit of life? In 

what sense did he remand that gift? In what sense is provision 
made for its restoration? If no arrangement had been 
made for its restoration what would have been man's condition 
in death? P. 344, par. 1. 

NOVEMBER 14 

(8) Why is death so frequently spoken of as a "sleep" 

in the Scriptures? Give an illustration of our Lord's use of 
the word sleep as referring to death. Is there any record of 
Lazarus having any conscious experiences during the four 
days he was asleep— dead? Would our Lord have called him 
from glory if he had been in heaven? Would such an awakening 
mean a blessing or a loss? Give a full explanation of 
it. P. 344, par. 2. 

(9) Why is the resurrection time spoken of as the 
"morning"? Give the quotation and citation. P. 345, par. 1. 

(10) Give nine quotations and citations from the New 
Testament in which death is referred to as a "sleep." P. 345. 

(11) Give similar citations from the Old Testament. 
P. 346. 

(12) Will those awakening from the death "sleep" have 
any consciousness of the lapse of time between their falling 
asleep in death and their awakening in the resurrection? 

P. 346, last par. 

(13) Will the resurrection work be practically a reawakening 
and will it be as great or a greater manifestation 

of Divine power than the original creation of Adam 
and Eve? P. 347. 

(14) Why is a living dog better than a dead lion? 

and how do the Scriptures use this comparison to illustrate 
the meaning of death to the human family? P. 347. 

(15) Quote some Scriptures which show that the 
dead know not anything and that there is no work nor 
device nor wisdom in the grave whither all go. 

NOVEMBER 21 

(16) What did St. Paul mean by his statement that 
some say "there is no resurrection of the dead"? And 
could there be a resurrection of the dead if nobody is 
dead— if all, when they seem to die, really become more 
alive? P. 348, par. 2-4. 

(17) What did the Apostle mean by saying that "if 
there be no resurrection of the dead then is Christ not 
risen?" P. 348, par. 5. 

(18) What did St. Paul mean by the statement, "If 
Christ be not risen, then is our preaching vain, and your 
faith is also vain?" P. 348, par. 5. 

(19) What did he mean by the statement that "If 

the dead rise not, Christ is not risen," and the Apostles 

were false witnesses, preaching a false Gospel? P. 348, par. 5. 

(20) In his argument for the resurrection does the 



Apostle anywhere state or otherwise imply whether he 
refers to a resurrection of the body or of the soul? Give 
a Scriptural citation showing why. P. 349, par. 1. 

(21) How would the Apostle have stated himself if 
he held the same views that the majority of people hold 
on this subject? P. 349, par. 1. 

(22) Show how the Apostle taught a resurrection of 
the soul and how that denied the resurrection of the body 
which died. P. 349, par. 2. 

NOVEMBER 28 

(23) Why did the Apostle in arguing the importance 

of the resurrection of the dead in I Cor. 15 say (Vs. 17,18), 
"If Christ be not raised, your faith is vain; ye are yet in 
your sins. Then they also which are fallen asleep in 
Christ are perished?" In what sense could they be perished 
if they went directly to heaven and were more than ever 
alive at the time when they appeared to be dead? Do those 
who claim that the soul cannot die thereby deny the 
resurrection of the soul or sentient being? P. 349, last par. 

(24) Why is it claimed, contrary to the Scriptures, that 
God's promise of a resurrection applies merely to the body, 

and why is there perplexity concerning the words of the inspired 
Apostle? 

(25) If, as is admitted, the death of Christ was the sacrifice 
for sin, what death was it? And if in dying he became 
more alive than before he died, in what sense did he die for 
our sins, or what was given as the ransom price for the sinner's 
forfeited life. P. 349, last par. 

(26) Respecting those who fall asleep in Christ as members 
of his Body and whose hope is to share in the glory and 
honor of the First Resurrection, will theirs be a resurrection 
of the body or a resurrection of the soul possessed of a new 
body? P. 350, par. 1. 

(27) God is a Spirit (Being). Is he Scripturally said to 
be a soul? If so, where? P. 350, par. 1. 

(28) What philosophy did the Athenians have which led 
them to reject St. Paul's words relative to the resurrection 
of the dead? Quote and cite the texts. P. 350, par. 2. 

(29) To what extent had the Platonic philosophy invaded 
Judaism at the time of our Lord? Explain the matter 
with proof texts. P. 351. 

(30) Why did Josephus mention prominently a sect of 
the Jews which was so small as not to be mentioned in the 
New Testament? 

(31) Was eternal torment any part of the Jewish faith? 



page 320 

PUBLIC MINISTRIES OF THE TRUTH 

UNDER THE AUSPICES OF PEOPLES PULPIT 
ASSOCIATION OF BROOKLYN, N.Y. 



GENERAL CONVENTION 

TRURO, N.S., OCT. 10, 11, 13 

A General Convention has been requested for this locality 
and is now arranged for in connection with Brother Russell's 
Maritime Province Tour (see corrections to schedule on page 
317). He expects to be present on Sunday, Oct. 10, with a 
morning rally at 10 and address to the interested at 11 o'clock. 
Public meeting in Academy Hall at 3 p.m.: Subject, "The 
Thief in Paradise, the Rich Man in Hell, and Lazarus in Abraham's 
Bosom." Brethren of ability will address the other 
sessions. Buy full-fare one-way ticket, securing certificate, 
which when properly validated will obtain free return privilege 
on nearly all the roads. Will you be present? 

DALLAS, TEX., OCT. 24, 25 

The society will be represented by Brothers F. Draper 
and E. J. Coward, of the Pilgrim Staff. Special rates are 
obtainable on account of the Dallas State Fair. 

INDIANAPOLIS, IND., DEC. 17, 18, 19 

ONE-DAY LOCAL CONVENTIONS ADDRESSED BY THE 
EDITOR OF THIS JOURNAL AS FOLLOWS: 

WORCESTER, MASS, OCT. 17 

Praise and Testimony Meeting at 10:30 a.m. Public 
meeting at 3 p.m. in Franklin Square Theatre, 2 Southbridge 
street. Evening meeting for the interested at 7:30 o'clock 
held (as morning meeting) in Horticultural Hall, 18 Front 
street. 

PHILADELPHIA, PA., OCT. 24 

AKRON, OHIO, OCT. 31 

BROOKLYN, N.Y., NOV. 7 



page 322 

STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES 
"MILLENNIAL DAWN" 

THESE STUDIES ARE RECOMMENDED TO STUDENTS AS VERITABLE "BIBLE KEYS. 

PRICES ARE NET AND BARELY COVER COST OF PRODUCTION, 

WHEN DELIVERED BY COLPORTEURS THE COST AND PRICE ARE INCREASED. 

SERIES I., The Plan of the Ages, gives an outline of the divine plan 
revealed in the Bible, relating to man's redemption and restitution: 
386 pages, in embossed cloth, 25c. (Is. l/2d.) India paper edition, 75c. 
(3s. l-l/2d.). 

This volume has been published as a special issue of our journal— 
at the extremely low price of 5c. a copy, in any quantity, postage included. 
(To foreign countries, 9c.) This enables people of slender 
purse to herald far and wide the good tidings in a most helpful form. 

SERIES II., The Time is at Hand, treats of the manner and time of 
the Lord's second coming, considering the Bible Testimony on this 
subject: 370 pages, in embossed cloth, 25c. (Is. l/2d.) India paper 
edition, 75c. (3s. l-l/2d.) 

SERIES III., Thy Kingdom Come, considers prophecies which mark 
events connected with the "Time of the End," the glorification of the 
Church and the establishment of the Millennial Kingdom; it also contains 
a chapter of the Great Pyramid, showing its corroboration of the 
dates and other teachings of the Bible: 384 pages, in embossed cloth, 
25c. (Is. l/2d.) India paper edition, 75c. (3s. l-l/2d.) 

SERIES IV., The Day of Vengeance, shows that the dissolution of the 
present order of things is in progress, and that all the panaceas offered 
are valueless to avert the predicted end. It marks in these events the 
fulfilment of prophecy, noting specially our Lord's great prophecy of 
Matt. 24 and Zech. 14:1-9: 660 pages, in embossed cloth, 30c. (Is. 3d.). 
India paper edition, 85c. (3s. 6-l/2d.) 

SERIES V., The At-one-ment Between God and Man, treats an all-important 
subject— the hub, the center around which all the features 
of divine grace revolve. Its topic deserves the most careful and 
prayerful consideration on the part of all true Christians: 507 pages, 
in embossed cloth, 30c. (Is. 3d.) India paper edition, 85c. (3s. 6-l/2d.) 

SERIES VI., The New Creation, deals with the Creative Week 
(Genesis 1 and 2), and with the Church, God's "New Creation." It examines 
the personnel, organization, rites, ceremonies, obligations and 
hopes appertaining to those called and accepted as members of the 
Body under the Head: 740 pages, in embossed cloth, 30c. (Is. 3d.) 
India paper edition, 85c. (3s. 6-l/2d.) 

The above prices include postage. 

IN FULL LEATHER BINDING, gilt edges, the set (6 vols.) $3.00, 
(12s. 6d.), plus postage, 60c. (Is.). 

Published in foreign languages as follows: German, five volumes; 
in Swedish Vols. 1, 2, 3, 5 and 6; in Dano-Norwegian, three vols.; 
in Greek, three vols.; in French, two vols.; Hollandish, Spanish, 
and Italian, one vol. each; bound in cloth, uniform with English edition, 
prices the same; in Polish, condensed edition, one vol., 10 cents. 



page 321 



SEMI-MONTHLY 
VOL. XXX NOVEMBER 1 No. 21 
A.D. 1909--A.M. 6038 



CONTENTS. 

"Them That Are Contentious" 323 

"Be Transformed" 324 

Moses a Mediator Before Aaron a Priest 325 

"To Make an End of Sins" 326 

The Antitype Begins Where the Type 

Ends 327 

A Tempest-Tossed Prisoner of Hope 328 

Calm in a Time of Storm 328 

"For God Was With Him" 328 

St. Paul Prisoner at Rome 329 

The Servant's Path (Poem) 330 

Some Interesting Letters 331 

Berean Studies on the Atonement 333 

Catalogue of Bibles, Testaments, Etc 334 

page 322 

PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY 
CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
"BROOKLYN TABERNACLE," 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, N.Y., U.S.A. 

Foreign Agencies:— British Branch: 24 Eversholt St., London, 
N.W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, Barmen. Australasian 
Branch: Equitable Building, Collins St., Melbourne. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:— All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 
and in touch with the Studies, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, DANISH AND ITALIAN EDITIONS. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N.Y., POSTOFFICE 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA 



CLOTH "HELPS" 



The Berean Bible Students' Manual is now in stock, uniform 
in size and binding with the SCRIPTURE STUDIES. Price, 
50 cents, postpaid. 

HYMNS OF DAWN IN LEATHER BINDING 

These are now in stock in elegant leather binding, stamped 
in gold, at $1.00 per copy, postpaid. 

VOLUNTEER MATTER IN OTHER LANGUAGES 

In German— A large assortment of both tracts and old 
TOWERS. 

In Dutch— We have a large supply of the "Do-You-Know?" 
tract in the Hollandish language for use among your 
Dutch neighbors and friends. 

In Swedish and Dano-Norwegian— We have an ample 
supply in both languages for Volunteer purposes. 

In French and Italian— New supply just received. The 
quantity of the latter is limited for the immediate present, 
however. 

In Polish and Hungarian— Peoples Pulpit in quantities 
for distribution. 

In Greek— Several tracts. 

Order as many of the above as you can judiciously use— 
they are free to TOWER subscribers. 



R4501 : page 323 

"THEM THAT ARE CONTENTIOUS" 

"God will render to every man according to his deeds; to them 
who by patient continuance in well-doing seek for glory 
and honor, and immortality, eternal life; but 
unto them that are contentious and do not obey 
the truth, but obey unrighteousness, 
indignation, and wrath." 

THE Apostle's words foregoing are applicable in some 
degree to everybody, but they are especially addressed 
to and applicable to the Church. In a general sense, 
those who are seeking the higher and better things 
along the lines of loving obedience to whatever they may 
know of the Divine will, are receiving a blessing day by 
day, even though their pathway be a narrow and difficult 



one. On the contrary, those who are of a contentious 
disposition, fault-finding, irascible, the dissatisfied, are 
continually making trouble for themselves as well as for 
others, and are cultivating a disposition which neither 
God nor anybody in harmony with God, could approve— 
a disposition which will not be rewarded by eternal life, 
but bring its possessor into more or less trouble continually, 
and spell failure for him in the end. 

But our subject shines out most distinctly when we 
apply it as the Apostle here does, to God's consecrated 
people. Some, a decided minority, we fear, are patiently, 
perseveringly, seeking for God's best and grandest gift— 
joint-heirship with the Redeemer in his Kingdom of 
Glory, and participation in his glorious, divine nature. 
There is only one way to seek for this great prize successfully, 
and that is by patiently and perseveringly cultivating 
and developing in ourselves the character-likeness 
of our Redeemer. (Rom. 8:29.) Various opportunities 
for serving the Lord are set before us, and these are 
blessed privileges, but we may rely upon it that the Divine 
purpose and intention in permitting such services is 
for our own development in Christian character. The 
command to all men is, to honor God supremely, and to 
deal justly with our fellows, treating them as we would 
be treated by them, loving them as ourselves; but the 
special command to the New Creation is, to love one 
another as our Elder Brother loved us— self-sacrificingly. 
Whatever we are permitted to do one for the other is in 
the nature of a test of our loyalty to God, of our justice 
toward the world, or of our loving devotion to the 
brethren. 

Following the example of our Lord, we are to lay 
down our lives in the service of the brethren. This command 
is not so much for their need of our self-sacrifice as 
for our need of it, as a development of our love and as a 
test of our love. As the Apostle says, "We ought also 
to lay down our lives for the brethren." 

R4502 : page 323 

There are plenty of opportunities for sacrificing self 
in the interest of the Priesthood. Not only are some of 
the brethren in darkness, in ignorance and superstition, 
and need our assistance out into the glorious light of 
Present Truth, but, additionally, some of them have 
weaknesses and blemishes, and need our consoling sympathy 
and strengthening encouragements, or loving rebukes. 
To the extent of our faithfulness in these matters, 
we are self-sacrificers, pleasing and acceptable to our 
heavenly Father and our Redeemer. 

The Apostle explained to Timothy, an Elder, that he 
should in meekness reprove those who opposed themselves, 
and not render evil for evil, nor railing for railing, 
nor accusation for accusation, but contrariwise by 
meekness and gentleness, patience and love, should show 
the brethren the more excellent way, and should develop 



ourselves in Christlikeness of character. It is by such 

"patient continuance in well doing," by such patient development 

of Christlike character, that we may successfully 

seek the glory, honor and immortality which God 

has promised only to such. For, as the Apostle points 

out, God has predestinated that all who will be of the 

elect Church, of the Bride class, must be copies of his Son 

in character, in heart— Rom. 8:29. 

Alas! that there seem to be so few well developed 
along these lines of Christ's character-likeness. Alas! 
that so many seem to be cultivating the wrong spirit 
which they know God will not approve— the contentious 
spirit, the fault-finding disposition which, instead of 
building one another up in the most holy faith, is destructive 
of faith, destructive of peace, destructive of 
every good quality. 

Alas! that amongst those who are in the Truth these 
contentious persons are to be found in considerable numbers, 
doing a destructive work, an injurious work, instead 
of a helpful work. Surely they must know that 
they are injuring and blemishing their characters and 
making themselves less and less fit for the Kingdom, or 
for eternal life on any plane. Surely they must know 
that they are doing a destructive work in the Body of 
Christ, which is the Church. Surely they must know 
that they are sowing seeds of discord, and planting roots 
of bitterness, which are sure to bring forth an evil fruitage, 
hurtful to many. Surely they must know that God 
has expressed a special reprobation for those who thus 
do injury to the Church. -Matt. 18:6; Luke 17:2. 

What will be the reward to these? Not glory, honor 
and immortality, but indignation, wrath, tribulation, and 
anguish, says the Apostle. He does not say that this 
means an eternity of wrath, and anguish, nor do we. On 
the contrary, knowing that the extreme penalty of opposition 
to God is the "Second Death," we must suppose 
that the tribulation and anguish will be more or less connected 
with the present life— either by their participation 
in the "Great Company," and passing through the 
great time of trouble and there learning the lessons they 
neglected to learn previously, or, soured in disposition, 
robbed of the peace, and joy, and love, which they might 
have possessed as spirit-begotten ones, these will die the 

R4502 : page 324 

"Second Death" as incorrigible, as having received the 
grace of God and the instructions of his Word in vain. 
Instead of developing character symbolized by the fruitful 
vine, they are developing the characteristics of the 
briar and the thorn, whose end is destruction. 

BE TRANSFORMED 

It would be of no avail for us to call attention to these 
matters of Divine Writ, nor for the Apostle to have 



penned these words of condemnation, if there were not a 
possibility of change on the part of those who are well-doing 
and well-seeking, and also on the part of those 
who are evil-doing and contentious. Such condemnations, 
on the contrary, are intended to help us to establish 
our characters in the right direction. Whoever, 
therefore, realizes while reading this article that he is 
going in the wrong direction, cultivating a contentious 
and fault-finding spirit, and a disposition to pull down the 
faith and obedience, and spirit of love, in the Body of 
Christ, will do well to immediately resolve by the grace 
of God to take the opposite course. And whoever is 
seeking the glory, honor and immortality of the heavenly 
calling along the right lines of patient perseverance in 
well doing, should be encouraged, and made watchful, 
that he might persevere in the right way, and become 
more and more blessed, and more and more secure, and 
entrenched, and fixed, in the character which God will 
approve, and to which he will say, "Well done, good and 
faithful servant; enter into the joys of thy Lord." 

To those who find themselves possessed of a cantankerous 
disposition, fault-finding, and nagging, destructive instead 
of constructive, quarrelsome instead of peaceable, 
we urge reform in great haste. We remind them that we 
are nearing the end of the Church's condition of trial; that 
we are already in the testing time, and that many are falling 
because of not having developed proper characters. 
We urge them to take the matter at once to the Lord in 
prayer, and by his assisting grace to immediately begin 
to reverse all these wrong currents of their lives. They 
should hearken diligently to the Apostle's words, and 
"seek peace and ensue it," and so far as possible henceforth 
"live peaceably with all men," and "let the peace 
of God rule in their hearts," and be thankful for blessings 
already received. In such a condition of heart they will 
have little disposition to find fault with the Lord or his 
providences in connection with his people and his work. 
They will "learn of him" instead of finding fault with 
everybody and everything which the Lord does not order 
to their pleasement. 

We urge all such to take note of the fact that the murmurers 
and complainers in typical Israel were not permitted 
to enter into Canaan's blessings. (1 Cor. 10:10.) 
We remind them of the Apostle's words to the effect that 
murmurings against the Divine arrangements are really 
murmurings against the Lord himself. Let us do with 
our might what our hands find to do, without murmuring, 
without complaining, without fault-finding. (Phil. 2:14.) 
Let us leave to God the management of his work. 
Let us humbly realize that if he would commit it all to 
our care we would be unable to manage it and would be 
obliged to take it back to him and to solicit his supervision 
of his own work. 

If the thought comes to us that we could manage better 
than the Lord; that we could guide the harvest work 
better than he has arranged it, let us flee that thought 



as a snare of the Adversary by which he would entrap us. 
Instead of fault-finding and endeavoring to change the 
Divine arrangements let us do our own parts as faithfully 
as we know how, uncomplainingly, co-operating to 
the extent that our conscience and talents will permit in 
the work which the Lord is carrying on and directing. 
Surely we do not know that if the Lord should give the 
entire management of his harvest work into our hands 
that we could do it better than he; surely, therefore, we 
should humble ourselves under the mighty hand of God, 
that he may exalt us in due time. 

Let us be assured that only those who do thus humble 
themselves, and realize the wisdom and grace of God, and 
fall in line therewith, will have any part in the Kingdom 
work. The heady, the high-minded, the self-conscious, 
the contentious, the dissatisfied, shall have neither the 
good of the present nor the honors of the future. 

YE SHALL RECEIVE THE SEVERER TRIAL 

The Apostle James admonishes the brethren respecting 
the peculiar dangers which beset those ambitious to be 
teachers, saying, "My brethren, be not many masters 
(teachers), knowing that we (teachers) shall receive the 
greater condemnation (judgment, or trial). For in many 
things we offend all"— we are all imperfect.— James 3:1. 

While all recognize the truth of the Apostle's words, 
few seem to be in any great degree deterred by them. 
As a consequence, we find many seeking the office of 
teacher in the Church, and perceive also the truth of the 
Apostle's words that as teachers they are subject to 
severer trials, and that the majority of those who appear 
to stumble and fall from the truth are of this class. 
We write thus not to suggest that teachers are unnecessary 
or contrary to the Divine arrangement, but to 
suggest that whoever enters upon the work of teaching 
should do so with a realization of the grave responsibility 
which he assumes, and the temptations or trials which 
beset his pathway toward the heavenly city. 

St. Paul wrote, "He that seeketh the office of a bishop 
(of a shepherd, of an overseer) seeketh a good service," 
and so we should recognize that whoever out of a pure 
heart seeks to serve the Lord's cause as an under- shepherd 
of the sheep, and as a co-laborer with the Redeemer, 
is engaging in a most noble service. If he approach this 
service from this standpoint of earnest desire to serve 
the flock, an earnest desire to be in full accord with the 
Great Shepherd, he should not be ashamed to rejoice that 
he has to this extent the Spirit of the Lord. But if he 
find in himself, in either great or small measure, a spirit 
of ambition, a spirit of pride, a spirit of boastfulness, the 
desire to lord it over the brethren of the household of 
faith, then let him fear. With trembling heart either 
let him resign the service, or at the throne of grace rid 
himself, purge himself, of the evil ambitions of his heart, 
and be filled with the Spirit of the Master. That holy 



Spirit is the spirit of meekness, gentleness, patience, 
longsuffering, brotherly kindness, love; to desire simply 
and only the glory of God and the blessing of his people— 
the spirit that is ready to sacrifice self at any moment for 
the peace of the Body of Christ, or the assistance of the 
flock. 

Some wonder why the Apostle should thus write of 
special dangers to those brethren who would attempt to 
teach in the Church. We answer that we accept his 
words as those of inspiration, and that, additionally, observation 

R4503 : page 324 

shows us the truthfulness of them. Moreover, 

unconsciously the Lord's dear people who make no pretensions 

themselves in the direction of teaching are often 

responsible to a considerable degree for the deflection of 

those whom they recognize as teachers, and whom unconsciously 

they lead into temptation. The besetments of 

teachers are, (1) pride, and (2) arrogance. 

(1) Encouraged by the laudatory words of the brethren, 
the tendency is for them to feel that they are somebodies, 
and to attribute the success of their efforts to 

natural ability, talent, etc., rather than to the wonderful 
power and beauty of the Truth. Ministers in general 
seem to be liable to besetment along this line, because it 
is indeed a very honorable position to stand before our 
fellows as ambassadors for the King of Glory. The general 
tendency is to boast of denominational strength and 
wisdom. But amongst those who are in the light of 
"Present Truth" the temptation to personal pride is perhaps 
even greater. 

The antidote for this is a distinct remembrance of the 
fact that the plan is not our own, but all of its lengths 
and breadths and heights and depths are of God and for 
all his people, and that we are highly honored in the delivering 
of it in the most humble manner conceivable. 

R4503 : page 325 

A proper allegiance to the Lord should lead us to hide 
ourselves, that all the glory and honor might go to the 
great Author of the Plan of Salvation, and to the great 
Redeemer, whose sacrifice is its very center, and whose 
love is the very circumference of our message. With these 
thoughts impressed upon our minds, the greater the service 
permitted us, the greater should be our humility 
and our realization of unworthiness to be the mouthpieces 
of the great Lord of Glory. 

(2) Arrogance we mentioned as one of the besetments. 
Alas! how inappropriate it is that any, because 

of being honored of the Lord as his mouthpiece for his 
message, should attempt to take the place of his Lord, 
and to act arrogantly toward his brethren, or, as the 
Apostle expresses it, to "Lord it over God's heritage." 
(1 Pet. 5:3.) The Scriptures set before us the very reverse 



standard, namely, that those brethren permitted 
to serve as teachers, so far from being lords of the 
Church, are merely its servants. While they are servants 
of God, the Divine direction in the matter is to be 
sought through the Church. In a word, the Church's 
election of elders, pastors, or teachers is the election 
of those whom it esteems to be the Lord's choice for its 
service— to serve it in holy things, to minister to it the 
grace of God, to dispense for it the spiritual food of the 
Divine Word. 

The Church has been responsible in a considerable 
measure for the stumbling of those whom it has recognized 
as Elder-brothers and teachers. While they should 
not think evil, surmise evil, surmise pride, or surmise 
arrogance, they should be so wakeful to their own duties 
and responsibilities toward these brethren that they 
would not unduly flatter them, nor unduly encourage 
them, nor stimulate them to manufacture new light. 

On the contrary, all who are spiritual should be helpful 
to those elder-brothers; should compliment them on 
their loyalty to the Lord, and to the old, old story, rather 
than commend them for fanciful fictions, or encourage 
them further along such lines. The Gospel of Grace 
has not changed; it is still the old, old story of Jesus 
and his love, and of the Father's love; it still includes the 
thought of our calling and election by faithfulness to the 
terms laid down in the Scriptures. The brethren should 
be encouraged along these lines rather than along the 
lines of manufacturing types by guess-work without any 
authority of the Word of God. 

As for arrogance on the part of leaders, and a supercilious 
lording it over the Church, we believe that the 
Church itself has a great responsibility. Beginners should 
not be hastily pushed forward, as St. Paul points out, 
and when any Elder-brother advanced in the Truth begins 
to show signs of headiness, and of disregard for the 
voice of the Church, and a disinclination to submit to it 
all the questions pertaining to its affairs, the Church 
should curb such arrogance promptly and thoroughly by 
declining the further election of such brother, and by 
insisting upon the rights of the Church. The insistence 
should not, however, be in the nature of wrangling or 
contention, but in a kindly, brotherly, noble manner 
the rights of the Church should be set forth, and the 
vote of the Church on the subject should be asked. If 
the vote be contrary to the brother who sought to protect 
the Church's rights, he should submit gracefully, 
because by him also the voice of the Church is to be accepted 
as decisive. 

We have great sympathy for the dear brethren who, 
in the providence of God, occupy the positions of Elders 
and teachers in the congregations of the Lord's people. 
And hence, while calling attention to the severe temptations 
to which they are exposed, and while urging the 
Church to do its duty and to assist them to keep humble 
and faithful, we also urge, in the language of the Apostle, 



that those who are noble, humble, self-sacrificing, 

cannot be too highly esteemed nor too loyally supported. 

The Apostle's words are, "Remember them which have 

the rule (supervision) over you; who have spoken unto 

you the Word of God; whose faith follow, considering 

them that have the rule (supervision) over you, and 

the end of their conversation: Jesus Christ the same yesterday, 

and today, and forever." And again, "Obey 

submit yourselves; for they watch for your souls as they 

that must give account, that they may do it with joy, and 

not with grief." (Heb. 13:7,17.) And again, "Esteem 

them very highly in love for their work's sake."— 

1 Thess. 5:13. 

If the position of an Elder and teacher in the Church 
of Christ is a very hazardous one, a very difficult one to 
fill with acceptableness to God and to the brethren, and 
a position very full of temptation, the Church should 
sympathetically be very watchful not to increase the 
temptation, not to foster it and a wrong fruitage. On 
the contrary, however, where a faithful servant is found, 
all the loyal brethren should seek in every way to be 
helpful and to co-operate with such. Instead of being 
fault-finding and inclined to criticize this, and that, and 
the other word, and manner, and tone, and look, they 
should be so full of love and sympathy, and so appreciative 
of his loving zeal, devotion and humility, as to let 
trivial and unimportant matters pass unmentioned, and 
indeed unnoticed. Realizing the responsibility of his 
office they have some reason to doubt if they would be 
able to fill his place with as good or as great ability and 
humility. 

In the selection of Elders the consecrated should remember 
that the responsibility rests upon them; and no 
vote should be cast without studious consideration of the 
Divine will, and prayer for Divine guidance. In seeking 
to determine the Lord's will in such a matter, we 
should remember the characteristics of the teacher as 
set forth in the Scriptures: (1) Of course, a teacher 
should be apt to teach; he should have the natural faculty 
or ability to make plain matters which he understands. 

(2) Still more important is it that if he have 

the ability to teach, he shall be clear in the Truth, 

so the Truth and not error may be set forth with clearness. 

(3) Humility and piety should be considered paramount 
and primary qualifications for eldership. However 
able a teacher, however doctrinally clear, no one is 
properly fitted for this position except he have humility 
and piety, and unless his words and deeds have manifested 
his love for the brethren. For, as the Scriptures set 

forth, these are qualities of great value in God's sight. 
Now as ever it is true that great opportunities for doing 
good means even greater opportunities for doing harm. 
This is because, under present conditions, spiritual sickness 
and contagions like earthly ailments spread and 
"catch" much more readily than spiritual health. 



R4503 : page 325 

MOSES A MEDIATOR BEFORE AARON A PRIEST 

THE record of the institution of the priesthood, the establishment 

of the tabernacle service, etc., comes after 

the account of Israel reaching Mt. Sinai— after the 

account of the mountain quaking and smoking 

and the terrible sights and sounds referred to by 

St. Paul (in Hebrews 12:26-28), which, we understand, 

prefigured the great time of trouble we are 

expecting, in which society will be shaken and mankind be 

prepared for the establishment of the Mediatorial Kingdom 

of Christ under the New Covenant. How shall we understand 

this fact? How can we harmonize it with the Scriptural 

thought that our Lord became High Priest more than eighteen 

centuries ago, when he offered up himself and later 

as Priest presented his blood on our behalf at the heavenly 

Mercy Seat; and that since then he has been gathering and 

sacrificing the body of under-priests, and that he, as the 

Head and they as the Body, will shortly be revealed as the 

antitypical Moses, the Mediator of the New Covenant? 

R4503 : page 326 

We must remind our readers afresh that the various 
types of the Scriptures do not follow one another in sequential 
order. Moses assuredly was a type of Christ— Head and 
Body. (Acts 3:22.) Just as surely Aaron was a type of 
Christ Jesus, and his sons types of the Church, the Body of 
Christ, the Royal Priesthood. King Solomon in some respects 
was a type of Christ. As the rich, the wise, the famous king, 
his fame was world-wide. Similarly Melchizedek was a type 
of Christ, in him being blended the kingly and the priestly 
offices. These types could not all be worked out in one person 
and at one time; hence we do not so find them. When 
thinking of Moses as a type of the Mediator between God and 
men, we should consider him as St. Peter explains, as composed 
of Head and members, and that God has been raising 

R4504 : page 326 

him up during this Gospel Age. Our Lord, the Head, first 
was raised to the plane of glory, honor and immortality. Later 
all of his faithful ones, sharers in his sacrifice, will be sharers 
in his Divine nature and glory, and will be raised up with 
him by a share in his resurrection (Phil. 3:10), "the first 
resurrection," which includes only the blessed and holy. These, 
his members, shall live and reign with Christ a thousand years 
and be unto him and unto the Father kings and priests for 
the blessing of mankind.— Rev. 20:6. 

In considering Moses, the mediator of the Law Covenant, 
as typical of The Christ, the Mediator of the New Covenant, 
we should view him from this standpoint— as one Head and 



many members, just as we would Melchizedek, who represents 
our Lord, the Head, and the Church, his Body, the Royal 
Priest of the future. On the contrary, Aaron represents the 
same great Priest from a different standpoint, because his 
typical work related to Christ and the Church in the present 
life only— as a sacrificing priesthood— up to the end of the 
sacrificial work, the sprinkling of the blood of atonement in 
the most holy on the Mercy Seat and the inauguration of 
the new dispensation of glory and blessing. His service, also, 
in some degree, shows the Millennial work of cleansing humanity 
from sin and that both the High Priest and the under-priests, 
his members, will be associated in that work. 

Since the two types could not be expressed simultaneously 
it was every way better that the mediator type and the institution 
of the Law Covenant, typical of the New Covenant, 
should precede all sacrificing; yea, precede the appointing and 
setting apart of the priesthood, even though the active work 
of the Mediator of the New Covenant cannot begin until the 
close of this age, when the sacrificing of the "better sacrifices" 
shall have been completed. Coming first in the record 
no one who rightly understands the types could misunderstand 
this to teach that the antitypical Mediator must first come 
forth and institute the New Covenant, before the antitypical 
priesthood would come forward and make the sacrifices, the 
sin-offerings which would make possible the institution of 
that New Covenant. We have been surprised that anyone 
could be so blind as not to see that the sacrifice of Christ 
is the very basis of his work as the Mediator of the New 
Covenant. Hence he could not be in any sense either a part 
or all of the antitypical Moses, until after serving as the antitypical 
Aaron. The correctness of this thought is also borne 
out by the fact that Aaron was older than Moses. 

It follows, then, that those who raised the objection that 
the Church could not be members of the Body of the Mediator, 
because the priesthood was not inaugurated until after Moses 
had mediated and sealed the Law Covenant, put themselves 
in a very foolish light and show the shallowness of their argument. 
For if this be an argument against the Church being 
members of the Mediator's Body, it would be an equally 
strong argument against our Lord Jesus, the antitypical High 
Priest, being the Head of that Mediator. 

The harmony between the two types is shown in the fact 
that in the end of the Atonement Day, after Aaron had offered 
the sacrifice of "the bullock for (instead of) himself" as the 
sin-offering for his body and his house, the household of 
faith, and after he had subsequently offered "the Lord's goat" 
and applied its blood on behalf of all the people, then, as the 
antitypical Priest, Head and Body, completely clothed in the 
garments illustrative of his authority and power, he was accompanied 
by Moses, the mediator, to the altar. 

Thus we read: 

"Moses and Aaron went into the tabernacle of the congregation, 
and came out, and blessed the people: and the glory 
of Jehovah appeared unto all the people."— Lev. 9:23. 



R4504 : page 326 

"TO MAKE AN END OF SINS" 

A BROTHER inquires how he shall answer those who 
claim that Daniel 9:24 teaches that our Lord Jesus 
made an end of sin at his First Advent and that 
therefore the Church could not share with him 
in his antitypical or "better sacrifices" for sins. 

The passage refers to the 70 weeks of Israel's favor, the 
69th of which reached to our Lord's baptism at Jordan, and 
the 70th, beginning there, reached to 3-1/2 years beyond the 
cross— our Lord's death marking the middle of that 70th 
week (v. 27), and the acceptance of Cornelius by the holy 
Spirit marking its end. A number of things were to be 
accomplished before the termination of those 70 symbolical 
weeks— 490 years. We therefore should inquire: In what 
sense were all of these fulfilled? In what sense were transgressions 
finished at that time? Were there no more after 
the close of the 70th week? Are there none now? "Everlasting 
righteousness" was to be brought in. Does "everlasting 
righteousness" prevail throughout the whole earth, or 
has it at any time prevailed either during or since the 70 
weeks of Israel's favor? The same query would be applicable 
to the making "an end of sins." Have sins come to an 
end? Are there no more sins? And in what sense did sins 
come to an end at any time during the 70 weeks? "Reconciliation 
for iniquity" was to be made. Are we sure that all 
iniquities were reconciled for at that time? What proof have 
we to that effect, since the Scriptures do not so say? 
These questions suggest their own answers. 

We still hold that the sense of this prophecy is that before 
those 70 symbolical weeks— 490 years— would end, long-looked 
for important events would begin to have their fulfilment 
—not to the world, nor yet to nominal Israel, but to 
"thy people." For "Israelites indeed" these blessings were 
provided and foretold— others to be blessed in due time. 
Those loyal to the Lord like Daniel were specially "thy people" 
—the most holy of verse 24. "Israelites indeed" who accepted 
God's mercy were the "most holy," who were anointed 
by the holy Spirit at Pentecost. To them and all of their 
class since, the incidents of that time sealed or made positive 
the prophetic utterances of the past, and confirmed the 
visions of coming glory declared by the prophets. In Christ 
and his redemptive work believers realized the beginning of 
God's blessing for humanity. 

To this class applied the "reconciliation for iniquity" 
which our Lord Jesus made at the heavenly Mercy Seat, when 
"he ascended up on high, there to appear in the presence of 
God for us." The iniquities of the Church were thus cancelled. 
The reconciliation of believers was thus effected. But 
the reconciliation went no further than believers; unbelievers 
are still unreconciled. The great Redeemer did not appear 
as their Advocate or make reconciliation for their iniquities. 
We are glad, however, that he will begin a reconciling work 



for them at a later time, as shown by other Scriptures. To 

those whose iniquities were thus reconciled for by our Redeemer's 

sacrifice there was an end of their sins— they were 

no longer under condemnation. The offense was by one 

man unto condemnation, but a free gift of God through Jesus 

effects for "Israelites indeed" the forgiveness of many transgressions. 

(Rom. 5:12-19.) Moreover, transgression was finished 

so far as these were concerned; because since then it 

is possible for these to abide in Divine favor to keep the 

Law blamelessly— as the Apostle declares, "The righteousness 

of the Law is fulfilled in us, who are walking not after 

the flesh, but after the spirit." (Rom. 8:4; Gal. 5:14.) The 

work of redemption and reconciliation effected opened to 

every Jew an opportunity for release from bondage to the 

Law by becoming dead with Christ; and likewise the close 

R4504 : page 327 

of that 70th week opened the secondary door of Divine favor 
to the Gentiles. 

We see nothing whatever in this Scripture to contradict 
the plain statement of other Scriptures, to the effect that our 
Lord's great work of reconciliation is divided into two parts 
—the first for the Church and the second for the world. As 
we read, "He is a propitiation (satisfaction) for our sins 
[the Church's sins] and not for ours only, but also [additionally 
and subsequently] for the sins of the whole world." 
Full satisfaction was in our Lord's sacrifice. It merely waits 
to be offered. It is nearly nineteen centuries since the first 
application for the Church. This use of the Lord's merit will 
soon be accomplished— and that merit (passed through the 
Church) will again be in the hands of the great High Priest 
to be used on behalf of the sins of the whole world. 



R4504 : page 327 

THE ANTITYPE BEGINS WHERE THE TYPE ENDS 

DID not the Law Covenant end at the time of our 

Lord's death? And if it was a type or a foreshadowing 

of the New Covenant, would not that 

be the time for the New Covenant to begin? If 

the New Covenant will not be ratified until the last member 

of the Church of Christ has suffered with the Head, 

would not that imply a considerable interim between the 

fulfilment of the type and the coming of the antitype? And 

has it not been THE WATCH TOWER'S teaching that where the 

type ceases the antitype surely begins? 

As we have already pointed out on previous occasions 
many make the mistake of supposing that the Law Covenant 
ended at the cross. On the contrary, the terms of that Covenant 

R4505 : page 327 



are binding upon every Jew from the day in which the 
Covenant was made to the present time— as St. Paul says, 
"The Law hath dominion over a man as long as he liveth." 
(Rom. 7:1.) Every Jew to-day is under a death condemnation, 
by virtue of that Law which he is under, yet cannot 
keep. There are only two possible ways of his getting free 
from that bondage: 

(1) With the end of this age the great High Priest will 
antitypically offer the blood of "the Lord's goat" "for the 
sins of all the people"; and this will include the sins of Israel. 
And then the blessed opportunities of the New Covenant will 

be opened to them, as God promised. (Jer. 31:31; Rom. 11:27-31.) 

Then their eyes will be opened and they will 

see out of their obscurity and gladly accept the Mediator of 

the New Covenant and begin at once to share that Covenant's 

blessings. 

(2) For any Jew to get free from the Law Covenant 
before the inauguration of the New Covenant in the times of 
restitution, he must die to the Law. As St. Paul declares, 
"The Law hath dominion over a man as long as he liveth." 
"Wherefore, my brethren, ye also are become dead to the 
Law by the body of Christ; that ye should be married to 
another, even to him who is raised from the dead." (Rom. 7:1,4.) 
This is in full accord with the Apostle's statement, 

"Christ is the end of the Law for righteousness to every one 
that believeth"— to the extent of becoming a follower of 
Christ and consecrating his restitution rights in death, a living 
sacrifice, following the example of his Redeemer. (Rom. 10:4.) 
The present being the time appointed of the Father 
as the "acceptable year of the Lord" (Isa. 61:2), the "acceptable 
time" when God is willing to receive sacrifices (first 
the sacrifice of Jesus, and, subsequently, the sacrificing of 
those justified by his blood, his followers, who present their 
bodies (Rom. 12:1), the Jews have as good an opportunity 
of thus entering into joint-heirship with Christ, the Spiritual 
Seed of Abraham, as have the Gentiles. And they have no 
better opportunity, because there is no other name and no 
other manner now open to any to obtain a share in the 
"high calling" to the divine nature, glory and honor. 

St. Paul, in writing to the Galatians, warning them against 
coming under the domination of the Law, does not at all 
intimate that the Law Covenant had passed away or become 
dead. On the contrary, he testified that if any would be 
circumcised they would become "a debtor to do the whole 
law." (Gal. 5:3.) In the Epistle of Hebrews St. Paul mentions 
the fact that the New Covenant was promised and that 
the very intimation of the word new signified that the Law 
Covenant had become old, and hence was "ready to vanish 
away" and lose its force entirely. But he did not say that 
it had passed away. His plain teaching was that those who 
by faith accepted the Lord Jesus and became dead with him 
by baptism into his death were thus made "free from the 
Law" and were thereafter "not under the Law [Covenant] 
but under the Grace [Covenant— the Abrahamic Covenant.]"— 
Gal. 5:18. 

One Scripture more requires to be mentioned on this 



line: "Blotting out the handwriting of ordinances that was 
contrary to us (Hebrews), and took it out of the way, nailing 
it to his cross." (Col. 2:14.) This signifies, not that 
the Law Covenant was abrogated or done away, but that, so 
far as the Jews who had accepted Christ were concerned, the 
demands of all of the Law's ordinances were fully met for 
them by the Lord Jesus when he was nailed to the cross. 

Another evidence that the Law Covenant did not cease 
when Jesus died, and has not yet ceased, is furnished us in 
the type of Hagar and her son Ishmael. The Apostle tells 
us that Hagar allegorically represented the Law Covenant 
and that Ishmael symbolically represented fleshly Israel, the 
children of that Covenant. He cites the fact that when the 
heir, Isaac, was born, the son of the Sarah Covenant, God 
said to Abraham, "Cast out the bondwoman and her son, 
for the son of the bondwoman shall not be heir with the 
son of the free woman." (Gal. 4:30.) This signifies that 
the Law Covenant and its Jewish children were to be outcast 
from Divine favor for a time. If Hagar had died at that 
time, the teaching of the type would have been that the Law 
Covenant ceased then to exist. But Hagar continued to live, 
and so the Law Covenant was continued, and still has power 
over every Jew as long as he liveth. If we trace the type further 
we find that subsequently Hagar returned and was subject 
to her mistress, and Ishmael, who represented the Israelites, 
received later a blessing from Abraham, who represented 
God. 

So then, the Law Covenant did not pass away when our 
Lord Jesus died, nor when he arose from the dead the antitype 
of Isaac. Consequently the antitypical New Covenant 
was not ushered in at that time. Nevertheless, as we have 
heretofore pointed out, when our Lord presented himself in 
baptism, saying, "Lo, I come to do thy will, O God" (Heb. 10:7), 
he set aside the first (the typical) sacrifice that he 
might establish the second (the antitypical) sacrifice. The 
three and a half years of his own sacrificial ministry were 
typified in the killing of the bullock of the day of atonement. 
Immediately on his ascension, applying his blood on 
our behalf for our reconciliation to the Father that we might 
become his joint-sacrificers, he at once began the secondary 
part of the Day of Atonement sacrifices— the killing of "the 
Lord's goat" taken "from the people" and whose blood would 
subsequently be applied "for all the people." 

This sacrificing of the Church, in one sense, was done 
by the great High Priest on the Day of Pentecost. But it 
has been a progressive work, and all of the sacrifice is not 
yet accomplished, and will not be until the last member of 
the Body shall have gone into sacrificial death, in the Redeemer's 
footsteps. Thus we see that the setting aside of 
the type and the establishing of the antitype required a long 
period. And this Atonement Day matter, while all-important, 
was by no means the only typical feature of the Law Covenant. 
Did it not foreshadow the coming out of the High 
Priest in garments of glory and beauty to bless the people? 
And is not this feature of the Law still unfulfilled? And can 
it pass away before this fulfilment? We hold that it cannot, 



and that the instant of its passing away will be the instant 
in which the New Covenant will come into force with the 
same people— Israel. 



R4505 : page 328 

A TEMPEST-TOSSED PRISONER OF HOPE 

-ACTS 27:l-26.-OCTOBER 31.- 

Golden Text:— "Commit thy way unto the Lord; trust 
also in him, and he shall bring it to pass."— Psa. 37:5. 

FESTUS, governor of Judea, sent St. Paul and other 
prisoners to Rome, the former with no derogatory 
charges against him. There was no direct intercourse 
between Rome and the little port of Caesarea; hence 
for a distance of six hundred miles the journey was made by 
a small trading vessel. This journey lasted from about the 
middle of August to September 1st— good speed for a sailing 
vessel in those days, but the weather was fine. At Myra, St. 
Paul and two of the brethren who accompanied him (Luke 
and Aristarchus) and the guard and the other prisoners were 
transferred to an Egyptian vessel laden with a cargo of wheat, 
enroute for Rome and bearing a considerable number of 
passengers besides the crew— in all two hundred and seventy-six 
persons. The pleasant weather continued for several days 
and then it became stormy. The vessel abandoned her intended 
route to get into the lea of the Island of Crete and 
tarried at the port of Fair Havens for better weather. Thus 
they were delayed until about October 1st, the Jewish New 
Year's Day and a fast day and the time for equinoctial storms. 

St. Paul drew attention to the dangers of continuing the 
journey and advised that they winter there, but those in 
authority concluded that they would go to Phenice, a larger 
port. But before they had gone far a northeast wind (typhonic) 
struck the vessel suddenly and they were obliged to 
go with the wind to the southward and came under the shelter 
of the little Island Cauda. Here they undergirded the ship 
by placing chains and ropes under her keel, because the weight 
of the cargo of wheat and the severity of the storm had 
strained her. They lowered the gearing of the sails and 
continued to drive before the wind, guarding against sand 
banks. The ship labored heavily in the storm; part of her 
cargo was thrown overboard; later on she was further lightened 
by casting overboard her heavier furniture, tackle, etc. 
The storm continued for several days. Neither sun nor stars 
were visible, and the captain could not tell his whereabouts, 
for the compass had not yet been invented. Hence all aboard 
were gradually abandoning hope. They had ceased to eat 
and were almost in despair. 

Then came the opportunity for St. Paul's message of 
cheer. He reminded them that they should have followed 
his advice and stayed at Fair Havens and not have sustained 



the loss and injury. But he bade them be of good cheer, for 

their lives would all be preserved, though the ship be destroyed. 

In explanation of his confidence he related that the 

angel of God whom he served stood by him in the night saying, 

"Fear not, Paul; thou must be brought before Caesar; 

and, lo, God hath given thee all them that sail with thee. 

Wherefore, sirs, be of good cheer; for I believe God, that it 

R4506 : page 328 

shall be even as it was told me. Howbeit we must be cast 
upon a desert island." 

CALM IN A TIME OF STORM 

The true Christian in proper relationship with the Lord 
has at all times "the peace of God, which passeth all understanding,' 
ruling in his heart. It was St. Paul who sang 
praises to God in the prison at Philippi, who was composed 
and ready to speak to the people after being mobbed at Jerusalem, 
who was also the composed one in the tempest on the 
Mediterranean Sea. While St. Paul was indeed a stalwart 
follower of Jesus, with whom few, if any, could stand comparison, 
nevertheless the same principle holds with respect to 
every sincere child of God. If their triumphs of faith are 
less heroic than those of the Apostle, so also their trials are 
proportionately less severe. The Christian has much advantage 
every way. He has the promise of God, not only as 
respects the life that now is, but also re the life to come. 

"JESUS SAVIOR PILOT ME OVER LIFE'S TEMPESTUOUS 
SEA" 

"The voyage of life" frequently resembles the one of this 
study. It may start out with summer suns and every prospect 
favorable, but, ere long, the trials and difficulties of life sweep 
down as a storm— financial or social or moral tests come 
upon the individual to drive him from his intended course. 
His purposes thwarted, his heart overwhelmed with dismay 
and almost in despair he finds himself the more ready to hear 
the message from on high, speaking peace and telling him 
of a fair haven at last. Nevertheless it can be reached only 
through the wrecking of the earthen vessel, and Divine providence 
alone can effect the ultimate salvation. Happy are 
those who shall ultimately be saved even "through great tribulation, 
as the companions of God's "peculiar people," represented 
by St. Paul. (Rev. 7:14.) But still more happy, 
more blessed will be the 144,000 who now have in the stormy 
times the fellowship of God and through sore tribulation shall 
enter the Millennial Kingdom as Joint-Heirs of the Lord. 
It will be through their instrumentality under God that their 
companions in the storm of life may ultimately be saved.— 
Rom. 11:31. 

Ah, yes, we do well to heed the exhortation of our Golden 
Text, "Commit thy way unto the Lord; trust also in him; 
and he shall bring it to pass." He shall bring to pass blessings 



and peace, even in the midst of the storms of life, and he 
shall bring to pass eventually for these glory, honor and immortality 
through Christ. 
May we not adapt Longfellow's majestic words: 

Thou, too, sail on, O Ship the Great! 
Sail on, O Church, be strong and wait! 
Humanity with all its fears, 
With all the hopes of future years, 
Is hanging breathless on thy fate! 
We know what Master laid thy keel, 
What Workman wrought thy ribs of steel, 
Who made each mast, and sail, and rope, 
What anvils rang, what hammers beat, 
In what a forge and what a heat, 
Were shaped the anchors of thy hope! 

Fear not each sudden sound and shock; 

Tis of the wave and not the rock; 

Tis but the flapping of the sail, 

And not a rent made by the gale. 

In spite of rock and tempest roar, 

In spite of false lights on the shore, 

Sail on, nor fear to breast the sea! 

Our hearts, our hopes, are all with thee, 

Our hearts, our hopes, our prayers, our tears, 

Our faith triumphant o'er our fears, 

Are all with thee— are all with thee! 



R4506 : page 328 

"FOR GOD WAS WITH HIM" 

-ACTS 27:27; 28:10.-NOVEMBER 1 .- 

Golden Text:— "The Lord redeemeth the soul of his 
servants; and none of them that trust in him shall 
be desolate. "-Psa. 34:22. 

OUR studies show us St. Paul from various standpoints 

—a bigoted persecutor; a humble penitent 

crying, "Lord, what wouldst thou have me to 

do?" a courageous witness to the Truth amongst 

his own people; a self-sacrificing missionary in foreign 

lands; we have noted his conduct in the presence of 

mobs and in the presence of kings and nobles; and his 

courage in the presence of danger while on his voyage 

as a prisoner to Rome. To-day we view him as a man 

amongst men in contact with the duties of life and in the 

midst of a great disaster— a shipwreck. His deportment 

from the time he became a follower of Jesus was noble, 

humble, reverential, faithful, devout, saintly: worthy of emulation 

by all the followers of the Lord Jesus Christ. The 

transformation wrought in St. Paul is possible in all who 



have the hearing ear and who receive the Gospel message 
into good and honest hearts. Such a transformation is of itself 
a witness to the power of God— to the reality of the religion 

R4506 : page 329 

of the Bible. What a changed world we should be in, 
if all mankind underwent such transformation! But all are 
not in condition of heart to be thus influenced, thus "drawn" 
by the Gospel. Some will need the strong arm of Messiah, 
will need the authority and force of the Millennial Kingdom 
to bring them to subjection and to show them the advantages 
of right over wrong. Thank God that we may pray with 
faith, "Thy Kingdom come; thy will be done on earth as it is 
done in heaven." 

SHIPWRECKED ON MALTA 

Fourteen days and nights scudding before a terrific storm 
brought St. Paul and the ship's company of two hundred 
and seventy-six souls to where the trained ears of the seamen 
in the night caught the sounds of the surf, they knew 
not where. Four anchors were cast out of the stern of the 
vessel and they waited for morning. St. Paul, the Jew Prisoner, 
by this time had risen in the estimation of all on board 
the ship— "For God was with him." Throughout the storm 
all had lost courage and hope but him, and his was due to 
his submission to God's will and partly to the fact that in 
a vision the Lord showed him that he should yet preach the 
Gospel at Rome and that, for his sake, Divine Providence 
would care for every life on board the ship. A heart at peace 
with God and instructed through his Word is prepared for 
what may come, of joy or sorrow. The Apostle exhorted his 
dejected companions to be of good cheer. He reminded them 
of his vision and assured them of his absolute faith therein. 
He urged them to take food that they might be strengthened 
for the strenuous exertions of the coming day. His cheerfulness 
and example were contagious. As the light of the 
Lord was his peace and joy, so he in turn was the light of 
that ship and its comfort. He illustrated what he taught— that 
God's people should do good unto all men as they have opportunity, 
especially to the household of faith. He exemplified 
his own words of II Corinthians 1:4— "God comforteth us in 
all our tribulation, that we may be able to comfort them which 
are in any trouble, by the comfort wherewith we ourselves are 
comforted of God." 

With the morning light they discerned the shore and a 
little bay which now is known as St. Paul's Bay in the Island 
of Malta, then called Melita. The pilot cut loose from his 
anchors, hoisted sail and sought to beach the boat; but, before 
reaching shore, grounded on a mud bank; the forepart 
holding fast, the rear began to go to pieces with the force of 
the waves, as it was a meeting place for two sea currents. 
The life boat had been cut adrift in the night, because the 
seamen had attempted to desert the ship. St. Paul advised 
this course, realizing the need of the seamen to bring 



the boat to land. His confidence in God's promise did not 
lead him to be slack as respects the proper use of earthly 
means. There is a lesson here for God's people. While 
praying and trusting, let us not slack our hands. 

Seeing that only by swimming or floating on wreckage 
could the shore be reached, the soldiers proposed to kill the 
prisoners because under Roman law they were answerable 
for their security with their own lives. But the centurion 
had learned to esteem the Apostle, and for his sake spared 
all the prisoners, doubtless remembering the vision which 
had inspired them all with the hope and courage which 
brought them thus far towards safety. It turned out as St. 
Paul had foretold, that every human life was spared and 
the ship alone was lost with her cargo. 

On the shore we get a new picture of the Apostle. He 
stood not on any dignity or assumed superiority to be served, 
but promptly assisted in serving the interests of the entire 
company. We find him gathering sticks for a fire, at which 
the company might be warmed and dried. The barbarians 
of the Island (so called because they did not speak Greek 
but Phoenician) showed them various kindnesses. But when 
they saw a viper, warmed to life by the heat of the fire, 
fasten itself upon the Apostle's hand, they reasoned that this 
prisoner was doubtless a murderer who, having escaped the 

R4507 : page 329 

perils of shipwreck, Justice still pursued, and had caused him 
to be bitten that he might die. They supposed that the arm 
would swell with the poison from the viper and that soon 
St. Paul would be writhing in agony and die in torture. But 
when he shook off the serpent and suffered no injury, they 
esteemed that he must be a God. 

A fresh opportunity here offered for the honoring of the 
Gospel message, for St. Paul found that the father of the 
governor was sick and he miraculously healed him and other 
sick people of the island. Thus was the knowledge of Christ 
and his minister to a considerable extent shed abroad, although 
so far as we have any information the Apostle did not 
attempt to preach the Gospel message, either to his companions 
on shipboard, or to the people of the island. Evidently 
he did not consider them to be "good ground" in 
which to sow the seed of the Kingdom— evidently he did not 
consider them to be of those whom the Lord our God has 
called to be of the Bride class now being "called" and tested. 
Their experiences, doubtless, will prove profitable to them "in 
due time," when the glorified Christ shall draw all men unto 
himself— "And I, if I be lifted up from the earth, will draw 
all men unto me" (John 12:32), granting them blessed opportunities 
for knowledge and blessing and restitution.— 
Acts 3:19-21. 



R4507 : page 329 



ST. PAUL PRISONER AT ROME 

--ACTS 28:ll-31.-NOVEMBER 14.- 

Golden Text:— "I am not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ; 
for it is the power of God unto salvation, to every one that 
believeth."— Rom. 1:16. 

EARLY in the spring A.D. 60 Centurion Julius and his 

soldiers of the Augustan Band started from Malta 

with St. Paul and the other prisoners for 

Rome in another ship, Luke and Aristarchus 

accompanying. The sea journey was effected without special 

incident, the landing being made in the Bay of Naples at 

Puteoli, the seaport of Rome, which is one hundred and 

fifty miles inland. Here they tarried seven days, the Centurion 

awaiting orders from Rome respecting the disposal 

of his prisoners. The delay afforded St. Paul an opportunity 

to meet with a little band of Christians residing at Puteoli. 

Doubtless he took the opportunity also to send word to 

the Christians residing at Rome, whom he repeatedly declared 

that he longed to meet and whom the Lord promised 

that he should meet. The journey to Rome, one hundred 

and eighty miles, was made on foot. En route the Apostle 

was frequently cheered by evidences of the Christian love of 

the brethren. Some of these met him at Appii Forum, forty-three 

miles distant from Rome, and another delegation met 

him at Three Taverns, thirty miles from the great city. 

Many great generals had come this same way with their 
troops to the imperial city, to receive honors and applause, 
but few preachers ever had so great honors as were accorded 
to St. Paul. The journey to and from was for one delegation 
sixty miles and for the other eighty miles, and the 
record shows us that the Apostle was by these made 
acquainted with the true spirit of brotherhood amongst the 
Christians at Rome. The brethren doubtless came on the 
journey for their own refreshment and joy, not realizing, 
perhaps, that the Apostle needed this evidence of their love. 
Commenting along these lines a gifted writer says, "We often 
forget that great men are often very lonely and, while we 
hesitate to say kind words to them, yet words of recognition 
for what they have done are refreshing to those who 
receive more criticism than praise. A few days ago an editor 
showed me a letter he had just received from one who 
had held nearly the highest position in the gift of the American 
people, thanking him for his kindly words in a late editorial. 
My friend said that at first he was astonished that 
so great a man should care for anything he could say; but 
on further thought he understood the value of generous appreciation 
even to the greatest." 

R4507 : page 330 

"IN HIS OWN HIRED HOUSE" 

The fact that there were no charges of an evil character 



against St. Paul and the further fact that the Centurion who 
had him in charge during the voyage became his friend were 
quite sufficient reasons why he should not be treated as an 
ordinary prisoner, but allowed to live in his own hired house 
under the care of a soldier to whom he was lightly chained. 
However, although not permitted to go at liberty, he was 
permitted to receive his friends and others who called upon 
him. It is difficult to estimate how much Divine Providence 
had to do with all these arrangements. Moreover, the soldier 
on guard was changed every few hours, so that probably he 
came in close contact with at least six every day, and thus 
gradually he probably had contact with the entire imperial 
guard. Thus many were brought in contact with Christian 
teachings and example. It is claimed that it was through 
these soldiers that the Gospel message was carried to France, 
Germany and Great Britain. Truly, "God works in a mysterious 
way, his wonders to perform!" St. Paul must have 
had some financial means. It is assumed that ere this he 
had come into his patrimony. The Scriptures intimate that 
Felix held him captive at Caesarea in hope of receiving a 
bribe for his release, evidently having some intimation respecting 
St. Paul's finances. 

The Lord's servant was not slow in using his God-granted 
privileges. He knew not when they might be taken 
away. First of all, of course, he met the Christian brethren; 
but, as early as the third day after his arrival, he sent for 
the Jewish leaders and officers of the synagogues, for at this 
time there were seven synagogues at Rome. He desired to 
give them information at first-hand respecting why he was 
there and a prisoner. Secondly, he wished to preach to them 
the Gospel. He explained that although a prisoner at the 
instance of the Jews at Palestine, he was not disloyal to 
his nation or its customs. He had been pronounced innocent 
at the Roman Court, but had been compelled to appeal to 
Caesar for his safety; but that even then he was making no 
accusation against his countrymen. He proposed that gladly 
he would explain to them the good news, that the long-expected 
Messiah, in whom the Jewish expectations of his 
nation rested, had come. The response was that they had 
received no letters or other communication injurious to the 
Apostle, and expressed a desire to hear for themselves what 
St. Paul had to say, because they had heard of this sect and 
knew that it was spoken against as evil. If he could say 
anything favorable to it they would hear it. 

As our Lord foretold, the darkness which now predominates 
in the world hates the light and everywhere speaks 
against it. Vile slanders are still the weapons of the Adversary 
which the Christian must not handle, because to do so 
is contrary to the spirit by which he has been regenerated. 
Even where a truth discreditable to another must be told 
for any reason it must be spoken in love and, so far as 
possible, nothing derogatory or injurious must be said. "Speak 
evil of no man." It is, however, necessary at times to show 
up the error, the falsity of doctrines presented in the name 
of Truth; but in so doing, appeals should not be made to 
bigotry or superstition, but to reason and to the Word of God. 



TESTIMONY FN THE KINGDOM OF GOD 

On the appointed day the Jews came to hear the Apostle's 
message and, from morning until evening, he quoted, explained 
and expounded, showing from the Law and the prophecies 
that Jesus is the Messiah and that he is now gathering 
a Spiritual Seed to be his Kingdom, and that when this 
Kingdom is complete, it will be glorified in the First Resurrection, 
and will begin the work allotted to the Seed of 
Abraham, namely, that of blessing all the families of the 
earth. The blessing will consist of mental enlightenment 
and mental, moral and physical uplifting out of sin and death 
conditions to all that was lost in Adam and redeemed at 
Calvary. When some of them refused the message, St. Paul 
sought to further influence them, or at least to influence the 
believing ones, by quoting from the Prophet Isaiah, showing 
that God foreknew and foretold that the majority of 
Jews would reject the message when it should come to them. 
As our Lord said of them, "Hearing ye shall hear, and shall 
not understand; and seeing ye shall see, and shall not perceive." 
(Matt. 13: 14.) The Apostle does not mean that 
those who are deaf to the Gospel will be eternally tormented, 
but still they lose a great blessing, the wonderful privilege 
of becoming heirs of God and joint-heirs with Jesus Christ 
the Redeemer in his Millennial Kingdom. They lose a share 
with the saints in the glorious work of uplift, which will 
then be in progress. They lose this privilege because not 
worthy of it. They were blind to the Truth for this cause. 
To have permitted the unworthy ones to see, hear and understand 
the message would have distressed them and added to 
their responsibilities and possibly hindered, to some extent, 
the outworking of the Divine purposes. 

Some believed St. Paul's message and some did not. It 
is always thus. The Truth is a searcher and discerner of 
hearts, and a separator. St. Paul remained for two years 
under these conditions, preaching the Kingdom of God and 
how it may be attained at the present time by becoming 
members of the elect "little flock," the Bride of Christ; how 
the Kingdom when established during the Millennium will 
bless the whole earth. He explained how all these things 
were dependent upon the Lord Jesus Christ and his sacrifice; 
that without the redemption which is in Christ Jesus there 
could be no remission of sins, no everlasting life, no Kingdom 
class on the spirit plane, but only everlasting destruction. 
-Acts 3:23. 



R4508 : page 330 

THE SERVANT'S PATH IN A DAY OF REJECTION 

Servant of Christ, stand fast amid the scorn 

Of men who little know or love thy Lord; 
Turn not aside from toil: cease not to warn, 



Comfort and teach, trust Him for thy reward; 
A few more moments' suffering, and then 

Cometh sweet rest from all thy heart's deep pain. 

For grace pray much, for much thou needest grace 
If men thy work deride— what can they more? 

Christ's weary foot thy path on earth doth trace; 
If thorns wound thee, they pierced Him before; 

Press on, look up, tho clouds may gather round, 
Thy place of service He makes hallowed ground. 

Have friends forsaken thee, and cast thy name 
Out as a worthless thing? Take courage then: 

Go tell thy Master; for they did the same 

To Him, who once in patience toiled for them; 

Yet He was perfect in all service here; 

Tho oft thou hast failed: this maketh Him more dear. 

Self-vindication shun; if in the right 

What gainest thou by taking from God's hand 

Thy cause? If wrong, what dost thou but invite 
Satan himself thy friend in need to stand? 

Leave all with God; if right, He'll prove thee so; 
If not, He'll pardon; therefore to him go. 

Be not men's servant: think what costly price 

Was paid that thou mayest His own bondsman be, 

Whose service perfect freedom is. Let this 

Hold fast thy heart. His claim is great to thee. 

None should thy soul enthrall to whom 'tis given 
To serve on earth, with liberty of heaven. 

All His are thine to serve: Christ's brethren here 
Are needing aid, in them thou servest Him. 

The least of all is still His member dear, 

The weakest cost His life-blood to redeem. 

Yield to no "party" what He rightly claims, 

Who on his heart bears all His people's names. 

R4508 : page 331 

Be wise, be watchful, wily men surround 

Thy path. Be careful, for they seek with care 

To trip thee up; see that no plea be found 
In thee thy Master to reproach. The snare 

They set for thee will then themselves enclose 
And God his righteous judgment thus disclose. 

Cleave to the poor, Christ's image in them is; 

Count it great honor if they love thee well; 
Nought can repay thee after losing this, 

Tho with the wise and wealthy thou shouldst dwell. 
Thy Master oftentimes would pass thy door 

To hold communion with his much-loved poor. 

The time is short, seek little here below: 



Earth's goods would cumber thee and drag thee down. 
Let daily food suffice; care not to know 

Thought for to-morrow: it may never come. 
Thou canst not perish, for thy Lord is nigh, 

And His own care will all thy need supply. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

I have had this poem for a long time and always intended 
to send it to you. I do not know the author and 
think he probably never knew you; but it seems to apply as 
if it had been written to you. 

Yours in the One Hope, S. L. G. C. 



R4508 : page 331 

SOME INTERESTING LETTERS 



MY DEAR PASTOR AND OTHER MEMBERS OF CHRIST'S BODY: 

God has certainly been good to me, and I cannot express 
the joy that has so recently come through the light 
of "Present Truth." And am so thankful, too, that it 
came at the time it did. For several years my life and 
my husband's life— and since our marriage our united 
lives— have been consecrated so far as we had light, and 
there was a great peace and comfort in our daily service 
for him. We were members of the M.E. Church 
from childhood, and, as "touching the righteousness which 
is in the law (Methodist law), blameless." 

For some years I served as class leader, Epworth 
League President, Junior League Superintendent, Superintendent 
Primary Department in Sunday School and 
afterward as a Nurse Deaconess and Evangelistic Deaconess 
under the Woman's Home Missionary Society. Six 
years ago I married Mr. Brown, General Secretary of the 
Young Men's Christian Association at Decatur, Ills. We 
were led, through the study of the Bible, to see that 
eternal torment, as taught by our church, was false, also 
to expect the establishment of Christ's Kingdom upon 
earth in the near future, though we knew nothing of the 
teaching of Millennial Dawn. 

About a year ago our first sorrow came, when a dear 
little babe died, and that was only the beginning of 
sorrows. A few weeks later my husband's health failed; 
he was forced to resign his position, our home was broken 
up, household goods stored, and, after vain attempts to 
restore health and for which all our money was spent, 
death again came and took the one upon whom it seemed 
my very life depended. A few weeks before his death 
some one mailed us a copy of "What Say the Scriptures 
about Hell?" I read it and said to my mother, who was 
present, "If these are the teachings of Millennial Dawn 
they are greatly misrepresented. I have always thought 
of them as I have of 'Dowieism,' but this gives me the 
proof that I have been seeking for three years— that the 



Bible does not teach eternal torment." Then I got the 
first three volumes of the "Dawn-Studies" and hurriedly 
read two of them. Under the circumstances I could not 
study; then came the death. The comfort that the knowledge 
of the high calling gave me and the peace which 
filled my soul sustained me through the sad hours and 
days, and continues even now. After reading the remaining 
four volumes, I subscribed for the "Tower," 
severed my relations with the Church and social organizations, 
and am rejoicing in the Blessed Hope. 

I have searched the Scriptures daily to see whether 
these things are so, and am proving beyond a doubt that 
they are the teaching of his Word. We (my two little 
children and I) are living in my old home town, where 
much of my church work has been done. My friends do 
not understand my action toward the church and are 
deeply grieved. So far as I can learn, I am the only 
woman in Casey who has accepted the Truth. Sometimes 
it seems hard to stand alone when I have had so many 
friends and such a strong Christian husband to help me, 
but the Father knows how much I am able to bear, and 
I rejoice that I am counted worthy to suffer for him and 
that I may "go to him without the gate bearing his 
reproach." 

Dear Brother Abraham is "strong in the Lord" and 
helps me very much. He and his wife come to my home 
(or I to theirs) one or two evenings each week for study 
of the Word. All the past earthly blessings "I count but 
loss for the excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus 
my Lord." We are thankful indeed to our blessed Lord 
for the strengthening food received through our dear 
Pastor, Brother Russell, and also for making us acquainted 
with members of the Body, who have been very 
helpful. We are also grateful for the increase of knowledge 
which Brother Hall's visit gave us, and the opportunity 
of having the harmonious teaching of the Word 
publicly presented to our friends. 

After much thought and prayer, I have decided to 
take the "Vow" and, with his help, keep it. My sacrifice 
is on the altar. Pray that I may keep it there until it 
be consumed in his way. With much love to all in the 
Truth, and an intense desire to make my calling and 
election sure, I am, 

Your new Sister in Christ, MRS. GEO. B. BROWN. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

For some time I have been thinking of telling you of 
my appreciation of "The Watch Tower" and the sermons, 
to say nothing of the books and all of the helps we have 
for the thorough study of our Father's Word. 

I feel very humble and thankful to our loving Heavenly 
Father and to our dear Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ 
that I am permitted to see these grand truths while some 
others blessed with larger opportunities are now stumbling 



on account of not being able to see eye to eye with 
you on the Covenants and the Vow. 

When the Vow first came out in "The Watch Tower" 
one year ago, I did not understand it and objected to it, 
as I felt that my consecration vow covered the whole 
ground. But it was not long until I realized that my objections 
were from the great Adversary of our souls. I 
soon discovered that there was a wrong condition of heart 
back of the objection, so I asked the Lord to remove all 
feelings of resentment and to fill my heart and mind with 
his holy Spirit and with a desire to obey his will at whatever 
cost. I praise his name that my prayer was answered 
and that he led me to see my need of the Vow and I 
gladly and thankfully made it my own; and now, daily, I 
pay my vows to the Lord. When I see a weak point in my 

R4509 : page 331 

character I strengthen it by making a vow to the Lord 
that through his grace I shall overcome that weakness. 
One vow that I have taken is that I will not murmur 
nor complain; another, that I will not speak evil or even 
slightingly of any one; not that I was particularly given 
to murmuring or complaining, for I am naturally of a 
hopeful turn of mind; neither was I given to evil speaking; 
but I never realized how much I needed to be on my 
guard along those lines until I made them a subject of 
special prayer and vowed to the Lord that by his help I 
would overcome those faults. At first I failed a number 

R4509 : page 332 

of times; then I would go to the Lord and tell him how I 
regretted my weaknesses and how I desired to be pure in 
heart; then came "The Tower" with the article, "There is 
a sin unto death." I read it over and over many, many 
times and then I realized more and more the great necessity 
of paying our vows to the Lord and that only those 
who come off more than conquerors will be of the Little 
Flock. 

Dear brother, it is indeed a narrow way, and I praise 
the Lord that he is showing me with each succeeding step 
more and more the narrowness of it; and I rejoice that 
the "path of the just is as the shining light that shineth 
more and more unto the perfect day." 

It is to me a great blessing and strength to remember 
you, dear Brother, at the throne of heavenly grace many 
times daily, and to remember the Brooklyn Bethel family, 
some of whom I know personally, with all the interests of 
the harvest work and also all of the Lord's dear people. 

I hope, dear Brother Russell, that you had a pleasant 
and helpful visit with the dear ones on the other side of 
the great Atlantic. Will it not be glorious when we all 
meet in our Father's Kingdom, and the glory and knowledge 
of the Lord shall be filling the earth ocean wide and 
ocean deep? 



Praying the Lord's blessing on yourself and all others 
in "Bethel Home" and on the harvest work, I am, with an 
humble request for your prayers on my behalf, 

Your sister in the One Hope, 

J. M. GOODHART,-Ohio. 

P.S.--I have been in Present Truth four and one half 
years. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

I wonder if it is not a pleasure for you to hear from 
those who have been blessed through your ministries! 

Five years ago my husband and I received light which 
we gladly accepted, when Brother Marchant stopped at 
our door and presented Vol. 1. We bought, read, wondered 
and eagerly obtained the other volumes and began 
to attend the meetings held by the Bible students. 

During these five years we have enjoyed the Sunday 
addresses on the Truth by Brother Streeter and visiting 
Pilgrim brethren, and the testimony meetings and Friday 
evening studies. The interest has grown so that from 
the handful that met together five years ago, there are 
now about a hundred regular attendants on Sundays, and 
often there are fifty or seventy-five above that number. 
Our testimony meetings have outgrown the parlors of any 
of our members, and so they have been divided into two 
sections. It is delightful to enjoy the harmony here, and 
I attribute it to the fact that we "have not many teachers," 
but study the Scriptures with the "Key" under the 
wise and careful leadership of our dear Brother Streeter, 
who patiently studies and guides us to the solution of 
each point, referring us constantly to God's Word as unfolded 
in the light now due. 

Interest has been aroused and is being developed in 
Pawtucket, and in Pawtuxet also, where a number of 
people await anxiously the next chart talk. Truly the 
Lord has blessed us in Providence, and we bless and 
praise him and ever rejoice in the Truth. 

Your Sister in our dear Lord, 

F. A. R.,-R. I. 



DEAR SIR:- 

A little over a year ago I providentially became acquainted 
with "The Watch Tower" and "Dawn-Studies," 
which I have read with increasing interest and enjoyment 
and deepening conviction. A friend loans me "The 
Tower," and I have the full set of books and "The Tower 
Bible." "The Tower" and "Dawn-Studies" have given 
me such new and blessed views of the Scriptures that 
they have superseded my church papers and other denominational 
literature, which no longer satisfy me, 
and which I have discontinued. I find my greatest delight 
is studying and conversing upon these gracious 



truths. 

The teaching refuting eternal punishment, declaring 
the grand and glorious restitution blessings and proclaiming 
the Lord's presence, though so wholly at variance 
with the doctrines and teachings of my church (Methodist), 
which I had ever loyally and devotedly supported, 
especially appealed to me, affording unspeakable joy and 
thanksgiving. I can never be thankful enough to God 
for bringing me a knowledge of these glorious things 
through your writings. The thought that Christ is now 
present and is setting up his Kingdom gives me keenest 

joy. 

Yours in the Present Truth, M. G. ROBERTS,-Me. 



DEAR BROTHER AND PASTOR:- 

As per your request, I send this postal to tell you I 
have made the Vow my own resolution before the Lord. 
I feel that I want to take my stand with those who are supporting 
the Truth and the Harvest Work and to withdraw 
myself from those who are opposing either. I feel it is 
incumbent on me to take advantage of every means of grace 
the Lord places at my disposal. I believe your visit removed 
the last barrier in my mind, and I think there may be others 
who have been helped to see the Vow in a different light 
as a result of your visit. May the Lord bless you and keep 
you. 

Your Brother only by his grace, 

FRANK P. SHERMAN. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

I have wanted so much to write you, but understanding 
how very busy you are, I refrained until now. 

Six years ago I was a nominal church member and a 
great Spiritualist, trying to find peace and comfort from 
those sources, but, finding none, was about to say there 
is no other world than this. 

When I purchased the first volume of "Scripture Studies" 
of Sister Coppage I was rejoiced to read it and found 
such comfort that I left off attending church, and read 
my book and Bible, not knowing that there were others 
of like faith until Brother and Sister Schuler canvassed 
here a year ago, of whom I bought the remaining volumes, 
since which I have carefully read your book on 
Spiritualism. 

I cannot tell you what joy I found, for even my children 
were afraid when night came; we were almost possessed 
by those evil ones. Since I have read and told 
them all, they all know and say, "Mother, we do not fear 
any more; and home is at peace again." 

When first I read the Vow I was much impressed with 
its grandeur. I have made it my own. Would that I 
could tell you all that your writings have done for me. 



Your Sister by his grace, 

MRS. N. J. KENDRICK,-Ga. 



DEAR FRIENDS :- 

While in Carnegie Library at Conneaut, O., recently, 
I came across your series of "Millennial Dawn." Now I 
should like to have samples of your tracts. I might add 
that my interest in your message has already caused some 
stir among friends who, like the Pharisees of old, think 
good news bad doctrine. 

Until I read those Keys to the Bible in Conneaut, I had 
no good light on eternal torment, which from a boy I 
never could accept. I prayed for light and the Lord, I 
believe, sent me into the library and to the "light." They 
were the first books I touched on entering and were just 
what I wanted. 

Yours in Christ Jesus, 

CHAUNCEY G. McCOY,-Pa. 



DEAR BROTHER AND PASTOR:- 

If you think this might prove an incentive to some one 
to study more faithfully please use it, if you think best. 

For the third time in a little over four years, I have 
commenced the study of the full course of "Millennial 
Dawn" series. During this time every available moment 
has been given to this course of reading, which has 

R4509 : page 333 

also included every printed sermon and issue of "The 
Tower." This has necessitated the giving up of visiting, 
fancy work, music and all other reading; none but necessary 
work of any kind has occupied my attention. 

As I take up Vol. II. for the third reading, I am amazed 
to find the many points overlooked in, or forgotten since, 
the former readings. Each time I read I find each volume 
more intensely interesting because of prophecy fulfilled 
or in process of fulfillment before my eyes. 

I need not add that the benefit received is inestimable, 
incalculable; that I would not exchange the knowledge 
and satisfaction thus far gained for the wealth of all the 
world. 

Undoubtedly this continuous study of the unfolding of 
the Father's plan, as also the making of the special vow 
to the Lord my own, has enabled me thus far to "stand 
in this evil day;" and by his grace I shall pursue this 
study and adherence to the entire vow of consecration according 
to ability, until our "change" come, that so "having 
done all," I may "stand" perfected in his presence. 

My Bible is a thousand fold more precious, because 
with each perusal of any one of the volumes, the eyes of 
my understanding are still more widely opened to discern 



the will and purpose of its Great Author. My reverence 

R4510 : page 333 

for and gratitude to him for the precious "meat in due 
season" for all who "will receive it," knows no bounds. 

May he keep you moment by moment, ever closer and 
closer "under the shadow of the Almighty," sustaining 
and protecting you through every trial or persecution he 
may permit to come into your life and crown you "more 
than conqueror" at the full close of the earthly 
pilgrimage! 

Your least Colporteur and joyful fellow-servant, 

E.G. 



page 333 

BEREAN STUDIES ON THE ATONEMENT 

THE TEXT-BOOK USED FOR THIS COURSE 
IS SCRIPTURE STUDIES, SERIES V (E)* 

Questions on Scripture Study V.— 
Man for whom Atonement was made 

DECEMBER 5 

(1) Our Lord's words, "All live unto him" (Luke 20:38), 
are sometimes cited as proofs that the dead do not die, but 
only seemingly die and become more than ever alive. How 
should these words be understood? 

(2) Quote the passage and explain it in detail. 

(3) If death signifies destruction, why do the Scriptures 
speak of the dead as being asleep and not as being destroyed? 
P. 352. 

(4) In I Thess. 5:23 the Apostle speaks of the body and 
spirit and soul of the Church. Quote the passage and explain 
its meaning. P. 353. 

(5) Could it be that the Apostle here meant to refer to 
the Church as individuals? Could he have meant that the 
body, the soul and the spirit of the individual members of the 
Church would be preserved until the Second Coming of the 
Lord? P. 353. 

(6) It is held that since souls are said to go to sheol, 

to hades, therefore the human soul must be something tangible 
and conscious after dissolution. What is sheol? What is 
hades? P. 353, last par. 

(7) How many times does the word sheol occur in the 
Old Testament Scriptures? How is it translated— by what 
English words, and are these translations reliable— when 
judged by the present definition of the words used in translating 
it? State the various translations of sheol in English 

Bibles. P. 354, par. 1. 

(8) Is there anything of joy or pain implied in the word 



sheol? What class of people is said to go to sheol? P. 354, par. 2. 

(9) Why are all souls said to go to sheol? What do 
they do there? What is their state or condition and when 
will they be relieved? P. 354, par. 3. 

(10) What do we know about the English word hell 
and its origin and meaning in the unabridged dictionary? 
P. 354, last par. 

(11) Give illustrations of the use of the word sheol and 
show that they could not mean suffering, torment, etc. P. 355. 

(12) What is the difference between qeburah, a grave, 

the tomb, and the grave, sheol, the state of death? Give illustrations 
in proof of answer. P. 356, par. 1 . 

DECEMBER 12 

(13) Give illustrations of the use of sheol, translated pit, 
and show what it signifies thereby. P. 356, last par. 

(14) In Deuteronomy 32:22 we read of the fire of God's 
anger which shall burn to the lowest hell. Explain this 
passage. P. 357. 

(15) What is meant by the sorrows of hell— sheol? P. 
358, par. 1. 

(16) Explain the statement of Job 7:9, "He that goeth 
down to the grave (sheol) shall come up no more." P. 358, 
last par. 

(17) What is meant by "deeper than hell"? (Job 11:8.) 
P. 359, par. 1. 

(18) What is meant by the expression, "Oh, that thou 
wouldest hide me in sheol"? P. 359, par. 3. 

(19) What is meant by the expression, "If I wait, the 
grave (sheol, oblivion) is my house"? (Job 17:13,14.) 
P. 360, par. 1. 

(20) What is meant by Job 21:13, "They spend their 
days in wealth, and in a moment go down into sheol— hell"? 
P. 360, par. 5. 

(21) We read that "hell is naked before him." (Job 26:6.) 
What is here signified? 

DECEMBER 19 

(22) What is meant by the statement, "In death there is 

no remembrance of thee; in the grave (sheol, oblivion), who 
shall give thee thanks"?— Psa. 6:5. P. 361, par. 3. 

(23) We read that "the wicked shall be turned into hell 
and all the nations that forget God." Where is the Scripture 
and what does it signify? P. 361, par. 5. 

(24) When we read, "Thou wilt not leave my soul in 

hell (sheol, oblivion); neither wilt thou suffer thine Holy One 
to see corruption" (Psa. 16:10), what should we understand? 
P. 362, par. 1. 

(25) We read, "The bonds of hell (sheol, oblivion) encircle 
me; the snares of death seize me" (Psa. 18:5); how 

should this statement be understood? P. 362, par. 5. 

(26) We read, "O Lord, thou hast brought up my soul 
from sheol"— hell (Psa. 30:3); what is here signified? P. 362, 
last par. 



(27) We read, "Let the wicked be ashamed. Let them 
be silent in hell"; explain.— Psa. 31:17. P. 363, par. 2. 

(28) "Like sheep they are laid in hell. ...But God 

will redeem my soul from the power of shed" --hell. (Psa. 49:14,15.) 
What does this signify? P. 363, last par. 

(29) "Let them go down quickly into hell." (Psa. 55:15.) 
How shall we understand this inspired prayer? P. 364. 

(30) "Thou hast delivered my soul from the lowest 
hell."-Psa. 86:18. P. 365, par. 1. 

DECEMBER 26 

(31) Explain the Scripture, "My soul is full of troubles 
and my life draweth nigh unto sheol"— hell.— Psa. 88:3. P. 
365, par. 3. 

(32) "What man is he that liveth and shall not see 
death? Shall he deliver his soul from the hand (power) of 
sheol"-hell? What is meant?-Psa. 89:48. P. 365, last par. 

(33) What is meant by the statement, "The pains of hell 
gat hold upon me; I found trouble and sorrow"?— Psa. 1 16:3. 
P. 366, par. 1. 

(34) Explain the Scripture, "If I ascend up into heaven, 
thou art there; if I make my bed in hell, behold thou art 
there. "-Psa. 139:7,8. P. 366, last par. 

(35) Explain the statement, "Her steps take hold on 
hell"— sheol.— Prov. 5:5. P. 367, par. 1. 

(36) "Her house is in the way of hell." "Her guests 

are in the depths of hell." (Prov. 7:27; 9:18.) Explain these 
Scriptures. P. 367, par. 3-5. 



page 334 
BIBLES, TESTAMENTS, STUDENTS' HELPS, ETC. 
SUPPLIED AT WHOLESALE COST PRICES 



THIS LIST SUPERSEDES ALL PREVIOUS LISTS 

Bible publishers announce that, owing to increased cost of material 
and labor, they have found it necessary to advance the price of 
many of the cheaper grades. 

IN presenting our list of Bibles this year, we have dropped a number 
which we previously carried and have selected others which we 
think more desirable. We give below a list which, although not 
very large, we think will cover a range sufficiently broad to suit the 
wants of nearly all. However, should any of the friends desire a 
more complete list to select from, we shall be pleased to mail publishers' 
catalogues upon postal card application. 

First in importance among Bibles we rank the 



WATCH TOWER BIBLE 

described on next page. 



TEACHERS' BIBLES 

No (Add Postage on these, 20c. each.) Pub. Our 

04403 Minion, French Morocco, div. cir., round corners, Price Price 

red under gold, references, 7-1/4 x 5 $1.45 $ .94 

8301 Minion, French Morocco, div. cir., red under 
gold, illustrated, full teachers' helps, references, 
linen, 7-3/4x5-1/4 1.60 1.05 

4412 Black Face Brevier— easy to read. Egyptian 
Morocco, div. circuit, head bands and marker 

round corners, red under gold, 5-1/8 x 7-7/8 2.30 1.25 

(Add Postage on these, 26c. each.) 

8701 Long Primer, French Morocco, div. cir., red 
under gold, helps, references, concordance, 
illustrated, linen, 8-1/2x6 2.10 1.38 

8702 Same as 8701, leather lined 2.50 1.63 

COMBINATION TEACHERS' BIBLES 

These Bibles show the variations of the Revised Version at the 
foot of each page. Otherwise they are ordinary "Teachers' Bibles" 
with maps, concordance, etc., illustrated. 
(Add Postage on these, 28c each.) 
610 Bourgeois, French Seal, div. cir., red under 

gold, 8 x 6 x 1-3/4 5.00 1.35 

614 Same as 610, leather lined 6.00 1.63 

LINEAR TEACHERS' BIBLES 

Hitherto these Bibles have been sold by Subscription Agents 
only. Their special feature, differentiating from other Teachers' 
Bibles, is that they show the readings of the Common and Revised 
Versions side by side in the same line, self -pronouncing. 

(Add Postage on these, 30c each.) 
350 Small Pica, French Seal, red under gold, full 

teachers' helps, 8-3/4x6 x 1-1/2 6.00 2.10 

360 Small Pica, Levant Morocco, kid lined, otherwise 
same as 350 10.00 4.25 

POCKET BIBLES 

(Add Postage on these, 15c each.) 
01 153 Ruby, French Morocco, round cor., red under 

gold, div. cir., text only, 5-1/2 x 3-7/8 x 1-1/8 95 .63 

01329 Same as 01327, leather lined to edge 1.60 1.05 

194 Minion, French Morocco, div. cir., red under 

gold, text, 5-7/8 x4x 1-1/4 1.20 .78 

INDIA PAPER POCKET BIBLES 



"Mite" Bible (the smallest Bible) 
093X Venetian Morocco, div. cir., gilt edges with 

magnifying glass, 1-3/4 x 1-1/4 x 5/8 1.00 .75 

(Add Postage on these, 8c each.) 
01 103 Diamond, French Morocco, div. cir., red under 

gold, text only, 4-1/2 x 2-1/2 x 1/2 1.40 .98 

01112 Persian Morocco, leather lined to edge, otherwise 

as 01103 2.00 1.35 

01157X Ruby, French Morocco, div. cir., leather lined, 

red under gold, text only, 5-5/8x3-7/8x9-16 2.00 1.35 

03029X Pearl, Alaska Seal, div. cir., leather lined, silk 

sewed, red under gold, references, 5-1/8 x 3-7/8 x 5/8.. 3.25 2.15 
03114X Ruby, Persian Levant, div. cir., leather lined, 

silk sewed, red under gold, references, 5-5/8 x 4 x 3/4. 3.25 2.15 
(Add Postage for these, 4c each.) 
0612 Diamond, Persian Morocco, div. cir., leather 

lined, red under gold, text only, 3-3/4x2-1/2x7/8... 2.25 1.55 
02002X Brilliant, Persian Morocco, div. cir., leather 

lined, red under gold, maps (smallest reference 

Bible made), 3-5/8 x 2-1/2 x 5/8 2.50 1.70 

INDIA PAPER BIBLES 

(Add Postage for these, 15c each.) 

8635 Minion, French Morocco, div. cir., red under 

gold, references, maps, 7 x 4-3/4 x 5/8 1.75 1.13 

8636 French Seal, leather lined, otherwise as 8635 3.75 2.34 

9635 Brevier, large face, French Morocco, div. cir., 

red under gold, references, 7-1/8 x 5 x 1 2.75 1.90 

THUMB INDEX ON A BIBLE, 25c EXTRA 
INDIA PAPER BIBLES-(Continued) 

03265X Minion, Levant Morocco, div. cir., calf lined 
silk sewed, red under gold (thinnest minion 
reference Bible), 6-7/8 x 4-3/4 x 5/8 4.25 2.85 

03274X Minion, Alaska Seal, div. cir., leather lined, silk 

sewed, red under gold, references, index, concordance 
and maps, 6-7/8 x 4-7/8 x 7/8 4.50 3.00 

03554X Brevier, black face, Alaska Seal, div. cir., leather 
lined, red under gold, references, index, 
self-pronouncing, concordance and maps, 
8-1/8x5-1/2x7/8 5.50 3.60 

0358 IX Long Primer, black face, same as 03554x, 7-3/4 x 
5-1/4 x 15-16 6.00 4.00 

0865-1/2X Long Primer, Levant, div. cir., calf lined, silk 
sewed, red under gold, teachers' helps, arranged 
as cyclopedic concordance, 7-3/4 x 5-1/4 x 
1-1/8 8.00 5.25 

AMERICAN STANDARD REVISED BIBLE 

(Add Postage on these, 20c each.) 

160 Bourgeois, Cloth, references 1.00 .80 

172 Bourgeois, Egyptian Seal, references, red under 



gold, div. cir 2.00 1.60 

(Add Postage on these, 30c each.) 

260 Long Primer, Cloth, references, 8-3/4 x 6-3/4 1.50 1.15 

272 Long Primer, Egyptian Seal, references, red 

under gold, div. cir., 8-3/4 x 6-3/4 3.00 2.25 

(Add Postage, 15 cents each.) 
Minion, black faced, reference edition, self-pronouncing, a 
fine edition— 4-3/4 x 7. 

152 Egyptian Seal, div. cir., red under gold 1.75 1.38 

154 Persian Levant, leather lined to edge, otherwise 

same as 152 3.25 2.35 

(Add Postage, 12 cents each.) 

152X India paper edition of 152 2.75 1.97 

154X India paper edition of 154 4.00 2.81 

LAP BIBLES FOR THE AGED-References, Light 
Weight, Large Print 

(Add Postage on these, 25c each.) 

2002 Pica, Cloth, red edges, 9-1/4 x 6-1/2 x 1-1/4 2.00 .90 

2014 Pica, French Seal, limp, size same as 2002 2.75 1.43 

2022 Pica, French Seal, div. cir., size same as 2002 3.50 1.75 

2032 Arabian Morocco, grained leather lining to 

edge, silk lined band and marker 6.00 2.80 

CHILDREN'S ILLUSTRATED BIBLES 

(Add Postage on these, lie each.) 
216 Minion, French Morocco, limp, red under gold, 

5-3/4x3-5/8 1.25 .84 

215B Minion, French Morocco, references, div. cir., 

red under gold, 7-1/4x5-1/4x7/8 1.50 .85 

TESTAMENTS 

(Add Postage on these, 3c each.) 
21 13 Nonpareil, French Morocco, limp, gold title, side 

and back, gold edges (vest-pocket edition), 

4-3/8x2-7/8x1/2 40 .22 

2113P Same as above, with Psalms 50 .27 

2115 Same as 2113, with div. cir., and red under gold 56 .30 

2115P Same as 2115, with Psalms 66 .35 

013RL Same as 2113, with words of our Lord in red 

letters 60 .33 

015RL Same as 013RL, with div. cir., red under gold 80 .42 

2142X Nonpareil, French Seal, limp, grained leather 

lining, red under gold, gold roll (thin), 4-3/8 x 

2-3/4x3/8 85 .43 

2142PX Same as 2142X, with Psalms 1.00 .55 

010 Diamond, Venetian Morocco, limp, gold edges, 

3-3/4x2-1/4x1/4 50 .35 

014 Diamond, Arabian Morocco, div. cir., leather 

lined, red under gold, India paper, 3-3/4 x 2-1/4 x 1/4. .90 .65 
(Add Postage on these, 5c each.) 
371 Brevier, Roan leather, flexible, gold edges, with 

Psalms, 6-1/4x4-1/2 45 .45 



NEW TESTAMENTS FOR THE AGED 

(Add Postage on these, 10c each.) 

270 Small Pica, Roan, square cor., 5-3/4x8-1/4 45 .45 

361 Same as above, with Psalms, 8-1/4x5-1/2x3/4 50 .50 

REVISED TESTAMENTS 

0100 Brevier, Cloth, red edges, 16 mo., including 
postage .23 

TEXT BIBLES 

(Postage, 7c.) 
241 Agate type, cloth, red edges, 4 x 5-3/4 17 .17 

(Postage, 12c.) 
208 Nonpareil type, cloth, red edges, 5-1/4x7-1/4 25 .25 



PRICES ON BIBLES IN FOREIGN LANGUAGES FURNISHED ON REQUEST. 
page 335 
CONCORDANCES AND OTHER BIBLE STUDY HELPS 

First in this list we mention the several volumes of 

"STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURE" SERIES 

—referring inquirers to the second page of each issue of this journal 
for prices, etc. We commend also, as aids, the following publications 
by other presses, which we supply at specially low prices because of 
the assistance they will lend to the study of God's Word. We mention 
these somewhat in the order in which they seem to us to be desirable 
aids. 

THE WATCH TOWER BIBLE 
STUDENTS' EDITION 

[There is a picture of this Bible on the left side of the column.] 

We specially recommend this Bible 
for its smallness of size, lightness of weight 
and good-sized print, and above all for the 
helps to Bible students and teachers 
bound with it. Printed on India paper; 
excellent press work. Its special feature 
distinguishing this Bible from all others is 

ITS BEREAN BIBLE 
TEACHERS MANUAL 

Parti. 



Brief Scripture Commentary based 
on expositions of Dawn-Studies, THE 
WATCH TOWER and Brother Russell's 
published sermons, tracts, etc., with 
references to these for fuller comments. 

Part II. 

INSTRUCTORS' GUIDE TEXTS 

Texts topically arranged for use in 
teaching divine plan privately or publicly. 

Part III. 

BEREAN TOPICAL INDEX 

Part IV. 

DIFFICULT TEXTS EXPLAINED 

SPURIOUS PASSAGES NOTED 

WHOLESALE PRICES 
IN ANY QUANTITY 

POSTAGE, OR EXPRESSAGE INCLUDED 

MINION TYPE EDITION, 4-1/2 x 6-3/4 
inches. Sample of Type in our October 
1 issue. 

No. 1918-So-called French Seal, 

red under gold, round-cornered, 

divinity circuit, linen-lined $1.65 

No. 1928-Same as 1918, bound in 

Levant Morocco, fine-grained, 

very durable, leather lined 2.50 

BOLD-FACED TYPE EDITION. 

SAMPLE OF TYPE IN OCT. 1, '08, ISSUE, 

PAGE 302, SIZE 5-1/2 x 7-1/2 INCHES. 
No. 1938-The Helps in this Bible 

and the binding are exactly the 

same as in the above described 
No. 1928. (We have these only 

in the better binding "Levant 

Morocco.") Price $3.00 

No. 1948-This Bible is exactly 

the same as No. 1938, except 

that it contains additional matter 

desired by some, namely: 

the Bagster Concordance, etc., 

which adds to its bulk. Price 3.25 

Patent index 25 cents extra, but we do not advise this on so 
small a book. The above very special price was secured only by our 
placing a very large order— 10,000 copies. This is probably the 
largest-sized single order ever placed for India paper Bibles. 



DAILY HEAVENLY MANNA 
FOR THE HOUSEHOLD OF FArTH. 

This publication, we believe, will be in great demand as soon as 
known. It is a text-book for each day in the year— and good year 
by year continuously. 

But this is more than a text-book; it has an appropriate comment 
under each text selected from the columns of back issues of 
THE WATCH TOWER. 

Our new edition of the "Manna" contains the same texts 
and comments as the former one; but it has twice as many 
pages. Every alternate leaf is blank ruled, for use as an 
Autograph and Birthday record. It is printed on fine bond paper 
and bound in handsome dark blue cloth. It would be well worth 
$1.00 or more, in any book store. 

PRICES, WHOLESALE AND RETAIL. 

The new "Manna" will be sold by Manna Colporteurs and others 
at 50 cents each (60 cents when gotten by mail or prepaid express). 
The wholesale rates, open to any TOWER reader, are as follows, 
cash with order:— 

1 copy, postpaid $ .35 

10 or more copies, by express, prepaid, each 30 

10 or more copies, by freight or express, charges collect, each.. .20 

We, of course, prefer the STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES to be colporteured; 
but a good follow-up work can be done with "Manna" 
by those who cannot do the regular work with the STUDIES. 

We hope this little book will find a place at every breakfast 
table; and that spiritual refreshment may thus be enjoyed with the 
natural food, stimulating thankfulness to the Giver of all Good and 
thus inducing the peace of God and favoring both spiritual and natural 
health and well-being. 

THE EMPHATIC DIAGLOTT 

This very valuable work, published under the author's copyright 
by Fowler & Wells Co., New York City, has been sold by them at 
$4 in cloth and $5 in half leather binding. For several years a friend, 
an earnest Bible student, desirous of assisting the readers of our 
Society's publications, has supplied them through us at a greatly 
reduced price; now he has purchased the copyright and plates from 
the Fowler & Wells Co., and presented the same to our Society as a 
gift, under our assurance that the gift will be used for the furthering 
of the Truth to the extent of our ability, by such a reduction of price 
as will permit the poor of the Lord's flock to have this help in the 
study of the Word. 

REDUCED PRICES.-These will be sold with THE WATCH 
TOWER only. In cloth binding $1.50 (6s. 3d.)— includes postage and, 
as a Premium, one year's subscription, new or renewal, to Z.W.T. 
On thin paper, in full morocco leather, divinity circuit, red under 
gold edges, silk sewed, leather lined, $2.50 (10s. 6d.)— includes postage 
and one year's subscription to W.T. 

THE TISCHENDORF NEW TESTAMENT 



This is the ordinary Common Version in cloth binding. As 
footnotes it gives the reading of the three oldest Greek MSS., Sinaiticus, 
Vaticanus and Alexandrine, wherever these differ from the Common 
Version. This is a very valuable little work, published in Europe, 
which we specially import for the benefit of our readers. Price, 50c, 
including postage. 

LEESER'S TRANSLATION OF THE OLD 
TESTAMENT 

This is the standard translation amongst English reading 
Hebrews, by one of their own rabbis. It is not perfect, but is a 
valuable aid in critical study of the Old Testament. Our special 
price, in leather binding, including postage, is 

ANALYTICAL CONCORDANCE TO THE 
SCRIPTURES 

In English, Hebrew and Greek, by Prof. Young (Presbyterian). 
A valuable work for all critical students. Price, in cloth binding, $5, 
including postage. We are not permitted by the publishers to cut 
this price; but may and do give postage free and give besides a 
premium of any four volumes of the SCRIPTURE STUDIES series in cloth 
binding with each Concordance, or six volumes if purchaser pays 
the expressage. 

THE EXHAUSTIVE CONCORDANCE TO THE 
SCRIPTURES 

In English, Hebrew and Greek, by Prof. Strong (Methodist). 
This is also an able work and useful in critical study. It has some 
advantages over Young's; after getting used to it we prefer it. 
Special reduced prices,— in cloth binding, $3; half leather, $5. 
Carriage prepaid, 65c. extra. 

CRUDEN'S CONCORDANCE TO THE SCRIPTURES 

A valuable work, but scarcely necessary to those who have either 
of the above mentioned. English only. Cloth binding, $1, 
delivered. 

SMITH'S BIBLE DICTIONARY 

This is one of the most desirable editions of Prof. Smith's work. 
It is a large volume of 1020 pages. In cloth binding, $1.30, including 
postage. 

"BIBLE TALKS IN SIMPLE LANGUAGE" 

This is the best book of its kind we have ever seen. It presents 
the Bible stories in simple, but not childish language, and seems 
remarkably free from the bad theology so common in this class of 
books. All Christian parents should have a Sunday Bible lesson 
with their children, and this book furnishes interesting topics, to 
which may be added as much concordant "Present Truth" as the age 



of the children will justify. Parents are responsible for their children's 
training in theology as well as morals. This will assist you in 
the discharge of this duty, and thus be a blessing to yourself as well as 
to your children. 

624 pages, 250 illustrations; cloth sides, leather back and 
corners, gilt edges. A subscription book at $3. Our special price, 
75 cents, plus 25 cents postage. 

SCRIPTURE STUDIES-INDIA PAPER 

Calls for SCRIPTURE STUDIES divided into small portions, light 
convenient for the pocket, that could be read on the cars, etc., led 
us to prepare an India-paper edition. The entire volume is on this 
very fine paper reduced to three-eighths of an inch in thickness and 
about four ounces in weight. [The type is exactly the same size as in 
the regular editions.] It is a beauty. Leather covers, gold edges. 
Its cost, with postage, is now 75c each for the first three volumes 
and 85c each for the remainder per volume, at which price it is 
supplied to WATCH TOWER subscribers. 



page 336 

PUBLIC MINISTRIES OF THE TRUTH 

UNDER THE AUSPICES OF PEOPLES PULPIT 
ASSOCIATION OF BROOKLYN, N.Y. 



ONE-DAY LOCAL CONVENTIONS ADDRESSED BY THE 
EDITOR OF THIS JOURNAL AS FOLLOWS: 

BROOKLYN, N.Y., NOV. 7 

Morning Rally and Testimony Meeting at 10:30 o'clock. 

Discourse by Brother Russell at 3:00 p.m. Evening Meeting 
for the interested at 7:30 o'clock; this will be a Question 
Meeting. Visiting friends cordially invited. 

All meetings will be held in the Brooklyn Tabernacle, Nos. 
13-17 Hicks street. Convenient to all cars and ferries— close 
to the old bridge terminus. 

BROCKTON, MASS., NOV. 14 

ROCHESTER, N.Y., NOV. 21 

YORK, PA., NOV. 28 

BROOKLYN, N.Y., DEC. 5 

PITTSBURG N.S., PA., DEC. 12 



BROOKLYN TABERNACLE EVERY SUNDAY 

Preaching at 3:00 p.m. Praise service at 7:00 p.m.; 
Berean Bible Study at 7:30 p.m. Convenient to New York 
via Subway, and Jersey City via P.R.R. Annex Ferry. 



page 338 

STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES 
"MILLENNIAL DAWN" 

THESE STUDIES ARE RECOMMENDED TO STUDENTS AS VERITABLE "BIBLE KEYS. 

PRICES ARE NET AND BARELY COVER COST OF PRODUCTION, 

WHEN DELIVERED BY COLPORTEURS THE COST AND PRICE ARE INCREASED. 

SERIES I., The Plan of the Ages, gives an outline of the divine plan 
revealed in the Bible, relating to man's redemption and restitution: 
386 pages, in embossed cloth, 25c. (Is. l/2d.) India paper edition, 75c. 
(3s. l-l/2d.). 

This volume has been published as a special issue of our journal— 
at the extremely low price of 5c. a copy, in any quantity, postage included. 
(To foreign countries, 9c.) This enables people of slender 
purse to herald far and wide the good tidings in a most helpful form. 

SERIES II., The Time is at Hand, treats of the manner and time of 
the Lord's second coming, considering the Bible Testimony on this 
subject: 370 pages, in embossed cloth, 25c. (Is. l/2d.) India paper 
edition, 75c. (3s. l-l/2d.) 

SERIES III., Thy Kingdom Come, considers prophecies which mark 
events connected with the "Time of the End," the glorification of the 
Church and the establishment of the Millennial Kingdom; it also contains 
a chapter of the Great Pyramid, showing its corroboration of the 
dates and other teachings of the Bible: 384 pages, in embossed cloth, 
25c. (Is. l/2d.) India paper edition, 75c. (3s. l-l/2d.) 

SERIES IV., The Day of Vengeance, shows that the dissolution of the 
present order of things is in progress, and that all the panaceas offered 
are valueless to avert the predicted end. It marks in these events the 
fulfilment of prophecy, noting specially our Lord's great prophecy of 
Matt. 24 and Zech. 14:1-9: 660 pages, in embossed cloth, 30c. (Is. 3d.). 
India paper edition, 85c. (3s. 6-l/2d.) 

SERIES V., The At-one-ment Between God and Man, treats an all-important 
subject— the hub, the center around which all the features 
of divine grace revolve. Its topic deserves the most careful and 
prayerful consideration on the part of all true Christians: 507 pages, 
in embossed cloth, 30c. (Is. 3d.) India paper edition, 85c. (3s. 6-l/2d.) 

SERIES VI., The New Creation, deals with the Creative Week 
(Genesis 1 and 2), and with the Church, God's "New Creation." It examines 
the personnel, organization, rites, ceremonies, obligations and 
hopes appertaining to those called and accepted as members of the 
Body under the Head: 740 pages, in embossed cloth, 30c. (Is. 3d.) 
India paper edition, 85c. (3s. 6-l/2d.) 

The above prices include postage. 

IN FULL LEATHER BINDING, gilt edges, the set (6 vols.) $3.00, 
(12s. 6d.), plus postage, 60c. (Is.). 

Is also published in foreign languages as follows: German, five vols., 



in Swedish Vols. 1, 2, 3, 5 and 6; in Dano-Norwegian, three vols.; 
in Greek, three vols.; in French, two vols.; Hollandish, Spanish, 
and Italian, one vol. each; bound in cloth, uniform with English edition, 
prices the same; in Polish, condensed edition, one vol., 10 cents. 



page 337 

SEMI-MONTHLY 
VOL. XXX NOVEMBER 15 No. 22 
A.D. 1909--A.M. 6038 



CONTENTS 

The New Covenant in the Book of Hebrews 339 

Mediator of a Better Testament 341 

Under-Priests Now Entering the Holies 342 

Inauguration of Law Covenant Typed 

Institution of New Covenant 343 

"A Frenzy of Delusion" 344 

"One Mediator"-"The Man Christ Jesus" 345 

The Power of the Will-Self -Control 347 

Developing Will Power 347 

St. Paul's Autobiography 348 

St. Paul's Three Proofs 348 

Ransom Points to Be Remembered 349 

Some Interesting Letters 350 

page 338 

PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY 
CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
"BROOKLYN TABERNACLE," 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, NY., U.S.A. 

Foreign Agencies:— British Branch: 24 Eversholt St., London, 
N.W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, Barmen. Australasian 
Branch: Equitable Building, Collins St., Melbourne. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:— All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 



and in touch with the Studies, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, DANISH AND ITALIAN EDITIONS. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N.Y., POSTOFFICE 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA 



SWEET BRIER 
ROSE BOOKLET 



[In this area are pictures of two cards with flowers and the following words 
printed on the front and descriptions below each] 





LOVE 


The 


one another 


Sweet Brier 


as I have 


Rose 


loved You. 




We ought to lay down 




our lives for the brethren 



8 pages 3-1/2x5 inches. 

Our own Christmas and 8x10-1/2 inches. 
Birthday Card. Just 

what we all want. Order Motto for 1910, with the Vow printed 
now! 9 for 15 cts.; 18 on the reverse side, 2 for 15 cts.; 5 for 
for 25 cts.; 80 for $1.00. 25 cts.; 12 for 50 cts.; 25 for $1.00. 



BRO. RUSSELL'S LARGE MAIL 

Bro. Russell thanks the dear friends for the many kind 
letters he receives daily. He requests them to expect THE 
WATCH TOWER articles as personal letters in response. 



R4510 : page 339 

THE NEW COVENANT IN THE BOOK OF HEBREWS 

IF THE New Covenant, in no sense of the word, belongs 
to the Church— that is to say, if we are not under the 
New Covenant, if it belongs merely to Israel, and 
through Israel to the world, why does the Apostle 
have so much to say concerning it in the Book of Hebrews? 
To appreciate the necessity for the Book of Hebrews, we 



must mentally take our stand back in apostolic days and get 

our bearings as though we were living there under those 

conditions. Thinking of matters from this sympathetic standpoint 

the answer to this question is very simple, very plain. 

The early Church for seven years after our Lord's baptism, 

for three and a half years after his cross, was composed exclusively 

of Jews. Not until the end of Israel's promised 

"seventy weeks" of special favor could the Gospel message 

go outside of that nation at all. We remember that Cornelius, 

a just man, who prayed always and gave much alms, 

was the first one from the Gentiles to be received. In his 

case we remember how it was necessary for God to specially 

prepare St. Peter for such a remarkable change in the Divine 

method of dealing. 

We remember that years after this, the question of receiving 
the Gentiles and eating with them, or in any sense 
of the word recognizing them as being on equality with the 
Jews, was one which caused continual disturbance in the 
Church and amongst the most prominent of the apostles of 
the time. Years after Cornelius had received the holy Spirit 
teachers from Jerusalem went to Antioch and found that 
there Gentiles were received on an equal footing with the 
Jews in the Church of Christ without in any sense of the 
word subscribing to Moses and the Law Covenant. They 
were shocked and expressed themselves in such positive terms 
that the Antioch Church sent Paul and Barnabas with others 
to Jerusalem that a full conference on the question might 
be had. Guided of the holy Spirit the apostles reached 
right conclusions, yet even Peter was so little in sympathy 
with these conclusions that years after we find St. Paul reproving 
him for dissimulation and refusing to eat with the 
Gentile brethren when Jewish brethren were in the company 
—through deference to the Law Covenant, which somehow 
all Jews felt must be recognized and subscribed to. St. Paul 
seems to have been one of the apostles who early got the 
proper focus on this subject. 

We find that this Judaizing teaching was not only in 
the ascendancy in Palestine, but that its influence in considerable 
measure affected the Gentiles. St. Paul's Epistle to the 
Galatians, for instance, shows us how many of them, Gentiles 
by birth, had been misled into believing that whatever 
blessings they might enjoy through Christ and the original 
Abrahamic Covenant, they must also become amenable to the 
Law Covenant. Note that the Apostle's letter to the Galatians 
is almost exclusively devoted to this subject, and remember 
that the Galatians were not Hebrews, or, at least, 
the majority of them were not. In that epistle he found it 
necessary to show that he had equal authority with the other 
apostles as a teacher— that the Galatians might know that 
he was as well qualified as the others, and as fully authorized 
to instruct them respecting their obligations; that his word 
was authoritative; that the Gentiles were not under the Law 
Covenant, but under the Grace Covenant— the original Abrahamic 
Covenant. He recounts that he did not get his instruction 
or his knowledge of the Gospel from the Apostles 
at Jerusalem, but that, so far as it was concerned, he had 



under the Lord's Providence been their instructor, rather 
than they his instructor.— Gal. 2:1-14. 

Note carefully the Apostle's appeal in Galatians III., "O 
foolish Galatians, who hath bewitched you, that ye should not 
obey the Truth, before whose eyes [of understanding] Jesus 
Christ hath been evidently set forth, crucified among you? 
This only would I learn of you, Received ye the spirit by the 
works of the Law, or by the hearing of Faith?" etc. His 
entire argument in this chapter is to show that the Law 
Covenant never was over or binding upon the Gentiles, but 
only upon the Jews. He shows also that the Law Covenant, 
instead of advantaging the Jew, condemned him, so that the 
Jew needed to be specially redeemed from the curse or sentence 
of that Law Covenant, by our Lord's death by crucifixion. 
Throughout this chapter St. Paul contrasts the Law 
Covenant, from which the Jews were desirous to get free, 
with the original Abrahamic Covenant, which had only free 
children. He shows that the Gentiles were received under 
this Abrahamic Covenant of grace (favor), whose blessings 
are conferred on a basis of faith and not on a basis of 
works, as under the Law Covenant. 

St. Paul shows further that the Law Covenant had Moses 
for a Mediator, because that Covenant placed binding obligations 
of obedience to the Law upon all who came under it. 
But, reasons the Apostle, the original Covenant made with 
Abraham was not so. It imposed no binding obligations, and 
therefore it needed no mediator and had no mediator. "Now 
a mediator is not a mediator of one, but God is one." 
(Gal. 3:20.) That is to say, a mediator is not necessary to 
a Covenant in which only one person is bound. In the case 
of the Abrahamic Covenant this is so: God is the one person 
bound by that Covenant; hence there is no need of a 
mediator for that Covenant to see to the faithful performance 
of the contract. However, as there was no mediator to guarantee 
a contract or Covenant on God's side, he gave to Abraham 
and to all who would be of his faith, the best possible 
guarantee that God did not make the Covenant lightly, in a 
trifling manner or thoughtlessly; for, in addition to pledging 
his Word, God gave his oath— that the Covenant was secure, 
sure, could not fail. It was this that gave Israel such great 
hope in that Oath-Bound Covenant. 

The Apostle proceeds to show that the Law Covenant 
did a good service for the Jews in that it prepared them and 
brought them to Christ, the great Teacher; that by hearing 
his message, his invitation, they might exercise obedient faith, 
sacrificing faith, and, being baptized into Christ, might put on 
Christ— become members of his Body. All such, Jew and 
Gentile, bond or free, male or female, would be members of 
the one Body, of which Christ Jesus is the Head. This 

R4510 : page 340 

chapter winds up with that forceful statement, "If ye be 
Christ's, then are ye Abraham's Seed and heirs according to 
the promise"— the Covenant made to Abraham. 
All this argument was to show the Galatians that, so 



far from needing to get under the Law Covenant, they had 

no need of it whatever, and those who were under it needed 

to get out from under it, in order to be able by faith to 

accept Christ as their Redeemer and Justifier, and by faith 

to consecrate their lives unto death, that they might be acceptable 

to God as members of the Body of Christ. 

The fourth chapter to the Galatians continues the argument, 
the expostulation against the error of wanting to get 
under the Law Covenant, until, with tears in his pen, the 
Apostle writes, "My little children, of whom I travail in 
birth again until Christ be formed in you, I desire to be 
present with you now, and to change my voice (to one of 
sternness), for I stand in doubt of you. Tell me, ye that 
desire to be under the Law (Covenant), do ye not hear the 
Law?" Do ye not realize its bondage, its impossible exactions? 
"Behold, I, Paul, say unto you, that if ye be circumcised, 
Christ shall profit you nothing. For I testify 
again to every man that is circumcised [every Jew], that 
he is a debtor to do the whole Law. Christ is become of no 
effect unto you, whosoever of you are (trusting that you are) 
justified by the Law (Covenant); ye are fallen from grace."— 
Gal. 4:19-21; 5:2-4. 

We have, perhaps, said sufficient to prove that the question 
of the Law Covenant was a burning question in the early 
Church, not only with the Hebrews, but also with the Gentiles. 
It seemed impossible, especially for the former, to learn 
that the Law Covenant, after having been in force, with all 
the wonderful paraphernalia of the Jewish dispensation, its 
laws, its sacrifices, etc.— that it, after all, was not necessary 
and that a Gentile could really have access to the Abrahamic 
Covenant through Christ easier than could a Jew. 

It was to counteract this powerful error of that day that 
St. Paul wrote the Epistle to the Hebrews. It certainly has 
been a valuable epistle to the Gentiles, but it was written 
specially to the Hebrews, and because of their tenacious adherence 
to the Law Covenant, from the dominating influence 
of which they seemed not to be able to free themselves. 

The Epistle to the Hebrews was written to prove that a 
totally new dispensation of Grace, and not of Works, had 
been ushered in through Jesus at Pentecost. He would have 
them see that Moses' faithfulness as a servant and Head 
of a typical priesthood, was inferior to Christ and the Royal 

R4511 : page 340 

Priesthood, of which he is the Head. He would have them 
see that Moses and his house were types and servants or 
illustrations of good things to come; but that Christ and 
his "elect" are sons of God, who will minister the real 
blessings in the future. He would have them see that there 
was a Canaan rest to which Moses led the willing and 
obedient priests and people of Israel, and that there is a 
greater rest which remains for the people of God, to which 
Christ will lead his people; and that those who by faith 
accept of Christ now may enter by faith into his rest in 
advance, now, in their hearts. 



Noting that the Hebrews were long accustomed to look 
to the earthly priests and yearly ministrations for the 
cleansing away of sin, the Apostle calls attention to the fact 
that the Lord Jesus is the High Priest of a new order of 
priests and that his Church are those under-priests. Answering 
their objections that Jesus was not of the tribe of Levi, 
and therefore not entitled to the priesthood, he shows them 
that God had already foreshown that there would be a new 
priesthood of a different kind; that Melchizedek was a type 
of that new priesthood. He gives the intimation that while 
Jesus and his Church in the flesh in their sacrificing work 
were typified by Aaron and his sons, nevertheless the real 
work of this higher priesthood is a future one of glory, 
when Jesus, the great Priest, and the Church, his Body, an 
under priesthood, associated with him, will be installed in a 
kingly, as well as a priestly office, and in ruling, as well as 
teaching authority. These glories of the Christ in the Royal 
Priesthood of the Millennial Age were not at all represented 
in Aaron, but were quite well represented in Melchizedek, 
who was a king at the same time that he was a priest. His 
greatness was shown, in that Abraham did him homage and 
paid tithes to him. And since Levi, the Father of the priestly 
tribe, was in Abraham's loins at the time that the tithes were 
paid, therefore he and all his sons inferentially paid tithes 
to Melchizedek and thus the Melchizedek order of priesthood 
was recognized as higher than the Aaronic. 

With this foundation for his subject the Apostle (Heb. 7:18-22) 
points out that it evidently was not God's intention 
to allow the Law Covenant to stand perpetually, nor to allow 
its priestly arrangements to continue forever. He proceeds 
to show that prophetically Jesus was made a priest by Divine 
appointment long before he came into the world— that God 
said of him, "I have sworn and will not repent; thou art a 
priest for the age after the order of Melchizedek" (Heb. 7:21) 
—not after the order of Aaron. This oath shows that 
the priesthood of Jesus was superior to the priesthood of 
Aaron which was established without any Divine Covenant 
of this kind. "By this much was Jesus made a surety of 
a better testament or Covenant." That is to say, the fact 
that God by his oath had recognized this higher order of 
priesthood particularly implied that in due time a New 
Covenant would supplant the Law Covenant, which the 
Hebrews felt must be perpetual. 

The Apostle does not argue that the New Covenant had 
been established, nor that the new priesthood had been established 
in its office of combined kingship and priesthood. He 
merely points to the fact that such a New Covenant is assured 
by God's promise, which implied the doing away with 
the Law Covenant and its priesthood, and the introduction 
of a better one. He proceeds to show that Israel and the 
world needed a higher order of priesthood than the Aaronic 
to inaugurate the reign of righteousness under the New 
Covenant. He points to the two sacrifices of Leviticus XVI. 
and intimates that our Lord will fulfil that Day of Atonement 
type by two offerings; first, for his own sins (not for 
his individual sins, for he had none), but for the sins of those 



accepted during this Gospel Age as the under priesthood, the 
"members of his Body"; and then later a second sacrifice for 
the sins of the people— the world in general. 

He tells us that the typical work of Atonement by the 
Levitical priest repeated this Atonement work every year 
(on the Atonement Day), but that our great Priest does it 
once for all time in the great antitypical Day of Atonement, 
in which he offers up himself— first individually, and secondly 
his members, collectively. In this connection we are to remember 
that as Christ offered himself in sacrifice at Jordan, 
and not at Calvary, so also he offered his Body, the Church, 
collectively in sacrifice at Pentecost. As the laying down of 
the life of the man Christ Jesus proceeded through three and 
a half years, and was finished at Calvary, so likewise the laying 
down of the life of the Church has proceeded since Pentecost, 
and it will not be finished until the last member of the 
Body shall have suffered with him— been faithful even unto 
death. 

This was shown in the type; for, after the priest had 
sprinkled the blood of the bullock, he appeared at the door 
of the tabernacle and laid his hands (power) upon the 
head of the Lord's goat (which represented his consecrated 
Church) and slew it. We see, then, how this entire work 
of sacrificing may have been said to have been accomplished 
at the time when St. Paul wrote the Book of Hebrews. The 
Apostle does not proceed to tell of the consummation of this 
Gospel Age, but drops the matter here by showing the two 
sacrifices performed. That he does wish us to understand 
that the second sacrifice of Atonement was offered at Pentecost 
is evidenced by the fact that he speaks of the Church 
as under-priests in the holy, enjoying the light of the golden 
candlestick, the table of shewbread and the golden altar 
privileges, and waiting until the testings shall have been completed 
and we all shall have passed beyond the vail, even 
into heaven itself, where the blood of this second sacrifice of 
Christ will then be offered in the propitiatory on behalf of 
the world. 

R4511 : page 341 

MEDIATOR OF A BETTER TESTAMENT 

Hebrews VIII. opens with the words, "Now of the 
things which we have spoken this is the sum: We have an 
High Priest, who is set on the right hand of the throne of the 
Majesty in the heavens; a minister (servant) of the sanctuary 
and of the true tabernacle." Verses 3-5 show that the sacrificial 
work already referred to was a necessity before he 
could enter the still higher work of distributing to Israel 
and the world the blessings of God's favor secured by the 
"better sacrifices." The glorious High Priest in heaven has 
a more exalted service (ministry) than the earthly priests 
and, accordingly, he is the Mediator of a better Covenant or 
Testament than the Law Covenant. The Apostle is here 
showing that our Lord's sacrificial work needs not to be continued 
throughout eternity; but that he has been exalted to 



the heavenly plane, and has another work to accomplish, 
namely, as the Mediator of a better Covenant than the Law 
Covenant. He is trying to get their minds away from the 
thought that they are under the Law Covenant. If he can 
convince them that Christ is the antitype of Moses and the 
antitype of Aaron, he will thus convince them that there 
must be a higher Covenant and arrangement for the blessing 
of the world than the Law Covenant in which they were 
trusting and which they considered indispensable. The 
remaining verses of the chapter and Jeremiah 31:31 show that 
such a better Covenant was in contemplation. 

Neither St. Paul nor the Hebrew Christians at Jerusalem 
and elsewhere to whom he wrote this epistle, had any thought 
that they were living under the provisions of the New 
Covenant. As he shows in Chapter 6:19,20, they were all 
hoping in the Abrahamic Covenant; but some of them had 
the erroneous thought that they additionally needed the Law 
Covenant and that it would be perpetual. St. Paul's argument 
is that God never intended it to be perpetual, but merely 
to prevail for a time as a schooling until Christ should come 
as the antitype of Isaac— the antitypical heir of the Abrahamic 
Covenant. He now shows that The Christ is in due 
time to be the Mediator of the New Covenant with Israel, 
as a proof that their old Law Covenant was not intended 
to last forever. Why should they be trusting in the old 
Law Covenant, when God distinctly tells that "after those 
days he will make a New Covenant with the house of Israel," 
and that Messiah (with his members now being selected) is 
to be the Mediator of that New Covenant, and is merely 
waiting for the completion of the Church to finish all the 
ministration necessary to put that Covenant into operation— 
the blessing of Israel and all the families of the earth? 

Chapter IX. contrasts the typical arrangements made 
for the service of the Law Covenant and the making of its 
blessings effective to Israel, with the arrangements for the 
service of the New Covenant to make its blessings effective 
to Israel and all people who shall eventually avail themselves 
of its privileges. All the paraphernalia of the Tabernacle 
and the work incidental to the typical sacrificing, were so 
much necessary to the putting of that Law Covenant into 
effective operation for all the people of Israel. And 
similarly on a spiritual plane there are antitypes, including 
better sacrifices, all of which are incidental 
to the putting of the New Covenant into operation 
for Israel and that all mankind may avail themselves of 
its privileges. The antitypical priest has appeared— "Christ 
being come an High Priest of good things to come." Those 
future good things represent the glorification of the Body of 
Christ, the blessing of Israel and all the families of the earth. 

All those blessings on a higher plane are abundantly provided 
for in God's arrangement. For if the typical arrangements 
of the Law Covenant needed a cleansing from sin by 
blood, and if the blood of bulls and goats, etc., typically accomplished 
this, how much more full of value should we 
esteem the sacrifice of Christ— how much more able to purify 
our consciences! Shall we not esteem the blood of Christ 



aside from the Law Covenant sufficient for our sins? And, 
as believers in his merit, shall we not conscientiously drop 
dead works of the Law Covenant and trust to something 

R4512: page 341 

higher, even to the merit of the antitypical High Priest? It 
is for this cause, or to this end, that he is the Mediator of 
the New Covenant, so that eventually all Hebrews condemned 
to death under the Law Covenant may be released from it 
(as in Romans 1 1:27 he declares will be the case as soon as 
the elect, the Body of the great Deliverer, the great 
Mediator, the great Priest, shall have been completed). 

In Hebrews 9:15 St. Paul shows that there is a special 
work of Christ on behalf of the Jews: they being under the 
death sentence of the Law Covenant, Christ's death on the 
tree was necessary for them, because that was the special 
"curse" of the Law. Thus a basis is laid, whereby all the 
transgressions of the Hebrews under the Law Covenant may 
be fully cancelled, under the provisions of the New Covenant 
when it shall become effective. (Rom. 1 1:27.) Not only so, 
but this special redemption of the Hebrews enabled those 
called of God from that nation during this Gospel Age to 
receive a share in the promise of the eternal inheritance— as 
members of Christ under the original Abrahamic Covenant. 

Then follows a statement of the general principle— 
that where a Will or Testament is made, the death of the 
testator is implied, and only after the death of the testator 
could its blessings be enjoyed. Our Lord having earned a 
right to human perfection and human life by obedience to 
the Law Covenant conditions, laid down those earthly rights 
in sacrifice, in harmony with the Father's will. And, when 
raised from the dead a New Creature of the Divine nature, 
he possessed those earthly rights which he laid down as a 
ransom-price for mankind, with the right to dispose of them. 
His Testament or Will disposing of those earthly rights could 
have been so made as to give them at once to fleshly 
Israel by sealing for them the promised New Covenant. But 
instead the Testator gave those earthly blessings to the 
household of faith, those called out from the nominal Jewish 
Church during and after his earthly ministry, and to "us" of 
the Gentiles since, on condition that they join in his 
sacrifice, "suffer with him," "be dead with him," participate 
with him in the glorious privileges of the Abrahamic Covenant 
for the blessing of the world under the New Covenant 
provision. 

The brethren understood that they were called to be 
"members of the Body of Christ" and that it would be after 
the completion of this "Body" that the Lord's favor would 
return to natural Israel, and that he would build again the 
tabernacle of David which had fallen down; that through 
them as members of the great Benefactor or Mediator of the 
New Covenant, a blessing might go to the world and "that 
the residue of men might seek after the Lord, and all the 
Gentiles upon whom God's name is called." (Acts 15:16,17.) 
The brethren addressed were reminded that the death of the 



Testator was necessary to these: not only the death of Jesus 
as the original testator to give the blessing to the Church, 
his Body, but also the death of the Church, his members, 
under his Headship, to again serve as Testator, and to die, 
so as to leave those restitution rights for the benefit of Israel 
and the world under the New Covenant. 

Let us never lose sight of the central purpose for which 
this Book was written— that it was to prove that the Law 
Covenant must give way, give place, to the New Covenant. 
Hence all the things connected with the typical Law Covenant 
should be expected to have antitypes in connection with the 
antitypical New Covenant. Thus the sacrifices of the Law, 
which came at the beginning of their year on the Day of 
Atonement, before the sins of the people could be forgiven, 
must here find parallel in "better sacrifices" than the bullock 
and the goat. The New Covenant cannot go into effect until 
these antitypical sacrifices are accomplished. He thus proved 
the inferiority of everything Jewish and connected with the 
Law Covenant; that all Christians might see that instead of 
going back to that or holding on to it, they should rather 
be grasping, looking forward to the antitypes, and grasping 
their share in the "better sacrifices." 

In verse 24, of the 9th chapter of Hebrews, the Apostle indicates 
how much of the sacrificing has already been finished; 
namely, that the High Priest has gone into the "most holy," 
"now to appear in the presence of God for us"— for Spiritual 
Israel. But he adds we must not expect him to do this every 

R4512: page 342 

year, as it was done in the type. We must not think that 

Christ's sacrifice could avail us only in conjunction with the 

Jewish institutions as additional thereto. To so suppose 

would imply that such annual sacrifices would have been 

necessary from the foundation of the world. But this was 

not the case: Abraham and others were justified by faith 

before the Law Covenant was instituted. In the end of the 

age Christ appeared to put away sin by the sacrifice of 

himself. And as men-priests are appointed to die, as symbolically 

represented in the animals they sacrificed, and as 

they after this passed into the Holy, and were there put on 

judgment, or tested before they entered the "Most Holy," so 

Christ was offered once to bear the sins of many, and, to 

them that are looking for him, he shall appear the second 

time, not as a sin-offering, but to grant the salvation secured 

by the merit of his sacrifice— to inaugurate the New Covenant, 

and as its Mediator to set up its Kingdom for the overthrow 

of sin and death and the establishment of righteousness and 

life. 

Christ was once offered to bear the sins of many, the 
Apostle says. The type shows us two offerings, yet the two 
were parts of one. The first represented the Head, and the 
second, the Body. The two sacrifices of the Day of Atonement 
were really one, because the second was based upon the 
first. The offering as a whole was evidently for the sins of 
the whole world. Evidently, as the Apostle says, the next 



thing to be expected, to be waited for, is his finishing his 
sacrificial work, finishing the sprinkling of the blood the 
second time, and then coming out, as typed in the high priest 
clothed "in garments of glory and beauty," representative of 
his elements of glory and power. He will stand forth as 
the Mediator of the New Covenant, the great Messiah, 
Prophet, Priest, King and Judge. 

Only those who recognize that the under-priests are the 
members of the High Priest can appreciate this picture. The 
Lord by his own blood justified us, his Church, his prospective 
members, when "he ascended up on high, there to appear in 
the presence of God for us"— as our Advocate and High 
Priest— to sprinkle the Mercy-Seat— to satisfy divine justice 
on our behalf. He began his secondary offering of his 
"members" as soon as the Father accepted his offering for 
us— at Pentecost. 

There "the Lord's goat" was killed, sacrificed, and the 
ignominious burning outside the camp commenced. What 
was done with those ready on Pentecost has continued to 
be done with their successors since for now nearly nineteen 
centuries. The sacrificing, burning, etc., have continued, just 
as in the figure of the High Priest's anointing, the oil ran 
down to his feet, so antitypically the holy Spirit has come 
upon each "member" accepted as a joint-sacrificer. The 
Lord meantime sits at the right hand of Divine favor, awaiting 
the consummation of the burning of his sacrifice— expecting 
or waiting until then to make the final sprinkling of his 
blood "for all the people" before Justice shall turn over to 
him the control or dominion of the world for reconstruction 
during the Millennium under the terms of the New Covenant. 

The appearing a second time is to the waiting people— 
the groaning creation waiting "for the manifestation of the 
sons of God" in the glory of the Kingdom. (Rom. 8:19,22.) 
It is wholly different from his coming, or parousia, during 
the harvest time to the Church. His appearing will be in 
power and great glory, yet only to be recognized by Israel 
and the world as they shall look for and seek for his Kingdom. 
"When he shall appear we also [his members] shall 
appear with him in glory." 

In the 10th chapter St. Paul proceeds along the same 
line, proving that Jesus is the great High Priest. He represents 
him as saying, "Lo, I come to do thy will, O God." 
(V. 9). Christ there began the taking away of the first, 
the typical Covenant, that he might establish the second, the 
antitypical Covenant. Verse ten shows how we, who have 
become his disciples, are sanctified by accepting his will and 
saying, as he did, "Lo, I come to do thy will, O God." We 
are sanctified through the offering of the Body of Jesus 
Christ, because we, accepted as members of his Body, are set 
apart to this great priestly, kingly, mediatorial work with 
him. Incidentally notice here that previously we were "justified" 
through the merit of Jesus' sacrifice, but that now we 
are sanctified through the offering of the Body. It is only 
as we obtain this great privilege of sacrificing as members 
of his Body that we can have any expectancy of participation 
with him in his glory. This Body was offered once for all. 



The individual members of the Church are not offered separately. 
The one "Lord's goat" represented the one entire 
Body of Christ, the "little flock," all who, during this Gospel 
Age will be accepted as members and lay down their lives in 
sacrifice with him. In verse twelve St. Paul shows that this 
one sacrifice of Christ (in two parts, Head and Body) having 
been offered (the Head at Jordan, the Body at Pentecost), 
our Lord rests from any further sacrificing, knowing that full 
satisfaction will be effected by the work already accomplished. 

The great Priest has since waited until the Father's time 
for putting all things of earth into subjection under him; 
because by the one offering (in its two parts) he hath perfected 
forever them that are sanctified. That is to say, the 
first part of his offering justified his members and their participation 
in the second part effected their sanctification and 
secured for them a share in the First Resurrection. Moreover, 
the perfecting of all mankind who shall eventually be 
saved during the Millennium will be as the result of Christ's 

R4513 : page 342 

one sacrifice in its two parts (bullock and goat). As a result 

of these "better sacrifices," eventually all mankind shall have 

an opportunity of becoming sanctified, holy, perfect. The 

Apostle says that the holy Spirit through Jeremiah's prophecy (31:31) 

witnessed to this, testified to this ultimate efficacy 

of the antitypical priest's work. Then he quotes this reference 

of the New Covenant, "after those days," and assures us that 

when the time of remission of sins shall have come, there 

will be no more offering for sin. Thank God that with the 

end of this Age, when the sufferings of the Body of Christ 

will be finished, then, all sacrificing opportunities being ended, 

the opportunities for blessing mankind through the merit of 

those sacrifices will be only beginning! 

UNDER-PRIESTS NOW ENTERING THE HOLIES 

In verse nineteen the Apostle reverts to the fact that 
while this great work is still incomplete, we, brethren [prospective 
under-priests], may have the boldness [courage] to 
enter into the holiest by the blood of Jesus, by a new and 
living way, which he has consecrated for us, through the vail, 
that is to say, his flesh; we may by faith realize ourselves as 
under-priests, members of the High Priest's Body, joint-sacrificers 
with him and under his ministration. We may 
enjoy now the privileges and blessings of the Holy and be 
assured that, as members of the great High Priest, and 
Mediator, we may ultimately go beyond the vail, even into 
heaven itself, entering that glorious plane of life through 
sharing with him in his death. This special way he consecrated 
for us as the High Priest, by making the merit of his 
death, typified by the blood of the bullock, applicable to us, 
permitting us in the strength of that justification to sacrifice 
with him and to become his members in glory. 

St. Paul exhorts all these fellow-members to hold fast 
to their faith, to provoke one another to love, to not forsake 



the assembling of themselves, etc. If Moses' Law inflicted 

a death penalty, assuredly the one who would willingly transgress 

under greater light would suffer a more severe punishment. 

The punishment of those under Moses' Law was 

death, but not Second Death, because they had not secured 

release from the first death; but for us who have been released 

by "faith in his blood" and who have been consecrated, 

joined with him in sacrifice— for us to do despite to all these 

favors and privileges of God's grace; for us to ignore the 

great High Priest, for us to count as a common thing our 

engagement, our consecration to share with our Lord in his 

death, in his sacrifice, in the blood of the New Covenant, this 

would mean the taking of ourselves completely out of all 

of the Divine arrangements intended for our blessing. Verse thirty 

shows that this is no idle suggestion of the Apostle. 

We are to remember him with whom we have been dealing, 

him through whose mercy in Christ we have been justified 

R4513 : page 343 

and him whose holy Spirit we received as an earnest of our 
inheritance when we presented our bodies living sacrifices, 
in harmony with his call, that we might become joint-heirs 
with Jesus in glory. To forfeit all this would be a fearful 
thing— the Second Death. 

However, the Apostle urges, let us not be discouraged, 
but remember our past experiences, our illumination, and the 
afflictions which we then endured, and let us not cast away 
our confidence, and faithfulness, for the reward will be great. 
Chapter eleven deals with the faithfulness of God's people 
during the past ages and dispensations, and, closing, tells us 
that there is a reward for all of those faithful ones in 
God's great plan, but something far better still for us, the 
members of the Body of the Messiah, the Mediator, Priest 
and King, so that they, without us, should not be made perfect; 
or, as St. Paul says in Rom. 11:31, "Through your 
mercy they also may obtain mercy." And then, through them 
under the New Covenant, Israel and all the nations will 
receive their intended share of the same Divine mercy, passed 
through Christ and then through the Church, his Body. 

Chapter twelve still addresses this consecrated priestly 
class. It suggests that these servants and handmaids, 
specially begotten of the holy Spirit, specially called, having 
the "high calling," specially devoted to sacrifice, should think 
of the Ancient Worthies and the faithful witness for God 
and the Truth which they bore— to which they witnessed by 
their martyrdom, that these may strengthen us and encourage 
us to run faithfully in the race that is set before us. He 
urges that these prospective kings and priests look away from 
the afflictions and persecutions incidental to their sacrifice 
and loyalty to Christ; that they look to Jesus, the author of 
their faith, who is also to be its finisher; that they remember 
his example and what he endured and that everyone whom 
the Father accepts into the house of sons under this call 
must expect to have chastisings, disciplines and various testings 
of faith and obedience for the development and crystallization 



of character. He exhorts (V. 15) that we shall watch 
diligently, lest any fail of attaining to the full privilege of 
God's grace. And he warns that roots of bitterness may 
come and defile, and also that, yielding to the pleasures of 
sin for a season, would signify the selling of this great birthright 
—that Esau got the mess of pottage, but that Jacob got 
the birthright by his self-denial, and that similarly we are 
to endure. 

THE INAUGURATION OF THE LAW COVENANT TYPED 
THE INSTITUTION OF THE NEW COVENANT 

The reason for all this carefulness on the part of the 
consecrated under-priests is that they have not come to (have 
not approached) Mt. Sinai and the wonderful sights and 
scenes incidental to the inauguration of the Law Covenant, 
but they have approached (Strong's lexicon, come near) to 
Zion, a Mountain and City of the living God— the Heavenly 
Jerusalem. We have come so near to the antitypical Mount, 
the Kingdom of God, so near to the antitypical New Jerusalem 
that we already by faith behold that New Jerusalem, 
that glorified Church, the Bride, the Lamb's Wife, from which 
the blessings are to flow to Israel and the world, as figuratively 
coming down from heaven to earth. We are surely 
nearer to that glorious consummation than was the Apostle. 
If he could say that the Church of Christ, following him, 
their leader, had approached or were approaching or coming 
near to that heavenly Kingdom condition, how truly may we 
assent to this today. "Evidently now is our salvation nearer 
than when we first believed"— nearer than when the first 
members of the Body of Christ walked in this narrow way 
of self-sacrifice. 

The Apostle proceeds to contrast the things which we 
may soon expect at the inauguration of the New Covenant 
with Israel with those things which occurred as types in 
the inauguration of the Law Covenant. He continues:— 

Not only are we approaching or coming nearer every 
day to the heavenly Jerusalem, the Kingdom condition, but 
also coming nearer to our association with the holy angels, 
whose numbers are innumerable, whereas ours are limited— 
144,000. More than this, we are approaching, coming near, 
to the "general assembly of the Church" by participation in 
the "First Resurrection"— "His Resurrection" (Phil. 3:10), 
for we are "members of his Body." Additionally we are approaching 
God, the Judge of all; soon we shall be ushered 
into the presence of the great King Eternal. As the 
Apostle declares, our Lord, our Redeemer, our Advocate, 
having had charge of us during the period of our schooling 
and sacrificing, and as the Father's representative, having 
raised us from the dead to glory, honor and immortality, "will 
present us faultless before the presence of his glory with 
exceeding joy." (Jude 24.) He is the Judge of all. To fall 
into his hands now, during the sacrificing period and before 
we have finished our course, would mean to fall out of the 
hands of our Redeemer and Advocate and to insure condemnation 
to the Second Death. But, then, to be presented 



before him faultless will signify that the great Judge will 
approve us, even as he approves all the holy angels. 

Additionally we are approaching, or coming near, to the 
"spirits of just men made perfect." This would seem to 
apply to the "great company," who will be justified in spirit 
through destruction of the flesh, though they fail in their sacrificing 
agreement and will not, therefore, be of the Body 
of the Christ, Priest, Mediator, King of glory. Next we 
read that we have come near to Jesus, the Mediator of the 
New Covenant. He was prophesied from of old to be the 
Messiah of Israel and the Messenger or Mediator of Israel's 
Covenant. He is our Bridegroom, our Advocate, our Head. 
We, his members, shortly will be forever with our Lord 
and see him as he is and share with him the glorious work 
of his Mediatorial Kingdom, by which Israel first, and through 
Israel all the nations, will receive the blessing of the Spiritual 
Seed of Abraham. 

Then the New Covenant, having been sealed, so far as 
Divine Justice is concerned, by the application of the precious 
blood, passed through the Church and made effective "for 
all the people," the time will come for the application of the 
blood of sprinkling to all the people— during the Millennium. 

In the type we read that in instituting the Law Covenant, 
Moses sprinkled first the Book of the Law, representing 
Divine Justice, and then, on the basis of this satisfaction, his 
Mediatorial work began toward the people, and was typically 
represented by the sprinkling of them with the same blood 
of the Covenant. So in the antitype. Our Lord's blood (the 
blood of the bullock, Leviticus XVI.) was applied on our 
behalf— on behalf of his Body and his house, and secured the 
forgiveness of our sins and opened the "new and living way" 
for our sanctification— for our privilege of sharing with him 
in "his death," partaking of "his cup." Finally, when the 
Church shall have finished using the blood, and, by God's 
grace through it, shall have attained to Divine nature in 
glory, that same merit (as the blood of the Lord's goat) will 

R4514: page 343 

be applied "for all the people" at the close of this Age by 
sealing the New Covenant. 

This second application for the people, "For the sins of 
the whole world," will settle completely all the claims of 
Divine Justice against every member of Adam's race and put 
the future interests of all into the hands of the Mediator- 
Jesus, and the Church, his Body. Forthwith the work of 
reconciliation manward will begin. This is represented as the 
sprinkling of the people with the blood of the New Covenant. 

Each one of Adam's race, as he comes into proper relationship 
with the Lord, will receive his share of the sprinkled 
blood until, by the close of the Millennial Age, when the 
great Mediator shall turn over his Kingdom to the Father, 
every member of Adam's race will have had fullest opportunity 
to enjoy his share in this sprinkling. Does that symbolical 
sprinkling in any sense of the word imply condemnation, 
responsibility for the blood of Christ, as in Abel's case, 



when his blood figuratively was said to call to God for 
vengeance upon his murderers? Oh, no! While the death of 
Christ and of many of his members has been by violence, 
yet this fact will not call for vengeance, because the life was 
voluntarily surrendered a sacrifice for the sins of the world. 
The sprinkling of the blood of the New Covenant upon all 
the people during the Millennial Age, then, will mean the 
impartation to each one of his share in the great blessing 
secured by the sacrifice accomplished by our Lord, "the Lamb 
of God which taketh away [eventually] the sin of the world." 

page 344 

"HIM THAT SPEAKETH FROM HEAVEN" 

R4514: page 344 

The Apostle intimates that our ascended and glorified 
Lord is to speak from heaven at the time indicated, the time 
to which we approach or come near. The prophet tells us 
that all the blind eyes shall be opened to see him, to recognize 
his dominion; and that all the deaf ears shall be unstopped 
to hear, to comprehend, his message. And St. Peter, speaking 
of that same time, declares, "It shall come to pass that the 
soul that will not obey that Prophet (Jesus the Head and the 
Church his Body raised up during this Gospel Age) shall 
be destroyed from amongst the people."— Acts 3:23. 

The Apostle interrupts his argument respecting the 
future, to throw out a cautionary suggestion to the under-priests, 
the members of the Body of Christ, saying, "See that 
ye refuse not him that speaketh." Our eyes and our ears 
have been opened in advance of the world's. We have been 
greatly blessed by this Divine favor. But our responsibility 
is proportionate to our favor. If we refuse the instructions 
of our Head, our Lord; if we submit ourselves not to the 
disciplines in the School of Christ; if we neglect to share 
in his death and to present our bodies living sacrifices, in 
harmony with our covenant; if we, as the branches, do not 
bear the fruit of the Vine, our trial for eternal life may end 
adversely. 

Resuming his narrative of the great thing to which we 
approach, or come near, the Apostle continues to contrast 
between these coming things pertaining to the New Covenant 
with the inauguration of the typical Law Covenant. He 
says, "Whose voice then shook the earth; but now he hath 
promised, saying, Yet once more I shake not the earth only, 
but also heaven"— the earth symbolizing society, and the 
heaven symbolizing ecclesiasticism. The Apostle comments 
on the prophecy, saying that this expression yet once more 
implies such a thorough work of the shaking that everything 
that is temporary, out of accord with the Divine order, shall 
be shaken out, so that, at the beginning of the Mediatorial 
Kingdom and the administration of the New Covenant 
nothing will remain in power or organization except those 
things which cannot be shaken, because of their harmony 
with God. 



Continuing this thought that then we shall be with our 
Lord as his members, participating in his Mediatorial work, 
we read, that Since, therefore, we are to receive an unshakable 
Kingdom, with reverence and godly fear we are to hold 
fast to the grace of God bestowed upon us, which will permit 
us to serve God acceptably (not only now sacrificially, 
but also in the administration of the Kingdom), for, gracious 
as our God is, he is consuming fire towards all 
unrighteousness. 

The Apostle concludes the Epistle with exhortations to 
the Royal Priesthood, giving helpful suggestions as to 
brotherly love, hospitality, contentment, submission to those 
whom we believe to be over us in the Lord. (Chapter XIII. , Vs. 7-17.) 
He tells us to avoid new Gospels and to remember 
that as the earthly priesthood were nourished by the things 
of the altar, so we have a right to eat of a spiritual altar, of 
which others may not eat. He then calls attention to the 
sin-offering (V. 10), that they were all burned outside the 
camp. Jesus, as the antitype of the bullock, was not only 
crucified outside the gate of Jerusalem, but suffered as an 
outcast from the social and religious systems of the time. 
St. Paul urges that we, as the Royal Priesthood (typified by 
the Lord's goat of Leviticus XVI.), shall also go forth sacrificially 
outside the camp to suffer with Christ social ostracism, 
and with deadness toward the world. He fixes by this passage 
our identity with "the Lord's goat" of Leviticus XVI. by 
assuring us that only the blood of the sin-offerings is taken 
within the vail— to sprinkle the mercy-seat. He also identifies 
this sin-offering by suggesting that the bodies of those beasts 
whose blood propitiated for sin were burned outside the 
camp. In exhorting the Church to follow the Lord in this 
experience, he clearly identifies our Lord with the bullock 
of the Day of Atonement and the Church with the Lord's 
goat, which followed all of the bullock's experiences. 



R4514: page 344 

"A FRENZY OF DELUSION" 

"For this cause God will send them a strong delusion [literally, 
a frenzy of delusion]; that they may believe a lie— because 
they had not pleasure in the truth."— I. Thess. 2:11. 

EVIDENTLY these words of the Apostle were a prophesy 

concerning the present harvest time. Doubtless 

they apply primarily to the Church and will 

later apply also to Babylon and the unregenerate world. 

"Judgment must begin at the house of God." 

St. Paul does not specify what lies will be believed 
and which truths will be unappreciated. We might particularize 
to some extent, but we believe that a disloyal 
condition of heart may be meant which would apply to every 
form of truth and correspondingly apply to various lies. 

Is it not a fact, that a mind may become generally indifferent 



to principles of honesty in respect to thoughts and 
reasonings? And would not such a mind be very open to 
erroneous conclusions? Would not this apply to all the 
affairs of life, so that unkind, uncharitable thoughts would 
be entertained without an honest endeavor to sift them and 
to give the one accused the benefit of every doubt? Is not 
this generally the case amongst men and women to-day? 

We believe that such injustice lies at the bottom of 
nearly all the troubles of the Church and the world. Few 
but the saintly are just— not to say merciful and generous 
in their interpretations of the words and deeds of others. 

And now according to this prophesy we are come to 
the time when God will test all— or allow Satan to test the 
whole world with a "frenzy of delusion" ! What may we 
not expect in the way of hasty and irrational conduct inspired 
by these delusions! Some may be so exercised in 
respect to the Truth— new and old; others may be influenced 
thus in respect to their personal, social and political 
affairs. 

It is this frenzy that is precipitating trouble, religious, 
financial and social, and leading on to the anarchy which 
is shortly, according to the Bible, to envelop and swallow 
our civilization in the indescribable time of trouble which 
will precede the reign of righteousness. 

The saints, the consecrated, will not escape from this 
testing. Who will be able to stand? Some seem to be 
under the strain already. Let us pity them and do all in 
our power to succor them. But our chief concern should 
be ourself— that we may each maintain and increase our 
"spirit of a sound mind." 

What then should be our course if we would stand 
the test successfully? 

We should not only square our every act and word 
with strictest justice, but beyond this we should scrutinize 
our every thought and "bring every thought into subjection 
to the will of God" as expressed in Christ. Love, do 
you say? Yes! in its proper order, "Love is the principal 
thing." But Justice must come first to be in line with the 
Divine precepts. "Just before generous" is an old and a 
very true adage. After learning to think justly of the words 
and acts of others we are prepared with a proper mental 
foundation to think generously— lovingly. 

The Scriptures say not in vain that "A false balance is 
an abomination unto the Lord." (Prov. 11:1.) And this 
balancing applies as truly to mental as to physical dealings 
with others. Whoever does not love righteousness; yea, 
whoever does not hate inequity, is surely in danger of being 
frenzied by delusions in this evil day. Surely Satan and the 
fallen angels under him are being granted extraordinary 
power to tempt God's people and later on the world, to cut 
loose from all moderation in a frenzy of error on one subject 
or another with one person or another. Let us be 
forewarned and "watch and pray lest we enter into temptation. 



R4515 : page 345 

"ONE MEDIATOR"-"THE MAN CHRIST JESUS" 

"There is one God and one Mediator between God and men, 
the man Christ Jesus, who gave himself a ransom for all, 
to be testified in due time."— I Tim. 2:5,6. 

OUR text contains two thoughts: (1) That the man 
Christ Jesus gave himself a ransom-price for all, 
and that the testimony of this great fact will in 
due time be extended to all mankind. 

(2) He, the Redeemer, is the Mediator between God 
and the world of mankind. As the Scriptures foretold a 
New Covenant between God and Israel and through Israel 
with the world, the Scriptures also foretold a great Mediator 
for that New Covenant. The Apostle announces that Jesus 
is that Mediator. Prophetically Jesus was the Mediator of the 
New Covenant long before he was born (Malachi 3:1); he 
was born the Mediator in the same sense that he was born 
the Savior. "Unto you is born this day. ..a Savior, 
which is Messiah the Lord." He was the prospective Savior 
then and the prospective Mediator of the New Covenant. As 
a matter of fact, however, our Lord is not yet the Savior 
nor the Mediator for the world, and will not be until the 
close of this Gospel Age. He has already saved believers 
by faith or reckonedly; but the Apostle tells us that this 
salvation shall be brought unto us at the revelation of our 
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. 

The two thoughts, namely, of mediation and ransom-price, 
although associated and connected, are distinctly separate 
thoughts. Our Lord Jesus began the work of giving 
the ransom-price at the time of his consecration, at his baptism 
at Jordan, and he finished that ransoming work on the 
cross when he cried, "It is finished." The life there laid 
down is a sufficient ransom-price for the sins of the whole 
world; and all will know of the fact and appreciate it in due 
time. But the price was not applied for mankind at Jordan, 
nor yet at Calvary. Our Lord's sacrifice was necessary before 
he could mediate the New Covenant. He must die as 
a sin-offering, in order to become the first-born from the dead, 
the Mediator, on the spirit plane. Then to be the world's 
Mediator, the risen Christ needed to have a merit or 
ransom-price in hand and, more than this, needed to present 
it to God on behalf of the world, before he could take control 
of the world and, through the agency of the Millennial 
Kingdom and under the terms of the New Covenant, proffer 
an uplift to Adam and his race— up, up, up, out of present 
conditions of sin and death. In a word, Justice needed to be 
satisfied as respects the penalty pronounced against Adam 
and entailed upon his race, before the great times of resurrection 
or restitution under the New Covenant could be 
inaugurated. 

When Christ (possessed of the full ransom-price, sufficient 
for the sins of the whole world) ascended up on high, 
he did not present the ransom-price on the world's behalf. 



On the contrary, in harmony with the Divine programme for 
the selection of the Church of firstborn ones, the appointed 
Mediator for that promised New Covenant applied the merit 
of his sacrifice, not for the world and the cancellation of its 
sins, nor for the sealing of the New Covenant between God 
and the world of mankind— he applied it "on our behalf," for 
the sins of the Church, for the sins of consecrated believers. 
"He made satisfaction for our sins," as, by and by in the end 
of this Age, he will use his blood, the merit of his sacrifice 
(passed through the Church) and apply it to Justice for 
the satisfaction of the sins of the whole world.— I John 2:2. 

Our Lord has various offices— Prophet, Priest, King, 
Mediator, Advocate, Judge. It was not as King that he appeared 
in the presence of God and made satisfaction for our 
sins— nor as Judge, nor as Prophet, nor as Mediator of the 
New Covenant. He appeared in the presence of God for us 
as the High Priest of our profession (or order)— as our 
Redeemer and Advocate with the Father. 

Why did our Lord allow Israel and the world to remain 
in an outcast condition for these nineteen hundred years, 
after he had laid down the ransom-price, sufficient for the 
sins of the whole world, and after he was recognized as the 
one who will mediate the New Covenant of reconciliation 
between God and mankind? 

The delay in the application of the ransom-price to the 
forgiveness of the sins of the world, the delay in sealing the 
New Covenant with Israel and making possible through it 
and them the blessing of all the families of the earth; the 
delay in bringing in "the times of restitution of all things" 
under the New Covenant arrangement, is for a special purpose. 
It is in order to permit the election or selection of 
the Church, which is the Body of Christ. "This is a great 
mystery; but I speak concerning Christ and the Church." 
(Eph. 5:32.) This mystery, which few are able to understand, 
is that a certain class, justified through faith, are permitted 
to join with their Redeemer as participators in his 
sacrifice, his sufferings, his death, in order that they may be 
granted a share with him in his glorious work of the Millennial 
Kingdom— in the blessing of natural Israel and all the 
families of the earth under the provisions of the New Covenant 
—to be sealed or made binding and operative by his 
application of his meritorious sacrifice on the world's behalf. 
"The secret of the Lord is with them that reverence him, 
and he will show them his Covenant." (Psa. 25:14.) "To 
you it is given to know the mysteries of the Kingdom of 
heaven" (Matt. 13:11), but to all outsiders these things are 
spoken in parables and dark sayings, that hearing they may 
hear and not understand. 

It is not for us to determine who are of the properly 
sanctified under-priesthood permitted to share with the High 
Priest in his sacrificial work during this Gospel Age and, 
as members of his Body, by and by to share his glories, 
typified by Melchizedek's priesthood— "a priest upon his 
throne" blessing under the New Covenant Abraham and his 
seed and all the families of the earth. Blessed are our eyes 
if we can see this "Mystery!" Blessed are our hearts if we 



appreciate the privilege which the consecrated enjoy during 
this Gospel Age of sharing in the sufferings of Christ, in 
the death of Christ— of drinking of his cup and being immersed 
into his sacrificial death! Only those who thus suffer 
with him sacrificially as his members will be granted a 
share with him in glory as his joint-heirs— as members of 
the great Prophet, Priest, King, Mediator, Judge of the 
world. 

In a word, then, the delay in sealing the New Covenant 
and blessing Israel, and blessing through Israel all the families 
of the earth, is not accidental, but quite of Divine intention. 
These nearly nineteen centuries are for the purpose 
of finding a special class of mankind, "not of the 
world, even as Christ was not of the world" (John 17:16), 
but chosen out of the world; and of granting these an opportunity 
to suffer with him as his members and thus to be 
in the end of this age through the First Resurrection recognized 
as his members, sharers in his resurrection, partakers 
of his glories. In other words, God purposed that all of his 
blessings should pass through Jesus, but first to allow the 
selection of the Church, to be his Bride, Associate, Joint-heir, 
in everything which he inherited under the Abrahamic 
Covenant. Thus it is written, "If ye be Christ's, then are ye 
Abraham's Seed and heirs according to the promise" (Gal. 3:29) 
—heirs of all the privileges of the promise, associates 
in all the work of blessing all the families of the earth. The 
Church, therefore, Scripturally is declared to be a Royal 
Priesthood which, during the Millennium, shall share the 
Redeemer's throne. They are declared to be associates with 
Jesus in the work of judging the world. As we read, "Know 
ye not that the saints shall judge the world?" (I Cor. 6:2.) 
They are to be members of the great Prophet, the great 
Teacher— "A prophet shall the Lord your God raise up unto 
you of your brethren." (Acts. 3:22.) The raising up of the 
members of this great Prophet has been in process for nearly 
nineteen centuries. The Head was raised up first. The members 
of his Body will soon be raised up also, sharers in "his 
resurrection." Similarly these are members of the great 
Mediator between God and men and will have to do with 
every feature of the work of mediating during the Millennium. 
The Lord, the Head, will always be Head of the 
Church. As the Apostle says, God gave Christ to be the 
Head over the Church, which is his Body— the Head over 
all, God blessed forever.— Eph. 1:22,23. 

R4515 : page 346 

We have seen how our Lord, when he ascended on high, 
appeared for the Church, for the household of faith only, 
as their High Priest, as their Advocate, but not as their 
Mediator, because the Church is not under the New Covenant, 
even as their Lord and Head was not under the New 
Covenant. He is the Seed of Abraham under the original 
Abrahamic Covenant. We, his Church, are also the Seed 
of Abraham under that Covenant. "If ye be Christ's, then 
are ye Abraham's Seed, and heirs according to The Promise," 



The Covenant— Gal. 3:29. 

The New Covenant was made necessary as a supplement 
to the Faith Covenant or Abrahamic Covenant because, as 
the Apostle declares, "All men have not faith." (2 Thess. 3:2.) 
The great majority of Adam's race are so fallen as 
to be unable to approach God as Abraham did, and as the 
true Church does, through faith. The only way to benefit 
the great mass of mankind, therefore, is by the establishment 
of a Mediatorial Kingdom, which will forcefully put 
down sin and everything contrary to righteousness and give 
mankind a sample of righteous government, righteous conduct, 
and an experimental lesson illustrating the blessings 
which will accrue under Divine arrangement to the righteous 
—the provision being that whoever under the favorable instruction 
of the Mediatorial Kingdom will learn to love 
righteousness and to hate iniquity may have the great gift of 
God, eternal life, through Jesus Christ our Lord, under the 
operation of the New Covenant sealed with Israel, whose 
blessings will be dispensed during the Millennium. 

Note how our Lord, before rejecting natural Israel at 

R4516 : page 346 

the First Advent, threshed and winnowed the entire nation 
and gathered all the wheat class, all of the "Israelites indeed," 
all who had the faith of Abraham and who, therefore, were 
eligible to the blessings of the Abrahamic Covenant. These 
all were blessed with the privileges of the High Calling— the 
privileges of sharing the sufferings of the Mediator of the 
New Covenant, that later, as members of his Body, having 
shared in his baptism into sacrificial death, they might share 
also in "his resurrection" to glory, honor and immortality; 
that, having shared in his cup of sorrow— participating in 
or partaking of "the blood of the New Covenant," they may, 
later on, share his cup of joy in the Millennial Kingdom. 

These, in all "not many," need not wait to be reconciled 
to God by force, by submission, under the operation of the 
Mediatorial Kingdom of the Millennial Age. These, through 
faith, are already reconciled to God by the death of his 
Son; for, as the Apostle says, he not only reconciles us, but 
has committed unto us the ministry of reconciliation, the 
privilege, the service of bringing others into a reconciled condition, 
into harmony with God. It is their privilege to use 
this ministry now with such as have an ear to hear— thus 
following the example of Jesus and the Apostles. But the 
ministry of reconciliation now committed to the faithful for 
the believing ears, will be extended to the world during the 
Millennium. The entire work of the Mediatorial Kingdom, 
under the control of the great Mediator King and his associate 
kings and priests, will be a work of reconciliation. 
The great Mediator will reconcile— or meet the demands of 
Justice for the sins of the whole world at the close of this 
Gospel Age by presenting the merit of his sacrifice on the 
world's behalf, after that merit shall have been used to the 
full and laid down by the Church, which is his Body. Then 
during the Millennium he will mediate or deal with "men"— 



the world. 

The "household of faith" whom God can and does accept 
under the Abrahamic Covenant, the Grace or Faith 
Covenant typified by Sarah (Gal. 4:22-31), is not only much 
smaller, but much different every way from the world of 
mankind referred to in our text as "men." Our Lord always 
spoke of the former as separate and apart from the world 
—"Ye are not of the world, even as I am not of the world." 
The prophecy of the outpouring of the holy Spirit marks 
them as separate from the rest of the world. At Pentecost 
and during this Gospel Age, God has been pleased to pour 
out his holy Spirit upon his servants and upon his handmaids 
—upon such as can and do come into relationship with him 
through Christ, under the faith terms of the original Abrahamic 
Covenant. But he distinctly shows us through the 
prophecy that in due time he "will pour out his Spirit upon 
all flesh"— upon men— the world— mankind. 

This distinct separateness of the Church class, called 
during this Gospel Age under the special blessings of the 
Abrahamic Covenant, in association with the Lord Jesus, is 
clearly and forcefully shown in the type of Isaac and his 
bride and joint-heir, Rebecca. Abraham (as a type of God) 
sent his servant Eleazar (type of the holy Spirit) to call a 
bride for his son Isaac. The servant presented certain proofs 
of his mission and authority and, when Rebecca believed and 
accepted Abraham's proposition to become Isaac's bride, she 
received certain gifts, typical of the gifts and fruits of the 
holy Spirit. Then by faith she started to meet her espoused 
husband. This is a God-given illustration and in full harmony 
with every text of Scripture. We do not read that 
Isaac called his own bride and then acted as a mediator between 
her and his father, nor that Isaac had anything to 
do with the drawing at all. In harmony we read our Lord's 
own words, "No man can come unto me (as a disciple, a 
follower, a joint-heir in my Kingdom— as a member of my 
Bride) except the Father which hath sent me draw him." 
(John 6:44.) And again, "No man taketh this honor unto 
himself, but he who is called of God, as was Aaron."— 
Heb. 5:4. 

Look at our text again; notice its setting! Why did 
the Apostle write these words? 

The context shows that he had been advising that 
prayer should be made for all men and not for the Church 
merely; that prayer should include kings and those in authority. 
Our prayer for them should not be that they should 
be members of the Body of the High Priest and Mediator for 
the world, but our prayer for them should be along the 
lines that would be most helpful for the interests of the 
Church, the elect class now being gathered— "that we may 
lead a quiet and peaceable life in all godliness and honesty." 
(I Tim. 2:2.) The Apostle proceeds to explain why we 
should thus remember the magistrates of the world in prayer. 
He says, "This is good and acceptable in the sight of God 
our Savior." He is pleased to have us think generously, 
sympathetically, kindly of the world of mankind, for thus 
he himself thinks of them and he intends, "wills to have all 



men to be saved [recovered from the disadvantages of the 

fall] and to come to a knowledge of the Truth." He does 

not wish that all men shall now come to this knowledge, for 

he knows that Satan, the god of this world, is blinding the 

minds of many so that they cannot get this knowledge, and 

his time has not yet come for the binding of Satan; but, 

since it is his will that eventually all must come to a knowledge 

of the Truth, therefore it must be good and acceptable 

in his sight that we should pray for these and sympathetically 

consider their interests and welfare, as associated with 

our own. 

In support of this position, that all mankind must be 
recovered from the death sentence and be brought to a knowledge 
of the Truth, the Apostle points out that God has made 
this provision, namely, that as there is one God, so there is 
one Mediator between God and men— between God and the 
world. The fact that this Mediator already has died for 
the sins of the whole world, a ransom-price, and the further 
fact that he has been recognized by God and highly exalted, 
gives us the assurance of the ultimate carrying out of God's 
gracious intentions on behalf of mankind. We see God and 
we see the condemned world and now we see the Mediator 
provided for the reconciliation of the two. After more than 
eighteen hundred years we still see the same; but we see 
additionally that the Lord has been calling and sanctifying a 
"little flock" as members of the Mediator's Body under this 
great Mediator Head. Then under New Covenant arrangements 
mankind in general will receive their share of the 
blessings of the ransom sacrifice of Jesus. 

All mankind are "by nature children of wrath"— the 
household of faith (except its Head) included. All mankind 
were "enemies of God through wicked works," in the 
sense that, by reason of ignorance and the fall, they were 

R4516 : page 347 

violators of the Divine Law, and hence subject to Divine 
condemnation afresh, after they should be set free from the 
death sentence of original sin. The Church and the world, 
"men," were all alike thus far. Here, however, a difference is 
manifested. All were sinful, but all did not love sin. All 
were imperfect in the flesh, but some in their minds desired 
and felt after God. So many of this latter class as possessed 
the eye of faith and the ear of faith, God has been pleased 
during this Age to justify by faith. The remainder, blind 
and deaf, during the Millennium, under the Mediatorial Kingdom 
of Christ, will be dealt with along the line of force. 
Their eyes being opened and their ears unstopped, every 
knee must bow and every tongue confess. 

Here we see distinct classes, and the reason for the distinction 
in the methods of God's dealing with them. Drawing 
some to Christ he permits them under the robe of Christ's 
righteousness to present their bodies living sacrifices and 
thus to become legally dead as men. At the same time, he 
begets these by his holy Spirit to a new nature, as members 
of and associates with his Son, the great Captain of their 



salvation. These as New Creatures need no mediator between 
them and the Father, for, as the Redeemer declares, 
"The Father himself loveth you." (John 16:27.) And St. 
Paul again declares, "Who is he that condemneth; it is God 
that justifieth." (Rom. 8:32,33.) If God himself has justified 
these and received their sacrifice, counting it "holy and 
acceptable," surely they need no mediator to come between 
the Father and them, but are themselves in preparation to be 
members of the Royal Priesthood, members of the Body of 
the great Mediator. 

But these do need what the Scriptures declare them to 
have, namely, an Advocate. The world, which needs a mediator 
and his mediatorial Kingdom, will find God's provision 
for them to that effect. The Church, which needs an Advocate, 
finds that God's provision has already supplied this 
need. "We have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ 
the righteous." (I John 2:1.) But we (the Church) have 
no mediator with God— a mediator would be entirely out of 
place, an interference in the precious relationship of the 
Church acknowledged both by the Father and the Son. 

But why do we need an Advocate? Because, although 
as New Creatures we are free from condemnation and have 
fullest relationship with the Father and can go to him at 
"the throne of heavenly grace to obtain mercy and find grace 
to help in every time of need," nevertheless we New Creatures 
have not our new bodies and will not have them until 
we receive them in the First Resurrection. Meantime, according 
to Divine arrangement, we must use our earthly bodies, 
which both God and we acknowledge to be imperfect. Since 
we can act only through our bodies, it follows that "we cannot 
do the things that we would," because "in our flesh 
dwelleth no perfection." But if, through the weakness or 
ignorance of the flesh we err, the Divine provision for us is 
that our Advocate, whose ransom-merit was applied to us, 

R4517 : page 347 

will appear for us (figuratively apply his merit) for the 
cancellation of our unintentional misdeeds and thus maintain 
us in the Father's sight without spot or wrinkle. 



R4517 : page 347 

THE POWER OF THE WILL-SELF-CONTROL 

-ROMANS 14:10-21.-NOVEMBER 28.- 

Golden Text:— "It is good neither to eat flesh, nor 
to drink wine, nor anything whereby thy brother 
stumbleth."-Rom. 14:21. 

IN TO-DAY'S study St. Paul, in his vigorous style, 
marks out the path of proper Christian conduct, in 
harmony with the second great commandment of the 



Law, "Thou shalt love thy neighbor as thyself." The 
lesson may be applied in a measure to every intelligent being, 
but strictly, particularly, peculiarly, it applies to every 
consecrated member of the Church of Christ. All men have 
wills and it is important that all should learn to use them. 
As a man willeth, so is he! The will-less, the supine, are 
things, not truly men and women. To be a hero in the 
strife means to have a will, and in proportion to its correctness 
and strength will be the influence and value of the 
personality. Children should not be trained to have no 
will, but, contrariwise, to have a will, but to submit it to 
the proper rulers and guides of life— at first to parents and 
the earthly teachers and, later on, to the Divine will— fully, 
completely. 

The Apostle is addressing those who submit their wills 
to the Lord— those who have accepted the Divine will, as instead 
of their own. The noblest and best of the people of 
God are those who have strong, iron wills, which they have 
fully submitted to the guidance and direction of the Lord- 
through the Bible, the holy Spirit and Divine Providence. 
"The Father seeketh such to worship him as worship him 
in spirit and in Truth." 

DEVELOPING WILL POWER 

Some are born with strong wills; others rather weak-minded. 
In the world the latter sink or swim, survive or 
perish, in the vicissitudes of life, often controlled by the 
law of supply and demand and the survival of the fittest. 
The inequalities of birth are frequently accentuated by life's 
experiences and often disastrously. Some of the strong-willed 
become merchant princes and managers of large enterprises, 
and some become thieves and desperadoes— the 
outcome depending largely upon haphazard channels. The 
only safe course for any mariner on the sea of life is to take 
on board the great Pilot, the Lord Jesus. This Pilot will 
probably rarely guide into a haven of earthly riches or earthly 
popularity, but, if permitted, he will bring us safely to the 
proper haven. 

Under this Pilot the human will is like a strong vessel 
with mighty masts and sails or powerful engines. The greater 
the power, the greater the capacity and the more useful. The 
proper Pilot will guide us not only safely past the rocks of 
disaster and shoals of sin, but to the haven of everlasting life 
and joy and peace and fellowship Divine. 

But not merely the strong-willed need this Pilot; the 
weak-willed naturally need him just as much, for although 
they might not run upon the rocks with the same degree of 
force and make equally bad shipwreck, they are quite as likely 
to be caught upon the shoals of sin and, in a purposeless 
manner, fail to achieve anything in life. 

NEW CREATURES IN CHRIST JESUS 

Those who during this age make a full surrender of 
their wills to the Lord and receive in return the begetting 



of the holy Spirit are Scripturally termed "new creatures in 

Christ Jesus." Their wills are brought into subjection to 

the will of God in Christ. The lessons of God's Word and 

all the experiences of life under Divine supervision are promised 

to work for their good; to strengthen their wills if too 

weak; to make them properly pliable if too rigid, and in general, 

eventually to make of them the most that is possible in 

the present life in godliness, and to prepare them for the life 

that is to come. 

Such are addressed by St. Paul in the present lesson. 
They are exhorted not to judge the brethren in the sense of 
condemning them, but rather to judge themselves, criticize 
themselves, and make of themselves shining examples, and 
thus to help the brethren and set a noble example before the 
world. All must give an account to the Lord sooner or 
later, and our judging them is unnecessary. Hence if we 
have judged or criticized each other in the past, we should 
avoid this in the future and merely criticize ourselves— our 
words, our deeds, our thoughts— that nothing in us shall 
put a stumbling block in the pathway of another. 

The ceremonial cleanness or uncleanness of food is 
nothing to the Christian, who is free from all law except 
the Law of Love. But the Law of Love controls, and forbids 
us to stumble or even to grieve a brother less well-informed 
on the subject than ourselves. How could we, controlled 
by love, either eat or drink, act or speak in a manner 
that would cause injury to another? It is good to have 
liberty, but let us so use it as not to injure those less advanced. 

R4517 : page 348 

The call of this Gospel Age is to joint-heirship with 
Christ in his Millennial Kingdom, and those so called are 
not under the bondage of the Jewish Law. They have 
greater liberty in Christ. But shall we say that the advantage 
of our relationship to the Lord as prospective heirs 
of the Kingdom consists chiefly in liberty to eat what we 
choose and to drink what we please? Surely not. These are 
but the lesser advantages of our blessed relationship to Christ 
and the Kingdom. Our chief blessing consists in our "justification 
and peace and joy in the holy Spirit."— V. 17. 

Let us appreciate these, our chief blessings and privileges 
of the present time, for, in so doing, we shall be well-pleasing 
in God's sight, and men also will approve our conduct. 
So, then, let us follow after the things which make 
for peace and things whereby we may edify one another. 
Let us not even risk injury to the cause of righteousness and 
work of God's grace in others by using our liberties in any 
manner contrary to their welfare. On the contrary, let us 
count it a privilege to void our rights, if thus we can glorify 
God and bless our fellows. 



R4517 : page 348 



ST. PAUL'S AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

-2 CORINTHIANS 11:21; 12:10.-NOVEMBER 21.- 

Golden Text:— "He said unto me, My grace is sufficient for 
thee, for my strength is made perfect in weakness."— 
2 Cor. 12:9. 

ST. PAUL'S brief story of his life noted in this 

study was written from Macedonia A.D. 57, before 

the occurrences noted in our recent studies. 

He gives us various facts recorded in the Book of 

Acts. An opponent might criticize his recitation of trying experiences 

and faith victories and might claim that modesty on 

the Apostle's part should have hindered such an eulogistic account 

of his own exploits. However, the Church at Corinth 

and all of God's people since have cause for thankfulness 

that the account was given. It was the Apostle's 

defense, not merely of himself, but specially a defense of 

the doctrines of Christ, which he, as the Lord's mouthpiece, 

had been used to declare. In God's order he was the leader 

in the presentation of Christian doctrine then, as he has been 

since. His expositions were opposed by false teachers and 

pseudo apostles, as well as by "would-be teachers." 

The Apostle was thus obliged to contend with foes outside 
and inside the Church and only the Divine power seemingly 
could have sustained him in so unequal a contest. He 
had spent more than a year at Corinth, planting the seeds of 
Truth and establishing believers there, while encouraging 
other little groups of the Lord's people in various quarters by 
messages and epistles. The work flourished and the Adversary 
was permitted of the Lord to stir up opposition both 
external and internal. Internally false brethren had made 
various charges against St. Paul. They opposed some of 
his teachings. They denied that he was an Apostle any 
more than themselves. They urged that he erred in teaching 
that circumcision was unnecessary to the Gentiles; that his 
teachings were not fixed and consistent (2 Cor. 1:17); that 
he was given to self-commendation (2 Cor. 3:1; 5:12; 10:8); 
and that he assumed unauthorized authority.— 2 Cor. 10:14. 

They charged that he was unpatriotic and had fallen 
away from the faith (2 Cor. 11:22); that he was not Christ's 
servant at all (2 Cor. 10:7; 1 1:23); that he had falsely assumed 
to be one of the ambassadors of Christ (2 Cor. 1 1:5; 
12:11); that he could show no proofs of his claimed apostleship; 
that unlike the twelve he had never known Christ personally; 
that his witness was second-hand and not direct like 
that of the others. 

It does not surprise us to learn that these false teachers 

R4518 : page 348 

confused the Church at Corinth and that splits, factions, 
sects, parties, resulted— some saying, I am of Paul; others, 
I am of Apollos; others, I am for Peter, etc. They reproached 
St. Paul for having worked at his trade and received gifts 



from Macedonia (2 Cor. 1 1:2-10), claiming that he should 
have urged his needs upon the Corinthians. They insinuated 
that the collections taken for the poor at Jerusalem were 
probably in part, at least, for himself. (2 Cor. 12:16.) They 
even asked if it were certain that he was a Hebrew at all— 
of pure blood— if he were not a Gentile in whole or in part. 
(2 Cor. 1 1:22.) These wicked arrows, even bitter words, 
must have wounded deeply, painfully, one so sensitive as the 
Apostle, especially as they came from erstwhile friends, for 
whom he had been willing to suffer the loss of all things. 
But this second epistle to the Corinthians was not written, 
we may be sure, in self-defense merely, but chiefly in the 
defense of the Truth, because if he were personally discredited 
the truths which he represented and the Lord himself 
and his glorious Plan would be likewise discredited. 

St. Paul was not alone in these perils from false brethren 
and the world. In the past Socrates, Calvin, Wesley, Washington, 
Savonarola, Lincoln, Grant, all of them had their traducers, 
slanderers, vilifiers. Bishop Phillips Brooks in recent 
years had severe experiences along this line which led 
him to write these lines respecting himself:— 

"And this is then the way he looks, 
This tiresome creature, Phillips Brooks? 
No wonder if 'tis thus he looks, 
The Church has doubts of Phillips Brooks! 
Well, if he knows himself, he'll try 
To give those doubtful looks the lie. 
He dares not promise, but will seek 
Even as a bishop to be meek; 

"To walk the way he shall be shown, 
To trust a strength that's not his own, 
To fill the years with honest work, 
To serve his day and not to shirk; 
To quite forget what folks have said, 
To keep his heart and keep his head, 
Until men, laying him to rest, 
Shall say, 'At least he did his best.'" 

ST. PAUL'S THREE PROOFS 

Studying in the light of the foregoing we may divide 
the Apostle's defense in his second epistle to the Corinthians 
into three divisions:— 

(1) The sufferings which he endured in connection with 
preaching the Truth demonstrated his love for it, his love 
for the Lord, and his love for such of mankind as might have 
the hearing ear. 

(2) The proof of his apostleship in the visions granted 

to him, the communion with God and his deep insight into 

spiritual truths and the fact that the Lord had specially commissioned 

him to declare his name at Jerusalem and to the 

Gentiles. This, indeed, in conjunction with his having seen 

the Lord "as one born before the time," constituted the 

chief evidence of his apostleship, in conjunction with the 



service which he was permitted to render to the Lord's cause 
under that commission. 

(3) Finally his further proof— he was still a minister of 
the Lord and of his message to such as had the hearing ear. 

Under the first count St. Paul enumerates his faithfulness, 
saying, Are they Israelites? So am I. Are they the 
Seed of Abraham? So am I. Are they servants of Christ? 
I serve more; for I have ministered or served more than 
they, in larger fields; in labors more abundant; in stripes 
above measure— received at the hands of Gentiles, the Jewish 
measure being forty blows. In prisons he was more frequent; 
exposed to death more often; flogged to the limit 
(thirty-nine blows) by the Jews; five times beaten with 
rods; stoned; shipwrecked; a day and a night in the deep 
on wreckage; in journeyings often; in perils many from 
floods, from robbers; from the heathen; from his fellow-countrymen; 
in the city; and in the wilds; on the sea and 
amongst false brethren. The weariness and painfulness of 
his service; his watching, hungering and thirsting, fastings, 
cold and deprivations he had experienced more than any of 
the other Apostles. Furthermore, in God's providence the 
care of all the Churches had been his pleasurable and weighty 
responsibility. All these demonstrated his supreme love for 
God, his neighbor, and his brethren, to a degree unequalled. 

Under the second count he had seen the Lord as a spirit-being 
in the brightness above the sun at noonday, and in 

R4518 : page 349 

advance of the remainder of the Church. What the other 
apostles saw of our Lord during the forty days of his appearance 
as a man after his resurrection would not compare 
in importance to the witness of our Lord's resurrection which 
St. Paul had seen. Besides this he had a most astounding 
vision or revelation in which he was "caught away to the 
third heaven" and saw things he was not authorized to 
explain. 

The third heaven is the new heaven of the future— of 
the Millennial Age. The first "heaven and earth," or primary 
arrangement, passed away at the flood. The second 
"heaven and earth" organization, beginning at the flood, still 
persists. The third "heaven and earth," or new dispensation, 
is the one to come— the one which will be introduced at 
Messiah's Second Advent. In other words, St. Paul in vision 
was caught away and given a glimpse of the Millennial 
Kingdom conditions, glories, blessings, etc.— things not proper 
at the time to be generally disclosed. Nevertheless that 
vision assisted the Apostle to a clearness of mental grasp 
of the Divine purposes, and shaped and colored all of his 
epistles. 

And now, "in due time," St. Paul's writings constitute 
the key to the Divine Plan of the Ages. He saw more literally 
the things subsequently revealed in symbols to St. John 
at Patmos and delivered to the Church in symbols which 
could not be solved until the due time. In view of these 
things he could well write, "I certify you, brethren, that the 



Gospel which was preached of me is not after man; for I 
neither received it of man, nor was I taught it, but by the 
revelation of Jesus Christ."— Gal. 1:11,12. 

The third test, namely, his sanctity, is everywhere manifest 
in his writings. He preached not for filthy lucre, nor for 
worldly applause, nor for the honor of men— not even for 
honor from the Church. He declared, "I will very gladly 
spend and be spent for you, though the more abundantly I 
love you the less I be loved." And again he says what his 
life affirmed, "I seek not yours but you." 

His "thorn in the flesh," probably weakness of the eyes, 
resulting from his experiences with the great light, enroute 
to Damascus, seems to have marred his personal appearance 
and, for the sake of the cause, to have justified him in praying 
to the Lord for relief and thereby a wider influence. His 
prayer was answered, but not as he had expected. The Lord 
declared that he would give his compensating grace, declaring, 
"My grace is sufficient for thee; my strength is made 
perfect in weakness." The Apostle assures us that he most 
heartily acceded to this proposition, saying, "Most gladly, 
therefore, will I suffer, that the grace of God may abound 
towards me." 

What a wonderful lesson we have in St. Paul's experiences 
and how justly he wrote that we should follow him, 
as he followed the Lord Jesus! 



R4518 : page 349 

RANSOM POINTS TO BE REMEMBERED 

WHENEVER the word Ransom is used in the 
Scriptures it has the sense of ransom-price according 
to the Greek— a corresponding price, a 
sufficient price. 

Ransoming signifies the application of the ransom-price. 

Thus when we read that our Lord Jesus gave himself a 
ransom-price for all, the meaning is that his sacrifice, finished 
at Calvary, is a sufficient price to effect the ransoming 
of all mankind, if so applied or when so applied. 

Our Lord laid down his life; he died on our behalf; he 
gave our ransom-price into the Father's hands when he offered 
himself without spot to God. But the putting of that 
meritorious sacrifice into God's hands and the application 
of that merit to mankind are two different matters. 

The laying down of the ransom-price was finished at 
Calvary; but the application of it was not even begun for 
fifty days. Three days our Redeemer was dead— arising on 
the third day. Then for forty days he was with the disciples, 
appearing occasionally for their instruction. Then he 
ascended up on high, there "to appear in the presence of 
God for us," and promptly on the fiftieth day, Pentecost, the 
outpouring of the holy Spirit upon God's believing and consecrated 
servants and handmaidens began. 

Pentecost was the proof that our glorified Lord had applied 



the merit of his sacrifice, had applied his blood as our 
ransom-price. Pentecost was therefore a proof that the 
Church had been ransomed— that the antitypical sprinkling 
of his blood by our great High Priest on the Mercy-Seat, or 
Propitiatory, "for us" had been accomplished, and that it 
was satisfactory to Justice, and that our sins were cancelled. 
Thereupon the High Priest began at once his secondary 
offering of his "members"— "living sacrifices, holy and 
acceptable unto God." (Rom. 12:1.) This in the type was 
represented by the killing of "the Lord's goat"— "the goat of 

R4519 : page 349 

the sin-offering that is for the people."— Lev. 16:15. 

The ransom-price all went for the atonement of our sins 
when the great High Priest appeared "for us." That ransom-price 
bought us (I Cor. 6:20); but was applied for no others 
and blessings came upon no others. It is "for all" (I Tim. 2:6), 
but has not yet been so applied. 

It took all of that merit or ransom-price to make atonement 
for our sins— because it was so applied. It would 
have required all of it for even one man's release. It is because 
the penalty or sentence of death passed "upon all 
men to condemnation," through one man's offense or sin, 
that the one man's death can be applied for more than one 
man's release from condemnation. But whatever the number 
it is applied for, it takes it all to effect the release from 
condemnation. 

So, then, the High Priest, having applied the entire 
ransom-price "for us," "on our behalf" (Heb. 9:24), for the 
blemishes or condemnation of those now accepted as his members 
and his house— the household of faith— it follows that 
he has no merit now remaining to apply for the world. The 
ransom-price which was sufficient for one man or for all 
men was applied only "for us," "for our sins." 

What then is the hope of the world? 

Ah, it has not been forgotten in the Divine purpose, and 
in due time it will be ransomed— "the precious blood," the 
ransom-price, will be applied on the Mercy-Seat for the 
sins of all the people! Then the holy Spirit will be poured 
out upon all flesh. 

What! Will the Church pay the world's ransom-price? 

Not so ! It is the Divine arrangement that in all things 
he [Jesus] should have the preeminence. Jesus' merit, as we 
have seen, is now fully in use— accredited to us who are of 
the household of faith, for our justification by faith. We 
are counted, or reckoned, as possessing the earthly rights 
and life forfeited by Adam and redeemed by Jesus. But 
this reckoning or justification is confirmed to us of God 
by the holy Spirit's begetting to a new nature only because 
of our consecration vow to the Lord that we would lay 
down our lives, sacrificing all those earthly interests and 
rights as he did— walking in his steps, being baptised into 
his death, drinking of his cup of ignominy— partaking with 
our Head of "the blood of the New Covenant," by which 
as a legacy or Testament the ransom-price blessing shall in 



due time be bequeathed to natural Israel— with the proviso 
that all mankind may be blessed by becoming Israelites indeed 
on the human plane of restitution— Abraham's earthly seed- 
as the sands of the sea for multitude. 

Note, then, that the one ransom-price, laid down by our 
Lord at Calvary, was all paid over to Justice "on our behalf," 
"for us," as was acknowledged at Pentecost and since, 
by the holy Spirit upon the Lord's servants and handmaidens. 
Note also that the restitution rights which we are now using 
as sharers in our Lord's sacrifice must all be surrendered 
back to Justice before the Great High Priest can present that 
same ransom-price again on behalf of the world, under the 
New Covenant conditions. 

R4519 : page 350 

"Ye shall all die like men," or as men, writes the Lord 
through the Prophet. (Psa. 82:7.) There are three classes 
developed under God's original Covenant with Abraham— 
the Grace or Sarah Covenant. (I.) The "little flock" of under-priests 
—members of the Body of the High Priest. These 
suffer with him, sharing "his death," "his cup," "baptised into 
his death." (II.) The "great company," who consecrated 
unto death and were begotten of the Spirit, but who "through 
fear of death were all their lifetime subject to bondage." 
These must die, but not as parts of Christ's Body, not as 
parts of his sacrifice. They must suffer "the destruction of 
the flesh, that the spirit (new nature) may be saved in the 
day of the Lord Jesus." (III.) Those who wilfully turn 
from and repudiate their consecration to sacrifice must die 
the Second Death. These are described by St. Paul as treating 
despitefully the one who paid their ransom-price and 
accepted them as his members, sanctifying them apart as his 
joint-sacrificers and joint-sharers of his glory in connection 
with the great work of mediating the New Covenant, under 
which Israel and the world will be blest— Heb. 10:29. 

All of these three classes, all whose justification and 
sacrifice of sanctification were accepted by the Lord— as 
evidenced by their receiving the holy Spirit as his servants 
and handmaidens— all these must die before the New Covenant 
with Israel and mankind will be sealed. They must 
lay down all earthly justification and earthly rights, forever, 
before the one ransom-price can be back into the hands 
of Justice to the credit of the High Priest, that he may 
therewith appear in the presence of God to make an atonement 
with his ransom-price for the sins of all the people. 
Then, at the close of this age and the opening of the Millennium, 
our Lord, who as the man Christ Jesus gave himself 
a ransom-price for all, will have presented that price "for all." 
Thus "he is the propitiation [expiator— Strong's Lexicon] for 
our sins [the Church's sins], and not for ours only, but also 
for the sins of the whole world." (I John 2:2.) The expiations 
are separate and distinct, but the one sacrifice, finished 
at Calvary, is the ransom-price by which both expiations are 
to be effected. 



R4519 : page 350 

SOME INTERESTING LETTERS 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

"No weapon that is formed against thee shall prosper 
and every tongue that shall rise against thee in judgment 
thou shalt condemn." In the recent experiences through 
which the Church has been passing I have frequently been 
reminded of these words, and especially in regard to you, as 
the Adversary's method of attack seems to be to first slander 
you and then try to produce evidence that you are guilty 
of denying the Lord. 

In this connection I have been thinking of how our Lord 
and Head was crucified for blasphemy against his Father, 
whom he had so faithfully served. 

Do you not think that we shall find a deeper significance 
in the statements, "the servant is not above his master," 
and "we should follow his steps," than we at first appreciated? 

Dear Brother, please permit me to express my appreciation 
of your loyalty to the Lord and his word and your 
courage in presenting the Truth. Truly the Lord has prepared 
for us "a table in the presence of our enemies." The 
DAWNS and TOWERS never seemed more precious than now 
and, remembering the Apostle's words that "ye cannot be 
partakers of the Lord's table and the table of devils," I 
have no desire of feeding at these side-tables prepared to 
draw us away from the Truth. 

Assuring you of my continued Christian love and heartfelt 
sympathy, I am, 

Your humble fellow-servant in the Harvest work, 
J. F. STEPHENSON, JR. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

I am forever grateful to you for the very precious help 
you have given to me in my coming "out of darkness into 
his marvelous light." I am still feasting upon the good 
things of the Master's table. Your articles on the Covenants 
are very interesting, and I note, with close attention, 
the restatement of some of the expressions concerning the 
great unchangeable truths. 

There is one other matter that I think some of the brethren 
are not quite clear upon, and I therefore ask that you 
consider the propriety of making a restatement of the facts 
in such language as will make it impossible longer for 
any confusion or misunderstanding. It is common to hear 
a brother speak of "the breath" as "the life." When I 
question the expression, they tell me that the DAWNS "so 
teach." I think not. Surely they are mistaken, as I will 
now show by the following quotations:— 

"This spark of life we receive from our fathers."— Vol. V., 
p. 334. 



"Life. ..is an invisible power.. .like electricity." 
--Vol. V., p. 335. 

"Jacob received his spark of life. ..from Isaac."— 
Vol. V., p. 365. 

"And Jacob passed on the life. ..to his posterity."— 
Vol. V., p. 365. 

"Human resurrection is therefore. ..a rekindling of 
animal existence."— Vol. V., p. 365. 

"The spark once started is supported by breathing."— 
Vol. V., p. 333. 

These statements by you are absolutely correct, and they 
do positively and clearly show a marked difference between 
the "spark of life," which begins the creature at conception, 
and "the breath of life," which supports the creature after 
birth. The above quotations from DAWN are firmly established 
in truth, as we learn from Job 33:4, "The spirit of 
God hath made me and the breath of the Almighty hath given 
me life." 

It was a wonderful intelligence that "fashioned" us, and 
was altogether superhuman, and, as Job says (33:4), it was 
"the spirit of God" (invisible influence), and not the "breath 
of life." We should never lose sight of the fact that breath 
or ruach or pneuma means not only wind or air, but also 
means like the wind, which is an invisible influence. This 
double meaning of the word "spirit" is clearly taught in the 
DAWNS (Vol. V., page 335), but is not always sharply differentiated 
by the student. The breath, while important to 
support life, as is also food and water, does not have the 
needful creative intelligence to "fashion" a man in the womb, 
where it does not have access. "He giveth to all life, and 
breath, and all things." (Acts 17:25.) We must believe "Thine 
hands (power) have made me, and fashioned me together 

R4520 : page 350 

roundabout; thou hast made me as the clay." (Job 10:8,9.) 
The "wind" cannot fashion the clay into a created organism, 
but God's invisible creative power can easily do so. 

Trusting that the above suggestion may meet with your 
approval, I will close by saying, each day my prayers are 
offered in your behalf, that God may aid and comfort and 
sustain you in your great work, until you faithfully reach 
the end; and that the "joy set before," will make you realize 
that— "The sufferings of this present time are not worthy to 
be compared with the glory that shall be revealed in us." 
(Rom. 8:18.) For myself, I will say that my prayer is to 
be "faithful unto death," and in being faithful to the Captain 
of my salvation, I necessarily and joyfully pledge to be faithful 
and loyal to his lieutenant, "that servant," as becomes a 
good soldier of the cross. 

With much love, your brother in the Master's service, 
W. W.CRANE, M.D. 



BELOVED PASTOR, GREETING: 



During all the years in which we have enjoyed Present 
Truth we have never written to tell you how much we appreciate 
your labor of love on behalf of the household of 
faith, and how gladly we recognize you as the Messenger of 
the Laodicean Church. Daily we remember you at the throne 
of grace, that you may be kept as the apple of his eye, and 

R4520 : page 351 

as we read your loving, gentle words relative to those who 
walk no more with us, we feel that most assuredly Brother 
Russell is being "hidden in the secret of his presence from 
the strife of tongues." 

May the peace and comfort of our gracious Heavenly 
Father abide with you to the end of your faithful pilgrimage. 

With Christian love, 

BRO. AND SR. A. L. RHOADES. 



DEAR BROTHER AND SISTER RHOADES:- 

Your very kind letter is much appreciated. I feel myself 
quite unworthy of so many honors as the Lord and his 
people continually shower upon me. I can only say that I 
am thankful for the privilege of the blessed service of the 
High Priest and his under-priests. 

May the Lord's blessing continue richly with you both. 
In his love and service, your brother and servant. 



OUR BELOVED PASTOR:- 

Another week of service ended and we come home to find 
more evidences of the severe trials promised to the true 
Church near the end of the harvest. Our hearts can only 
bow in inexpressable gratitude and awe before our Heavenly 
Father that he has kept us and provided grace unto faithfulness 
for another week past. 

By Nov. 1st "Tower" I see more plainly how easily I 
might permit the wrong spirit to arise; so with greater fear 
and trembling I am determined by his grace to do those 
things pleasing in his sight until he can clothe this imperfection 
with perfection. I give all praise to our Father that 
I am still one of those whom he calls Blessed— "Whosoever 
shall not be offended in me"— and thank him that my heart is 
daily increasing in love and gratitude for you, dear Pastor, 
and your labor of love. Our hearts are enlarged with 
sympathy and love for the one for whom many lay in wait, 
seeking to catch something out of his mouth that they might 
accuse him. 

We claim the promise for ourselves and all the loyal at 
heart which the Lord gives us, "Neither shall any man pluck 
these out of my hand. ..and no man is able to pluck them 
out of my Father's hand." 

May you have peace, joy and comfort in the Lord's love 
amid sorrows, until the sacrifice is entirely consumed and you 



are with our glorified King for all eternity. 
We are "gathering with you" in sincerity and truth. 
With much love from us all. 

C. WHITE. 



IT IS CORRECTLY STATED 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

A statement in the October 15th TOWER does not seem 
clear to us, and we were wondering if your pen said what 
you intended it should. The statement is found in the second 
paragraph of the second column, page 314, and reads:— 

"St. Paul refers directly to this New Covenant to be 
made with Israel at the end of this age (v. 27), saying, 'This 
is my Covenant unto them (natural Israel), when I shall take 
away their sins.' (Rom. 1 1:27.) The taking away of their 
sins is a necessity for them, before they can receive this New 
Covenant, because God makes no Covenant with sinners." 

We have had the understanding that it was because they 
were sinners that God will make the Covenant with them, so 
that they could get back into harmony with God. If their 
sins are first to be taken away, why will a Covenant then be 
necessary? 

Perhaps we have not caught the thought you have, and 
would be glad to have a word or two in explanation. Possibly 
you may think the reply of sufficient importance for the 
TOWER. 

IN REPLY 

The statement is quite correct. God makes no covenants 
with sinners. His Covenant with Abraham, for instance, was 
made because Abraham had first been justified by faith. Because 
of his faith, attested by obedience, God dealt with him 
as though he were released from condemnation of sin. It is 
the same with believers in this Gospel Age. We are first 
justified freely through faith in the blood of Jesus, before we 
are even invited to present our bodies as living sacrifices, to 
share with Christ as his members in mediating the New 
Covenant, under which Israel and the world will be blessed. 

The delay in the sealing of the New Covenant and its 
institution and the blessing of all the people under it has 
been merely for the purpose of permitting the predestinated 
number of under-priests to be developed. Each member of 
this household of faith, typically represented in Aaron's sons 
and the tribe of Levi, must first be justified by faith in the 
blood of Jesus— washed, cleansed, and each one must be sanctified 
or set apart through consecration to share in Christ's 
death, and must be accepted by the begetting of the holy 
Spirit and must finish his course, before the great High Priest 
(Jesus the Head, and the Church his Body) shall present on 
behalf of the world the merit of our Lord's sacrifice, now 
being utilized on behalf of the Church to permit us to become 
members of the Priest through joint-sacrifices. 



When, as you quote, we said that "the taking away of 
Israel's sins is a necessity for them, before they can receive 
this New Covenant," we refer to the first part of the taking 
away of sins, namely, the satisfaction of Justice on their behalf. 
It should always be remembered that sin has its two 
parts; first its obliquity and condemnation from the Divine 
standpoint; and secondly its effect upon the sinner in the way 
of mental, moral and physical blemishes. 

It is the first of these that must be cancelled before 
blessing and covenants are possible. Then, under the New 
Covenant arrangements, their sins will be put away gradually 
during the Millennium by assistance of the Royal Priesthood 
and all the uplifting influences of the mediatorial Kingdom. 

The Great High Priest, who at the beginning of this 
age appeared in the presence of God "on our behalf," "for us," 
and who applied the benefit of the ransom-price for our sins— 
for the sins of the household of faith— will, in association with 
the members of his Body who are now faithful in sharing his 
sacrifice, in the end of this age, in the dawning of the Millennium, 
present the ransom-price "on behalf of all the 
people." He will thus purchase the world entire, as he already 
has "bought us," the Church. Not until after he shall have 
thus purchased the world by the satisfaction of Justice on 
their behalf, "on behalf of all the people," will he have the 
right to open to them the blessed privileges of the New 
Covenant, which will be to Israel first and through Israel to 
all the families of the earth. 



BELOVED BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

We, the undersigned members of the "Ecclesia" at 
Cardiff, Wales, deem it a great privilege to register our 
names as those taking the responsibility, by the Lord's 
grace, of complying with the conditions of the Vow as 
presented in "The Watch Tower" of June 15th, 1908. 
And since we have heard of the uncharitable spirit manifested 
toward you by some who oppose the Vow we have 
been led to conclude that you, dear Brother, have been 
guided by the Lord in its presentation and that the opposition 
shown to such a simple form of words is an evidence 
that Satan is very much on the alert in regard to 
the matter. 

We confess that we can see nothing in the "Vow" but 
what we believe would be helpful to every one of the 
Lord's consecrated people who is giving diligence to make 
his calling and election sure. We also think that the 
main cause of the opposition shown is through that clause 
of it referring to the precaution suggested when meeting 
in private with members of the opposite sex. We believe 
that Satan has scored many victories in the past on similar 
lines and are of the opinion that we need more than 
ever to be on the watch now in this respect, in this time 
of special testing of the Church. The Lord, we believe, 
will see that we get all the necessary testings without our 
making the conditions for ourselves. We believe he will 



bring about the conditions himself in his own way. 

May the Lord guide you still further, beloved Brother, 
and grant Divine wisdom to Pastor the "flock of God," 
so that Truth may search us and prove whether or not 
the carnal mind is dominating us in any sense of the 
word. 

SIGNED BY FIFTEEN. 



page 352 

PUBLIC MINISTRIES OF THE TRUTH 

UNDER THE AUSPICES OF PEOPLES PULPIT 
ASSOCIATION OF BROOKLYN, N.Y. 



ONE-DAY CONVENTIONS ADDRESSED BY THE 
EDITOR, ETC. 

BROCKTON, MASS., NOV. 14 

Morning meeting for praise and testimony, beginning 
at 10:30 o'clock, and evening meeting with address for the 
interested, to be held in Canton Hall, 13 N. Main Street. 

Evening session for the public at 3 o'clock in City Theatre, 
No. 50 Main Street. Subject, "The Overthrow of Satan's 
Empire." Visiting friends heartily welcomed. 

ROCHESTER, N.Y., NOV. 21 

Morning meeting for Rally at 10:30 and evening meeting 
for interested at 7:30 in Odd Fellows' Temple, 1 1 Clinton Av. N. 

Afternoon session for the Public at 3 o'clock in Lyceum 
Theatre, 32 Clinton Av. S. Subject, "Where Are the Dead?" 

YORK, PA., NOV. 28 

For local particulars ad. J. H. Martin, 561 Pa. Av., York, Pa. 

BROOKLYN, N.Y., DEC. 5 AND 19 

PITTSBURG (N.S.), PA., DEC. 12 

RICHMOND, VA., DEC. 26 

CHICAGO, ILL., JAN. 2 



BROOKLYN BETHEL HYMNS FOR DECEMBER 

After the singing of the hymn the Bethel Family 
listens to the reading of "My Vow unto the Lord," 



then joins in prayer. At the breakfast table we consider 
the MANNA text: (1) 281; (2) 130; (3) 114; 
(4) 72; (5) 121; (6) 318; (7) 110; (8) 95; (9) 153; 
(10) 119; (11) 324; (12) 195; (13) 313; (14) 131; 
(15) 60; (16) 17; (17) 4; (18) 246; (19) 91; (20) 
30; (21) 8; (22) 293; (23) 196; (24) 9; (25) 16; 
(26) 152; (27) 28; (28) 29; (29) 279; (30) Vow; 
(31)333. 



page 354 

STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES 
"MILLENNIAL DAWN" 

THESE STUDIES ARE RECOMMENDED TO STUDENTS AS VERITABLE "BIBLE KEYS. 

PRICES ARE NET AND BARELY COVER COST OF PRODUCTION, 

WHEN DELIVERED BY COLPORTEURS THE COST AND PRICE ARE INCREASED. 

SERIES I., The Plan of the Ages, gives an outline of the divine plan 
revealed in the Bible, relating to man's redemption and restitution: 
386 pages, in embossed cloth, 25c. (Is. l/2d.) India paper edition, 75c. 
(3s. l-l/2d.). 

This volume has been published as a special issue of our journal— 
at the extremely low price of 5c. a copy, in any quantity, postage included. 
(To foreign countries, 9c.) This enables people of slender 
purse to herald far and wide the good tidings in a most helpful form. 

SERIES II., The Time is at Hand, treats of the manner and time of 
the Lord's second coming, considering the Bible Testimony on this 
subject: 370 pages, in embossed cloth, 25c. (Is. l/2d.) India paper 
edition, 75c. (3s. l-l/2d.) 

SERIES III., Thy Kingdom Come, considers prophecies which mark 
events connected with the "Time of the End," the glorification of the 
Church and the establishment of the Millennial Kingdom; it also contains 
a chapter of the Great Pyramid, showing its corroboration of the 
dates and other teachings of the Bible: 384 pages, in embossed cloth, 
25c. (Is. l/2d.) India paper edition, 75c. (3s. l-l/2d.) 

SERIES IV., The Day of Vengeance, shows that the dissolution of the 
present order of things is in progress, and that all the panaceas offered 
are valueless to avert the predicted end. It marks in these events the 
fulfilment of prophecy, noting specially our Lord's great prophecy of 
Matt. 24 and Zech. 14:1-9: 660 pages, in embossed cloth, 30c. (Is. 3d.). 
India paper edition, 85c. (3s. 6-l/2d.) 

SERIES V., The At-one-ment Between God and Man, treats an all-important 
subject— the hub, the center around which all the features 
of divine grace revolve. Its topic deserves the most careful and 
prayerful consideration on the part of all true Christians: 507 pages, 
in embossed cloth, 30c. (Is. 3d.) India paper edition, 85c. (3s. 6-l/2d.) 

SERIES VI., The New Creation, deals with the Creative Week 
(Genesis 1 and 2), and with the Church, God's "New Creation." It examines 
the personnel, organization, rites, ceremonies, obligations and 
hopes appertaining to those called and accepted as members of the 
Body under the Head: 740 pages, in embossed cloth, 30c. (Is. 3d.) 
India paper edition, 85c. (3s. 6-l/2d.) 

The above prices include postage. 

IN FULL LEATHER BINDING, gilt edges, the set (6 vols.) $3.00, 
(12s. 6d.), plus postage, 60c. (Is.). 

Is also published in foreign languages as follows: German, five volumes; 
in Swedish Vols. 1, 2, 3, 5 and 6; in Dano-Norwegian, three vols.; 
in Greek, three vols.; in French, two vols.; Hollandish, Spanish, 
and Italian, one vol. each; bound in cloth, uniform with English edition, 
prices the same; in Polish, condensed edition, one vol., 10 cents. 



page 353 



SEMI-MONTHLY 
VOL. XXX DECEMBER 1 No. 23 
A.D. 1909--A.M. 6038 



CONTENTS 

Views from The Watch Tower 355 

Bishop Fallows Not a Spiritualist 355 

To Give Life to the Image 357 

The Land of Abraham 358 

Longing for Home 358 

Evil Speaking and Hatred 359 

Our Wedding Garments 360 

Communion With Our Father (Poem) 361 

St. Paul on the Grace of Giving 361 

St. Paul's Last Words 362 

Concerning Messiah's Mediatorship 363 

Pilgrim Bro. Harrison Gone Home 365 

Some Interesting Letters 365 

Schedule of Bro. Russell's Dec. Tour 367 

Berean Studies on the Atonement 367 

page 354 

PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY 
CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
"BROOKLYN TABERNACLE," 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, N.Y., U.S.A. 

Foreign Agencies:— British Branch: 24 Eversholt St., London, 
N.W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, Barmen. Australasian 
Branch: Equitable Building, Collins St., Melbourne. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:— All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 
and in touch with the Studies, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, DANISH AND ITALIAN EDITIONS. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N.Y., POSTOFFICE 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA 



MOTTO CARDS FOR HOME EMBELLISHMENT 

We have these in elegant designs— new and old. For 
convenience we assort them in $1.00 packages, postpaid. 
These prices are about one-half the usual rates. We put 
up five different dollar assortments and one 55c. packet— 
the latter smaller and cheaper, but all nice. Order before 
the Christmas rush and delay. 

Remember also the 1910 Motto Card, and the Sweet 
Brier Rose booklet mentioned in our last issue. 

"DAILY HEAVENLY MANNA," ETC. 

Do not forget that Christmas is the most favorable time 
for giving to your friends something expressive of your 
faith. The DAILY HEAVENLY MANNA and THE DIVINE PLAN 
OF THE AGES, with many of our readers, head the list. For 
a children's booklet remember the "Wonderful Story of 
God's Love." See prices, etc., in our November 1 issue. 

VOLUNTEER MATTER 

Special issues of PEOPLE'S PULPIT for use as tracts are 
usually shipped direct from the printing establishments doing 
the work. Our friends are therefore requested to report 
to us promptly, the total numbers received and when, 
and whether in good condition. We intend that charges be 
prepaid. Should charges be demanded, pay them, obtain a 
receipt and communicate with us for reimbursement. 



R4521 : page 355 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER 

BISHOP FALLOWS NOT A SPIRITUALIST 

THE New York World publishes an interview with 
Bishop Fallows, of the Reformed Episcopal Church, 
as follows:— 

"Telepathy is an established fact. In recent 
years great strides have been made in the explanation of 
psychic phenomena and in the years to come the science of 
communication with the dead will be made a part of the 
curriculum of great educational institutions. As its study 
becomes systematized and more widely spread greater advances 
will be made and some day we will talk with the 



spirits as we now talk with material persons. 

"The Bishop made some startling statements in discussing 
the matter. He frankly states that he formerly 
fought shy of Spiritualism, and that he is just beginning 
to learn. 

"In the enlightened days to come,' said Dr. Fallows, 
'we shall be able to converse with spirits of departed friends 
and relatives. Their state will be made known to us through 
these communications. They will be able to advise us on 
knotty problems. 

'"There are great truths in Spiritualism. Many Spiritualistic 
phenomena we cannot understand, but we have to 
admit them. I have called the new science "Immortalism" 
because it depends for its existence upon the immortality of 
the soul, in which we all believe, and the preservation of 
identity beyond the grave. Immortalism is simply Spiritualism 
with all the fraud and trickery eliminated. On account 
of these frauds Spiritualism has been shunned by 
many right thinking people, but immortalism will claim their 
most earnest attention.' 

"In support of his belief Bishop Fallows quoted from 
many eminent men who have expressed similar views." 

Bishop Fallows will be recognized by many as one of 
the ministers who have recently been taking a great interest 
in Faith Healing clinics. We have already pointed out that 
to our understanding these cures are effected by hypnotic 
influences and that hypnotism is but another form of Spiritism. 
We believe that through this channel the fallen angels 
("wicked spirits," Eph. 6:12) are seeking to break down 
the human will, and that the results, shortly, will be direful 
in the extreme, leading to spirit control and every evil work. 
It was only to be expected that sooner or later Bishop Fallows 
and his associates in "faith healing" would be drawn 
into co-operation with Spiritism and more or less outwardly 
acknowledge it. But it is with pity that we note Dr. Fallows' 
endorsement of the power and his denial of the name, 
as though the change of a name, the calling of it Immortalism 
instead of Spiritism, would effect any real change in 
its character. 

Immortalism is really a more deceptive name than Spiritism, 
because it seems to imply the deathlessness of those 
who have died and to give the inference that it is the dead 
who do the communicating. Spiritism is the more correct 
name for the cult because, as the Scriptures show, these 
various manifestations come not from dead men, who "know 
not anything" (Eccl. 9:5), but from spirits— wicked spirits- 
fallen spirits— "the angels which kept not their first estate" 
and who were restrained at the time of the flood.— I Pet. 3:19; 
Jude 6. 

Poor Christendom! Boasting of its scientific attainments 
and learning and wisdom it is being led by its professors 
of colleges, its ministers and bishops, straight into 
the enemy's camp— into Spiritism— demonism. Within the 
next few years we expect wonderful developments along 
this line, for is not the entire nominal Church of Christ 
blindfold on this subject, and worse, mistaught, deceived into 



thinking that their friends are alive, whereas the Bible distinctly 
assures us that it is because the dead are not alive 
that they need "a resurrection of the dead" and that the 
Lord has provided therefor? 

Meantime while expecting these traps and snares to 
stumble many who are not Bible students and taught of 
God, let us who do recognize them beware for ourselves 
lest we be entrapped in another way— through the subtle 
influences of the same great Adversary— inciting to anger, malice, 
envy, hatred, strife, evil-speaking, slander, etc. We believe 
special testings along these lines are now being permitted 
that those who have not faithfully used God's blessings 
for their establishment in faith and righteousness may 
stumble, may fall, may be tested by fiery trials along both 
these lines— faith and practice. 

ENCOURAGING IMMIGRATION INTO PALESTINE 



A bill has been introduced in the Turkish Parliament 
with a view of encouraging Jewish immigration into Palestine. 
It is proposed to do away with the so-called "red 
passports," which had hitherto been given to every Jew 
landing in Palestine as an assurance that he would not stay 
there more than three months. It is believed that such a 
bill will greatly facilitate Jewish settlement in Palestine and 
remove the restrictions which deterred many Jews from 
taking up their abode there. 

SOCIALISM GREATLY TO BE FEARED 



The public prints still continue to make mention of the 
great strike and threatened revolt in the Swedish Metropolis, 
Stockholm. Various lessons are sought to be impressed 
by it— amongst others the prevalence of Socialism 
and what it portends. The following from the Moline Dispatch 
is a sample. The general comment is that when the 
patient and order-loving Swedes become riotous it marks a 
new epoch, and more or less justifies the expectation of lawlessness 
anywhere, everywhere. The below article gives, 
we think, a fair reflex of European conditions and the influence 
of Socialism in the affairs of life to-day:— 

"The Socialists, of course, fail this time, but we should 
indeed be blind if we do not see in the incident a further 
warning of a tendency visible all over Europe. Within the 
last few months we have seen three important disturbances 

R4521 : page 356 

—in France, in Spain and now in Sweden. In each case 
there has been instant talk of revolution, while the actual and 
immediate causes of the outbreaks have been submerged by 
the other and greater forces in the background. No one 



wanted to know the immediate excuse for the strikes in 
France. The only interesting question was whether the 
shock might be enough to bring down the avalanche. In 
Spain the only pertinent question was whether the grievances 
of the people were at last heavy enough to break that 
patient camel's back, and now in Sweden we are hastily assured 
that the strike would be quite unimportant but for 
the stimulus of Socialism. 

"Two things are evident throughout nearly the whole of 
Europe. The first is that the labor organizations are gradually 
uniting under one control and that any man of magnetic 
genius can snatch at their dictatorship. Pautaud nearly 
did this in France, and may do it yet. The second symptom 
is the growing affinity between European labor Unionism and 
Socialism, and it is to be remembered that over the larger 
part of Europe an avowal of Socialism creates no comment 
or surprise either among rich or poor. A Socialist 
has been made Prime Minister of France without a word 
of protest from any one. Socialism in Germany is the 
one supreme fact that keeps her statesmen awake at nights, 
while in the English House of Commons we find that the 
powerful Labor party is practically synonymous with the 
Socialist party. There are no Socialists in the House of 
Lords, but it would be easy to find a great many among 
the titled aristocracy. And now comes the strike in Sweden, 
and we find the whole standing army of the country 
placed on the alert, not so much to suppress the ordinary 
turmoils of such an occasion, but rather to discourage a possible 
attempt to begin the organized civilization of the country 
all over again. 

"It must, of course, be remembered that there is no cut-and-dried 
definition of European Socialism. Over very wide 
areas it is little more than another term for social discontent 
and for constitutional attempts at reasonable reform. The 
German Socialist, for example, is by no means the long-haired 
firebrand with whom we are unpleasantly familiar. 
He may be simply an orderly advocate of measures that 
are matters of commonplace here, while any man who opposes 
the semi -clerical tyranny of Spain is apt to be dubbed 
a Socialist. Socialism in Europe may sometimes have a 
definitely constructive meaning with the educated, but with 
the great masses of the people it means no more than an 
effort toward Democratic expression. None the less it is 
significant that widespread discontent should thus be forced 
under a leadership that may become one of a mischievous 
intelligence." 

BRITISH INTERESTS IN INDIA 



The world's discontent has long been felt in India, 
where a rebellion against British rule has recently been 
nipped in the bud by prompt measures on the part of the 
Government. Now the Hindoos have adopted another 
method of procedure. They propose to boycott all British 



goods and thus to damage British interests heavily. Anyone 
patronizing British goods is to be treated as an outcast 
by his fellow-countrymen. Unrest prevails the world over. 
How we long to give the poor, groaning creation a proper 
view of that blessed hope which so inspires our hearts— the 
Second Presence of our Lord and the establishment of the 
Millennial Kingdom— his rule of righteousness for the blessing 
of all the families of the earth. "Be patient, brethren," 
while diligent and fervent in spirit. 

WELCOMING THE SCALPEL 



"When a man is attacked for his loyalty to the Bible 
and Bible truth, he has a right to feel encouraged. The 
Bible begins to mean something to him then; and he begins 
to mean something to the Kingdom. Such an attack is evidence 
that he is really alive. For, as a well-known defender 
and expounder of the Bible as God's Word has keenly said: 
The Bible is a living thing; and when it gets into you and 

R4522 : page 356 

your life, you'll be under the scalpel of every little critic' 
Criticism is not a thing to be sought; but when it comes as 
a result of getting the Bible into your blood, it is not to be 
feared. Are you intimate enough with the Bible to invite 
such criticism?" 

The above from The Sunday-School Times is well stated 
and applicable not only to those who resist Higher Criticism 
and Evolution, but also to those who stand in the light of 
the Divine Plan of the Ages revealed in the Lord's Word 
and opposed by the darkness of this present age and the 
Prince of Darkness and his poor, deluded servants. 

TORPEDOES IN THE AIR 



The mind of man is fertile. Recent wonderful developments 
of aeroplane and dirigible balloons are leading the 
national thought to a new line of warfare. Aerial battles 
are anticipated. The dropping of explosives upon battleships 
and cities, arsenals and armies, is being studied. All 
the governments are seeking to prepare for this new form 
of warfare, while still the building of battleships continues. 

It will be remembered that some years ago the use of 
torpedoes at sea was brought to considerable perfection, 
mechanism being finally devised to guide the torpedo by 
electric currents to the ship intended to be destroyed. The 
latest suggestion is an aerial torpedo guided through the 
air, instead of through the water, and so swiftly that the 
enemy would not be able to ward off its blow and the explosion 
and destruction which would follow. 

Oh, that the world had less of the spirit of the Adversary 



and more of the spirit of the Lord. Oh, that these bright 
minds now exercised in devising death-dealing devices were 
equally diligent in seeking a system of healing and helping 
and uplifting humanity out of sin and death conditions to 
restitution blessings! 

Well, a little while and the present order of affairs will 
be ended! A little while and the last member of the "elect" 
Church shall have been called, chosen, tested, found worthy 
and glorified. And then the long-promised dominion of the 
Lord will be established— his Kingdom for which we pray, 
"Thy Kingdom come; thy will be done on earth as it is done 
in heaven." A little while and, in the awful trouble of the 
"day of wrath," the world will have an illustration of its 
own money-mad condition and be ready for the peace which 
God purposes shall then be established! A little while and 
the world's blind eyes shall be opened to see wonderful 
things in the opposite direction from that in which it is now 
looking. Thank God that our eyes are already opening and 
our ears already being unstopped and that the blessed sights 
and sounds of the Divine programme are coming to us in 
comforting and sustaining measure! 

THE RISING GENERATION 



The Apostle pointed out as among the conditions prevalent 
in the end of this age the following:— Disobedience to 
parents; lawlessness; pleasure-loving; ferocity of temper, 
etc. We need not on this occasion go deeply into the why, 
but recognize the fact that many of these predictions are 
now fulfilled before our eyes. Lack of reverence for parents 
leads on to that careless condition which fears not God, 
neither regards man, in its selfish, wayward course. 

The Philadelphia Public Ledger calls attention to the 
fact that photographs of those who recently participated in 
the street-car riots in that city were chiefly those of boys 
from fifteen to twenty-one years. The same has been remarked 
of the Springfield, 111., riots and others in this country, 
and also respecting riots in Russia about two years ago, 
and others more recently in Spain. 

The lesson is that these boys have been either mistaught 
or not taught at all respecting justice, the rights of others, 
etc. We fear that the world is gaining too slack a conception 
of liberty. Too much time apparently is given to teaching 
something about man's evolution from a monkey or from 
protoplasm, and not sufficient time to instructing the youth 
respecting his own rights and the rights of others and the 
necessity for law and order. 

R4522 : page 357 

In Divine Providence the care of the school does not 
devolve specially upon us nor our readers, except it be those 
of us who are school-teachers. Wherever our influence can 
be felt, it should be used in favor of righteousness, equity, 



justice, mercy. But in our own homes and families we 

surely, each and all, have important duties toward the young 

of both sexes. The care of his children is a paramount 

obligation and responsibility resting upon every parent. Right 

exercise of this great responsibility should be sought carefully 

and prayerfully and exercised with the greatest wisdom 

at command. A parent assumes a great responsibility in 

bringing a child into the world. And how could he hope to 

be classed as an "overcomer" if he should neglect this responsibility? 

If, after we have done our very best, a child 

shall go astray into wrong paths it is a cause for regret and 

prayer. But if a child go astray because of a lack of proper 

parental instruction, it is a calamity which should properly 

call for tears and groans, as well as prayers for Divine 

forgiveness. 

Again we urge upon all WATCH TOWER readers the daily 
use of the HEAVENLY MANNA at the breakfast table and the 
reading of the Vow and that surely every day begin with 
praise and prayer. Also that the children be Scripturally 
instructed every Sunday by the parents. 

THE FERRER PROTEST UNIVERSAL 



The wave of protest which quickly spread over the 
civilized world upon the announcement of the execution of 
Prof. Ferrer in Barcelona, Spain, has astonished the world. 
The professor's teachings were anti-Catholic, socialistic, perhaps 
almost anarchistic. "He was hounded for a time, then 
imprisoned and finally executed"— most unjustly, it is claimed. 

Great commotion of protest which followed, as if by 
magic, in all parts of the world showed a cord of interest and 
sympathy and an organization which astonished rulers. New 
York's "demonstrations of protest" with flags, banners, etc., 
was followed by speeches in which both Catholics and 
Protestants were derided and liberty, Socialism, etc., were 
lauded. En route to the large auditorium the marchers 
hooted and jeered both Catholic and Protestant Church 
buildings as they passed them. 

Only recently have we seen the reports of the London 
"protest." We append an account of it. The indications are 
that respect for both political and ecclesiastical rulers is decidedly 
waning. The condition of things in Rome was extreme 
—the Catholic Church being held responsible for the 
action of the Spanish officials in executing Prof. Ferrer. The 
London report says:— 

"Spanish anarchists in London are openly threatening the 
life of King Alfonso, and are boasting that he will not be 
permitted to live the year out. Malatesta and others of the 
more rabid anarchists are actually inviting reporters to accompany 
them to secret meetings to listen to firebrand 
speeches. Some of them have shown reporters laboratories 
with newly devised bombs, wherewith they hope to be able 
to take the lives of European monarchs. 

"The outbreak of Ferrerism, which is convulsing the 



continent, reached England this afternoon and evening and 
London witnessed scenes duplicating those enacted in Paris 
and other European capitals. Following a demonstration in 
Trafalgar Square, 10,000 malcontents rushed to the Spanish 
embassy in Grosvenor Gardens, by way of Whitehall and 
Victoria streets, and succeeded in reaching it in spite of frequent 
charges by the police. The embassy, which was 
guarded by a strong force of police, escaped any damage. 
Hand to hand fights occurred, missiles were thrown and 
sticks and umbrellas were used. 

"Victor Grayson, the stormy petrel of Parliament, made 
a violent speech in Trafalgar Square this afternoon, in which 
he announced that the expulsion of the Spanish ambassador 
would be moved in the House of Commons Monday. His 
speech is the strongest thing delivered from any rostrum in 
England. He said the murder of Ferrer was a local outrage 
on cosmopolitan feeling. It means not only the death of one 
great worthy man but an insult to the intelligence of Europe,' 
he said. 'I believe the price of Ferrer's life will be paid long 
hence. If the heads of all the kings of Europe were torn 
from their trunks to-morrow it would not pay the price of 
Ferrer's life. Let us make no mistake. If all these heads 
were rolled in the dust to-morrow we should not have one 
like Ferrer's, who, by his acts as a royal son, lost his life for 
the people of the world.' 

"In the Spanish Parliament one speaker criticized the 
Government's course, saying, 'This execution was an 
egregious political blunder. The innocence or guilt of the 
man has nothing to do with the case. The object of his 
removal was to help restore internal peace in Spain, but today 
Ferrer's influence is much stronger in Spain and throughout 
Europe than it ever was while he lived.'" 

CONDITIONS IN PARIS 



A correspondent of the State Gazette writes:— 
"One must know the restless, red-thinking class of Paris 
to understand what will most likely happen to old Europe, 
with its feudalism, its armies, its priests, its czars, autocrats, 
bureaucrats, and underneath the whole inflammable mass 
oppressed workingmen full of anarchy and revolutionary ideas. 

"Barcelona is only a symptom of what I positively know 
exists throughout all Europe. Let them try a modern war 
and then you see what happens." 

HOME CONDITIONS AS SEEN BY MR. WATSON 



Mr. Thomas E. Watson, several times nominee for President 
of these United States on the Populist ticket, is reported 
to have described present conditions here in the following 
extract from a letter:— 

"President Taft knows as well as I do that Socialism is 



R4523 : page 357 

sweeping this country like a prairie fire, and that there is an 
army of nearly 400,000 banded together, true to the organization 
which their leaders have made, and that those men 
are thirsting for an opportunity to come into collision with 
the Federal army. That is one reason why Taft and Roosevelt 
are so eager to increase the number of Federal troops." 

EVOLUTION GOSPEL FOR THE "GROANING 
CREATION" 



"Life has become so meaningless and so useless to some 
that I advocate the setting up of a suicide slot-machine, 
where one can deposit a cent and be killed easily and 
respectably." 

The Press is crediting the above to Rev. D. Guthrie, 
D.D., of Baltimore, Md. Alas! poor, groaning creation! 
After being deceived for centuries by bad tidings of great 
misery for all people except a few "elect," they are now 
treated to the information that they sprang from a monkey, 
but did not spring high enough. Now they are told that their 
case is hopeless and that it would be a benevolence to help 
them get off the face of the earth and into her bosom "respectably" 
by suicide. Would that their ears were open to 
hear and that we had a thousand tongues to tell them of the 
"Good tidings of great joy which shall be unto all people"— 
the result of our Redeemer's sacrifice! Thank God for the 
testimony of his Word that soon every ear shall be unstopped 
and the due time shall come for the testimony of God's grace 
to every member of our race. 

TO GIVE LIFE TO THE IMAGE 



Our readers well know that in 1880 we pointed out in 
the columns of this journal the now much discussed Federation 
of Protestant Churches. We showed that it was foreshadowed 
in Scripture prophecy: that the beginning of it 
was in 1846 in the organization of the Evangelical Alliance 
and that the full development waited for the closing hours 
of this age. This was at a time when the thought of Federation 
was generally flouted and many boasted that sectarian 
divisions were advantageous everyway. 

We showed that the coming Protestant organization 
would, according to Scripture, become the friend and associate 

R4523 : page 358 

of Papacy and not its antagonist. We pointed out the 
prophesy that the life of the new organization or federation 
would come from the Episcopal Church, which amongst 



Protestants has long stood as the "oldest" and as possessed 

of "Apostolic succession" and supposed consequent "authority." 

We have for years looked earnestly for such a 

Protestant Federation as would include the Episcopal Church 

and give its sanction to the Protestant system. 

Finally the way seems to be clearing for this— the pressure 
of "higher criticism" on the one hand, and the Truth 
on the other hand forcing religious institutions to band 
together for mutual protection. But woe will betide all the 
"little independents" when the great system shall throb with 
life and become a living image of Papacy and cooperate 
with it. 

The following from the Hartford Post tells of an important 
proposition now under consideration, looking to the 
federation of Episcopal and Congregational Churches. We 
quote:— 

"Bishop Hall called attention to the very evident fact 
that the church needed to stand for definite truth in a community 
more now than ever before; that religion must have 
an actual meaning to the people, who are fast falling away 
from it, if it would bring them back and continue to grow, 
and that to do this it must unite, come together under one 
creed, and do its best to bring in other new denominations, 
rather than lose their valuable contribution by allowing them 
to maintain separate sects of their own. 

"Most of the speakers agreed that it is all a matter of 
contribution— of how much a church might contribute towards 
a new Catholic faith, and not how much it might keep of its 
old faith. That in most cases there was no definite faith at 
all, is what Bishop Hall called attention to, and thus it might 
come about that a revival of endeavor might bring Christians 
to unite on just the one thing set up by the apostles of 
Christ as his Creed. The Episcopal Church, he said, stood 
ready to give up its 39 articles of religion, and it was ready 
to give up its name 'Episcopal' and to sink its identity to 
accomplish this purpose of unity. In return it offered its 
creed, definite, simple, true. 

"From the Episcopalian standpoint it could be seen today 
that the movement is no dream and that every clergyman 
of the church in this section goes out with the one idea 
that before the next meeting of the body the problem will 
be much nearer settlement than to-day." 

THE LAND OF ABRAHAM-MESOPOTAMIA 



"As is reported in the Jewish Chronicle, the Jewish Colonization 
Association, which controls the de Hirsch millions, is 
making now all necessary preparations for the colonization 
of Mesopotamia by Jews. A petition has been presented to 
the Turkish Government to legalize the establishment of a 
company which will have this object in view and which 
should begin work at once. The Government is favorably 
disposed toward the movement, and there is very little 
doubt that the desired permission will be soon granted. It 



will be remembered that it was the Government itself which 
first issued the invitation to Jewish organizations to settle 
in Mesopotamia and later even promised to defray part of 
the expense of irrigating the land. 

"Major General W. Wilcocks, who was commissioned by 
the Turkish Government to investigate the existing irrigation 
in Mesopotamia, has presented his report to the Minister of 
Public Works. He states that the construction of a new 
dam for the Hindieh River and the repair of the old dam 
would create a prosperity five times as great as that which 
existed thirty years ago."— Jewish Exponent. 

INQUIRING FOR THE OLD PATHS 



The Editor of this journal was surprised recently to 
receive a request from a Society of Jewesses to address them 
on the prophecies of the Hebrew Bible. Some of their husbands 
learned of the matter and desired to attend, so that 
their hall was deemed too small and they propose getting a 
larger one. Even should the matter abort entirely, it shows 
just such a looking to the Lord as we should expect at this 
time. We are not to expect the Spiritual message to appeal 
to the Jews, but we surely have a very joyful restitution 
message for them— to be attained under their New Covenant 
of Romans 11:27 and Jeremiah 31:31. 

GREAT BRITAIN AND GERMANY TO CLASH WITHIN 
THREE YEARS 



"Lord Northcliffe, owner of the London Times, in an interview 
at Winnipeg, Manitoba, predicted war between Germany 
and Great Britain. He said in the Krupp works alone 
100,000 men are working night and day and on Sundays, preparing 
for war. 

'"I will make the suggestion with all respect to the 
Canadians who are investing the money and labor in constructing 
railroads and building grain elevators, that they 
keep an eye on European affairs and begin to figure out why 
it is all the ship yards in Germany are busy constructing 
rapid cruisers and first-class battleships, and why it is that 
the Krupp works have increased their hands to over one 
hundred thousand men— more than the population of 
Winnipeg.' 

"He said that some Canadians have Utopian views and 
consider such a war a crime. 

'"The Germans don't think so,' he continued; 'they have 
a magnificent army and the strongest navy in the world, and 
they ask what these things are for. 

'"They are a thrifty people. They made an immense 
sum of money out of their last great war. And they will 
fight again when they think it will pay.' He said some observers 
think such a war might begin by 1912." 



COTTON FOR THE MILLENNIUM 



A new variety of cotton called Caravonica Cotton has 
been found or developed in East Africa, which produces fibre 
of extra fine quality and length, so that it is difficult to distinguish 
it from wool. But the further remarkable feature 
about it is that the life of the plant is about eight years, thus 
saving a great deal of the labor and expense connected with 
the common cotton. A company has been formed with a 
capital of one million marks and headquarters at Berlin for 
the cultivation of this new and wonderful cotton. It is said 
to have already been cultivated with success in East and 
West Africa and Egypt and Mexico. 

LONGING FOR HOME 



"Zionism is increasing amongst the Jews. There is an 
awakening desire for national reunion, also in a geographical 
sense. The old paschal wish, 'next year in Jerusalem?' a 
mere sentiment so long, is at last showing faint bodings of 
a dawn of realization. A couple of years ago the first national 
Jewish banner was unfurled at a Zionist world congress. 
Russian pogroms and Austrian antisemitism are driving 
the Jews in scores back to the old country. 

"In Palestine Jewish agricultural colonies are increasing 
and thriving. One of these, the colony of Petach-Tikwah 
(the Door of Hope) has at present actually issued the first 
Hebrew stamp. The Austrian postal officials have arranged 
to carry letters free from charge to and from Jaffa 
and the Jewish colonies. In return these latter have undertaken 
to provide themselves with a fixed number of foreign 
postage stamps at the Austrian office. Seeing that thus they 
indirectly are made to pay for their postal service, the Government 
of Petach-Tikwah colony have decided to indemnify 
themselves by issuing stamps of their own. 

"Every letter that the Austrian mail carries from the 
colony must now be provided with one of these stamps, the 
value whereof is about three-fifths of a penny. In the same 
way all letters posted at Jaffa for the colony are to bear 
this stamp. The stamp has an orange tree and a plowshare 
on a greenish yellow background. It is enclosed in a black 
and yellow border, and on top it bears in Hebrew characters 
the name of the colony, Petach-Tikwah."— Exchange. 



R4524 : page 359 

EVIL SPEAKING AND HATRED 

MANY who speak evil of others say, "The Lord 



be glorified": sometimes they even profess love 
for those whom they defame, and manifest that 
they know not what spirit they are of. The 
Scriptures declare, "Love worketh no ill to the neighbor." 
If we injure our neighbor in either word or act or thought 
there must have been a motive or cause behind and it must 
have been a bad motive or cause, unless we did it ignorantly. 
And surely we are responsible for the avoidance of 
ignorance, by the exercise of alertness in the knowledge and 
practice of the Divine regulations. 

In a general sense, therefore, we may conclude that evil 
words and evil deeds represent some wrong condition, either 
of head or heart. Hatred is classified as a part of the spirit 
of the Adversary of God, and properly enough every child 
of God should flee from anything akin to it and should feel 
horrified at the bare suggestion that he possessed anything 
of this un-Christlike character. However, it behooves all 
to remember the Scriptural declaration that the human mind 
is deceitful— not necessarily hypocritical, but, as the Apostle 
suggests, it often deceives itself. All who are seeking to put 
off all the works of the flesh and the devil should pray the 
Lord in the language of the Psalmist, "Cleanse thou me from 
secret faults. Keep back thy servant also from sins of presumption. 
(Psa. 19:12,13.) Each one of the Lord's footstep 
followers should daily, yea, hourly, keep watch over his 
thoughts and words and deeds and the underlying motives 
connected therewith. This the Apostle terms judging ourselves. 
He assures us that those who so scrutinize, criticize, 
themselves should seek to bring the very thoughts of their 
minds into captivity to the will of God in Christ. These 
are the very ones who will not need to pass through the 
trying experiences which will come upon others more careless 
—less zealous to know and to do the will of the Father. 

We have already considered the Apostle's declaration that 
there is a two-fold work for us to do— certain characteristics 
we are to put off, because they belong to the Old Man and 
his depraved affections and desires. And we are to put on 
the fruits and graces of the holy Spirit. To whatever extent 
we put off the one we are prepared or privileged to put on 
the other. Only as we put off anger, malice, envy, strife, etc., 
may we put on meekness, gentleness, patience, long-suffering, 
brotherly kindness, love. 

RIGHTLY DIVIDING THE WORD 

While emphasizing the foregoing thoughts to the fullest 
extent we wish to guard some against the misunderstanding 
of what constitutes evil-speaking. Our cue or guide on the 
subject must be measured by the Scriptural injunctions and 
examples. Some fail to get the proper thought on the subject 
of evil-speaking and appear to get the impression that 
any kind of criticism and any kind of objection to the belief 
of another is evil-speaking. This is not the right thought. 
According to this thought our Lord and the apostles did 
evil-speaking. Whoever has this conception should re-adjust 
his ideas so that they may conform to the Scriptural lines. 



To tell that a certain brother now disbelieves what he 
formerly believed is not evil-speaking, if it be true. St. Paul 
spoke quite freely of false doctrines and mentioned particularly 
the names of some of those whose perverse teachings had 
been injurious to the Cause, "overthrowing the faith of some." 
Our Lord Jesus criticized the misconduct of some in his day. 
He called attention to some as being hypocritical in that they 
did not practice their own teaching. But neither the Lord 
nor the Apostles made personal attacks, slandering others. 
To tell fairly what another believes and to show that it is 
wrong is far from evil-speaking. It is speaking the Truth, 
which should always be spoken in love. In many instances 
it is a duty so to speak. 

In a recent issue we published Brother Wilcox's letter to 
Brother McPhail, because it seemed to us that in a kind way, 
without attempting in any degree to slander Brother McPhail's 
character or to say an evil word against him personally, 
Brother Wilcox criticized some of Brother McPhail's doctrines 
and endeavored to show their fallacy and that some 
of them were sophistry and not logic. This is what we frequently 
do with the presentations of our Presbyterian and 
Methodist brethren and with only the kindest intentions— to 
assist in opening the eyes of their understanding. A few dear 
friends were inclined to criticize Brother Wilcox, but we 
think without just cause. 

On the other hand, let us say that we could have no 
sympathy with any harsh or unkind expression, either towards 
brethren or the world. If some who once rejoiced in the 
light have become more or less blinded to it, that is a cause 
why we should have sympathy for them— not a sympathy 
which would lead us to give them encouragement in their 
wrong course, but a sympathy which would incline us to 
pity them and to be ready in any possible manner to assist 
them back to the right way. Even when they misrepresent us 
we should, so far as possible, attribute this to their blindness 
and pray for them, rather than smite them in return. "Let 
no man render evil for evil to any man, but contrariwise— do 
good to those who evilly entreat you." 

Let us remember that the final test of character is love 
for God and the brethren, yea, and for our enemies— not in 
word merely, but in deed and in Truth— out of a pure heart. 
If, as we have endeavored to set forth, we are now going 
deeper and deeper into the testing time, "The hour of temptation 
that shall try all them that dwell upon the face of the 
whole earth," and if we see many falling from their steadfastness, 
let us not rail at them, nor even feel unkindly, but 
contrariwise, let us think of ourselves and take heed to our 
own steps, that they shall be in the footprints of Jesus. Let 
us remember that the Adversary is trying some in one direction 
and others in another. Let us remember that we ourselves 
must be tested by the "fire that shall try every man's 
work of what sort it is."— I Cor. 3:13. 

If the Adversary could stir us up to anger, malice, hatred 
and strife, even in a good cause— even against Satan or those 
whom he is using to some extent as his servants (Rom. 6:16) 
—he would thus be poisoning our hearts and separating us 



proportionately from the Lord and his Spirit. We cannot be 
too careful along these lines ! 

It is our conviction that God brought to our attention 
at the proper time the advisability of the Vow which we 
suggested and which we believe is helping so many of the 
saints in many ways. Constantly we hear from those who 
have taken the Vow that they are blessed. Some tell us that 
the daily repetition of the Vow is assistful— reminding them 
of the necessity of guarding their every word and act; 
others, that their own interest in the harvest work and in 
all the dear co-laborers has been greatly blessed as a result 
of their taking the Vow; others assure us that they have 
been specially blessed by being reminded of and guarded 
against Spiritism and Occultism; still others write us freely 
that they needed and were greatly blessed by the precautions 
suggested by the Vow in respect to conduct toward the 
opposite sex. 

We have not set forth the Vow as a test of Christian 
brotherhood! God forbid! We would have no right so to 
do ! If it were a Divine command it would not be a vow 
at all; for a vow is a voluntary agreement or restriction or 
sacrifice made for our own assistance, or for what we believe 
would be to the Lord's glory. At very most the suggested 
Vow set forth with emphasis for our daily consideration 
and practice some of those features of our Consecration 
Vow (our Baptismal Vow) which previously had 
been less perspicuous to many— features nevertheless which 
are everyone of them included in our Consecration Vow of 
faithfulness to the Lord and the interests of his Cause and 
to the avoidance of sin, even unto death. 

Assuredly that Vow was brought to the attention of 
the Church by the Lord's providence at this very time; in 
order to awaken his people and draw them very near to 
himself and make them very careful, very circumspect as 
respects every word, deed and thought. Surely the drawing 
very close to the Lord, which has already been effected in 
many hearts by the Vow, and the staying very close to the 
Lord, which is assisted by the daily repetition of the Vow, is 
having a grand effect in many hearts. We believe that 
many others of the Lord's consecrated ones will yet see 

R4524 : page 360 

that they are missing a blessing by delaying thus to bind their 
sacrifice with cords to the altar. 

But let no one think of the Vow as a charm or fetish. 
Its blessing comes through its keeping us close, "under the 
shadow of the Almighty," where the Wicked One cannot 
touch us. And let us add a word of warning here by suggesting 
that those who have taken the Vow, if they become 
careless of its provisions, would really thereby become 
more reprehensible in the Lord's sight than if they 
had never taken it. "I will take the cup of salvation, and 
call upon the name of the Lord (for aid). I will pay my 
vows unto the Lord now in the presence of all his people." 
-Psa. 116:13,14. 



Another word of caution: While cautioning those who 
have not taken the Vow to beware not to oppose it— not to 
interfere with this step of consecration on the part of others 
—we would also caution those who have taken the Vow that 
they be not boastful and that they allow no feeling of self-righteousness 
to spring up in their hearts as a result. We 
can readily see how the Adversary might tempt some along 
this very line. "Be not high-minded, but fear." (Rom. 11:20.) 
Let none attempt to force the Vow upon others, but accord 
all the full right of his own conscience. Let us commend 
the Vow by our loving moderation. Let us remember that 
humility is the first of the graces and will have much to 
do with our standing the tests now multiplying in so many 
ways upon all who have named the name of Christ. As 
the testing begins with the Church and proceeds to the world, 
so apparently in the Church the testing comes first upon 
those in prominent positions. And these need to be the 
more watchful, the more prayerful, the more earnest, that 
they may be able to stand. 

R4525 : page 360 

The Adversary's attempts are various. Some he beguiles 
with flattery, pride and ambition; others he would 
vanquish with despondency mingled with humility; others 
he attracts with the pleasures of the present life; others with 
ease and popularity; others with misdirected energy, which 
gradually leads them away from the narrow way. Some are 
seduced through too great a reverence of human teachings, 
human authority, subserviency to creeds and theories; while 
temptation comes to others along the line of disloyalty to 
God and to the leadings of his providence. Let us each 
remember that love for God means loyalty to him and to 
his Word, and to every leading of his providence and grace, 
and loyalty to the brethren. A little while and our trials will 
be ended. A little while and we shall see His face, if we 
are faithful. 



R4525 : page 360 

OUR WEDDING GARMENTS 

APPARENTLY many of the Jewish customs connected 

with marriage were so ordered by the Lord as to 

be typical of matters connected with the marriage 

of the Church to Christ. The Jewish 

maiden was betrothed to her intended husband by 

her father, or some substitute for him. Her father 

stipulated the conditions as between her and the 

bridegroom. When these were signed she was considered 

"espoused." The bridegroom came about a year 

later to receive his betrothed one and thereby to make her 

his bride, and to install her in the home as his joint-heir. St. 

Paul applies this matter to the Church, telling us that we 



have been "espoused" to one husband, which is Christ, our 
Beloved, our Lord. He has gone to prepare a place for us 
and will come again and receive us unto himself, and make 
us his joint-heirs in his Kingdom. Then "the Spirit and 
the Bride will say, Come. ..and take of the Water of 
Life freely." For all the families of the earth, the river of 
the Water of Life will then flow. 

One of our Lord's parables took note of the fact that 
when a kingly bridegroom brought home his bride, he expected 
that all of his servants would be more than ever on 
the alert to welcome him and to honor him— intent to note 
the first sound of his approach and to open immediately when 
he should knock. Our Lord used this to illustrate how awake 
all of his true disciples should be that, at his Second Coming, 
they might not be asleep and overcharged with the cares of 
this life, but hear the knock— the testimony of the Scriptures 
respecting the times and seasons and manner of his Second 
Presence in the harvest of this age. We remember the 
precious promise given to all of the Lord's followers who 
would be found thus awake and alert: their Lord would become 
their servant. He would cause them to sit down to 
meat— to enjoy a spiritual feast. He would gird himself as 
a servant and serve them with rich dainties. How we have 
seen this parable in process of fulfilment during the past 
thirty years. The knocking has been heard by one and another 
of the Lord's true servants. Those awake have heard, 
have discerned his presence, his parousia. And all such have 
experienced the blessing promised— the Master has become 
the servant. The servants are seated at his table and are 
being bountifully fed with rich spiritual food, such as never 
before was tasted, and such as they were not aware he 
had provided. 

The parable of the wedding garment illustrates another 
feature of Truth from another standpoint. It was the custom 
at weddings that all the guests, as they entered the house, 
should be handed a wedding garment. The acceptance of 
this implied that they would put it on and wear it. (Matt. 22:1-13.) 
The parable shows how one, representing probably 
a class, rejecting the wedding garment furnished him, was 
expelled. 

Interpreting the parable: Coming to the door, desiring 
to enter in, would imply faith in respect to the marriage. The 
robe would represent justification; the imputation of Christ's 
righteousness shows that all who would be acceptable at the 
wedding must appear in the imputed righteousness of Christ, 
and not in their own more or less filthy garments of imperfection 
and unrighteousness. But surely this garment represented 
something more than mere justification, else why 
should it be called a "wedding garment"? These garments 
were not provided for the public in general, but merely for 
those who had been invited to the wedding and who had 
accepted the invitation and were desirous of entering in on 
the terms and conditions of the host. Applying this we 
see that God is not supplying justification to the world in 
general, nor to believers in general, but merely to such believers 
as accept the terms and conditions attaching to the 



marriage supper arrangements. 

We might assume that all believers were invited to this 
feast and that all the invited ones were informed that wedding 
garments were provided for them, but that only those who 
accepted the invitation and actually came to the wedding and 
entered in through the door were actually given the wedding 
robes. Applied, this would mean that all believers were informed 
respecting the merit of Christ's sacrifice and its 
sufficiency for them as a covering for all their blemishes and as 
making them acceptable at the wedding feast if, leaving sin 
and worldly business and pleasure, they would come as guests 
to the wedding. The promise and tender of the wedding 
garment was a promise of full justification from sin and a 
full imputation of restitution rights, but with the understanding 
that in order to be sharers of the heavenly blessings 
all earthly rights, earthly honors and talents, must be surrendered, 
must be buried, that the individual might be reckoned 
as a New Creature in the provided robe. 

The coming of the guests to the door desiring to enter 
in to the festival, pictures our compliance with the Lord's call 
and willingness to sacrifice self and to have ourselves buried 
as old creatures that we might appear as New Creatures in 
the wedding garments. The acceptance of the garment and 
the putting of it on, therefore symbolized that the individual 
had not only consecrated himself unto death, but that his 
consecration had been accepted and that thenceforth he was 
a New Creature privileged to enter in and to participate in 
all the privileges and joys of the occasion. The point we 

R4525 : page 361 

wish specially to emphasize here is that the wedding garment 
in the parable represents more than merely justification— it 
represents additionally sanctification or consecration, to be 
dead with Christ; to suffer with him; to be baptized into his 
death; to drink of his cup. Only by such a consecration 
could anyone possibly have right to be at the great banquet, 
either as a member of the Bride class or as a member of the 
"great company," her companion. 

If now we have clearly in mind the meaning of the 
wedding garment, what would be suggested by the taking 
of it off— its repudiation? Would not the rejection of the 
robe signify a rejection of the consecration unto death— the 
consecration to share in his cup of sufferings— the consecration 
to suffer with him and to be dead with him? Is it not 
a fact that all this must be included in the wedding garment 
symbol? Must it not represent all the sacrifice we covenanted 
when we accepted justification on condition that we would 
sacrifice our justified rights? Is not this our robe as New 
Creatures and not our robe as human beings? 

Surely the "wedding garment" can be worn only by those 
who, as New Creatures, still have fleshly bodies, whose 
imperfections are covered by the robe. Surely none but 
New Creatures ever had on this wedding robe and surely no 
one ever became a New Creature, except by the full consecration 
of his earthly restitution rights, sacrificial, after the 



manner showed us by the Lord. So then, to take off the 
wedding garment would not signify merely the rejection of 
our Lord's merit as our Redeemer, our Ransomer, but it also 
would include specially the practical renouncing of the terms 
and conditions of sacrifice, on account of which we obtained 
the robe. Would it not seem, therefore, that a repudiation of 
membership in the Body of Christ, a repudiation of our share 
in his cup and repudiation of our baptism into his death, 
might symbolically be represented as a taking off of the 
wedding garment? 

Why anyone should wish to draw back from fellowship 
in the sufferings of Christ seems difficult to understand. 
Indeed, happy are we if our own loyalty and appreciation of 
the privilege is so great that we cannot understand the 
attitude of those who repudiate their Vow to suffer with him, 
to be dead with him, that they may also share in his resurrection 
and live with him, that they may also reign with him. 



R4529 : page 361 

COMMUNION WITH OUR FATHER 

Oft when alone in prayer I kneel 

Before my Father's throne; 
I cannot tell him all I feel, 

Nor make my wishes known. 

With heart subdued, and head bowed low, 

I lean upon his breast, 
And while the tears unbidden flow, 

My love for him confess. 

I have no boon to ask of him, 

Save that his will be done, 
To make me holy, pure within— 

An image of His Son. 

But as he smiles and draws me near— 

His Spirit from above 
Floods all my soul with peace so dear, 

And fills my heart with love. 

Though from my gaze he hides his face, 

My soul, from self apart, 
Has found its happy resting place 

Close to his loving heart. 

L. C. RAMSDELL. 



R4526 : page 361 

ST. PAUL ON THE GRACE OF GIVING 



--II COR. 8:1-15-DECEMBER 5.- 

Golden Text:— "Remember the words of the Lord Jesus... 
It is more blessed to give than to receive."— Acts 20:35. 

THE Bible is singularly free from monetary solicitations 

from first to last. The prophets were poor. 

The Savior himself had not where to lay his head and 

his followers were noted as being "of the common 

people who heard him gladly," and "chiefly the poor of this 

world." And yet we know of no solicitations for money, 

either for personal use or for building churches. The Scripture 

we consider today may be said to be the only appeal 

for money recorded in the Bible, and it was for the poor at 

Jerusalem, sorely pressed by the famine in the time of the 

Roman Emperor Claudius. (Acts 1 1:28.) If the pages of 

the Bible abounded with accounts of our Lord's and the 

Apostles' begging and "sponging," their lives and their words 

would have far less influence with us. 

The fact that their faith and their preaching did not 
bring them wealth, but cost them much in self-sacrifice, is a 
convincing proof to us of their sincerity, their honesty— that 
they believed what they proclaimed. Not to mention the great 
Redeemer's self-denials, but merely looking at his followers, 
we perceive that in espousing an unpopular cause they became 
objects of hatred and derision and were boycotted 
socially and everyway. Instead of profiting by the Gospel, 
it was of Divine Providence that the acceptance of it cost 
them "the loss of all things." What noble characters they 
were, in that they needed not to be bought with money, but 
gladly paid the price of the Truth. They esteemed their 
earthly possessions and hopes as loss and dross, that they 
might share in the sufferings of Christ and thereby attain 
joint-heirship with him in his Millennial Kingdom by the 
First Resurrection.— Phil. 3:8; Rev. 20:4. 

"MORE BLESSED TO GIVE" 

Our text furnishes the key-note to this Study. St. Paul 
had proven the Truth of Jesus' words, "It is more blessed 
to give than to receive." He was happy, "joyful in tribulation," 
giving constantly for the good of others from his 
store of grace and Truth. He was more blessed in the 
giving than any of his hearers in the receiving of the message. 
In the words of this Study, he sought to extend to 
the Church at Corinth the blessing and joy of giving. They 
already knew of the necessities of the principal congregation 
of Christians— at Jerusalem. They already knew that 
St. Paul intended going thither and that others of the Gentiles 
purposed sending at his hands a present— an acknowledgment, 
as it were, that the spiritual blessings of the Gospel 
message had come to them through representatives of the 
Jewish people. 

St. Paul knew that giving would cheer and warm their 
hearts and bring them a great blessing— therefore, not selfishly, 
but as their true friend, he would stir them up to the 



exercise of generosity that he might increase their spiritual 
vitality and joy. He asked nothing for himself, however. It 
was by way of inspiring them to emulation that he related 
how the churches of Macedonia had contributed, even while 
in affliction. The abundance of their joy led them to great 
liberality, notwithstanding their own deep poverty. Evidently 
there, as elsewhere, "not many rich" were among the "called." 
To the measure of their power and beyond it and without 
urging they gave. Indeed they had entreated the Apostle to 
act as their representative in this service to the Jerusalem 
saints. Their course in the matter was more noble than the 
Apostle had dared hope. They had said in effect, "We are 
Christ's in this matter, and yours after him; for this we 
realize to be the will of God." 

PRESENT YOUR BODIES SACRIFICIALLY 

It was this giving from the heart which the Apostle 
wished to inculcate. If the Corinthians learned the blessedness 
of giving a little money to help the poor, if they found 
that much blessing resulted therefrom, they, like the Macedonians, 
would be impelled to give themselves more completely 
than ever to the Lord. And this latter was the 
Apostle's aim in respect to all Christians, "I beseech you 
therefore, brethren, by the mercies of God, that ye present 
your bodies a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto God, 
which is your reasonable service."— Rom. 12:1. 

He complimented them on their faith, utterance, knowledge, 

R4526 : page 362 

earnestness and love, and urged for their own good 

that they should not neglect the grace of giving. It would 

constitute a proof of the sincerity of their love for the Lord 

and for the brethren. Emphasizing the necessity for a development 

of a spirit of benevolence, he reminded them of 

the Lord Jesus, who for our sakes left riches of glory 

and honor, when he humbled himself to become the "man 

Christ Jesus"— that he might redeem our race from its death 

sentence. If our exemplar became poor that we might attain 

the riches of eternal life and fellowship Divine, his Spirit in 

us would surely lead us "to lay down our lives for the 

brethren." (I John 3:16.) And whoever would lay down 

his life for a brother would surely be yet more willing to 

lay down time or influence of money for his assistance. 

But, the Apostle urged, that was not suggesting that 
they should burden themselves by too generous giving— 
nor that others should be left without a burden entirely at 
their expense. Amongst men, and especially amongst those 
who constitute the family of God, there should prevail a 
spirit of sympathy and equalization. He reminded them also 
that God looked not at the amount, but at the heart condition 
prompting the gift. And surely all will agree that in 
the dark pathway of sorrow and the shadow of death, in 
which we daily walk, there are abundant opportunities to be 
generous, even for those who have no money to give. A 



kind word of sympathy or advice, yea, even a kind look, has 
sometimes been worth more to a discouraged brother than a 
handful of gold: 

"It is not the deed we do, 

Though the deed be ever so fair, 
But the love that the dear Lord looketh for, 

Hidden with holy care 

In the heart of the deed so fair. 

"The love is the priceless thing, 

The treasure our treasure must hold; 
Or ever the Lord will take the gift, 

Or tell the worth of the gold 

By the love that cannot be told." 



R4526 : page 362 

ST. PAUL'S LAST WORDS 

--DECEMBER 12.— II TIMOTHY 4:1-18.- 

Golden Text:— "For me to live is Christ, 
and to die is gain."— Phil. 1:21. 

SURELY saintly was the heart which wrote, For me 
to live in the world is for a member of The Christ 
to be living here, serving by self-sacrifice the 
cause of righteousness— Truth. Equally true was 
it that for him to have died and rested from his labors, to 
await the resurrection morning, would have been gain. So 
far as his own character development was concerned, it was 
evidently finished. He remained by God's grace, that he 
might further serve the Lord's flock— including us who have 
since lived. He thus wrote to the Philippians about A.D. 
62, when circumstances intimated that his death was 
imminent. 

Four years later, A.D. 66, St. Paul wrote his last 
Epistle to Timothy, who was then Pastor of the Ephesus 
Church. The Emperor Nero was showing greater hostility 
than ever against Christians, and circumstances indicated 
that St. Paul was to be a martyr very soon. Sometimes he 
addressed Timothy as "his son" in the Gospel. He evidently 
felt great confidence in him as a sort of successor in a 
general "care of all the Churches." Hence to him he now 
wrote special warnings and commendations and prophecies 
respecting the Church's future. 

The Gospel should be preached, and nothing else— when 
convenient and when inconvenient, to the preacher— whenever 
opportunity offers. The importance of having the Church 
well indoctrinated was emphasized by the fact that with 
prophetic vision St. Paul perceived that the "great falling 
away" mentioned in his other Epistles and by the Lord might 
be expected to come in speedily after his death. The mission 



of the Gospel was not the conversion of the world, but to 
call out from the world the Church to be glorified with the 
Redeemer at his appearing and Kingdom. It might be necessary 
for Timothy to reprove, rebuke and exhort, but if so, 
all should be done patiently and with instruction, explanation, 
doctrine. Faithfulness was enjoined in view of the fact that 
the time was nearing when "sound doctrine" would not be 
appreciated, nor even be endured by the Church. 

THE FIGHT, THE COURSE, THE FAITH, THE CROWN 

The reason for the deflection would be an unsatisfactory 
condition of heart in the Church, a lack of faith in the Lord's 
supervision— "itching ears for something new." They would 
seek teachers who could tickle their ears. They would be 
more pleased with style and oratory than with Truth. They 
would find such teachers as they were seeking, who would 
turn their ears away from the hearing of the Truth to fables. 
Would Timothy succumb to such influence? St. Paul hoped 
not. "Watch, then, in all things; endure afflictions; do the 
work of a Gospel bearer; make full proof of thy service to 
the Lord, for I, Paul, am now ready to be offered and the 

R4527 : page 362 

time of my departure is at hand."— Vs. 5,6. 

Not egotistically, but for Timothy's encouragement, St. 
Paul wrote, "I have fought a good fight. I have finished my 
course. I have kept the faith. Henceforth there is laid 
up for me a crown of righteousness, which the Lord, the 
Righteous Judge, shall give me at that day; and not to me 
only, but unto all them also that love his appearing." (Vs. 7,8.) 
What a grand testimony— and at the conclusion of a 
grand life nobly lived, or rather nobly sacrificed, after the 
Lord's example, laying down his life for the brethren! He 
suffered for Christ's sake, as a servant of his Gospel message. 
How grand the incentive for us who are seeking to walk in 
the same narrow way! Our opportunities for sacrifice and 
service are less indeed, but the Lord reckons to each of us 
according to the heart, the intent. He that is faithful in 
that which is least would be faithful in greater things. He 
that is unfaithful in little things gives no proof that he would 
use large opportunities properly. 

The secret of St. Paul's labor was the Divine approval 
to be manifested in granting him a share in the "First Resurrection." 
(Phil. 3:10.) This would be "a crown of righteousness" 
—glory, honor, immortality, association with Christ 
in his Millennial Kingdom. He knew of his own whole-heartedness 
in the Lord's service and knew that the Lord 
was not unjust to forget his work and labor of love. Nevertheless 
he did not expect reward until "that day"— until the 
morning of the Millennial Day, the morning of the Resurrection 
Day. Then the Redeemer, as the Head, and his 
Church will give to each faithful member an abundant reward 
—not to St. Paul only, but to all those who similarly 
love his appearing— his manifestation in Millennial Kingdom 



glory. 

The number, even amongst Christians, who love the 
Lord's revelation in Kingdom glory is comparatively small. 
Some prefer that he shall delay to appear that they may add 
farm to farm or house to house, barn to barn, million to 
million. Such instinctively feel that the King of glory would 
not approve of many of the methods in vogue for such 
additions as they covet. Others have family schemes. Others 
have unscriptural theories which lead them to look elsewhere 
for blessings rather than to the Second Coming of Christ 
and the establishment of his Kingdom. 

His fight, as the Apostle explains elsewhere, was not 
with carnal weapons. He, the New Creature, fought with and 
gained the victory over his mortal body, bringing it more 
and more into subjection to his new mind. Recognizing 
Satan as "the Prince of this world [age]" and the fallen 
angels as his assistants, he perceived and taught that these 
had much to do with the iniquity prevailing in the world— 
that they deceived mankind into false doctrines and evil 
practices. He blamed not men so much as the ignorance and 
blindness by which Satan deluded them. "In whom the god 

R4527 : page 363 

of this world hath blinded the minds of them which believe 
not, lest the light of the glorious Gospel of Christ should 
shine into their hearts." (2 Cor. 4:4.) Recognizing the spirit 
of error as the spirit of the world, he resisted in himself 
and sought to assist all of the brethren to similarly fight a 
good fight against every pernicious influence, doctrine and 
practice. 

He had finished his course. He recognized as a Christian 
that he had certain lessons to learn in the School of Christ 
and this was a part of his course of preparation for join t-heirship 
with Christ in the glories of the Millennial Kingdom. 
The course included not merely theory, but also practice. He 
not only theoretically learned about Christ, but experimentally. 
He became a partaker with him in the sufferings of this 
present time. And sympathetically he was permitted to enter 
into a large degree of knowledge of the "mystery" of the 
Divine Plan hidden from the world. Not only had his 
own course of instruction been a thorough one, but he had 
been given a post-graduate course as an ambassador for his 
Lord and Redeemer and as an Apostle for the brethren, the 
Church. Moreover he recognized the fact that all such as became 
members of the Body of Christ are so directly under 
the Divine supervision and regulations that their times are 
in God's hand— all of their affairs of life, temporal and 
spiritual. As the Master's death could not occur "until his 
hour was come," so likewise it is with his consecrated 
members. 

He had kept the faith and the faith had kept him. Many 
do not realize how important are knowledge and a correct 
faith. "My people perish for lack of knowledge" is the Lord's 
testimony. And their faith can keep pace only with their 
knowledge, for faith must have a basis. A correct life depends 



greatly upon a correct faith. Why did our forefathers 

burn one another at the stake in a diabolical manner? Because 

they were governed by error. False doctrines, styled 

by the Apostle "doctrines of devils," had been presented to 

them and they had believed them. And the legitimate outcome 

of the wrong belief, the wrong faith, was wrong doing. 

Believing that God purposed the torture of his creatures for 

centuries in Purgatory or for untellable millions of years in 

eternal torment, they copied the misconception of the Almighty 

in their lives, to our horror. 

But St. Paul had kept the faith— the true faith once delivered 
unto the saints— faith in the Redeemer's sacrifice; 
faith in its application on our behalf; faith in our justification 
by the Father on that account; faith in the glorious 
promises of God's Word; faith in the Lord and faith in the 
brethren. Surely it means something to keep the faith— 
especially when we realize that our great Adversary, Satan, is 
on the alert continually to take it from us or to turn or 
twist it to our loss or injury. 

The crown mentioned, the Apostle had seen for many 
years with the eye of his faith as a part of the Lord's promise. 
He had absolute confidence in the Lord and in the promise 
he had received from him. That crown had been his cause 
of rejoicing for many years, not because of pride or ambition, 
but because of love and benevolence. He would love to receive 
that crown because it would be the mark of Divine appreciation 
and love for him; and a mark of his faithfulness. He esteemed 
it because it would afford him untold opportunity of blessing 
his fellowmen in association with his Lord and the brethren 
on the plane of glory during the Millennium. 

He hoped for this crown, but did not hope to receive 
it at death. He knew the Bible teaching on the subject of 
resurrection— that this was his God's provision for the communication 
of his blessing, first for the Church, and subsequently 
for the world. He knew and taught that there would 
be "a resurrection of the dead, both of the just and of the 
unjust." (Acts 24:15.) He desired to have a share with 
his Redeemer in all of his glorious Kingdom work and he 
knew that it could not begin until the completion of this 
Gospel Age, when all the elect Church, as members of the 
Bride of Christ, would share in "his resurrection," to glory, 
honor, immortality and glorious Kingdom privileges.— 
Phil. 3:10,11. 

It was for this reason that he proceeded to declare 
that the crown was laid up for him— awaiting him— not at 
death, but at the time of his resurrection. That crown the 
Lord would give to him and to all others in the attitude 
of heart to appreciate his revelation at the Second Advent— 
"that day." True, not many at the present time love his 
appearing. The majority, not only of the world, but also of 
Christians, seeking but not finding in pleasures, riches, honors 
of men, have certain ambitions along these lines which they 
would like to satisfy first, and then possibly they might be 
willing for the Lord to establish his Kingdom. But, no ! by 
the time their lives have been spent in such pursuits, they are 
usually thoroughly disappointed and bewildered and generally 



further than ever from seeking the Kingdom. 

None but this class will receive this crown. Thank God, 
the remainder will not be tortured, but, on the contrary, will 
be blessed by their crowned brethren, from whom, as the 
Christ of God, will go the blessings of restitution through 
the agency of the Millennial Kingdom. Eventually all the 
blind eyes of understanding will be opened— eventually all 
will see the great Messiah, though invisible to the natural 
sight. Then every knee shall bow and every tongue confess 
to the glory of God. 

St. Paul closes his exhortation by reciting that in his 
trial before Nero some in whom he had full confidence had 
forsaken him and he concludes that the Lord, nevertheless, 
stood with him and strengthened him and that he had every 
confidence in his care to the end of the way. 



R4527 : page 363 

CONCERNING MESSIAH'S MEDIATORSHIP 

WE READ, "God so loved the world, that he gave 
his only begotten Son, that whosoever believeth 
in him should not perish, but have everlasting 
life." (John 3:16.) A brother claims that in this 
Scripture the word son refers to the Church, the Body of 
Christ, as well as to Jesus, the Head of that Body. Is this 
correct? We did not so understand your discourse on this 
text printed in the newspapers, entitled "The Most Precious 
Text." 

Assuredly the suggestion is wrong. The text refers to 
our Lord Jesus only. How else could he be "the only begotten?" 
The difficulty with many seems to be that they see 
the Divine Plan only in sections and do not get these connected 
up in one general whole. Let us endeavor again to 
briefly locate the parts and show their relationship together:— 

The Plan of God is for the salvation of the world. To 
accomplish this God sent his only-begotten Son into the world. 
Jesus sacrificed his life, in harmony with the Divine Plan, 
for the salvation of the world. Incidentally, by virtue of his 

R4528 : page 363 

sacrifice, he attained Divine nature— glory, honor and immortality 
—which qualified him to be the great Prophet, Priest, 
Mediator, King of the world. But before beginning his work 
for the world, and in harmony with the Divine Plan, a little 
flock of footstep followers of Jesus must be selected— taken 
out of the world. "Ye are not of the world, even as I am 
not of the world." In order that these may share with Jesus 
in all of his great and glorious work for the world during 
the Millennium, they must be spirit beings like their Head. 
In order to grant them this "change" of nature from human 
to spiritual they must be granted the privilege of sacrificing 
the human nature and its rights even as did their Redeemer, 



Head, Fore-runner. 

But they are blemished; for, although pure in heart, in 
intention, in will, they are imperfect, sinful, as respects their 
flesh. In a word, they have no earthly life-rights to sacrifice. 
Hence, in order to give them these earthly life-rights which 
they are desirous of sacrificing, the Redeemer applied for 
these, his consecrated followers and under-priests or members, 
the merit of his sacrifice first, before giving it to the world. 
The merit of his sacrifice and the restitution or earthly 
rights which it is able to secure for every man, has been 
temporarily diverted from the world to the Church, the 

R4528 : page 364 

assurance being given that "in due time" it will still be 
available and efficacious for the world. 

In accord with this proposition our Lord Jesus, after his 
resurrection, ascended up on high and appeared in the presence 
of God "for us," "on our behalf"; for he "bought us 
with his own precious blood"— with the merit of his sacrifice 
of earthly rights. He could have bought the world just as 
easily, but he followed the Divine Plan and bought the 
Church. "Christ loved the Church, and gave himself for it." 
(Eph. 5:25.) As it required all of the Lord's merit for any 
one individual, so it required all of it for the Church and 
left none unappropriated. But the world is not by this arrangement 
to be deprived of the originally intended blessing. 
It will get it at the time intended of the Father. The only-begotten 
of the Father was sent into the world long enough 
in advance of the world's "due time" for deliverance to 
permit the developing of the "mystery"— the Church as the 
Bride of Messiah. 

The application of the benefit of Christ's sacrifice to "the 
household of faith" imputes to them earthly rights, earthly 
restitution, human perfection, etc., solely for the opportunity 
this will give them of receiving these restitution blessings by 
faith and sacrificing them by faith— laying them down as did 
their Lord— becoming dead to earthly interests, hopes, etc., 
that they may become alive as his members toward the spiritual 
mercies and blessings promised. This work of faith-justification 
and faith sacrifice has progressed throughout this 
Gospel Age— the antitypical Day of Atonement. The entire 
matter has been under the control of our glorified Head, the 
High Priest, who by this means is not only justifying, but 
also sanctifying the antitypical priests and Levites. He is 
thus preparing the agencies and instrumentalities for the 
world's blessing in its "due time." 

With these under-priests the Father deals directly, yet 
through the Chief-Priest, his Representative, their Advocate. 
Their call is of God— "Ye should show forth the praises 
of him who hath called you out of darkness into his marvelous 
light." (I Pet. 2:9.) Their justification is by the 
Father. "It is God that justifieth." (Rom. 8:33.) Their 
sanctification is of God by Jesus. "The very God of peace 
sanctify you wholly." (I Thess. 5:23.) "Father.. .sanctify 
them through thy Truth: thy Word is Truth." (John 17:17.) 



The evidence that the Father has already received us as 

"members" of the Mediator is the impartation of the holy 

Spirit— first given at Pentecost. The spirit of begetting is 

only a foretaste of the greater blessing we are to receive 

from our Father in our resurrection "change"— which will be 

as members of the Anointed Mediator, sharers in "his resurrection.' 

(Phil. 3:10.) We are particularly informed that 

it was the Father that raised up Jesus from the dead and 

that the Father will "raise us up also" by his own power exercised 

through Jesus our Head.— 2 Cor. 4:14. 

When all this shall have been accomplished the great 
Prophet, Priest, Mediator and King of the Millennial Age 
will be complete, according to the Divine foreknowledge and 
intention. Then, in various ways, as represented by these 
various titles, the antitypical Prophet, Priest, Mediator and 
King will begin the exercise of the various offices represented 
by these titles "for the world." By that time the merit of 
Christ's sacrifice applied to the Church as faith-restitution 
will all have been returned to Justice; because all to whom 
that merit is now appropriated (during this Age) will have 
died to or surrendered back sacrificially the earthly restitution 
rights. 

As New Creatures, begotten of the Spirit, the Church will 
have no need for restitution rights or human perfection, even 
as our Lord in his resurrection had no further need for the 
earthly tabernacle or its rights. Thus the merit of Christ 
for the world's restitution, temporarily loaned to the Church 
for a faith-justification as a basis for sacrifice" will all get 
back again in the hands of Justice to the credit of our Lord 
the Redeemer— of whom we will be "members." And then 
the Redeemer our Head will apply to the world that merit 
now loaned to us. It will not be similarly loaned to the 
world for sacrificing it, but will be given to them. The world 
will not have the opportunity of sacrificing the earthly rights 
and getting a higher nature, because the "acceptable time," 
the day of sacrifice, the antitypical Atonement Day, will have 
ended. The resurrection rights which our Lord will give to 
the world at the beginning of the Millennium will not only 
cancel their past sins, but, under the terms of the New 
Covenant made with natural Israel, will bring actual restitution, 
human perfection and human rights, to so many of mankind 
as will respond to the Millennial opportunities which 
the great High Priest will then almost, but not quite, force 
upon them. 

Thus seen the Law Covenant effected with natural Israel 
under Moses as its Mediator and Aaron as its priest was a 
type of the New Covenant with The Christ as its Mediator 
and Priest combined— "after the order of Melchisedec," a 
kingly priest. The present Gospel Age is the time for the 
finding, testing and glorifying of the antitypical Mediator, 
Head and members— the antitypical Melchisedec Head and 
members. Not until the Mediator is complete, or, in the 
other picture, not until the Kingly-Priest is complete will 
God's dealing with the world of mankind begin. That dealing 
will all be with and through the Mediator, the Priest. 
And incidentally the Mediator's dealing with the world will 



be through Israel, the "natural seed (children) of Abraham," 
under the terms of the New Covenant. 

The Original Covenant made with Abraham and typed 
by his wife Sarah is our mother— the mother of the Spiritual 
Seed, begotten directly by the Father, typed by Abraham. 
(Gal. 4:24-26.) "We brethren, as Isaac was, are the children 
of the promise" or original Covenant. "If ye be Christ's 
['members'] then are ye Abraham's Seed and heirs— according 
to the promise." "As many of you as have been baptized 
into Christ [by 'immersion into his death'] have put on 
Christ." (Gal. 3:27-29.) We are the children neither of 
the old Law Covenant, nor of the New (Law) Covenant; 
but of "the Covenant that was confirmed before of God in 
Christ."-Gal. 3:17. 

This Seed of Abraham as Testator bequeaths to Israel 
(and through Israel to the world) all the earthly or restitution 
privileges secured by Jesus' death and applied by him 
"on our behalf" and surrendered by us in death. The death 
of the Testator is not yet fully accomplished; hence the 
restitution blessing delays and has not yet begun: Israel's 
New (Law) Covenant with its better Mediator and restitution 
glory must wait until the last one for whom the merit 
of Christ was imputed when he appeared "for us" shall have 
died actually— because, "they shall obtain mercy through your 
mercy." Not even the Ancient Worthies (already declared 
acceptable to God) can get actual restitution until the last 
member of the Testator shall have died and passed beyond 
the vail. Thus the Apostle declares— the New Covenant or 
testament or bequest is of no strength, "no efficacy, while 
the Testator liveth."-Heb. 9:16,17. 

Surely it is inconsistent and unscriptural to claim that 
the Body of Christ is developed under different covenants. 
It seems equally inconsistent to claim that the Christ of the 
spirit plane is developed by the faith-sacrifice of earthly 
rights, under the same Covenant by which the world will 
secure earthly rights never to be sacrificed. 



R4525 : page 364 

THE MARITIME PROVINCES CONVENTIONS 

THE program as outlined in THE WATCH TOWER announcement 

was carried out in detail. The dear 

friends at each appointment had made excellent 

preparations, securing good halls and advertising 

thoroughly. The results were their own joy and large numbers 

of their neighbors hearing the glad tidings with earnest 

attention and evident interest and appreciation. 

About forty accompanied us from Boston on the steamer 
and others joined us enroute. It was a pleasurable series 
of conventions, very stimulating to our faith and Christian 
love, and made us long for our "change" and "the general 
assembly of the Church of the first born." 



R4528 : page 365 

PILGRIM BROTHER HARRISON GONE HOME 

--DIED OCT. 19TH, BURIED OCT. 22ND.- 

WHEN our last issue went to press we had not 
received any details of his death. He was an 
excellent Brother in Christ and, as one of his 
members, an "able minister (servant) of the New 
Covenant," faithful in his sacrifice to the last. While it is 
not ours to judge, we express freely our convictions respecting 
him. We believe that of him it could be said, as of St. 
Paul, that he fought a good fight, kept the faith, and finished 
his course with joy. We doubt not that as a "member" of 
the Body of Christ, the great Prophet, Priest, Mediator and 
King of the world, he has passed beyond the vail and heard 
the Master's "Well done! good and faithful servant, enter 
thou into the joys of thy Lord." 

R4529 : page 365 

We append a letter from Bro. Harrison's daughter: 
BROTHER RUSSELL, DEAR PASTOR:- 

Last August, at the time father had the severe attack from 
which we thought he might not rally, he expressed the wish 
that he might leave you some token of his love, and said, 
"Perhaps I might leave him a little letter; don't you think 
so?" He then dictated the letter which follows, down as 
far as the Scripture quotation, when he felt too weak to go 
on, expecting to take it up later. As you know, he soon 
began to improve so that the matter as a "farewell message" 
was not taken up again. When he did go there was no opportunity. 
While we knew he was in a critical condition, 
we rather expected that he would be with us for some time, 
and did not until the day he died really feel that "the time 
of his departure was at hand." His mind was clear Saturday, 
Sunday and Monday, though he was very weak; but on Tuesday 
it wandered, the poison having gone to his head. 

That last afternoon I was alone with him, having asked 
mother to lie down and try to get some sleep, when all at 
once he began deliberately and in a full voice, as if addressing 
an audience, "Have you ever considered that Scripture, 
Though he were rich, yet for your sakes he became 
poor, that ye through him might be rich?" He paused as 
if realizing there was a mistake, and then, without comment, 
repeated it from the first, this time correctly— "that ye through 
his poverty might be rich." With no further hesitation he 
went on with a discourse from the text, speaking about ten 
or perhaps fifteen minutes without a break and the thought 
in as logical order and in as good language as in any of his 
public addresses. 

If I had thought of his saying more than a few disconnected 
sentences, I would have tried to take it down, and 



rather regretted afterward that I did not, especially as it was 
just what he was going to give in the letter to you when 
he stopped on account of weakness. I will give it in the 
letter as well as I can remember it. It was no doubt due 
to the thoughts having at some previous time passed through 
his mind in that order that he reproduced them that afternoon 
a few hours before he passed away, even when unconscious 
of his surroundings. I know from the way he spoke 
of the passage during his sickness that he had not used the 
words as a text, but that their beauty and depth of meaning 
had been more forcibly impressed upon him the morning he 
mentions in the letter. 

The first few sentences he dictated some one else took 
down, and I haven't them. What I have is as follows: 

"The gladdest day of my life was when I became acquainted 
with your writings and accepted the same. All my 
associations with you have been both pleasant and profitable. 

"The Lord has been very good to me in that he has 
permitted me to have some share in the harvest work of 
the age. I have rejoiced in these privileges and grown strong 
in the faith while in the exercise of the privilege of helping 
others. 

"I thought I had everything tucked away in the will of 
God so that I could say with the blessed Master, "Thy will, 
not mine, be done,' but when it became a known fact that I 
must for the second time within a few months cease from 
the active pilgrim service, I found some spirit of rebellion in 
my heart. My great desire to continue the work became 
manifest, and I found it necessary to take myself vigorously 
in hand and adjust matters so that perfect harmony might 
exist between the Father's will and my will. 

"Since the adjustment of this matter, perfect peace and 
joy and gladness have been my portion, and while confined to 
my room with much time for reflection and meditation, my 
experiences have been very sweet. I would like to give you 
an example of one of my experiences in the early morning 
before the family were up. I was awake and, as was my 
custom, began some meditations. 

"Though he was rich, yet for your sakes he became 
poor, that ye through his poverty might be rich.' Though he 
were rich— how rich? [He spoke of the riches he had in 
his prehuman state, of his nearness to the Father— his Only 
Begotten One in whom the Father delighted, the Father's 
Agent in the creation of all things, etc.] Though he were 
rich, yet for our sakes he became poor— how poor? He 
divested himself and took a bondman's form! How poor was 
he? 'Foxes have holes and the birds of the air have nests, 
but the Son of Man hath not where to lay his head!' 

"That was poverty, was it not? Would not you and I 
think it poverty? But he not only had nowhere to lay his 
head, but there was none to fully sympathize with him. As 
a New Creature he was alone in the world. It is written, 
'Of the people there was none with him.' Did all forsake 
him? Yes; in the garden he was alone. 'No,' some one 
may say, 'he had with him Peter and James and John.' Not 
so; they were asleep and no man can properly be said to 



be with another in sympathy and support when he is asleep. 
But was this the depth of his poverty? No; hitherto he had 
had the Father's smile of approval, but there came a time 
when the gate of earth and the door of heaven were both 
closed to him. There, as he hung suspended between earth 
and heaven— an outcast— he tasted the depths of poverty for 
us. Having given up at consecration his earthly rights, he 
now had no share in them; but not only so, the door of 
heaven was also closed: 'Cursed is every one that hangeth 
upon a tree.' 

"Oh, the depths of that poverty— 'of the people there 
was none with him'! And as he hangs there the Father, too, 
withdraws himself and hides, as it were, his face from him 
and in his utter loneliness of soul our Lord cries out, 'My 
God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me?' 

"Oh, the depths of the poverty he tasted for us, that we 
through his poverty might be rich!" 

There was nothing new, of course, in what was said, but 
he spoke in a very impressive manner, as though he had 
come to appreciate more than ever the Savior's sacrifice. 
Some points he enlarged on, of course, more than I have done. 

Your sister in Hope, 

MRS. H. L. MITCHELL. 



R4529 : page 365 

SOME INTERESTING LETTERS 
IF ONE SUFFERS ALL SUFFER 

OUR DEARLY BELOVED PASTOR: - 

We rejoice that you are counted worthy to suffer for 
Christ's sake and the Gospel's, and regard it as evidence 
that the spirit of glory and of God rests upon you. We are 
also glad and thankful to be your companions in sorrow, 
suffering with you as members of the same Body. We do 
indeed desire that we might comfort you, but know that 
your help and consolation are sure; are near you indeed at 
all times— his Word in your mouth and in your heart. This 
being so our prayer for you, dear Brother Russell, is that 
you may continue in the Father's favor, standing steadfast 
in your defense of the Truth, and faithful in your service 
of teaching, and that your fellowship with the Father and 
with our dear Lord may daily grow more intimate, as more 
and more you sound the depths of the fellowship of the 
sufferings of Christ. 

We would like to express our continued appreciation of 

R4529 : page 366 

THE WATCH TOWER, especially the articles on the Covenants 
and the Sin-Offering. The Truth on these subjects 
is becoming more beautiful and harmonious as we view it 
with you from every angle. We are glad to say that as we 



search the Scriptures earnestly we find that these things 

are so, and we are thus well defended against the attack of 

the Adversary. We think that some of the dear friends 

fall because they neglect to "eat" these things; they forget 

that the food on the Lord's table must be thoroughly assimilated 

—not merely sniffed at and barely tasted. 

R4530 : page 366 

Having through you, dear Brother Russell, come into 
possession of all these treasures, we would as humble learners 
call your attention to some Scripture passages which seem 
to us of great value in establishing the fact that the New 
Covenant is to fleshly Israel only, and which, as far as we 
can discover, you have as yet not made use of. They are 
these: Ezekiel 37, the whole chapter, but especially the last nine verses. 
And in connection with these: Zechariah 8:20-23. 
We would also be glad if you will at some time in the 
TOWER explain Heb. 9:15. To us this verse seems plainly 
to teach that The Christ becomes the Mediator of the New 
Covenant by offering himself in death as a Sin-Offering for 
the transgressions that were under the old Law Covenant- 
both covenants, thus proving to be with fleshly Israel only. 
Is this right? You would be able to make this matter so 
much clearer to us, if you will. 

Assuring you again of our fervent love for you in 
Christ, and our constant prayers in your behalf, we remain, 

Your brethren in Christ, 

R. AND E. S. -Washington. 

IN REPLY 

BELOVED IN THE LORD:- 

I acknowledge your kind letter of the 26th ult. Being 
admonished by the sure word of prophecy, we do not think 
it strange concerning the fiery trials that are now amongst 
us, realizing that to these we were "called." After we have 
patiently endured to the end we hope to obtain the crown 
of life which the Lord, the righteous Judge, will give to all 
that love him, in that day. 

I note the Scripture texts which you call to my attention 
in connection with the Covenant and the Sin-Offering, 
and will give consideration along the lines which you suggest, 
in due time. 

Your brother and fellow-servant, C. T. R.~ 



THE NEW COVENANT EARTHLY 

MY DEARLY BELOVED BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

Your article in Nov. 1 issue of TOWER, entitled "Them 
that are contentious," has had the effect of inciting the writer 
to a very close scrutiny of his own heart— of its attitude 
toward the Lord and the "brethren." Am sure it will prove 
a great blessing to all TOWER readers who desire to be 



humble and faithful. Your recent articles on the Covenants 
(particularly in Oct. 15 issue of TOWER) have made the 
subject clearer than ever to my mind. 

It seems that the Lord permitted the subject, so much 
discussed in the Church of late, namely, the Covenants and 
the Sin-Offering, to be a little difficult to clearly understand 
at first, in order to prove whether or not we had genuine 
Christian love for the brethren, and now, those who had 
that love are being wonderfully blessed by a much clearer 
understanding of those, and related subjects. 

Ah, yes! we are coming to see more and more that "love 
for the brethren" is one of the strongest tests of true Christian 
character. And I more than ever realize how important 
it is that we all keep very humble; and how strongly the 
leading brothers are tempted to pride and arrogance. For a 
long time my special prayer has been that God would enable 
me to be in the proper attitude toward all the brethren, and 
very humble before him. 

Last night, with a few of the "brethren," we briefly 
studied the particular Covenant the Church is under, and, by 
God's grace, received additional light on the subject from the 
consideration of Gal. 4:21-31— particularly verse 29— in which 
it is intimated that Isaac was born "after the Spirit," and 
that "even so it is now," with respect to Isaac's antitype, 
the Church, whose members are spirit-begotten, heavenly-minded 
beings, "new creatures." 

In verse 26 we see that Sarah was a type of the Heavenly 
Jerusalem, the Covenant that produces the Seed class— the 
Christ, Head and Body. As Isaac was produced by unnatural 
means, under the operation of God's holy Spirit, so is 
his antitype, The Christ, thus produced. And as Isaac was 
a child of "promise," so are all the members of The Christ, 
the Seed class, children of promise. 

In Jeremiah 31:27-34 it is plainly intimated that the 
"New Covenant" will be earthly, and not heavenly; that the 
Lord will "Sow the house of Israel, and the house of Judah, 
with the seed of man, and the seed of beast." How plain 
it is to see that the "New Covenant" is entirely earthly, while 
the Sarah Covenant— "Jerusalem which is above"— is entirely 
heavenly. It is quite evident that the Church, whose members 
are spiritual, "new creatures," could not be under a 
covenant which, when in operation, will replenish Israel with 
"man and beast!" 

How we praise our God for the clear light he is now 
giving us on these subjects, and how we more than ever 
appreciate THE TOWER, through which he is giving us such 
light! With much Christian love, and very best wishes, 

Your brother and servant, FRANK DRAPER. 



DEAR PASTOR:- 

Just a few words in regard to the Vow: Before taking it, 
I never fully understood my Consecration Vow, or the import 
of it, until you suggested the recent Vow; then 
I said that is just the very thing we all need; it is my 



Consecration Vow, put into words that I never could 
form. I wish to say that I realize his leading so much 
more, and for this I am glad. 

Brother Utzler had to go to Aulander recently to deliver. 
When he arrived there the books had not come 
and the station agent told him it would be at least twelve 
or fifteen days yet. However, a freight was due at five 
o'clock that evening and Brother U. concluded to wait. 
He sat on the platform of the station all day, and when 
the freight came in and a car was opened, the first thing 
he saw was his box of books. "Praise his name." They 
were just in time. We thank our Lord for his wonderful 
goodness to us. I could tell you of numerous instances 
of a like character. Oh, how we love and trust him in 
everything, even the very smallest item. 

Both of us desire to express to you our sincere love and 
sympathy in the trials you are passing through. We pray 
for you every day that the dear Lord will sustain you and 
bear you up and keep you in his mighty love. 

Your Sister by his grace, 

MRS. C. M. UTZLER,-Colporteur. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

As there is a party representing himself as a Brother 
Smith from Illinois and now traveling through Kansas and 
the Southwest securing money from the friends wherever 
he can, I have thought it best to write you that a warning 
be put in the TOWER regarding him. 

He is heavy set, light complexion, with small, blue or 
gray eyes set well back in his head; has a heavy head of 
hair which he parts in the middle; he wears a winter suit 
of light colored clothing with a black derby hat; he has on 
a cross and crown pin or button and carries a WATCH TOWER 
and seems to be not only well versed in the Truth but also 
fully aware of the sifting that is in progress and speaks 
familiarly of many of the prominent brethren. 

He tells a very smooth story and seems to deprecate any 
lack of confidence, professing great reluctance in receiving 
anything not freely and fully tendered. His general course 
is not to ask assistance but to solicit a loan. 

Yours in our Redeemer, 



R4534 : page 367 

RAILWAY SCHEDULE FOR BRO. RUSSELL'S DEC. TOUR 

Lv. Brooklyn, N.Y., 9:45 p.m., December 11 (via P.R.R.) 

Arr. Pittsburg, Pa., 9:30 a.m., December 12 
Lv. Allegheny, Pa., 8:35 p.m., December 12 (via Chicago) 

Arr. Elgin, 111., 9:40 a.m., December 13 
Lv. Elgin, 111., 9:15 a.m., December 14 (via C.&N.W.) 

Arr. Rockford, III, 10:53 December 14 



Lv. Rockford, 111., 10:00 a.m., December 15 (via C.&N.W.) 

Arr. Madison, Wis., 1:25 p.m., December 15 
Lv. Madison, Wis., 7:50 a.m., December 16 (via C.&N.W.) 

Arr. Milwaukee, Wis., 10:30 a.m., December 16 
Lv. Milwaukee, Wis., 7:30 a.m., December 17 (C.M.&St.P.) 

Arr. Indianapolis, Ind., 3:10 p.m., December 17 
Lv. Indianapolis, Ind., 11:15 p.m., December 17 (P.R.R.) 

Arr. Columbus, O., 7:00 a.m., December 18 
Lv. Columbus, O., 5:45 p.m., December 18 (P.R.R.) 

Arr. Brooklyn, N.Y. 9:15 a.m., December 19 



page 367 

BEREAN STUDIES ON THE ATONEMENT 

THE TEXT-BOOK USED FOR THIS COURSE 
IS SCRIPTURE STUDIES, SERIES (V)* 

Questions on Scripture Study V.— Man 
for whom Atonement was made. 

JANUARY 2 

(1) "Hell and destruction are before the Lord." (Prov. 15:11.) 
What does this signify? P. 367, par. 7. 

(2) "The way of life is above to the wise, that he may 
depart from hell (sheol) beneath." (Prov. 15:24.) What 
does this signify? P. 367, par. 9. 

(3) What is meant by the statement, "Thou shalt beat 
him with the rod, and shall deliver his soul from hell 
(sheol)." (Prov. 23:14.) P. 368, par. 1. 

(4) "Hell (sheol) and destruction are never full." 
(Prov. 27:20.) What does this signify? P. 368, par. 2. 

(5) "There is no work, nor device, nor knowledge, nor 
wisdom in the grave (sheol, hell)." (Eccl. 9:10.) What 
is the meaning of this statement? P. 368, par. 7. 

(6) "Hell (sheol) hath enlarged herself." (Isa. 5:14.) 
What is the significance of this Scripture? P. 369, par. 3. 

(7) What is meant by the statement, "Hell (sheol) 

from beneath is moved for thee, to meet thee at thy coming?" 
(Isa. 14:9.) P. 369, par. 5. 

(8) "We have made a covenant with death, and with 
hell (sheol) are we at agreement." (Isa. 28:15.) What does 
this Scripture teach? P. 369, last par., and P. 370. 

(9) What is meant by the statement, "The grave 

(sheol, hell) cannot praise thee?" (Isa. 38:18.) P. 371, par. 3. 

JANUARY 9 

(10) "Thou. ..didst debase thyself even unto hell 
(sheol)." (Isa. 57:9.) What is signified by this expression? 
P. 371, last par. 

(11) "He went down to the grave (sheol). ..I cast 

him down to hell (sheol);. ..they also went down into hell 



(sheol)." (Ezek. 31:15-17.) What is signified by this reference 
to hell? P. 372, par. 1. 

(12) "The strong among the mighty shall speak to 
him, and them that help him, out of the midst of hell 
(sheol)." (Ezek. 32:21.) Explain the Scripture in harmony 
with this statement, "There is no wisdom, nor knowledge in 
sheol." 

(13) What is meant by, "They which are gone down 

to hell with their weapons of war"? (Ezek. 32:27.) P. 372, 
last par. 

(14) What is meant by the statement, "I will ransom 
them from the power of the grave (sheol, hell)?...0 
grave (sheol, hell), I will be thy destruction." (Hos. 13:14.) 
P. 373, par. 1. 

(15) Who are they that "dig into hell"? (Amos 9:2.) 
P. 374, par. 1. 

(16) Who prayed to God "out of the belly of hell" 
and was heard? (Jonah 2:2.) P. 374, par. 1. 

(17) What is meant by the statement, "Enlargeth his 
desire as hell (sheol)"? (Hab. 2:5.) P. 374, last par. 

JANUARY 16 

(18) What word in the New Testament Greek corresponds 
exactly to the Hebrew word sheol in the Old Testament? 

P. 375, par. 1. 

(19) When translations are made from the Old Testament 
Scriptures into the New Testament and the word sheol 

is included, how is it uniformly translated in the New Testament 
Greek? P. 375, par. 1. 

(20) What is the meaning of the Scripture, "Thou, 
Capernaum, which art exalted unto heaven, shalt be brought 
down to hell"? (Matt. 1 1:23.) P. 375, par. 2. 

(21) Explain the Scripture, "I will build my Church 

and the gates of hell shall not prevail against it." (Matt. 16:18.) 
P. 375, par. 4. 

(22) Quote Luke 10:15 and explain it. P. 376, par. 1. 

(23) "In hell he lifted up his eyes, being in torments." 
(Luke 16:23.) Explain this Scripture in harmony with the 
declaration that there is no wisdom, nor knowledge, nor 
device in sheol, in hades. Is the nation of Israel dead, but 
its people alive? P. 376, last par. 

JANUARY 23 

(24) What is meant by the Scripture, "Thou wilt not 
leave my soul in hell"? (Acts 2:27.) P. 377, par. 2. 

(25) Christ's soul was not left in hell. (Acts 2:31.) 
What does this signify? P. 377, par. 3. 

(26) What did the Apostle mean by the words, "O hell (hades), 
where is thy victory?" (I Cor. 15:55.) P. 377, last par. 

(27) "I have the keys of hell and of death." (Rev. 1:18.) 
P. 378, par. 1. 

(28) "Hell followed with him." (Rev. 6:8.) What 
does this statement signify? 

(29) "Death and hell delivered up the dead which were 



in them." (Rev. 20:13.) Explain this Scripture. P. 379, par. 2. 

(30) What is meant by the statement that "death and 
hell were cast into the lake of fire"? (Rev. 20:14.) P. 318. 

(31) What conclusion should we reach in respect to 
these various Scriptures examined? P. 381. 

JANUARY 30 

(32) What is meant by the statement that "Our Savior 
Jesus Christ.. .hath abolished death and brought life 

and immortality to light through the Gospel"? (2 Tim. 1:10.) 
P. 383. 

(33) Have mankind a longing for a future life? If 
so, why so. P. 383. 

(34) Did God encourage man's aspirations for a future 
life? P. 383, last par. 

(35) Is there any direct promise of eternal life in 

the Old Testament? If so, what and where? And does it 
contain any statement respecting human immortality either 
present or prospective? P. 383, last par. 

(36) "The Gospel was preached to Abraham"; did it 
contain any mention of human immortality? Did it contain 
any basis of suggestion of a future life? P. 384. 

(37) State what assurances of everlasting life or immortality 
or both are mentioned in the New Testament and 

to whom they are applicable. P. 384. 

(38) State what the New Testament assurances respecting 
a future life imply— the basis for the hope, the 
conditions for its attainment and the process by which those 
blessings may be secured. P. 385. 

(39) Does the abundance of the Divine provision imply 
that eternal life is already a possession of humanity or that 
it will be forced upon Adam and his race? P. 385, last par. 

(40) Quote some Scriptures bearing upon this subject 
and showing that eternal life is a gift from the Almighty 
and that it must be striven for, in order to be obtained. 
P. 386. 



page 368 

PUBLIC MINISTRIES OF THE TRUTH 

UNDER THE AUSPICES OF PEOPLES PULPIT 
ASSOCIATION OF BROOKLYN, N.Y. 



ONE-DAY CONVENTIONS ADDRESSED BY THE 
EDITOR, ETC. 



PITTSBURG (N.S.), PA., DEC. 12 



Morning Rally for Praise and Testimony in Bible House 
Chapel, 610 Arch street, at 10:30 o'clock. 

Afternoon session for the public at 3 o'clock in Allegheny 
Carnegie Hall, corner Federal and Ohio streets. Subject, 
"The Thief in Paradise; the Rich Man in Hell; Lazarus in 
Abraham's Bosom." 

Evening meeting for the interested in Bible House 
Chapel, at 7:30, preceded by half-hour's song service. 

Visiting friends heartily welcomed. 



ELGIN, ILL., DEC. 13 

Rally and Testimony Meeting at 10 a.m., followed by 
Question meeting at 1 1 o'clock. 

Address to the interested at 3 p.m. 

Service for the public at 7:30 p.m. Subject, "The 
Thief in Paradise; the Rich Man in Hell; Lazarus in Abraham's 
Bosom." 

All meetings in the Coliseum, Grove avenue, to which 
visiting friends are cordially invited. 

ROCKFORD, ILL., DEC. 14 

Morning Rally for Prayer, Praise and Testimony in 
Woodman Hall, 109-111 W. State street, at 10:30 o'clock. 

Discourse to the interested at 3 p.m., in same hall. 

Public meeting at 8 p.m. in the Armory, 121 N. Church 
street. Topic, "The Thief in Paradise; the Rich Man in 
Hell; Lazarus in Abraham's Bosom." 



MADISON, WIS., DEC. 15 

Meeting for the public in Colonial Hall, 1 13 E. Mifflin 
street, at 8 p.m. Subject, "Overthrow of Satan's Empire." 

For local particulars regarding meetings for the interested 
apply to Mr. W. J. Laughlin, Oregon, Wis. 



MILWAUKEE, WIS., DEC. 16 

Morning Rally for Praise and Testimony at 10:30 o'clock. 

Discourse to the interested at 3 p.m. 

Evening meeting for the public at 8 o'clock. Subject, 
"Overthrow of Satan's Empire." 

All meetings in John Plankinton Hall (Auditorium Annex), 
to which visiting friends are cordially invited. 



INDIANAPOLIS, IND., DEC. 17 (18, 19) 



Brother Russell will be present on the 17th for an 
afternoon address to the friends and an evening meeting for 
the public. Other brethren of ability will serve the friends 
for the other sessions of the Three-Day Convention, further 
particulars of which will be given later. 



BROOKLYN, N.Y., DEC. 19 

Morning Rally and Testimony Meeting at 10:30 o'clock. 

Discourse by Brother Russell at 3 p.m. Evening meeting 
for the interested at 7:30 o'clock will be a Question Meeting 
Opportunity for water-baptism will be afforded. 

All meetings will be held in the Brooklyn Tabernacle, 
Nos. 13-17 Hicks street. Convenient to all cars and ferries 
—two blocks from Fulton Ferry. 



page 369 

SEMI-MONTHLY 
VOL. XXX DECEMBER 15 No. 24 
A.D. 1909-A.M. 6038 



CONTENTS 

Watch Tower Bible & Tract Society's 

Report 371 

A Soldier of the Cross 374 

The Birth of the Savior 375 

"Present Your Bodies Living Sacrifices" 376 

Your Good Hopes-1910 377 

"Sold All That He Had" 379 

Brooklyn Bethel Hymns for January 379 

God's Everlasting Covenant (Illus.) 380 

Preparation for the Fulfillment of the 

Divine Promise to Abraham 381 

Bro. Russell's Holiday Season Tour 383 

page 370 

PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY 
CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
"BROOKLYN TABERNACLE," 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, NY., U.S.A. 

Foreign Agencies:— British Branch: 24 Eversholt St., London, 
N.W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, Barmen. Australasian 
Branch: Equitable Building, Collins St., Melbourne. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:— All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 
and in touch with the Studies, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, DANISH AND ITALIAN EDITIONS. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N.Y., POSTOFFICE 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA 



YOUR STEWARDSHIP AND RESPONSIBILITY 

More than four hundred newspapers are now publishing 
Brother Russell's sermons weekly. Their publishers should 
have the support and encouragement of every WATCH TOWER 
subscriber. Bigotry, envy and ignorance prompt many "ministers 
of the gospel" and others to write to the publishers, 
slandering Brother Russell and threatening the use of their 
influence against the newspaper, unless the sermons are 
stopped. The publishers have no more interest in the sermons 
than they have in the preachers— none. They are simply 
working for money, and whatever the people want they are 
pleased to publish. In many instances the publishers are 
amazed at the interest manifested by the public in these sermons 
and they would not think of dropping them no matter 
what the preachers might threaten. 

The time, however, when our readers should show their 
appreciation of the service is especially at the first, when 
the preachers howl and the public have not had time to get 
interested and to express themselves. At first, then, is your 
time to do all you can to encourage the editors. Send subscriptions 
through our office and send letters direct to the 
editors, and keep it up. If a paper in your vicinity discontinues 
the sermons, ask the Lord whether or not you failed 
to do your duty. 

QUESTIONS ON "TABERNACLE SHADOWS" 

We have these printed in cheap form and will supply 
them free to those who have TABERNACLE SHADOWS and who 



will request them. 

BIBLE STUDY HELPS, CLOTH AND LEATHER 

These are same as in the latest WATCH TOWER Bibles. 
Cloth, 50c; leather, $1.25. 

FIRST VOLUMES IN LEATHER AS XMAS PRESENTS 

We call attention to the desirability of the first volume 
of the SCRIPTURE-STUDIES in leather binding for use as an 
inexpensive and at the same time missionary gift for the 
holiday season. We have some specially desirable for this 
purpose since the covers are not stamped with the volume 
number. Price 60c, postpaid. Also the leather STUDIES in sets. 

CROSS AND CROWN PINS 

Gold; beautiful, good and cheap. The cross in red 
enamel, the wreath in green— $1.35. The same without the 
green on wreath, $1.25. In silver enameled wreath and 
cross, 25c; size 3/4 inch. Plain gold without enamel, 1/2 inch, 
$1.15. These are wholesale rates and include postage. 

"DAWN-SCRIPTURE STUDIES" 

These six volumes divided into two sets three vols, each: 

Vol. I.-"The Divine Plan of the Ages"; Vol. II.-"The 
Time Is at Hand"; Vol. III.— "Thy Kingdom Come"; Vol. 
IV.— "The Day of Vengeance"; Vol. V.— "The At-one-ment 
Between God and Man"; Vol. VI.— "The New Creation." 

Every reader of THE WATCH TOWER should be not only 
a reader but a student of these books. Many keep reading 
them by course over and over with continued and increasing 
profit— twelve pages or more daily. We commend the plan. 

These books are sold at one-third usual rates, in order 
to permit them to be freely sold to the humblest. 

The cloth edition we supply (vols. 1-3) at 35 cents; 
vols. 4-6 at 40 cents, post or express prepaid. 

The full leather, gilt-edged edition, $4.80 for full set. 

The India paper set, gilt-edged and leather flexible, $4.80. 

Several volumes appear in foreign languages as well- 
German, Swedish, French, Italian, Norwegian, Hollandish, 
Spanish, Greek, Hungarian, Polish— in one volume; some in 
all volumes— in cloth binding only. 



R4530 : page 371 

WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY'S REPORT 

-DECEMBER, 1908, TO DECEMBER, 1909.- 

HOW fast they fly, these busy "harvest" years! How 
golden are their hours for reaping work and for 



the ripening work in our own hearts and the filling 

and rounding out of our own characters! Hours 

and days of toil and danger— yet wonderful in their compensating 

joys of grace and truth! They are too precious 

to lose a single one in sin or in worldly vanities, or even in 

religiously "beating the air"; and yet we are glad to see them 

speeding past and to hope that they are bringing us nearer 

and nearer to "the rest that remains for the people of God." 

"For how can we with such a hope 

Of glory and of home; 
With such a hope awaiting us, 

Not wish the hour were come— 
The blessed hour, the glorious morn, 

When we shall see his face! 
Yet peace our hearts! and hush our tongues! 

Be calm our troubled breasts; 
Each passing hour prepares us more 

For everlasting rest. 
We know full well the time our God 

Appoints for us is best." 

While our faith and hopes would be equally clear and 
logical whether this age ends in October, 1914, or a century 
later, nevertheless our expectation that "Gentile Times" will 
conclude October, 1914, undoubtedly has a stimulating effect 

R4531 : page 371 

upon our hearts and influences all of life's interests and helps 
to "wean" us from earthly joys and ambitions and to set our 
affections on things above! 

If we may judge from hundreds of oral expressions and 
letters, received as being the sentiments of our readers in 
general, we conclude that the year past has to many of them 
been their very best of all years. It surely has been the 
Editor's best year; and, notwithstanding grievous heart-wounds, 
it has been one of his happiest as well as one of 
his busiest years. 

However, candor requires that we note that the past year 
has been one of severe trial and testing upon the Church. 
And, alas, some fell in the attack— some whom we dearly 
loved and whom we had hoped would be with us in the 
battle to the end— the victory! Even though forewarned 
that a thousand would fall at our side (Psa. 91:7), we have 
been surprised— we feared more for some who fell not and 
feared less for some who fell. 

It would be a mistake, however, to suppose that the 
deflected ones are many; nor should the fact that some of 
them were prominent imply that the harvest work has been 
crippled. We have no thought that it is within the power 
of opponent to thwart the great King or hinder his "harvest" 
work. "All his purposes shall be accomplished." We merely 
sorrow for the dear ones themselves as we think of what 
they have cast away— their share in "the sufferings of Christ," 
their share in drinking His "cup"; their share in "baptism into 



His Death"; their share in "His Resurrection." 

For years night and day we have forewarned the dear 
brethren that the harvest tests would surely be along these 
lines, and that supreme loyalty to God and to his Word and 
his Providences in the Church would test our love for the 
brethren. Surely, too, we have long warned the dear friends 
that however we might point out to them the previous truths 
they must put these on as an armor, else they would be unprepared 
for the Adversary's attacks when they would come. 

It is just what we might have expected, that our wily 
Adversary would attempt to keep the Lord's people from 
putting on the whole armor of God and fastening it on. 
More than this, he attempts to prejudice them against the 
very instrumentalities God provided to keep the "feet" of 
Christ in this evil day.— Psalm 91:11,12. 

From various quarters the word came to us that the 
leaders of classes were protesting that WATCH TOWER publications 
should not be referred to in the meetings, but 
merely the Bible. This sounded loyal to God's Word; but 
it was not so. It was merely the effort of those teachers to 
come between the people of God and the Divinely provided 
light upon God's Word. 

Let us remember that Satan is behind such a move as 
that! He poses as an angel of light and a defender of the 
Bible, yet he has succeeded in blinding millions with Bibles 
in their hands and in regular Bible-study classes! Why would 
it be any more disloyal to the Bible to consult THE WATCH 
TOWER publications respecting the meaning of a verse of 
Scripture than to consult the leader of the class or any of 
its members? Ah! says the leader, it would be right enough 
to consult THE WATCH TOWER publications, only that since 
(because) from them you got nearly all you know about the 
Bible that is rational you are inclined to stick to those things. 
I would like you to forget them and let me lead you in a 
hunt after the old style, in which anything found is more 
likely to be confusing than helpful. 

On the other hand we forewarn all that Satan surely will 
try to lead them to an opposite course— to learn, parrot-like, 
to answer Berean questions from the printed page without 
comprehending the meaning. The questions should be discussed 
freely by all first, and then before proceeding to the 
next question the DAWN answer should be considered and discussed 
and understood. Never forget that the Bible is our 
Standard and that however God-given our helps may be they 
are "helps" and not substitutes for the Bible. 

But, notwithstanding the loss of some of these dear 
"reapers" (who very soon begin to do all in their power to 
oppose the "harvest" work and to dishearten other "reapers") 
the work as a whole progresses, as our details to follow will 
show. "The Lord knoweth them that are his," and will keep 
those whose hearts are loyal to the sacrifice they made when 
they were begotten to the new nature as members of the 
Christ— the Prophet, Priest, Mediator, King of the World. 

Have we no hope of their return? We would be glad 
to welcome them back, but our experience along these lines 



R4531 : page 372 

forbids us to so hope. If after having seen our fellowship 
in the "Mystery," in the sufferings and in the glory to follow, 
they now become blind to them so that they see them no 
longer, how can we account for the matter? Apparently in 
only one of two ways. Either they never really saw these 
privileges, or else for some reason the Lord has so thoroughly 
taken that spiritual sight from them that they are completely 
gone now. Of course, some may be merely confused, and 
may eventually be recovered: we have not ceased to pray 
for them, nor to do all in our power to awaken such as may 
be merely dreaming, and who may not have actually lost the 
light wherewith they once seemed to be "illuminated."— 
Heb. 10:32. 

On the whole, the "sifting as wheat" seems to be having 
an awe-inspiring effect upon those whose sight remains, making 
them more careful, drawing them nearer to the Lord and 
to each other. The effect upon the others seems to be the reverse. 
They seem glad to "separate themselves," anxious to 
bring about division, to boast of their "liberty." They denounce 
the majority because they will not allow the minority 
to lord it over them, speaking evil of them as "slaves," "in 
babylonish bondage," etc. 

It would appear that nearly every case of doctrinal deflection 
and blindness was preceded by more or less of a 
mind-poisoning by slander, evil-speaking, evil surmising. By 
such rapidly developed roots of bitterness the Adversary prepared 
the way for the error, in nearly every case. 

The number being reached and brought into fellowship 
in the sufferings of Christ is greater than ever: as if to include 
substitutes for those who no longer esteem it a privilege 
to "walk in His steps," to "suffer with Him," to "be dead 
with Him," to drink of the "cup" of their great Redeemer 
and Advocate: who prefer to count themselves under the New 
Law Covenant and prefer to think of Christ as a Mediator 
between them and the Father, rather than as their "Advocate 
with the Father." 

Mark them that cause division and stumblings contrary to 
the doctrine which ye have learned, and avoid them. (Rom. 16:17,18.) 
Do not render evil for evil, nor slander for slander; 
but both think and speak kindly of them with pitying 
love, even as toward all men confused by the Adversary. (2 Cor. 4:4.) 
Let us keep our hearts in the love of God, and 
full of love for all the brethren, and in love for truth and justice 
everywhere and on all matters. Let us "mark" how the 
wrong spirit misguides and blinds and leads into the dark, 
while the right spirit of love, the holy Spirit, guides into the 
Truth. Let us "mark" the course taken by those who have 
separated themselves from us "because they were no longer 
of us," and whither that course leads them.— I. John 2:19. 

We congratulate ourselves, and all the dear "members" 
of the Christ associated with us in this Society, that we still 
see the "Mystery of God," and still rejoice in "the fellowship 
of this Mystery." (Eph. 3:9; Col. 1:26.) And that as servants 
or able (qualified) ministers of the New Covenant we 



still realize that we are in the "harvest" time; and that the 

present work of gathering the elect will soon be finished; and 

that then the selection of the sacrificing members of the Mediator 

being completed the New Covenant with Israel will go 

into effect for the blessing of every creature, with Restitution 

privileges. 

We congratulate you also that the Lord has so wonderfully 
blessed your efforts and ours in the harvest work during 
the past twelve months. Small and insignificant as we are 
amongst the great religious systems our work and labor of 
love is not in vain, but is mighty through God to the pulling 
down of the strongholds of error and the finding of the Lord's 
jewels in all parts of the earth. Most evidently our Lord 
has prospered the work, else it never could have been accomplished. 
Recognizing this let us acknowledge it and give 
thanks for the privileges granted to us to have some little 
share in it. While the reward is future, we realize that already 
we have been more than compensated by the joys of 
the Lord for every trial, every self-sacrifice connected with 
the service of the Truth and the brethren. 

THE CORRESPONDENCE DEPARTMENT 

Like other features of the work, the correspondence of the 
year shows a further increase over previous good records. 
The Editor is not able to answer so many personal letters as 
formerly, but he is still in touch through your letters and often 
their intimations influence his writings in THE WATCH TOWER. 

He again requests that the dear friends accept THE TOWERS 
as personal letters twice a month. The increased volume 
of letters, in and out, measures to a considerable degree the 
general work. The letters received and sent out by the various 
foreign branches are not included in the report which 
appears in the Summary further on in this Report. 

THE WATCH TOWER 

The subscription list of THE WATCH TOWER we rely on as 
the best test of all respecting the numbers of the deeply interested. 
Hence we urge that each one of this class send 
us every year his subscription or renewal— whether for cash 
or on credit or as the Lord's poor for the "Charity (love) 
List." Numbers of the brethren stand ready and anxious for 
the privilege of paying for the "Charity" list. But under the 
later interpretations of the postal laws we are hindered from 
counting as a subscriber any who do not yearly comply with 
one or the other of the above conditions. Do not wait until 
your name has been dropped; but save us and yourself trouble 

R4532 : page 372 

by renewing promptly and in plain language; for sometimes 
P.O. Inspectors ask to see the letters. 

Our WATCH TOWER list does not show a marked increase 
over last year. We still publish 30,000 copies each issue— which 
allows about 3,000 for sample copies and for new subscriptions. 



The cutting off of some who did not renew, accounts for 
this in part. 

Responsibility for the size of the list lies largely with you, 
dear readers. You are our agents; not for the sake of 
"premiums," but because you appreciate the contents and because 
you desire as "fellow-servants" to dispense the Divinely 
provided "meat in due season" to all who belong to the "household 
of faith." 

THE COLPORTEUR DEPARTMENT 

The output of volumes the past year, as will be seen 
from the Summary, was less than for the year preceding. 
But that year had a phenomenal record, which we dare 
not hope ever to exceed. Assuredly no fault lies with the 
dear Colporteurs, who now number about 625, and whose 
loving zeal for the service is continually manifested in 
various ways. One Brother has tried the plan of introducing 
the six volumes of DAWN-STUDIES for $2.15-only 
about the price of one volume as such books are ordinarily 
sold. He reports that he sells as many sets of six as 
he formerly sold sets of three. And where formerly he 
sold one he now can usually sell three. Should this plan 
become generally successful it might lift our output for the 
coming year still higher than that of 1908. Nor is it merely 
the sale of the books, for some are more attracted by the 
rV. or V. or VI. Volume than by the first three. Again, 
the entire six upon the book-shelf attract more attention 
and are the more likely to be examined. 

We are glad to note that this service seems to be yielding 
a larger fruitage than ever before. Either the public are 
in better attitude of heart and head to receive the Truth 
or the Colporteurs are more successful in finding and gathering 
the deeply interested. Surely the Colporteurs, too, are 
putting forth more effort to establish little classes for DAWN-SCRIPTURE 
STUDIES. Communicating with the Office they frequently 
arrange for a Pilgrim visit, or themselves give a few 
Chart Talks, and illustrations of how to conduct profitable 
"Scripture-Study Meetings" with our helps. One thing is 
very evident, namely— that the dear Colporteurs themselves 
are reaping rich blessings from their privileges in the service 
as "able (qualified) ministers of the New Covenant"— seeking 
to serve it in the sense of seeking for and assisting and 
making ready the "members" of the Great Priest who shortly 
will establish his Mediatorial Kingdom and bless Israel and 
the world under the New [Law] Covenant. 

R4532 : page 373 

THE VOLUNTARY TRACT DISTRIBUTION 

More and more those who love the Truth and have zeal 
to serve it are anxious to do so. If they cannot give their 
entire time to preaching or Colporteuring they can enlist in 
the army of voluntary tract distributors. Many are doing 
so and the result is great. The fruit of their labors is 



manifested in many ways— partly by the greater yielding of 
prejudice and opposition— partly by the letters of inquiry 
for more reading matter which reach our Office. But a very 
special blessing resulting from this work is the rich outpouring 
of the Lord's favor upon the heads and hearts of those 
who render this service— to the Lord and to the Truth 
and to Brethren in Babylon, who could not otherwise be so 
well reached. The Summary shows a grand total that certainly 
should be inspiring to us all. Surely the quantities are 
far in excess of any other tract distribution work. So far 
as we know, it exceeds all others combined. 

Yet we would not boast. When we have done all in our 
power we are to realize that we are unprofitable servants, 
that we do not bring to our Lord as much as we receive from 
him. If we could double or treble the work, surely we all 
would rejoice in the privilege which thus would be afforded 
us of testifying to our Lord of our love and zeal for him 
and his Truth, and for showing forth to our fellow creatures 
"the praises of him who has called us out of darkness into 
his marvelous light." What shall be done in this Department 
of the harvest work during 1910? Let each reader 
ask himself this question and answer it according to his 
judgment of what would be pleasing to the Lord. 

"THE FIELD IS THE WORLD" 

Evidently the due time has come for the proclamation of 
the harvest message in every nook and corner of this favored 
land, to which the Lord has brought people of every nation 
and through whom in turn the message properly goes back to 
their home lands. For a time the Lord's providence opened 
up to us no other channels for distributing the Truth than 
the interested— Colporteurs, Sharpshooters, Volunteers, etc., 
but latterly he has opened secular channels— newspapers. The 
intimation would seem to be that there was not a sufficient 
number of "reapers" to accomplish the work intended in the 
time apportioned. 

A year ago we noted the fact that eleven newspapers 
were publishing the sermons regularly and that brethren 
familiar with newspaper work had advised our removal from 
Pittsburg that the sermons might come from a preferred city 
and that the number of newspapers to use them would greatly 
increase. We noted the providential leadings in connection 
with the transfer of the Society's office to its present location. 
We now note the resulting blessing of the Lord upon this 
newspaper service; for, instead of the eleven publishing the 
sermons a year ago, we now have more than four hundred, 
with the list continually increasing. The Brethren having 
this part of the service in charge estimate the present weekly 
circulation of the sermons to be about two and a half million 
copies; or for the year, one hundred and twenty-five million 
copies. As newspapers are reckoned to reach four persons 
each, these figures run up enormous totals. 

The majority of these papers are weeklies which reach 
rural districts not so easily accessible to Colporteurs, Volunteers, 
etc. Moreover we have occasionally encouraging reports. 



For instance, we learned recently the following from a 
Brother who was Colporteuring in Tennessee. He canvassed 
the clerk of a country store, where several men had congregated. 
As soon as it was learned that his books were from 
the same pen as the sermons they had been reading in their 
newspaper he got a hearty welcome and sold sets to nearly 
all in the store. Later one of these purchasers, laboring with 
others upon a road, recognized him as he passed and introduced 
the subject to his associates. Thus several more sets 
were sold and the Brother was urgently requested to hold a 
meeting and to address them along these lines. The lesson 
to us is "Sow beside all waters. Withhold not thine hand; 
thou knowest not which will prosper, this or that." 

Now an additional feature of newspaper work has been 
started. Some of the larger newspapers desired the sermons 
but could not spare more than one column of space. In an 
endeavor to meet these requirements and thus to still more 
fully circulate Present Truth we have commenced to supply 
these papers— the weekly Sunday School Lesson headed 
"Brooklyn Tabernacle Bible Studies." Already ten newspapers 
are publishing these, and, their circulation being large, about 
one-half a million of readers are now being reached in this 
manner weekly. 

Our intimation above, that this service is carried on by 
worldly agencies alone, might give the wrong thought. In a 
very particular and important sense all of our readers have 
the privilege of co-operating in this service, and very many 
of them are doing so— by patronizing the journals which publish 
the sermons, and by encouraging their editors from time 
to time by post card or otherwise— advising them of their appreciation 
of this feature of their journals. It is not ours to 
reward you, dear friends. The great Chief Reaper takes note 
of your efforts and ours to use the various agencies which he 
is pleased to open up for the dissemination of the Truth. We 
are all waiting for the joyous moment when he shall say, 
"Well done!— enter into the joys of your Lord." Indeed in 
these various ways we are already entered into some of those 
joys— the joy of sacrificing and serving in the interest of others. 
If we thus drink of his "cup" now, we shall drink 
afresh of his cup of joy in the Kingdom. 

THE PILGRIM SERVICE 

The report of Pilgrim service in our Summary does not 
include work of this kind done in other lands, but merely in 
the United States and Canada. The summary shows fewer 
Pilgrims, but about the same amount of work— a little more. 
The results of the work continue to be favorable every way. 
The new location of the office is favorable to the Pilgrim service. 
Our office helpers use their Sundays and evenings 
in this work and we are now planted in the center of a population 
of twenty millions of people, the most remote accessible 
by a few hours' ride. 

The dear Brethren engaged in this Pilgrim branch of the 
service have special opportunities for serving the Lord's dear 
flock. We pray for them, and believe that they enjoy special 



blessings of the holy Spirit, specially qualifying them for this 
work of ministry. All of the Lord's dear people are to be 
"Able ministers of the New Covenant"— serving it by their 
own sacrificing and the promotion of the spirit of sacrifice in 
the brethren in general, by exhorting them to drink of the cup 
of the New Covenant, of which our Redeemer drank; that 
they may be accounted worthy of sharing with him in his 
Kingdom glories. 

The Pilgrim Brethren should be, and we believe are, 
specially qualified for this service. We continually look for 
the guidance of the Lord's Word and the leadings of his providence 
in respect to who may serve the flock most advantageously 
along the lines of this service— the means which the 
Lord puts at our disposal being considered a factor also in 
determining how many shall be thus engaged, etc. These dear 
Pilgrim Brethren, Colporteurs, and others express themselves 

R4533 : page 373 

as encouraged greatly by the fact that they are remembered 
daily by the more than six thousand of our number who have 
taken the Vow suggested in these columns some time ago. 
This was our motive in the framing of that particular clause 
of the Vow which specifies prayer for the harvest workers 
everywhere. Many letters told the Editor that he was continually 
remembered at the Throne of Grace, and in the 
knowledge of this he is greatly refreshed and strengthened. 
This led him to desire that the sympathies and prayers of all 
might be enlarged so as to include all who love the Lord and 
who are seeking to manifest their love and faith by devotion 
to the Harvest Work. 

We remind you again that the amount set down in the 
Reports of the last two years as expended for the Pilgrim 
service includes much more than their personal expenses and 
traveling expenses. It will be remembered that we invited the 
friends everywhere to send to the office a memorandum of 

R4533 : page 374 

funds which they expended in connection with One-Day Conventions 

and Pilgrim Visits— for the hire of halls, advertising 

of meetings, etc. We give credit in the TRACT FUND for the 

amounts thus expended, just the same as though the money 

were sent to us and paid out by us. All such expenditures are 

charged to the Pilgrim Service account, thus swelling the 

amount considerably. 

While the Society proposes to furnish all the expenses of 
the Pilgrims, it expects, and the Pilgrims heartily agree, that 
their expenses shall be kept just as small as decency and comfort 
will permit. Neither they nor we forget that many of 
those who contribute to the TRACT FUND are very poor in this 
world's goods, and that their donations frequently represent 
special self-denials for the sake of the Lord, the Truth and 
the Brethren. Our thought is that all engaging in the Pilgrim 
service should do so from this same standpoint of self-sacrifice. 
Nevertheless it is our desire that the Pilgrims shall 



be comfortable and that their clothing shall be such as would 
not cause the friends to be ashamed of their appearance— 
"decent." 

SUMMARY OF THE YEAR'S WORK 

Letters received 81,649 

Letters sent out 88,230 



Dawn-Studies sent out— all volumes, all languages 626,981 

Average per working day 2,035 



Tracts and Towers and People's Pulpit circulated 

free in English language, 8,538,800-pages 171,999,000 

Tracts and Towers and People's Pulpit circulated 

free in other languages, 6,269,700— pages 83,368,800 

Sermon circulation— weekly service— newspapers 407 

Total number of sermons published 140,421,496 



Pilgrims in service during the year 42 

Miles traveled in the Pilgrim Service (Bro. R. 

45,700) 311,816 

Public meetings held by Pilgrims 2,781 

Parlor meetings held by Pilgrims 6,070 

Financial Showing. 

Balance from 1908 report $ 8,100.34 

"Good Hopes," 1909 96,870.81 



$104,971.15 

Expended in Foreign Missions: 

Germany $ 6,562.02 

Australia 1,822.67 

Scandinavia 2,330.26 

Jamaica 1,702.21 

Switzerland, France and Italy 350.06 

Africa 4,270.78 

India 351.77 

Greek, Syrian, Spanish 623.93 



Foreign Missions total $18,013.70 

Expenditures: 

Account Tracts, postage, freight, 

People's Pulpit, Sermons, etc. ...$43,794. 19 

Gas, coal, office help, etc 6,024.72 

Account Pilgrim Service, conventions, 

advertising, etc 27,420.16 



$ 95,252.77 

Balance for 1910 $ 9,718.38 

We rejoice that in God's Providence we are able to 
make so favorable a report. We congratulate you and ourselves 
that the substantial balance on hand will give us a 
good start for the new year. Present prospects are that it 
will afford us better opportunities than ever before for the 
glorious harvest work. We shall greatly miss the few 
dear friends who walk no more with us, but we cannot delay 
for tears. We leave them in the Master's care and onward 
press our way. Some very precious brethren have been 
found by the Truth during the year closing and we doubt 
not the Lord has others ready for every crown that may be 
vacated. 

"A little while, our trials will be over. 

A little while, the harvest time will end. 
A little while until the Great Chief Reaper 

Shall have us in his Kingdom without end." 



R4533 : page 374 

A SOLDIER OF THE CROSS 

-2 TIMOTHY 4:7.-DECEMBER 19.- 

Golden Text:— "I have fought a good fight, I have 
finished my course, I have kept the faith." 

WAS there ever a nobler soldier of the Cross than 

St. Paul— the Redeemer alone excepted? Soldiers 

of fortune and patriots have indeed left their 

marks in the world and on the pages of history, 

but not one of them has left so indelible a mark as St. Paul. 

The motive power influencing others has generally been selfishness. 

But the motive power of the Christian is the reverse 

—love. Others hazarded and laid down their lives in self-interest, 

or in the interest of their kin or tongue. St. Paul, 

copying his Master, laid down his life for Jew and Gentile, 

bond and free, male and female, to assist in gathering the 

"elect" to be the Bride of Christ— that ultimately through the 

glorified King and his glorified Bride, all the families of the 

earth may receive the blessing which God waits to give to 

"all the families of the earth, through Abraham's Seed."— 

Gal. 3:29. 

St. Paul's courageous life reminds us of the words of 
the poet:— 

"Be not like dumb, driven cattle, 
Be a hero in the strife." 

God is seeking only for heroes now. By and by he will 



deal with the remainder, helpfully. The "elect" must all be 
courageous, "conformed to the image of his Son"— heroes. 
Hence the promises to the Church are "to him that overcometh." 
And let us remember that Scripturally considered 
this character which the Lord seeks may be developed in very 
humble stations— the butcher, the baker, the machinist, the 
housewife, the washer-woman— all these may develop the overcoming 
qualities which the Lord will reward. 

When writing the words of our study St. Paul realized 
that the close of his career was near— his course was finished. 

He recognized as a Christian that he had certain lessons 
to learn in the School of Christ and this was a part of his 
course of preparation for joint-heirship with Christ in the 
glories of the Millennial Kingdom. The course included not 
merely theory, but also practice. He not only theoretically 
learned about Christ, but experimentally. He became a partaker 
with him in the sufferings of this present time. And 
sympathetically he was permitted to enter into a large degree 
of knowledge of the "mystery" of the Divine Plan hidden 
from the world. 

Not only had his own course of instruction been a thorough 
one, but he had been given a post-graduate course as 
an ambassador for his Lord and Redeemer and as an Apostle 
for the brethren, the Church. Moreover, he recognized the 
fact that all such as became members of the Body of Christ 
are so directly under the Divine supervision and regulations 
that their times are in God's hand— all of their affairs of 
life, temporal and spiritual. As the Master's death could not 
occur "until his hour was come," so likewise it is with his 
consecrated members. 

He had kept the faith and the faith had kept him. Many 
do not realize how important are knowledge and a correct 
faith. "My people perish for lack of knowledge" is the 
Lord's testimony. And their faith can keep pace only with 
their knowledge, for faith must have a basis. A correct life 
depends greatly upon a correct faith. Why did our forefathers 
burn one another at the stake in a diabolical manner? Because 
they were governed by error. False doctrines, styled 
by the Apostle "doctrines of devils," had been presented to 
them and they had believed them. And the legitimate outcome 
of the wrong belief, the wrong faith, was wrong doing. 
Believing that God purposed the torture of his creatures for 

R4533 : page 375 

centuries in Purgatory or for untellable millions of years in 
eternal torment, they copied the misconception of the Almighty 
in their lives, to our horror. 

But St. Paul had kept the faith— the true faith once delivered 
unto the saints— faith in the Redeemer's sacrifice; faith 
in its application on our behalf; faith in our justification by 
the Father on that account; faith in the glorious promises of 
God's Word; faith in the Lord and faith in the brethren. 
Surely it means something to keep the faith— especially when 

R4534 : page 375 



we realize that our great Adversary, Satan, is on the alert continually 

to take it from us or turn or twist it to our loss or 

injury. 

The crown mentioned, the Apostle had seen for many 
years with the eye of his faith as a part of the Lord's promise. 
He had absolute confidence in the Lord and in the promise 
he had received from him. That crown had been his cause 
of rejoicing for many years, not because of pride or ambition, 
but because of love and benevolence. He would love 
to receive that crown because it would be the mark of Divine 
appreciation and love for him; and a mark of his faithfulness. 
He esteemed it because it would afford him untold opportunity 
of blessing his fellowmen in association with his 
Lord and the brethren on the plane of glory during the 
Millennium. 

He hoped for this crown, but did not hope to receive it 
at death. He knew the Bible teaching on the subject of resurrection 
—that this was his God's provision for the communication 
of his blessing, first for the Church, and subsequently 
for the world. He knew and taught that there would be "a 
resurrection of the dead, both of the just and of the unjust." 
(Acts 24:15.) He desired to have a share with his Redeemer 
in all of his glorious Kingdom work and he knew that it could 
not begin until the completion of this Gospel Age, when all 
the elect Church, as members of the Bride of Christ, would 
share in "his resurrection," to glory, honor, immortality and 
glorious Kingdom privileges.— Phil. 3:10,11. 

It was for this reason that he proceeded to declare that 
the crown was laid up for him— awaiting him— not at death, 
but at the time of his resurrection. That crown the Lord 
would give to him and to all others in the attitude of heart 
to appreciate his revelation at the Second Advent— "that day." 
True, not many at the present time love his appearing. The 
majority, not only of the world, but also of Christians, seeking 
but not finding in pleasures, riches, honors of men, have certain 
ambitions along these lines which they would like to 
satisfy first, and then possibly they might be willing for the 
Lord to establish his Kingdom. But, no! by the time their 
lives have been spent in such pursuits, they are usually thoroughly 
disappointed and bewildered and generally further than 
ever from seeking the Kingdom. 

None but the faithful will receive this crown. Thank God, 
the remainder will not be tortured, but, on the contrary, will 
be blessed by their crowned brethren, from whom, as the 
Christ of God, will go the blessings of restitution through the 
agency of the Millennial Kingdom. Eventually all the blind 
eyes of understanding will be opened— eventually all will see 
the great Messiah, though invisible to the natural spirit. Then 
every knee shall bow and every tongue confess to the glory 
of God. 

St. Paul closes his exhortation by reciting that in his trial 
before Nero some in whom he had full confidence had forsaken 
him, and he concludes that the Lord, nevertheless, stood 
with him and strengthened him and that he had every confidence 
in his care to the end of the way. 



R4534 : page 375 

THE BIRTH OF THE SAVIOR 

--DECEMBER 26. -MATT. 2:1-12.- 

Golden Text:— "Thou shalt call his name Jesus; for 
he shall save his people from their sins."— Matt. 1:21. 

NOT until some time after Pentecost was the 

"middle wall of partition" between Jews and Gentiles 

broken down, as St. Paul explains. For 

more than eighteen centuries previous all of 

God's favors and promises were made to the Jews exclusively 

and only through their prophets did he speak and only 

to them. Only their kings and priests were in any sense recognized 

by the Lord. This was not because there were not 

noble minds amongst other peoples, but because, in the working 

out of the great Divine Program the seed of Abraham 

was specially selected— although declared by the Lord to be 

a crooked and perverse people. Because they had no special 

revelation from God, the nobler minds amongst the other 

nations gave special study to the starry heavens along the 

lines of astronomy or astrology. The stars were charted 

and certain lessons were said to be learned therefrom bearing 

upon humanity's welfare. 

At the time of the birth of the Savior, God made some 
astrological sign of the momentous event, which the wise 
men of the East, described in our study, understood. Reverentially 
they followed the guiding star from their home in 
the East, possibly Persia. How the star led we are not informed, 
but apparently its leading discontinued when they 
reached Judea, and naturally they went to the palace of King 
Herod inquiring for "him that is born King of the Jews." The 
mistake was quite reasonable. It required some time for us 
to learn that Divine favors and blessings are not always to 
the rich and the great, but oftenest for "the poor of this 
world, rich in faith and heirs of the Kingdom." (Jas. 2:5.) 
The filled, the rich, the satisfied, are frequently less interested 
in the Savior than are the poor, because they do not realize 
so great need for him and for the Millennial Kingdom of 
righteousness and blessing which he is to establish. For that 
matter, however, only the comparatively few were interested 
at our Lord's First Advent, as the Scriptures intimate that 
comparatively few will be longing for his Second Advent and 
the establishment of his Kingdom. 

Herod affected an interest with the wise men in their 
search, but merely that he might thwart the Divine purpose 
by destroying the Child, that thus the Kingdom of Israel 
might be preserved to his own family— as it was through his 
six successors who bore his name, Herod. As the announcement 
of Jesus the Babe troubled the great at that day, similarly, 
we may be sure, any announcement of Jesus as the 



King of Glory to take over the dominion of the world, if 
corroborated, would cause consternation amongst the rulers 
of earth today— financial, political, etc. All have unfinished 
plans more or less selfish, and all instinctively realize 
that the inauguration of a reign of absolute righteousness 
would interfere with the business and schemes and trusts 
and corners, grafting and trickery, which are getting such a 
hold upon the highest civilization of our day. 

The prophecies were searched and it was learned that 
the humble city of Bethlehem would be the honored place 
of our Savior's birth. The crafty Herod feigned reverence 
and his desire to worship the Heaven-appointed King, 
but only that he might subsequently destroy him— as a little 
later he attempted to do in causing the slaughter of the innocents 
from two years old and under. But how foolish 
was his endeavor to thwart the Almighty! 

The wise men who sought the Babe of Bethlehem with 
worship and gifts, symbolized, perhaps, the great fact that 
those are truly wise who ever since have sought the Divinely 
appointed King and who bring to him the incense of their 
devotion, and as gifts all their talents and powers. Such lay 
their very lives at the Savior's feet, as St. Paul explains: 
"living sacrifices, holy and acceptable to God."— Rom. 12:1. 

The name Jesus is the Greek form for Joshua, signifying 
Savior; and in the Syriac, Savior signifies life-giver. Therefore, 
the Babe that was born to be King of the Jews was to 
be the Savior, the Life-Giver of the world. He has not become 
the Life-Giver yet, nor the King. His great work is 
still future. It will be at his Second Coming that he will 
appear in his glory and become the King of Israel— on the 
spirit plane. Then, too, as the out-working of that glorious 
Empire which he will establish, he will be the world's Life-Giver, 

R4534 : page 376 

its great physician, and all mankind will be blessed 

with the glorious opportunity of becoming "Israelites indeed." 

The Empire of Sin will be overthrown and the darkness, 

ignorance and superstition connected therewith will be dissolved 

in the glorious light of Truth and grace which then 

will overspread the world. 

True, in a certain sense, Messiah's Kingdom, rule, dominion, 
may be said to be already begun— begun at Pentecost. 
In a similar sense his work of saving sinners may be said 
to have begun there. But as respects the world's salvation, 
what has been accomplished during the past nineteen centuries 
is merely preliminary work to that which Jesus will 
accomplish when "he shall take unto himself his great power 
and reign" at the beginning of the Millennial Age. Those 
who now become his people are the favored few, "not many 
great, not many wise, not many learned," a "little flock" 

R4535 : page 376 

altogether. These he deals with on the basis of faith. They 
have sickness, pain, trouble, sorrow, as other men, but they 



believe God and act accordingly, and have the Spirit's testimony 
that they are children of God, called out from the 
world to be joint-heirs with their Savior. Their salvation 
begins now in the sense of reformation and rest in the Lord's 
promises, but, as the Apostle declares, they are not saved 
actually, but "saved by hope." For the actual salvation they 
must await the Second Coming of the Redeemer in the end 
of this Age to gather them as his jewels and to actually save 
them from sin and from death, by granting them a share 
in the First Resurrection. 

Neither can it be properly said that Jesus reigns over 
the Church, his "members," his "espoused," soon to become 
his Bride. Toward her his attitude is that of teacher, Elder 
Brother, Lord, Head. His promise to her is that when he 
shall take his great power and establish his Throne of Empire 
over earth, she shall sit with him in that Throne as his 
Bride and Joint-heir. She shall be associated with him in 
judging or disciplining the world, incidental to its uplifting 
to human perfection— to more than Adam possessed and lost 
and that Jesus redeemed. Ah, yes, there is a depth of meaning 
in this word Jesus— Savior. Only with the conclusion 
of this Age and the experience of the resurrection "change" 
will the Church enjoy the promised reward that shall be 
brought unto her at his revelation. And only at the conclusion 
of the Millennial Age will the full meaning of Savior 
be appreciated by the world. By them the willing of earth's 
millions will have become "his people," saved from their sins, 
while the incorrigible will be utterly destroyed in the Second 
Death. 



R4535 : page 376 

"PRESENT YOUR BODIES LIVING SACRIFICES" 

WHOEVER fails to see that the Church as "members" 

of the Christ suffer with him sacrificially 

(after being "justified by faith in his blood"), 

will be logically bound by and by to interpret the 

sacrifices and sufferings in some other way. This our opponents 

already do. They say that we offer merely "the sacrifice 

of thanksgiving." (Psa. 116:17), "the sacrifice of praise 

to God."~Heb. 13:15. 

True, we answer, the word sacrifice is used in that broad 
sense, even though it is a pleasure rather than a sacrifice to 
praise God, as the word sacrifice is now generally used. This 
sacrifice under the Law was represented in the "peace-offerings" 
and "thank-offerings." But St. Paul also urges us, 
"Present your bodies living sacrifices, holy and acceptable to 
God." (Rom. 12:1.) He as well as the Master intimates that 
there is a more difficult sacrifice than the offering of praise 
before us when we forsake all and take up our cross to follow 
him in the narrow way. St. Paul urges, "Let us go to him 
outside the camp, bearing the reproach with him." He identifies 
these words with the Sin-offering by pointing out that 



the blood of both the bull and the goat of sin-offering was 
taken by the Priest beyond the second vail into the Most 
Holy. He identifies it again by his reference to the burning 
of both "outside the camp." Compare Hebrews 13:11-13 and 
Leviticus 16:27. If once you saw the beauty of this application 
of the "better sacrifices" and see it not, confess the blindness 
that has come upon you and seek the precious eyesalve 
of Divine supply. 

So far from the "sufferings of Christ," which we experience, 
being sufferings for sins, the reverse is true. Even the 
"great company" suffers not for its own sins, but suffers the 
"destruction" of their justified flesh (as the "scape-goat"), 
because they fail to sacrifice it. 

This is the one peculiar and destructive feature of the 
Gospel Call of this Gospel Age, differentiating it from the 
preceding and the succeeding ages! Some of the past, from 
Enoch to John, had the sacrificing spirit and did lay down 
their lives in the service of the Lord and righteousness, but 
God did not accept them as sacrificers. Our Lord's great sacrifice 
was necessary first for our actual justification before 
God. Since then is the opportunity for believers who have 
the same sacrificing spirit— "Present your bodies living sacrifices, 
holy and acceptable to God." "Now is the acceptable 
time"— "the acceptable year of the Lord"— the time in which 
God will accept your sacrifices, because he accepts you as 
"members" of the Body of the Christ, the Great High Priest, 
the Great Mediator of the New Covenant— Isa. 61:2; Luke 4:19; 
2 Cor. 6:2; I Pet. 2:5; Eph. 1:6; Rom. 12:1. 

In the future age "the acceptable time" will be past— the 
Antitypical Atonement Day will be at an end. Satan will be 
bound and none will any more suffer for righteousness sake. 

Now note the import of this. The Ancient Worthies will 
get restitution blessings as a part of the world. "Instead of 
thy fathers, they shall be thy children." (Psa. 45:16.) They 
will be the first-born children of "the everlasting father." 
Under the new order of things they will be made the earthly 
agents or representatives of the Kingdom. And the world will 
get restitution blessings also as under the New Covenant they 
obey the great Mediator. But why is this? Is there partiality 
with God that we of this Gospel Age alone of all mankind 
have the offer of a spiritual or heavenly inheritance? 

No, we answer! The gift in every case is the same, 
namely restitution of earthly rights secured by our Lord's 
sacrifice of his earthly rights. The whole difference is that 
we live in the "acceptable year (or time) of the Lord" and 
willingly take advantage of the privilege afforded. That privilege 
is restricted to those who have ears of faith and hear 
the "glad tidings" now, and fleeing from sin become servants 
of righteousness and present their "bodies living sacrifices holy 
and acceptable to God." We receive of our Redeemer earthly 
restitution rights by faith, and sacrifice these with whatever 
we have of earthly advantage. All such are accepted as 
"members" of the Christ, under the Redeemer their Head, 
the Prophet, Priest, Mediator and King of the world. 

Whoever sees this sees "the Mystery hid from past ages 
and dispensations, but now made manifest unto the saints— 



Christ in you [which is, that you are his 'members,' and that 
this fact is the only ground for your] hope of glory." Whoever 
helps to blind those who have once seen this great 
"Secret of the Lord" (Psa. 25:14) is beguiling them of the 
prize (2 Cor. 1 1:3), whether he knows what he is doing or 
not. Whoever loses sight of the fact will cease to strive for 
it. And the fact that the Lord led into the light of "Present 
Truth" and showed us the "Secret," the "Mystery," implies 
that he would not let us be plucked out of his hand and away 
from his leading unless the heart was at fault. 

Nor is it necessary for us to specially condemn the 
hearts of those who are now losing their sight of what they 
once claimed to see as clearly as we. Some of them may be 
merely blinded by dust and may be recovered; and find their 
chief trial along the line of humility in the matter of acknowledging 
their error. Let us neither do nor say anything to 
make their way back more difficult. Let us apply the principle 
rather to ourselves. Let us find comfort, peace and joy as 
well as caution in the assurance that if our hearts are loyal, 
God by myriads of agencies is able and willing to keep 
our poor heads! 



page 377 

YOUR "GOOD HOPES" FOR 1910 



[The plan here proposed we designate "GOOD HOPES," 
because nothing is actually promised— only your generous 
hopes expressed, based upon your future prospects as they 
now appear to you. The plan proved not only so beneficial 
to the cause of truth, but also so blessed to the hopers, for 
some years past, that we again commend it to all as Scriptural 
and good. Those who desire to make use of this plan 
can fill out both these memoranda. One should be kept 
for the refreshment of your memory; the other mail to us.] 

To the 
"WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY." 

Dear Friends:— I have read with interest of the openings 
for the Dawn and Tract work in foreign lands and here 
at home. I need not tell you that I am deeply interested in 
the spread of the Glad Tidings of the lengths and breadths, 
the heights and depths of redeeming love expressed for us 
in God's great Plan of the Ages. 

I am anxious to use myself— every power, every talent, 
voice, time, money, influence, all— to give to others this 
knowledge, which has so greatly blessed, cheered and comforted 
my own heart and placed my feet firmly upon the 
Rock of Ages. 

I have been considering carefully, and praying to be instructed, 
how to use my various talents more to my Redeemer's 



glory and for the service of his people— those 

blinded by human tradition who are, nevertheless, hungering 

for "the good Word of God," and those also who are 

naked, not having on the wedding garment of Christ's imputed 

righteousness, the unjustified, who stand at best in 

the filthy rags of their own righteousness. I have decided 

that so far as my "money talent" goes, I will follow the rule 

so clearly laid down for us by the great Apostle Paul (1 Cor. 16:2), 

and will lay aside on the first day of each week, according 

to my thankful appreciation of the Lord's blessings 

during the preceding week. Out of this fund I wish to contribute 

to the several parts of the Lord's work carried on by 

our Tract Society. Of course, I cannot in advance judge 

or state particularly what the Lord's bounty may enable 

me to set apart weekly, and hence you will understand the 

sum indicated to be merely my conjecture or hope, based 

upon present prospects. I will endeavor to contribute more 

than I here specify; and should I not succeed in doing as 

well, the Lord will know my heart, and you, also, will know 

of my endeavors. 

My only object in specifying in advance what I hope to 
be able to do in this cause is to enable those in charge of 
the work of publishing and circulating the Tracts, etc., to 
form estimates, lay plans, make contracts, etc., with some 
idea of what I will at least try to do in the exercise of this 
my highly appreciated privilege. 

My present judgment is that during the coming year, by 
self-denial and cross-bearing, I shall be able to lay aside on 
the first day of each week for Home and Foreign Mission 
Work (to assist in circulating Scripture Studies in foreign 
languages, and in publishing the "Old Theology Tracts" in 
various languages, and in supplying these gratuitously to 
brethren who have the heart and opportunity to circulate 
them widely, and in meeting the expenses of brethren sent 
out as "Pilgrims" to preach the divine plan of salvation, 
and in general to be expended as the officers of the Society 
may deem best), the amount of per week. 

To comply with United States Postal Laws, all or any 
portion of my donation may be applied as subscription price 
for Watch Tower or O. T. Tracts sent to the Lord's poor 
or others, as the Society's officers may deem advisable. 

That the work be not hindered, I will endeavor to send 
you what I shall have laid aside for this cause at the close 
of each quarter. I will secure a Bank Draft, Express Order 
or Postal Money Order as I may find most convenient, and 
will address the letter to 

WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 

BROOKLYN TABERNACLE, 13-17 HICKS ST., BROOKLYN, NY. 

or, 24 Eversholt St., London, N.W., England; or, Equitable Building, 
Collins St., Melbourne, Australia. 

(Name) 



(Post Office) (State). 

page 378 



Watch Tower Subscriptions 
ON "GOOD HOPES" ACCOUNT 



The friends who contribute to the "Good Hopes" (described 
on the reverse of this sheet) at times desire to send 
the WATCH TOWER to friends who are not yet interested enough 
to subscribe for themselves; or to deeply interested friends 
who are too poor to subscribe and backward about accepting 
our Lord's Poor offer. They are invited to give us such addresses 
below— the expense to be deducted from their donations. 
Give full addresses, and write very plainly, please, 
mentioning the length of the subscriptions. 



Watch Tower Subscription Renewals 



Most of our subscriptions end with the year, so we take 
this opportunity to remark that we shall be glad to hear 
promptly from such as desire the visits of the WATCH TOWER continued. 
The Lord's Poor friends have been requested to send 
their applications in May. When names are dropped and 
afterward renewed it makes us unnecessary trouble. When 
desiring to know date of expiration, look on your TOWER wrapper. 
Date is given in lower left-hand corner. 

Hymns of Dawn with Music 



Our readers have for years inquired for this book. We 
now have it for you in handsome cloth binding and at cost 
price. It is the best and the cheapest hymn book in the world, 
at 35 cents per copy, postpaid, and contains 333 of the choicest 
hymns of all ages. By express, collect, 25c each, in any 
quantity. 

Watch Tower Binders 



These are substantially made of stiff cloth boards, and 
can hold two years' issues of the WATCH TOWER. They prevent 
soiling and loss. Price, postpaid, 50c. 

Christian Home Embellishments 



For several years we have been supplying our readers with 
handsome text and motto-cards for the walls of their homes. 
Their influence is excellent; for they continually and cheerfully 
catch the eye and remind the heart of our great favors 
present and to come, based upon the "exceeding great and 
precious promises" of our Father's Word. We commend these 
as helps in the "narrow way"— helps in character-building. 
(These we import from London subject to custom duty, hence 
our London office can do still better for our British friends.) 

We have a very choice assortment of these this year. For 
your convenience and ours we put these up in packets of 
choice assortments, as follows: At $1.00 each, postpaid. So 
doing we are enabled to give you twice as many mottoes for 
your money as you could purchase elsewhere. Besides, we 
select the styles and mottoes with great care. The following 
packets represent our assortment. Order by number: 

No. Ma— Contains only small mottoes of assorted texts 
and styles, 22 in number; all beautiful. 

No. Mb— Contains medium and small mottoes assorted, 
11; all choice. 

No. Mc— Contains medium mottoes, 10; all handsome. 

No. Md— Contains medium and large mottoes, 5; all 
elegant. 

No. Me— Contains large mottoes only, 4; all desirable. 

No. Mal/2— Is a 50-cent packet of small mottoes. 

Daily Heavenly Manna 



Those who use this book as we recommend are surely being 
blessed. It should be on your breakfast table regularly. 
Its daily text should be read and commented on freely by all. 
Then the Manna comment should be read. Introduce it to 
your friends as a help toward godly living. See prices in our 
November 1st issue. 

1910-Motto Card and Vow- 19 10 

This beautiful card was illustrated in our issue of Nov. 
15th. The text is our Lord's "New Commandment" for his 
"members" with St. Paul's commentary words. The illustration 
of a grapevine, well laden with fruit, tells the same story 
pictorially. These should be in all of our homes. 

On the reverse side in good sized type is the Vow. 

Prices are low, prepaid, 2 for 15 cents; 5 for 25 cents; 
12 for 50 cents; 25 for $1.00. 

Sweet Brier Rose Booklet 
(EIGHT PAGES) 

Just what we all want. See November 15th TOWER. 

Cross and Crown Pins 



In celluloid, small, 1/2-inch 5 cents for two. 

In silver, 3/4-inch 25 cents each. 

In gold, 1/2-inch $1.00 each 

In gold enameled $1.35 each 

In gold enameled, 3/4-inch $1.50 

New and Old Tracts, all Languages, Free 



A Privilege and a Service 



We are convinced that the WATCH TOWER lists do not contain 
the names of one-half of those deeply interested in its teachings. 
The total is small enough surely, and we are not content 
that the name of any should be missing. We believe that 
all such will be stimulated and encouraged on the "narrow 
way" by its semi-monthly appearance on their table, reminding 
them afresh of spiritual matters which the world, the flesh 
and the devil continually tend to crowd out of mind and heart. 

Hitherto we have required that all desiring the WATCH 
TOWER on credit, or free, as "the Lord's Poor," should make 
personal application; but now we request every subscriber to inquire 
among those whom he knows to be interested in Present 
Truth, and to obtain the consent of all such to send in their subscriptions 
either on credit or free, as their circumstances may 
necessitate. Any getting it on credit may at any future time 
request that the debt be cancelled, and we will cheerfully comply. 
We desire that as nearly as possible the WATCH TOWER 
lists shall represent all those deeply interested in its message. 

Our object is not the gain of "filthy lucre," but "the perfecting 
of the saints for the work of ministry"— present and to 
come. (Eph. 4:12.) We offer no premiums, desiring the co-operation 
of such only as appreciate the privilege of being 
co-workers with us in this ministry. Our list is now about 
25,000; but it should be at least 30,000, and we confidently 
expect the above program to bring it to that figure. Let as 
many as appreciate it as a privilege, join at once in this service. 



R4535 : page 379 

"SOLD ALL THAT HE HAD AND BOUGHT" 

TWO of our Lord's parables are very assistful to a 

proper understanding of the difference between the 

Ransom-Price and the Sin-Offering. "The Kingdom 

of Heaven is like unto a treasure hid in a field; the 

which when a man hath found, he hideth, and for joy thereof 

goeth and selleth all that he hath, and buyeth that field. Again, 

the Kingdom of Heaven is like unto a merchantman, seeking 

goodly pearls, who, when he hath found one pearl of 

great price, went and sold all that he had, and bought it." 



(Matt. 13:44-46.) The Kingdom of Heaven, the Millennial 
Kingdom, its glory and honors and its privileges in connection 
with the world's restitution, constitute the great prize 
peculiar to this Gospel Age. This prize never before was 
possible of attainment, and opportunity to attain it will end 
with this age, when it will be established in power and great 
glory at the Second Coming of our Lord— at which time "we 
shall appear with him in glory." This prize was first presented 
to our Lord Jesus; as we read, "Who for the joy that 
was set before him, endured the cross, despising the shame 
and is set down on the right hand of the Majesty on High." 
This is the same prize or high calling which has since been 
set before us. 

The two parables under consideration illustrate the process 
by which this Kingdom is obtainable. Our Lord left the 
glory of the Father and humbled himself to become "the man 
Christ Jesus." But this humbling was no part of the Ransom 
nor of the Sin-Offering. It was preparatory work. A perfect 
man had sinned and had involved the entire race in his 
death condemnation, and only a perfect man could pay the 
price for one or any number or all of the sinners. When our 
Lord reached the age of thirty years, the age of manhood 
according to the Law, he was ready to be put on trial for his 
own life, that by loyalty under tests he might prove his worthiness 
of everlasting life on the human plane. Only such a 
tested, proven, perfect man could be the world's ransom-price. 

Our Lord's keeping of the Divine Law was not the 
ransom-price of the sinners. It merely demonstrated that 

R4536 : page 379 

our Lord could be an acceptable ransom-price for all. The 

giving of his life at thirty years in consecration was finished 

at Calvary. By that consecration, by the things which 

he suffered, by the laying down of his life, he laid down the 

world's ransom-price. It mattered not that the testing of 

his personal loyalty and his consecration of himself unto 

death were simultaneous. It was just as proper that it should 

be so as it was that he should have been tried and tested 

first and should subsequently have surrendered his life willingly 

as man's ransom-price. 

This feature of the work— the laying down of his life- 
is illustrated in the parables under consideration by the statement, 
"Sold all that he had." As in the parable the selling 
of all that the merchant had did not purchase the field or the 
pearl, but merely secured the price which was sufficient afterward 
for its purchase, so, our Lord's surrender of his life 
and all of its rights and interests sacrificially in the world's 
behalf did not purchase the world— did not pay the price- 
but merely secured the ransom-price for the sins of the 
world, to be applied afterward as he may please. 

As in the parable the price was afterward used in the 
purchase of the treasure, so in the reality our Lord's payment 
of the price to Justice corresponded to the buying of 
the treasure, the buying of the pearl. In other words, the 
ransom-price of the world was secured by our Lord by the 



sacrifice of his human life, but the use of that price for the 
purchase of the treasure was a later and a totally different 
transaction. It was after our Lord had risen from the dead 
and sojourned with his Apostles forty days and had ascended 
up on high that he "bought us with his own precious blood." 
"He appeared in the presence of God for us" and there applied 
on our behalf the merit or ransom-price which previously 
cost him his life. 

Those whose eyes of understanding are open to a discernment 
of "the mystery of God" will readily see the further 
application of the parable to us, the Lord's followers 
and members. By the grace of God our Lord paid the 
price and bought us for whom he appeared. He did not buy 
the world, but the "Church." He "loved us and bought us 
with his own precious blood." "Ye were redeemed (bought) 
not with corruptible things, but with the precious blood of 
Christ." (I Pet. 1:18,19.) But this application of the ransom-price 
to us is provisional, conditional. To be of the class 
included in this purchase requires that we shall not only 
flee from sin and believe in the Lord Jesus Christ unto justification, 
but that additionally we must have our Lord's character-likeness 
and must, like him, sell all that we have, that 
we might share with him in his great work and thus pass 
his merit on for the purchase of the world— for the cancellation 
of the sins of the whole world, at the close of this age. 

Whoever has not the Spirit of Christ in this sacrificing 
is none of his. And whoever, after thus consecrating his 
life, draws back does so unto perdition, destruction. (Heb. 10:39.) 
Whoever seeks to preserve his life— the restitution 
life imputed to him through the merit of Christ— will lose 
his eternal life. (Mark 8:35.) (This principle is applicable 
to the Church only, during this age. The rule will be the 
reverse for the world during the Millennium. Whereas we 
receive of Christ restitution rights to sacrifice them as his 
members and to gain the new nature with him, the world will 
get restitution rights to keep them everlastingly and never to 
sacrifice them.) 

In the transaction, be it noted, the merit, the value, all 
proceeded from the one man— the man Christ Jesus. No 
more was needed. No more was demanded by Justice for 
the sins of the whole world. So to speak, our Lord Jesus 
loaned to the "elect" the merit of his righteousness, imputing 
it to us by faith as a wedding garment. Thereby he qualifies 
us as his members and in his name to share in his sacrificial 
work in order that we may be permitted to share with him in 
his Millennial Kingdom glory and its great uplifting work 
for the world of mankind. 

It is the merit of Jesus which now temporarily is loaned 
in justification by faith to the Church and which must be 
sacrificed again by us as his "members"— that is to constitute 
eventually the ransom-price of the whole world of mankind, 
who are to be blest during the Millennium. 

The condition upon which we may share the Millennial 
Kingdom with our Lord is that we shall walk in his steps; 
that we shall suffer with him; that we shall drink of his cup; 
be partakers of the blood of the New Covenant, which, at 



the end of this age, will be sealed for Israel and the world. 
Thus we shall be sharers in the sufferings of Christ, by immersion 
into his death, in order that, in due time, we may 
share also in "his resurrection." 

Who cannot see the force of these parables? Who cannot 
note that our dear Redeemer counted well the cost, then laid 
down his life— sold all that he had? And who does not remember 
that he calls upon us also to sit down and count 
the cost of being his disciples? The field will be bought. 
The precious pearl will be secured by our Lord, in harmony 
with the Father's arrangement. And more than this, the 
faithful elect Church will secure a share therein as members 
of his Glorified Body. How important, then, that we count 
the cost in advance and that we count not our lives dear 
unto us, that we may win the prize, the pearl, the treasure! 



BROOKLYN BETHEL HYMNS FOR JANUARY 

After the singing of the hymn the Bethel Family 
listens to the reading of "My Vow unto the Lord," 
then joins in prayer. At the breakfast table we consider 
the MANNA text: (1) 34; (2) 312; (3) 230; (4) 
75; (5) 22; (6) 278; (7) 94; (8) 16; (9) 313; (10) 
262; (11) 49; (12) 3; (13) 72; (14) 191; (15) 258; 
(16) 8; (17) 193; (18) 176; (19) 293; (20) 4; (21) 
130; (22) 26; (23) 95; (24) 316; (25) 12; (26) 32; 
(27) 87; (28) 105; (29) 333; (30) 93; (31) 60. 



VARIOUS BOOKLETS BOUND TOGETHER 

Uniform in style with the DAWN-STUDIES. Cloth, 50c; 
Morocco, gilt, $1. 



R4538 : page 380 

[The majority of this page is a chart entitled:] 

*GOD'S*EVERLASTING*LAW*COVENANT* 
PERFECTION AND OBEDIENCE REWARDED WITH EVERLASTING LIFE. 

[3 horizontal lines on the chart are labeled and described as follows:] 

A. Plane of spirit perfection and covenant relationship. 

B. Plane of human perfection and covenant relationship to God, 
actual and reckoned; but ineffectual even for sacrificial purposes 
until Christ appeared as their Advocate.— Heb. 1 1:38-40. 

C. Adam and his race fallen from covenant relationship in sin and death." 



[The vertical areas of the chart are labeled and described as follows:] 
*EDEN* 

Adam, created perfect, was in covenant relationship to God, under 
Divine Law— obey and live everlastingly; disobey and die. 

Sin broke this covenant relationship and brought Adam and 
his race under death-sentence. Their only hope lies in a restoration 
of perfection and then a renewal of the covenant conditions by Messiah. 

*PATRIARCHAL*AGE* 
*FROM* 
ADAM TO MOSES 

*JEWISH*AGE* 
*OF* 
TYPICAL COVENANT 
FROM MOSES TO CHRIST 

[The following sentences span both vertical areas entitled 
PATRIARCHAL and JEWISH AGES:] 

The Abrahamic Oath-bound Covenant Barren 
Until The Christ Came. 

Ancient Worthies justified by faith to reckoned covenant relationship with 
God. 

[The following sentences span only the area under JEWISH AGE:] 

TYPICAL ISRAEL BROUGHT 
INTO COVENANT RELATIONSHIP 
WITH GOD BY MOSES, but 

unable to maintain it. 

Renewals "year by year" 
brought life everlasting to 
none. "Salvation is of the 
Jews." 

Amos 3:2; Jno. 4:22. 

*THE*GOSPEL*AGE* 
*UNTIL* 
FULNESS OF GENTILES COME IN 
COMPLETING BODY OF CHRIST 

JESUS CHRIST BY HIS PERFECT 

sacrifice and the Church, his 
"members," by their faith -justified 
sacrifice exalted to covenant relationship 
on the spirit plane— Heirs of 
the Oath-bound Covenant-"THE SEED." 
Gal. 3:29. 
To retain covenant relationship 
these are required to be obedient to 
the spirit of God's Law in Christ. 
"Ye are not under the Law, but under 



Grace".— Rom. 6:14. 
The "Great Company" spirit-begotten, 
attain this plane through the 
"destruction of the flesh." 

THE PRIZE WON BY THE 

CHRIST AND SACRIFICED.- 

Rom. 11:7. THE JEWISH NATION 

BLINDED AND REJECTED UNTIL 
SPIRITUAL ISRAEL'S SELECTION. 
Rom. 11:25-32. 

Believers tentatively justified by 

faith, giving them opportunity 
for sacrificing earthly interests: 
failing of this their justification 

lapses and they pass with the 
world to the actual justification 
of the Millennium. 

IJno. 5:19. 

"The whole world lieth in the wicked one." 

*MILLENNIAL*AGE* 

*QP* 

♦MEDIATORIAL *REIGN* 

THE CHRIST IN GLORY, 
MEDIATOR, PROPHET, 
PRIEST, KING, JUDGE OF 
ISRAEL, reconciling and perfecting 
fallen men, as 
Abraham's Earthly Seed- 
getting them ready to turn 
over to God under his Law 

Covenant renewed. 
"I have constituted thee 
(Abraham) a father of many 
nations." 
The "blood" of Christ applied 
secures opportunity for the 
return of all men to Covenant 
relationship with God. Rom. 4:17 

ANCIENT WORTHIES, 
ABRAHAM'S EARTHLY SEED, 
IN COVENANT RELATIONSHIP - 
"PRINCES IN ALL THE EARTH." 
THE EARTHLY PHASE OF THE 
MEDIATORIAL KINGDOM. 
ALL THE FAMILIES OF THE EARTH 
UNDER MEDIATOR'S KINGDOM IN 
PROCESS OF RESTITUTION. 

THE DISOBEDIENT DESTROYED IN 



SECOND DEATH AS GOD'S ENEMIES. 

"AGES 
TO COME" 
EVERLASTING 
BLISS. 

CHRIST 
ON THE THRONE 
--OF-- 

UNIVERSE 
*WITH* 
THE FATHER 

Mankind anew 
in covenant 
relationship 
with God. 
The Mediatorial 
Kingdom at an end. 
I Cor. 15:24-28. And 
the restored ones 
tried by justice and 
the unworthy "Goats" 
destroyed. Rev. 20:9,10; 
Matt. 25:41-46. 

Satan and all 
evildoers destroyed, 

there will 
be a clear universe— 
"Every creature... 
praising God." Rev. 5:13. 

[This is the end of the chart.] 

There is but one Divine Law, whatever be the form of 
its statement— Supreme love for God and the same love for 
a neighbor as for self. To this Law angels 
and men must conform to be in Covenant Relationship with 
God, enjoying eternal life. The Law Covenant attempted this 
for Israel during the Jewish Age, by its 
mediatorial work of one Atonement Day renewed "year by year.' 

The Antitypical Moses (the Christ Head and Body, the 
"Royal Priesthood"), by his "better sacrifices," will succeed 
in bringing antitypical Israel into Covenant 
Relationship and life everlasting. The Gospel Age is "the 
acceptable time" for consecrating the priests through sacrificing 
(Psalm 50:5), and paying to Justice the ransom-price 
laid down at Calvary. The Millennial Age will 
be the time for reconciling the world, symbolized by Moses 
sprinkling "the people" with the blood of the 
sacrifices of atonement. The at-one-ment will not be complete 
between God and men until the end of the Millennium, when 
Christ shall deliver over the Kingdom to 
the Father. 



The world through Israel's renewed Covenant and 
better Mediator will begin to receive New Covenant blessings 
at once under the Mediatorial Kingdom, but 
not until the Millennium is ended will perfected, restored 
men, be admitted to covenant relationship with God. 

The Church, accepted through Christ by faith and consecration, 
as members of the antitypical Seed of Abraham, are 
now at one with God through their Bridegroom-Advocate, 
in Covenant relationship and blessing.— Gal. 3:29. 



R4537 : page 381 

PREPARATION FOR THE FULFILLMENT 
OF THE DIVINE PROMISE TO ABRAHAM 

"IN THY SEED SHALL ALL THE 
FAMILIES OF THE EARTH BE BLESSED" 



(1) Moses was the typical mediator between God and the 
people of Israel (who typified the world of mankind); undertook 
to bless them by mediating for them with God the Law 
Covenant. Under his mediation their past sins were ignored, 
provided they would keep perfectly the Divine Law. The 
arrangement failed because they could not abide in covenant 
relationship with God, being unable to keep the Law of God 
perfectly. 

(1) Jesus by prophesy of Divine appointment is the Mediator 
"between God and men"— the world. He undertakes 
the satisfaction of Justice for all, and then to bless all under 
his Millennial Mediatorial Kingdom (through Israel represented 
by the Ancient Worthies) by affording all the opportunity 
to become Israelites indeed and thus ready for transfer 
to the Father anew under everlasting Law Covenant 
conditions. 



(2) By Divine arrangement the typical mediator associated 
with himself the priestly tribe— Aaron and his sons and 
the entire tribe of Levi— "his house," by whom the sacrifices 
of mediation were offered. 

(2) By Divine arrangement Christ, the real Mediator, 
during this age is associating with himself a priestly class— 
the Church— a "little flock," "the royal priesthood" and "a 
great company" or "household of faith," antitypical Levites. 



(3) This house of Moses (the tribe of Levi) was specially 
chosen of the Lord as his "first-born." It alone represented 



the first-born of Israel spared in the Passover night, when the 
first-born of Egypt were slain, in that Passover night. 

(3) This "household of faith," of which the "royal priesthood" 
is a part, is called by the Lord "the Church of the first-born." 
It includes all those passed over in the Gospel Age 
"night" preceding the Millennial Day of general deliverance. 



(4) While Aaron was the chief of that house, he was 
subject to Moses, his brother. As the Lord declares, "I have 
given thee Aaron to be thy mouthpiece and thou shall be a 
god (ruler) unto him"— a superior. 

(4) "Wherefore, holy brethren, partakers of the heavenly 
calling, consider Jesus Christ the high priest of our profession" 
or order. (Heb. 3:1.) Consecration as a priest preceded 
Kingship and its Mediatorial work for men. 



(5) Aaron and the underpriests and Levites all assisted 
Moses— were his servants and under his direction in the mediating 
in the various services incidental to the satisfaction of 
Justice and the sprinkling of the people, "reconciling" them 
prior to the inauguration of the Law Covenant, which represented 
their harmony with God and his acceptance of them 
so long as they should keep his Law. Thus it is written, 
"Moses verily was faithful as a servant over all his house"— 
the Levitical tribe. 

(5) "But Christ as a Son (is) over his own house, 
whose house we are if we hold fast the confidence of our 
rejoicing firm unto the end." (Heb. 3:6.) This service includes 
the propitiation offerings and later the blessing and 
teaching of the world to prepare all for a renewal of covenant 
relations with God as before the fall. All agreeing, "All these 
things of Divine Law will we do!" as did Israel to Moses, will 
be blessed with Millennial opportunities— restitution— to enable 
them to do perfectly— for direct relationship with God. 



(6) The priests participated in the offering of the "calves 
and goats" whose blood sprinkled the tables of the Law and 
subsequently sprinkled all the people. For was it not this 
same sin-offering which was repeated "year by year continually" 
and which could no more than typically cleanse from 
sin?-Heb. 9:19-21. 

(6) The antitypical priests are invited to join with the 
High Priest in the work of sacrificing necessary to the inauguration 
of the Mediatorial Kingdom. "I beseech you therefore 
brethren by the mercies of God (justifying you by faith) 
that ye present your bodies living sacrifices, holy and acceptable 



to God and your reasonable service."— Rom. 12:1. 



(7) The killing of the bullock and the goat for the sin-offering, 
whose blood propitiated for the sins of the house 
of the mediator and also for the sins of all the people, was 
efficacious for a year, and was "repeated year by year." Since 
it never really took away the sin, the blessings which came 
from it were merely temporary, as was indicated in the necessity 
for the annual repetition. (Heb. 10:1.) The two killings 
and the two sprinklings of the Mercy Seat foreshadowed 
plural antitypes. 

(7) The antitypical bullock and goat, "the better sacrifices" 
of Jesus and his "members," his under-priesthood (all 
the merit proceeding from Jesus' sacrifice and through his 
under-priests) will be fully efficacious and need no repetition. 
The High Priest offered himself (the bullock) at Jordan and 
"finished" the sacrifice at Calvary. Following this he 
offered his Church (the goat) at Pentecost, and this sacrifice 
will finish with the death of his last "member" in the 
flesh.-Heb. 10:22,23. 



(8) As a result of its sacrifices being only typical, the 
Law Covenant failed to give eternal life and blessing to 
Israel. Hence they did not attain their glorious hopes of 
participating with Messiah in the blessing and instruction of 
all the families of the earth— in line with the promise made 
to Abraham. But what they failed to attain as a whole the 
elect did attain to, and the remainder were "blinded" until all 
of the elect "members" of Spiritual Israel— the Antitypical 
Moses and his house— should first be delivered by the power 
of God in the First Resurrection.— John l:13;Rom. 11:25-31. 

No Jew can get eternal life under the terms of the Law 
Covenant except by one of two methods. (1) During this 
"acceptable time" he might become a "member" of the Anointed 
Priest, King, Mediator by becoming "dead to the Law and 
alive toward God through Jesus Christ." (Rom. 6:11; 7:4.) 
(2) In the Millennium the old Law Covenant will be supplanted 
by the new Law Covenant, and all under the old will 
then for a thousand years have the opportunity to come under 
the New Covenant— through its better Mediator, the Christ. 

(8) As a result of "the better sacrifices" of the true Mediator 
—King and Priest— the Gospel Church, accepted by the 
Father as a sacrifice at Pentecost, progresses "until we all 
come to the full stature of a man in Christ"— Jesus being the 
head and we his "members." (Eph. 4:13; Acts 3:23.) Jesus 
and all his "members" are ministers (servants) of the New 
Covenant. (Mai. 3:1; 2 Cor. 3:6.) The first service is to 
sacrifice. At the end of this age the blood, "holy and acceptable" 
through Jesus' merit (Rom. 12:1), will be applied "for 
all the people." Then Messiah's Kingdom will at once restore 



to perfection the Ancient Worthies, who will at once be in 
New Covenant fellowship with God. These as the earthly 
seed will become the "princes" through whom the Millennial 
Kingdom blessings will extend to all mankind. The result 
will be glorious: All the families of the earth will be blest 
with knowledge and assistance out of sin and death conditions 
back to the renewed covenant conditions of eternal 
life upon terms of obedience. The rebellious will be utterly 
destroyed in the Second Death. 



page 382 

PUBLIC MINISTRIES OF THE TRUTH 

UNDER THE AUSPICES OF PEOPLES PULPIT 
ASSOCIATION OF BROOKLYN, N.Y. 



CONVENTIONS TO BE ADDRESSED BY 
THE EDITOR, ETC. 



INDIANAPOLIS, IND., CONVENTION, DEC. 17, 18, 19 

All sessions of the Convention will be held in the K. 
of P. Auditorium, Massachusetts avenue and Pennsylvania 
street (opposite Postoffice). Several car lines from Union 
Station pass this point. Rooms may be secured in advance 
by addressing C. A. Wise, 1112 W. Thirtieth street, Indianapolis, 
Ind. A party of friends will be made up at Chicago 
and any desiring to take advantage of the fellowship and 
lower fares may make arrangements by addressing Dr. L. W. 
Jones, 4209 Washington boulevard, Chicago, 111. Come all 
who can, praying a blessing from the presence of the Lord 
and from the presence of his consecrated people. 



COLUMBUS, OHIO, DEC. 18 

Meetings in I.O.O.F. Temple, S. High street, between 
Rich and Town streets. Morning Rally for Praise, Prayer 
and Testimony at 10 o'clock. Discourse to the interested 
at 1 1 o'clock. Session for the public at 3 p.m., with the 
topic of "Overthrow of Satan's Empire." 



HOLIDAY SEASON CONVENTION TOUR 
RICHMOND, VA., DEC. 26 (AND 27) 

Morning Rally for Praise and Testimony at 10 o'clock. 



Address to the interested at 1 1 o'clock in Smithdeal College 
Hall, Ninth and Broad streets. Session for the Public at 
3 p.m. in City Auditorium, Cary and Linden streets. Subject: 
"Where Are the Dead?" A Pilgrim Brother will serve 
Sunday evening and on Monday for the friends who find it 
convenient to remain. 



KNOXVILLE, TENN., DEC. 26-28 

Brother Russell will be present for the afternoon and 
evening of the 27th and for the other sessions brethren of 
ability will serve. Address to the interested at 3 p.m. in 
Market Hall (where all other sessions of the convention 
will be held). Public meeting in the evening at 7:30 o'clock. 
Subject: "Man's Past, Present and Future in the Light of 
the Bible." Holiday rates will be obtainable over most of 
the roads at this season. 



ATLANTA, GA., DEC. 28 

Brother Russell will be present for an afternoon and 
evening meeting. Address to the interested at 3 p.m. Evening 
meeting for the Public at 7:30 o'clock in Cable Music 
Hall. For further particulars, apply to Mr. W. S. Stevens, 
75 Park avenue, Atlanta, Ga. 



BIRMINGHAM, ALA., DEC. 28-30 

Brother Russell expects to be present the entire day of 
the 29th. Pilgrim brethren will be in attendance for other 
sessions, all of which will be held in the First Baptist 
Church, Sixth avenue and Twenty-second street. At 10:30 
a.m. Wednesday, the 29th, Question Meeting. At 3 p.m., 
address to the interested. At 7:30 o'clock, discourse to the 
Public. Subject: "The Overthrow of Satan's Empire." For 
local particulars, address Miss Bessie T. Morris, 4805 First 
avenue, Woodlawn, Birmingham, Ala. 



MEMPHIS, TENN., DEC. 30-JAN. 2 

Here, too, will be a Convention of several days, with 
the Editor present on Thursday, Dec. 30, who will address 
the interested in the afternoon at 3 o'clock in Business 
Men's Club Hall, 79-81 Monroe avenue, and discourse to the 
Public in the evening at 8 o'clock. Subject: "The Thief in 
Paradise; the Rich Man in Hell; Lazarus in Abraham's 
Bosom." Evening session to be held in Italian Hall, 136 S. 
Second street. Brethren of ability will serve at the remaining 



sessions of the Convention, including a public 

meeting on Sunday in the Lyceum Theatre. Local particulars 

may be had from L. E. Turner, 688 Beale avenue. 



FORT SMITH, ARK., DEC. 31 -JAN. 2 

In response to requests from this quarter, a Three-Day 
Convention has been arranged. Bro. Russell expects to be 
present on the 31st. Address of welcome at 10:30 a.m. 
Address to the interested at 3 p.m. Evening meeting for 
the Public at 8 o'clock. Subject: "Man's Past, Present 
and Future in the Light of the Bible." Pilgrim brethren 
will serve for the remainder of the convention. Arrangements 
have been made by the Fort Smith class for the free 
entertainment of any of the friends who find it inconvenient, 
financially, to remain during the whole Convention. 
Address C. L. Knowles, 2212 N. Fourteenth street, Fort 
Smith, Ark. 



CHICAGO, ILL., JAN. 2 

Morning Rally for Praise and Testimony at 10 o'clock. 
Address to the interested at 1 1 o'clock. Afternoon service 
for the Public in the Auditorium, Congress and Wabash 
avenue. Visiting friends cordially welcomed. 



BLOOMINGTON, ILL., JAN. 3 

Morning Rally for Praise and Testimony at 10:30 o'clock 
in Odd Fellows' Hall. Afternoon and evening sessions in 
the Coliseum. Afternoon address to the interested at 3 
o'clock. Evening meeting for the Public at 8 o'clock. Subject: 
"Man's Past, Present and Future in the Light of the 
Bible." For local particulars address Miss Lula Isemenger, 
713 S. Clayton street, Bloomington, 111. 



DUBUQUE, IA., JAN. 4 

Praise and Testimony meeting at 10:30 a.m., also discourse 
for the interested at 3 p.m., in Temple Hall, Ninth 
and Locust streets. Evening meeting for the Public at 
Grand Opera House. Subject: "The Overthrow of Satan's 
Empire." For any additional information, address F. A. 
Uhlrich, Kniest and Garfield avenues, Dubuque, la. 



ST. PAUL, MINN., JAN. 5 



Morning Rally for Prayer, Praise and Testimony in 
Woodruff Hall, Prior and St. Anthony streets, at 10 o'clock. 
Address to the interested at 1 1 o'clock. Public meeting in 
Minneapolis at 2:30 p.m. in the Auditorium. Subject: "The 
Thief in Paradise; the Rich Man in Hell; Lazarus in Abraham's 
Bosom." 



WINNIPEG, MAN., JAN. 6 

Morning Rally for Praise and Testimony at 10:30 o'clock. 
Address to the interested at 3 o'clock. Public meeting at 
7:30 p.m. For further particulars regarding place of meeting 
etc., address E. C. Tinling, Gen. Del., Winnipeg, Man. 



HAMILTON, ONE, JAN. 8 

In view of the great distance from Winnipeg to Hamilton, 
and in view of the possible delay of trains at that 
season, it is not likely that Brother Russell will be able to 
reach Hamilton in time for more than an evening meeting 
for the Public at 8 o'clock in Y.M.C.A. Hall, James and 
Jackson streets. Subject: "Man's Past, Present and Future 
in the Light of the Bible." 



TORONTO, ONE, JAN. 8-10. 

Pilgrim brethren will be provided for the Saturday and 
Monday sessions, Bro. Russell being present on Sunday. He 
will conduct a question meeting beginning at 1 1 a.m. Afternoon 
meeting for the Public. For further particulars, see 
later announcement, or address F. W. Man ton, 100 McPherson 
avenue, Toronto, Ont. 



R4536 : page 383 

ITINERARY FOR BROEHER RUSSELL'S HOLIDAY SEASON TOUR 

Lv. Brooklyn, N.Y Saturday, December 25 

Pennsylvania Railroad 9:15 p.m. 

Ar. Richmond, Va Sunday, December 26 

R.,F.&P.R.R 7:50 a.m. 

Lv. Richmond, Va Sunday, December 26 

N.&W.R.R 9:00 p.m. 

Ar. Bristol, Tenn Monday, December 27 

N.&W. (via Bristol) 9:30 a.m. E.T. 

Lv. Bristol, Tenn Monday, December 27 

Southern R.R 9:15 a.m. C.T. 



Ar. Knoxville, Tenn Monday, December 27 

Southern R.R 1:45 p.m. 

Lv. Knoxville, Tenn Tuesday, December 28 

L.&N 6:10 a.m. 

Ar. Atlanta, Ga Tuesday, December 28 

L.&N 11:55 a.m. C.T. 

Lv. Atlanta, Ga Tuesday, December 28 

Southern R.R 11:10 p.m. 

Ar. Birmingham, Ala Wednesday, December 29 

Southern R.R 5:20 p.m. 

Lv. Birmingham, Ala Wednesday, December 29 

Frisco Line 10:30 p.m. 

Ar. Memphis, Tenn Thursday, December 30 

Frisco Line 7:30 a.m. 

Lv. Memphis, Tenn Thursday, December 30 

Frisco Line 11:00 p.m. 

Ar. Fort Smith, Ark Friday, December 3 1 

Frisco Line 11:30 a.m. 

Lv. Fort Smith, Ark Saturday, January 1 

Frisco Line 6:05 a.m. 

Ar. St. Louis, Mo Saturday, January 1 

Frisco Line 7:45 p.m. 

Lv. St. Louis, Mo Saturday, January 1 

C.&A.Ry 11:45 p.m. 

Ar. Chicago, 111 Sunday, January 2 

C.&A.Ry 7:55 a.m. 

Lv. Chicago, 111 Monday, January 3 

C.&A.Ry 9:00 a.m. 

Ar. Bloomington, 111 Monday, January 3 

C.&A.Ry 12:39 noon 

Lv. Bloomington, 111 Tuesday, January 4 

I.C.Ry 6:20 a.m. 

Ar. Dubuque, la Tuesday, January 4 

I.C.Ry 1:40 p.m. 

Lv. Dubuque, la Tuesday, January 4 

CB.&Q.R.R 11:59 p.m. 

Ar. St. Paul, Minn Wednesday, January 5 

CB.&Q.R.R 7:20 a.m. 

Lv. Minneapolis, Minn Wednesday, January 5 

G.N.R.R 5:50 p.m. 

Ar. Winnipeg, Man Thursday, January 6 

G.N.R.R 7:25 a.m. 

Lv. Winnipeg, Man Thursday, January 6 

C.P.R.R 10:40 p.m. 

Ar. Hamilton, Ont Saturday, January 8 

C.P.R.R. (via Toronto) 4:45 p.m. 

Lv. Hamilton, Ont Sunday, January 9 

G.T.R.R 8:10 a.m. 

Ar. Toronto, Ont Sunday, January 9 

G.T.R.R 10:00 a.m. 

Lv. Toronto, Ont Sunday, January 9 

G.T.R.R 6:10 p.m. 

Ar. Brooklyn, N.Y Monday, January 10 

D.,L.&W.R.R 10:45 a.m. 



