Are You Putting It Off?
Putting what off? Filling out the DPA (durable power of attorney) card that is provided for baptized Witnesses. Since “you do not know what your life will be tomorrow,” it is crucial that you decide in advance and indicate in writing what treatments and procedures you would accept in a medical emergency. (Jas. 4:14; Acts 15:28, 29) To help you, the video Transfusion-Alternative Health Care​—Meeting Patient Needs and Rights has been produced. View it, and then prayerfully review what you learned with the help of the questions set out below.​—Note: Because the video includes brief surgical scenes, parents should use discretion in viewing the video with young children.
(1) Why are some in the medical community reevaluating the use of blood transfusions? (2) Give three examples of complex surgeries that have been performed without blood transfusions. (3) How many physicians and surgeons worldwide have indicated their willingness to treat patients without blood transfusions? Why are they willing to do so? (4) What have recent hospital studies revealed about blood use? (5) What are the medical risks associated with blood transfusions? (6) What conclusion have many experts reached regarding the benefits of transfusion alternatives? (7) What causes anemia? How tolerable is it in humans? What can be done to compensate for it? (8) How can red-cell production be stimulated in a patient’s body? (9) What techniques are being used to minimize blood loss during surgery? (10) Can transfusion alternatives work for young children or for people involved in life-threatening emergencies? (11) What is one of the primary ethical principles of good medical care? (12) Why is it important for Christians to make nonblood treatment choices in advance? How can we do this?
Acceptance of some of the treatments featured in the video is a matter for private decision in accord with each one’s Bible-trained conscience. Have you taken a clear position on which medical treatments and procedures you are willing to accept for yourself and your children? For a more complete discussion of these matters, see “Questions From Readers” in the June 15, 2004, and October 15, 2000, issues of The Watchtower and the insert “How Do I View Blood Fractions and Medical Procedures Involving My Own Blood?” in the November 2006 issue of Our Kingdom Ministry. Your selected health-care agents and any non-Witness family members should be fully informed of your decisions.

