Help Bible Students to Become Publishers of the Kingdom Good News
1 The commission that Jesus laid upon his disciples as expressed at Matthew 28:19, 20 was far-reaching indeed. Christ’s disciples were instructed to make more disciples who, in turn, would carry on with the disciple-making work. A foundation would be laid for the final worldwide proclamation of the good news of God’s Kingdom during the momentous time of the end, where we now find ourselves.​—Matt. 24:14.
2 Our Bible students may be our children or others who are willing to study the Bible with us. We genuinely want to help such ones to accept individual responsibility to help others become disciples of Jesus Christ.​—Luke 6:40.
3 Prepare Them to Give a Witness: Urge those you study with to share with others what they are learning. Relate encouraging field service experiences to them. Train your children from an early age to participate in the ministry in a meaningful way according to their ability. (Ps. 148:12, 13) Show by word and example your appreciation for the ministry.​—1 Tim. 1:12.
4 Jehovah uses only those who accept and abide by his righteous standards. Of course, new publishers do not know as much as experienced, dedicated, and baptized Kingdom ministers, but the new ones must believe and be able to explain basic Bible teachings. (See Organized, pp. 79-82.) Having completely separated themselves from “Babylon the Great” and all involvement in politics, they should be attending congregation meetings regularly.​—Rev. 18:2, 4; John 17:16; Heb. 10:24, 25.
5 As soon as you believe that one of your Bible students qualifies to be an unbaptized publisher, this should be brought to the attention of the presiding overseer. He will arrange for two elders to meet with you and your Bible student to determine whether he qualifies as an unbaptized publisher of the Kingdom good news in association with the congregation. It will then be your privilege to broaden the training of your Bible student as he accompanies you in field service.

