Do You Remember?
Have you read the recent issues of The Watchtower carefully? If so, you should recognize these important points. Check yourself.
● What reason is there for a Christian to be happy when he is persecuted?
He does not rejoice over the suffering in itself, but he is happy that his faithful course honors God, and he rejoices in the prospect of receiving the reward for faithfulness.—P. 264.a
● What is a primary responsibility of the Christian overseer toward those who are spiritually weak?
To visit them personally and build them up by discussions centering on the Bible and the activities of Jehovah’s people.—P. 273.
● What should be the attitude of all with respect to greater privileges of service in Jehovah’s organization?
All should be willing to serve and should equip themselves so they will be in position to be used, but not doing so covetously or ambitiously.—P. 276.
● What does it mean to be ‘modest in walking with our God’?
Being aware of our limitations, not presumptuous, but recognizing our dependence on Jehovah and his organization.—Pp. 282-284.
● How does the outlook of the man of faith differ from that of the man without faith?
The man of faith is joyful, confident, filled with love for God and neighbor, and has the prospect of eternal life before him. The man without faith lacks joy because he does not have faith; he is cynical, uncertain and without a real purpose in life.—P. 306.
● How does one prove his confidence in Jehovah’s name as a strong tower?
Turning to Jehovah for protection, as one might flee to a strong tower, one will follow the counsel of God’s Word, stay close to His organization and advocate His purposes to others, since all of these are associated with His name.—Pp. 306, 307.
● Of the need for what help is one made cognizant by Jesus’ command concerning baptism?
Divine help; that of Jehovah God, Jesus Christ and the holy spirit.—P. 333.
● For whose benefit in our day was Jacob’s deathbed prophecy recorded?
The remnant of spiritual Israelites who are heirs of the heavenly kingdom, also others who desire to be blessed with eternal life on earth.—P. 365.
● What is foreshadowed by Ezekiel’s vision of the land distribution, as recorded in Eze chapter 48?
The distribution of the land under God’s kingdom of the new world.—P. 367.
● Of what should Jacob’s judgment on his son Reuben remind one?
That acting recklessly can result in the forfeiture of privileges of service.—P. 368.
● Of what beside the priesthood should the name Levi remind one?
As shown in Genesis 49:5-7, that a curse rests on the use of weapons to give vent to cruel anger; such must be forsaken by those who enter the congregation of God.—P. 371.
● What dangers lie in speculative questions?
They waste time; lead to divisions, even stumbling new ones; attract undue attention to men. They draw one away from the things that are clearly recorded in the Bible and which are necessary for salvation.—Pp. 380-383.
● Who is the “lion of the tribe of Judah”?
The glorified Jesus Christ.—P. 392.
● Who are the fellow rulers with the “lion of the tribe of Judah”?
The 144,000 members of spiritual Israel.—P. 408.
● In matters of conduct, when is it wise to deny ourselves things that may be proper in themselves?
In cases where the conduct might be a cause for stumbling other persons who are striving to serve God.—P. 413.
● Why is wealth said to have deceptive power?
It gives one a greater feeling of security than is warranted. Its value can be wiped out overnight. It cannot buy life, health or true friends.—P. 433.
● What example of material care for the aged did the early Christian congregation provide?
It did not run institutions to care for all the aged in the community. When some fell in need in its midst, children and grandchildren shouldered the responsibility. But if any who had a good record of faithful Christian service were really destitute, the congregation provided material assistance for these.—Pp. 438-440.
● In giving gifts what practice do Christians avoid?
They do not ‘blow a trumpet’ announcing their generosity by putting their name on a gift given when a group is gathered, nor do they give to make a “showy display” of their own economic circumstances.—P. 472.
● What associations should Christian children avoid?
Associations with worldly persons who have no love for Jehovah God or respect for the godly standards set out in his Word.—P. 491.
● What group of people were responsible for the development of the papyrus codex, the forerunner of the modern-day book?
The early Christians.—P. 502.
[Footnotes]
All page references are to The Watchtower for 1962.

