Assist Sheeplike People to Build on a Solid Foundation
1 Building a house requires careful planning and concentrated effort. After the house is designed, the building site must be prepared and a solid foundation laid. The project takes shape progressively until it is finally completed. Likewise, we must assist sheeplike people to learn the truth progressively. We endeavor to stimulate interest on the initial call. Thereafter, we make return visits, laying a foundation by teaching basic truths about God and his purpose for mankind.​—Luke 6:48.
2 Before the foundation can be laid, though, we need to prepare the building site, as it were, taking into consideration the circumstances of the householder. What subject was previously considered? What scriptures were used? What was the response? What publication was left? When returning, have specific points in mind, and progressively build the foundation. With each call the householder’s knowledge grows and his faith in God increases.
3 If a “Live Forever” book was placed, you might say:
▪ “I’m so glad to find you at home. You may recall that when we had our last discussion, we considered the declining interest in God locally. The Bible clearly outlines that God is interested in mankind and that righteous ones will be blessed through his Kingdom. [Read Matthew 6:9, 10.] By means of this Kingdom, righteousness and justice will prevail.” Read Isaiah 11:3-5, and then draw the householder’s attention to the first two paragraphs of chapter 1 of the Live Forever book. Demonstrate how the material can be studied.
4 If the Peaceful New World tract was placed on the initial call, the main points previously considered, about the need for better conditions and the Bible’s promises, could be reviewed. Emphasize that in order to live in the new world, we must take in accurate knowledge. Read John 17:3. Explain that after taking in such knowledge, we must do God’s will. Read 1 John 2:17. Draw the householder’s attention to specific points from page 5 of the tract.
5 If the subject of family life was highlighted when placing the “Live Forever” book on the initial call, you might say:
▪ “The last time that I called, we discussed the subject of family life. We agreed that in order to have a happy family life, the guidelines found in the Bible must be followed. What do you think is needed in order to make a success of marriage?” Allow for response. Highlight specific points from the information outlined on pages 243-6 in the Live Forever book. Ask for the householder’s comments on the illustrations and consider selected points as appropriate. Stress the practical value of Bible principles.
6 If the Enjoy Family Life tract was left, review the key Bible principles outlined on pages 4 and 5. If interest is stimulated, offer the Live Forever book. Point out chapter 29, “Making a Success of Family Life,” and show how this could be considered with the householder and his family.
7 All of us should have a regular share in making return visits. Follow up on all interest shown by making effective return visits during September.

