Helping Others to Recognize a Great Treasure
1 When we preach to others about the good news of the Kingdom, one of our aims should be to help honesthearted ones appreciate the excelling value of God’s Word. (Phil. 3:8) Our Bible-​based literature plays an important part in spreading the Kingdom message. For example, the Live Forever book has helped hundreds of thousands of people to serve Jehovah as a result of the Bible truths they have learned.
2 Our ministry involves more than simply leaving literature with anyone willing to take it. We need to introduce the message in an appealing manner, listen with discernment to what the householder says, and then be ready to ‘reason with him from the Scriptures.’​—Acts 17:2.
3 How Can This Be Done? Our introductions can open the way for householders to show whether they are truly interested in the Bible and its message.
You could say:
▪ “We’re calling to discuss the meaning of what’s happening around us in the world today. Among many people there has been declining interest in God and in his standards for living as set out in the Bible. This has greatly influenced the attitude of people toward one another. Have you noticed this? [Allow for comment. You may refer to specific instances.] Please note the attitude of those mentioned at 2 Timothy 3:1-5, and tell me whether you think this sounds like the world today. [Read; allow for comment.] Is there sound reason to expect better conditions in the future?” If interest is displayed, refer to the picture on pages 12 and 13 of the Live Forever book and direct attention to paragraphs 12 and 13. If interest is limited, then the Peaceful New World tract could be offered.
4 If a parent comes to the door, we may start our conversation this way:
▪ “We’re talking to people who are interested in how we can better cope with the problems of family life. We all try to do the best we can, but if there is something that can help us to have greater success, we’re interested, aren’t we? [Allow for response.] The Bible gives direction in this matter as found at Colossians 3:12-14. [Read.] So, what is necessary to enjoy a successful family life? Note what is stated in this publication in the chapter entitled ‘Making a Success of Family Life.’” Read paragraph 3 on page 238 of the Live Forever book. If the householder is busy or does not readily respond, try presenting a recent magazine that discusses family matters or the tract Enjoy Family Life.
5 We never want to lose sight of our purpose in giving a thorough witness about the Kingdom. (Matt. 24:14) By making good use of the Bible and the wonderful provisions of theocratic literature available to us, we can confidently look to Jehovah for his blessing in accomplishing his will during these momentous times.​—Gal. 6:9.

