Starting Home Bible Studies
1 One of the most rewarding and satisfying experiences for true Christians is to teach someone the truth by means of a home Bible study. Yet, some may not be enjoying this enriching feature of the ministry because they feel they are unable to start and conduct a Bible study. Many outstanding publishers and pioneers once felt that way. However, by trusting in Jehovah and by applying suggestions from Our Kingdom Ministry, they learned how to start and conduct Bible studies, and they increased their joy in the ministry. You can have the same goal.
2 Using the Direct Method and Tracts: One of the easiest ways to start a study is by the direct method. All some people need is a warm invitation to study the Bible. This can be done by merely asking the householder: “Would you like to have a personal home Bible study and increase your knowledge of the Bible and God’s purpose for the earth?” Or you could tell the householder that you would be happy to demonstrate the way in which a home Bible study is conducted. Although many may refuse this offer, think of your joy in finding someone who accepts it!
3 Another way to start a Bible study is by using one of our tracts. Although small in size, they present a message that is powerful and convincing. How can a study be started in a tract? Simply by giving the householder a tract that you believe will interest him. Then, take the initiative, and invite the householder to read the first paragraph with you. Look up the scriptures cited, and discuss how they apply to the material. On the first call, you might consider only one or two paragraphs. As the householder comes to appreciate that he is learning interesting things from the Bible, you may be able to increase the time you spend in your discussions.
4 Using Just the Bible: Sometimes a person is agreeable to discussing the Bible but seems reluctant to accept a formal study or make use of one of our publications. You can still start and conduct a Bible study by preparing interesting Scriptural discussions based on portions of the Live Forever book or the Reasoning book but then using only the Bible when visiting the interested person. Such discussions may last 15 or 20 minutes, or longer, depending on the circumstances. If done regularly and with a progressive method for teaching Bible truths, you have started a Bible study, and it can be reported as such. When the time is right, introduce the Live Forever book, and conduct a formal study in it.
5 In addition to finding opportunities in the field ministry, have you endeavored to start Bible studies with neighbors, associates, or family members? Was it some time ago? Have you tried again recently? If one method didn’t work, have you considered trying another?
6 You can be successful at starting studies if you apply the suggestions given, persevere in the field service, and trust in Jehovah for his blessing. Never underestimate the power of the truth and the help that Jehovah gives. May you increase your joy in the ministry by starting and conducting home Bible studies.

