What Will We Accomplish During This Service Year?
1 With the beginning of the 1994 service year on September 1, it is now an appropriate time for all of us as Jehovah’s people to establish clearly in our minds what we wish to accomplish as individuals and as an organization during this new service year.
2 Keep Growing Spiritually: If we are newly associated with the truth, we should desire to become strong in the faith. (Heb. 6:1-3) If we are already spiritually strong, not only should we help new ones and others but we must also pay attention to our own spirituality, never feeling that we have all the necessary Bible knowledge and experience in Christian living. Do we consider the daily text, keep up with the Bible-​reading program set out in the Theocratic Ministry School Schedule, and prepare for the Congregation Book Study and the Watchtower Study? That should be a minimum goal for all of us. We must keep growing spiritually if we are to survive the destruction of this wicked system of things and be preserved into God’s new world.​—Compare Philippians 3:12-16.
3 Remain Spiritually Clean: In order to be fully acceptable before Jehovah, we must be cleansed of “every defilement of flesh and spirit.” (2 Cor. 7:1) Once we are clean, why would we want to ‘roll in the mire’ of this wicked old world again? (Compare 2 Peter 2:22.) We must be determined to remain spiritually strong and clean. Then we will not be ignorant of Satan’s evil designs and be overreached, falling into sin and away from Jehovah’s favor.​—2 Cor. 2:11.
4 Heed Wise Counsel: Proverbs 15:22 points out: “In the multitude of counselors there is accomplishment.” Remember, though, that the man who spoke those words, Solomon, later allowed ‘his wives to incline his heart to follow other gods’ because he failed to heed God’s counsel about not taking foreign wives. (1 Ki. 11:1-4) So unless we personally heed wise counsel, how can we expect to be effective in Jehovah’s service or set an example worthy of being imitated? (1 Tim. 4:15) The Bible’s counsel will help us to safeguard our heart. (Prov. 4:23) Loving what Jehovah loves, hating what he hates, constantly seeking his guidance and the doing of what pleases him are a sure protection.​—Prov. 8:13; John 8:29; Heb. 1:9.
5 Our worship of Jehovah is not something mechanical, not a form of godly devotion like that of professed Christians in the world, but spirited, active, and alive in accord with the truth as found in God’s Word.​—John 4:23, 24.
6 Our determination to do God’s will may be challenged daily. We should be fortified by the knowledge that “the entire association” of our brothers faces similar tests and that it is Jehovah who will make us strong. (1 Pet. 5:9, 10) Thus we will be able fully to accomplish our ministry during the 1994 service year.​—2 Tim. 4:5.

