Announcements
“BE RICH IN RIGHT WORKS”
That is the theme for the month of March, taken from 1 Timothy 6:18, New World Translation. It is sound advice, for it means life to those who hear and heed it. The Creator, who furnishes the things needful for our existence and the enjoyment of it, requires us to work to gain life. What work then is “right” work? A good example is the work done by Christ Jesus. Also, recall his words to the rich young man who wanted life? No, his answer did not advise one to try to become rich in this old world. Rather it was to use what things one has now and the knowledge of God’s Word, and spread this forth to those who do not as yet possess these riches. In this manner we will be following our Master and Leader in being “rich in right works”. During the month of March, Jehovah’s witnesses will offer a year’s subscription for The Watchtower, for $1. Each new subscriber will receive three booklets free, Can You Live Forever in Happiness on Earth?, Evolution versus The New World, and one other. Make a sound investment of your life, time and possessions by following the example set forth in the Scriptures; join in with Jehovah’s witnesses and be “rich in right works”. Our life, security and happy living depend on right works. Send in your report of the time you devote to this work, or, if a company of Jehovah’s witnesses is nearby, attend the meetings there and work with them and report through the local company;
MEMORIAL FOR 1951
One of the most important days in the calendar year for the people upon whom Jehovah’s great name is called is the day when they observe the memorial of the Lord’s evening meal. (1 Cor. 11:20-26, NW) And why not? It is a time of joy and rejoicing for this favored and happy people. Nisan 14 is the proper time to observe the Lord’s evening meal, and in this year, 1951, it is after sunset (or after 6 p.m.) of Friday, March 23. All companies, units and other groups of consecrated persons and those of good will should assemble. After having a Kingdom song and the opening prayer, some consecrated person, preferably one of Jehovah’s anointed ones, should deliver a talk on the Lord’s evening meal. The emblems should be unleavened bread and red wine, to copy our Lord’s example. The cordial welcome is here extended to all persons of good will, whether consecrated or not, to attend this significant and blessed event. What are the privileges to be gained by attending? Who participate? Must I? The answers to these questions and others will be satisfactorily answered at these gatherings. All in attendance will gain peace of mind and the unity of Jehovah’s people will increase world-wide as they acquire a full understanding and appreciation of this occasion. Last year over a half million persons attended. Why not be one of these this year and accept the invitation that is being extended to many more in The Watchtower through the medium of 35 languages? After the Memorial appropriate service announcements for those assembled may be made, a closing song sung, and the meeting dismissed with prayer. A report should be made to the Society of the entire number attending each gathering, and the number of those partaking of the emblems.
1951 YEARBOOK AND CALENDAR
“Praise Jah, you people, because Jehovah our God, the Almighty, has begun to rule as king.” (Rev. 19:6, NW) This 1951 yeartext is prominently highlighted in both the 1951 Yearbook and the calendar. Reports from the ends of the earth gathered and compiled for the 1950 service year are set forth between the covers of the 1951 Yearbook of Jehovah’s Witnesses. This annual report by the president of the Watchtower Bible and Tract Society, plus a Scriptural thought for every day of the ensuing year and appropriate comments thereon, appears complete in this volume. You may obtain your copy by remitting 50c. If you live near a congregation of Jehovah’s witnesses, send your order through them. Combining orders saves time and expense. The 1951 calendars may be ordered at the same time, 25c each, or 5 to one address for $1.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES
Week of March 11: Why Jehovah’s Witnesses Are Not Pacifists, ¶1-20; and Pacifism and Conscientious Objection—Is There a Difference? ¶1-5.
Week of March 18: Pacifism and Conscientious Objection—Is There a Difference? ¶6-25.

