Circuit Assembly Held Despite Legion Antagonism
PREPARING for their circuit assembly (semiannual convention for Bible study and instruction of ministers) Jehovah’s witnesses of Oklahoma City and vicinity contracted for use of the facilities of Municipal Auditorium. The written agreement, entered into with the city council, provided for the use of the Hall of Mirrors September 29 and 30 and the main auditorium October 1. A down payment was made with arrangements for the balance to be paid at the conclusion.
On Friday, September 22, while final plans for the meeting were being pushed, the local American Legion Post 35 filed a scandalous resolution with the city officials demanding that the city council illegally break its contract and not permit Jehovah’s witnesses to hold their assembly. It was claimed that they insist upon teaching and instilling doctrine “into the minds of the youths of this nation which violates and is in direct contradiction of the constitutional principles and traditions of our government”.
Not quick to deprive an unpopular minority of constitutional rights of freedom of assembly, speech and worship, the city officials took the matter under consideration and set it down for hearing at the next council meeting. In the meantime local newspaper reports aroused the interest of the public. Many citizens became concerned over the issue and protested the action of the American Legion.
When the city council was called to order on Tuesday, September 26, upward of 300 legionnaires helped to pack the council room. Represented by two lawyers, they resumed their vituperative denunciation of Jehovah’s witnesses, shouting that they do “not honor the flag” and “discourage enlistments in our armed forces” which would hinder the war efforts. Rebutting these and other inflammatory assertions, representatives of Jehovah’s witnesses showed that their ministers were exempt by law from performance of military service and training the same as clergymen of other organizations, that at no time do they advocate refusal to salute or fight and that they regard it as wrong for them to oppose the efforts of persons who do, but that they must live by God’s laws. “If everybody in this country were Jehovah’s witnesses there would be no country,” it was alleged. “If everybody in the world were Jehovah’s witnesses,” came the answer, “there would be no war.”
Jehovah’s witnesses reminded the city council that denial of freedoms to Jehovah’s witnesses would jeopardize these rights to all other Americans. Each member of the council was given a copy of the booklet Defending and Legally Establishing the Good News. Others manifested like concern for the preservation of the fundamental freedoms. During the discussion a letter from the Oklahoma City Council of Churches was read which stated that, although they did not concur with the beliefs of Jehovah’s witnesses, yet they believed constitutional rights should be upheld and the use of the Municipal Auditorium permitted.
At the conclusion of the arguments the acting mayor sought advice as to whether the contract was legally binding, from the city attorney, who assured the council that it was. When the chairman then placed the matter before the council for determination and asked if any of the councilmen desired to break the contract all remained silent. So, commending the city council for refusing to capitulate to pressure to deny constitutionally guaranteed assembly, we give all thanks and praise to Jehovah for the victory.

