Make Known the Good News
IT IS a proverbial saying among earth’s sad and troubled people: “No news is good news.” From every side, every quarter, every front, the majority of reports are tragic tales of woe and calamity that bring increased distress and perplexity. The people grope in darkness, their hearts failing them for fear of what they see coming upon the earth. (Luke 21:25, 26) Consequently, most of the news they hear, to borrow a line from Shakespeare, befits the present nighttime—“black, fearful, comfortless and horrible.” What, then, could be more important than letting the people hear about the theocratic kingdom that will cure all mankind’s ills? Such a divine message is truly heart-cheering, joy-provoking, soul-satisfying to those who drink it in, even though it comes from afar, even from heaven.—Prov. 25:25.
In speaking of the time when this present system of things would reach its consummation, when all nations would be divided against one another, when there would be food shortages and great pangs of distress upon the people, Jesus declared that at such an appropriate and appointed time “this good news of the kingdom will be preached in all the inhabited earth for the purpose of a witness to all the nations, and then the accomplished end will come”. (Matt. 24:3-14, NW) The apostle John saw in vision its proclamation: “And I saw another angel flying in midheaven, and he had everlasting good news to declare as glad tidings to those who dwell on the earth, and to every nation and tribe and tongue and people.”—Rev. 14:6, NW.
What a tremendous assignment that is! Globe-encircling! Penetrating all international barriers and iron curtains! Overcoming all language handicaps! Of a truth this colossal job which Jehovah’s witnesses have been given to do is being accomplished only because the Most High has also given them an abundance of his strength and wisdom. Paul the apostle in his day asked the congregation at Ephesus to keep awake and alert and constantly pray in behalf of all the Lord’s people, including himself, that he might have the ability and freedom to speak and make known the good news of the Kingdom. (Eph. 6:18-20; Col. 4:2-4) As then, so now, Jehovah hears and answers the prayers of his holy ones.
“The god of this system of things,” that is, the Devil, “has blinded the minds of the unbelievers” to the message of good news. (2 Cor. 4:4, NW) It is therefore no surprise that the proclaimers of the good news are bitterly hated and persecuted. Paul described himself as God’s “ambassador in chains”; yet he continued to preach. To Timothy he wrote: “Do not become ashamed of the witness about our Lord, neither of me a prisoner for his sake, but take your part in suffering evil for the good news according to the power of God.” (2 Tim. 1:8, NW) Jehovah’s witnesses often collide with the dictators and rulers of this world, for “as we have been proved by God as fit to be entrusted with the good news, so we speak, as pleasing, not men, but God”. As a result, some of them are killed. But no matter, they have Jesus’ precious promise: “Whoever loses his soul for the sake of me and the good news will save it.”—1 Thess. 2:4; Mark 8:35, NW.
So push on with the work, you faithful witnesses of the Lord! Spread this most excellent news. Let earth’s sad and troubled people hear and be comforted. Jehovah’s smile of approval and blessing is upon you. “How beautiful are the feet of those who declare good news of good things!”—Rom. 10:15, NW; Isa. 52:7.

