Branch Letter
Dear Publishers:
What pleasure we at Bethel felt recently on hearing the final figures for the “Divine Victory” assemblies in North America! In the continental United States, a grand total of 665,945 attended the nineteen assemblies and 15,851 were baptized. And at the five Canadian assemblies, 155,788 attended and 3,838 were immersed. It was a marvelous spiritual feast! Having benefited from it, we should all feel strengthened and invigorated for a full share in the work that lies ahead.
What have you done with the new books that you received? We were encouraged to read and discuss with our families the new book True Peace and Security​—From What Source? Many of us have been doing just that. If you have, you know why the suggestion was given. What is in that book is information that we need in our field ministry now, and if we are acquainted with it we can make the best use of it. Also, the counsel it contains affects our own lives and will aid us greatly in our efforts to put on the new personality.
No doubt many of you are also reading the book God’s Kingdom of a Thousand Years Has Approached. What a wealth of spiritual meat it contains! It will be a pleasure to get an overall view of it in public talks later this year, and then we will be in using it at our congregation book studies early in December. We certainly have good things ahead of us.
If your order was sent in early, then by the time you get this Kingdom Ministry you will no doubt have received a shipment of the new books. Feel free to start using them in your field ministry. Although they are not the regular offer yet, we encourage you to carry copies with you and to offer them when you meet someone that you feel would benefit from them. Some people may ask what you have that is new. Bible students and others on whom you make return visits will doubtless appreciate it if you make copies available to them.
Before us now, in the latter part of September, is the special work with Kingdom News No. 16. Our brothers and sisters everywhere are organizing for this activity. We are anxious to get started. May Jehovah bless you as you share whole-souled in delivering this timely message, and thus prove that you are indeed for Divine Rulership​—with its Chief Agent.
Your brothers,
BROOKLYN BRANCH OFFICE
[Blurb on page 1]
For Divine Rulership, with Its Chief Agent!

