Presenting the Good News​—With Kingdom News No. 16
1 The extent of Jehovah’s undeserved kindness and mercy is great indeed. Though under no obligation to imperfect humans, Jehovah has opened up the way for people of all nations and languages to have eternal life. (Rev. 5:9, 10; 7:9, 10) Wanting all to benefit from his provision, he has put it into the hearts of his people to take time from other activities in order to proclaim the “good news” and to make disciples. And is it not an evidence of Jehovah’s undeserved kindness and mercy that he has moved the governing body of the “faithful and discreet slave” to arrange for a new instrument​—Kingdom News No. 16​—to help us in reaching many people quickly?
2 During the last ten days of September we will be offering this new tract to people everywhere. The distribution will be done primarily from house to house. We are going to ring doorbells or knock and then hand the tract to people personally. This type of distribution will no doubt encourage the largest possible number of persons to give it serious consideration.
3 Our presentation may be very brief. For example, we might say: “Hello. I’m glad to find you at home. I have volunteered to share in distribution of an important message. This is your copy; it is free. [Hand it to the householder.] Please be sure to read it.” Or, you could say: “This week hundreds of thousands of volunteers around the world are delivering an important message to people. This is your copy. Please be sure to read it.” What you say may vary, depending on the attitude of people in your territory. In some areas you may find it beneficial to state that the message is from the Bible, or that it involves the meaning of world conditions. Use whatever method enables you to get it into the hands of the most people in their homes in a short time.
4 If the householder asks whether you have the current magazines with you, or requests a book, feel free to supply it. But our principal objective is to reach as many homes as possible with the tract. If you find someone who shows interest and would like to discuss matters further, we suggest that you make a note of the name and address and arrange to call later. Until this work is finished, our goal is to cover the territory quickly.
5 We want to deliver the tract to every building, every home, every family in our territory. However, no record will be made of those who are not at home. Instead, the tract should be left at the door so they can pick it up when they return. As you know, it should not be put in a mailbox, and it is best if it can be left out of sight of passersby. But be sure that each household receives a copy.
6 Where you cannot get into certain apartment houses or call on the permanent residents in hotels, ask the door man or the superintendent for special permission to put the tract under the doors. He might let you do that without ringing the bells. You could also mail personal copies to some who cannot otherwise be reached. In some cases, you may choose to stand on the sidewalk outside a building to hand copies to residents as they come and go. But we will not be distributing the tracts promiscuously on the streets.
7 Along with your other territory, we encourage you to call on business places. Give a copy of the tract to the owner or manager, and, if he grants permission, you may hand them to the other workers too. During lunch hour at your place of secular work, you may also be able to hand copies personally to fellow workers. And school-age publishers will no doubt want to deliver them to their teachers.
8 Keep on offering the tracts as long as you have any available. Endeavor to get all of them into the hands of the public. But if you run out of them before the end of the month, then keep on working in the territory with the Evolution book or with the magazines. The September 22 issue of Awake! is a specially fine one to acquaint the public with the worldwide work of Jehovah’s witnesses, contrasting this with the religions of Christendom.
9 By vigorous activity on the part of all of us in presenting the good news, surely a fine witness will be given. At the same time we will be demonstrating our appreciation for Jehovah’s great mercy and undeserved kindness.
[Blurb on page 8]
Let’s Get All the Tracts Out to the Public.

