Using the Special Magazines
1 In these “last days” the printed page has played a vital role in getting the “good news” to people in the “most distant part of the earth.” (Acts 1:8) Knowing that Jehovah’s blessing has been upon the use of the publications, we certainly have every reason to want to get them into the hands of as many people as possible.
2 The month of October is one in which we specially carry out the Kingdom work by distribution of magazines and by obtaining subscriptions. We encourage all publishers to put special emphasis on the obtaining of subscriptions. Do not hold back from offering them. There are many people who enjoy reading Awake! But how often during the year do you call at their home to offer it to them? Why not give them the opportunity to have it regularly so that they can enjoy every issue. More importantly, their getting the magazine regularly increases the possibility of their reading material that may stir their hearts to accept the truth.
3 The special October 8 issue of Awake! features the theme “Where is This World Heading?” It is designed to answer the kind of questions that many people will have after having read the tract. If you go right back into the territories that you worked at the end of September and offer this Awake!, no doubt many householders will be glad to obtain it. Offer it enthusiastically. Along with it you will have the October 15 Watchtower, which features the timely public talk from our recent international assemblies, “Divine Victory​—Its Meaning for Distressed Humanity.”
4 Later in the month you will have the October 22 issue of Awake!, which contains up-to-date material on the subject “Evolution​—Facing Its Greatest Challenge.” This is current information, taking up matters that have developed since the Evolution book was published. It is very revealing. We suggest that, in addition to presenting it from house to house, you especially offer it to anyone who showed interest in the Evolution book during September.
5 There is surely a wealth of fine material available to use in giving a Kingdom witness during October. May Jehovah bless our efforts.

