From Our Readers
How to Find a Job and Keep It (July 8, 2005)  I appreciated your recommendation to follow up on each job opportunity, even if it seems to involve menial work. I recently wanted to cut down to part-time employment so that I could devote more time to my Christian ministry. But I was being too particular about the type of work I would accept. Then I was offered another job, which I accepted. It is menial work, but I’m making an effort to be satisfied with it. At least I’m not mentally exhausted when I come home, and I can concentrate on my personal study of the Bible.
M. I., Japan
May Day—What Does It Mean to You? (April 22, 2005)  I am a senior in high school, and a May Day festival is held at my school each year. There is a dress rehearsal, and all the high-school and middle-school students are asked to watch it. I attended them before, but the festival bothered my sister’s conscience. This article helped me to realize that she was right! Thank you so much. The article came at a perfect time!
C. C., United States
Facing Illness With a Sense of Humor (April 22, 2005)  I have been battling ovarian cancer for the past six years, and several times I have undergone surgery and chemotherapy. Like Conchi, I try to support my congregation and to attend all the meetings and conventions as I am able. Cancer is a challenging disease, so I appreciate Conchi’s comments about how to cope with the bad news that it seems we cancer patients constantly receive from doctors. Conchi’s experience was really encouraging to me!
B. F., United States
I suffer from lupus, and on one occasion I even had amnesia for a time. While recuperating, I tried to keep my sense of humor. Recently, when I was hospitalized for gastritis, I tried to do the same. I agree with Conchi’s words, “It’s no joke being sick, but you have to try to keep your sense of humor.”
M. A., Venezuela
Watching the World (July 8, 2005)  Regarding the item entitled “Vitamin Supplements and Cancer,” I would like to point out that the views of Dr. Sullivan as quoted are not shared by many nutritionists. Reports in countless scientific publications and a multitude of studies have shown that the substances you list have proved useful in preventing—and treating—some forms of cancer. I feel that including one-sided information of this nature could endanger the neutral stand of Awake!
A. B., Netherlands
“Awake!” responds: Evidently, as this reader notes, studies have shown that the substances mentioned in our item have in a number of cases had a beneficial effect upon cancer patients. We regret any misunderstanding that publishing this item may have caused. “Awake!” takes a neutral position when it comes to health treatments. The fact that we present health-related information for our readers’ consideration does not mean that we endorse it. Likewise, when we quote a publication or an expert in some field of study, we understand that—as is often the case—other publications and other experts may hold a different view. We leave it up to our readers to make informed decisions when it comes to their health.

