“Religious Tolerance Day”
INTRIGUED by a discussion she had had with Jehovah’s Witnesses, the headmistress of a school in Poland set aside a “Religious Tolerance Day” for her school. She suggested that volunteers among the students—Catholics, Buddhists, and Jehovah’s Witnesses—prepare short presentations to acquaint other students with their beliefs and practices. Three teenage Witnesses of Jehovah volunteered immediately.
When the day arrived, the first to speak was 15-year-old Malwina. In part, she stated: “Many of you knew us before we started attending this school because we had called on you in your homes. You probably wonder why we keep doing that. It is because we follow the example of Jesus Christ, the Founder of Christianity. He preached the good news of God’s Kingdom wherever people could be found. The apostles and other early Christians did the same. In many places, Jehovah’s Witnesses endure difficult trials of faith, but we are happy that in our school we enjoy peace, to which all of you contribute. We thank you for that!”
At the conclusion of her presentation, Malwina stated: “There is another reason why we call at your home. We care about you. The Bible says that mankind will soon experience world-shaking events. So the next time we knock on your door, please take time to listen. We would like to tell you how we can live together forever in a paradise on earth.”
The next speaker was Mateusz, also 15. Mateusz told his audience that over the years, Jehovah’s Witnesses have used various methods to spread the good news. For example, in 1914—during the era of silent movies—the Witnesses were showing the “Photo-Drama of Creation,” a motion picture and slide presentation that included synchronized sound.
Mateusz discussed the role of radio in spreading the Kingdom message and then described the unique computerized multilanguage electronic phototypesetting system (MEPS) developed by Jehovah’s Witnesses. He also related how Jehovah’s Witnesses have helped to inform doctors about bloodless treatment techniques. “Now, eminent Polish physicians comment favorably on our stand and emphasize that each year more and more non-Witness patients are being operated on without blood,” he said.
Mateusz concluded by telling about the construction of Kingdom Halls and said: “Would you like to visit ours? Admission is free, and there is no money collection.” Speaking about the convention center in Sosnowiec, Mateusz said: “You should see this large and functional structure. Why don’t we go there together? We have an idea, and our friend Katarzyna is going to tell you about it.”
Next, 15-year-old Katarzyna said enthusiastically: “You are welcome to come to Sosnowiec for the district convention of Jehovah’s Witnesses. Subjects that concern young people will be discussed.” Katarzyna also referred to the principal observance for Christians—the Memorial of Jesus Christ’s death. She encouraged her listeners: “Last year over 14 million people worldwide attended that observance. Why don’t you join us next time?”
After their presentations, Malwina, Mateusz, and Katarzyna presented the teachers with the book Jehovah’s Witnesses—Proclaimers of God’s Kingdom along with two videocassettes that discuss the beliefs and activities of Jehovah’s Witnesses.a The teachers accepted them appreciatively and promised to use them in history classes.
At the end of the session, 12-year-old Martyna played for all assembled the song entitled “We Thank You, Jehovah.” These young Witnesses ‘mustered up boldness by means of their God’ and gave a fine witness. (1 Thessalonians 2:2) What an excellent example for young Witnesses everywhere!
[Footnote]
Published by Jehovah’s Witnesses.
[Picture on page 26]
Katarzyna choosing scriptures for the presentation
[Picture on page 26]
Malwina preparing the presentation a few days before giving it at school

