The Bible Changes Lives
WHY did a man who was raised in a staunch Catholic family and who had a successful career in law enforcement become one of Jehovah’s Witnesses? What moved a terrorist to give up violence and become a minister of religion? Read what these people have to say.
“I Gained a Deeper Understanding of Right and Wrong.”—SEBASTIÃO ALVES JUNQUEIRA
YEAR BORN: 1946
COUNTRY OF ORIGIN: BRAZIL
HISTORY: JUDGE
MY PAST: My family lived in the country, some four miles (6 km) from the town of Piquete. My parents had a small farm, and the land provided our basic needs. The school I attended was in Piquete, so I eventually bought an old bicycle, which made traveling to town easier. The people in our area were poor, but the town was clean and had a relatively low crime rate. Most of the men in town worked in a factory that made weapons for the military.
I was studious and managed to enter the Aeronautical Military School in a nearby city where, in 1966, I graduated as a sergeant. I then went to law school and got my law degree. Later, I applied for the position of police chief. In 1976, I passed a government test and was chosen for the job. Sometimes my work included being an administrator at the jail. During this time, Jehovah’s Witnesses would often come and ask permission to preach to the prisoners. They always shared a Bible message with me too. I had a lot of respect for God. I was impressed to learn that God has a name, Jehovah, and that we can develop a friendship with him.
Gradually, I worked my way up the judicial ladder. In 1981, I passed another government exam and was made a state judge. Then, in 2005, I was appointed as a court of appeals judge in the court of São Paulo.
HOW THE BIBLE CHANGED MY LIFE: Soon after I graduated from law school, I started reading the Bible—an act that brought about quite a change in my thinking. I was a staunch Catholic. We had priests and a bishop in the family, and I assisted the priest during Mass. Before he gave a sermon, I read assigned parts of the prayer book. It wasn’t the norm in Catholic households to read the Bible. My mother was terribly upset when she learned that I was reading the Bible. She tried to discourage me, saying I risked losing my mind. Even so, I went on reading; I could see no harm in it.
I suppose that my curiosity spurred me on in my Bible reading. I wanted to know more about priests and their role in the church. I also started reading about the liberation theology movement, but the reasoning and logic used by its proponents was so flawed that I couldn’t make any sense of it.
At the same time, my dentist, who was a Buddhist, offered me a book that had been given to him. The title of the book was Did Man Get Here by Evolution or by Creation?a I accepted the book, thinking that it would be interesting to read it along with The Origin of Species, by Charles Darwin. The arguments in Did Man Get Here by Evolution or by Creation? were forceful, logical, and convincing. There was no doubt in my mind that the evolution theory was unfounded.
Reading the book on the topic of creation heightened my curiosity. I wanted to get hold of more books published by Jehovah’s Witnesses. I was told that a mechanic in the aeronautics school was one of Jehovah’s Witnesses. I talked to him, and he gave me some books to read. At the time, I didn’t accept the offer to study the Bible with the Witnesses. I thought I could study it on my own.
When I started reading the Bible, I decided that since I was now married, it would be wise to read it with my family too. We had a family study every week and read the Bible together. As Catholics, my family’s world revolved around the priests and bishops. So what I read at John 14:6 grabbed my attention: “Jesus said to him [the disciple Thomas]: ‘I am the way and the truth and the life. No one comes to the Father except through me.’” After extensively investigating the subject, I was convinced that our salvation comes from Jehovah through Jesus. We had been led to believe that our salvation came from the priests.
Two other Bible passages changed my attitude toward the Catholic Church and its teachings. One is at Proverbs 1:7, which says: “The fear of Jehovah is the beginning of knowledge. Wisdom and discipline are what mere fools have despised.” And the other is at James 1:5, which states: “If any one of you is lacking in wisdom, let him keep on asking God, for he gives generously to all and without reproaching; and it will be given him.” I had an unquenchable thirst for knowledge and wisdom, which was not being satisfied by going to church. So I stopped attending.
In 1980, my wife started studying the Bible with the Witnesses. Whenever I was at home, I would sit in on the study. In time, I accepted a Bible study. However, we took a long time before we decided to get baptized as Jehovah’s Witnesses. My wife was baptized in 1994, and I in 1998.
HOW I HAVE BENEFITED: My four children have benefited by being brought up to live by Jehovah’s standards. (Ephesians 6:4) I have two sons, both of whom work hard to care for the spiritual needs of other Witnesses in the congregation where they attend. My two daughters are very zealous in preaching to others. My wife spends many hours each month helping people learn about the Bible, and I enjoy serving as an elder in the local congregation.
When I became one of Jehovah’s Witnesses, I gained a deeper understanding of right and wrong. As a judge, I try to put Jehovah’s way of dealing with different issues into practice in court—taking into consideration all the circumstances, being reasonable, and being compassionate when there are mitigating circumstances.
I have dealt with many cases of violence, crime, and child abuse, as well as other serious criminal offenses. Even so, I haven’t become desensitized. As I watch the news, I am disgusted with the rampant moral decay and depravity in this world. I’m grateful to Jehovah that I’ve come to understand the reason behind the increase in crime, as well as the hope that we have of better days.
“Prison Didn’t Rehabilitate Me.”—KEITH WOODS
YEAR BORN: 1961
COUNTRY OF ORIGIN: NORTHERN IRELAND
HISTORY: TERRORIST
MY PAST: I was born in 1961 in Portadown, a busy town in Northern Ireland. I came from a Protestant background, and I grew up in a housing estate with a mixture of Catholic and Protestant neighbors. Most families were relatively poor. There wasn’t a lot of money about, and we all lived in and out of one another’s houses.
I had a lifestyle that I’m not proud of. In 1974, I got involved in the “Troubles” that then existed in Northern Ireland. About that time, things got worse in our communities. For example, one night my father, who was a manager of the Ulster Carpet Factory, was at work training two young Catholic lads who lived next door to us in our housing estate. Meanwhile, someone hurled a bomb through the living room window of the home where the Catholic boys lived, killing their father, mother, and brother.
Problems escalated, and open war broke out. Protestants were burned out of Catholic areas, and Catholics were harassed in Protestant communities. Our estate became mainly Protestant. It wasn’t long before I was arrested and sentenced to three years in prison for my involvement in bombing activity.
While in jail, I became good friends with a prisoner who was a well-known figure in the loyalist community. We were like brothers, and later I was his best man at his wedding. Prison didn’t rehabilitate me or him. When we were released, we went straight back to our political activities, only this time in a bigger way. As a result, my friend again found himself in prison. While there, he was murdered.
I also became a target, and on one occasion my car was blown up. But those events only made my determination to be active in the campaign for “God and Ulster” more firm.
During this time, I was involved in a documentary regarding the “Troubles,” which aired on British TV. The documentary created additional problems for me. For instance, one night I went home and discovered that my wife had left me. Shortly afterward, as a result of the TV program, my son was taken from me. I recall looking into a mirror and saying, “If there is a God out there, help me.”
The following Saturday, I met an acquaintance of mine named Paul, who had become one of Jehovah’s Witnesses. He started talking to me about the Bible. Two days later, Paul sent me a copy of The Watchtower. An article in that magazine quoted Jesus’ words recorded at John 18:36. He said: “My kingdom is no part of this world. If my kingdom were part of this world, my attendants would have fought that I should not be delivered up to the Jews. But, as it is, my kingdom is not from this source.” Those words made a big impression on me. That was the day my life began to change.
HOW THE BIBLE CHANGED MY LIFE: Paul started to study the Bible with me. Later on, Bill, another Witness, continued the study. I know that I was a difficult student; I had so many questions! I also brought many religious ministers to my home to prove Bill wrong. But the truth of God’s Word shone through.
I recall on one occasion telling Bill not to come to my house for the study because there were roadblocks around the estate and his car would surely be confiscated and burned. However, Bill came for the study as usual. He left his car at home and rode his bicycle. Who would want to confiscate that? On another occasion, Bill and I were sitting in my home having a Bible study when the police and the army came to arrest me. As they carted me away, Bill called out and told me to trust in Jehovah. Those occasions made a big impression on me.
The first time that I attended a meeting of Jehovah’s Witnesses at the Kingdom Hall must have been a shock for some of them. I had long hair and an earring, and I wore a trademark leather jacket. However, I couldn’t believe how well the Witnesses treated me. Their kindness really impressed me.
Even though I was studying the Bible, I was still involved with my old associates. Eventually, however, the truths I learned from the Bible began to sink deeper into my heart. I realized that if I wanted to serve Jehovah, I had to change my political viewpoints and associations. That wasn’t easy to do. But as I learned more about the Bible and drew strength from Jehovah, I was able to make changes. I cut my hair, removed my earring, and bought a suit. What I was learning also started to improve my attitude toward other people.
HOW I HAVE BENEFITED: I had lived a life of crime and terrorism. My face was well-known by the law-enforcement groups in the community. Now things are different. For example, when I attended my first convention of Jehovah’s Witnesses, which was held in the town of Navan, the law-enforcement authorities escorted me all the way through Ireland and Northern Ireland. Now, though, I travel to conventions without an escort. I also now share freely with my fellow Witnesses Paul and Bill and the rest of the congregation in the preaching work.
As my life changed for the better, I settled into the congregation. There I met a Witness named Louise, and we were married. In addition, my son and I were reunited.
When I look back on my life, I regret having caused hurt and harm to others. But I can confirm that the Bible really does enable people like me to change from a life of misguided actions to one of purpose and hope.
[Footnote]
Published by Jehovah’s Witnesses but now out of print.
[Blurb on page 12]
My mother was terribly upset when she learned that I was reading the Bible

