Do You Know the Happiness That Comes From Giving?
SHE had spent nearly 50 years in active Christian service. Although the effects of old age had left her frail, she was determined to visit the newly built Kingdom Hall. Bracing herself on the arm of a helpful Christian brother, she entered the hall and walked slowly but directly toward her objective—the contribution box. There she deposited the modest sum she had been saving for this purpose. Though she could not lend a hand in the construction of the hall, she wanted to help.
This Christian woman may remind you of another faithful woman—the “poor widow” whom Jesus observed dropping two small coins into the temple treasury. We are not told of her circumstances, but being without a husband back then could put a woman in a precarious financial situation. Surely Jesus’ heart went out to her, for he fully understood her plight. In holding her up as an example for his disciples, he noted that her small gift represented “all of what she had, her whole living.”—Mark 12:41-44.
Why would a needy woman like this poor widow make such a sacrifice? Clearly, it was because she was deeply devoted to Jehovah God, whose worship was centered at the temple in Jerusalem. Although limited in what she could do, she wanted to promote sacred service. And she must have felt real joy in contributing whatever she could.
Giving to Support Jehovah’s Work
Making material and financial contributions has always been a necessary part of pure worship, and it has always been a source of great joy. (1 Chronicles 29:9) In ancient Israel contributions were used not only to beautify the temple but also to keep all aspects of Jehovah’s worship there in daily operation. The Law specified that the sons of Israel contribute one tenth of their produce to support the Levites, who performed the temple services. But the Levites too were to contribute to Jehovah a tenth of the products they received.—Numbers 18:21-29.
Although Christians were set free from the requirements of the Law covenant, the principle that God’s servants contribute materially in support of true worship remained unchanged. (Galatians 5:1) In addition, first-century Christians considered it a joy to contribute toward relieving their brothers’ needs. (Acts 2:45, 46) The apostle Paul reminded Christians that just as God generously supplied them with good things, so they should show generosity to others. He wrote: “Give orders to those who are rich in the present system of things not to be high-minded, and to rest their hope, not on uncertain riches, but on God, who furnishes us all things richly for our enjoyment; to work at good, to be rich in fine works, to be liberal, ready to share, safely treasuring up for themselves a fine foundation for the future, in order that they may get a firm hold on the real life.” (1 Timothy 6:17-19; 2 Corinthians 9:11) Indeed, from personal experience, Paul could confirm Jesus’ words: “There is more happiness in giving than there is in receiving.”—Acts 20:35.
Christian Giving Today
Today, Jehovah’s servants continue to use their material assets to help one another and to support God’s work. Even those with little means contribute what they can. “The faithful and discreet slave” feels responsible to Jehovah to make the best possible use of all these contributed funds. (Matthew 24:45) Funds are used to operate branch offices, translate and produce Bibles and Bible literature, arrange for large Christian gatherings, train and send out traveling overseers and missionaries, provide disaster relief, as well as for many other essential purposes. Let us focus on one such purpose—helping to provide places of worship.
Jehovah’s Witnesses meet several times a week in their Kingdom Halls to benefit from spiritual education and wholesome association. In many lands, however, economic conditions do not permit local Witnesses to finance the construction of Kingdom Halls without some initial assistance. In 1999, therefore, Jehovah’s Witnesses began a program to use funds from wealthier lands to help build Kingdom Halls in poorer countries. In addition, thousands of volunteers have donated their time and skills, often working in remote areas of these countries. During construction, local Witnesses learn building and maintenance skills, and the Kingdom Hall Fund makes it possible to purchase needed equipment and materials. The Witnesses who now use these new halls are deeply grateful that their fellow believers donated time and money. Local Witnesses also contribute from month to month to maintain the new Kingdom Hall and to help defray the construction costs, thus helping toward the building of more Kingdom Halls.
Kingdom Halls are built using local methods and materials. Although these halls are not elaborate, they are attractive, practical, and comfortable. When the building program began in 1999, some 40 countries with limited resources were included. Since then, the construction program has been expanded to encompass 116 such lands, involving more than half of the congregations of Jehovah’s Witnesses in the world. In the past five years, more than 9,000 Kingdom Halls have been built under this arrangement, an average of more than 5 new halls each day! Still, in these 116 lands, there remains a need for 14,500 new Kingdom Halls. With Jehovah’s blessing and through the willingness and generosity of Witnesses around the world, it is hoped that there will be enough funds to meet this need.—Psalm 127:1.
Kingdom Halls Promote Growth
What impact has this tremendous effort had on the local Witnesses and on the Kingdom-preaching work? In many localities, there is a dramatic increase in meeting attendance after a new Kingdom Hall is built. A typical example is found in this report from Burundi: “As soon as the Kingdom Hall is finished, it fills up. For example, one Kingdom Hall was built for a congregation that averaged about 100 in attendance at their meetings. Their new Kingdom Hall comfortably seats 150. By the time it was finished, 250 were attending meetings.”
Why does such increase take place? For one thing, groups of Kingdom publishers who have no formal meeting place but who must meet under a tree or in a field are sometimes viewed with suspicion. In one land, ethnic violence has been associated with such small religious groups, and the law requires that all religious meetings be held inside a house of worship.
Having their own halls also helps Jehovah’s Witnesses to show the community that they are not disciples of some individual pastor. The Zimbabwe branch office of Jehovah’s Witnesses writes: “In the past, brothers in this area used to meet in private homes, and the local people identified the congregation with the owner of the home in which they met. They would refer to the brothers as belonging to the church of Mr. So-and-so. All of this is changing now as people see signs clearly identifying each hall as a ‘Kingdom Hall of Jehovah’s Witnesses.’”
Joyful Givers
“God loves a cheerful giver,” wrote the apostle Paul. (2 Corinthians 9:7) Large donations are, of course, very helpful. But the greater portion of funds contributed to the work of Jehovah’s Witnesses comes from Kingdom Hall contribution boxes. Large or small, all contributions are important and are not overlooked. Recall that Jesus stationed himself where he could see the poor widow contribute her two small coins. The angels and Jehovah saw her too. We do not even know the widow’s name, but Jehovah saw to it that her selfless act was recorded in the Bible for all time.
In addition to Kingdom Hall construction, our contributions support all other facets of the vital Kingdom work. Cooperating in this way gives us reason to rejoice and to be “rich with many expressions of thanks to God.” (2 Corinthians 9:12) Our Christian brothers in Benin report: “Each day many prayers of gratitude ascend to Jehovah for the financial aid received from the international brotherhood.” At the same time, all of us who have a share in supporting the Kingdom work financially experience the happiness that comes from Christian giving!
[Box/Picture on page 22, 23]
Ways in Which Some Choose to Give
CONTRIBUTIONS TO THE WORLDWIDE WORK
  Many set aside, or budget, an amount that they place in the contribution boxes labeled “Contributions for the Worldwide Work—Matthew 24:14.”
  Each month, congregations forward these amounts to the office of Jehovah’s Witnesses that serves their respective countries. Voluntary donations of money may also be sent directly to Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society of Pennsylvania, c/o Office of the Secretary and Treasurer, 25 Columbia Heights, Brooklyn, New York 11201-2483, or to the branch office that serves your country. Checks should be made payable to “Watch Tower.” Jewelry or other valuables may be donated as well. A brief letter stating that such is an outright gift should accompany these contributions.
CONDITIONAL-DONATION TRUST ARRANGEMENT
  Money may be placed in trust for the benefit of Watch Tower. However, upon request the funds will be returned. For more information, please contact the Office of the Secretary and Treasurer at the address noted above.
CHARITABLE PLANNING
  In addition to outright gifts of money, there are other methods of giving to benefit Kingdom service worldwide. These include:
Insurance: Watch Tower may be named as the beneficiary of a life insurance policy or a retirement/pension plan.
Bank Accounts: Bank accounts, certificates of deposit, or individual retirement accounts may be placed in trust for or made payable on death to Watch Tower, in accord with local bank requirements.
Stocks and Bonds: Stocks and bonds may be donated to Watch Tower as an outright gift.
Real Estate: Salable real estate may be donated either by making an outright gift or, in the case of residential property, by reserving a life estate to the donor, who can continue to live therein during his or her lifetime. Contact the branch office in your country before deeding any real estate.
Gift Annuity: A gift annuity is an arrangement whereby one transfers money or securities to a Watchtower corporation. In exchange, the donor, or someone designated by the donor, receives a specified annuity payment every year for life. The donor receives an income-tax deduction the year the gift annuity is established.
Wills and Trusts: Property or money may be bequeathed to Watch Tower by means of a legally executed will, or Watch Tower may be named as beneficiary of a trust agreement. A trust benefiting a religious organization may provide certain tax advantages.
  As the term “charitable planning” implies, these types of donations typically require some planning on the part of the donor. To assist individuals desiring to benefit the worldwide work of Jehovah’s Witnesses through some form of charitable planning, a brochure has been prepared in English and Spanish entitled Charitable Planning to Benefit Kingdom Service Worldwide. The brochure was written to provide information on a variety of ways that gifts may be made either now or through a bequest at death. After reading the brochure and conferring with their own legal or tax advisers, many have been able to help support the work of Jehovah’s Witnesses worldwide and maximize their tax benefits while doing so. This brochure may be obtained by requesting a copy directly from the Charitable Planning Office.
  For more information, you may contact the Charitable Planning Office, either in writing or by telephone, at the address listed below or at the office of Jehovah’s Witnesses that serves your country.
Charitable Planning Office
Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society of Pennsylvania
100 Watchtower Drive,
Patterson, New York 12563-9204
Telephone: (845) 306-0707
[Pictures on page 20, 21]
Older and newer meeting places of Jehovah’s Witnesses
Zambia
Central African Republic

