The Search for Good Leadership
“Depart, I say, and let us have done with you. In the name of God, go!”—Oliver Cromwell; quoted by Leopold Amery, member of the British Parliament.
World War II had run its destructive course for eight months, and it was not going well for Britain and her allies. To Leopold Amery and others in the government, a change in leadership was needed. Therefore, on May 7, 1940, in the House of Commons, Mr. Amery quoted the words above to Prime Minister Neville Chamberlain. Three days later, Mr. Chamberlain left office, and Winston Churchill took his place.
LEADERSHIP is a basic need of mankind, but not just any leader will do. Even in a family, the father must be up to the task of taking the lead if his wife and children are to be happy. Imagine, then, what is required of a national or world leader! Little wonder that good leaders have proved very hard to find.
Consequently, for thousands of years, uncountable coronations, revolutions, coups, appointments, elections, assassinations, and regime changes have occurred. Kings, prime ministers, princes, presidents, secretaries-general, and dictators have found themselves in and out of power. Unexpected changes have removed even powerful rulers. (See the box “Suddenly out of Power,” on page 5.) Still, competent and enduring leadership has proved elusive.
“We Must Make Do”—Or Must We?
It is no wonder, therefore, that many have lost hope when it comes to finding good leadership. In some countries, the people’s feelings of apathy and hopelessness become especially evident at election time. Geoff Hill, a journalist in Africa, noted: “Apathy or abstention [from voting] holds sway when people feel powerless to change the misery of their lives. . . . In Africa, when people don’t vote, it doesn’t necessarily mean they are content. More often, it is a cry for help from those who feel that no one is listening.” Similarly, a newspaper columnist in the United States wrote regarding a pending election: “I wish a perfect candidate were running.” He added: “There’s no such being. There never is. We must make do.”
Has mankind, indeed, no choice but to “make do” with imperfect leaders? Does the fact that human leaders have been unable to satisfy the needs of their subjects prove that we will never have good leadership? No. Leadership of the highest quality is available. The next article will consider who the ideal leader of mankind is and how his service can benefit many millions of people of all backgrounds—including you.
[Pictures on page 3]
Top left: Neville Chamberlain
Top right: Leopold Amery
Bottom: Winston Churchill
[Credit Lines]
Chamberlain: Photo by Jimmy Sime/Central Press/Getty Images; Amery: Photo by Kurt Hutton/Picture Post/Getty Images; Churchill: The Trustees of the Imperial War Museum (MH 26392)

