Who Is the Right Leader for Today?
In 1940, there was a leadership crisis in the British Parliament. Seventy-seven-year-old David Lloyd George, who listened to the debate, had led Britain to victory in World War I, and his many years in politics enabled him to evaluate keenly the work of high officials. In a speech to the House of Commons on May 8, he stated: “The nation is prepared for every sacrifice so long as it has leadership, so long as the Government show clearly what they are aiming at and so long as the nation is confident that those who are leading it are doing their best.”
THE words of Lloyd George make it clear that people expect their leaders to be competent and to make honest efforts to try to improve things. An election campaign worker put it this way: “When people cast a vote for president, they are casting a vote for someone in whom they are entrusting their lives, their future, their children.” Guarding such a trust is a monumental task. Why so?
Our world is beset with problems that defy solution. What leader, for example, has proved himself so wise and powerful that he can eradicate crime and war? Who among today’s leaders has the resources and compassion to provide every human with food, clean water, and health care? Who has the knowledge and determination to protect and restore the environment? Who is competent and powerful enough to ensure that all mankind enjoy a long and happy life?
Humans Cannot Do the Job
It is true that some leaders have achieved a measure of success. However, they can serve at most for a few decades—and then who is next? One of the most competent leaders who ever lived, King Solomon of ancient Israel, pondered this question. He concluded: “I, even I, hated all my hard work at which I was working hard under the sun, that I would leave behind for the man who would come to be after me. And who is there knowing whether he will prove to be wise or foolish? Yet he will take control over all my hard work at which I worked hard and at which I showed wisdom under the sun. This too is vanity.”—Ecclesiastes 2:18, 19.
Solomon did not know whether his successor would continue his good work or tear it all down. To Solomon, the cycle of replacing old rulers with new ones was “vanity.” Other Bible translations call this process “futile,” or “pointless.” One version says: “It doesn’t make sense.”
At times, violence is used to force a change in rulers. Capable leaders have been cut down as they were doing their work. Abraham Lincoln, a highly esteemed president of the United States, once told an audience: “I have been selected to fill an important office for a brief period, and am now, in your eyes, invested with an influence which will soon pass away.” His service was indeed brief. Despite all he did and his desire to do more for the people, President Lincoln led his country for only four years. At the start of his second term in office, he was murdered by a man who wanted a change in leadership.
Even the best human leaders cannot guarantee their own future. Should you, then, trust them to guarantee yours? The Bible says: “Do not put your trust in nobles, nor in the son of earthling man, to whom no salvation belongs. His spirit goes out, he goes back to his ground; in that day his thoughts do perish.” The Byington translation renders the last part of Ps 146 verse 4: “That day his goodwill is a total loss.”—Psalm 146:3, 4.
The advice not to trust in human leaders may be hard to accept. However, the Bible does not say that mankind will never have good, steady leadership. “Look! A king will reign for righteousness itself,” says Isaiah 32:1. Jehovah God, man’s Creator, has prepared “a king,” a Leader, who will soon take full control of earth’s affairs. Who is he? Bible prophecy identifies him.
One Truly Qualified to Lead
Two thousand years ago, an angel told a young Jewish woman named Mary: “You will conceive in your womb and give birth to a son, and you are to call his name Jesus. This one will be great and will be called Son of the Most High; and Jehovah God will give him the throne of David his father, and he will rule as king over the house of Jacob forever, and there will be no end of his kingdom.” (Luke 1:31-33) Yes, Jesus of Nazareth is the King of Bible prophecy.
Religious artwork often portrays Jesus as a baby, as an undernourished weakling, or as an ascetic who passively submits to whatever befalls him. These images do not inspire confidence in him as Ruler. The real Jesus Christ of the Bible, however, grew up to be a vigorous, well-developed man full of zeal and initiative. And he possessed other traits that qualified him for leadership. (Luke 2:52) Following are a few aspects of his outstanding personality.
Jesus maintained perfect integrity. His honest, upright conduct was such that he publicly challenged his enemies to present a valid accusation against him. They could not. (John 8:46) His unhypocritical teachings persuaded many sincere people to become his followers.—John 7:46; 8:28-30; 12:19.
Jesus was completely dedicated to God. He was so determined to finish his God-assigned work that no opponent—human or demon—could deter him. Violent attacks did not frighten him. (Luke 4:28-30) Fatigue and hunger did not discourage him. (John 4:5-16, 31-34) Even though his friends abandoned him, he never swerved from his goal.—Matthew 26:55, 56; John 18:3-9.
Jesus had deep concern for people. He provided food for the hungry. (John 6:10, 11) He gave comfort to the depressed. (Luke 7:11-15) He restored sight, hearing, and health to those needing a cure. (Matthew 12:22; Luke 8:43-48; John 9:1-6) He gave encouragement to his hardworking apostles. (John, chapters 13-17) He proved to be “the fine shepherd” who cared for his sheep.—John 10:11-14.
Jesus was willing to work. He washed the feet of the apostles in order to teach them an important lesson. (John 13:4-15) His own feet got dirty as he preached the good news along the dusty roads of Israel. (Luke 8:1) Even when he was planning on resting in “a lonely place,” he responded when the crowds sought him out for more instruction. (Mark 6:30-34) He thus set an example of diligence for all Christians.—1 John 2:6.
Jesus finished his assignment and passed off the earthly scene. As a reward for his faithfulness, Jehovah God granted him kingship and immortality in the heavens. Of the resurrected Jesus, the Bible says: “Christ, now that he has been raised up from the dead, dies no more; death is master over him no more.” (Romans 6:9) You can be assured that he is the best possible Leader of mankind. Once Christ Jesus takes full control over the earth, there will be no need to empower someone else, nor will there ever be a need for change in leadership. He will never be cut off while in office, and his work will not be undone or ruined by an inept successor. But what specifically will he do to benefit mankind?
What This New Leader Will Do
Psalm 72 gives us some prophetic details of how this perfect, immortal King will rule. In Ps 72 verses 7 and 8, we read: “In his days the righteous one will sprout, and the abundance of peace until the moon is no more. And he will have subjects from sea to sea and from the River to the ends of the earth.” Under his beneficial rule, earth’s inhabitants will enjoy everlasting and unbroken security. He will destroy all existing weapons and will remove from man’s heart even the desire for conflict. Those men who today attack others like voracious lions or who act like ill-tempered bears toward their neighbors will have changed their dispositions completely. (Isaiah 11:1-9) Peace will be abundant.
Psalm 72 further says in Ps 72 verses 12 through 14: “He will deliver the poor one crying for help, also the afflicted one and whoever has no helper. He will feel sorry for the lowly one and the poor one, and the souls of the poor ones he will save. From oppression and from violence he will redeem their soul, and their blood will be precious in his eyes.” The lowly, poor, and afflicted will become part of one happy human family, unified under the leadership of the King Jesus Christ. Joy, not pain and despair, will characterize their lives.—Isaiah 35:10.
Ps 72 Verse 16 promises: “There will come to be plenty of grain on the earth; on the top of the mountains there will be an overflow.” Hunger is the constant companion of millions on earth today. Politics and greed often prevent the fair distribution of sufficient food, so that multitudes, especially children, die of starvation. But under the rule of Jesus Christ, this problem will vanish. The earth will be blessed with good harvests of delicious food. All mankind will be well fed.
Would you like to enjoy those blessings of good leadership? If so, we encourage you to learn about the Leader who will soon exercise full control over all the earth. Jehovah’s Witnesses will gladly help you to do so. You will not be disappointed, for Jehovah God himself says of his Son: “I, even I, have installed my king upon Zion, my holy mountain.”—Psalm 2:6.
[Box on page 5]
SUDDENLY OUT OF POWER
  A ruler can usually count on the respect and support of his subjects if he brings them a reasonable measure of peace and secure living conditions. However, if people lose confidence in him for any reason, someone else may soon be sitting in the seat of power. Following are some examples of conditions that suddenly forced strong rulers out of power.
Bad living conditions. By the late 18th century, many French citizens were forced to live a life that was long on taxes and short on food. These conditions contributed to the French Revolution, which in 1793 sent King Louis XVI to the guillotine.
War. World War I put an end to the rule of some of the most powerful emperors in history. For example, in 1917 a war-induced food shortage in St. Petersburg, Russia, turned into the February Revolution. This revolt dethroned Czar Nicholas II and led to Communist rule. In November 1918, Germany wanted peace, but the Allies would not stop fighting until a change in rulership had been made. As a result, German Emperor Wilhelm II was forced into exile in the Netherlands.
Desire for different systems of government. In 1989 the Iron Curtain was removed. Regimes that seemed as hard as rock crumbled as their subjects rejected Communism and established different forms of rule.
[Pictures on page 7]
Jesus fed the hungry, healed the sick, and set a fine example for all Christians
[Picture Credit Line on page 4]
Lloyd George: Photo by Kurt Hutton/Picture Post/Getty Images

