From Our Readers
Special Needs  Thank you for the article on helping those with special needs. (August 22, 1989) I have a severe crippling disease that affects my muscles, joints, and organs. As a result, I have had many operations and have had to use wheelchairs, walkers, canes, and braces of various types. Being only 25 years old, I get many comments, directly and indirectly, that really hurt. While some people are simply curious, others are rude and thoughtless. Such an article helps not only disabled ones but also those who are blessed with good health; these learn to be more understanding.
D. H., United States
Gossip  About a year ago, I fell victim to harmful gossip. I was offended and hurt at first, but my father and I tracked the rumor down and stopped it that same day. The article (July 22, 1989) helped me put this outrageous lie behind me.
P. M., United States
I am 17 years old, and some persons gossiped about me. One night I saw one of them, and I did not know what to do. When I got home, I came upon the article on gossip. I thanked Jehovah from the heart for answering my prayers. I learned how to deal with such persons and saw that I should not take myself too seriously. After all, I am not so important that they will talk about me the rest of my life, and what is more important, my real friends and Jehovah know that what they spread is not true. Thank you for being aware of the needs of youths!
L. U., Brazil
Shark Bionics  I read with interest the article about artificial shark skin. (“Watching the World,” August 8, 1989) I am employed by a company that has been working on this same project for several years. Awake! articles like this that discuss the amazing creative designs found in nature have given me many opportunities to talk to others about our Creator.
M. H., United States
Profanity  Recently I wrote you a letter about the problem of profanity among youths. To my great surprise, just today I received the August 22, 1989, issue with the article “What’s Wrong With Cursing Once in a While?” I know this article was prepared long before I wrote, and it is encouraging and faith-​strengthening to experience personally that my prayer for help was answered through your publications.
J. A., United States
Safe Food  I serve as a traveling minister of Jehovah’s Witnesses, accompanied by my wife. We don’t like to burden our hosts with a lot of rules on food care, so we are exposed to digestive problems. You can well imagine how helpful this article (June 22, 1989) has turned out to be for us! We really want to thank you for thinking of everything that is good for God’s people.
R. P., Venezuela
Death for Sale  Everything written in your article (July 8, 1989) was informative and true. I know because I smoked for more than ten years. The result: fatigue, sweating, and bad humor when I had no tobacco. I decided to stop smoking, but my resolve lasted only two months. Some time later, I began to study with Jehovah’s Witnesses and learned to apply the Bible’s counsel at 2 Corinthians 7:1, and I finally quit. Soon I hope to be baptized as a Witness.
A. P., Spain

