Homeless Children​—Is There a Solution?
PEOPLE who really care for their fellowman do not want to give up as if nothing more can be done for homeless children. They realize that street children need more than a roof over their heads. Children flourish when they have peace of mind, enjoyable work, good health, and self-​confidence. Altruistic men and women offer themselves willingly in the interests of the homeless, and that is commendable. But in spite of their efforts, the problem of street children persists.
The reason is that the present system that perpetuates conditions that produce homeless children cannot be fixed. It is like a broken-​down car that is beyond repair. Realistically, should we not recognize that man’s creativity alone cannot bring about a just human society?
Happily, though, a change is possible​—but not by human hands. Only Almighty God has the capability and the wisdom to eliminate entirely what is hurtful on earth. His Word, the Bible, tells us about administration by his heavenly Kingdom and how it will fulfill man’s desire for righteous conditions right here on earth.​—Daniel 2:44.
God Cares
Do you think it possible for God to remove the present system and introduce a new way of life? If so, remember that not only man’s salvation but, above all, Jehovah God’s name is involved. Being the Creator, the superlative example of orderliness and punctuality, he assures us that he will act in his due time and manner, and this through his Kingdom. Actually, that Kingdom is not something indefinite and vague but is a heavenly government, able to provide supervision and progressive instruction to deal with man’s real needs.​—Isaiah 48:17, 18.
A homeless child can take to heart the words of David at Psalm 27:10: “In case my own father and my own mother did leave me, even Jehovah himself would take me up.” It is also encouraging to know that a low status in the world does not disqualify one from learning about God’s will. Proverbs 22:2 states: “The rich one and the one of little means have met each other. The Maker of them all is Jehovah.” Yes, the unfortunate ones, when sincere, can be sure that Jehovah God is willing to help them.​—Psalm 10:14, 17.
Jehovah is interested in our well-​being and knows how to satisfy our rightful desires. Once he asked the Israelites through the prophet Isaiah: “Is not this the fast that I choose? . . . Is it not the dividing of your bread out to the hungry one, and that you should bring the afflicted, homeless people into your house? That, in case you should see someone naked, you must cover him?” (Isaiah 58:6, 7) This is the equality and justice that God will bring about through his Kingdom government. No one will be ignored or treated as though he did not exist. Thus, Psalm 145:19 informs us: “The desire of those fearing him he will perform, and their cry for help he will hear, and he will save them.” Love for God and fellowman will be the principal force to unite the human family. As a result, the problem of homeless children will be solved. No one will be left alone!
Will Man’s Imperfection Hinder God’s Purpose?
No, man’s bad inclinations will not be allowed to hinder Jehovah’s purpose to transform the earth into a paradise of pleasure. Those who are privileged to live in God’s new world, either because they survive the battle of Armageddon, as described in the Bible, or because they are resurrected from the dead to live again on earth, will be encouraged to do their very best.​—John 5:28, 29; Revelation 16:14, 16.
No one who responds will find his work to be futile. His work will be rewarded accordingly. Note, please, God’s promise: “They will not build and someone else have occupancy; they will not plant and someone else do the eating. For like the days of a tree will the days of my people be; and the work of their own hands my chosen ones will use to the full. They will not toil for nothing, nor will they bring to birth for disturbance; because they are the offspring made up of the blessed ones of Jehovah, and their descendants with them.” (Isaiah 65:22, 23) Would you and your family not like to see the fulfillment of those words? And what a joy to know that then you will nowhere find famine, poverty, unemployment, or homeless children!
No doubt, those who presently suffer privations, as the homeless children do, will value more fully the blessings of a happy family and a comfortable home. As we read at Isaiah 65:17: “The former things will not be called to mind, neither will they come up into the heart.” Persons privileged to live then will find that adverse conditions are gone forever and that people of all nations, languages, and races will be working together in a loving brotherhood. Family units that survive into that time will no doubt continue to give God glory. Psalm 37:11 says of that earthly Paradise: “The meek ones themselves will possess the earth, and they will indeed find their exquisite delight in the abundance of peace.”
How Can You Prepare Yourself for the Future?
Even now, it is possible to obtain life-​giving knowledge and to cultivate desirable qualities, such as love and kindness. How so? Jehovah loves the human family, and through his Son, Jesus Christ, He ‘draws people to Christ’ by contact with His Word and His people. (John 6:44) He also has an organization on earth with a teaching program that can help you to do God’s will so that you can look forward to a happy and meaningful life forever. Thus, the good news of God’s Kingdom is preached to those in need. (Matthew 24:14) God’s Word says: “The one despising his own fellowman is sinning, but happy is he who is showing favor to the afflicted ones.” (Proverbs 14:21) It is heartwarming to know that even underprivileged ones can approach God if their motive is right. The psalmist wrote: “But I am afflicted and poor. O God, do act quickly for me. You are my help and the Provider of escape for me. O Jehovah, do not be too late.”​—Psalm 70:5.
Yes, God’s Word can give you a real hope for the future. Yet, the common use of the word “hope” does not always imply certainty. In Brazil one often hears the expression: “A esperança é a última que morre” (similar to the English “Hope springs eternal”). The idea is to remain hopeful even when there seems to be no basis for it. In contrast, the Scriptures provide solid reasons for maintaining strong faith in God and hope in his promises. We read at Romans 10:11: “None that rests his faith on him will be disappointed.” Such a Bible-based hope will not lead to frustration. Just as the wonders of our earth are real, testifying to Jehovah’s wisdom and love, so the fulfillment of Bible prophecies permits you to have a positive outlook, a genuine hope for the future.​—Romans 15:13.
God’s Kingdom is the real solution for homeless children, yes, for all who love what is right. Acquiring accurate Bible knowledge now will enable you to enjoy happiness and everlasting life in God’s new world. The anticipation of these promises is not a product of fantasy. As Proverbs 11:19 declares: “The one firmly standing for righteousness is in line for life.”
[Box on page 11]
A Temporary Solution?
An outstretched hand from a soulful-​looking waif can tug at the heart. But concerned individuals are at a loss as to how to help a homeless child. In order to feel less guilty, some people will drop a few coins into the child’s palm and quickly walk away. Yet, chances are slim that the handout will be spent on food or shelter. Rather, it may well end up being used to buy drugs or alcohol. Therefore, some civic-​minded adults are giving their attention and money to local government-​sponsored programs that they feel will assist homeless children. Other people believe that a more practical approach is to direct the homeless child to the proper agency for help. In this way, concerned citizens feel that they are trying to make their own community more humane.
[Picture on page 9]
“They will not plant and someone else do the eating.”​—Isaiah 65:22
[Credit Line]
FAO photo
[Picture on page 10]
“For like the days of a tree will the days of my people be.”​—Isaiah 65:22

