Young People Ask . . .
What About Modeling Careers and Beauty Contests?
“WHEN traveling to New York last year,” recalled 12-​year-​old Amy, “a guy running a hotel told my mom, ‘You ought to enter your daughter in a modeling school. . . . She’s pretty.’”
A number of attractive youths have had similar experiences. Fifteen-year-old Racine received a phone call from a man who tried to interest her and her younger sister in a modeling career. A young woman from South Africa was asked to participate in a beauty contest. And the lucrative offers are not limited to girls. Young Jonathan was offered employment as a male model.
Yes, throughout the world, young men and women and children of all ages are being recruited for modeling careers, beauty pageants, and the like. In the United States alone, it is reported that hundreds of thousands of beauty contests are held each year. Winners receive thousands of dollars in cash, prizes, and scholarships. For a select few, winning a beauty pageant has resulted in lucrative entertainment and modeling careers.
One young woman states: “All my life I have wanted to be a fashion model​—modeling clothing for local magazines and fashion shows. The pay ranges from $25 to $100 per hour.” Reportedly, though, some top models earn salaries of as much as $2,500 per day! Little wonder, then, some Christian youths have been tempted to cash in on their good looks. How might you respond if you were offered such a flattering opportunity?
Beauty Can Be Beneficial
It was said of the Jewish virgin Esther that she was “pretty in form and beautiful in appearance.” (Esther 2:7) In fact, you could even say that she involuntarily participated in a beauty contest of sorts. The circumstances? Persian queen Vashti had been removed from office for insubordination. In order to find a suitable replacement, King Ahasuerus collected together the most beautiful virgins from all the realm. Over a 12-​month period, he arranged for the young women to be placed on a special diet and to receive regular massages with balsam oil and myrrh. Each girl was then evaluated in turn. And when Esther’s turn came, she was selected to be the new queen!​—Esther 1:12–​2:17.
Why, though, did Esther participate? Was she a vain glory seeker? No, Esther was following Jehovah’s direction, which she repeatedly sought through her godly cousin and guardian, Mordecai. (Esther 4:5-17) A wicked man named Haman was plotting the destruction of God’s people, the nation of Israel. The ‘beauty contest’ allowed Jehovah to maneuver Esther into a prominent position where she would be able to foil this plot. Esther’s good looks thus proved to be a blessing for all of God’s people!
What about today? How one looks is definitely not the most important thing in life.a Nevertheless, when accompanied with modesty and humility, attractive looks can be an asset. Does this mean, though, that modeling or participating in beauty pageants is a prudent way to use this asset? Or are there factors to consider beyond the lure of fame, glory, or riches?
Behind the Glitter
Fashion modeling does have its glamour. Fine clothing, expensive jewelry, good pay, the prospects of travel and television appearances​—these are all quite alluring. Additionally, modeling training has helped many young women and men to walk gracefully and to speak with confidence and poise. But beyond the glamour, glitter, and glitz may lurk real dangers for a Christian.
Not that modeling in itself is bad. Some modeling serves an upright purpose: to make a product look appealing. That is one reason why lovely hands are used to display nail polish in magazine layouts and TV commercials. Similarly, well-​formed men and women are used to display articles of clothing. Presuming such clothing is modest, there may be no objection to a Christian’s being paid to model it.
Nevertheless, there are many problems inherent in modeling that are not always easy to avoid. How would you react, for example, if you were called upon to wear something immodest or inappropriate for Christians? Or if a photographer used subtle pressure to have you pose in a suggestive, alluring way? Furthermore, one cannot always be certain how photographs will be used. For example, the photos could appear in a setting that promotes false religious holidays or that has immoral overtones.
Then there is the effect that such a career could have on one’s personality, promoting the development of negative traits. The continued emphasis on one’s outward appearance rather than on “the secret person of the heart” has caused some fashion models to become exceedingly vain. (1 Peter 3:4) Also, working with expensive clothing, jewelry, and the like can cause materialistic thinking to take root.​—1 Timothy 6:10.
The fashion-​modeling profession is also notorious for exposing one to individuals, male and female, who insist on sexual favors in exchange for career advancement. As one former fashion model observed: “Frankly, you have to give in [sexually] to get anywhere.” Some further claim that homosexuality is rampant among male models. While this may not always be true, it may be more of a problem in modeling than in other professions.
Beauty Pageants
Much of the foregoing can also be said of beauty pageants. In addition, however, there is also the pressure of intense competition. This has pushed some contestants to the point of deliberately sabotaging fellow contenders. According to one report, “some competitors are so desperate for victory they are not above smearing lipstick on rivals’ swimsuits or ‘accidentally’ staining their evening gowns with Coke.”
Also, beauty pageant sponsors expect total commitment from their girls as their sales and public-​relations representatives. Often this requires socializing till dawn. One young woman was told: “Darling, you’re never tired. Just remember that. You’re the first one to arrive at a party and you’re the last one to leave.” At the very least, this can expose a Christian youth to unwholesome association and could even lead to one’s becoming romantically involved with an unbeliever.​—2 Corinthians 6:14.
Finally, there is the fact that beauty contests disregard the Bible principle at Romans 1:25, which condemns those who ‘venerate and render sacred service to the creation rather than the One who created.’ (Compare Acts 12:21-23.) On that basis alone, a Christian youth would do well to decline participation in a beauty contest even if it were on a small-​scale basis in school.
Real Beauty
The young folks mentioned earlier had to weigh these facts in making their own decisions. Although pursuing employment as a model may not be wrong in itself, Amy and Racine decided not to do so. Jonathan likewise turned down employment as a male model and is currently serving at the world headquarters of Jehovah’s Witnesses, pursuing a career in the full-​time ministry. But another attractive girl entered and won two beauty contests. Today, she no longer attends Christian meetings. How true the saying: “That which is striking and beautiful is not always good; but that which is good is always beautiful.”
We are reminded again of Esther. Because of her physical beauty, she was included in the king’s lineup for a wife. However, it was her modesty, submissiveness, obedience, and lack of greed that made her really beautiful. (Esther 2:13, 15-17) She exemplified Peter’s words: “Do not let your adornment be that of the external braiding of the hair and of the putting on of gold ornaments or the wearing of outer garments, but let it be the secret person of the heart in the incorruptible apparel of the quiet and mild spirit, which is of great value in the eyes of God.” (1 Peter 3:3, 4) In the long run, cultivating these Christian qualities will be of far greater gain than the short-​lived rewards of physical beauty.
[Footnotes]
See the article “How Important Are Looks?” appearing in the January 8, 1986, issue of Awake!
[Pictures on page 23]
Christian qualities are of greater gain than the short-​lived rewards of physical beauty

