From Our Readers
Cerebral Palsy
Just six days before I received the issue of August 8, 1982, the doctors told my husband and me that our youngest daughter (sixteen months old) had a nerve disease that also affected her muscles. They say she will never walk, or even stand, and that the disease is fatal. The article “He’s Going to Be a Little Boy” has really given me comfort in knowing that with Jehovah’s help our family too can cope with such trials. Thank you for the article at such a time when I needed the extra encouragement.
L. M., Louisiana
We want to express our appreciation for the article “He’s Going to Be a Little Boy.” It was especially touching to us because our little daughter has cerebral palsy. I hope that if I am ever faced with a similar situation I may reply with the same conviction. We were fortunate to find a doctor who detected the cause of our daughter’s problems when she was only four weeks of age. When she was eleven weeks of age we were able to begin neurodevelopmental therapy. She has made steady and remarkable progress and will soon be one year old. Our hearts ache to know that others have not had such a pleasant outcome. But we have faith that God sees all of it and will fully rectify all matters in his due time.
D. N., California
I must put pen to paper and say how much I appreciated the article “He’s Going to Be a Little Boy.” My husband and I have two handicapped little girls, aged two and four, and know exactly how the mother felt when she quoted 1 Corinthians 13:8: “Love never fails.” At times things do become very difficult, and there have been days when I’ve wondered where I’m going to get the energy to keep going, but I just remember Jehovah’s words at Isaiah 41:10, 13 and I’m so grateful that I worship a God who keeps his promises.
A. T., Scotland
I have never read such a heart-moving article as the one “He’s Going to Be a Little Boy.” I prayed that Jehovah will bless the parents of little Sasha for the love, patience and kindness they showed their loving son. I too look forward to seeing Sasha in the new order when Jehovah will restore him to perfect health.
K. F., England
I am twelve years old. When my mother and I were reading the article “He’s Going to Be a Little Boy,” we both started to cry. It just goes to show that even though we don’t know the person who wrote it, our hearts pour out to them. Hopefully, someday soon they will be able to see their dear son again, when people won’t have to die.
C. K., New Jersey
“I Just Want a Job!”
Thank you very much for the article “I Just Want a Job!” (June 8, 1982) The practical suggestions are most helpful. I am often with young people my own age who will soon be faced with this problem. I am sure that in such cases I will be able to make good use of this magazine. Thank you once again.
N. S., Germany

