The “Diary of an Unborn Child” Goes to School
MY ENGLISH teacher asked the class to write a report on a recent magazine that we had read. At the time the current issue of Awake! had a series of articles on abortion. Since abortions occur frequently, even among high school students, I chose that subject. When I presented my report to the class I read “Diary of an Unborn Child.” (Awake! of May 22, 1980, page 16) The class listened intently, and at the end when the baby said, “Today my mother killed me,” practically everyone gave a heartbroken sigh.
After class one girl came to me and asked, “May I have that magazine?” She explained that her mother wanted to have an abortion, but she wanted very much to have a little brother or sister​—preferably a brother. I gave her the magazine, she gave it to her mother, and the next morning her mother announced that she had changed her mind. She would have the baby, not the abortion. Later on the mother had a test to determine the sex of the baby​—it was to be a boy. The girl was overjoyed!
So was I. Witnessing to others can save lives in more ways than one!​—From a young Witness in Ontario, Canada.
In my third year of high school a group of us had to work up a play on anything relating to the home. I proposed the theme of abortion, and my companions accepted. The play concerned a family that did whatever they wished. The daughter committed fornication and became pregnant. When it became known to the rest of the family, the different members gave their opinions as to what should be done, but the decision was left up to the girl. As she stands thinking in front of the audience a recording of the “Diary of an Unborn Child” is heard. The play ended with the last entry in the diary: “Today my mother killed me.”
There was silence. Many of the class sat there with tears running down their cheeks. Others were near tears but held them back. All were deeply moved by the “Diary of an Unborn Child.” Finally the teacher, her own eyes misty, demanded: “Well, aren’t you going to applaud?” The spell broken, applause broke loose. The teacher asked where I got this information, and I showed her the diary as it was published in the Awake! magazine.
This play caused many comments among both students and teachers.​—Experience from a Witness in Ensenada, Baja California North, Mexico.

