Young People Ask . . .
What Future Is There for Any of Us?
RECENTLY, young people in Europe have made headlines. In the Netherlands young rioters caused 2.5 million dollars worth of damage at the coronation of Queen Beatrix. In Zurich rioters caused nearly 5 million dollars worth of damage. In Berlin reports tell of the famous shopping center Kurfürstendamm’s being turned into a “battleground.” In Great Britain white youths attacked racial minority groups.
What was their motive? “Violence is the only way to make people understand the mistakes that have been made,” a protester explained to London’s Financial Times. “They’ve promised us a lot and never made good. What counts is violence against property.” What “mistakes” was he referring to?
In the Netherlands it started with the housing problem. Reasonably priced apartments are very difficult to obtain there, so a group of homeless young people broke into an abandoned apartment building and set up camp. But that was only a beginning. “We started with housing. But we soon saw that all society is rotten,” a young man told Time magazine.
There are other “mistakes”​—joblessness, for example. In the Common Market 40 percent of those out of work are under twenty-five years of age. The nuclear threat is another ‘mistake.’ In Europe young people are visible in the huge demonstrations against atomic weapons. Sometimes, though, the violence seems pointless to an outsider. One pamphlet proclaimed: “Zurich is on fire. People are asking, ‘Why Zurich​—clean, quiet Zurich?’ We don’t have an answer, except that it’s high time this happened.” A protester told a reporter in Zurich: “Everything is perfect, everything is peaceful, everyone is rich. It makes us vomit.”
What alternatives do the young rioters propose? Some have radical suggestions. According to World Press Review, a recent poll in Germany revealed that at least a million students want an alternative culture​—possibly on the model of the North American Indians’ tribal societies. “We want our own reservations,” said a twenty-year-old. “And the cowboys can keep their distance.”
But, more disturbing, many rebels offer no alternatives. They merely fight against the way of life that is offered by modern European states. Graffiti scrawled on the walls in West Berlin reveal a dominant motive: “Self, not society.” They feel things are wrong but have no idea how to change them for the better.
Why So Much Restlessness?
Could the answer be in two principles found in the Bible? What principles? The first was stated by Jesus himself: “Man must live, not on bread alone, but on every utterance coming forth through Jehovah’s mouth.” (Matthew 4:4) The second is found in the book of Proverbs: “Where there is no vision the people go unrestrained.” (Proverbs 29:18) Can you see how these principles hold the key to the problems of young people today?
The words of Jesus indicate that man has spiritual as well as physical needs. Since the last world war some countries in Western Europe have built up materially prosperous societies that are among the wealthiest in the history of the world. Most Europeans, however, have paid little attention to spiritual needs. Hence, now that material security is taken for granted, many find it hollow, purposeless.
The Biblical proverb shows that we need “vision,” or foresight​—a clear view as to where we are going. Faced as they are with unemployment, industrial pollution, the threat of nuclear war, faltering economies, and so forth, the future looms dark to many youths. A sociologist in Germany said: “Today’s young express fear and desperation derived from a lack of prospects for the future.” The world just cannot give them the “vision” that they need. Is there anyone who can?
An Alternative to Rebellion
Yes, there is. Consider the experience of one young married couple. At first, Buz and Becky lived a fairly conventional life, but they were appalled by the crime, violence and other horrible things they read about. So they “dropped out.”
They sold their home and took their two-year-old daughter to live in an army tent in the country. They tried to live very simply, feeling that in this way they were not contributing to the destruction of the earth. But they realized that their small efforts made very little difference. Once, they looked at each other and said: “Man doesn’t care. The earth is going to be destroyed, and our children will have no future.” That night, Becky lay in bed feeling tense and nervous. She knew there was no future. Pollution or something else would eventually kill everyone.
However, they found an answer. It was not violence but something much more positive. They found a hope. How? They were contacted by Jehovah’s Witnesses and discovered something that they had not considered before. God has a purpose for this earth, and that purpose will come to pass no matter what man does. God will “bring to ruin those ruining the earth,” yet he will bring a satisfying future to those who harmonize their lives with his way of doing things. (Revelation 11:18) Not wielders of nuclear weapons, nor big business conglomerates will survive, but only the meek ones of earth: “Just a little while longer, and the wicked one will be no more; and you will certainly give attention to his place, and he will not be. But the meek ones themselves will possess the earth, and they will indeed find their exquisite delight in the abundance of peace.”​—Psalm 37:10, 11.
This hope was literally from God because Jehovah’s Witnesses showed it to them in the Bible, which is the Word of God. It added the dimension that was lacking in their lives. They discovered that this hope is not just a delusion​—something to hang on to in order to hide from reality; no, this is reality. Other young people have found the same.
Tony, a teenager from Oregon, USA, said: “The most important change of attitude on my part was the realization that the Bible was true, and doing Jehovah’s will was the only hope for me.” A Central American youth, Mario, once felt forced by circumstances to steal in order to survive. He was shown this hope in the Bible and now says: “Now that I have this relationship with my Creator I can see that all that the world has to offer is a lot of refuse.”
Hence, there is an alternative to violence or “dropping out.” God has offered us a beautiful hope that is believable, logical and that will come true. Why not check it out for yourself? It may be just what you are looking for.

