Announcements
● Literature offer for September: You Can Live Forever in Paradise on Earth, for contribution of $2.50. October and November: Subscription for The Watchtower or Awake! or both. Offer single one-year subscription for $3.50 or the two for $7.00. Six-month subscriptions are $2.00. December: New World Translation and any older 192-page book for contribution of $3.75 or New World Translation with the brochure Enjoy Life on Earth Forever! for $3.25. Continue offering the brochure whenever appropriate on contribution of 25c.
● After September 1 congregations may order additional copies of the United in Worship book. Remember, this publication will not be used at present as a house-to-house campaign offer. It is for use at home Bible studies, at the Congregation Book Study and for personal study. It may also be offered to people who have read the Truth or Live Forever books. As a start, we suggest you order about one book for each Bible study being conducted in the congregation as well as one for each publisher who may need a personal copy. When additional supplies are needed, these may be ordered.
● There will not be special public talks in January and February based on the United in Worship book. Plan to use talks from the regular series during that time.
● The presiding overseer or someone assigned by him should audit the congregation accounts on September 1 or as soon as possible thereafter.
● We are pleased to announce that a new Cost List has been prepared. Four copies are being sent to each congregation. The secretary should keep one copy; the other three should be given to the brothers caring for the literature, magazines and accounts.
● Important cost changes effective September 1, 1983:
Kingdom News Nos. 30, 31, 32     50c per 50 or 1,000 for $10.00
Handbills (Order in lots of 1,000.)             $3.00 per 1,000
● New Publications Available:
Happiness—How to Find It—Greek
My Book of Bible Stories—Efik, Hausa, Igbo, Palauan, Sango
Organized to Accomplish Our Ministry—Greek, Italian
United in Worship of the Only True God—English, French, Greek, Italian, Spanish
Good News for All Nations—English, French, Greek, Italian, Korean, Portuguese, Spanish
School and Jehovah’s Witnesses—English, French, Greek, Spanish
Kingdom News No. 32—English, French, Greek, Italian, Spanish
● Available Again in U.S.A.:
“Your Will Be Done on Earth”—Spanish
● New Cassette Recordings Available:
Kingdom Melodies No. 4 (single cassette)

