Are You Using the New Book?
1 At our recent “Kingdom Unity” District Conventions we were delighted to receive the new book United in Worship of the Only True God. A quick examination made it evident that this book was not designed for beginners, people who have little or no knowledge of the Bible. It is for those who are already acquainted with basic Bible truths. It can help us to benefit in practical ways from some of the solid spiritual food in God’s Word. This book can help us to broaden and deepen our own understanding of the Scriptures and to apply these more fully in our lives.—Heb. 5:13; 6:1.
2 Are you personally reaping those benefits? Are you reading the book? As you do so, take time to look up the cited scriptures and meditate on their application to the surrounding material and your own life. Do not skip over them. You cannot use the material in the book effectively until you are able to reason on it from the Bible.
3 Have you also been making good use of the study questions found both in the paragraphs and at the bottom of the page? Many of these questions, as you may have observed, are designed to make you think about your own life and how it should be affected by what you are studying. In time, of course, we will use this book at the Congregation Book Study, but if you make a personal study of it now, this will enable you to benefit more fully when we study it together later on.
4 At the convention it was mentioned that this book can be valuable in helping teenage youths to press on to maturity. Although they may already know the fundamental truths and perhaps share to some extent in the field ministry, as they come to understand the reasons for Jehovah’s requirements, their joy will increase and they will take greater pleasure in applying Bible counsel. The United in Worship book can help them. It encourages them to express the truth in their own words, to reason on the scriptures and to discern how these can help them to make sound decisions. Since youths are more prone to make the truth their own when someone studies with them personally, logically you parents with teenage children are the ones to do that.—Compare Genesis 18:19.
5 United in Worship of the Only True God is the book that is now recommended for study with newly interested persons after they have completed either the Truth book or You Can Live Forever in Paradise on Earth. If you are conducting a study with someone who is ready to go into a second book, and if you have a copy of the new book, do not hesitate to start using it right away.
6 May we all use this new instrument well (1) to contribute to the spiritual advancement of ourselves and our own families and (2) to help others who have already studied basic Bible truths to press on to maturity.

