Looking Ahead to the 1984 Service Year
1 A year of spiritual accomplishments! What a fine way to describe the 1983 service year. Soon we will enjoy reading the complete worldwide report in the 1984 Yearbook. But what about the goals you personally set for yourself? Did you achieve them? Was 1983 a year of spiritual accomplishments for you? A brief review of your theocratic activities in 1983 may help you work toward yet another year of satisfying work.—1 Cor. 9:26; om, pages 116-118.
2 From the reports we have been receiving, it is evident that many of us reached our personal goals during 1983. Some enrolled in the Theocratic Ministry School, went out in the field service for the first time or started their first Bible study. Others became pioneers or were invited to Bethel. Some were appointed as ministerial servants and others as elders. All these things bring us satisfaction and please Jehovah. On the other hand, there may have been some personal goals you were not able to reach. Perhaps some unexpected circumstances hindered you. But do not be discouraged. Those goals may still be within your reach during the 1984 service year.
OUR INDIVIDUAL GOALS
3 Were you able to auxiliary pioneer during 1983? Could you make it your goal to do so in 1984? A brief look at the calendar will help you to plan ahead. For example, have you noticed that there are four months that have five Saturdays? Also, there are four months that have five Sundays. Yes, October has five full weekends! If you regularly have Saturdays and Sundays free for field service, a substantial part of the required hours could be realized by planning full service days. Even if you cannot enroll as a regular or an auxiliary pioneer, you may be able to increase your field service and improve the quality of it.
4 Have you finished reading the publications that were released at the “Kingdom Unity” District Convention? What about the Our Ministry book? Have you read it and put its suggestions to work in your ministry? Were you able to keep up with the 1983 weekly Bible reading assignment? A good study schedule will help you contribute more to the meetings. Why not set these as goals for 1984? Reaching them will be spiritually rewarding.—Ps. 1:2.
5 Attending the Congregation Book Study is another very important part of our worship. We are now studying the Live Forever book. Being regular at this meeting will indeed add to our enthusiasm as we continue offering the book in the field during September. Starting studies in it should be another goal for each of us.
FAMILY GOALS
6 Family unity is precious in Jehovah’s eyes. It is strengthened when families get involved in theocratic activities and work together toward common goals. When was the last time you went from door to door with your mate? Can you set aside a month in which the entire family could auxiliary pioneer or spend more time in field service? Do you set aside some time every month to preach together as a family? Those who do, experience great joy as they become more closely united in praising Jehovah.
7 Did you have a regular family study during 1983? Do all cooperate with the arrangement? Are all members of the family regular each week in the field service? Some may need to establish these as their goals for 1984.
8 Family unity can be strengthened by other goals too. Circuit assemblies provide a fine opportunity for family members to work together in volunteer service. There is also much to do in the upkeep of the Kingdom Hall. Elders will gladly suggest ways you can help.
9 We can be sure that Jehovah is happy when we work to achieve spiritual goals. Perhaps you would like to select, for a start, two or three of the above-mentioned goals. Then, as these are attained, move on to others. Make it your determination to continue advancing even more during the 1984 service year.

