Meetings to Help Us Make Disciples
WEEK STARTING AUGUST 28
Song 16
 5 min: Local announcements. Brief discussion of daily text and comments from Yearbook, tying in encouragement for all to be out in house-to-house ministry the first Sunday in September, which also is the first Sunday of 1984 service year. Special arrangements should be made for group witnessing on Monday, September 5, a secular holiday.
20 min: Why a School Brochure? Preferably an elder with exemplary children in high school should handle this part.
(5 min.) Introduction. Great enthusiasm manifested at release of School brochure on second day of recent “Kingdom Unity” District Conventions. Something parents and schoolchildren have been wanting. Designed to fill particular needs of parents, children and teachers in handling situations unique to Jehovah’s Witnesses involved in secular education. Explain that although the brochure is directed to teachers, it will also aid Jehovah’s Witnesses in knowing how to conduct themselves in connection with school activities. So it is particularly vital that all Witnesses be familiar with and appreciate the information the brochure contains on school activities. In this way we can all be at unity in our worship as it affects our children in school.
(7 min.) Question-and-answer discussion of “The Reason for This Brochure” on page 3 of brochure. Assign capable brother to read each paragraph before it is discussed.
(4 min.) Demonstration. Parent with younger child approaches teacher and presents brochure. Include points from paragraph 5 on page 30 of brochure, pointing out desire of parent and child to cooperate with teacher and school system.
(3 min.) Demonstration. Teenage student presents brochure to high-school teacher, briefly explaining the purpose of the brochure and what it contains.
(1 min.) Conclusion. Brief encouragement for parents and school-age Witnesses to make full use of School brochure.
20 min: Question-and-answer discussion of insert from beginning to subheading in column 1 on page 4. Conclude meeting with further brief encouragement for all to share in field service this weekend. Remind publishers to bring Our Ministry book to Service Meeting next week.
Song 8 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING SEPTEMBER 4
Song 18
10 min: Introduction. Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry and local announcements. Suggest and demonstrate several well-prepared 30- to 60-second magazine presentations that publishers can use with current magazines on second-Saturday magazine day. Encourage house-to-house and street witnessing. If appropriate, specify territory that may be used for street witnessing.
15 min: “Looking Ahead to the 1984 Service Year.” After brief introduction based on first two paragraphs, conduct question-and-answer discussion of rest of article tying in appropriate points from pages 116-118 of Our Ministry book. At conclusion interview newly baptized publisher and one with some years of experience in the truth. Have them relate how they view matter of setting personal goals and how they have benefited from having definite but reasonable spiritual goals.
20 min: Question-and-answer discussion of insert from subheading in column 1 on page 4 to subheading “Society to Make Survey of Local Needs” on page 5.
Song 89 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING SEPTEMBER 11
Song 116
10 min: Introduction and local announcements. Have publishers relate experiences about efforts to start new studies in Live Forever book. Remind publishers of field service arrangements for weekend, including street witnessing and house-to-house magazine work as well as house-to-house ministry using current Topic for Conversation with book offer. Also brief reminder that October has five full weekends and may offer fine opportunity for auxiliary pioneer service. Application forms are available.
15 min: “Improving Our Teaching Ability.” Questions and answers. Assign qualified brother to read paragraphs and call for reading of as many cited scriptures as time allows.
20 min: Question-and-answer discussion of insert from subheading “Society to Make Survey of Local Needs” on page 5 to end.
Song 39 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING SEPTEMBER 18
Song 50
10 min: Introduction. Local announcements and accounts report.
20 min: “Are You Using the New Book?” Talk and interviews. Enthusiastic elder to present material in article in well-prepared talk, citing portions of book that illustrate points in article. Then interview two or three publishers who have appreciated and are making good use of this new book. Comments should not only show genuine appreciation but also offer practical suggestions as to how the new book can be used personally, in conducting Bible studies with advanced students and in helping young family members.
15 min: Congregation field service report. Service overseer should handle this part. Feature warm commendation for what has been accomplished by brothers in the field. Some totals and averages can be given from report for August and from overall report on 1983 service year. Call attention to increases and improvements that have been noted. Total number of auxiliary pioneers for the year and any improvement in meeting attendance could be encouraging. Brothers should seriously consider areas in need of improvement. May want to include these as goals for 1984 service year. Conclude part with positive suggestions regarding weekend service arrangements. Fourth Saturday of month coming up and magazine work is featured. Encourage use of magazines in house-to-house and street witnessing as well as in informal witnessing. Also work will continue with Live Forever book this weekend. Be alert to start studies with interested persons. Any who have not been out in service yet this month, be sure to make necessary arrangements now. Help is available for those needing personal assistance.
Song 85 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING SEPTEMBER 25
Song 40
 8 min: Introduction and local announcements. Arrangements for weekend field service on first Sunday of month. If some publishers have enrolled as auxiliary pioneers for October, give commendation and remind others that they still have opportunity to enroll also. Announce any arrangements being made to assist those serving as pioneers during October.
20 min: Elder gives well-prepared talk on chapter 5 of Our Ministry book from page 28 to subheading on page 41. Highlight Scriptural requirements for those who are appointed to serve as overseers in the congregation.
17 min: “Presenting the Good News—With Subscriptions.” Questions and answers and demonstrations. Assign capable brother to read selected paragraphs. Present one or two well-prepared brief demonstrations using Topic for Conversation “Can You Live Forever in Paradise?” Demonstrate how to tie in magazine article with Topic and then present subscription. Allow time for audience to comment on demonstrations.
Song 42 and concluding prayer.

