Presenting the Good News—With Subscriptions
1 “‘Look! There are days coming,’ is the utterance of the Sovereign Lord Jehovah, ‘and I will send a famine into the land, . . . for hearing the words of Jehovah.’” (Amos 8:11) We can truly say that these words have found fulfillment today. There are people everywhere hungering for the truth. They need to hear the Word of God.
2 Jehovah’s people can supply this need. For over a hundred years we have been using The Watchtower to help satisfy such spiritual hunger. For the last 64 years Awake! also has been helping sincere persons to come to an accurate knowledge of the truth.
3 No doubt you have enjoyed and benefited from the many fine articles that have been appearing in these magazines over the years. Why not help others benefit too? How can we do so?
BY OFFERING SUBSCRIPTIONS
4 There have been some very fine experiences in obtaining subscriptions. For example, in the April issue of Our Kingdom Ministry we were told of one brother in Macao who obtained 82 new subscriptions in November and 200 in December. Although we may not have that much success, a positive attitude will certainly assist toward obtaining subscriptions.
5 This positive attitude is very important. After applying the suggestions made in the April Our Kingdom Ministry insert, a circuit overseer wrote: “I want to say this has had a telling effect on all of us. I especially have noticed the difference in the past two weeks or so. Because of being positive toward obtaining subscriptions it is common for a car group to return from service, having taken at least four or five subscriptions.”
6 Another publisher wrote: “I really want to thank you for the special insert in the April Kingdom Ministry. My attitude about offering subscriptions has taken a 180° turn for the better. My qualms have disappeared about the price when I reflect that the average subscription in the U.S. costs $18.00 a year. The insert is chock-full of stimulating ideas.” It would be good for all to review the April 1983 insert before each subscription campaign begins.
7 A delightful spiritual meal has been prepared for us by “the faithful and discreet slave” class! The four issues of The Watchtower for October and November will open with feature articles on “Paradise” that should be very attractive for presenting to the public. The October 8 Awake! develops the subject “Moral Bankruptcy—Where Is It Leading?” And the cover subject of the October 15 Watchtower is “You Were Meant to Live in Paradise.”
8 When offering Awake! subscriptions during the month of October, it may be that after introducing yourself you could say: “Many feel that there is a general moral breakdown within the family and on all levels of business and government. Do you feel this is so? [Allow comment.] News reports seem to indicate this. But wicked men will not always maintain control. Note, please, what the Bible says at Psalm 37:29. [Read and comment.] The morally bankrupt condition we see on the earth must be leading to something bad. This issue of Awake! examines this alarming trend, in the article ‘Moral Bankruptcy—Where Is It Leading?’ [Discuss points from article.] We are offering this magazine on a subscription basis. You can receive 24 issues for $3.50.” (Or you may want to offer a subscription for both magazines for $7.00.)
9 It may be that you would like to offer The Watchtower initially. After introducing yourself, you could say: “With conditions in many parts of the world worsening day by day, many sincere people are asking if things will ever get better. What do you think? [Allow for a reply.] At Revelation 21:4 the Bible has comforting words about the changes God will bring. [Read and comment.] The October 1 issue of The Watchtower has articles showing that millions now alive will never die but can look forward to living forever in a Paradise on earth. I am sure you will find them encouraging. If you would like, this magazine can be sent to your home twice a month for an entire year for just $3.50.”
10 With the spiritual famine getting worse, we are happily experiencing the fulfillment of Isaiah 65:13: “Look! My own servants will eat.” We are eating well! With such an abundance of spiritual food, why not share it with others? Be positive in offering subscriptions!

