What You Don’t Know Can Hurt You
“WHAT I don’t know cannot hurt me.” “I’m just going to mind my own business and let others mind their own.” “At least, they cannot blame me for something I did not know.” These are but a few of the expressions heard from persons who do not wish to become involved with others, who do not want to take on any responsibility for their neighbors or fellow creatures. Some actually believe that by isolating themselves and insulating themselves against undue contact with others they will be able to live a quiet, carefree life.
How wise are such attitudes? And can those who adopt them do so and at the same time claim God’s favor as followers of his Son, Christ Jesus?
“Blissful ignorance” certainly sounds attractive. And it is according to the rules of human justice that crimes of ignorance are viewed with greater leniency than those committed willfully. So, on the surface of things, it might seem to be quite plausible to think that what you do not know cannot hurt you.
But why not go to God’s Word, the Bible, for authoritative counsel on the subject? Suppose we consider Lot, the nephew of Abraham. This faithful worshiper of God could have closed his eyes and ears to all that was going on around him in Sodom and the adjacent cities, deluding himself into thinking that everything was all right, that the less he knew about matters the less would be his responsibility. But is that how this God-approved man viewed matters? The Bible answers: “That righteous man by what he saw and heard while dwelling among them from day to day was tormenting his righteous soul by reason of their lawless deeds.”—2 Pet. 2:8.
To disclaim any responsibility for the safety and welfare of our neighbors and fellow creatures might seem to relieve us of a heavy load. This is what some have in mind when they determine to “mind their own business.” But surely it is wise to stop and ponder this question: Wherein does my attitude differ from that expressed by bloodguilty Cain when he said to God: “Am I my brother’s guardian?” (Gen. 4:9) This lack of regard for others accounts for the heartless manner in which people in the large cities can stand by and see a fellow citizen done to death without bothering to summon aid.
It is absolutely true that what people do not know can prove to be very hurtful to them, yes, even fatal. If you lived in an upper apartment, and you were unaware that a great fire raged in the lower apartments, you would, in fact, be in grave danger. In the same way, a blind man walking along in the general direction of a deep pit is also in great peril. In either case a warning word is what is needed. But who is going to give the word of warning if each one is determined strictly to “mind his own business”? Is not the endangered person going to get hurt by what he does not know?
That there are some who do not wish to pay attention to warning information was made clear by the apostle Peter when he wrote: “For, according to their wish, this fact escapes their notice, that there were heavens in ancient times and an earth standing compactly out of water and in the midst of water by the word of God; and by those means the world of that time suffered destruction when it was deluged with water.” (2 Pet. 3:5, 6) None of those who turned down the advance warning, who took the attitude that what they did not know would not hurt them, survived that world’s watery end.
The Scriptures show that one who insulates himself from the needs of his fellowmen is headed for trouble. Under inspiration the wise man declared: “One isolating himself will seek his own selfish longing; against all practical wisdom he will break forth.” (Prov. 18:1) Practical wisdom would tell him that he himself urgently needed upbuilding association of others. Isolationist tactics do not excuse from responsibility, nor do they protect from calamity.
Really, then, there is nothing to be gained by hiding one’s head in the sand like the proverbial ostrich. Responsibility will attach to us, even though we are ignorant, if we have turned down opportunities to gain knowledge. Just think of the terrible situation of those Israelites who refused to hear the word of warning from God, and of whom he, in turn, declared: “‘Just as he called and they did not listen, so they would call [in their day of calamity] and I would not listen,’ Jehovah of armies has said”!—Zech. 7:13.
Those who refuse to take in vital knowledge, who take the view that what they do not know will never hurt them, may well be jeopardizing their lives. Why? For the reason stated by Christ Jesus, when in prayer to his Father in heaven: “This means everlasting life, their taking in knowledge of you, the only true God, and of the One whom you sent forth, Jesus Christ.” (John 17:3) How important, then, to lay up sound knowledge, for knowledge brings wisdom, and wisdom, in turn, provides defense against calamity.—Eccl. 7:12.
The proclamation of the Kingdom message by Christ Jesus and his followers nineteen hundred years ago brought great responsibility upon all within hearing, whether they listened or not. Now, in our day, that responsibility has been intensified both by the spread of knowledge and the critical time in which we live. Apropos, then, are the words of the apostle Paul: “God has overlooked the times of such ignorance, yet now he is telling mankind that they should all everywhere repent. Because he has set a day in which he purposes to judge the inhabited earth in righteousness by a man whom he has appointed.”—Acts 17:30, 31.
Ignorance of God’s purposes in this day when he is having the knowledge proclaimed to the ends of the earth will be no excuse in his great court of justice. Truly, what you don’t know CAN hurt you.

