The Worship of Me
“WORSHIP myself? Ridiculous!” For you, it may be “ridiculous.” But for growing numbers of others, it may not be. In fact, the trend in this direction is so pronounced that many call this the “Me Generation.” The evidence to support this description is considerable.
“Well, maybe selfishness is getting a little out of hand. But worship of self? Isn’t that going overboard on the subject?” At first glance it may seem so, but the picture may change as the self-awareness movement comes under closer inspection.
True, awareness is important. We need to be aware of what is happening around us. We need to be aware of the people with whom we associate—family members, neighbors, those in our community, even everyone on earth, in view of our shrinking world. And, yes, our awareness must certainly take in ourselves, our thoughts and acts, our needs and responsibilities.
However, the self-awareness that is now being preached by the psychologist-gurus is narrowed down until the guiding doctrine seems to be, ‘Me first; you second, or sixth, or whatever—it doesn’t really matter to the Imperial Me.’ Not all of those involved in the movement go this far, but many do, whether they state it so explicitly or not.
Why the Surge in MEism?
There are reasons for the surge in the self-awareness movements at this time. The old values have been challenged, and many of the orthodox religions fail to uphold them. The new codes advocated by many psychologists and psychiatrists are unsatisfying to the human spirit, and are often contradictory. Spiritually, millions drift on restless seas, searching for reliable rudders and strong anchors.
Disillusioned, they are fertile soil for teachings that put self on a pedestal. They embrace “teachers to suit their whims and tickle their fancies, and they will turn from listening to the truth and wander off after fictions.” They are exploited “through the pretensions of philosophy, guided by human tradition, following material ways of looking at things.”—2 Tim. 4:3, 4; Col. 2:8, An American Translation.
Have Some Found the Answers?
However, many feel that they have found genuine answers in self-awareness movements. They feel that they have found the rudders and the anchors needed to weather the stormy seas. Have they? Are they happy, contented, no longer groping, no longer searching?
There is cause for reasonable doubt. The following series of articles probes more deeply into the pros and cons of the self-awareness movements.
[Box on page 3]
THE SELF-AWARENESS MOVEMENT
Why this surge in ‘MEism’ now? Is it a passing fad? Is it of practical value? What are its fruits?
Does it meet emotional needs? Can it eliminate guilt feelings? And what about sin? Is it outdated?
If self-awareness isn’t the answer to our emotional gropings, what is?

