VOL. XIX. DECEMBER 15, 1898. No. 24. 



CONTENTS. 



Gathering the Lord's Jewels 363 

"As Many as the Lord shall Call" 364 

"Spake often One to Another" 366 

"The New Song in their Mouth" 367 

"The Lord Hearkened and Heard" 368 

Tract Society's Report for 1898 368 

"Unto You is Born a Savior" 371 

"The True Light that Lighteth 

Every Man" 373 

Index for Zion's Watch Tower, 1898 376 

Dawn, Vol. III., in Swedish, etc 362 

Do You Desire Z.W. Tower for 1899? 362 

page 362 

SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 56-60 ARCH STREET, ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, N.Y. DRAFT, MONEY ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS: 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age or accident, or other 
adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, if they 
send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting the 
paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list 
constantly. 



R2410 : page 362 

M. DAWN, VOL. III., SWEDISH, AND DANO-NORWEGIAN. 

Our Swedish friends who have been anxiously waiting for this 
volume for some time will be glad to learn that it is now ready. 
We regret to say that our Danish and Norwegian friends 



must not expect the third volume in their languages: the demand 
is small, and the loss would be too great. These friends, we believe, 
can, if interested, gain from the Swedish edition considerable 
knowledge of the subjects treated. 

The price of this volume is the same as the English— tho 
because of extra expense and smaller edition it costs us nearly 
double the wholesale figures. 



page 362 

DO YOU DESIRE ZION'S WATCH TOWER FOR 1899? 

Please notice the terms upon which you can have this journal, 
if desired. They are as liberal as we can consistently make 
them. We desire to hear at once, from all whose subscriptions 
expire with this number, whether or not they desire our ministries 
further. Those who cannot pay now, but hope to remit 
subscription later, will please send postal card so stating. Those 
of God's people who are unable to pay are welcome to the TOWER 
free, if they will send a postal card request to this effect. "He 
that asketh receiveth," is the Lord's rule which as his stewards 
we follow. Write the card the minute you read this, and thus 
save us the trouble of resetting your name in our list. 



WATCH TOWER BINDERS. 

We supply at 50 cents, post paid, Emerson's Patent Self-Binders, 
holding three years' issues of the TOWER. We advise 
all to keep a regular file of TOWERS for future reference. We 
often answer your questions by referring to back TOWERS. Get 
extra copies for loaning, etc. 



R2404 : page 363 

GATHERING THE LORD'S JEWELS. 



"They shall be mine, saith the Lord of hosts, in that 
day when I make up my jewels."— Mai. 3:17. 

JEWELS have a value of their own, an intrinsic 

quality, and no doubt would be appreciated, if 

they were very plentiful, but their appreciation is all 

the more marked because of their comparative scarcity. 

The figures and similes used throughout the Scriptures 

by the holy spirit are full of significance, and this 

one as well as others. When the Lord likens his faithful 

people to the precious stones, jewels, it signifies 

that there is an intrinsic value or beauty that he appreciates, 



and it implies also that such characters are 

in comparison to the world very scarce— a "little flock." 

Our text points to the close of the Gospel age, and 
not only tells us that the Lord will not gather his jewels 
sooner, but implies also that the only class to be 
gathered at that time will be the jewel class— he comes 
to make up his jewels. We have here a contradiction 
of the ordinary thoughts on this subject: (1) That 
the Lord has been gathering his jewels all along for 
the past six thousand years: evidently an erroneous 
thought, since he has appointed a day, in the end of 
this age, in which he will gather or make up his jewels. 
(2) It exposes the fallacy of the thought that 
everybody who is respectable, half-way decent, is to 
be gathered to the Lord, and share in his Kingdom, for 
it distinctly points out that a very exceptional class 
only will be sought for and gathered. 

The class here described as jewels are contrasted 
with other classes in the context (vs. 15), "the proud," 
who have much of the success of the present time, and 
workers of wickedness, who tempt God, and are not 
careful to please and serve him— and such evidently 
are the majority of mankind. The jewel class is described 
in vs. 16 as "They that feared Jehovah"— that 
reverenced him, "and that thought upon his Word." 

But we inquire, where are jewels usually found? 
The answer of the figure is that jewels may be found 
in very unexpected places, as for instance the diamonds 
of South Africa are sometimes mingled with the ordinary 
gravel, and sometimes embedded in a bluish black 
clay. They all require to be searched after, and generally 
require to be washed from the mire, before being 
prepared to refract the light. So some of these "jewels" 
whom the Lord is now seeking out from the world, 
are found in the ordinary walks of life, and some came 
from deep down in the mire of sin. The Lord does 
not expect to find in the world of mankind the jewels 
which he seeks in perfect order, shaped, cut, polished 
and ready for the setting in glory. On the contrary, 
by one class of his servants he lifts them out of the 
mire of sin and out of the horrible pit, and washes 
them, cleanses them from sin through the merit of his 
own precious blood, and through his Word: and then 
through other servants and providences he polishes 
them with divine skill, to the intent that they may reflect 
and refract the light of the glory of God— the divine 
character,— justice, wisdom, love. 

As the diamond, in its rough state, uncut, unpolished, 
would have no more value than any other common 
stone for ordinary purposes, so those whom the 
Lord is selecting and preparing as his jewels are to derive 
their ultimate value from the cutting, shaping, 
polishing of their characters under divine providence: 
as it is written: "We are his workmanship." (Eph. 2:10.) 
We cannot suppose the illustration to be perfect 
in every particular, yet we may readily see that, while 



divine grace is to be credited with the entire outcome, 

the beauty and grace of the finished jewel, yet nevertheless, 

divine grace operates according to principles 

and conditions, under divine law. As the experienced 

diamond miners reject the soft clay and various of the 

R2404 : page 364 

hard stones, in seeking for those of the desirable kind, 
so the great Jewel-Gatherer operates according to a 
principle in seeking for his jewels. 

"EVEN AS MANY AS THE LORD SHALL CALL." 



The hardness of the diamond may be used to represent 
character, and we are to remember that character 
belongs to the individual, and not to God. Each 
of us must have his own character, and only in proportion 
as each has character, can he hope to be accepted 
finally as a jewel, for those without character 
will not endure the tests. As the diamond-seeker lays 
hold upon everything in his path that gives evidence 
of having the diamond quality, so divine grace, operating 
in the diamond field of the world (Christendom, 
and wherever the Word of the Lord has gone), lays 
hold upon all who have anything resembling character. 
The soft, the pliable, the uncrystallized, are not being 
sought now, and coming in contact with divine grace 
are passed by. Only such as give evidence of character 
are thought even worthy of washing and testing. 

The hard crystallization of the diamond corresponds 
to willingness towards righteousness in the individual; 
and unless there be such willingness toward God and 
righteousness, there is none of the jewel quality which 
the Lord is now seeking. It is those whose wills are 
formed, crystallized, set, determined, for righteousness, 
that the Lord is now seeking. And here we have the 
imperfection of the simile; for, while all diamonds are 
alike hard, the great Jewel-Seeker accepts some in 
whom the crystallizing process is incomplete, and 
"helps our infirmities," developing in us by his providences 
the quality of firmness for righteousness, at the 
same time that he polishes us.— Rom. 8:26. 

But even when the rough diamond has been found, 
as before observed, it would be of no value, except as 
it could be cut— indeed, of less value than other stones 
and clay for many purposes. So it is with those whom 
divine grace finds in the mire of sin, as having, nevertheless, 
will or character desiring righteousness, truth, 
goodness, justice,— "feeling after God" (Acts 17:27): 
the great Jewel-Cutter, the great Lapidarist, must really 
give them all their value, by his wisdom and skill in 
shaping, cutting and polishing them. Yet, on the 
other hand, he could not cut, shape or polish that which 



had not the quality or character, the will for righteousness, 
essential to the receiving of such a polishing. 
Those, therefore, who are in the hands of the great 
Lapidarist, and undergoing his polishing process, must 
first have passed through the previous experience of 
having been found of divine grace— found of the Lord 
Jesus; must first have been washed; and must have been 
accepted as having wills desirous of harmony with the 
divine mind. Therefore, they may take pleasure in all 
the trying experiences and difficulties through which 
our Lord Jesus causes them to pass, as various parts 
of the grinding and polishing process, necessary to 
their completion as Jehovah's jewels, to be made up 
with the close of this Gospel age, and to be set in the 
gold of the divine nature, to reflect the beauties of the 
divine character forever. 

R2405 : page 364 

It is in harmony with this thought that the Apostle 
encourages us to rejoice in tribulation, knowing 
that it is working out for us patience, experience, hope, 
brotherly-kindness, love,— the various facets of the 
jewel essential to it in the eyes of him who is shortly 
to gather his jewels. The Apostle again speaks of 
even the most trying and difficult experiences of the 
Christian life as being "light afflictions," and he speaks 
of the present life as being, in comparison to the eternal 
future, but "a moment," saying, "Our light affliction, 
which is but for a moment, worketh for us a 
far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory;"— 
Rom. 5:3-5; 2 Cor. 4:17. 

"ABANDON US NOT IN TEMPTATION." 



The lapidarist takes firm hold upon the jewel which 
he has already tested, and proved to have the requisite 
jewel quality, and encasing it in a suitable instrument, 
he presses it against the friction, a lap-wheel, with just 
the required amount of pressure to cut away the roughness 
and unevenness, and to effect the necessary shaping 
and polishing. The process requires great skill, 
otherwise at times much of the value of the stone 
might be lost through misshaping; hence only skilled 
workmen are employed in this department. 

For instance, the celebrated Kohinoor diamond originally 
weighed nearly 800 karats, but in the hands of 
a poor cutter was reduced to 280 karats. Yet so much 
of a diamond's value depends on skilful cutting, that 
more than one-half of its size was subsequently sacrificed 
in recutting it, to obtain symmetry, beauty and 
refractive power, and now it weighs less than 107 karats. 

So it is with the polishing of the Lord's jewels: 
their value depends much on proper cutting; and this 



is entrusted only to the skilled hands of our Lord Jesus 

Christ, of whom we are assured in advance that he was 

tempted in all points like as we are— that he himself 

passed through similar experiences of testings, etc., at 

the Father's hands. He knows just what we need to 

perfect us, so that we will be pleasing and acceptable 

to the Father, to reflect and refract the light of his 

glory when it shall fall upon us in our finished state. 

A part of our lesson is to have faith in this great Master-workman 

whom the Father has appointed to shape 

and polish us. We may require much more trimming 

on some sides of our characters than on others; and 

the disposition often is to "draw back," to be not fully 

R2405 : page 365 

submissive, to fear that the Lord has forgotten and 
abandoned us in trial. But infinite wisdom assures us, 
guarantees us, that this is not so and that to draw back 
would leave us "unfit for the Kingdom."— Heb. 13:5; 
Luke 9:62. 

The earthly lapidary imbeds the jewel he is polishing 
in cement, except the facet which he is grinding, 
so that neither he nor others see it during the 
operation, except as he lifts it, cools it and examines 
the progress of his work; but all the while he knows 
just what is being done, for he has an instrument called 
a "Lapidary's Dial," which indicates the position of 
the jewel exactly and avoids the poor cutting of olden 
times. 

And just so it is with the Lord's jewels: "The 
world knoweth us not"— it has seen the wheel of discipline 
which has been cutting the Lord's jewels for 
centuries, but it has not understood the necessity and 
value of the process. It may even have caught an occasional 
glimpse of the jewels but not to any advantage 
—not so as to be able to know the real merit of 
their characters nor the value of the cutting and polishing, 
for even the already finished facets are smeared 
with the cement and the slime from the grind-wheel. 
But the great, loving Master-workman and Lapidarist-in-Chief 
knows and has explained it all to the "jewels;" 
and they know in part now, and by faith are 
trusting all the remainder, singing in their hearts, 
"He knows, he knows!" "He will not suffer us to be 
tempted above that we are able to bear, but will with 
the temptation provide also a way of escape." Yes, the 
Lord knows just how much pressure to apply,— just 
how much friction is necessary— and will not willingly 
afflict us, nor cause tribulation which he cannot and 
will not overrule for our good. And being thus assured 
that all things are working together for good to 
them that love God, his living jewels can "rejoice in 
tribulation," knowing that it is working out in them 
the peaceable fruits of righteousness— of love, and that 
such experiences are essential, and that without them 



they could never be amongst the gathered jewels. 

"WHAT SON IS HE THAT THE FATHER CHASTENETH 
NOT?" 



Our text, after speaking of the gathering of the 
jewel class, drops the figure, and refers to the same 
class as God's sons, saying, "And I will spare them, 
as a man spareth his own son that serveth him." 
Here we have the distinction always held out, as between 
those who are servants merely, and those who 
are serving sons. Moses was faithful as a servant over 
his house (natural Israel), but Christ is faithful as a 
Son over his house (the elect Church)— the house or 
family of sons, who have received the spirit of adoption, 
the holy spirit. Altho sons, yet they must learn 
obedience no less thoroughly than if they were merely 
servants. Indeed, as sons, it is all the more necessary 
that they learn the lessons of obedience to the 
Father; more, much more, is to be expected of a son 
in his father's service, than of one who is not a son. 
He is expected to engage in the service in the spirit of 
his Father, moved by the same impulses of justice and 
love, because "begotten again" by that spirit of holiness. 
As a son he requires not less careful but more 
careful training than a servant: more careful disciplining 
at the Father's hands; for is he not his representative 
and to be his heir?-Heb. 3:5,6; 12:7; 
Rom. 8:15,17. 

While these sons are not to be spared from the 
polishing processes necessary to make them acceptable 
as sons,— "accepted in the Beloved,"— nevertheless, 
they are to be spared from something, our text assures 
us. Other Scriptures show us that this class is to be 
spared, (1) from the great time of tribulation which 
is to come upon the whole world of mankind in the 
end of this age: in harmony with our Lord's words, 
"Watch ye, that ye may be accounted worthy to escape 
all these things that shall come to pass, and to stand before 
the Son of Man." (2) They are to escape the 
thousand years of judgment or trial, coming upon the 
world, which has its beginning in the time of trouble 
of "the time of the end." Thus the Apostle declares 
that this class of faithful sons, the jewel class, "shall 
not come into condemnation [judgment] with the 
world."-Luke 21:36; 1 Cor. 11:32; John 5:24. 

Nor does this imply that the world's trial or judgment 
will be an unendurable one, for, quite to the contrary, 
we are assured that it will be most favorable, 
that the Lord "will judge the world in righteousness" 
during the Millennial age. But for the Church to have 
share in that trial would mean a prolongation of the 
period of trial; it would mean also a thousand years of 
delay of entering into the joys of the Lord in the fullest 



sense,— a thousand years of delay in attaining to 
that which is perfect. And not only so, but, as we 
have seen from other Scriptures, and as is implied in 
this Scripture, the class now being selected is a jewel 
class, differing in many respects from the world of mankind 
in general, all of whom have been redeemed, and 
for all a way of escape has been provided, from the 
inherited Adamic sin and penalty. 

"AFTERWARD IT YIELDETH THE PEACEABLE FRUITS 
OF RIGHTEOUSNESS." 



Nor are we to suppose that those who are now 
pressed against the wheel of tribulation, trial, affliction, 
difficulty, are thereby made miserable. Quite to 
the contrary, they realize, as the Scriptures point out 

R2405 : page 366 

they should, a joy and peace which the world knows 
not of,— which the world can neither give nor take 
away. And when it is remembered that their severe 
experiences and polishings are "but for a moment," 
as compared with the longer disciplines of those who 
will be dealt with in the Millennial age,— when it is 
remembered also that in proportion to their trials and 
difficulties they are granted the "more grace," and 
additionally that the reward shall be exceedingly, 
abundantly more than they could ask or think, according 
to the exceeding great and precious promises of the 
divine Word,— then we can see that this house of sons, 
these "jewels" now being prepared by the Lord, are 
truly highly favored above all men, and may well take 
the spoiling of their goods (worldly reputation, etc., 
included) joyfully: knowing that these things are but 
working out their "far more exceeding and eternal 
weight of glory."— 2 Cor. 4: 17. 

In speaking of us as sons of God, the Scriptures 
declare that we are in the school of Christ (the same 
thought as the cutting of the jewels): and of those 
who will ultimately be accepted as sons, they show that 
they will be such as finish their course with joy,— 
such as will have complied with the predestinated conditions; 
viz., that all who will be of that son class (the 
jewels) must be copies of God's dear Son, who himself 
is the greatest, most brilliant and absolutely perfect 
one.-Rom. 8:29,30. 

This process of seeking the house of sons, the 
jewels, and polishing them, has already been in 
progress for over eighteen centuries; and the Scriptures 
indicate to us that now the end of the age is upon us, 
the time for making up or gathering these jewels, and 
setting them in the glory of the divine nature, preparatory 
to the new age in which they shall be exalted 



as the light of the world. The signs of the times clearly 
indicate, in harmony with this, that the great time 
of trouble for the world is nigh, even at the door, to 
prepare the world for the coming blessings. Hence 
we see that if we are to be amongst the acceptable 
jewels, amongst the sons who shall be spared from the 
calamities approaching, we have need to give diligence, 
and to cooperate with the great Master-Workman, 

R2406 : page 366 

that the shaping and polishing of our hearts, our wills, 
may be perfected quickly, and that we may be ready 
to share a glorious part, when he comes to make up 
his jewels, his loved and his own. 

"THEN SHALL YE.. .DISCERN BETWEEN THE RIGHTEOUS 
AND THE WICKED." 



The Lord, through the prophet, indicates that as 
soon as the jewels shall have been gathered there will 
be a general change in his dealings with the world of 
mankind. Verse 15 shows how it is at the present 
time, while the polishing of the Lord's jewels progresses: 
—the unfaithful and the worldly frequently seem to 
have the advantage; but vs. 18 points out that after 
this polishing of the jewels is completed, and they have 
been set in the great crown of rejoicing at the end of 
this age, "Then shall ye return, and discern between 
the righteous and the wicked, between him that serveth 
God and him that serveth him not." 

Now, while evil predominates, while "the prince of this 
world" (John 14:30) reigns unbound, and while "they 
that tempt God are even delivered," it would be difficult, 
by outward evidences, to judge of who are the Lord's 
favored ones. Indeed, his favored ones, his "jewels," 
seem to be less favored and have more afflictions, more 
trials, more persecutions, more difficulties, a narrower 
way, than others. And amongst them, consequently, 
are not found many great or rich or wise, but chiefly the 
poor of this world, rich in faith, and prospectively heirs 
of the Kingdom (Jas. 2:5). But when these shall be glorified 
with their Lord in the Kingdom— then there shall 
be a general change, a turning round. No longer will 
the wicked and those who tempt God be found in power 
and in influence and in prosperity, and the humble, 
the meek, the godly, suffer persecution and tribulation: 
but contrariwise, of that time, when Christ's Millennial 
reign shall be inaugurated, it is declared prophetically, 
"In his day the righteous shall flourish," and 
the "evildoer shall be cut off"— Satan shall be bound 
also.-Psa. 72:7; 37:9; Rev. 20:2. 

"THEY.. .SPAKE OFTEN ONE TO ANOTHER." 



But glancing back at the context, we see another 
suggestion respecting the disposition of this "jewel" 
class during their time of polishing. We read, "They 
that feared [reverenced] the Lord spake often one to 
another." (vs. 16.) Ah yes! What could be more natural 
than a desire for communion with all who are of 
"like precious faith," all who are similarly in the hands 
of the Lapidarist, undergoing polishing, all who are 
of the same character, disposition, as respects God and 
his righteousness? Our Lord points out that "love of 
the brethren" will be a marked quality in all his servant-sons, 
for he that loveth him that begat loveth also 
him that is begotten of God. (1 John 5:1.) And the tendency 
of the mutual love of the "brethren" is to meet 
frequently and (personally or through the printed or 
written page) to speak to each other. The Apostle Paul 
distinctly calls to our attention the propriety, yea, the 
necessity, for this class meeting together. He exhorts, 
"Forget not the assembling of yourselves together,... 
and so much the more as ye see the day [the day of 
gathering of the 'jewels'] drawing nigh." It is to the 
same end that our Lord has made some of his promises 
to his people collectively, saying, "Where two or three 

R2406 : page 367 

of you are met in my name, there am I in the midst." 
-Matt. 18:20; Heb. 10:25. 

There is a thought also in the word "together:" 
the sons of God are not merely anxious for a meeting, 
in which the world, the flesh and the devil will commingle 
—they are anxious specially for fellowship with 
each other, with those who have similar characters, 
similar faith in the precious blood, similar consecration, 
and who are similarly passing through the hands 
of the great Polisher, to be prepared for association in 
glory. This desire for fellowship with one another is 
not selfishness, nor an impropriety; on the contrary, 
our Lord declares that those who love the light come 
to the light, while those who love darkness shun the 
light, and the Apostle inquires, "What communion 
hath light with darkness?" and he points out distinctly 
that while Satan and the children of darkness may 
simulate the table of the Lord and the grace of his 
truth, yet there is no real harmony or fellowship between 
their table and the Lord's table, upon which he 
sets forth the precious truth for his loved and his own. 
-1 Cor. 10:21. See WATCH TOWER for Dec. 1st, '95, 
"The Cup of the Lord and the Table of the Lord." 

When we read that these faithful "spake together," 
we naturally inquire respecting the topic of their 
converse, the subject upon which they communicate, 
it is not stated here, but is clearly stated elsewhere in 



the inspired Word. The Apostle points out that such 
"mind heavenly things," and contrasts them with others 
of the earth, earthly, who "mind earthly things," 
and whose god is their belly. Their converse, therefore, 
will not be respecting earthly pleasures, food and 
raiment, the ambitions of the natural mind, the pride 
of life, etc., but will be respecting "the things which 
belong unto their peace," the things which are uppermost 
in their hearts: for these are all seeking first the 
Kingdom of heaven and its righteousness, and in earthly 
matters are "content with such things as they have," 
—as the Lord's providence shall arrange for them. 

THE NEW SONG IN THEIR MOUTH. 



Neither do they come together to lament the trials 
and difficulties by the way, altho there may be some 
occasions when the majority may "weep with those 
that weep." Usually, however, the proper condition 
is that in which each should live so in the light of the 
Father's countenance that the trials and difficulties of 
the present life, which would be terrible and burdensome 
to the world, unsustained by divine grace, will 
be to these but "light afflictions:" and as children of 
the heavenly King, instead of going mourning all their 
days, they will rejoice— rejoice in tribulation and adversity, 
as well as in prosperity. Accordingly, as the 
sentiment of this class, it is written,— "He hath put a 
new song into my mouth, even the lovingkindness of 
our God." 

It is quite in harmony with this that the Apostle 
prays for some, that they may be enabled to "comprehend 
with all saints the length and the breadth, the 
height and the depth of the love of God, which passeth 
all understanding." Those who have received the 
"new song," and have comprehended its meaning, 
with the saints in general, will have, in this love of 
God, and in the wide and deep and high, glorious plan 
of God for the salvation, first of the elect Church and 
subsequently of the world of mankind— "whosoever 
will"— an abundant theme, a never-ending theme, a 
theme above all others, which will fill their hearts and 
fill their minds. It will crowd out worldly topics, as 
being not worthy to be compared. It will crowd out 
complainings and murmurings, as being wholly improper 
on the part of those who have been recipients of so 
many divine favors, and "much advantage every way," 
in that we have delivered unto us the divine oracles,— 
and especially in view of our adoption into the family 
of God as sons and "joint-heirs with Jesus Christ our 
Lord, if so be that we suffer with him, that we may 
be also glorified together."— Rom. 8:17. 

"HIM THAT IS WEAK IN THE FAITH RECEIVE." 



While it would be wholly improper for the consecrated 
ones to thrust out others who desire to meet 
with them, or to attempt to judge the hearts of those 
who profess faith in the ransom and full consecration 
to the Lord, yet to the extent that those who have received 
the holy spirit of adoption let their light shine 
out properly, and seek to "edify one another," and to 
"build one another up in the most holy faith," in that 
proportion the insincere, the unconsecrated and the 
hypocritical will find less and less to attract them. And 
in consequence "those who fear the Lord and who 
think upon his Word" find all the more of blessed 
spiritual communion and edification. 

The class of whom the Apostle says that they are 
sensual, earthly, having not the spirit of the Lord, 
make disturbance when they come amongst the true 
sons of God, and do injury, because with them, as well 
as with others, it is true, as it is written, "Out of the 
abundance of the heart the mouth speaketh," and their 
hearts, filled with pride, selfishness, vain-glory and ambition, 
overflow through their mouths; and communication 
with such is unprofitable. From such evil hearts 
come evil words of envy, slander, hatred, malice, strife, 
selfish suggestions contrary to the word and spirit of 
the Lord. Such edify no one; their influence is always 
pernicious; they build not up in the most holy faith, 
but, on the contrary, tend to develop and to cultivate 
roots of bitterness, whereby often "many are defiled." 
-Heb. 12:15. 

R2406 : page 368 

Those who fear the Lord, who reverence his name, 
who think upon his Word, who are seeking to copy 
his disposition, and to be fashioned under the hand of 
divine providence, should see to it that the class we 
have described, of whom the Apostle declares that their 
envy, malice, hatred, strifes, etc., are works of the 
devil, do not get opportunities to work their evil works. 
They should do this, first, by showing their disapproval 
of all evil-speaking and evil works: and those who 
cannot show their disapproval by words of kindly admonition, 
pointing out that such things are not from 
God, but from the Adversary, should at least manifest 
their disapproval in their withholding any look of sympathy 
with such a course, and by breaking off the conversation, 
and very generally avoiding the company of 
such; and by the more strict attention to their own 
words and conduct, that therein they may "show forth 
the praises of him who hath called us out of darkness 
into his marvelous light." 

R2407 : page 368 



"AND THE LORD HEARKENED AND HEARD." 



Another thought in this connection, that we should 
not overlook, is that brought to our attention in the 
words, "And the Lord hearkened and heard it." How 
often would the sons of God be greatly blessed as they 
meet together to talk over the divine plan, the divine 
goodness, wisdom, love, justice, and to help one another, 
and to encourage one another with psalms, hymns, 
spiritual songs, and by refreshing one another's minds 
with the exceeding great and precious promises which 
belong to them that reverence the Lord,— how much 
would such be blessed, if they could always have in 
memory this statement, that the Lord is hearkening, 
is listening to our conversation when we speak together. 
He listens to see which, out of good hearts, speak 
forth those things which are loving, gentle, pure, good, 
true, as distinguished from those who are careless of 
the truth, and whose words are vain or frivolous, or 
worse than this, slanderous, enmitous and selfish. 

And even amongst those who are on the Lord's 
side, amongst those who are showing forth his praises, 
endeavoring to build one another up in the most 
holy faith, and in the fruits and graces of the spirit, 
—we may be sure that our Lord hearkens to such teachers 
and helpers, and takes knowledge of the purity of 
their motives, as well as of their words; he takes knowledge 
of whether they are seeking to glorify themselves, 
or to glorify him in their use of such privileges and 
opportunities. If their words are boastful, it would 
indicate pride in the heart, a flaw in the "jewel," which 
would make it unworthy to be amongst those to be 
"gathered." If vaingloriously any attempts to take to 
himself the honor which belongs to the Lord, he is 
showing himself disloyal to his Master, Christ. Such 
would thus prove that he had not the spirit of the 
Master, who humbled himself, and who gave all glory 
and honor to the Father, in respect to every feature of 
the great salvation. 

Let all the sons of God remember the importance 
of honesty, "truth in the inward parts," when they 
come together as members of the body of Christ, to 
study the divine Word, and to help one another, and 
"let nothing be done through strife or vain glory," but 
let each esteem the other greater in saintliness than 
himself,— seeking to see, so far as possible, in each 
other the good, the noble, the true: and let each seek 
to watch his own heart, and to know of his own blemishes. 
Thus let personal humility and love of the 
brethren keep pace with our growth in knowledge of 
divine things; otherwise let us be assured that we are in 
the sifting and separating time, and that all who have not 
this spirit of humility, patience, gentleness, brotherly-kindness, 



love, will surely be separated.— 1 John 2:19. 

Some will not be amongst those who are gathered 
as jewels, because the jewels which the Lord will gather 
will be pure, "first-water" diamonds— stainless. 
They are to be faultless in love before the Father; and 
perfect love not only casts out fear, but casts out also 
selfishness, animosity, evil surmisings and evil-speakings, 
as well as self-love, pride. O how beautiful will 
be the Lord's jewels! How full of meaning is the statement 
that our Lord Jesus, the great Jewel, polished by 
the divine hand, and after whose likeness we are to be 
polished, "shall come to be glorified in his saints, and 
to be admired [head and body] of all them that believe 
in that day"— by all those who, during the Millennial 
Day, come into harmony with God, through Christ, 
under the terms of the New Covenant sealed by the 
precious blood.— 2 Thess. 1:10. 



R2402 : page 368 

WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY. 

-REPORT FOR FISCAL YEAR ENDING DEC. 1, 1898.- 

WE ARE confident that many of our readers, 

deeply interested in the present "harvest" 

work are anxiously awaiting this annual report: for 

such reports show, as nothing else can so accurately 

show, the real status of the work in which you as 

well as we are absorbingly interested. There is a wide 

difference between interest and curiosity; and it is the 

former that we seek to serve. We seek no publicity for 

our affairs before the world; but feel it a privilege as 

well as a duty to report yearly for the satisfaction of 

our many colaborers, who otherwise might judge of 

the work merely from their own surroundings and experiences 

and be either unduly elated or depressed and 

discouraged. 

It will be interesting for those of our readers who 
preserve and file their WATCH TOWERS to look back 
over these annual reports to their first appearance— 
for 1891. The progress for these eight years is encouraging 
to the friends of the truth and astounding 
to its enemies. The lesson is that the work of grace 
is progressing; for zeal must be either the result of superstition 
or of grace: and as it must be admitted that 
WATCH TOWER readers, translated out of darkness into 
the marvelous light of present truth, are freer from 
superstition and from bondage to human creeds than 
others, it is but reasonable to credit their zeal to growth 
in grace and knowledge and to increasing thankfulness 
for the liberty wherewith Christ makes free. 

R2402 : page 369 



If each year has seemed to bring intenser trials, 
testings and sittings, and to inspire opponents to more 
bitter and yet more unscrupulous envy, hatred and 
slanderings, each year has also found those who are 
walking as "children of the light" stronger, more on 
the alert against "the wiles of the devil," and better 
prepared to resist him and his blinded servants: because 
better armed with the panoply of divine truth and forewarned 
by the Captain of our salvation to expect such 
things. To such the divine promise is fulfilled so that 
they are enabled to realize that all things are working 
for good to those who love God,— the called ones according 
to his purpose. 

For several years back we have felt (when making 
out these reports) that we had reached the highest 
limit, and that of necessity the showing of the following 
year would be smaller: but thus far we have been 
agreeably disappointed, and the year 1898 quite outranks 
its predecessors, as will be seen from a study of 
the following reports and a comparison with those of 
previous years. 

By the Lord's favor the present year has brought 
to the Society the ownership of the entire plant at Allegheny: 
-the WATCH TOWER, the Bible House with 
its complete outfit of office fixtures, type, stock of Bibles, 
DAWNS, booklets, tracts, etc., together with tons 
of valuable electroplates of DAWNS, tracts, etc., in various 
languages. The Bible House is a four-story 
building, built for our use and intended from the first 
to be sooner or later presented to us. It is valued at 
$34,000, and has against it a mortgage of $15,000, 
which may remain indefinitely— the interest on it being 
more than provided for by extra rooms rented out. 
The net equity of this entire donation is appraised by 
the Society's Board of Directors at $164,033.65. This 
much of an explanation is necessary, that you may 
understand the Treasurer's financial report which follows 
—which of necessity will assume a slightly different 
form from previous ones. Formerly the Tower 
Publishing Co. met all expenses and furnished the 
books, tracts, etc., to our Society at an agreed upon 
price: now the Society pays its own expenses, buys its 
own paper— in a word, does its own publishing. Formerly 
the Tower Publishing Co. furnished the capital, 
and all debts of colporteurs, etc., were owing to it: 
now this Society furnishes its own capital, and all such 
accounts are owing to it. 

We have separated this special donation in the account, 
because it is out of the usual, and so that the 
records of future years may not be overshadowed thereby. 
It will hereafter appear as "Plant, Real Estate, etc." 

The items of borrowed money need explanation. 
Several friends of the cause who have already contributed 
liberally had money which they desired should go 
to this Society at their death; but they desired that it 



be actively in use in the service of the truth while they 

R2403 : page 369 

live, and presented it to us on these terms: if they 
should ever come to need a portion or all of it, they 
are to call for it— giving reasonable time. If they never 
need it and do not call for it, it shall at their death be 
credited in their names as donations. Some of these 
need interest on their deposits to live on, and get it: 
others do not need interest, having other income, and 
get none. 

Envious enemies will as usual whisper that these 
reports and the "Good Hopes" blanks are solicitations 
for money. We deny this: we neither covet, nor ask 
for any man's silver or gold, and entreat that those 
who feel thus send us nothing. Our God is rich. He 
tells us that all the gold and silver are his, and we believe 
him. He is abundantly able to give us ten times 
as much annually, if he choose. What he supplies for 
the spread of the truth is but a drop in the bucket, as 
compared with the millions spent annually in the propagation 
of error. But we are satisfied and thankful, 
and appreciate his wisdom. We perceive that as the 
lack of "laborers" in the harvest-field is a call and an 
incentive to some to enter who would not enter if the 
supply were abundant, so with those who have the 
financial "talent"— the fact that the means for the propagation 
of the truth is so meager as compared with the 
plethora of error, furnishes opportunity and incentive 
to the consecrated to do with their might in this direction 
also. And our experience is that all who are active 
in the Lord's service, using in love whatever talents 
they possess, are the most blessed and stand the firmest. 
Is it then wrong for us to make known to such 
opportunities for service that will bring them spiritual 
returns and blessings? No! It is duty! It would be 
wrong to withhold the knowledge and the opportunity. 
It would be withholding a means of grace. 

Our report of the work we classify as follows:— 

(1) ZION'S WATCH TOWER we esteem as a messenger 
used by our present King to stir the hearts and 
minds of his people whom he is feeding with the meat 
of present truth. As such it is your servant, and its 
editor rejoices greatly in this privilege. Respecting 
its service during the year, that is not for us to report 
—the Lord knoweth. We have merely done what we 
could, regretting that we could not serve the "brethren" 
more and better. We have, however, been encouraged 
by many letters telling us of help by the way 
rendered to pilgrims on the "narrow way" to the Celestial 
City. But we are waiting, hoping, praying and 
striving, trusting that the Master's decision may be, 
"Well done, good and faithful servant,— thou hast 
been faithful over a few things." 

We hear almost daily of some who are deeply interested 



R2403 : page 370 

in these things and who long for the regular 

visits of the WATCH TOWER but find themselves financially 

unable to spare even one dollar a year. Every 

issue of the TOWER contains our offer to supply such, 

as "the Lord's poor," free, if they will write us to this 

effect, yearly. We know not what more to do for this 

class: those who think they can pay later may have 

credit indefinitely, while to the hopelessly poor it is 

sent as cheerfully as to those who do pay. Possibly 

the fact that the WATCH TOWER is no longer of individual 

ownership, but the property of the Tract Society 

may encourage more of these classes to ask that they 

may receive— freely. 

(2) CORRESPONDENCE DEPARTMENT.-During 
the year we received 29,523 letters and sent out 14,371, 
—our largest record thus far. We value very highly 

the privileges of the mail, which bring us into so close 

touch with so many of the Lord's people throughout 

the world: from your letters we are the better enabled 

to appreciate and sympathize with your varied experiences 

of joy and sorrow, your trials and triumphs, 

and to reflect these in turn upon you all, through the 

WATCH TOWER.-blending these with the light of divine 

revelation through the lenses of the Scriptures, 

to our mutual benefit. As an evidence of the general 

character of much of this correspondence (that it is 

not merely "business") we note the fact that we received 

about twenty-five special requests for remembrance 

at the throne of grace each week, or thirteen 

hundred during the year. These are remembered regularly, 

specially, and are personally mentioned in prayers, 

in addition to our general requests for the welfare of 

all the Lord's flock, at our WATCH TOWER home which 

is on the fourth floor of the Bible House, and shared 

by the office assistants. Moreover, those who ask our 

prayers usually assure us that we are remembered in 

their petitions, morning and evening, daily. The very 

knowledge of this loving interest and sympathy is a 

blessing, a strength, an encouragement, and helps us 

to esteem our share of the trials of life as "light afflictions, 

which are but for a moment," designed of the 

Lord to "work out for us a far more exceeding and 

eternal weight of glory." Thus— 

"We share our mutual joys, our mutual burdens bear; 
And often for each other flows the sympathizing tear." 
"Blest be these ties which bind our hearts in mutual— LOVE!" 

(3) THE COLPORTEUR WORK. This we sometimes 
describe as the Evangel branch of the work; for 

by it the good news is being borne everywhere, much 
after the manner of the work of the disciples at the 
first advent— when they went from house to house and 
from city to city to make known— the Kingdom of 
Heaven at hand. The dear brethren and sisters engaged 



in this service often endure hardness as good 
soldiers of the cross of Christ. And they need, and 
because of their self-sacrificing service deserve, the love 
and sympathy and prayers of all of the Lord's faithful 
people,— they have ours daily. Theirs is the pioneer 
work, so indispensable. 

It is a mistake to suppose that this service is merely 
for those who are out of other employment: it is for 
those who seek first the King's business, preferring it 
to all other. These colporteurs forsake other vocations 
of greater ease and profit to use their talents in 
this fullest, best and truest sense, whether the world 
so recognizes them or not. Moreover, in going from 
house to house they get better opportunities for presenting 
the true gospel than can be had in any other 
method known to them or to us. 

It will be noticed from the Secretary's report following 
that the number of DAWNS disposed of this year 
fell behind that of last year; but really the quantities 
were about the same— the difference being accounted 
for by the eight thousand copies of VOL. IV, sent to 
TOWER subscribers in 1897. Besides, the booklets 
have become quite a feature— very effective in the 
spread of the truth. Nor do the Colporteurs merely 
circulate the DAWNS: they leave tracts where DAWNS 
are refused, note the interested ones and call in the 
evenings and help them, and before leaving a city introduce 
them to the WATCH TOWER, or, if possible, 
start them as a little meeting of truth seekers and servers. 
God bless these noble servants! There are evidences 
that the improvement of times is encouraging 
others to enter this service with all their time. 

Nor should we neglect to mention the many noble 
souls, whose family duties hinder continuous service 
for the truth, who are nevertheless doing with their 
might what their hands find to do, to find the "lost 
sheep" of Spiritual Israel and to bring them to the 
green pastures of present truth, and to point out to 
them the glories of our Heavenly King and the beauties 
of his Word and plan. These sent out thousands 
of DAWNS and booklets the past year— loaning, selling 
or giving them gratis, according to circumstances and 
judgment— together with millions of tracts. These 
also are faithful soldiers and overcoming, and being 
blessed accordingly. 

(4) PILGRIM LABORS. -The "Pilgrims" are chosen 
from amongst those whose age, experience, knowledge 
of the truth, general "moderation" and ability for 
public speaking, and freedom from domestic cares and 
obligations fit them specially for their service. They 
visit the friends at different accessible points where 
there are as many as five WATCH TOWER readers and 
hold meetings with them— counseling them in the good 
way. Four brethren are continually engaged in this 

R2403 : page 371 



work at present, besides a number who give a portion 
of their time. 

These take up no collections, either publicly, or 
privately. Their expenses are met out of the Tract 
Fund and are very moderate. Receive them joyfully 
as ministers (servants) of the Lord. And be prompt 
to avail yourselves of their ministries, for their stay 
will be short— from one to three days. They come 
prepared to speak at least twice a day, so drop other 
matters, so far as possible, and enjoy with them a feast 
at the Lord's table. Cards are sent out by the Society 
notifying you of the coming of these "Pilgrims." It 
is desirable that some, at least, of the meetings be for 
believers of "this way"— but you may rely upon it 
that any thus introduced to you by card, as "Pilgrims," 
are fully competent to hold public meetings that will 
be both creditable and profitable. 

(5) TRACT DISTRIBUTION. -All WATCH TOWER 
readers are considered representatives of the tract work, 
and are supplied on application with all they can use 
judiciously as sample copies. Some who can and do 
supply the funds have fewer opportunities for tract 
distribution than others who are unable to contribute 
to the fund— and thus this service is blessedly divided. 
The report of our Secretary and Treasurer on quantities 
of tracts distributed and of the economy with which 
such large results were attained is surely good cause 
for rejoicing. No other Society in the world ever attained 
anything like such results at so proportionately 
low cost. The secret of this is, that the WATCH TOWER 
force labors for the love of the truth and for a future 
reward— accepting merely their very moderate expenses, 
from the Society's funds. 

"Finally, brethren, pray for us, that the Word of 
the Lord may have free course and be glorified."— 
2 Thes. 3:1. Very truly your brother and servant in 
Christ, C. T. RUSSELL, President. 

TREASURER IN ACCOUNT DR. 



To Cash on hand, Dec. 1, '97, $ 191.80 

Good Hopes," 9,286.65 

" " Other Donations, 2,114.07 

Amount, $11,592.52 

Special Donatiom-ZIONS WATCH TOWER, 
office, plant, books, tracts, type, electroplates, 
etc., etc., including the Bible 
House building. Value, appraised by 

Board of Directors, $186,000.00 

Less-Mortg. on Bible House, $15,000.00 
Obligations to friends, 6,966.35 



$21,966.35 

Net Value of Special Donation, $164,033.65 

Total Amount, $175,626.17 



TREASURER IN ACCOUNT CR. 



Net Appraisement of plant, stock, cash, 
etc., approved by Audit Committee of 

Board of Directors, $188,401.53 

Less-Mortgage on Bible House, $15,000.00 

Obligations to friends, 6,453.32 



21,453.32 
Working Capital, Dec. 1, 1898, $166,948.21 



SECRETARY'S REPORT. 



Copies of MILLENNIAL DAWN, circulated 

during the year 1898, 62,027 

Copies of various "Booklets," circulated 

during the year 1898, 20,658 

(This department of the work is self-supporting.) 
Copies of ZION'S WATCH TOWER supplied 
gratis, to "the Lord's poor," and other 

sample copies, sent out free, 228,313 

Copies of Tracts sent out during the year, 2,091,875 

This, represented as usual when referring 

to tracts, represents tract pages, 40,778,102 

E. C. HENNINGES, Sec'y & Treas. 



R2407 : page 371 

"UNTO YOU IS BORN.. .A SAVIOR." 

-DEC. 25.-HEB. 1:1-9.— 

"Behold, I bring you good tidings of great joy, which shall be to 
all people. For unto you is born this day in the city of David 
a Savior, which is Christ the Lord."— Luke 2:10,11. 

"CHRISTMAS Day," in celebration of our dear 
Redeemer's birth, has for long centuries 
been celebrated on December 25th; and altho it is now 
well known that this date is in error, and that it more 
properly corresponds with the date of the annunciation 



to Mary, nine months before our Lord was born, and 
that he was born about October 1st,— nevertheless, since 
the Lord has given no instructions whatever upon this 
subject, and since it is proper to do good deeds and 
think good thoughts upon any day, it cannot be improper, 
in harmony with general usage, for us to remember 
in a social way our dear Redeemer's birth at this time. 

Our Lord Jesus was God's great gift to Israel and 
to the world, as yet appreciated fully only by the Spiritual 
Israelite. Through him also all of God's gifts are 
promised and to be bestowed. (Eph. 4:8.) In view 
of these things, the custom throughout Christendom of 
making Christmas Day a joyful one, by the interchange 
of little tokens of love in the family, and to the poor, 
seems most appropriate. 

The central thought of our Golden Text is that 
Christ is a Savior, provided for the world— for "all people." 

R2407 : page 372 

And while all may gather something of the force 
and meaning of the word "Savior" as signifying deliverer, 
its underlying force and significance are not generally 
recognized. It is supposed that the Lord and his 
disciples spoke the common language of Palestine, the 
Syriac, and in that language this word, rendered Savior, 
signifies "Life-Giver." How much force this adds to 
the meaning of this beautiful text! Jesus was born to 
be a Life-Giver, and this joyful news is to all people. 
He may give life to whomsoever he chooses; and he 
chooses to give it, in harmony with the divine will, only 
to those who come unto the Father through him, by 
faith and obedience. 

A life-giver is a father, and it is from this point of 
view that our Lord Jesus is prophesied to be, by and by, 
known as the Everlasting Father— the Giver of everlasting 
life— to the obedient of the world, not to the 
Church. (Isa. 9:6; 1 Pet. 1:3.) Adam, the father of 
the race, failed to give to his posterity perfect and lasting 
life: through sin he came under the sentence of 
death himself, and transmitted to his posterity only a 
blemished, dying condition. What the whole world 
needs, therefore, is life— eternal life,— and in sending 
Jesus into the world, God was meeting our necessities 
most bountifully. 

But God does not propose to give eternal life to any 
of his creatures unless that gift would be a real blessing: 
and we know that eternal life would be a curse, 
instead of a blessing, to any not in full accord with the 
Lord and his righteous arrangements. Accordingly, we 
are told that all who would have the life which Jesus 
came to secure for mankind, and to offer to all, must 
accept the same according to the terms, conditions and 
limitations of the New Covenant— faith in the Redeemer 
and heart-harmony and obedience to God, to the extent 
of ability. In the present time (sin abounding and 



Satan deceiving and blinding) not many can appreciate 
this great gift of God's love, and not many become his 
disciples in verity. This is the time, therefore, in which 
the Lord selects, "elects," from the whole world of the 
redeemed ones the "little flock," who shall be joint-heirs 
with Christ in the Kingdom. 

But thanks be unto God, we can now see that the 
plan of salvation does not stop with the gathering of 
the elect Church, but that in the full sense of the word 
it is merely beginning there. And the testimony of the 
angelic choir which sang at our Savior's birth, and of 
the angel who declared, "Behold, I bring you good tidings 
of great joy, which shall be to all people," shall 
yet be completely fulfilled. 

In the lesson above set forth (Heb. 1:1-9), the 
Apostle calls attention to the fact that our Lord Jesus 
and his testimonies were but further developments of 
the great divine plan of which God had been speaking 
to his people Israel, "at sundry times and in divers 
manners" in the past. He points out that if it was always 
appropriate to hearken to the Lord's messengers, 
it is much more appropriate that we hearken to the great 
Chief Messenger of Jehovah, our Lord Jesus, "whom 
God hath appointed heir of all things." 

He next points out the basis of our good hopes of 
salvation through Christ— the basis on which divine 
justice and love may operate toward fallen mankind; 
viz., that this Jesus "himself purged our sins and has 
sat down on the right hand of the majesty on high," 
far above angels and principalities and powers. 

When the Apostle points out the high exaltation 
of our Lord Jesus, and that it was a reward for his obedience 
in suffering death on our behalf, he proves four 
things: (1) That our Lord Jesus did give a ransom for 
our transgressions, which was satisfactory to the divine 
justice; so that through his stripes we might be healed, 
notwithstanding the sentence of eternal death which 
was against us through father Adam's transgression. 
(2) He proves this by the fact of our Lord's resurrection 
and high exaltation above angels, to share the 
Father's throne and nature in glory. (3) This exaltation 
of the Savior implies power— power to carry out 
the blessed provisions of the New Covenant, which he 
merely sealed with his precious blood. It must yet be 
made effective to mankind. (4) To make it effective 

R2408 : page 372 

will imply the use of the power and exaltation granted 

to this Life-Giver by Jehovah. Having bought the 

world from under the sentence of death he will in due 

time proceed to the establishment of the heavenly Kingdom: 

thus he shall bring in everlasting righteousness as 

the law of earth; lay judgment to the line and righteousness 

to the plummet; sweep away all the refuges of 

lies; bind the great Adversary, Satan; and, opening the 



eyes of the blind and the ears of the deaf, he then will 
cause all mankind to know respecting the love of God 
which passeth all understanding, which would not that 
any should even perish, but that all might turn unto 
him and live.-Isa. 11:9; 28:17; 35:5; 2 Pet. 3:9,13; 
Rev. 20:2. 

The exalted and fully empowered Life-Giver will 
then stand ready, not only to make known to all mankind 
the terms of the New Covenant under which all 
may have eternal life, by obedience to God in him, but 
as the great Prophet he will stand ready to teach, and 
as the great Priest he will stand ready to help their infirmities 
and to direct their paths in the way of 
righteousness. 

"Hallelujah! What a Savior!" 

"He is able to save unto the uttermost all that come 
unto the Father by him." "I am not ashamed of the 
Gospel of Christ, for it is the power of God unto salvation, 
to everyone that believeth." 



R2408 : page 373 
"THE TRUE LIGHT THAT LIGHTETH EVERY MAN." 
--JAN. l.-JOHN 1:1-14.— 

"In him was life, and the life was the light of men."— John 1:4. 

REACHING far into the past, to the beginning of 
earth's creation as mentioned in Genesis, our 
lesson informs us that even then the Logos, the Word, 
existed, with God. "The Word" is a very good title 
for our Lord Jesus in his prehuman condition: it is the 
translation of the Greek word Logos, which might more 
literally be rendered, "the Expression:" for the great 
and honorable one, the heavenly Father's companion 
"before the world was" made, who is declared to have 
been "the beginning of the creation of God," was in 
every sense of the word a full and complete expression 
of the divine will, mind, purpose, character. Of this 
First-begotten-one the Apostle writes that he was "in 
the form of God"— a likeness of Jehovah (Phil. 2:6), 
but he does not claim, as our common version would 
appear to make him say, that the Logos thought it not 
robbery to be equal with the Father, Jehovah God. The 
Apostle's argument is to the very contrary of this: he 
is showing that the Logos was fully subservient to Jehovah; 
and that it was a proof of this subserviency and 
obedience and humility, that the Logos became flesh, 
the "man Christ Jesus." And further, in harmony 
with the same humility and obedience to the Father, 
he became obedient to death, even the death of the 
cross; and on this account ("wherefore") Jehovah God 
highly exalted him by a resurrection to the divine nature, 



far above angels, principalities, powers, and every 
name that is named,— to a position higher than any 
other, higher than his prehuman condition, next to the 
Father, and an associate of his throne, his glory, his 
power, his nature. 

What the Apostle does say is to the very contrary 
of the statement of our common translation. A good 
translation is furnished in the Emphatic Diaglott:— 
"Who, tho being in God's form, did not meditate a usurpation 
to be like God, but divested himself, taking a 
bondman's form." This is in agreement with the rendering 
of the passage by various Greek scholars, thus: 
"Who. ..did not think it a matter to be earnestly desired," 
—Clarke; "Did not earnestly affect,"— Cyprian; 
"Did not think of eagerly retaining,"— Wakefield; "Did 
not regard.. .as an object of solicitous desire,"— 
Stewart; "Thought not. .a thing to be seized,"— 
Sharpe; "Did not eagerly grasp,"— Kneeland; "Did 
not violently strive,"— Dickinson; "Did not meditate a 
usurpation,"— Turnbull; "Who, being in the form of 
God, counted it not a prize [margin, a thing to be grasped] 
to be on an equality with God, but emptied himself, 
taking the form of a servant."— Revised Version. 

But altho the Scriptures nowhere place the only 
begotten and well-beloved Son of God on an equality 
with Jehovah himself, either while he was here on 
earth, nor while he was the Logos, before he was "made 
flesh," they do assure us that now, in his highly exalted 
condition, the Logos still, Christ Jesus still, he is 
partaker of the divine nature, glory and all power in 
heaven and in earth; and accordingly we are instructed 
that "all men should honor the Son, even as they honor 
the Father." (John 5:23.) However, our lesson introduces 
us to our Redeemer in his prehuman condition, 
a spirit condition, higher than the angels, and assures 
us that all things were made by him: literally, "Without 
him was not one thing made that was made." Thus 
we see that in all of Jehovah's creative work on every 
plane the Logos had preference— "that in all things he 
might have the preeminence."— Col. 1:18. 

The number of Bible students who are non-critical 
is very large. It is not, therefore, surprising that many 
have fallen into the error of supposing that this 
first verse of John's Gospel is a declaration that the Logos 
was the full equal of Jehovah— that the Word, the message, 
was the full equal to the one who sent the Word, 
the expression, the message. Yet this is contradictory 
to reason, as well as contradictory to the testimony of 
our Lord Jesus himself, who unequivocally declared, 
"Of mine own self I can do nothing; as I hear I judge;" 
and again, "The Father is greater than I."— John 5:30; 
14:28. 

Scholars are all aware that the word that is translated 
God in the Old Testament is not equivalent to the 
word Jehovah. Altho its significance is "mighty one," 
it is frequently used for others besides the All-mighty, 



Jehovah: it is used for angels; it is used for great 
men; it is used for false gods. The word Jehovah is the 
specific name for the All-mighty One, to whom all other 
elohim (gods— mighty ones) are subject. So in the New 
Testament, the word theos is the equivalent to elohim, 
and signifies mighty one. It is used in the New Testament 
most frequently in reference to Jehovah himself, 
but sometimes, in referring to man, and to false gods, 
and several times in referring to our Lord Jesus. The 
first verse of John's Gospel is a marked instance of the 
use of theos in referring to Jehovah's Logos, his Only 
Begotten Son, "the beginning of the creation of God." 
(Rev. 3:14.) But the critical Greek student should 
find no difficulty in distinguishing between these two 
Gods, and noting that the one is distinctly referred to 
as the superior of the other, for this distinction is clearly 
shown by the use of the Greek article before theos in 
referring to Jehovah, and the absence of that article 
when theos is used in referring to the Logos. The effect 
of this, expressed in our English language, would render 
the passage thus:— 

"In the beginning was the Logos, and the Logos 
was with the God, and the Logos was a God. The same 
was in the beginning with the God." 

This translation will not be disputed by any Greek 
scholar; and it sets at rest all ground for dispute respecting 
the primary relationship between the Father and 
the Son. Indeed, the expressions, "Father" and "Son" 
imply what is elsewhere stated,— that the Son "proceeded 
forth and came from God" (John 8:42). Otherwise 
these terms, Father and Son, are meaningless. A son can 
never be his own father, nor can it be claimed that a 
son never had a beginning, for the term, son, implies a 
life, existence, being, which had a beginning, and which 
was derived from a father. The Scriptures, when permitted 
to interpret themselves, are beautifully consistent, 
and harmoniously reasonable. But when warped 
and twisted by preconceived ideas and false doctrines, 
the light of truth becomes darkness, and mystery is 
written upon everything connected therewith— not the 

R2408 : page 374 

mystery of God, however, but "the mystery of iniquity," 
of darkness, of error. 

"In him was life." Our Lord's separateness from 
the human family is thus pointed out: in no other man 
than "the man Christ Jesus" was there life. In all the 
race of Adam, the entire human family, aside from 
Jesus, death was working; it thus reigned in the entire 
race from the time father Adam became disobedient and 
forfeited the life that was in him originally, and was 
able to impart to his posterity only dying conditions. 
It was this life in Christ— the fact that he was separate 
from sinners, holy, harmless, undefiled, that constituted 
this Savior, whom the Father sent, a beacon light of 



hope for our race. Had he in any manner forfeited his 
rights to life, either before he came to human conditions, 
or while he was the man Christ Jesus, our light of hope 
would have been extinguished: but possessing his rights 
to life he, according to the Father's program, laid down his 
life on our behalf— a corresponding price for the life of 
Adam, which had been forfeited through sin;— a corresponding 
price, therefore, for all who had a share in 
Adam's death penalty. 

Having thus bought us with his own precious blood, 
he thus became light-giver, hope-giver, to the world of 
mankind, and also its life-giver. Praise God for this 
great light and life provided for a dying world; and altho 
it is true that the light shone amidst the darkness of 

R2409 : page 374 

human depravity without being generally comprehended 
or appreciated, it is also true, nevertheless, that "that 
was the true [antitypical, the real, genuine, not counterfeit 
or typical] light, which lighteth every man that 
cometh into the world." It matters not, therefore, that 
this true light was not comprehended and appreciated 
by the Jews in the days of his flesh, and that he is not 
comprehended even to-day by the world of mankind; 
he, nevertheless, is the true light, and in the Father's 
due time he shall accomplish the great plan of God, of 
which he is the center, the expression, the Logos;— he 
shall enlighten every man born into the world. Nor 
shall any be permitted to languish in darkness, or to fail 
of eternal life by reason of lack of knowledge; in due 
time all the blind eyes shall be opened, all the deaf ears 
shall be unstopped, and the blind shall see out of obscurity 
the great Light which God has raised up, to be 
a prince and a Savior for whosoever cometh unto the 
Father through him.— Isa. 35:5; John 8:12; 14:6. 

True, only a minority have yet seen this light, for 
still "Darkness covers the earth, and gross darkness the 
people." (Isa. 60:2.) We are waiting, however, for 
the glorious Millennial Day in which this great light, 
this true light, shall shine forth as the sun in the Kingdom 
of the Father, and when his faithful ones, his 
jewels, chosen and polished during this time of darkness, 
shall be glorified with himself, and be associated 
in the great work of enlightening mankind, and as the 
Seed of Abraham, in blessing all the families of the 
earth with this enlightenment, and with accompanying 
opportunities for harmony with God, and eternal life. 
-Matt. 13:43; Rom. 8:17; Gal. 3:16,29; 
Gen. 22:17,18. 

Nothing in this, however, offers excuses for those 
catching even a glimpse of this great light in the 
present time. Blessed are their eyes if they see, and 
their ears, if they hear, and such will have the graver 
responsibilities and "stripes," if they do not walk according 
to the light which they have received.— 



Luke 12:47,48. 

The Apostle carefully distinguishes between the 
messenger of the light and the Light itself. Subsequently 
(John 5:35) our Lord speaks of John the Baptist 
as a burning and a shining lamp (mistranslated light). 
A totally different Greek word is used when our Lord is 
spoken of as being the Light, but this same Greek word, 
phos, is used with respect to the Church which is the 
Body of Christ, and with her Lord partaker of the holy 
spirit. Respecting these members of his Body, members 
of the ecclesia, the elect, our Lord expressly says, 
"Ye are the light of the world," using the very same 
Greek word that in this lesson is used with respect to 
himself. It is this same word, phos, that is used in the 
following Scriptures: "If the light that is in thee become 
darkness;" "The children of the light;" "What union 
hath light with darkness?" "Put on the armor of light;" 
"Now are ye light in the Lord;" "Walk as children of 
the light;" "Out of darkness into his marvelous light;" 
"Walk in the light, as he is in the light." A similar 
distinction, as between John and Christ, is to be noted 
in the fact that our Lord is the Logos, the Word, while 
John the Baptist was not the Word, but was merely "A 
voice crying in the wilderness." 

When the Logos was made flesh, became the man 
Christ Jesus, altho he was in a world which he had created 
by the Father's power vested in him, yet the world 
did not recognize him, and even his own nation, to 
whom he specially presented himself, received him not. 
Nevertheless, some of them received him, and as many 
of them as did so were blessed— blessed with the power 
and privilege of becoming sons of God, whereas previously 
their highest possibility had been to be God's 
servants and friends. Here we note the change of dispensation 
from the Jewish to the Christian, and that 
this change was made possible by something which our 
Lord did or offered. What he did was to redeem the 
Jews from the sentence of the Law Covenant, under 
which they rested, and to redeem all mankind from the 
death sentence which came upon all through Adam's 
disobedience. 

Until this ransom had been paid to divine Justice, 
the condemned ones could not be received back to the 
condition of sonship primarily enjoyed by father Adam, 
but forfeited for himself and posterity when he became 
a sinner. The mission of the great Light into world 
was not only to redeem man's life, but also to enlighten 
him and to restore as many as may be willing to accept 
sonship, and this work has not yet been accomplished. 
Nay, it may be said scarcely to have begun, for only a 
remnant of his own nation received the true Light; and 
only a little flock in all, from every kindred, nation or 
people, have received him and his blessing, as now offered 
to mankind,— the vast majority being blinded by 
Satan, and thus hindered from seeing the true Light, as 
the Apostle explains.— 2 Cor. 4:4. 



Those called during this time of darkness, when 
gross darkness covers the people, are called to what the 
Scriptures denominate a "high calling," a heavenly 
calling— not merely to a restoration to human nature, 
and its privileges and blessings lost through sin: they 
are called to special fellowship with the Logos himself 
—called to be partakers of his light, and sharers with 
him in the future work of enlightening and blessing 

R2409 : page 375 

the world. These are sons of God in an especial sense 
—in a sense different from Adam even in his state of 
innocence. (Luke 3:38.) These are invited to be sons 
of God on a plane of sonship higher than the angelic 
sons; viz., as heirs of God, joint-heirs with the Logos, 
partakers with him of the divine nature, which is far 
above angelic and all other natures.— 2 Pet. 1:4; 
Rom. 8:17. 

This power to become sons of God is not granted 
to sinners, but to the justified— to those who have been 
justified by faith, by believing on his name. These are 
begotten, not after the ordinary manner in which fleshly 
children are begotten, not by blood, nor has the will 
of the flesh anything whatever to do with their begetting, 
as it always has to do with the begetting and character 
in a fleshly begetting. In their begetting of the 
spirit of the truth, altho that truth may be presented 
through human agencies, the begetting cannot be accomplished 
by the will of man, but only in proportion 
as the natural will is rejected and ignored, and the will 
of God received instead. The Apostle James (1:18) 
explains this begetting, saying, "Of his own will begat 
he us with the word of truth, that we should be a kind of 
first fruits of his creatures." These "new creatures in 
Christ Jesus," sons of God and prospectively joint-heirs 
with Christ, are expected to receive of the Father's spirit 
so fully (through the word of his grace) that they will 
be willing to suffer reproach for his cause and his truth, 
and like the Logos himself be willing to lay down their 
lives for the brethren, in harmony with the divine arrangement 
of this age, as living sacrifices to God, holy, 
acceptable through Christ. And it is only upon condition 
that they suffer with Christ that they may hope 
eventually to be his joint-heirs in the Kingdom and 
glory and power promised him by the Father.— Rom. 8: 17; 
John 1:11,12. 

The fourteenth verse goes back to take up the subject 
at the same point as verse five, and to repeat the 
narrative from another standpoint. "The Logos was 
made flesh, and dwelt among us." This does not teach 
what is ordinarily called the doctrine of the Incarnation, 
which is understood to signify that the only begotten of 
the Father, the Logos, came as a spirit being, and inhabited 
a fleshly or human body for a time, and was 
again liberated from that body at or about the time that 



the body was crucified. This view of the incarnation 
of the Logos makes nonsense of much of the Scripture, 
and beclouds and mystifies the minds of many Bible 
students. From this standpoint they think of our Lord 
as really a spirit being, who never ceased to be a spirit 
being, and who never was in any sense of the word a 
man, a human being, but who merely appeared to be a 
human being, but actually was not. From this standpoint 
of view our Lord's prayers to the Father, his 
temptations in the wilderness, and his tears and dying 
cry are all made to appear as so much clever acting; because 
this false claim makes it appear that he really was 
so far above human conditions that he could not be 
tried, tempted, suffer, etc. Furthermore, it implies 
that he did not really die, but merely appeared to die, 
and that at the moment the flesh was crucified the Logos 
merely stepped out, and became a silent invisible spectator 
of the tragedy of Calvary. 

But it was no such farcical sacrifice for sins, and 
pretended death without dying, that God had typified 
during the preceding sixteen hundred years, in the 
sacrifice of bulls and of goats, etc., year after year continually. 
Adam's death-sentence was a real sentence, 
a genuine penalty, and the ransom by which we are made 
free from sin was a no less real sacrifice, which our 
Lord— "the man Christ Jesus"— gave on our behalf. 
-1 Tim. 2:5,6. 

The Apostle assures us that he who was rich for our 
sakes became poor: he did not merely pretend to be 
poor, by merely putting on an outer coat of a lower 
nature, but he actually became poor, actually left the 
glory and honor of a higher nature, he actually humbled 
himself and took human nature;— not, however, 
fallen human nature, not sinful flesh, but the human 
nature unfallen, the likeness of humanity free from its 
blemishes through sin and death. 

This is in exact accord with the Scriptures under 
consideration, "He was made flesh:" literally, "he became 
flesh." Nothing less than this great stoop or humiliation 
enabled him to be our Redeemer, and qualified 
him to give to God the ransom price for man's transgression; 
as it is written, "By a man came death, by a 

R2410 : page 375 

man also came the resurrection." It was a man that 
was sentenced to death, and neither an angel's life, nor 
the archangel's life, nor any other life than a man's life 
could be the "corresponding price" which would release 
Adam and his posterity from the death penalty. 
Just so the sacrifice of lower animals could never take 
away sin; because, altho innocent of sin, they were not 
of the same identical nature as the sinner, and therefore 
could not be accepted of divine justice as man's 
ransom price. The Logos did not die in his change from 
spirit nature to human nature; but when "the man 



Christ Jesus" died, it was the full giving up of life in 
every sense of the word— nothing was retained; "He 
gave all that he had" (Matt. 13:44,46),-he gave his 
life, the life of the man Christ Jesus, which had previously 
been the life of the Logos. His being ended: 
"He poured out his soul [being] unto death; he made 
his soul [being] an offering for sin." This is further 
testified to by the Lord himself who, after his resurrection, 
declared, "I am he that liveth and was dead— behold, 
I am alive forever more." "Christ dieth no more; 
death hath no more dominion over him."— Isa. 53:10,12; 
Rev. 1:18; Rom. 6:9. 

"We beheld his glory," his grandeur, his perfection, 
his nobility; it shone out clearly to those who had 
eyes to see it— those who were not blinded by the prince 
of this world. These very glories of the man Christ 
Jesus attest fully that he was not of the sinner race of 
Adam, but that he was indeed an exception to all mankind; 
giving evidence of having been begotten of the 
heavenly Father, in that he was full of grace and truth. 
"As he was so are we in this world," says the Apostle: 
and altho we are by nature sinners and children of 
wrath even as others, yet by grace we have been begotten 
again to a new nature, and this grace of God operating 
in our hearts, enlightening, purifying, sanctifying, 
should, gradually at least, transform us, change us "from 
glory to glory," bringing us more and more to the likeness 
of God's dear Son, our Redeemer and Lord, to 
whom, with God the Father, be praise and thanksgiving 
now and forever, for "so great salvation, which at 
the first began to be spoken by our Lord, and was confirmed 
unto us by them that heard him."— Heb. 2:3. 


