
An Exciting and Fresh Approach to Public Witnessing




 1. What have congregations with areas of high pedestrian traffic been encouraged to do?
1 Congregations that have areas of high pedestrian traffic have been encouraged to organize public witnessing, using tables or mobile displays. If a mobile display is used, at least one publisher stands or sits next to the display. However, two publishers should man a table display. Those stationed at the displays endeavor to be warm, friendly, and inviting. If a person gives his attention to the display, one of the publishers can start a conversation, perhaps by saying, “Have you ever wondered what the Bible says about that subject?” Another publisher or two can be within eyesight of the display while engaging in informal witnessing.
 2. Relate an experience that illustrates the value of public witnessing with a literature display.
2 This approach has resulted in many new Bible studies. One college student chose to write a research paper on Jehovah’s Witnesses, but she was unable to find a Kingdom Hall. The next week she saw a table display on the campus. A Bible study was started, and now that student is a baptized publisher and participates in this form of witnessing herself.
 3. How do some feel about this avenue of public witnessing?
3 One sister who has enjoyed this form of public witnessing commented: “Some stop at the display to pick up the current magazines. Others have never heard of Jehovah’s Witnesses before. I can see that with this approach, many can be reached.” Another sister remarked, “This is an exciting, fresh method of witnessing because the people come to you and, at the very least, they are curious.”
 4. Why is it beneficial to set up a literature display at the same times and location each week?
4 It is beneficial to set up the display at the same location, on the same days, and at the same times each week. As a result, people get used to seeing the displays and eventually feel comfortable enough to approach and ask questions or obtain literature. Has your congregation organized public witnessing? If so, perhaps you can participate in this enjoyable and fruitful way to “declare abroad the Kingdom of God.”—Luke 9:60.




