
Improving Our Skills in the Ministry—Showing Personal Interest




Why Important: Jesus viewed people as individuals, and he showed loving personal interest in them. For example, on one occasion Jesus may have sensed some uneasiness in a deaf man, so when he healed him, he did so privately, away from the stares of the crowd. (Mark 7:31-35) He showed consideration for his disciples by recognizing their limitations and not overwhelming them with too much information. (John 16:12) Even in his heavenly position, Jesus shows personal interest. (2 Tim. 4:17) As followers of Christ, we want to imitate him. (1 Pet. 2:21; 1 John 3:16, 18) Furthermore, we will be more effective in our ministry if we show consideration for the householder and take note of his unique circumstances, his interests, and his concerns. He will be more likely to listen if he senses that we are not just on a mission to deliver a message or to leave literature; rather, we are interested in him personally.
How to Do It:
           Be well-prepared. Relax, smile, and be friendly.

            Be observant. Do you see indications that the person has children? that he enjoys gardening or has pets? that he has certain religious beliefs? Perhaps you can tailor your introduction to fit his circumstances.

            Ask for his opinion, and listen carefully without needlessly interrupting. Maintain eye contact to show that you are listening. Acknowledge his comments, and commend him if you can do so sincerely. Avoid being argumentative.

            Be adaptable. If necessary, adjust your presentation to address the person’s concerns. This may be easier than you think, since our tracts, brochures, and magazines discuss a wide variety of subjects. If you have called at an inopportune time, such as when he is busy, acknowledge that and shorten your presentation.




Try This During the Month:
            Have practice sessions during family worship, or perhaps while in the ministry, in which the publisher must adapt his presentation to address something the householder says.

            During some meetings for field service, the brother conducting could discuss or demonstrate ways to show personal interest.








