Believing in a God We Might Not Know
TWO out of three people in Germany believe in God. Yet, when over a thousand were asked for a description of the God they believe in, almost everyone gave a different answer. “German people have individual conceptions of God that are just as diverse as the people themselves,” reports the newsmagazine FOCUS. While belief in God is commendable, is it not a pity to believe in him without knowing what he is like?
This uncertainty about the nature or person of God is found beyond the borders of Germany; it exists elsewhere in Europe. A survey carried out in Austria, Britain, and the Netherlands revealed widespread agreement that God is “a higher power or an undefinable secret.” Particularly among young people, even among those who believe in him, is he a mystery.
Do You Know God Personally?
There is a world of difference between knowing of someone and knowing him personally. To know of someone​—a remote monarch, a top athlete, a film star—​is simply to acknowledge that he exists. To know someone personally, however, means much more. It involves being familiar with that person’s character, conduct, feelings, likes and dislikes, and plans for the future. To know someone personally opens the way for having a close relationship with him.
Hundreds of thousands of individuals have decided that having only a vague idea about God​—or simply knowing of him—​is not enough. They have gone much further by getting to know God closely. Have they found it to be worthwhile? A man named Paul, who lives in northern Germany and who once had just a general belief in God, decided to become better acquainted with Him personally. Paul explains: “Getting to know God well takes time and effort, but the dividends are high. Having a close relationship with the Creator makes everyday life much better.”
Is it worth the time and effort needed to get to know God closely? Please read the next article.
[Blurb on page 3]
There is a world of difference between knowing of someone and knowing him personally

