From Our Readers
Abortion  Your series “Abortion​—The Making and the Taking of a Life” (May 22, 1993) brought tears to my eyes and pain to my heart. If I had read this information eight years ago, I would not have had an abortion. It took me almost seven years to confess this sin to my husband, who would have been the father. I hope that anyone considering abortion will read the articles and realize that life is precious and a gift from God.
G. D., United States
I am 16 years old, and we learned about abortion in school. Yet, somehow I had not realized the pain involved for the child. As I read this magazine, great anger welled up in me, along with tears that I couldn’t stop. How can people treat so lightly the precious life that Jehovah kindly gives?
N. K., Japan
I took this magazine with me to school, and to my great surprise, the students liked it! It touched the hearts of my classmates to the point that one of them broke down and cried. Just days before, she had had an abortion performed.
L. S., United States
Helicopters  Your article “Workhorse of the Skies” (March 8, 1993) was of special interest to me. As an aviation safety inspector for the Federal Aviation Administration and a helicopter pilot/​flight instructor, I can see that the article reflects extraordinary care in accuracy. I especially appreciated the simplicity of presentation.
J. R., United States
Losing Weight  I read the article “If I Lost Weight, Anybody Can!” (January 22, 1993), and while I’m very happy that the writer is managing his battle with his weight, I fear the article will encourage many to think that overweight people simply need self-control and to diet. My problem involves a bit more than a “1,200 to 1,500 calories per day” diet can solve. Eating is a compulsion for me, a drug. Only recently have I come to understand that as an adult child of an alcoholic, I have been trying to fill a hunger for love and self-esteem. Rigid dieting is therefore not a simple solution to this complex issue.
R. S., United States
We appreciate these candid comments. The article, though, was directed primarily to individuals with poor eating habits, not to those battling serious eating disorders. The latter may need professional help to overcome their difficulties. Helpful information on eating disorders was published in our February 22, 1992, issue.​—ED.
The article was like a review of my own history of bad nutritional habits. The suggestions were very useful, and I am now applying them. Thank you very much for this article!
S. P., Brazil
The article taught me how to balance my eating habits in a healthy way. This was exactly what I needed. Thank you!
S. G., United States
Horses  I was moved by the article “Horses Were My Life.” (May 22, 1993) Before becoming a Christian, I devoted almost all my free time to riding and taking care of horses. After studying the Bible, however, I gave up my costly hobby and took up the full-time preaching work. Even so, I still love horses. The article helped me recognize that others have dealt with similar feelings.
G. V., Germany

