The One Who Will Protect Our Wildlife
FROM the dawn of human history, man has found delight in the study of wild animals. Sadly, though, after God gave man permission to add meat to his diet, appreciation for wildlife degenerated into needless slaughter and cruel trophy hunting.​—Genesis 2:19, 20; 9:2; 10:9; 25:27.
But some men continued to marvel at earth’s wildlife. About 3,000 years ago, the words of Psalm 104 were penned by a wildlife lover. He mentions various wild creatures by name, such as zebras, lions, mountain goats, rock badgers, and the stork. From his study of birds, birdsongs, and wild beasts, the psalmist was moved to burst forth in praise: “All of them in wisdom [Jehovah has] made.”​—Psalm 104:10-12, 17-21, 24.
Indeed, Jehovah God can rightly be pleased with his magnificent works of creation. (Genesis 1:31) Thus, we can be sure that he will not allow earth’s remaining wildlife to be wiped out. Consistent with that, God inspired the psalmist to record information that should be good news to all wildlife lovers. We are told that “the earth . . . will not be made to totter to time indefinite, or forever.” (Psalm 104:5) Such concern for the everlasting welfare of this planet surely includes the creatures that live on it. (Isaiah 45:18) Jesus Christ verified God’s concern for wild creatures when he said: “Five sparrows sell for two coins of small value, do they not? Yet not one of them goes forgotten before God.” (Luke 12:6) God’s concern for his creatures is also highlighted at Psalm 104, verse 14, which reads: “He is making green grass sprout for the beasts, and vegetation for the service of mankind, to cause food to go forth from the earth.”
In harmony with these facts, Jehovah God will not forever tolerate humans who deny him and who threaten the future of the earth and its wildlife. Emphasizing this, Psalm 104 concludes with these reassuring words: “Sinners will be finished off from the earth; and as for the wicked, they will be no longer.”​—Psalm 104:35.
How comforting to know that God has expressed his determination “to bring to ruin those ruining the earth.” (Revelation 11:18) At that time other prophecies that are now being fulfilled in a figurative way will have a literal fulfillment. For example, through his prophet Hosea, Jehovah God declares: “I shall certainly conclude a covenant in that day in connection with the wild beast of the field and with the flying creature of the heavens and the creeping thing of the ground, and the bow and the sword and war I shall break out of the land, and I will make them lie down in security.”​—Hosea 2:18; Isaiah 11:6-9.
Picture yourself in that coming earthly Paradise. What a delightful time it will be! ‘But,’ you may wonder, ‘what is required to inherit such blessings?’ First of all, it is necessary to study God’s Word. Then, for those who submit to the Bible’s direction, Jehovah God makes this wonderful promise: “The righteous themselves will possess the earth, and they will reside forever upon it.”​—Psalm 37:29.

