From Our Readers
No to Drugs
I want to thank you and to congratulate you for the series of articles on drugs published in the feature “Young People Ask . . ” (March 8, July 8, September 8, September 22, October 8, 1985) For three years I regularly smoked marijuana, and it was ruining my health. I couldn’t understand the teachers at school, my memory had diminished, and I could not concentrate on anything for a long time. Today I give thanks to Jehovah for his kindness in delivering me from drugs. Now I know what to do so as not to start using drugs again.
G. B. V., Mexico
Thank you for your articles on drugs. I brought this series of articles to my health class at school. My teacher gave me extra credit for taking the time to find the information on drugs. Your articles really do help.
H. P., New York
Confiding in One’s Parents
I am writing to you about the article “Young People Ask . . . Should I Tell My Parents?” (December 22, 1985) I am 12 years old, and I was in a lot of trouble and could not talk to my parents about it. It was getting me down. I had a bad conscience, and my study was going down. Then the elders talked with my father, and everything had to come out. If I had just talked to my parents before, it would not have been so bad. Now after four months, I am on my way up again. It does help to talk about it.
M., England
Your article helped me to see that I should tell my parents my problems. I find it easier to tell my mother. My father is quite different. Please give me some more advice on this problem I have. It’s a real difficult subject.
A. S., Ohio
You will find it beneficial to confide in both your parents. The Bible states at Proverbs 1:8: “Listen . . . to the discipline of your father, and do not forsake the law of your mother.” See also Proverbs 4:1; 6:20; 23:22; and Ephesians 6:1-3. See also future articles.​—ED.
Are Looks Important?
Thank you for the article “Young People Ask . . . How Important Are Looks?” (January 8, 1986) Also the article in the same issue on “Peace in the Family​—What’s the Secret?” Both have helped me greatly at school and at home. Our family is much more peaceful now, and being beautiful isn’t everything. This I realize.
S. I., Indiana
Improving Family Life
I married when I was 16. My father was a drunkard, and Mother had to work to provide for me and my sisters. I never did learn to keep house. All I did was scream and complain about washing diapers and other clothes. So my husband took refuge in local bars, gambling away his salary with his friends. To pass the time, I read a lot, and not having money for other books, I read my mother’s Bible. I learned that what I was doing was wrong and began to try to get my husband back again. Then I read your articles on “Family Communication​—Why the Breakdown?” (January 8, 1985) I hope you continue to publish such marvelous information to help families.
L. P., Brazil
See “Peace in the Family​—What’s the Secret?” January 8, 1986, “Awake!”​—ED.

