Announcements
EMULATING THE EXCLUSIVE DEVOTION OF THE SHULAMMITE
The love of the Shulammite girl of Solomon’s superlative song is illustrative of the devotion of the congregation to Christ Jesus. (Cant. 8:6) He is their Lord and Head and heavenly “bridegroom.” The exclusive devotion of the Shulammite for her shepherd lover and that of those whom she pictured as a group for Christ Jesus should be followed as an example by all who as “other sheep” of the Right Shepherd join in his service. During the month of September they will do so by telling the good news of his kingdom. Two valuable Bible-study aid books and two booklets will be left on a contribution of only $1.
THE ANNUAL MEETING IN PITTSBURGH
At ten o’clock in the forenoon of Wednesday, October 1, 1958, the annual meeting of the members of Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society of Pennsylvania will be held at the Society’s office located at 4100 Bigelow Boulevard, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. All members should be certain that the secretary’s office has their present addresses so that the letters of notice will reach them shortly after September 1.
Along with the notice of the annual meeting, which will be mailed to all the members of the corporation, proxies will be sent. The proxies are to be returned so as to reach the office of the secretary of the Society not later than September 15. Each member should complete and return his proxy promptly whether he is going to be at the meeting personally or not.
GOD’S KINGDOM RULES—IS THE WORLD’S END NEAR?
Is it possible for God’s kingdom to be ruling now when the world is in such a frightful state of affairs? Is there hope for a world change? Do the troubles afflicting the world signify better things to come? These and many more questions that pertain to our day and the world’s future are answered in the talk “God’s Kingdom Rules—Is the World’s End Near?” This momentous discourse which we have joined in advertising for delivery by the president of the Watch Tower Society at the Divine Will International Assembly of Jehovah’s Witnesses on August 3, in New York city’s two largest baseball stadiums, Yankee Stadium and the Polo Grounds, you can read in the booklet God’s Kingdom Rules—Is the World’s End Near? Send five cents for your copy or ten cents for three copies. Translation into other languages will follow.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES FOR THE WEEKS
September 14: “Be Vigilant with a View to Prayers, ¶1-24, and Prayer, a Precious Loving Provision, ¶1-3. Page 497.
September 21: Prayer, a Precious Loving Provision, ¶4-28. Page 503.

