page 1 



SEMI-MONTHLY 
VOL. XXVIII JANUARY 1 No. 1 
A.D. 1907--A.M. 6035 



CONTENTS 

1907-Our Year Text- 1907 3 

The Christian's Conflict 3 

Helpfulness of Method or Resolution 4 

Reports from our Foreign Branches 5 

Our Advocate, the World's Mediator 7 

"We Have an Advocate" 7 

The Mediator of the New Covenant 8 

The Type of the Sin Offering 10 

The Bullock Sacrificed for the Levites 11 

The Goat Sin Offering 1 1 

Creating the World 12 

Man Created in God's Image 13 

Berean Studies in "Tabernacle Shadows" 15 

page 2 

THIS JOURNAL AND ITS SACRED MISSION 



THIS Journal is one of the prime factors or instruments in the system 
of Bible Instruction, or "Seminary Extension," now being presented in 
all parts of the civilized world by the WATCH TOWER BIBLE & 
TRACT SOCIETY, chartered A.D. 1881, "For the Promotion of Christian 
Knowledge." It not only serves as a class room where Bible Students 
may meet in the study of the divine Word, but also as a channel of 
communication through which they may be reached with announcements of 
the Society's Conventions and of the coming of its traveling representatives 
styled "Pilgrims," and refreshed with reports of its Conventions. 

Our "Berean Lessons" are topical rehearsals or reviews of our Society's 
published "Studies," most entertainingly arranged, and very helpful 
to all who would merit the only honorary degree which the Society accords, 
viz., Verbi Dei Minister (V.D.M.), which translated into English 
is, Minister of the Divine Word. Our treatment of the International 
S.S. Lessons is specially for the older Bible Students and Teachers. By 
some this feature is considered indispensable. 

This Journal stands firmly for the defence of the only true foundation 
of the Christian's hope now being so generally repudiated,— Redemption 
through the precious blood of "the man Christ Jesus who gave himself 
aransom [a corresponding price, a substitute] for all." (I Pet. 1:19; 
I Tim. 2:6.) Building up on this sure foundation the gold, silver 
and precious stones (I Cor. 3:11-15; 2 Pet. 1:5-11) of the Word 
of God, its further mission is to— "Make all see what is the fellowship 
of the mystery which. ..has been hid in God,. ..to the intent 
that now might be made known by the Church the manifold wisdom of 
God"— "which in other ages was not made known unto the sons of men 



as it is now revealed."— Eph. 3:5-9,10. 

It stands free from all parties, sects and creeds of men, while it 
seeks more and more to bring its every utterance into fullest subjection to 
the will of God in Christ, as expressed in the Holy Scriptures. It is thus 
free to declare boldly whatsoever the Lord hath spoken;— according to 
the divine wisdom granted unto us, to understand. Its attitude is not 
dogmatical, but confident; for we know whereof we affirm, treading with 
implicit faith upon the sure promises of God. It is held as a trust, to 
be used only in his service; hence our decisions relative to what may and 
what may not appear in its columns must be according to our judgment 
of his good pleasure, the teaching of his Word, for the upbuilding of his 
people in grace and knowledge. And we not only invite but urge our readers 
to prove all its utterances by the infallible Word to which reference 
is constantly made, to facilitate such testing. 

TO US THE SCRIPTURES CLEARLY TEACH 



That the Church is "the Temple of the Living God"— peculiarly "His 

workmanship;" that its construction has been in progress throughout the 
Gospel age— ever since Christ became the world's Redeemer and 
the chief corner stone of his Temple, through which, when finished, 
God's blessing shall come "to all people," and they find access to 
him.-I Cor. 3:16,17; Eph. 2:20-22; Gen. 28: 14; Gal. 3:29. 

That meantime the chiseling, shaping and polishing, of consecrated believers 
in Christ's atonement for sin, progresses; and when the last of these 
"living stones," "elect and precious," shall have been made ready, 
the great Master Workman will bring all together in the First Resurrection; 
and the Temple shall be filled with his glory, and be the meeting 
place between God and men throughout the Millennium.— Rev. 15:5-8. 

That the Basis of Hope, for the Church and the World, lies in the fact that 
"Jesus Christ, by the grace of God, tasted death for every man," "a ransom 
for all," and will be "the true light which lighteth every man that 
cometh into the world," "in due time."— Heb. 2:9; Jno. 1:9; I Tim. 2:5,6. 

That the Hope of the Church is that she may be like her Lord, "see him 
as he is," be "partaker of the divine nature," and share his glory as 
hisjoint-heir.-I John 3:2; John 17:24; Rom. 8:17; 2 Pet. 1:4. 

That the present mission of the Church is the perfecting of the saints for 
the future work of service; to develop in herself every grace; to be God's 
witness to the world; and to prepare to be kings and priests in the 
next age. -Eph. 4:12; Matt. 24:14; Rev. 1:6; 20:6. 

That the hope for the World lies in the blessings of knowledge and opportunity 
to be brought to all by Christ's Millennial Kingdom— the restitution 
of all that was lost in Adam, to all the willing and obedient, 
at the hands of their Redeemer and his glorified Church— when all the 
wilfully wicked will be destroyed.— Acts 3:19-23; Isa. 35. 
CHARLES T. RUSSELL, Editor. 



LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 



-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-24 EVERSHOLT ST., LONDON, N.W. 
GERMAN BRANCH-MIRKER STR., 45, ELBERFELD. 
AUSTRALASIAN BRANCH-EQUITABLE BLDG., COLLINS ST., MELBOURNE 

PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 

TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR AS FOLLOWS:- 

All Bible Students who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity or 
adversity, are unable to pay for this Journal, will be supplied FREE if 
they send a Postal Card each June stating their case and requesting its 
continuance. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on 
our list continually and in touch with the Studies, etc. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



THIS JOURNAL IS PUBLISHED IN THE 

FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, DANISH AND ITALIAN LANGUAGES. 

SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



PITTSBURG DISPATCH RENEWALS 



The publishers of the Dispatch notify us that they will continue 
to report Brother Russell's weekly discourses during 1907; 
and we accordingly notify our readers that they may send their 
subscriptions TO US at once. Indeed we have guaranteed the 
Dispatch a certain number of subscriptions. 

We suggested that if the price were cheaper more would subscribe, 
but the Dispatch says the weekly sermons should be 
worth the price aside from the best news service in the world. 
Its publishers supply the paper to us at clubbing rates, but refuse 
to allow us to quote a less price than they charge, namely, 
$6.00 per year. 

We adjust matters thus: For $6.00, the price of the Dispatch 
(2c each), we will send the Dispatch and three dollars 
worth of any other publications from our Catalogue (Dec. 1, 
'06). Or, if you subscribe for the Dispatch for 6 months, 
through us, we will present it to you free for the following six 
months. Or you can send us three dollars and authority to 
charge the balance of $3 against your Tract Fund remittance. 

WATCH TOWER BINDERS. 



These are substantially made of stiff cloth boards, and can 
hold two years' issues of the WATCH TOWER. They prevent 



soiling and loss. Price, postpaid, 50c. 

R3913 : page 3 

1907--OUR YEAR TEXT-- 1907 

OUR book of "Daily Heavenly Manna" is evidently 

being greatly used of the 

Lord for the blessing of the 

household of faith. The bringing 

thus of a morsel of meat from the 

storehouse of Truth, with a comment 

upon it, at the beginning of 

each day, is evidently tending toward 

the strengthening of the new 

nature, the new mind, by continually 

directing it in the ways marked 

out in the Lord's Word. Additionally 

our year-texts are helpful, as 

tending to remind us along the 

lines of our general duty, as the daily 

texts refresh us and strengthen 

us along particular lines. We have 

had this in mind in the choosing of this text, and believe 

it to be one the frequent consideration of which will be 

profitable— and the value of all these spiritual refreshments 

is enhanced by the realization that the minds, 

the hearts, of the Lord's people everywhere are being 

similarly stirred and refreshed along the same lines. 

As announced in a previous issue we have this 
year's texts in large supply, very elegantly gotten up 
and at a trifling cost, so that none need do without 
them— none need be deprived of this help and encouragement. 
Desiring that every reader of this journal 
should have the comfort and profit of this means of 
grace— this assistance in the narrow way— we have 
made the prices extremely low, simply to cover cost, 
but additionally now propose that if there be any of you 
who cannot afford to purchase we will take pleasure in 
supplying you without charge: that thus we may assist 
in washing the feet of the Lord's disciples— assist in 
cleansing them from earthly defilements and thus in 
preparing them for the heavenly courts. 

TO WHOM IS OUR TEXT APPLICABLE 

The Apostle does not address the world, however 
morally well disposed they may be. None has an interest 
in the things above unless first of all he has 
heard of Jesus as the Redeemer, renounced sin and 
fled to the Savior for refuge— justification. He must 
have gone even further than this to have an interest in 
the things above: he must have consecrated his justified 
life, presenting it a living sacrifice to the Lord 



(Rom. 12:1), and been accepted of the Lord and been 
begotten again of the holy Spirit, and thus have started 
his experiences as a spirit being— a New Creature in 
Christ Jesus. 

It is well for us to have continually in mind the 
sharp distinction which the Scriptures draw as between 
the natural man and the New Creature. The 
natural man, however well disposed, is of the earth 
earthy. This does not signify that he must be sensual, 
degraded, devilish; for, on the contrary, some 
natural men have very fine characters indeed, considering 
that they are sharers with all of mankind in the 
degradation of the fall. Adam thus was a natural man 
in his perfection, in the image of God. He could not 
set his affections on things above, for he had no revelation 
respecting them, no hopes or prospects centered 
there. His interests, in harmony with his nature, 
were earthly. So it will be also in the future age. 
While mankind under the blessings of restitution will 
be restored to the full perfection of human nature lost 
through Adam, redeemed by the precious blood of 
Christ (Acts 3:19-21), although they will be reverencing 
the heavenly laws, messages, authorities, they will, 
properly enough, be giving their thought and attention 
largely to earthly things— appreciating especially the 
restitution blessings, privileges, opportunities that 
will then be afforded them. 

THE CHRISTIAN'S CONFLICT 

It is because the Lord has called us out of the 
world to constitute the New Creation, his "body," his 
"Bride," to share with him his spiritual, heavenly glories 
and honors, therefore we should ever keep this in 
mind and strive for these things, for "even hereunto 
were ye called."— I Pet. 2:21. Called to "glory, honor 
and immortality," it remains for us to make this calling 
and election sure. (Rom. 2:7; 2 Pet. 1:10.) Again he 
reminds us, "Let us fear lest a promise having been 
left us of entering into his rest [the heavenly rest] any 
of you should seem to come short of it."— Heb. 4:1. 

The Apostle forewarns us that we must not forget 
that, although we are reckoned by the Lord and by 
ourselves and by the brethren as dead according to the 
flesh and alive according to the spirit, nevertheless we 
have this treasure of the new life in the earthen vessel, 
which is only reckoned dead, but which really is very 
much alive and constitutes our chief enemy. Not that 
we have two wills and are thus double-minded (Jas. 1:8). 
Thank God, No! We have only the one will, 
and it is fully devoted to the Lord according to the 
terms of its consecration. But this one new will can 

R3913 : page 4 

not have its new body until it proves itself worthy of it, 



and then will gain it as a reward in the resurrection. 
Meantime the conflict is on between the new will (which 
has no body of its own kind) and the old flesh (which 
has no will of its own kind). In order to be a conqueror 
the new will must struggle with the old flesh, 
and by the Lord's assistance keep it under, in subjection 
until the end of the course, until literally dead. 

The Apostle assures us that in proportion as the 
new mind, the New Creature, grows on the spiritual 
food, the promises of the Lord's Word— in proportion 
as it affiliates with other New Creatures and is thus 
strengthened and sustained by the holy Spirit granted 
to all such, it grows stronger and stronger for its conflict 
with the world and the flesh and the Adversary. 
It cannot hope to conquer the Adversary nor the world, 
even though it may resist them; but it is encouraged 
to hope for victory in its combat with the flesh. The 
Apostle's assurance along this line is that "If the Spirit 
of him that raised up Jesus from the dead dwell in 
you, he that raised up Christ from the dead shall also 
quicken your mortal bodies by his Spirit that dwelleth 
in you." (Rom. 8:11.) If the power of God was sufficient 
to quicken and energize the dead body of Jesus, 
surely he is able as well as willing to make it sufficient 
for us— to give us the victory over our flesh to the 
extent that sin need not reign in (dominate) our mortal 
bodies, but instead we, as New Creatures, will be 
able to use them more and more efficiently in the service 
of our Lord, to whom we have pledged our all. 

WHY SET OUR AFFECTIONS ABOVE? 

Since the new mind (the will) has no way of expressing 
itself except through the mortal body, and 
since the latter is prone to sin through inherited weaknesses, 
the new mind has a difficult task before it to 
rise from the grovelling things of sin and the sordidly 
selfish conditions surrounding everything at the present 
time to the grand heights of perfect love and unselfishness 
inculcated by the Spirit of the Lord, by 
which we have been begotten. Realizing that the tendency 
of the fallen flesh is continually downward, the 
New Creature is obliged to make heroic efforts to overcome 

R3914:page4 

the tendencies of the flesh and the spirit of the 
world in order that he may live in the world as not of 
the world, but on the contrary as a New Creature, a 
spiritual or heavenly creature, merely tabernacling for 
awhile with men in a body of flesh, far from perfect or 
acceptable to himself. Since, then, the constant tendency 
of the flesh is downward and in opposition to 
the new mind, it follows that those even who have already 
consecrated to the Lord need to reset or reestablish 
their affections on the heavenly things continually. 



A little carelessness, a little looking away from the 

things which God hath in reservation for them that 

love him, a little putting of our minds and affections 

on earthly things, earthly hopes, earthly ambitions, 

earthly prospects, would speedily mean great loss to 

us— the revival, the strengthening of the old nature and 

the proportionate weakening of the new, and correspondingly 

a great backset as respects the race we are 

running for the heavenly crown, the prize of our high 

calling in Christ Jesus. 

Is it any wonder then that the Apostle urges the 
Lord's faithful ones to set their affections on things 
above and not on things on earth? Surely not! It 
was his duty to remind us of the danger along this line 
and our duty to remind ourselves continually and to 
remind each other of the necessity for setting, fixing 
our affections, our minds, our hearts, more and more 
firmly on the heavenly things. It is with this in view 
that the Scriptures have been provided us as a guide 
to our new minds, and the throne of grace has been 
opened to us that we may come there, too, and obtain 
mercy and find grace to help in every time of need. 
And the same gracious Provider has in these days 
given to the household of faith still further meat in 
due season whereby we may be strong in the Lord and 
in the power of his might. At a time when earthly 
things are more attractive, more seductive than ever 
before in the world's history, the Lord opens before 
his faithful ones still clearer views of the heavenly 
crown, heavenly glories, honors and privileges and 
blessings, that they thus may give the strength to the 
new mind which will offset the seductive influences 
affecting us through the flesh. 

HELPS OR HINDRANCES, WHICH? 

We have today in the advancement of art, in the 
increase of wealth, in the better homes and their better 
furnishments, in improved roads and landscapes 
and more artistic clothing, in pictures and music and 
conveniences and wider business prospects and opportunities, 
in the conveniences of mail, telegraph and 
telephone— in all these things we have a hundred-fold 
more to attract our minds and ambitions and desires 
to the earth and earthly things than had our forefathers 
of even a century ago. How needful it was that 
the Lord should open simultaneously to his faithful a 
clearer understanding of his Word and plan— of the 
riches of his grace and his lovingkindness toward us, 
his wonderful provisions which eye hath not seen nor 
ear heard, neither hath it entered into the heart of the 
natural man, but which God hath revealed unto us by 
his Spirit. (I Cor. 2:9.) Moreover, by the same Word 
we can see that these heavenly glories are nigh, even 
at the door, and that the earthly joys, ambitions and 
prospects under present conditions will be transitory, 



leading to the great time of trouble and anarchy which 
will blight every earthly prospect and at the same time 
mean the realization of our heavenly hopes and prospects 
and the ushering in of the glorious Kingdom of 
God's dear Son for the blessing of the world in 
general. 

The means for the dissemination of this light of 
Present Truth for our aid is undoubtedly of the Lord. 
This journal, under the Lord's providence, cheers, 
comforts, and helps to inspire with fresh zeal and 
courage for the heavenly race about 50,000 of the Lord's 
advancing followers twice a month (we are now publishing 
about 30,000 at each issue, and estimate that this 
represents approximately 50,000 readers). The DAWNS, 
as Helping Hands and Bible Keys, are in the homes of 
nearly 2,000,000 of the most intelligent of the Lord's 
people, many of whom we find are considerably interested 
yet not on the WATCH TOWER list. (We deplore 
this fact: we would like to have on our lists, even 
though free, as to the Lord's poor, every child of God 
interested in Present Truth. We suggest to our readers 
cooperation along this line.) 

An additional aid in setting our affections on 
things above is the fellowship of the brethren and participation 
with them in Berean Studies, DAWN Circles 
for Bible Study, and Prayer and Testimony meetings 
for mutual upbuilding in the fruits and graces of the 
Spirit through ministries of the Truth, in proportion 
as they are found helpful and valuable in aiding us to 
lose the spirit of the world and to receive more and 
more the Spirit of Christ— to set our affections on things 
above, and not on things on the earth. 

HELPFULNESS OF METHOD AND RESOLUTION 

The whole world is rapidly learning the value of 
method and resolution— learning that wobbling and 
indecision are responsible for the majority of failures, 
learning that a positiveness of will, of intention, is 
necessary to every good or noble result. As Christians 
—as disciples of Jesus, as soldiers of the cross, followers 
of the Lamb— we need to have this great fact well 

R3914:page5 

impressed upon our hearts. All of the Lord's teachings 
are in accord with this. He instructs us that in 
order to be acceptable to the Father at all we must 
make a full self-surrender, turn over an entirely new leaf, 
because we are now New Creatures in Christ Jesus, to 
whom old things have passed away and all things have 
become new— new motives, new hopes, new aspirations, 
new relationships, new rules, a new mind, a fixity of 
the will for the Lord and his righteousness. 

"A double-minded man is unstable in all his ways," 
hence the Lord does not expect the double-minded 



amongst his true followers, running in the race for the 
prize of the high calling. On the contrary, he instructs 
those who would be his disciples, his members, to sit 
down first and count the cost. Those who love sin and 
its joys and sorrows would not be acceptable to the 
Lord as members of his Bride class. He desires only 
those who, after counting the cost— the renouncement 
of earthly things and ambitions, etc., in favor of the 
heavenly blessings, hopes, promises and joys— do with 
full purpose of heart give themselves unreservedly to 
the Lord, to henceforth be his at any and every cost, 
with the understanding that if we suffer with him we 
shall reign with him, if we be dead with him we shall 
also live with him, and with the resolution to count all 
earthly ambitions, opportunities and hopes but as loss 
and dross that we may win Christ and be found in him 
—members of his body. 

Whoever takes this step of full consecration does 
the proper thing and realizes a blessing, and that blessing 
will continue and increase in proportion as the 
same spirit continues to guide and control in all the 
little affairs of life. If a Christian at all, his will is 
fixed so far as its general purpose and direction go; 
nevertheless this is not enough— there might be a firmness, 
a positiveness of the will as respects the great 
fact of consecration, yet a slackness as respects the 
little details of everyday life. Our suggestion is that 
this fixity of purpose should be extended to all of life's 
matters— that the words of our mouths, the meditations 
of our hearts, and so far as possible every act of 
life might speak forth the praises of him who hath called 
us out of darkness into his marvellous light. Whoever 
takes this position is setting, fixing, establishing 
his affections, his mind, his heart on things above, and 
loosening them as respects things of earth. 

Such will grow the more rapidly, the more thriftily. 
On the contrary those who, even with fixity of will, rule 
their mortal bodies slackly, too leniently, are in danger 
of failing to come off more than conquerors, failing 
to become members of the little flock. They are in 
danger of becoming members of the great company, 
for whose development it will be necessary that they 
pass through a time of trouble for the washing of their 
robes in the blood of the Lamb and for the development 
of character thereby. Much better is it that we 
develop this character in harmony with the Lord's 
Word without the bitter experiences, but with, on the 
contrary, the continued assurance of the Lord's favor 
and smile, encouragement and blessing upon our endeavors 
to set our affections on things above, to cut 
loose from the earthly things, and to take a firm stand 
in even the small affairs of life for the Lord and his 
cause in harmony with the directions of his Word. 

Let us unite our hearts and our prayers the one for 
the other, that this Year-Text may be deeply impressive 
to all of us and deeply helpful, for we realize that 



its admonition is from the Lord and is the essence of 
wisdom, the wisdom that cometh from above. 



R3919 : page 5 

REPORTS FROM OUR FOREIGN BRANCHES 
REPORT FROM BRITISH BRANCH, 1906 



25 Eversholt St., London, N.W., England 
DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

Herewith I forward to you reports of the WATCH 
TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY'S work in Great Britain 
for the fiscal year. It is not all that we could have 
desired and hoped for, but all that we were able to attain. 
In some respects, I am sure, you will be pleasurably 
surprised at the good results. My chief cause for 
regret is the slowness of the colporteur work here. I 
realize, too, that this in some respects is the most important 
branch of the service— for the dissemination of 
the Truth— for the finding of the wheat, for the gathering 
of it into the garner. I regret the fact that our 
sales of DAWN, Vol. I., during the past year were not 
so large even as during the previous year, whereas in 
all reason, with the love and zeal and knowledge which 
the friends of the Truth here seem to possess, we 
should have put at least five times as many into circulation. 
I trust that the fault is not mine: that I am 
doing all in my power to forward this important branch 
of the service. 

How I wish some of the dear friends of the cause 
here, of good address, and unencumbered, could see 
their way clear to enter this grand work. Truly, as the 
Master said in the harvest of the Jewish age, The 
fields are white for the harvest but the laborers are 
few. Would that all of the dear ones here might fall 
in line with the Master's exhortation, "Pray ye the Lord 
of the harvest that he would send forth more laborers 
into his vineyard": I should hope that as a result of 
such earnestness and prayers quite a good many would 
quickly be saying, "Lord, here am I! accept my little 
service— send me!" And if this should include some 
who can only give a part of one or two days a week 
from business or household duties, as I understand is 
the case with many in the United States, we would be 
glad to assign to such what territory they could profitably 
use nearer at home. I do trust that next year's report 
will show a great advance in the service of our King in 
this most valuable department. We have plenty of 
territory as yet untouched. We feel ashamed to ask 
aid from the American laborers for this field, yet would 
be very glad indeed if some of them were here to assist 



us, to stimulate us, to put more vim in us. 

Since our last report of a year ago there has been 
considerable work done in Wales and Ireland, in both of 
which there is now a considerable and growing interest. 

We had two General Conventions during the year, 
both of which were very profitable and deeply interesting, 
besides which some Pilgrim work was done, including 
that by Brother Barton, whom you so kindly 
sent to us and whose ministries we so greatly 
appreciated. 

You will note that the volunteer report this year 
shows well: those of the brethren who did take part 
have worked hard, and the year shows larger than any 
before in the distribution of free literature. We are 
preparing for a great campaign next year, not forgetting 
that the time is short and that the privilege and 
opportunity of service is grand beyond compare. We 
hope for more volunteers this year, too. As the Truth 
takes hold of our hearts more and more and its spirit 
energizes us, we will be wanting to do with our might 
what our hands find to do— and there is so much to be 
done! How can we be idle or careless or indifferent 
or overcharged with the cares of this life while we have 
the opportunity of serving such a Master and of telling 
such good tidings? 

The Tract Fund donations, you will notice, have 
considerably increased over previous years— another 

R3919 : page 6 

evidence of the deepening of the work of grace in the 
heart. When the Truth touches the pocket-book, so 
that such donations are offered without request, without 
an appeal, without urging and without collections, it 
means considerable of love for the Lord, for the Truth, 
and for the brethren. 

Praying divine grace and blessing upon yourself 
and all the dear brethren, and with much love, I am, 
Your fellow-laborer, J. HEMERY. 

SUMMARY OF WORK ACCOMPLISHED THROUGH THE BRITISH 
BRANCH 

DAWNS and STUDIES, various bindings, sold 23,987 

DAWNS in magazine form 1,898 



Total number of DAWNS and STUDIES put into circulation. .25, 885 

Total number of Booklets, Hymn Books and Manna sold 7,897 

Total number of Tracts and TOWERS circulated free... .1,159, 000 

(Expressed in usual form of tract pages) 30,195,800 

Letters and cards received at this office 7,825 

Letters and cards sent out from this office 8,150 

FINANCIAL SUMMARY 

Expenditures L. s d. 



"Pilgrim" and Convention expenses 104 10 

Cost of Tracts, postage and office expenses 1318 2 5 



Total 1422 3 3 

Donations to Tract Fund 908 14 



Deficit for year 1906 513 9 3 



REPORT OF GERMAN BRANCH 



45 Mirker St., Elberfeld, Germany. 
DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

I send you with this a report of the Society's work 
done through its German Branch during the past year. 
It has been a great year with us, a year of great activity, 
as the report shows. And yet along some lines we 
might feel discouraged did we not know what to expect 
in this "harvest" time. We are always glad to have 
your sympathies, your love and your prayers in this 
part of the harvest field. The oneness of the Lord's 
cause is sustaining us, not only financially but in every 
way. It certainly encourages the less numerous friends 
of the Truth on this Continent to know of the prosperity 
and the love of the Lord's people in other parts of 
the world. We rejoice that the Truth is made more 
and more accessible to the hungering ones of various 

R3920 : page 6 

nations through its publications in many languages. 

We seem to be unable to accomplish much in that 
very important department of the harvest work— the 
colporteur field. We are ashamed of the small showing 
in this particular, although books are sold at an 
extremely low price and although there is a large middle 
class of people here who are able to purchase. We 
seem not to have been able to find the right method for 
impressing them with their need of these helps in Bible 
Study. Indeed, one great difficulty is that good, well-meaning 
people here are full of prejudice, while those 
who get free from the prejudice and superstition seem 
very generally to fall into Socialism, with its earthly 
aims and prospects, ignoring the Bible, or into open 
infidelity and antagonism to everything religious. I 
remember that it is your opinion that great numbers of 
DAWNS could be sold here if we only get at the proper 
method. I have been endeavoring to find that method 
and will still endeavor. 

You will be glad to learn that quite a work of grace 
is in progress amongst those who have received the 
Truth. Many of them have been subjected to calumny 



and opposition of various kinds, but now seem to be 
learning that the "disciple is not above his Lord"— 
learning to overcome their trials. Letters from these 
dear soldiers of the cross bring many messages of love 
and sympathy and requests for remembrances in 
prayer. The Truth is rooting and grounding them in 
character, so that none of the attacks of the Adversary 
move them. Others are fearful and need our tender 
care, words of sympathy, etc. 

Our principal work accomplished has been in the 
distribution of free literature, some of which, we trust, 
will ultimately prove to be good seed in good hearts, 
bringing forth abundantly to the Master's praise. 

During the year we received 2474 letters and sent 
out 1433. Many of these were answered by the mailing 
of free literature and others by post-card replies. 

We had one Convention this year which was very 
interesting and we trust very profitable to all. We 
made four extended "Pilgrim" tours (with frequent visits 
to neighboring towns). The mileage covered in 
these tours was 7625— one of them extended a considerable 
distance into Russia. Through these various 
methods, by voice and pen and printed page we trust 
that we have succeeded in bringing the Truth before a 
considerable number, and that some of these are the 
Lord's jewels. 

Here I mention that I read with concern your kind 
words of admonition in the November 1st TOWER, 
"Gathering or Scattering. Which?" I hope and pray 
that the love of Christ may constrain us each and all 
more and more to be of "one mind," "one mouth," "of 
the same judgment," having the "same love." How 
well meant and tender-hearted are the Apostle's words 
along this line in Rom. 12:16; 15:6; I Cor. 1:10; 2:16; 
2 Cor. 13:11; Phil. 1:27; 2:2; I Pet. 3:8; 4:1. 

Your brother and servant in our dear Redeemer, 
O. A. KOETITZ. 

SUMMARY OF WORK ACCOMPLISHED THROUGH THE GERMAN 
BRANCH 

DAWNS sold, various bindings, 2,805 

DAWNS issued, magazine form 3,250 

Total 6,055 

Various booklets sold 4,290 

Sample TOWERS and Tracts free (stated in tract pages)5,600,000 

FINANCIAL SUMMARY 

Cost of Tracts, postage, samples, Pilgrim expenses, 

rent, light, heat, etc $3,990.82 

Volunteer Donations to the Tract Fund 1,802.81 

Deficit for 1906 2,188.01 



JAMAICA AND COSTA RICA MISSION 



[This mission, now several years old, is under the 
general care of the colored brother who sends this report. 
Thus far the work is almost exclusively among 
the blacks. However, a little interest is being aroused 
amongst the whites lately and we will assist them as 
opportunity may offer.] 

DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:- 

We send you herein our General Report for the 
fiscal year 1906. Our tongues can but feebly express 
the gratitude we feel for our heavenly Father's leadings 
during a year so fraught with wonderful experiences 
for us all. We feel like David when he said, "Truly God 
is good to Israel, even to those who are of a pure heart." 

We are pleased to say that the spiritual condition 
of all the brethren is constantly growing better and the 
number of interested ones is gradually increasing. We 
were agreeably surprised at the many inquiries from 
strangers who had come in contact with colporteurs 
or with tracts bearing our address stamp. Some of 
these we are continually watering with DAWNS and 
TOWERS and they give evidence of genuine interest. 

The Pilgrim service has been used effectively and 
chiefly to establish an assembly in Montego Bay, the 

R3920 : page 7 

second city of importance in the Island, situated in the 
west. The Adversary was strenuously opposed to it 
and gave us much trouble, but he who is on our side 
proved to be mightier than all those who are against 
us; and now there are about a dozen brethren and 
deeply interested ones in regular attendance: and 
Bro. Condell is rendering good service. 

The inconvenient situation of the brethren in the 
country parts as well as the difficulty of reaching them 
prevented us from paying them Pilgrim visits as often 
as we desired. We made two trips during the year 
which took in all the assemblies except Cedar Valley, 
covering a distance of 362 miles and holding sixteen 
semi-private meetings and two public ones. In addition 
to these we held three public meetings in Kingston 
which have done much to arouse some of the sleeping 
ones. 

The Colporteurs have done better work this year, 
though they were not able to go out as constantly as last 
year. The whole number engaged was 17, four of whom 
gave all their time. 

Number of DAWN volumes sold 2,210 



Number of Booklets sold 1,593 

Number of Tracts distributed free (tract pages) 1,267,886 

The Colporteur brethren should be specially mentioned: 
the work here is extremely hard, even distressing, 
and we are sure that it is only the love of the Truth 
that would lead anyone to give up his life to it. 

There are no facilities for traveling or for conveying 
books. All the work is done in the mountains and 
brethren have to walk from 20 to 60 miles, carrying on 
their shoulders from 15 to 30 books. It is difficult 
traveling over the mountains and into the valleys, sometimes 
being overtaken by rain, sleeping out often at 
night because unable to find lodging, and, being disappointed 
many times in deliveries, have to return long 
distances with the books they carried. And yet some 
of them call it a joyful privilege to be so engaged. 
Their appreciation is shown by the fact that others are 
joining the ranks. The physical condition of our colporteurs 
in general is very poor: at one time during 
the year every one was sick and the work had to stop. 

OUTPUT IN COSTA RICA 

DAWNS 451 Booklets 91 

Free Tracts (pages) 123,186 

Brother Hudson is the only one colporteuring there. 
Your brother in Christ, J. A. BROWNE. 



R3914:page7 

OUR ADVOCATE, THE WORLD'S MEDIATOR 

"Ye are not of the world, even as I am not of the 
world," for "I have chosen you out of the world." 

THESE words of Jesus respecting his Church clearly express 

the wide difference in his relationship to the 

two. Again, when praying for his followers, he said, 

"I pray not for the world, but for them that thou hast given 

me:" "that they may be one"— "that the world may believe." 

(John 17:9,1 1,21.) Here again the Church and the world 

are kept separate and distinct, and although the prayer was 

exclusively for the Church, he clearly intimates his love and 

interest in the world. He prayed not for the world because 

R3915 : page 7 

the world's time for trial for life eternal had not yet come: 
he prayed for the Church because its time of trial had already 
begun— because therefore it needed the divine grace 
imparted. 
Our Lord's interest in the world will be fully manifested 



in due time. He has already given his life with a view 
to the world's blessing— he tasted death for every man; but 
now in the present age his chief interest is in the Church, 
which is his body. The development of the Church is a 
necessary step in the divine plan before the blessing of the 
world in general can be accomplished. As it was necessary 
that Christ should come as the Seed of Abraham, so also it 
was necessary that the Church, his body, his Bride, should 
be developed as members of the same Seed before their 
work could be accomplished, "In thy Seed shall all the families 
of the earth be blessed." Thus the Apostle's words are 
clearly applicable to the Church: "If ye be Christ's, then are 
ye Abraham's Seed, and heirs according to the promise"— 
heirs of the promise that through you, as members of Christ, 
a blessing shall proceed to all the families of the earth.— 
Gal. 3:29. 

ALIENS, STRANGERS AND FOREIGNERS 

What constitutes the distinction between the Church and 
the world may properly be asked. Why should the Lord 
favor one class more than another during this Gospel age? 
We answer that the distinctions between the classes is the 
basis for the difference in the divine dealings: the Church 
are those who are hungering and thirsting after righteousness 
—desiring to know and to do the Lord's will, walking 
after the spirit of his law to the best of their ability, not 
after the flesh. God is pleased to accept such, and to make 
known to them the riches of his grace in Christ Jesus, and 
to receive them into his family by the adoption which is in 
Christ Jesus. 

But as for the world, the Scriptures clearly set forth 
that its children are strangers, aliens, foreigners, enemies of 
God through wicked works. They have not the spirit or 
disposition to be sons; they have suffered so severely through 
the fall that they are quite alienated from God and considerably 
in sympathy with sin and injustice, so that they do not 
desire to walk after the spirit of God's law but prefer to 
walk after the flesh. Notwithstanding the sin and imperfection, 
injustice, hypocrisy, double dealings, etc., they love the 
world and the things of the world; they do not love righteousness 
and hate iniquity in such degree as to recognize that all 
unrighteousness is sin, that they themselves are full of blemishes 
and imperfections, and therefore justly under divine 
condemnation as unworthy of eternal life amongst the perfect 
and holy. 

Not seeing their need of the great Physician the worldly 
are not listening in that direction and do not hear his voice. 
The Gospel message sent hither and thither throughout the 
world during this Gospel age has been sifting, separating— 
electing— the lovers of righteousness and Truth and God from 
the lovers of sin and selfishness and those who are in sympathy 
with them. The result is a household of faith, among whom 
there are not many wise, not many great, not many learned, not 
many noble, not many altogether who enjoy the divine favor 
and blessing and privileges of this present time. On the 



other hand are the great mass of mankind, still outside of 
divine recognition, still under condemnation, still children of 
wrath, still in darkness and ignorance respecting the divine 
character and plan, which thus far they have not been counted 
worthy to understand, because "The secret of the Lord is 
with them that reverence him, and he will show them his 
covenant."— Psa. 25:14. 

"WE HAVE AN ADVOCATE" 

Seeing the distinction which God's Word sets forth between 
the Church and the world, it does not surprise us to 
learn that totally different terms express the relationship of 
Christ to the Church and to the world. He is our Advocate 

R3915 : page 8 

now, and by and by he will be the world's Mediator. A mediator 
is one who interposes between two persons who are 
at variance, with a view to reconciling them. Thus the Scriptures 
teach that there is "one Mediator between God and 
man, the man Christ Jesus, who gave himself a ransom for 
all, to be testified in due time." (1 Tim. 2:5,6.) The due 
time for this testimony to be known, as the Scriptures clearly 
show, will be the Millennial age, the period of our Lord's 
reign, his mediatorial reign, as some have expressed it— a 
reign as a mediator for the purpose of effecting reconciliation 
between God and others opposed to him— the world, for God 
was in Christ reconciling the world to himself. 

As the Apostle Paul explains, a mediator is not of one 
party only but of two parties. (Gal. 3:20.) In this case the 
two parties are God and Adam and his race. Justice lay on 
God's side: he had a charge of disobedience against mankind, 
and he justly placed his ban or condemnation upon 
Adam and his race— "Dying thou shalt die." As the Apostle 
expresses the matter, "By one man's disobedience sin entered 
the world and death by sin; and so death passed upon all 
men because all are sinners." (Rom. 5:12.) Originally man 
had no antipathy to God: on the contrary, we may be sure 
that Adam felt contrition, realized that his penalty was just, 
and longed for restitution to divine favor. But as centuries 
rolled around the fallen conditions worked havoc in man, 
and mentally and morally he got out of harmony with his 
Creator, got to be the enemy of God, learned to love unrighteousness 
and to delight in sin. The record is that God 
gave him over to a reprobate mind— allowed him to take his 
wayward course of opposition to God and to righteousness— 
and the result has been increasing degradation and increasing 
opposition not only to righteousness but to God, the great 
King and representative of righteousness. 

In addition to man's natural depravity the Scriptures 
inform us that Satan and the fallen angels have conspired 
to his undoing, blinding him to principles of Right and Truth, 
putting darkness for light and light for darkness, good for 
evil and evil for good. As a result the heart of man has 
become exceedingly warped and twisted from the principles 



of righteousness, and much out of harmony with God himself. 
To such an extent is this true that only a very few now 
have the ear to hear or any appreciation of heart for the 
divine message of God, that they through Christ may now 
come back into harmony with him. This is the declaration 
of the Apostle, The god of this world hath blinded the minds 
of them that believe not, lest the glorious light of the goodness 
of God shining in the face of Jesus Christ should shine 
in their hearts.— 2 Cor. 4:4-6. 

THE WORLD NEEDS A MEDIATOR 

The need of a mediator under these circumstances is 
very apparent: God refuses to recognize sin or to tolerate it 
in any degree. His law declares that the "wages of sin is 
death." The world has gotten to love sin, and is so blinded 
to its best interests that it hates God's righteousness— strict 
righteousness. The first thing necessary was the satisfaction 
of justice in respect to our race. There would have been no 
propriety in exhorting men to return to God when the divine 
law inexorably commanded the death of the sinner and declared 
that God could have no communion with the unrighteous, 
the blemished. Hence it was that God provided 
the Lord Jesus to be the Mediator between himself and the 
race of sinners, to the intent that through his work so many 
of the sinners as possible might be brought back into accord 
with God and thus to the enjoyment of his approval and 
blessing instead of the curse or death sentence. Our Lord 
Jesus at his first advent died, gave himself a ransom for 
mankind, that thus through him the divine sentence against 
mankind might be remitted, cancelled, and that then the 
Mediator might have the opportunity of taking hold of the 
race he had redeemed with a view to bringing the rebels 
back from their blinded and fallen condition, by restitution 
processes, to perfection; and thus to the condition where the 
Father could receive them without condemnation and grant 
them his blessing of life eternal. 

The Mediator's work in the world will be considerably 
one of force, compulsion: he will lay righteousness to the 
line and justice to the plummet, and sweep away the refuge 
of lies. (Isa. 28:17.) His anger will burn against all injustice 
and unrighteousness; stripes or punishment will be visited 
upon those who are out of the way and who need correction; 
the plowshare of trouble will be run through the hearts of 
men, to break up the fallow ground and to prepare them for 
a resowing of the good word of God, the gracious promises 
and appreciation of divine favors. That will be a time of 
reconstruction. At the very beginning of the Millennial age 
the Mediator will be revealed in flaming fire, taking vengeance, 
executing punishments upon all wrong doers, upon all 
who know not God, who appreciate not his character and 
plans and government and righteous laws— to the intent that 
they may learn what these are, in hope that by experience 
therewith they may come to learn righteousness and hate iniquity 
instead of loving iniquity and hating purity. 



THE MEDIATOR OF THE NEW COVENANT 

God's arrangement or dealing with the world during the 
Millennial age is said to be under the New Covenant. The 
great original covenant was the one made with father Abraham, 
which reads, "In thy Seed shall all the families of the 
earth be blessed." This we sometimes designate the "Oath-Bound 
Covenant," because the Lord swore to it. That covenant, 
the Apostle points out, had no mediator— it needed 
none so far as Abraham was concerned. He loved the Lord 
and desired to serve him: he was not an alien or a stranger 
or a foreigner, not a rebel, but was acknowledged to be a 
"friend of God." (Jas. 2:23.) No mediator was necessary 
then; God merely promised Abraham a certain great blessing. 
The children of Abraham, the Seed of Abraham, are 

R3916 : page 8 

counted in with him under this covenant which needed no 
mediator. 

Anyone, at heart or otherwise an alien from God, could 
not be counted as the real Seed of Abraham: only those 
coming into relationship to God through faith and obedience 
to Christ are counted of this Abrahamic Seed. They are not 
in alienation from God, and need no forced measures to bring 
them back. Rather they are looking longingly for the heavenly 
city and the glorious conditions of the Kingdom which 
God has promised to them that love him; they are to him as 
children, and he to them as a father; they inherit his gracious 
promises and delight therein, and of his sentiments 
toward them it is written, "The Father himself loveth you." 
(John 16:27.) No wonder that that covenant and those represented 
under it as its beneficiaries need no mediator, no 
go-between, to enforce upon them terms and conditions. 
There is a willing love which leads them to willing sacrifices 
that they may do the will of the Father in heaven. 

The Apostle explains to us that although this Oath-Bound 
Covenant is the real, genuine first one, nevertheless 
it was not time for it to go into operation at once; but instead 
the Law Covenant was added, and developed during the Jewish 
age the Jewish nation, as a typical people of God under 
the Law Covenant, with Moses as its mediator, which was 
typical of the New Covenant, with Christ as its Mediator. The 
Apostle points out that this Covenant failed to bring forth 

R3916 : page 9 

any children of God— it brought forth only servants— and 
that with its failure it was set aside when our Lord Jesus at 
his first advent, by his obedience, proved his right to be heir 
to the Abrahamic Covenant. The Apostle points out that 
Sarah, Abraham's wife, typified that Oath-Bound Covenant, 
which for more than 2000 years was barren— did not bring 
forth the spiritual Seed of Abraham to bless the world. He 
declares that Hagar, the bondwoman of Abraham's family, 
represented the Law Covenant, that her child Ishmael represented 



the Jews, and that the casting off of the Jewish nation 
and the setting aside of their Law Covenant was typified in 
Abraham's dealing with Hagar— "Cast out the bondwoman 
and her son, for he shall not be heir with the son of the free 
woman."— Gal. 4:30. 

The Apostle points out that antitypically the Son of the 
free woman, the son of Sarah, the Seed of Abraham that was 
to inherit this promise, was primarily the Lord Jesus himself, 
and in a larger and secondary sense the entire Gospel Church, 
the "little flock," of which he is the Head and Captain— "If 
ye be Christ's then are ye Abraham's Seed and heirs according 
to the promise." Thus we have before our minds now, by 
the Apostle's aid, a clear view of the Jewish nation and their 
Law Covenant; and also a clear view of the true Seed, 
Christ and the Church, the heirs of the Abrahamic Covenant, 
which had no mediator. It has required all of this Gospel 
age for the selection of this spiritual Seed (house of sons) 
just as it required all of the Jewish age for the selection of 
the class symbolized by Ishmael, the house of servants, born 
in bondage under the Law. 

THE NEW COVENANT 

Entirely separate and distinct from both of the foregoing 
covenants is the Lord's promise of a New Covenant. It 
also was represented in Abraham's family by a woman, for 
after the death of Sarah Abraham married again, his wife's 
name being Keturah; and by her we are told that he had 
many sons and daughters, whereas there was but the one son 
by Hagar, and but one by Sarah. The intimation thus clearly 
is that under the New Covenant God will bring many into 
the relationship of sons, as it is written of Abraham, who 
typified God, "I have constituted thee a father of many 
nations."— Gen. 17:4. 

Not unnaturally there has been a disposition to apply 
the New Covenant promises to the Gospel Church, for two 
reasons: 

(1) Because during the "dark ages" God's purpose for 
the blessing of all the families of the earth in ages to come 
was lost sight of, and the theory accepted instead that death 
is the end of all hope, and that with the end of this Gospel 
age would come a wreck of matter and crash of worlds, with 
nothing beyond. 

(2) Another reason why the promises respecting a New 
Covenant have been more or less applied to this Gospel age 
is that remarkably few of the Lord's people during and since 
the "dark ages" have seen clearly what the Apostle designates 
as the "mystery of God"— which he explains to be 

"Christ in you [the overcomers of the Church] the hope of 
glory." (Col. 1:27.) Not seeing that the Church are to be 
fellow-heirs with Jesus in the Kingdom which is to bless all 
the families of the earth, indeed not seeing with any distinctness 
that there is to be a Kingdom at all, it is not surprising 
that the promises of the New Covenant were applied 
exclusively to this age. 
Now, however, in the clearer dawning of the Millennial 



morning, in the brighter shining of the Lamp of God's Word 
upon our pathway as a light in a dark place, we see most 
distinctly that the New Covenant belongs exclusively to the 
coming age, as the Abrahamic Covenant belongs exclusively 
to the Gospel age, and as the Law Covenant applied exclusively 
to the Jewish age. And when we examine the matter all 
the Scriptures confirm this interpretation. For instance, 
note the Apostle's application of the words of Jeremiah 31:33. 
He says:— 

"Behold the days come, saith the Lord, when I will make 
a new covenant with the house of Israel and with the house 
of Judah: not according to the covenant that I made with 
their fathers in the days when I took them by the hand to 
lead them forth out of the land of Egypt.. ..For this is the 
covenant which I will make with the house of Israel after 
those days, saith the Lord; I will put my laws within their 
mind and write them in their hearts, and I will be to them 
a God and they shall be to me a people: and they shall not 
teach every man his neighbor and every man his brother saying, 
Know the Lord: for all shall know me from the least to 
the greatest of them. And I will be merciful to their unrighteousness, 
and their sins and their iniquities will I remember 
no more. In that he saith a new covenant he hath 
made the first old. Now that which decayeth and waxeth 
old is ready to vanish away."— Heb. 8:8-13. 

It is evident that the Apostle here is contrasting the 
New Covenant with the Law Covenant, which did vanish 
away. He is not contrasting the New Covenant with the 
Abrahamic Covenant, under which we inherit. Moreover, the 
New Covenant is to be made with the House of Israel and 
the House of Judah, and they have been cast off from divine 
favor during the eighteen or more centuries since their Law 
Covenant passed away. They are waiting therefore for the 
New Covenant— for the blessed arrangement of the Millennial 
age, under which the Lord declares he will be merciful 
to them and remember no more their past sins and 
iniquities. 

That this is the Apostle's thought let us note carefully 
his teachings in Rom. 1 1:25-33. There the Apostle is pointing 
out that Israel did not obtain the chief blessing sought for, 
that the elect obtained it, and that the rest were blinded and 
cast away from divine favor. Nevertheless he tells us that 
they are not forever cast away nor forever blinded, but as 
soon as the elect class shall be completed the divine blessing 
will turn toward the blind and outcast ones to recover 
them and to save them all from that blindness and cast-off 
condition, as it is written, "There shall come out of Zion the 
Deliverer that shall turn away ungodliness from Jacob.— 
Rom. 11:26. 

This Deliverer is the Christ, Jesus the Head, and the 
Church, his body, or, under another figure, his Bride. As 
soon as this great Deliverer is completed Israel's time for 
restoration to favor will be due. Mark now the Apostle's 
words further, "For this is my covenant unto them when I 
shall take away their sins." Notice the similarity of the terms 
here: The Apostle says they are to be blessed under a covenant, 



and that it will mean the cancellation of their sins. He 
cannot mean the Abrahamic Covenant, because the spiritual 
Seed inherited it and took the place of the natural seed: neither 
can he mean the Law Covenant, for it passed away— the bond 
woman and her son were cast out at the end of the Jewish age. 
He must, therefore, refer to the New Covenant, and the expression 
is in exact accord with the prophecy respecting the New 
Covenant in which the Lord declares the taking away of the 
sins of natural Israel. 

THE MEDIATOR OF THE NEW COVENANT 

Our Lord Jesus is specifically declared to be the Mediator 
of the New Covenant (Heb. 12:24); and again it is declared, 
"There is one Mediator between God and man, the 
man Christ Jesus, who gave himself a ransom for all, to be 
testified in due time." But where is the New Covenant? 

R3916 :page 10 

Where is the mercy to the Jew and the forgiveness of his 
sins? We answer that the New Covenant is not yet in existence, 
and hence the Jew, who is first to be blessed under 
it, is not yet receiving his portion. Nevertheless the work 
has been begun: the man Christ Jesus has appeared, he has 
already paid the ransom price sufficient for the satisfaction 
of justice in respect to Adam and all of his race. He is fully 
prepared, therefore, to be the Mediator and to proceed in the 
work of mediation, and under the New Covenant to bless the 
world. Why, then, so long delay— over 1800 years? 

We answer that the Mediator, in the interim, is accepting, 
in harmony with the divine plan, a Bride from amongst 
the redeemed ones. As we have already shown, this Bride 
class— now being called and accepted and tested in faithfulness 
even unto death— needs no mediator, needs no go-between, 

R3917 :page 10 

needs no urging, needs no stripes to bring them to an 
appreciation of God and a desire to be his. Rather, after the 
manner of Abraham and in the spirit of their Lord, they delight 
to do God's will, they delight themselves in righteousness, 
they seek to walk not after the flesh but after the Spirit. 
They realize indeed their imperfections, but they glory not 
in these. They do rejoice that he who called them out of 
darkness into his marvelous light, out of the abundance of 
his merit has applied a portion on their behalf, that they 
may be reckoned perfect, clean every whit, holy, and may be 
accepted as his joint-sacrificers and joint-heirs in the Kingdom 
that is to bring the blessing to Israel under the New 
Covenant and through Israel to all mankind. 

That the Oath-Bound Covenant could not go into effect 
without the shedding of blood was evidenced by the fact 
that Isaac, the seed of promise, died typically and typically 
was received from the dead by a resurrection, as the Apostle 
explains. (Heb. 11:17-19.) So no part of the great plan 



of God, either toward the Church or the world, could have 
succeeded without the death of Christ. Thus the Apostle, 
speaking of the Bride class, says that, "Christ loved the 
Church and gave himself for it, that he might sanctify and 
cleanse it with the washing of water by the Word, that he 
might present it to himself a glorious Church, not having 
spot or wrinkle or any such thing."— Eph. 5:25-27. 

As for the world, the death of the Mediator is the basis 
of its reconciliation under the New Covenant. By his death 
on our behalf Jesus proves himself worthy before the divine 
law to be the Mediator of the New Covenant. He has associated 
the Church with himself, and shortly the inauguration 
of the New Covenant will take place. This inauguration 
is typified in the Law Covenant, for Moses its mediator 
took the blood of the typical sacrifices for sin-offerings and 
sprinkled the book of the Law, which represented the Almighty, 
as being bound by the Covenant, and then sprinkled 
the people by the same blood, as intimating that they also 
were bound by it. Meantime stirring scenes were enacted 
at Sinai: the mountain shook, the earth quaked, and tempest 
and storm prevailed with flames of lightning. And all 
of this the Apostle explains to us was typical of the way in 
which the New Covenant will be inaugurated at the second 
coming of Christ and the establishment of his Kingdom. We 
who are now being called as the joint-heirs with Christ belong 
to the antitypical house of Levi, and are members of 
the Royal Priesthood, whose work it is to offer the sin-offerings 
and to do the sprinkling of the blood. 

The Apostle clearly intimates that this age will end 
with a time of trouble, which will be an antitype of the 
shakings and tumults at Sinai, and that here everything 
will be shaken, things political, religious, financial and social, 
until everything contrary to the divine will shall have 
been overthrown, and only that which God would approve 
will be permitted to stand. And this the Apostle intimates 
will be the inauguration of the Lord's Kingdom: his words 
are, "Wherefore, receiving a Kingdom which cannot be shaken, 
let us have grace whereby we can serve God acceptably." 
The very thought of this Kingdom of righteousness, which 
God is about to establish through us for the blessing of Israel 
and all the families of the earth under the New Covenant, 
should give us a realization of the holiness necessary 
to be pleasing in the sight of the Lord, and should lead us 
to more and more sanctity of life, as it is written, "He that 
hath this hope in him purifieth himself even as he is pure." 

OUR RELATIONSHIP TO THE MEDIATOR 

Moses was the Mediator of the Law Covenant, which 
typified the New Covenant, and he foretold the greater 
Moses, the Mediator of the New Covenant, saying, "A Prophet 
shall the Lord your God raise up unto you from amongst 
your brethren like unto me." (Acts 3:22.) Our Lord Jesus himself 
was the great Head of this antitypical Prophet, Priest, King, 
Mediator, for Moses was all this to Israel. But it pleased 
the Father to associate with our Lord in these glorious 



offices the "little flock," his Bride and joint-heir. Again: 
all through this Gospel age the Lord has been raising up 
from amongst the brethren the "more than conquerors" who 
shall be counted worthy of membership, joint-heirship, as 
the glorified body of the Messiah— the great antitypical 
Mediator in whom will be vested all the powers of kingship 
for the rule of the world, of prophet for the instruction of 
the world, and of priest for the relief and succor of the 
world under the New Covenant. 

The Church's share in the work of mediation will be a 
great one, as the Apostle declares, "Know ye not that the 
saints shall judge the world?" (1 Cor. 6:2.) It will not 
only be the mission of the Church to shine forth with their 
Redeemer as the great Light of the world, the Sun of Righteousness 
(Matt. 13:43), and to invite the world to a knowledge 
and appreciation of divine mercy (Rev. 22:17), but 
also it will be their mission to judge, to correct, to discipline 
the world in righteousness. "And it shall come to pass 
that the soul that will not hear [obey] that Prophet shall 
be utterly destroyed from amongst the people." Indeed 
we may assume that this is a large part of the divine purpose 
in connection with the calling of the elect Church, to 
make them joint-heirs with his Son and co-laborers with 
him in the glorious work of the Kingdom, for the judging 
and uplifting and blessing of all Israel, of whom it is written, 
"They shall obtain mercy through your mercy," and of 
all the families of the earth. 

It being thus evident that the Church will have as Mediator 
an important share with our Lord in the reconciling of 
the world during the Millennial age, the next question is, 
Has the Church any share with her Lord in that part of the 
mediatorial work which satisfies divine justice as against 
the world? 

THE TYPE OF THE SIN OFFERING 

We answer Yes to this question, and refer to the words 
of the Apostle that we are to suffer with Christ if we are to 
reign with him, that we are to go to him without the camp 
bearing the reproach with him. (Rom. 8:17; Heb. 13:13.) 
We notice his remark here that the sin-offerings were burned 
without the camp, and reason therefore that we are invited 
to be participants in the same offering— "burned without 
the camp." 

Turning to the principal account of the sin-offerings in 
Leviticus 16 we find the matter there most interestingly set 
forth, yet in a manner which none can understand except 
as the eyes of their understanding open to these things. 
Hence the Apostle prayed for the Church that, the eyes of 

R3917 :page 11 

their understanding being opened, they might be able to 
comprehend with all saints; and our Lord declared, "Blessed 
are your eyes for they see." This spiritual sight, however, 
is granted only to those who abide in the shadow of 



the Almighty, in the secret place of the Most High, in nearness 
and fellowship with him;— these alone may see that 
there were two sin-offerings on Israel's typical Atonement 
Day— the bullock, which represented our Lord Jesus, and 
the goat, which represented the Church, his followers. 

The value of these animals as sacrifices was typically 
represented in the amount of their fat, which was burned 
upon the brazen altar as a sweet incense to God— as a mark 
of the love and devotion of the sacrificed ones. And here 
the figure is beautifully appropriate, for the goat, which represents 
the Church, is a very lean animal, while the young 
bullock, which represented our Lord Jesus, had much fat, 
much zeal, much love, which gave incense before God. Furthermore, 
these two sacrifices were not treated as equals in 
any sense of the word: they were not offered together, but 
the bullock first as making atonement for the class represented 
by the goat. Thus it was necessary that Christ 
should die and pay the penalty for our sins, and that this 
should be accepted on our behalf by the Father before we 
could have any part or lot with him in Christ's sacrifices; 
or, as the Apostle expresses it, "Fill up that which is behind 
of the afflictions of Christ,"— afflictions which Jesus' sacrifice 
was so abundantly able to complete, but which he purposely 
left for us, in order that by participation in his sufferings 
we might also in harmony with the divine program be 
enabled to participate in his divine glory, his Kingdom. 

THE BULLOCK SACRIFICED FOR THE LEVITES 

Reading the account carefully we find that these two 
parts of the sin-offering were appropriately different: the 
valuable sacrifice, the bullock, was appropriated not for all 
the people but merely for the priest and his house— the 
house of Levi— the tribe of Levi. The signification of this 
is not difficult to find, for over and over the Scriptures assure 
us that Christ is the High Priest of our profession or 
order, and that we are a Royal Priesthood under him. He 
is the Head, the chief of this body of priests, the little flock. 
And these all are selected from the household of faith, 
which was typified by the house of Levi. So, then, when 
we read that the High Priest offered the bullock for himself 
and his house, we are to understand it as signifying that the 
merit of the death of Christ was by God's order and arrangement 
applied for himself (for the Church his body— the 
Head himself being holy, harmless, undefiled, separate from 
sinners, had no sins to atone for) and for his house, the 
household of faith. 

This sacrifice of the bullock was accomplished by our 
Lord Jesus— he "finished" it at Calvary. In the type the 
bullock represented the man Christ Jesus consecrated to 

R3918 :page 11 

death at his baptism, and gradually fulfilling that consecration 

for three and a half years of his ministry, laying down 

his life for his brethren, until finally he finished his baptism 



into death at Calvary. At the moment that our Lord made 

his consecration he received the begetting of the holy Spirit, 

of which John bore witness that it descended in the form of 

a dove. From that moment our Lord was reckoned as a 

New Creature, which, as the Priest, had the duty of sacrificing 

the mortal body consecrated to death. Our Lord's consecration 

was represented in the type by the first vail of the 

Tabernacle, under which he passed in consecration into the 

Holy, which signifies his life as a New Creature, in the 

closest fellowship with God, enlightened by the holy Spirit, 

typified by the Golden Candlestick, fed by the truth, symbolized 

by the table of shew bread, and privileged to offer 

sweet incense acceptable to God on the Golden Altar. 

Our Lord continued in that condition, symbolized by 

the Tabernacle's Holy, during all of his ministry, until he 

as the Priest passed under the second vail, which represented 

his actual death. He was under that vail for parts of 

three days and nights, and arose on the other side of it in 

the Most Holy in the perfect spiritual condition of his resurrection, 

concerning which he himself said, "All power is 

given me in heaven and in earth." A little later our Lord 

appeared in the presence of the Father, to lay before the 

divine presence the merit of his atoning sacrifice. This in 

the type was illustrated by the High Priest sprinkling the 

blood upon the Mercy Seat and before the Mercy Seat to 

make atonement. The efficacy of the High Priest's work 

was solely for the class for which he offered the sacrifice, 

namely, himself and his house— the Royal Priesthood, the 

household of faith. This is in full accord with the Apostle's 

statement, "He ascended up on high, there to appear in the 

presence of God for us."— Heb. 9:24. 

Jesus did not "appear" for the world: it would not 
have been proper to have advocated the cause of those that 
were aliens, strangers and foreigners through wicked works; 
but he could and did appear for us who have fled away 
from sin, who desire full harmony with the Father, and who 
delight to know and to do his will. The great High Priest 
Jesus offered his sacrifice for the Church, and we have the 
blessed assurance that we are reconciled to God by the death 
of his Son. Through the sacrifice of Christ we whose hearts 
long for righteousness and delight to do to the extent of our 
ability the Father's will, were brought into accord with him. 
The Father's acceptance of the High Priest's sacrifice on behalf 
of the Church and the household of faith was indicated 
by the remarkable manifestation of Pentecost, this, the 
Apostle declares, assuring us that Jesus procured of the 
Father this blessing which he shed forth upon his followers, 
and which indicated divine reconciliation. 

THE GOAT SIN-OFFERING 

The second sin-offering of the Day of Atonement was 
the goat, which, as already stated, typified the elect Church, 
"the body of Christ"— the body of the Priest whose cleansing 
and reconciliation was typified by the sprinkling of the 
blood of the bullock. The New Testament abounds in exhortations 



to this class that they faithfully follow in the 
footsteps of Jesus, that they walk with him in the narrow 
way of self-sacrifice, self-denial, even unto death. The 
Apostle's words are, "I beseech you, brethren, by the mercies 
of God [your reconciliation, already accepted], that ye 
present your bodies living sacrifices, holy, acceptable to God, 
your reasonable service."— Rom. 12:1. 

In the type of the Day of Atonement we see how the 
sacrifice of the Church is accepted— we see it typified in the 
sacrifice of the goat. If at first we are disposed to say that 
it is impossible that we, who by nature are children of wrath 
even as others, should be acceptable to God as participants 
with Jesus in his great work of atonement, we must remember 
again the words of the Apostle above quoted to the 
effect that our sacrifices are both holy and acceptable to 
God, and this by reason of the fact that the merit of our 
Redeemer has been appropriated to us. Our sins were laid 
upon him, his righteousness is imputed to us. 

The record states that the Priest laid his hands upon 
the head of the Lord's goat and slew it, as he slew the bullock. 
This is interesting as showing that it is not alone our 
consecration to the Lord that is necessary. Our consecration 
is shown in the fact that the goat stood at the door of 
the Tabernacle, and the fact that the High Priest killed 
the goat of the sin-offering illustrates that it is the 

R3918 :page 12 

power of the Lord operating in us as members of his body, 
working in us to will and to do of his good pleasure, that 
enables us to accomplish our sacrifice— he by his Spirit in 
us sacrifices us, assists us to perform the great transaction 
we have undertaken, to be dead with him, to suffer with 
him, to walk in his steps, to be baptized into his death. 

The record is that the goat in everything was treated 
exactly as the bullock had previously been treated. Its fat 
(very little, however) was placed upon the altar, and its 
hide, hoofs, etc., were burned without the camp in the same 
place that the hide, hoofs, etc., of the bullock had been 
burned, and its blood was taken into the Most Holy and 
sprinkled as the blood of the bullock had been. Thus we, 
like our Lord, present all that we have in sacrifice. The 
proportion of our love and zeal is what the Father recognizes 
upon the altar— alas that we have no more! Our 
suffering of the contempt of the world and the nominal 
Church, the opposition of sinners, is represented by the burning 
outside of the camp, and in this respect resembles our 
Lord's experience, "The world knoweth us not, even as it 
knew him not"— they called the Master of the house Beelzebub, 
why should they think that his followers were anything 
better than fools and the offscouring of the earth? as 
the Apostle declares.— 1 Cor. 4:13. 

After telling us that only the sin-offerings were burned 
outside the camp, the Apostle exhorts us to go unto him without 
the camp, bearing his reproach; and thus he identifies 
us with the goat and our Lord with the bullock, and the 



adverse experiences of both with the burning outside the 
camp. But we also have advantages, for like our Lord we 
at our consecration pass beyond the vail into the Holy, and 
there, as the Apostle declares, are seated together with 
Christ in the heavenlies, enjoying the light of the Golden 
Candlestick, eating of the Shewbread, and coming with 
courage to the Golden Altar, realizing ourselves as accepted 
in the Beloved. Finally, we all, as members of the great 
High Priest's body, will pass under the second vail, pass 
into death actually, and rise beyond it in resurrection 
power. The entire company complete, the great High 
Priest— without a member of his body missing, and without 
a superfluous member— will then present the blood of the 
goat as his own blood, because it represents the sacrifice of 
all of those whom he has accepted as his members. The 
value of the sacrifice of the Church is thus to be presented 
before the Father in the end of this age, when all shall have 
passed beyond the vail. 

THE APPLICATION OF THE BLOOD 

On what account will this blood, this merit represented 
in the Church, the body of Christ, be applied? The Scriptures 
answer: The type tells us that whereas the blood of 
the bullock was applied only for the tribe of Levi, typifying 
the household of faith, the blood of the goat was applied for 
all the other eleven tribes of Israel, which typified all mankind 
who will ever desire to come into harmony with God- 
all the Israel of God as they shall be ultimately numbered 
at the close of the Millennial age. How beautifully these 
matters harmonize! what a grand message of divine love 
and mercy they speak! and what strength, what courage, it 
brings us to realize the privileges thus granted us by our 
Lord and our Redeemer, of having fellowship with him in 
his sufferings that by and by we may be sharers in his 
glory. 

A little while and all the sufferings of all the members 
will be at an end. There will never be any more sin-offerings 
for Adam and his race, no more burnings without the 
camp, no more walking in the narrow way of self-sacrifice. 
Thank God for the privileges brought to us in this way, 
and thanks be to his name also for the blessed assurances 
that the whole world shall, in consequence of divine favor 
thus bestowed, be brought into fullest opportunities for reconciliation 
to the Father— to the Jew first, also to the Greek 
and to all men. While in the type the sacrifices were offered 
for one tribe first and then for the other eleven, in the 
antitype we see this is much larger— that the one tribe represents 
the believers of this present Gospel age, and the 
eleven tribes represent the world of mankind in general, at 
the head of which will be natural Israel, the first to share 
the benefits of the New Covenant. 



R3920 : page 12 



CREATING THE WORLD 

--GENESIS 1:1-25. -JANUARY 6.- 

"In the beginning God created the heavens and the earth." 

WE BELIEVE that we serve the interests of our 

readers best by not attempting a discussion 

of this lesson here. Instead we refer them to 

the quite comprehensive discussion of the subject presented 

in the DAWN SCRIPTURE STUDIES, Volume VI., 

Chapter I. This will not only serve their purposes 

better, but save our space in this issue for other 

matters. 

We content ourselves here with a mere reference 
to the Golden Text, noting the fact that the Bible records 
assume the existence of the Creator himself "from 
everlasting to everlasting." (Psa. 90:2.) This lesson 
discusses merely the things pertaining to this world— 
their beginnings— leaving out of account entirely the 
other worlds of the universe. It is our thought, however 
—and the general inference of Scripture, we think 
—that the other worlds are less advanced in their development 
than this one. For aught we know to the 
contrary, the lessons and experiences wrought out on 
our earth are yet to have to do with other planets whose 
inhabitants have not yet been created. All that, however, 
is beyond us, and we are not authorized to speculate 
on it, and hence must restrain our imaginations 
and content ourselves with the things which God has 

R3921 :page 12 

already revealed, assured that we shall have in this a 
sufficiency to occupy our limited time and talent. 

Nothing in this lesson takes in the wide scope of John 1:1, 
which declares, "In the beginning was the Word, 
and the Word was with the God and the Word was a 
God.. ..All things were made by him, and without 
him was not anything made that was made." The beginning 
here mentioned was evidently long prior to 
the beginning mentioned in today's lesson. Our Lord 
himself, we are told, was "the beginning of the creation 
of God," and divine power was exercised through 
him in the creation of the various orders of angels, for 
"without him was not anything made that was made." 
(Rev. 3:14; John 1:3,10.) This comprehensive statement 
would undoubtedly embrace the creative work mentioned 
in the lesson of today. We thus have an assurance 
that the Only Begotten of the Father, the beginning 
of the creation of God, was the superintendent of 
the various affairs connected with the creation of the 
earth and its inhabitants. 

For the details respecting the six creative periods, 
the harmony between the Scriptural statements, and 



the best findings of Geology, see DAWN, Vol. VI.. 
Chapter I. 



R3921 : page 13 

MAN CREATED IN GOD'S IMAGE 

--GENESIS l:26-2:25.-JANUARY 13.- 

"God created man in his own image, 
in his own image created he him." 

MANY of the blind devotees of Science, bent 
upon ignoring the power, and, if possible, 
the very existence of the divine Creator, 
attempt to account for all things by so-called laws 
of nature. They seize upon the great variety in 
nature and the evident relationship between some 
of its parts as evidence, proof, that they all sprang 
from one source. The definite objects of their 
attack are man and the Scriptural declaration that 
he was the special creation of God. Their particular 
desire is to disprove this Scriptural statement, and 
hence they construct a theory of Evolution as respects 
plant and animal life and fit this to man, claiming that 
he is the development of this natural process of 
evolution. 

Some may say, "What difference does it make?— 
let them account for the origin of man as they choose. 
It is admitted that he is not now a monkey— why quarrel 
or dispute on the subject? Let us leave all discussion 
and disputation and go forward to make the best 
we can of what we are." This has a wise sound, but 
it has not the wisdom that comes from above, which is 
first pure, then peaceable. (Jas. 3:17.) It is not pure 
at all, it is not wise at all; for it ignores God and his 
revelations on these subjects and looks solely to human 
wisdom, which means merely human guess-work supported 
by insufficient evidence. Its acceptance means, 
not merely a reliance upon human guess-work, but 
far worse than this— it means the rejection of the entire 
system of divine truth furnished to us in the Bible. 
It is in conflict with every proposition of the Bible from 
Genesis to Revelation respecting man's origin— so violently 
in conflict that if the one be true the other must 
be false. 

Since many fail to see this conflict, and seem to 
think that the evolution theory of man's origin, that 
Adam had an ape for a grandfather, does not conflict 
with the teachings of Christianity and of the Bible in 
general, it is well that we take this opportunity for a 
fresh statement of the conflict, not only that our own 
minds may be more firmly established, but as opportunity 
may offer we may be able to assist others who are 



rapidly but unconsciously sinking into infidelity. This 
is our apology for a fresh rehearsal along these lines. 

MAN A PERFECT CREATION 

As for the lower animals we will not on their behalf 
quarrel with the deductions of evolutionists, although 
we do hold that the fixity of species today is 
not very favorable to their contention. If an evolutionary 
process did take place in the past we hold that 
it was so under divine supervision and guidance— that 
different species of plants and animals were brought to 
perfection, so that no further evolutionary processes in 
them are possible. On the other hand be it noted that the 
Scriptural account might be understood to rather favor 
the Evolution theory in respect to the lower creatures. 
For instance the statement, "God said, Let the earth 
bring forth the grass, the herb yielding seed and the 
fruit tree," etc.; and again, "God said, Let the waters 
bring forth abundantly the moving creature that hath 
life and the fowl"; and again, "God said, Let the earth 
bring forth the living creature after his kind, cattle 
and creeping things and beasts." But when we come 
to the creation of man there is no suggestion that this 
was a bringing forth or a development. On the contrary, 
the account is most explicit that God formed 
man, and "God created man in his own image." This 
distinction in the statement implies that there was a 
difference between the ordinary development of plant 
life and the special creation of man to be the lord of 
earth, the representative of the Creator. 

Whoever believes that Adam was developed from a 
monkey is in violent conflict with the faith once delivered 
to the saints, to the effect that man was specially 
created in the image of his Maker. Scientists agree 
that there is a wide difference between the so-called 
"man-ape" and even the lowest form of human being. 
Professor Rice points out that the highest man-ape 
known has a brain capacity of only 34 cubic inches, 
while the lowest of men has 68 cubic inches of brain 
capacity. In other words, the very lowest form of man 
has twice the brain capacity of the highest ape. He 
says, "No specimen of the stone age that has yet been 
discovered is inferior to the lowest of existing men." 
A reasonable inference from this statement would be 
that we have today lower specimens or forms of humanity 
than any of those discovered by science supposed 
to belong to the remote past. 

"SCIENCE FALSELY SO CALLED" 

Thus does "science falsely so-called" receive a rebuff 
at the hands of its own facts and in the mouths of 
its own teachers, while at the same time the Word of 
God, the Bible, receives corroboration. The Bible 
teaching is that man has deteriorated seriously from 



his original grand perfection as the image of God in 

the flesh. The Bible accounts for the degraded races 

of mankind by the fall of our first parents into disobedience 

and under divine condemnation to death. The 

Bible shows that this death-sentence affected our race 

not only physically but also morally and mentally, and 

that thus the mental, moral and physical deterioration 

that surrounds us in the world are more or less directly 

connected with original sin.— Rom. 5:12. 

The Apostle Paul most particularly describes some 
of this extreme degradation which we witness today in 
heathendom, saying that God gave them over unto evil 
passions, and that as they did not care to retain God 
in their knowledge, God gave them over to a reprobate 
mind, to do those things which are not fitting. "Because 
that when they knew God, they glorified him not as 
God, neither were thankful; but became vain in their 
imaginations, and their foolish heart was darkened. 
Professing themselves to be wise they became fools." 
(Rom. 1:20-30.) Thus we see that the Scriptural account 
hangs together and takes cognizance of every 
fact known to us, and maintains its position as fully as 
does science even on the outside. 

INTERNAL SCRIPTURAL PROOFS 

It is when the Lord's people look at matters from 
the inside— from the standpoint of a divine revelation 
respecting man's fall and redemption and recovery— 
that he perceives the strength of the Bible's position 
and the weakness and untenableness of the Evolution 
theory. According to that theory, if man were evolved 
from a monkey, and if the first man were very little better 
than a monkey, he would have been in no condition 
mentally or physically or morally to be put on trial for 
eternal life or eternal death. Moreover, if the race has 
been gradually rising during the past six thousand 
years, has been losing its monkey weaknesses and failings 
and attaining more and more to manhood, where 
would be the original sin? Why would there be the 
curse, the divine displeasure and condemnation, and 
where would be the room or necessity or propriety 
in the plan of human redemption from sin? According 
to this theory the race has been going grandly 
onward, evolving itself according to the law of nature, 
and may hope surely to attain to some still higher position 
or condition than it now enjoys. 

The Bible takes the very reverse position, and declares 
that man was in God's image at the beginning, 
that the first man was in a proper condition to be tried 

R3922 : page 14 

by the divine law, that he was tried, that he failed and 
was condemned to death, and that none of his children 
since have been in proper condition mentally or physically 



to be tried as he was— that they all first need to 
be redeemed and restored before they could be fit for 
a testing as respects eternal life. Note the consistency 
of the Scriptures in every detail, that the disobedient 
Adam was condemned and punished, and that various 
apologies and excuses were made by his children— 
that they were unlike him, but were "born in sin and 
shapen in iniquity," and are "prone to sin as the sparks 
to fly upward," and that they need a Redeemer through 
the merit of whose sacrifice they may be reconciled to 
God, and under whose superintending care they may 
be brought back through restitutionary processes to 
all that was lost in Adam and redeemed by Jesus. 

How appropriate, too, that this coming Millennial 
age for man's restoration to what was lost 
should be called "times of restitution," the inference 
of which most signally confirms the Scriptural 
record that man was originally "very good," 
the image of his Creator. The Scriptures do not 
claim that the first Adam had perfection of knowledge, 
but merely perfection of capacity, that it was 
the Creator's design that he should gain the knowledge 
by experience, and that while gaining it he should 
trust to the wisdom, love, justice and power of his Creator 
and be guided and instructed thereby. It was his 
failure to thus rely upon the Creator that got him into 
difficulty and disobedience and the penalty therefor, 
death. 

Professor Thomas Dwight, of Harvard Medical 
School, in a recent address (1906) is reported to have 
said that he did not think it impossible that plants 
might develop into animals, although he did not think 
it likely; "but when it is said that man had an ape for 
his grandfather we are talking nonsense,— if indeed we 
are talking by the principles of sane reason." He added 
that it is not proved that man came from the lower 
animals. As a scientific secret, he added, the leaders 
of science are at a pause on this subject. Professor 
LeConte remarks, "The earliest known man, the river-drift 
man, though in a low state of civilization, was as 
thoroughly human as any of us." Recent discoveries 
in Egypt and Babylonia show conclusively that the 
people of long ago were no more monkeys than the 
people of today. They had a civilization which in 
many respects corresponded to our own, and yet these 
ancients, according to the Bible account, were members 
of the fallen race who had experienced two thousand 
years of degrading influence without any counteracting 
influence from God for their uplift— without anything 
that would correspond to the stimulating influences 
that have come to those of our day through the 
Law and the prophets of the past, and through the 
instructions of Christ and the apostles of the present 
age. 

We prefer to read verse 26 of our lesson thus, "And 
God said, Let us make man in our image, that after our 



likeness he may have dominion over the fish of the 

sea," etc. In other words, man was not only made morally 

and intellectually to resemble his Creator, so 

that he would be able to think on higher planes than 

would be possible to the lower animals, but he was 

also endowed with authority to control the lower creatures 

—to be the god of earth as Jehovah is the God of 

the universe. This agrees well with the statement of 

Psalm 8:5-8, in which it is declared that God created 

man but a little lower than the angels, so far as his 

intelligence and capacity were concerned, and that 

thus he was "crowned with glory and honor" and given 

dominion over the lower creatures. Be it noted also, 

that we not only have the original proposition of God 

to create man thus in his own image but the after declaration, 

"So God created man in his own image, in the 

image of God created he him, male and female created 

he them." This statement that God's work was fully 

accomplished in Adam, thoroughly contradicts the 

suggestion of some that God merely began a creation 

which he purposed should eventually attain to perfection 

in his image. "Let God be true though it make 

every man a liar."— Rom. 3:4. 

The creation of mother Eve is a further testimony 
in contradiction to the Evolution theory, for had Adam 
been merely a higher type of monkey no doubt he 
would have found companionship amongst the monkeys; 
but the Scriptural account is that he was so far 
superior to all other creatures that he had no companionship 
amongst them. They were his servants, under 
his control, but none of them suitable to be a helpmate 
for him; hence the declaration of the particular formation 
of Eve as a part of Adam, to be his companion and 
joint-heir with him in the blessings of the Lord. 

The story of creation is rehearsed throughout the 
Scriptures, in the New Testament as well as in the 
Old. As the latter tells of the perfection of Adam, so 
the former tells that Jesus in the flesh gave himself to 
be the ransom, the corresponding price for the first 
man. And this very statement of correspondence implies 
not that our Lord was an inferior man corresponding 
to a first inferior man, but, quite the contrary, 
that he was a superior man, corresponding to the first 
superior man, by whose disobedience life was lost for 
himself and the race. The fact then that our Lord is the 
Redeemer, the corresponding price for father Adam, 
establishes well the conclusion to those who are logical 
and who accept without question the Word of God, that 
the first man was perfect. 

"AND GOD BLESSED THEM" 

The divine blessing is withheld from that which is 
imperfect. The entire theory of Scripture being that 
"all his work is perfect," and that any imperfection or 
blemish implies sin, degradation from the original 



divine concept. The fact that God blessed Adam in 

his original condition, and that the Scriptures teach 

that since the fall there is a curse or condemnation 

upon all the members of the race, is but another way of 

telling us that we all are imperfect and that father Adam 

was originally perfect. Another thought connected 

with this blessing is the declaration, "Be fruitful and 

multiply and fill the earth and subdue it and have dominion," 

etc. According to this original condition it 

evidently would have been possible for our first parents 

to have had their home in Eden and to have gradually 

carried on the work of subjugation and rectification 

of the as yet unfinished earth, had they continued 

under divine favor. It was their disobedience that led 

to their expulsion from the Garden of Eden and compelled 

them to rely upon the sweat of face for their 

daily bread, struggling therefor amongst the thorns 

and thistles, and hindered from approaching the life-sustaining 

fruits of the trees of Eden by the cherubim 

with flaming sword which barred the way. 

Thus, had disobedience, sin, not entered the world, 
the intimation is that there would have been no death 
in the human family, but that a perfect race would 
have been developed, all of them in the image and likeness 
of God. We have here then strong condemnation 
of the thought of some that it is sinful to marry and to 
bring forth children. On the contrary, the Lord expresses 
this as a part of the blessing upon the first 
pair, "Be fruitful and multiply and fill the earth." It 
was a part of the curse that woman's conceptions and 
incidental sorrows were increased— leading, nevertheless, 
to the rapid filling of the earth so that our estimate 
of 20,000,000,000 of Adam's children who have been 
born and died would constitute quite a fair filling of 
the earth in its perfection, when the great Redeemer 
shall bid them all come forth from the tomb. 

While thus contradicting those who speak against 
marriage and the begetting of children, our position 
should not be misunderstood; hence we add that the 

R3922 : page 15 

Lord's words in this connection were to the natural 
man and woman and not to the Church— New Creatures 
in Christ Jesus. It is for each one of the Church to 
consider his consecration of life to the Lord and his 
service, his cause, and to remember the example of our 
Lord Jesus who, by the power of his consecrated will, 
became a eunuch for the Kingdom of heaven's sake. 
(Matt. 19:12.) The Apostle lays down certain lines 
and furnishes certain advice which we merely refer to 
and endorse (see I Cor. 7, and DAWN, Vol. VI., Chap. 12). 

Had our first parents remained loyal to God and 
hence free from the curse and more and more possessors 
of the spirit of a sound mind we may be sure that, 
under the Lord's blessing, their development of a family 



would have been profitable not only to the family 
but also to themselves. Even under present fallen 
conditions, where the spirit of a sound mind rules, 
children may to a large extent become precious blessings 
instead of being nuisances to themselves, their 
parents and their neighborhood. The parent who does 
his duty by his children, instructing them, controlling 
them, guiding them in harmony with the precepts of 
the Lord's Word, will not only greatly advantage his 
offspring but additionally will bring to himself a rich 
blessing of experience, because while attempting to be 
the guide and instructor of his children in the nurture 
and admonition of the Lord, he will continually find he is 
teaching himself valuable lessons that will be helpful 
in his own character-development and tend to bring 
him increasingly to the character-likeness of the Lord. 

Man's original power over the animal creation is 
evidently considerably lost through his own fall. Professor 
Charles Darwin points out that brutes trust man 
until they learn to know him from his bad conduct, 
and that the more civilized peoples can raise the brute 
creation to a higher condition than savages have ever 
done. When the times of restitution have brought 
mankind back again to all that was lost in Adam, and 
redeemed him and his race through the precious 
blood of Jesus, we have the assurance in Scripture that 
nothing shall hurt or destroy throughout the Lord's 
holy Kingdom, but that peace and blessing shall reign 
throughout the earth. 

"MAN'S FALL OVERRULED FOR GOOD" 

The wisdom of God is able to take hold of the affairs 
of his creatures and to so transform and reshape 
them as to bring blessings even out of some of our 
calamities and curses. Thus in man's case, while God 
did not cause the disobedience but merely permitted it, 
he has overruled the matter so as to make of man an 
exhibit that would be profitable not only to himself 

R3923 : page 15 

and posterity but also to the angels. The lessons 
taught show us divine justice in connection with the 
condemnation and destruction that have come upon our 
race— the redemptive work accomplished through Jesus 
shows us as nothing else could have shown the love 
and compassion and mercy of God toward those to 
whom he was under no obligation. The entire plan, 
when it is consummated, will show the wisdom of God 
in having permitted the evil, because he saw how he 
could overrule its dire results and make them profitable 
both to angels and to men. The power of God 
will be manifested through the fall and especially in 
the resurrection of the dead— the most wonderful exhibit 
of divine power anywhere referred to. Furthermore 



we must not lose sight of the fact that the Lord 

has so utilized the fall of man as to provide, in connection 

with the redemption from it, that the little flock 

might become New Creatures in Christ Jesus, partakers 

of the divine nature, joint-heirs with him as his Bride 

in the glorious Kingdom to come and the everlasting 

glory and service of the Father. 

As for other features of this lesson, including the 
blessing of the seventh day, we refer our readers to 
DAWN STUDIES, Vol. VI., page 46. 



page 15 

BEREAN STUDIES IN "TABERNACLE SHADOWS" 
CONSECRATING THE PRIESTHOOD 



JANUARY 13 

1. What did the consecration of Israel's priesthood 
typify? T.39, par. 1. 

2. What is the object of the antitypical consecration? 
What does this consecration signify? T.39, par. 1. 

3. What is the present result and the promised future 
reward to those who thus consecrate? T.39, par. 1. 

4. Will all who consecrate to sacrifice reach the future 
royal service? T.40, par. 1. 

5. Why must one class come up "through great tribulation" 
in order to be "saved"? T.40, par. 1. 

6. How do the Scriptures point out a class of priests 
who will be destroyed in Second Death? T.40, par. 2. 

7. How did the type of Aaron's sons represent these 
two classes which fail of the prize? T.40, par. 3; 
Z/02-238 (2nd col.) and 239. 

8. Why were Aaron and his two remaining sons forbidden 
to make lamentation for their brethren 

thus cut off? T.40, par. 3. 

JANUARY 20 

9. Who are invited to sanctify themselves, and what 
does this invitation signify? T.41, par. 1; Z. '03-437 
(2nd col.) 

10. What are the conditions of our acceptance and begetting 
on God's part? T.41, par. 1. 

11. What two parts of our consecration were shown by 
the typical consecration service? T.41, par. 2. 

12. How were the spiritual and the earthly natures represented 
in the type? T.41, par. 2. 

13. What was first done with the bullock? and what did 
this signify? (See Lev. 1:4.) Why was the bullock 

next delivered over to Moses? and what did 



this signify? T.41, par. 3. 

14. Why did Moses apply the blood to the horns of the 
altar? and what did the blood poured at base of 

the altar signify? T.42 (top of page). 

JANUARY 27 

15. What was done with the hide, flesh, etc., of the bullock? 
and what did it typify? What represented 

the heart devotion which prompts our sacrifice? 
T.42, par. 1. 

16. What was done with "the ram of burnt-offering"? 
and what did this typify? T.42, par. 2. 

17. Briefly what did "the ram of burnt-offering" and 
"the ram of consecration" signify? T.45, par. 1. 

18. What was done with "the ram of consecration"? and 
what did it show? T.45, par. 1. Z/03-437 (2nd col.) 

19. What significance in the priests' waving the choice 
parts of the ram before the Lord? T.45, par. 2. 

20. Why did Moses take "the wave-offering" off the 
hands of the priests? T.46 (top of page). 

21. What was laid upon "the wave-offering" while in 
the hands of the priests? T.46, par. 1. 

FEBRUARY 3 

22. What did the "three cakes" represent? T.46, par. 2. 
(Ex. 16:31). 

23. Why were these a necessary part of the typical service? 
T.46, par. 3. 

24. What significance in the sprinkling of oil mingled 
with blood over Aaron and his sons? T.46, par. 4. 
F.131,par. 1. 

25. Why was the flesh boiled and eaten? T.47, par. 1. 

26. What did the seven days of consecration typify? T.47, 
par. 2. (See Ex. 29:30,35,37.) 

27. Why is it especially necessary now that all who 
consecrate should see to it that they be "dead with 
him?" T.47, par. 3,4. 

28. When will all opportunity to enter the Royal Priesthood 
cease? T.47, par. 4. 



page 17 



SEMI-MONTHLY 
VOL. XXVIII JANUARY 15 No. 2 
A.D. 1907-A.M. 6035 



CONTENTS 

Views from the Watch Tower 19 

"What will the Poor Do with the Rich?" 19 



Socialistic President in 1912 20 

The Climax will Surely Come 21 

Religious Toleration 21 

The Crime of Suggestion 21 

The Socialists' Scheme 22 

Hygienic Value of Prayer 22 

Disobedience, Penalty, Hope 22 

The Shadow of God's Hand (Poem) 25 

"Sin Lieth at the Door" 25 

Some Interesting Letters 29 

Public Ministries of the Truth 32 

page 18 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-24 EVERSHOLT ST., LONDON, N.W. 
GERMAN BRANCH-MIRKER STR., 45, ELBERFELD. 
AUSTRALASIAN BRANCH-EQUITABLE BLDG., COLLINS ST., MELBOURNE 

PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 

TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR AS FOLLOWS:- 

All Bible Students who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity or 
adversity, are unable to pay for this Journal, will be supplied FREE if 
they send a Postal Card each June stating their case and requesting its 
continuance. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on 
our list continually and in touch with the Studies, etc. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



THIS JOURNAL IS PUBLISHED IN THE 

FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, DANISH AND ITALIAN LANGUAGES. 

SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



CHARTS OF THE TABERNACLE 



We have arranged to supply beautiful Charts of the Tabernacle 
on cloth, carriage prepaid, for two dollars each. Very 
choice, and very cheap for the quality. 

PITTSBURGH DISPATCH RENEWALS 



The publishers of the Dispatch notify us that they will continue 
to report Brother Russell's weekly discourses during 1907; 
and we accordingly notify our readers that they may send their 
subscriptions TO US at once. Indeed we have guaranteed the 
Dispatch a certain number of subscriptions. 

We suggested that if the price were cheaper more would subscribe, 
but the Dispatch says the weekly sermons should be 
worth the price aside from the best news service in the world. 
Its publishers supply the paper to us at clubbing rates, but refuse 
to allow us to quote a less price than they charge, namely, 
$6.00 per year. 

We adjust matters thus: For $6.00, the price of the Dispatch 
(2c each), we will send the Dispatch and three dollars 
worth of any other publications from our Catalogue (Dec. 1, 
'06). Or, if you subscribe for the Dispatch for 6 months, 
through us, we will present it to you free for the following six 
months. Or you can send us three dollars and authority to 
charge the balance of $3 against your Tract Fund remittance. 



R3923 : page 19 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER 
"WHAT WILL THE POOR DO WITH THE RICH?" 



UNDER this caption quite a striking article has 
appeared recently in the London Daily Mail. 
The form of the question is very suggestive. 
It is not a great while since the question continually 
asked was, "What shall we do with the poor?" How 
shall we build almshouses for them, restrain them, and 
arrange soup-kitchens and shelter for those out of 
work? It is quite a new question, therefore, to reverse 
the matter and say, "What shall the poor do with the 
rich?" This great change has been effected by two 
things: (1) The public demand for universal suffrage 
which has only prevailed, except in our own land, for a 
comparatively short time; and (2) the other factor in 
the situation is the increase of knowledge. Many are 
running to and fro, and knowledge is being increased— 
and knowledge, as some one has said, is power. The 
poor have learned that they are in the majority, that 
each vote has its count, and that the majority of votes 
means the control of the government. It is surprising 
that it has required so long a time for the masses to 
awake to the power that is in their hands through the 
ballot. When they do become thoroughly awake it is 
very easy to be seen that with the power in their hands 
the poor will see to it that the rich do not have as great 
advantage in the future as in the past. 



Only in this last election, as we have stated, have 
the British voters gotten awake to the situation, and 
now they are planning for the future, arranging to take 
over as much of the government as possible into their 
own hands and to effect legislation favorable to their 
own interests. In the United States a similar movement 
is on foot amongst the labor unions. It may be a 
few years before it reaches the point of danger to the 
present social structure, but its coming is inevitable. 
We may be sure that it will be heard in full force and 
weight by the end of "Gentile times." In Germany 
matters have already progressed further. The Socialists 
there would have matters in their own hands were 
the voting privileges theirs on the same basis that they 
are in the United States and Great Britain. The Germans, 
however, foresaw something of coming conditions 
and shielded the government and the wealthier 
and middle classes from the poor by providing certain 
conditions under which the favored classes have a 
larger number of votes at the polls. Nor do we think 
this an unreasonable position— that education and 
property should be represented. The point we make, 
however, is that all these matters are culminating on 
time. Hearken to the words of Scripture, applicable 
now: "Go to now, ye rich men; weep and howl for your 
miseries that shall come upon you."— Jas. 5:1. 

We quote below the article referred to:— 

"WHAT WILL THE POOR DO WITH THE RICH?" 

"Of peculiar importance and significance at the 
present time, when England is wondering whether or 
not the Socialist Party is in the immediate future to 
control the fate and fortunes of the United Kingdom, is 
Sir Henry Wrixon's political study, published under 
the obscure title of 'The Pattern State.' Sir H. Wrixon 
stands far aloof from purely British controversies; he 
is an Australian publicist and statesman; yet his contribution 
to political science is the more valuable since 
he has seen in Australia the working of the very tendencies 
which he describes. 

"The great problem of today, to his mind is, 'What 
will the poor do with the rich?' The general election 
in England has marked a change more profound than 
the French Revolution. Power has passed finally and 
forever from the English middle-class to the wage-earner. 
Nor is it probable that the conditions which 
now exist in this country will speedily change. The 
middle class, Sir Henry thinks, were accessible to 
argument and reason; the wage-earning class are not. 
The middle class sought, on the whole, the interests of 
the nation, and were divided because some took one 
view and some another of what those interests might 
be. The wage-earning class seek first and foremost 
their own personal interest, to ameliorate their own 
economic condition, to obtain higher wages and greater 



R3923 : page 20 

comfort from the State, at the expense of others, and, 
in a word, to eliminate the struggle for existence. 
Hence they are and will remain solid and united. The 
political pendulum will swing no longer. 

THE DREAM OF MR. GLADSTONE 

"The political forecasts of the immediate past have 
been belied. Political reformers, down to the late Mr. 
Gladstone, thought that the wage-earners would, if 
given votes, be content to follow the judgment 'of those 
who have superior opportunities, and have also, or are 
supposed to have superior fitness of all kinds.' The 
very contrary has happened. The wage-earners, instead 
of voting for the orthodox Liberal or the orthodox 
Unionist, have voted for Labor members, trade 
unionist representatives, and others of their own class 
and station, without the education and training which 
gave Mr. Gladstone's 'superior fitness' to govern. The 
poor are not following the lead of the well-to-do, but 
are kings in their own right. 

"This kingship of the people (by 'the people' being 
understood the poor, who are in every nation the majority) 
will produce immediate and inevitable results. 
In the first place, we shall see the rule of ignorance. 

"Theories and proposals that under a middle-class 
rule would be regarded as too wild to require an 
answer will be favorably regarded even by learned professors. 
...They will be discussed with all the care 
and respect that is due to a monarch's words.' 

"Municipal government in England and the United 
States has already shown that political intelligence 
does not widen as we descend in rank and station, and 
that universal education has not the enlightening results 
which were promised in its name. Hence the 
prospect of the future is the rule of the wire-pullers, 
bribing the electorate with the plunder of the rich, to 
be bestowed in the form of 'political outdoor relief.' 

"The elector will no longer be asked, What have you 
done for your country? but, What has the Government 
done for you? We have reached a condition of affairs 
where the political conditions are in absolute opposition 
to the industrial. At the polling station the worker 
is the equal of the master, nay, even his superior, since 
he has on his side a vast numerical advantage, which 
virtually reduces the employer to a state of political 
impotence. But within the factory affairs are reversed. 
There the employer is king, and his equal at the voting 
station is his inferior. 

A BLACK OUTLOOK FOR INDUSTRY 

"Such conditions could only persist while the attention 



of the voter was confined to 'what are properly 
called politics, or the public affairs of the nation.' If 
the scope of politics is extended— as it has been— so 'as 
to include the management of the industrial side of 
life, with the purpose of there enforcing that equality 
which is so dearly prized on the political side of life, 
then we come directly upon that problem which western 
civilization must either solve or perish in the attempt 
to solve.' In a word, political equality is irreconcilable 
with industrial inequality. One or other 
must go. 

"This is clearly seen and understood by the Labor 
party; it is the doctrine also of a considerable body of 
Liberals, numbering not much less than 100, outside 
the Labor ranks, though Sir Henry does not note this. 
If that section gives effect to its doctrines, backed by 
the majority of voters, the whole order of civilization as 
we now know it must change. 

"Already in the municipalities the change has begun. 
The exploitation of the few rich by the many 
poor, their oppressive taxation, and the provision of 
comfortable conditions for the poor, who find themselves 

R3924 : page 20 

possessed of supreme power in virtue of their 
numbers, is the system known as municipal Socialism. 
Already it is taken for granted. 

'"That it is the duty of the State to find work for 
its people; to provide all citizens with pensions in old 
age; to fix hours of work and rates of wages. ..and 
it is the duty of county councils to tax property so 
many shillings in the pound, to improve the surroundings 
of the poor.' 

"The municipal Socialist, when resisted, can always 
appeal to an army of the proletariat and vote 
down those owning property. In fact a stage has been 
reached where taxation is levied on one small class by 
another large class, and spent wholly or mainly in the 
interests of the latter class. That is a state of affairs 
which earlier thinkers pronounced contrary to the 
rights of man; it is, in other words, a barely disguised 
tyranny. 

INEVITABLE DECLINE AND FALL 

"This tendency will proceed further, Sir H. Wrixon 
holds. The tyranny will become as complete as it 
was in the democracies of Greece, when the plunder of 
the rich was the normal rule, and as it was in the 
French Revolution, when the assertion of political 
equality was instantly followed by an attack on property. 
He points out that the modern demagogues exhibit 
a marked antagonism to private property, and 
propose to wipe it out of existence by graduated 
taxation. 



"There will be no violent revolution, unless property 
resists by force, but simply a series of confiscatory 
laws. Industry after industry will be municipalized or 
taken over by the State, when efficiency will inevitably 
decline. 'All the causes that promote expense and inefficiency' 
will be present; absent only the causes 
which stimulate energy and inventiveness. There will 
be no penalties for slackness, and, if for a time, all 
goes well, this will be because the State is living on its 
accumulated capital. A gradual decay will set in, and 
either a fresh revolution will be accomplished, or the 
State will be crushed by some foreign power...." 

SOCIALISTIC PRESIDENT IN 1912 



At the First Presbyterian Church, St. Louis, Rev. 
Chas. Steizle, secretary of the Church and Labor Department 
of the general Presbyterian Church, delivered 
a sermon in which he asserted that the labor problem 
is purely a religious question. He said in part:— 

"For three years I have traveled all over the country. 
I have a personal acquaintance with all the labor 
leaders of the United States. It seems to me the workingmen 
are moving in two general directions: (1) Political; 
(2) economic. Who has not been appalled by 
the tremendous growth of socialism? In our own 
country the growth in the last four years has been sevenfold. 
If it increases in the same ratio in the next 
eight years the socialists will be able to elect a President. 

R3924 : page 21 

Whatever one may think of the economic value 

of socialism, this fact remains that socialism is becoming 

to thousands of workingmen a substitute for the 

Church." 

THE CLIMAX WILL SURELY COME 



"Words will not wake up the masses to realize the 
maze into which capitalism is plunging them, but 
words will wake up a few of them. It will take conditions 
to do what words have not the power to do. And 
these conditions are coming like a cyclone. But when 
conditions begin to press harder and harder, when the 
clock strikes the ominous sound, precipitated by some 
insignificant matter, perhaps, then the words that the 
masses have read will come to them with great force. 

"The howling of the abolitionists did not awaken 
the antagonism to chattel slavery, but the firing on 
Fort Sumter with popguns created a condition that 
made the people jump to their feet with a determination 



to settle the question of which power should 
rule the nation."— Appeal to Reason. 



There can be no doubt about it that recent revelations 
of how rich men have acquired much of their 
wealth has come as a revelation to the general public. 
Though long known among the rich, it has been hidden 
from "the man in the street" by financial terms 
which he did not comprehend. With his increase of 
knowledge he has received a "shock." His reverence 
for the rich and the great is shattered. This is but the 
precursor of the complete loss of confidence in everybody 
and every thing, pointed out in the Scriptures as 
the very foundation of the coming anarchy. 

The immediate effect upon many is to lead them to 
philosophise thus: "So, so; I see now how it is all 
done! I used to wonder how a man could accumulate 
even one million dollars honestly, but supposed the 
honorable millionaires were the very personification of 
honor and justice, after the style of their requirements 
of the bank clerks and cashiers of railroads, etc. Now 
I see differently. Well, I hope my chance may come 
soon, that I also, by the methods which I see are 
'usual,' may become a multi-millionaire." 

RELIGIOUS TOLERATION 



"The disposition among worthy and earnest men 
to ignore religious differences in pursuit of common 
and noble ends was strikingly shown at the recent international 
arbitration conference at Lake Mohonk. 
There, at the opening devotional exercises which 
marked each daily session of the conference, were to be 
seen as active participants a cardinal of the Roman 
Catholic Church in his scarlet robes, a Quaker in his 
simple garb, an Episcopal bishop, a Congregational 
judge, together with Presbyterian, Baptist and Methodist 
clergymen. The Quaker read the hymn of peace, 
written by a Unitarian. The Roman Catholic and 
Quaker sang from the same book, and after a psalm 
the cardinal read prayers in English, with many a 
Protestant responding 'Amen.' 

"To say such a scene was remarkable is simply to recognize 
the fact that as respects religious and sectarian 
differences the world has moved forward out of that bigotry 
and intolerance which for so many ages obscured 
the vision and warped the judgment of many otherwise 
good and worthy men. We are doing now only what 
rational and sincere men should always have done in 
the past, and which they will continue to do in the 
future, until scenes like that at Mohonk will be so much 
in the natural order that they will cease to be notable." 



-Leslie's Weekly. 



In view of the above general tendency to religious 
toleration is it not remarkable the amount of intolerance 
that is displayed against all who sympathize with 
the teachings of MILLENNIAL DAWN? The manifestations 
of hatred and opposition come from all denominations, 
and the various persecutions in a small way 
practised against individuals in their homes, amongst 
their business and Church relatives, is surely remarkable. 
Why is it so? We might just as well ask why 
was it that Scribes and Pharisees and Doctors of the 
Law, all classes and parties of the Jews, opposed 
Christ and his simple, straightforward teachings at the 
first advent. Why was it that with the wide differences 
existing between themselves these all could unite in 
the opposition to the light, the truth? Whoever can 
answer those questions respecting the harvest of the 
Jewish age will be able probably in similar vein to answer 
the similar questions pertinent to the harvest of 
this Gospel age. General doubt and darkness on all 
theological questions is settling down rapidly upon all 
denominations— "They believe they know not what," 
hence why should they any longer quarrel with each 
other? We know what we believe, and in that sense of 
the word are certainly amongst the few Christians. 
Our presentations in MILLENNIAL DAWN are clear cut, 
Scriptural; and the Scriptures are thus shown to be 
opposed to all the sects and parties of Christendom, and 
their various creeds are shown to be out of accord with 
the Word of God. "If the world hate you ye know 
that it hated me before it hated you. If ye were of the 
world the world would love its own: but because ye 
are not of the world, but I have chosen you out of the 
world, therefore the world hateth you."— John 15:18,19. 

THE CRIME OF SUGGESTION 



It would appear that the average German citizen 
has a higher sense of the obligation of an oath than 
have some religious teachers. This is shown in the 
following report from the London Daily Mail. It 
causes us to wonder how the common people would 
decide the matter if some of the clergy were put on 
trial for the violation of their vows of ordination— in 
preaching contrary to their solemn covenants. The 
item follows:— 

"Father Geisert, a Catholic priest, of Lautenbach, 
Baden, has been sentenced to a year in the penitentiary 
for attempting to induce a parishioner to swear 
falsely in the Catholic Party's interest in the course of 
a bye-election contest for the Landtag. 



"The priest made a pathetic supplication to his 
judges to let him off, confessing that the letter wherein 

R3924 : page 22 

he made the incriminating suggestion was written to a 
parishioner in a moment of foolish zeal, and that he had 
done penance for it many times over. 

"The defense introduced as a last resort the evidence 
of Professor Mayer, the authority on 'moral theology 
as related to the question of the oath.' He declared 
that during the time of the Inquisition a certain 
'mental restriction' was permitted to persons who took 
oath, and said that Geisert may have had this in mind 
when he advised his parishioners to lie." 

THE SOCIALISTS' SCHEME 



"The recent increase in the activity of socialist 
propagandists has been noticeable. The latest development 
is the formation of an intercollegiate society 
to spread the principles of socialism not only in the 
colleges of the country but among the pupils of high 
schools in the larger cities. Literature is to be distributed 

R3925 : page 22 

broadcast, while lecturers will be sent from school 
to school to explain the doctrines for which it is hoped 
to make many converts. Among those back of this 
movement we are not surprised to find E. Benjamin 
Andrews, Jack London and Charlotte Perkins Gilman." 
—Pittsburgh Gazette. 

HYGIENIC VALUE OF PRAYER 



At a recent medical conference Dr. Hyslop paid a 
remarkable tribute to the hygienic value of prayer, 
says the English Churchman. In treating of the influence 
of moral and religious environment, he said it ought to 
be their object, as teachers and physicians, to fight 
against all those influences which tended to produce 
either indifference or intemperance towards religion. 
Of all hygienic measures to counteract disturbed hope 
or depression of spirits, he would undoubtedly give 
first place to the simple habit of prayer. Its effect 
on the mind was more beneficial than any other therapeutic 
agent known. 

Apropos of which may be quoted the following 
from Longfellow's "The Day is Done": 

"Such songs have power to quiet 



The restless pulse of care, 
And come like the benediction 
That follows after prayer." 



R3925 : page 22 

DISOBEDIENCE, PENALTY, HOPE 

--GENESIS 3:1-6,13-16.-JANUARY 20.- 

"As all in Adam die, so all in Christ 
shall be made alive."— 1 Cor. 15:22. 

IF THIS LESSON were properly taught in all the Sunday 
Schools and Bible classes of Christendom it would 
of itself revolutionize all the theology of Christendom. 
The wonder is that reasonable, thinking people can con over 
this lesson without apparently getting the least ray of light 
therefrom. Our own past experiences along the same line 
enable us to sympathize with others in their blindness, 
stimulating us to render them all the assistance in our power, 
to the intent that their eyes of understanding may be opened, 
that they may be able to discern the fundamentals of the 
divine plan, and thus come into a better understanding 
thereof and closer harmony with the Lord every way. 

From Genesis to Revelation the serpent is set before us 
as the synonym of Satan. The introduction of sin is charged 
to the great Adversary of God, who, following his ambition, 
sought to secure our first parents and their posterity as his 
subjects under the new empire which he hoped to establish, 
that he might be like the Most High. This sinful, disloyal 
ambition not only wrought havoc in a cherub, degrading 
him and making him an adversary of God, but through him 
it wrought havoc to our race— divine condemnation to death, 
with all the attendant miseries of sickness, pain— mental, 
moral and physical— deteriorating, culminating in death. 
We all are witnesses of the penalty; the doctors' signs, no 
less than the crape and the cemetery, assure us that the sentence 
of death still rests upon our race— the most awful 
calamity that could be imagined. 

MOTHER EVE'S TEMPTATION 

That a serpent was used in Mother Eve's temptation 
there can be no doubt, but whether it spoke with audible 
voice or only by its actions we cannot know— it was quite 
probably the latter, as we sometimes say, "Actions speak 
louder than words." Satan merely used the serpent as the 
instrumentality of his temptation. His desire was to alienate 
the affections, love and respect of our first parents from 
God to himself. He attempted to do this by passing as their 
friend and giving the insinuation that God, although the 
Creator, was the transgressor, who desired to hinder their 
best and truest advancement and prosperity. The Lord had 



placed our first parents in the Garden of Eden, which was 
highly favored every way, and entirely fitted for the perfect 
pair to enjoy their human perfection to the full. In it were 
all kinds of trees, some beautiful to look upon and some 
good for food— trees of life— the eating of whose fruit would 
perpetuate life in full degree. But amongst the trees of 
life in this orchard was one tree of very marked peculiarity, 
which our Lord had called the tree of knowledge and of 
whose fruit he forbade our parents to eat. This restriction 
would not necessarily have been perpetual. In due time, 
after the test of obedience had demonstrated the loyalty of 
our first parents, no doubt they would have been granted 
full liberty in the use of the tree of knowledge, but partaking 
of it before the Lord's time would mean not only their 
disobedience but their injury, and would bring upon them 
the divine sentence, "In the day that thou eatest thereof 
thou shalt surely die"— margin, "Dying thou shalt die." 
This restriction on the tree of knowledge became the 
channel of temptation. Satan was aware of that trait of 
nature which leads everyone to be interested in and to have 
more or less desire for anything that is forbidden— to wonder 
why it is forbidden, etc. Such thoughts had undoubtedly 
passed through the minds of Adam and Eve, and had 
been set aside as improper, because surely their Creator, who 
had done so much for their blessing and joy, would not 
withhold from them anything really to their advantage; 
hence in appreciation of his goodness they settled the matter 

R3925 : page 23 

that they would be obedient to the Lord and would not 
taste the forbidden fruit. Now came Satan's attack: posing 
as their best friend he intimated selfishness on God's part 
as the basis of their restriction. More than this, he suggested 
that they never could be happy without the valuable 
knowledge which the fruit of that tree would bring them, 
and, further, that God had lied to them in saying that death 
would surely follow the eating of the forbidden fruit. 
Had Satan appeared and held personal conversation 
with them directly or through the serpent, they seemingly 
should have been on guard, and would probably have wondered 
why any of God's creatures should speak disparagingly 
of his wisdom and his love. Our conjecture is that the whole 
matter was done by signs— that under Satan's guidance the 
serpent partook of the tree of knowledge of good and evil, 
and when mother Eve saw that no harm came to the serpent, 
but perceived that it was one of the most cunning of all 
the animals of the earth, the operation of her mind was, "Has 
God deceived us? Has he an object in deceiving us? Why 
did he tell us that we should die if we ate of that fruit, 
whereas we see that the serpent eats of it and does not die? 
Quite probably it is because of the partaking of this fruit 
regularly that the serpent is the wisest of all the living 
creatures under our control." And when the woman perceived 
by this process of reasoning that the tree was good 
to make one wise, her desire for wisdom entrapped her into 



disloyalty to the command of her Creator. She ate, and as 
a result did indeed get a great increase of knowledge, with 
condemnation, sorrow, pain, tears— because the knowledge 
came not in God's time and order, but in violation of his 
command. 

"A MURDERER FROM THE BEGINNING" 

In thus entrapping mother Eve, and through her bringing 
upon Adam and his race the death penalty, Satan became 
the great murderer of the race, as our Lord Jesus 
declared, "He was a murderer from the beginning, and abode 
not in the truth." His counsel, and indeed the counsel of 
all who are out of harmony with God is evil, injurious, and 
whosoever heeds or agrees therewith is not wise. The Apostle 
says, "The serpent beguiled Eve," and this is his general 
procedure in all of our temptations. He does not come out 
into the open, but everywhere seeks to put darkness for light 
—to deceive, to mislead. We are to remember, too, that 
mother Eve had no experience with sin, nor with any adversary 
of God and of righteousness, and hence was the more 
easily misled in this temptation. Coming from her the 
temptation was an hundred-fold what it otherwise would 
have been, for we are informed by the Apostle that "Adam 
was not deceived." He was aware, fully convinced, that 
death would be the penalty for his partaking of the forbidden 
fruit, irrespective of its effect upon the serpent. His 
temptation, however, touched him upon his most vulnerable 
point— his love for his wife. 

There are intimations that the fall took place one and 
a half years after father Adam's creation, but for what portion 
of that time he had his beautiful and loved companion, 
Eve, we are not informed. It is clearly intimated, however, 
that he was alone for a sufficient period to realize that there 
was no companion suitable for him amongst all the beasts, 
cattle and creatures under his dominion; and when, finally, 
the Lord gave him a wife of his own flesh and bones, of his 
own nature, he evidently found in her that complement to 
himself for which he had so greatly longed. And now, 
when he perceived that Eve had eaten of the forbidden fruit 
and that she must die, the poor man evidently felt that without 
her life would lose its charms, and determined that whatever 
the cost he would share it with his bride— therefore 
he partook of the fruit at her instance, with the full knowledge 
that it would mean his death. He not only knowingly 

R3926 : page 23 

and willingly disobeyed the divine command, but did it 
intentionally— he suicided. 

SATAN'S DECEPTIONS STILL PREVAIL 

We must not censure our first parents too severely, but 
remember that, although they were perfect in their capacities, 
created in the image of God, they were not perfect in 



knowledge. They should have been wise enough to know, 

to realize, their limitations of ignorance and to have trusted 

to the Lord. Lack of faith was mother Eve's difficulty, and 

had father Adam possessed a sufficiency of faith and maintained 

his obedience no doubt God would have arranged 

some way for the recovery of his companion, but for their 

undeveloped condition the trial was too strong; they succumbed, 

as no doubt nearly all of their children would have 

done under similar circumstances. We blame them not, yet 

we see that God, foreknowing what course they would take, 

preferred to allow them to take that course rather than to 

interfere with them, intending to ultimately overrule their 

disobedience for a higher and wider development of his own 

gracious purposes through the redemption and ultimate 

blessing which the divine plan centers in Jesus. 

What do we see today but similar disobedience, notwithstanding 
the fact that we have larger experience than 
our first parents as respects contact with sin and its penalty? 
In how many instances today does ambition, love of knowledge, 
lead to disobedience of divine restrictions to the serious 
injury of the disobedient one? One would think that 
the lesson before us would be so powerful, so convincing, 
that all who have a knowledge of it would flee from temptation 
in such directions and resolve that at any cost they 
would be obedient to the Word of the Lord. How many 
today, like Father Adam, would be willing to sacrifice their 
eternal interests for the joys and pleasures of earthly companionship, 
even to the extent of disobedience to the divine 
requirements. 

WHOM SHALL WE BELIEVE? 

Whoever may be inclined to condemn mother Eve for 
hearkening to the voice of the serpent should reflect that 
the great majority of the world today are believing Satan's 
lie, rejecting God's message. The heathen, numbering 
1,200,000,000, almost without exception believe Satan's lie, 
"Ye shall not surely die," so that when their friends die 
they claim that they are not dead but more alive than ever. 
Nor is this the worst of it: so-called Christendom, representing 
400,000,000 of our race, have very generally 
accepted the same lie, and similarly believe that none are 
dead— that all in the moment in which they appear to die 
really become more alive than ever before. How can we 
blame mother Eve on this score while we see the deceptions 
spread abroad far and near, notwithstanding all the lessons 

R3926 : page 24 

which she learned and which her children should have 
learned through her example. As to believe God always 
leads us in the right direction and brings blessings, so to reject 
God's counsel, to receive the serpent's counsel, always means 
to bring injury in some sense or degree. 

Look about over the world today— see the heathen 
worshiping their ancestors, and imagining that they hold 



communion with those whom the Scriptures declare are dead 
and know not anything, and never would know anything 
had it not been for the redemption accomplished at Calvary 
by Jesus, and who would not in any sense of the word be 
conscious until awakened by our Lord at his second coming 
in resurrection power. Look at Christendom, and perceive 
that two-thirds of these believe in the doctrine of a present 
purgatory, in which their relatives and friends are suffering 
from the moment of death. See them praying for the dead 
and paying for masses for their relief from pain. Think of 
the thousands of injurious superstitions that are built upon 
this error, and reflect that Spiritism, which is already having 
a great influence and, according to the Scriptures, will shortly 
have still wider and more baneful effect; and note how it 
has all its power from this false doctrine which the Adversary 
originally started in Eden— that the dead are not dead, 
but alive, and ready to communicate through mediums, etc. 
Consider how Satan has used this error all the way down 
through the ages, and how, through the fallen angels, the 
demons, he has personated the dead and sought thus to entrap 
the living. Let us learn the lesson; let us say, with 
one of old, "Let God be true, though it make every man a 
liar."— Rom. 3:4. 

CURSING AND BLESSING 

Let us realize that every one who opposes or denies the 
divine testimony is a liar and the truth is not in him; but 
let us set to our seal that God is true, and realize that the 
penalty of death is real, that the redemption price paid by 
our Lord Jesus was his death, also real, and that the blessed 
provision of the divine plan for the future is the awakening 
of mankind from the sleep of death, from the unconsciousness 
of death, for the very purpose of bringing them to a 
clear knowledge of God and his truth and releasing them 
from the superstitions and evil influences, degradation, etc., 
which came upon them through disobedience, through the 
fall, through the following of Satan's original lie. 

The curse that rests upon the race, upon the earth itself 
and upon the serpent and Satan is a condemnation, a 
penalty, a reprobation. The serpent, under divine reprobation, 
experienced some kind of a change of form and locomotion, 
and became to mankind a synonym, a representative, 
of everything evil, loathsome, vile— the synonym of sin and 
Satan. Not only in our lesson is this brought to our attention, 
but also in the typical system of natural Israel. Fiery 
serpents were sent upon Israel as a curse or penalty for sin; 
and when, through their doubts, the people were perishing, 
under the Lord's instruction Moses raised upon a pole a copper 
serpent, looking to which in faith the Israelites were 
recovered from the poison of the serpents. Thus the Lord 
early intimated that Christ would be made a curse, a sin 
offering for us, and that we would be healed through looking to 
him in faith. 

BRUISING THE SERPENT'S HEAD 



In pronouncing the curse against the serpent— against 
evil— the Lord declared, "I will put enmity between thee 
and the woman, and between thy seed and her seed; it shall 
bruise thy head and thou shalt bruise his heel." The Scriptures 
show us clearly that this divine prophecy is to be fulfilled, 
that our Lord Jesus is the seed of the woman through 
whom the blessing shall come, and that his Church, his 
Bride, is to be joint-heir with him in the suffering incidental 
to the attainment of the honorable position of joint-heirs 
with him also in the great work of delivering mankind from 
all the evils that have come upon us through Satan, through 
the serpent. The head and the heel are referred to symbolically 
as representing vital and non-vital portions of the 
body. 

Thus the Christ, Jesus the Head and the Church his 
members, throughout this Gospel age have all suffered something 
from the serpent, from evil, from Satan, but under 
God's providences their sufferings are not serious, not deadly 
—they are wounded in the heel, so to speak. This seed 
class is begotten of the holy Spirit, New Creatures; hence 
nothing that can come to them in their earthly, human experiences 
can prove injurious to their spiritual welfare. All 
the bruising of the heel, under the Lord's supervision, shall 
work together for good to the development of character, to 
the preparation of the injured members for the far more exceeding 
and eternal weight of glory by and by. Thus it has 
been with our dear Redeemer, who being wounded for our 
transgressions has been highly exalted of the Father. We 
also who are sharers with him in his sufferings, ignominy, 
death, are to be sharers in his glory. 

As for the serpent, his head shall be crushed, all evil 
shall be utterly destroyed in God's due time. Not yet, however; 
evil is still rampant, not only as much as it has ever 
been in the world's history, but more so, and this is in full 
accord with the divine record that "evil men and leaders 
astray shall wax worse and worse," and a few short years 
ahead will fully demonstrate the power of Satan over and 
in those who are his subjects. But victory is coming to 
those who are now wounded. The Christ shall by and by 
bind that old serpent, the devil, Satan, and cast him into 
the abyss and set a seal over him that he may deceive the 
nations no more until the thousand years of the Millennial 
reign of Christ be passed— until all mankind shall have had 
a full opportunity of coming to a true knowledge of God and 
of accepting and using the grace provided through the great 
Redeemer's sacrifice. 

As for the Church, we also will have to do with this 
work of crushing evil— as the Apostle expresses it, "The 
very God of peace shall bruise Satan under your feet 
shortly."— Rom. 16:20. 

OUR GOLDEN TEXT 

Our Golden Text fits the subject well, especially in the 
better translation which we have given. All of Adam's posterity, 



all who are in him, are dying as a result of his disobedience. 
Failing to maintain his hold upon the gift of 
God, eternal life, he has also failed to transmit that character 
and degree of life to his children. The six thousand 
years of crying and dying have been an awful lesson to the 
world of the exceeding sinfulness of sin, but thank God the 

R3927 : page 25 

time of this groaning of creation is nearly at an end, the new 
dispensation is near at hand. He that gave himself a ransom 
for Adam, and who thus incidentally purchased not 
only him but all of his race who had lost life in him, this 
great Redeemer is about to establish the rule of righteousness 
in the world and to inaugurate that era of blessing, the 
Golden Age, for which the whole creation waits and longs, 
whether intelligently or unintelligently. 

The blessing of life in its full, everlasting, complete 
sense is coming to "all in Christ" and to none others. Now 
is the opportunity for coming into relationship with him as 
his Bride and joint-heir. Blessed are we whose hearts of 
understanding and ears of appreciation have recognized this 
grand opportunity, so that we have been glad to accept the 
Lord's proposition at the cost of every earthly interest. 
Surely the faithful shall be like him and see him as he is 
and share his glory. Then in the time of his presence the 
world of mankind in general will be granted an opportunity 
to see and to hear and to accept of divine mercy in him— 
not by becoming the Bride, for that class will have then 
been filled, but they will be granted the privilege of coming 
into relationship with the Christ as children, receiving of his 
life, being begotten again to restored life— to a restitution 
of all that was lost in the first Adam and restored in the 
second Adam. He that hath such a hope in him may well 
purify himself and strive to come into relationship with 
Christ, and thus to as quickly as possible attain to the joys 
and blessings of the divine favor. He that hath the Son 
hath life, he that hath not the Son shall not see life eternal. 
-1 John 5:12. 



THE SHADOW OF GOD'S HAND 

Bright and fair the sun was beaming 

O'er my smooth and easy way, 
And my soul moved lightly onward; 

Fear and care were far away. 
Hope was bright and winged my footsteps, 

Eagerly I pressed along, 
And the joy of heavenly favor 

Filled my heart with praise and song. 

I could see my Father's wisdom, 

Loving care and sheltering arm, 
Leading me through pleasant places, 



Guarding me from every harm. 
I could feel love's flame arising 

High and higher in my breast, 
And my lips o'erflowed with gladness, 

All was joy and peace and rest. 

When at once a voice within me 

Seemed to thrill my very soul: 
Could I stand if joy departed, 

Sorrow flooding all my soul? 
In an arid desert lonely, 

Would my faith endure the test? 
Would my spirit, still undaunted, 

Praise him then as when at rest? 

This one thing my soul pursueth, 

To attain thy perfect love, 
Love, unwavering and loyal, 

Rising all things else above; 
I would have the faith enduring, 

Stronger when most sorely tried, 
"Spare me not, but prove me, Father," 

Anxiously my spirit cried; 

When across my clear horizon 

Suddenly a cloud arose, 
Spreading wide and lowering darkly, 

Threatening my soul's repose. 
Stranger voices sounded near me, 

Scarce a step was plain before, 
But my Father's arm sustained me, 

What, then, could I ask for more? 

And, while leaning hard upon him, 

His sweet peace was given me, 
By the Spirit's gentle whisper, 

"This is his great love for thee; 
Well he knows thy deepest yearnings 

To reflect his image bright- 
All thy prayers come up before him, 

And are precious in his sight. 

"And this darkness come upon thee 

Is the shadow of his hand, 
Never raised except in blessing, 

Though thou may st not understand." 
Then my heart grew strong and trustful, 

And with joy my soul was stirred; 
"Teach me, Lord, to trust thee fully," 

This my prayer so soon was heard. 

Fearless then, I started onward, 

Compassed by the gloom of night, 

For, by Father's love surrounded, 
Darkness is as safe as light! 

Still I pray, "O, lead me, Father, 



By thy goodness and thy might, 
Till, beyond time's misty shadows, 
Dawns the pure, eternal light." 

—Bessie P. Lockerbie. 



R3927 : page 25 

"SIN LIETH AT THE DOOR" 

-GENESIS 4:3 -15. -JANUARY 27.- 

Golden Text:— "Whoever hateth his 
brother is a murderer."— 1 John 3:15. 

THE STORY of Cain and Abel itself is a sharp contradiction 
of the Evolution theory. Had Adam been but a 
slight remove above the monkey, and lower than the lowest 
type of man today, his children would have been little if 
any better. But our lesson shows us two sons of Adam, 
clothed and in their right minds, the one a tiller of the soil, 
the other a shepherd and herdsman. Do apes exhibit such 
dispositions at the present time? Assuredly not. Furthermore, 
these two men of noble character esteemed it a duty 
and privilege to acknowledge God with their substance. 
They did not worship idols, nor sun nor moon nor stars, but 
the living God, the Creator. Surely neither apes nor the 
lowest forms of man exhibit such tendencies today. And 
even after Cain had become a murderer, his reverence for 
the Almighty and his appreciation of his crime marked him 
as not only higher than the brute creation, but very much 

R3927 : page 26 

higher than many of his race today who have little regard 
for life, fearing chiefly the penalty. 

At what particular time our lesson dates we may not 
surely know, the chapter in which it occurs passing over 
centuries of time. In the first verse it tells of the birth of 
Cain, in the next verse he is a full-grown man and has a 
full-grown brother Abel, and quite probably they both had 
large families, though through neither one is Adam's genealogy 
reckoned, and Abel's children, if he had any, are not 
mentioned at all. The third verse, with which our lesson 
opens, intimates a considerable period of time after Abel 
was a keeper of sheep and Cain a tiller of the ground, saying, 
"And in the process of time it came to pass that Cain 
brought of the fruit of the ground an offering unto the Lord, 
and Abel an offering of the firstlings of his flock." 

THE RESPECTED OFFERING 

Nothing either good or bad is recorded of either of these 
men, Cain and Abel, up to the time of this lesson and their 
presentation of their respective offerings before the Lord. It 



was but natural, and we might say proper, that each should 
present to the Lord an offering representing his own industries, 
and the Lord's acceptance of Abel's offering and failure 
to accept Cain's should not be considered as any slight 
upon the latter, but rather as a lesson of instruction, a leading 
of divine providence, indicating the character of offering 
that would be most acceptable and pleasing to the Lord. 
The reason for the acceptance of Abel's offering is apparent 
—God desired that all offerings from his creatures should 
recognize original sin and the necessity for a great sin-offering, 
the sacrifice of the life of the Redeemer. Thus early 
did God begin the lesson of instruction emphasized by the 
Apostle that without the shedding of blood there is no remission 
of sins.-Heb. 9:22. 

So near to perfection, the first-born son of the perfect 
Adam, Cain had undoubtedly inherited a fine human organization, 

R3928 : page 26 

nearly perfect in all of its parts, comparatively well 

balanced; but as Adam, who was perfect, could allow love 

for his wife to misguide him into disobedience of his Creator, 

so Cain allowed the wrong view of matters to enter his mind, 

to have control and ultimately to bring forth its evil fruit, 

murder. We can sympathize with him in his grief that his 

sacrifice was not acceptable to the Lord: we can appreciate 

his surprise that the offering of his younger brother, a blood 

offering, should be more acceptable. But here we who have 

the new mind, begotten of the holy Spirit, can see that he 

took the wrong course in allowing envious, angry feelings 

against his brother, whereas he should have gone to the 

Lord in supplication to know why his sacrifice was not acceptable. 

Had he done so the Lord would undoubtedly 

have told him that his desire to worship and serve were appreciated, 

but that it must be a divine regulation amongst 

men that all sacrifices, to be acceptable to the Lord, must be 

those which would typify the death of a ransomer and atoner 

for sin. 

Here we see the fine, subtle, entering wedge of sin, and 
who that has had experience may not trace analogies in his 
own experience and note when and where the wrong thought 
was permitted to have control of his mind and the proper 
thought was not entertained? Many of us can perhaps see 
by how narrow a margin we have escaped a wrong course, 
it may be, on various occasions. It is in such respects that 
the New Creatures in Christ have much advantage every way 
over natural men, however well disposed they may be; for, 
as the Apostle explains, as New Creatures we have the 
"spirit of a sound mind," which enables us to think calmly, 
dispassionately, temperately of our own experiences and those 
of others, and leads us to look to the Lord for the wisdom 
from on high as a guide in the interpretation of our daily 
experiences. Whoever learns to look to the Lord in all his 
sorrows and disappointments, as well as in his joys, has 
learned a valuable lesson, which Cain had not yet learned, 
and which he never learned, because none were begotten of 



the holy Spirit or permitted to receive the new mind of 
Christ until after the real atonement had been made and 
Pentecost came as a result of the acceptance of that atonement 
on our behalf by the heavenly Father. 

"WHY ART THOU WROTH?" 

The power to be angry, the power to be wroth, is not a 
result of the fall nor an evidence that Cain was bestial. 
The Lord uses these same words in reference to his own attitude 
of mind at times, declaring that he was wroth under 
certain conditions and that he is angry with the wicked 
every day. (Psa. 7:1 1.) The force of character which permits 
of anger is the very same force which otherwise directed 
signifies intensity of love: the inability to be angry under 
proper cause would imply imperfection, blemishes, just 
as inability to love strongly would imply similar defects of 
character. To be perfect implies a full-rounded capacity in 
every direction. The perfectly shaped head would not be a 
bumpy one representing some of the organs large and others 
small, but would be a well-rounded head in all particulars. 
In such a perfect organization, while every power would be 
there, the higher powers of veneration for God, spirituality, 
conscience, etc., should be in control and indicate when combativeness, 
destructiveness, should and when it should not be 
exercised. It is a mistake to suppose that a perfect being 
would be deficient in combativeness: on the contrary, every 
Christian must have this quality of mind, otherwise how 
could he become an "overcomer"? how could he "fight the 
good fight"? The desirable thing is that every organ of our 
heads should be perfect, and that these all shall be under 
the perfect control and regulation of the higher reasoning 
faculties. 

Cain was not rightly exercised by his experiences. He 
went about sullenly for a time, brooding over the fact that 
God had not recognized his offering and had recognized 
Abel's. He was angry— it seemed to him an injustice on 
God's part: he had been as faithful in his department as 
Abel had been in his. 

God did not leave him to himself, but considering the 
fact of his inexperience and that there were none others to 
give him proper counsel, the Lord admonished him with the 
query, "Why art thou wroth? and why is thy countenance 
fallen? If thou doest well shalt thou not be accepted? 
and if thou doest not well sin lieth at the door." This suggestion 
should have been sufficient. Cain should at once 
have appealed to the Lord, and having learned God's will, 
should have prepared himself to offer such a sacrifice to the 

R3928 : page 27 

Lord as would be pleasing to him. The inference that he 
was not now doing well, not now pleasing the Lord in his 
wrath and sullen attitude, was a reprimand; and the suggestion 
that sin was lying at the door, or (revised version) 
"crouching at his door," should have suggested to him the 



danger of a misstep. Nothing is intimated of a wrong condition 
prior to this sacrifice, and the sacrifice itself was not 
wrong— it was merely that Cain was ignorant. The wrong 
began when he became angry and sullen instead of applying 
himself to learn the lesson of the Lord's providences. Sin 
was now crouching at his door like a wild beast, ready to 
spring upon him and devour him. And, alas for him! he 
failed to heed the Lord's warning and allowed the crouching 
enemy, sin, to enter into his heart and to make of him a 
murderer. It was the spirit of Satan that entered into him, 
taking the place of the spirit or disposition of the Lord, 
which was his originally as one closely in the likeness of 
God, not greatly marred as yet by the fall. This the Apostle 
intimates, saying that he was "of that wicked one"— he 
partook of Satan's disposition, spirit. (1 John 3:12.) And 
as Satan was a murderer from the beginning, so his spirit 
in Cain was a murderous spirit— John 8:44. 

ALL HATERS ARE MURDERERS 

Here we have the vital point of this lesson as respects 
the household of faith, especially the New Creation. We 
who have been begotten of the holy Spirit and who thus 
have the "mind of Christ" (1 Cor. 2:16), have the mind or 
disposition that is loving, generous, kind, forgiving toward 
our fellows and that is reverential and obedient toward God. 
This is the spirit or disposition that is of the Father and of 
the Son: the opposite disposition or spirit is of the Adversary. 
The two spirits or dispositions are so opposite that we 
cannot have both at once— we cannot serve God and Mammon, 
Christ and Belial. 

The Lord lays down his regulations in this matter in 
most positive terms, telling us in the Golden Text of this 
lesson that "he that hateth his brother is a murderer"— telling 
us also that no murderer has eternal life abiding in him, 
and assuring us that the spirit or disposition of murder is 
the spirit or disposition of the Adversary, who was the first 
murderer. If we resist the devil he will flee from us, but if 
we allow anger and a souring disposition to take possession 
of our minds, the Adversary comes closer and closer until 
he crouches at the door of our hearts, ready to leap in and 
have possession at a favorable opportunity. In Cain's case, 
he was not counted as having sinned at the time he thought 
of his brother in angry mood— his sin was in the outcome of 
that angry mood— murder itself. 

With us the matter is different, because the Lord is not 
dealing with us according to the flesh but according to the 
spirit, the will, the intention. Our flesh is reckoned as degenerated, 
hopelessly dead, and we are accepted of the Lord 
purely on the basis of our new minds, our faith in Christ, 
and our consecration to walk in his steps. For all such 
New Creatures murder would be an impossibility. How 
could one who has the Spirit of the Lord commit murder? 
It would be impossible for him to desire or commit murder 
under any conditions. It would imply that he had lost the 
Spirit of the Lord entirely; and since under the Lord's Covenant 



he would not be permitted to do this ignorantly and 

without reproof, it would imply a wilfulness in the sin. 

Still stronger is the statement that hatred would be murder 

for the New Creation. The angry thought might be suggested 

through the imperfect, fallen brain, but the mind, the 

will, must be so loyal to God and so well instructed respecting 

his will that it would repulse such a suggestion as that 

of hate. The New Creature, the New Will, the New Intention, 

cannot deliberately entertain a feeling of hatred toward 

a brother— it would mean the spirit or disposition of murder, 

and thus the reverse of the Lord's Spirit. 

WORKS OF THE FLESH AND OF THE DEVIL 

Another Apostle, in cautioning the Church, assures us 
that the works of the fallen flesh and of the devil are manifestly 
different from the works or operation of the Spirit of 
the Lord in his people. The latter he tells us brings forth 
the reverse, or the fruitage of gentleness, meekness, patience, 
long suffering, brotherly kindness, love, etc.; the former, 
the spirit of the fallen nature, the Adversary— anger, malice, 
envy, hatred, strife, backbiting and slander. 

It is only as we get this matter well before our mental 
vision that we have the proper conception of the Spirit of 
the Lord in contrast with the spirit of error, the spirit of the 
Adversary, the disposition of sin. Whoever gets such an 
opening of the eyes of his understanding will be assisted, 
quickened thereby to fresh zeal in his opposition to sin in 
its every form. And the wider the eyes of his understanding 
open to a discernment of God's character and the beauties 
of his law of love and justice, the more vigilant will he 
be in his opposition to the downward tendencies of his own 

R3929 : page 27 

flesh— the more on guard lest he should be overtaken in 
such faults. 

DESIRE CONCEIVES SIN 

We read, "Lust [desire] when it has conceived bringeth 
forth sin, and sin when it is finished bringeth forth 
death." (Jas. 1:15.) Here we have a suggestion of the insidious 
character of sin; it does not stalk about openly in its 
horrible aspect, rather it starts in desire: it is prompted by 
selfishness of some kind, either in envy as in Cain's case or 
in ambition as in Satan's case. Small, refined, insidious 
are the beginnings of such desires, with no suggestion whatever 
of disloyalty to God or murder of our fellows. It is 
when these selfish desires and envyings, being unrepulsed, 
have gradually grown stronger and stronger, that, as the 
Apostle suggests, they conceive and bring forth to fruition, 
where they have life actually. Then the course is longer or 
shorter according to the individual or the circumstances, 
but the tendency of a desire that has conceived is to bring 
forth— to have the desire, the ambition, the envy, reach a 



consummation, and such a consummation is always sin. 
Such sin continued in, unrepented of, cherished, would surely 
lead on to death— the Second Death. How important, 
then, it is that we keep a close watch upon the desires of 
our hearts, and remember that out of the heart, out of the 
desires, proceed not only the good, kind, loving, generous 
sentiments, conceiving and bringing forth good deeds, kind 
words and proper conduct, but also out of the heart desires 
proceed the envyings and wrong and selfish ambitions which 
lead farther and farther away from the Lord and nearer and 

R3929 : page 28 

nearer to that condition which he would ultimately declare 
worthy of the Second Death. How appropriate the words 
of the poet:— 

"I want a principle within 

Of jealous, godly fear; 
A sensibility of sin, 

A pain to feel it near; 
I want the first approach to feel 

Of pride or fond desire; 
To catch the wandering of my will, 

And quench the kindling fire." 

"THOU SHALT RULE OVER HIM" 

After cautioning Cain that sin crouched at the door of 
his heart, the Lord added, "Unto thee shall be his desire and 
thou shalt rule over him;" that is to say, Satan desired 
to have Cain, but the latter's proper course would be to resist 
the devil, to rule over him by keeping his heart in tune 
with the Lord and the recognized spirit of righteousness, 
justice, love. St. Peter found the Adversary desiring to 
have him, to sift him as wheat, to get him out of the discipleship 
of which he was one of the strongest characters and 
leader. We have all seen how nearly the Adversary succeeded 
in Peter's case as he entirely succeeded in Cain's. 
Peter had the advantage of the Lord's prayers and of his 
contact with him and of the lessons he had learned as his 
disciple, and in his case a victory resulted, even though for a 
time he was overcome. 

Is it not the same with all the Lord's true followers? 
Is not Satan desiring to have us to sift us— to hinder us 
from being garnered amongst those who shortly will 
shine forth as the Sun in the Kingdom of the Father. (Matt. 13:43.) 
Assuredly this is the case, and our experiences today 
are in full accord with the testimony of the Scriptures 
that we are now in a very trying time— subject to the special 
temptations of the Adversary, but succored of the Lord in a 
special manner through his Word, through the brethren, 
through the various helpful instrumentalities which the Lord 
has provided for this harvest time for those who look to him 
for assistance and who are willing and glad to accept those 
aids which he proffers them. Yea, we see that we are living 



in that particular time which the Scriptures designate the 
hour of temptation, which shall come upon all them that 
dwell upon the face of the whole earth.— Rev. 3:10. 

Temptations, trials, there must needs be: without these 
there would be no such thing as demonstrating or perfecting 
character, and the Lord proposes that only overcomers shall 
be joint-heirs with his Son in the Kingdom. Instead, therefore, 
of temptations being a sign of divine displeasure they 
should be regarded by us as evidences of the Lord's favor- 
that he still considers us worthy of being further proven; 
that he still has us in hand with a view to our preparation, 
chiseling, polishing, making ready for places in his glorious 
heavenly Temple. Let us learn, therefore, to rejoice in tribulation 
and, as the Apostle urges, let us also fear. (2 Cor. 7:4; 
Heb. 4:1.) Thus between the rejoicing and the fear, 
and carefulness and watchfulness and prayerfulness, we 
shall be in that attitude which will assist us in the knowing 
and doing of the good and acceptable and perfect will of 
God. 

"MY BROTHER'S KEEPER" 

How long Cain brooded over his trouble, how long it 
took for his wrong desire, his envy, to conceive and bring 
forth the sin of murder we are not told— merely the fact is 
stated that this was the bitter fruit. The Lord did not hinder 
the murder, and even dealt most generously with the 
murderer, to whose attention the matter is called by the inquiry, 
"Where is Abel, thy brother?" As the question implied 
ignorance on the Lord's part, Cain may have wondered 
to what extent the Almighty was omniscient, all-seeing, and his 
answer was in line with this. "I know not: am I my brother's 
keeper?" This question continually recurs, not only 
amongst the members of Adam's natural family but also 
amongst the brethren of the Lord's family, the New Creation. 
To what extent is one his brother's keeper? how far does 
our responsibility go? 

Let us look first at the spiritual family: Its members 
are declared to be bounden or holden one to another by the 
cords of love, by membership in the body of Christ, so that 
if one member suffer all the members suffer with it, and if 
one member be honored all the members are honored. (1 Cor. 12:26.) 
The Apostle, expatiating on the importance of 
the various members of the body, declares that even the 
humblest is necessary— that the hand may not say to the 
foot, I have no need of thee; and that as in our natural 
bodies we take the greatest care of those members which are 
least pleasing, so in the spiritual family those which are 
least attractive of themselves need our attention and sympathy 
and covering with the garment of charity more than do 
others. The new commandment which the Lord gave to his 
disciples was, "That ye love one another as I have loved 
you." We cannot love the world with that deep, intensive 
love— it is not incumbent upon us to sacrifice our own interests 
for the world; but it is made obligatory that we have 
the Lord's Spirit toward all the household of faith, so that, 



as he did, so shall we rejoice to lay down our lives for the 
brethren, serving them with our moments and our hours at 
the cost of our own self-denial. 

"EVERY MEMBER IS NECESSARY" 

According to this, the law of our Head, the terms and 
conditions of membership in his body, we are our brothers' 
keepers: each one has a responsibility for his fellow— not 
to intrude upon him as a busybody, but to look out for his 
interests, his welfare, and to do all for that brother that he 
would have that brother do for him— yea, more than this: 
that he would lay down his life for his brother, as Christ 
loved the Church and gave himself for her. If all the Lord's 
brethren could realize this to be the divine rule governing 
the New Creation, and realize that only those who do live 
up to this rule are making their calling and election sure, 
what an awakening of zeal amongst the brethren for the 
service one of another would result, and what a blessing 
would come to all of the Lord's dear flock! Let us take 
heed that no man take our crown— that we be found possessors 
of the Master's Spirit toward the fellow members, 
and thus be accounted worthy of a share in the Kingdom 
class. 

As for the world: We are to remember that while there is 
a wide gulf between the natural man and the New Creature 

R3929 : page 29 

in Christ, nevertheless according to the flesh there is a brotherhood 

which we are not to disdain or overlook. The entire 

groaning creation are our brethren according to the flesh, 

and have claims upon us that the Lord would have us recognize. 

They are our "neighbors," and according even to 

the Jewish letter of the Law the neighbor must be loved 

as one's self— his interests are to be safeguarded as we 

would guard our own interests. Hence, in the whole world 

of mankind, this question, "Am I my brother's keeper?" 

would properly be answered, Yes, each one should be on the 

lookout for the interests, the welfare of others as well as his 

own, and so doing would not be disposed to override or cheat 

his neighbor, but, according to the Golden Rule, to do unto 

others as he would have them do to him. 

We cannot hope that the world, blinded by selfishness, 
and devoting all the energies of life along selfish lines and 
ambitious channels— we are not to expect the world to appreciate 
this high standard of the divine Law. But surely 
all who are New Creatures in Christ should appreciate it, 
and in their dealings with the world, therefore, should not 
only be just, but more— loving and generous and kind, unwilling 
to injure but willing to bless. Thus the Lord's people 
are to be peculiar people in that they unselfishly will 
seek to be their brother's keepers, looking out for the interests 
of others as well as for their own interests. Not necessarily 

R3930 : page 29 



laying down their lives for their neighbors, but ready to do 
good unto all men as they have opportunity, especially to the 
household of faith.— Gal. 6:10. 

THE VOICE OF ABEL'S BLOOD 

Putting the matter in figurative language, the Lord declared 
to Cain that Abel's blood cried from the ground for 
vengeance. It was another way of telling Cain that the 
Lord was omniscient, knew everything that transpired, knew 
that his brother had died at his hand. In this figurative 
sense all sin cries for the punishment of the wrong-doer— it 
is the voice of justice. The Apostle Paul, referring to the 
death of our Lord, who similarly was murdered by his 
brethren, and whose blood might be expected to cry out 
against them, against the whole world of mankind, tells us 
that, instead of crying for vengeance, our Lord's blood- 
shed as a sacrifice on our behalf, as an atonement for our 
sins— cries out not for justice but for mercy! O, how gracious 
that our dear Redeemer, laid not the sin to the charge 
of those who crucified him and despitefully used him, but 
that in his generosity he is willing to make an appropriation 
of his precious blood on behalf of the sinners, to effect 
their reconciliation to God by the blood of the cross— by his 
death on the cross. 

The Apostle's words are that the blood of Jesus speaketh 
better things for us than the blood of Abel. (Heb. 12:24.) 
Let us not forget that blood stands for or represents 
something higher than itself— that when we speak of 
the blood of Christ we are not referring merely to that which 
coursed his veins and arteries and which flowed from his 
wounded side, but we are speaking of that which the blood 
represents, namely, the life: as the Lord said, "The life is 
the blood." Hence, whenever the shedding of blood is referred 
to, the giving up of life, the death, is the main 
thought— thus the passage, "We are not redeemed with corruptible 
things such as silver and gold, but with the precious 
blood of Christ," signifies that we are redeemed with the incorruptible 
life of Christ— the life which was not under penalty, 
not forfeited, not condemned, but approved, and which 
was yielded up as a sacrifice, a corresponding price, a ransom, 
for the forfeited life of Adam and his race. 

The curse of God was upon Cain, the murderer— divine 
condemnation rested upon him; he was cut off from communion 
with God, previously enjoyed, and according to his 
own language felt his condemnation and outcast condition 
severely. The Lord declares through the Apostle that no 
murderer hath eternal life. This signifies that anyone having 
the spirit of murder in his heart is unfit for eternal 
life, could not, according to divine arrangement, be granted 
that great boon or blessing— he himself must die, because 
unfit for life. This does not mean that there will be no hope 
for Cain in the future: we know not to what extent he may 
have repented of his crime before he died. But we are sure 
that he, as well as all mankind, not only will receive a just 



recompense or punishment for their sins, but also secure a 
measure of the blessing which God has provided for every 
member of the race through the dear Redeemer, who bought 
us with the precious blood. 

On the other hand, for one of the Lord's consecrated 
ones, begotten of the Spirit, to commit murder intentionally, 
willingly, in the first degree, would undoubtedly mean his 
Second Death; because it would signify that the spirit of 
love, the Spirit of God, must have entirely perished in his 
heart ere such a deed could be deliberately and intentionally 
committed. We would have no hope for such an one. 
More than this, for wilful and deliberate hatred toward a 
brother to be engendered in the heart would seem to mean 
the perishing of the spirit of love there, and if so would 
mean the Second Death. However, because of the weaknesses 
of the flesh it would be very unsafe for any of us to 
attempt to judge closely upon this point. But it would be well 
indeed that we should be fearful along these lines, as the Apostle 
suggests, "Let us fear, lest a promise being left us of entering 
into his rest any of us should seem to come short of it." 
(Heb. 4: 1 .) Let us fear, therefore, any approximation of a 
feeling of hatred, anger or malice against a brother in the 
Lord or against anybody. Let us strive more and more that 
the new mind shall control positively in our thoughts and 
intentions, and so far as possible in our outward deportment. 



R3930 : page 29 

SOME INTERESTING LETTERS 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

There are three churches quite close to us, Free 
Methodists, United Brethren, and Methodist Episcopal. 
We were not here very long before they found out that 
Bro. Wagner knew something about the Bible, and the 
Free Methodists came and asked him to come to Sunday 
School and teach their Bible class. He told them 
if they would let him teach the way he understood the 
Bible he would teach, and that he would not teach anything 
or accept anything without a direct proof from 
the Bible. "Yes," they said, "he could teach that way," 
and he has taught it that way ever since. While some 
did not altogether agree with what he taught they could 
not find anything to disprove it and had to let it go. 

R3930 : page 30 

A short time after he started teaching there the United 
Brethren asked him to take their Bible Class also, because 
they heard he was so "wonderful" on the Bible, 
and as their school was in the afternoon and the other 
in the morning he could do it. He accepted on the 
same terms as with the Free Methodists. One of the 
class leaders of the M.E. Church heard so much that 



he came to our house to investigate, and Brother Wagner 
gave him a brief outline of God's plan. We gave him 
some tracts and he soon came back to hear more and 
get more to read. We gave him Vol. I. in "Scripture 
Studies," and he told us on Sunday night he wanted us 
to send for the TOWER, Diaglott and a set of the "Studies. 
Last Sunday, when he got his quarterly to look 
at the lesson he said the explanation was too "rank," 
and he would not go to Sunday School at all, as he 
said he did not have enough of the Truth to teach yet 
and would not teach error. 

The Free Methodist minister said Sunday before 
last that he thought this was not suitable doctrine to 
teach in the Sunday School, which this M.E. class 
leader found out, and immediately came to ask Bro. 
Wagner if he would take charge of a Bible class if he 
started one, and teach the Truth. Bro. Wagner consented 
and he arranged one for last Sunday night. 
His brother class leader became alarmed and decided 
to come also and show his brother his foolishness, but 
after the meeting he came humbly forward and shook 
hands with Brother Wagner and said he had never 
heard anything like it and begged for permission to 
come again. There were fourteen at the meeting with 
their Bibles and all thoroughly interested. The interested 
had not all been notified, as the time was too 
short, and we expect many more next Saturday night 
at our house. The membership of either of these 
churches does not exceed twenty, so you see there is a 
good percentage interested in the Truth. 

Your sister in his name, S. M. W.,~ Pa. 



page 30 

MY DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

As such I am indeed glad to address you. I am a 
stranger to you in the flesh, but am of "the household 
of faith." You have not the time to listen to my experience, 
for it is but one of many that you have heard 
and of which I trust there shall be many others. Yet 
it differs in many particulars. For perhaps nine years 
I had been seeking the truth; had seen it as a land 
afar off. I came up closer to it, however, after coming 
to this place in May, 1905, where I have been as pastor 
of a Baptist Church. Before coming here for a number 
of years I had been a student of the subject of the 
Lord's return, and before coming here I had come upon 
the first volume of MILLENNIAL DAWN. I did not get 
interested in it until some time about September or 
October of last year, when a Pilgrim brother came and 
I happened in, as it seemed, being attracted by the advertisement 
of the meeting. There the seed was sown. 
I had come so far that I have concluded to resign my 
pastorate here. I have done it really, though unknown 



to all the Church, and have been for nearly two months 
working at my old trade, carpentering, and on the 
Lord's day ministering in the Truth to the people here. 
Circumstances are such that I cannot locate elsewhere 
until about the middle of November, so I shall resign 
here to take effect then. I am really out of Babylon, 
and the satisfaction is simply indescribable. I am 
glad to have obeyed the Master's voice. 
Yours in the common faith, , Pa. 



R3930 : page 30 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

The Pilgrim service continues a source of great 
blessing to me, and where a request for Pilgrim visits 
was sent to the TOWER office I believe the visits are 
especially refreshing to the friends of the Truth in that 
locality. There, too, the spirit of love and good fellowship 
is more pronounced, and generally there is manifest 
a greater degree of zeal for the service of the 
Truth. Indeed, how could we expect it to be otherwise? 
And where Pilgrim visits are requested I find 
more hungering for truth, and of these it is written, 
"They shall be filled." They seem to show more the 
disposition of self-sacrifice and less inclination to criticize 
each other. The characteristic of contentment 
dominates more largely, while at the same time they 
deplore their inability to do a great deal more for the 
Master. 

Some are disposed to think their accommodations 
for entertaining a Pilgrim are not good enough. But I 
assure them to the contrary, for so often they are much 
better than we deserve. Our service is so easy, so 
devoid of weariness of mind and body, and withal so 
blessed and spiritually uplifting that anything the dear 
friends have to offer is good enough for us, and "our 
cup runneth over" with joy continually. 

There seems one thing, however, that needs to be 
corrected, so far as my observation goes, and that is 
the bringing to the meetings of small children, who 
cry and fret and talk aloud and thus disturb others 
who are present, as well as distract the attention of the 
speaker, so that he cannot do justice to the occasion. 
Many of the friends tell me they cannot get from the 
service the good they would like to have gotten, because 
some infant or small child present drew their attention 
despite their effort to keep the mind on what the Pilgrim 
was saying. And I find, too, that the fretful 
child impairs the service in that the speaker's attention 
is drawn from his subject, and causes more or less 
of rambling talk and disconnected sentences, and an 
extra effort and weariness. 

R3931 : page 30 



While personally I have not been troubled much in 
this respect, the friends tell me of many instances 
where the service of other Pilgrims (and in one instance 
your own talk) was spoiled by a fretful child. 

Wherever I go, dear Brother, I hear expressions of 
sympathy for yourself and deep appreciation of your 
work and the Truth in general. I think the Church is 
drawing together more and more closely in bonds of 
love and Christian unity. 

Faithfully in Christ, your brother, 

J. A. BOHNET,-Pilgrim. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

Knowing that you would be specially interested in 
having a more particular account of the condition of 
the harvest work in the Maritime Provinces than could 
be possible in our reports, I have thought that a letter 
to this end would be acceptable. 

One of the most significant things noted, as contrasted 
with last visit, was that there seemed to be a 

R3931 : page 31 

greater desire to look into what, to many there, seems 

to be a "new doctrine." This was manifested in an increased 

attendance of Church members at the different 

meetings, who had been reading to some extent the 

harvest literature. The meetings were held in Presbyterian, 

Baptist, Unitarian, Disciple, and MacDonalite 

churches; also, in two instances, in Y.M.C.A. halls. 

In H we had quite an interesting time. The 

friends secured a Disciple Church for the meetings. 
The minister and some of the members of the committee 
having in charge the leasing of the Church were 
out of town when the permission was granted, but on 
the evening of the first meeting all the members of the 
committee were present. 

I spoke on God's Plan of Salvation and was listened 
to very attentively, and before the close of the 
meeting announced another meeting for the next evening. 
After the close of the meeting I noticed several 
of the audience, who I afterwards learned comprised 
the committee, gathered together and conversing very 
earnestly. Then I saw them call the brother who had 
secured the hall, and begin conversation with him in a 
very animated manner. I scented trouble of some kind, 
and when it seemed opportune approached them and 
enquired what was the matter. One of the committee 
replied that in the absence of their minister they did 
not care to assume the responsibility of allowing us to 
hold another meeting, and also said that if all the members 
of the committee had been at home when the application 
was made we would not have been permitted to 



have the use of the Church at all. I told them that the 
meeting had been announced for the next night, and 
that I did not see who could assume the responsibility 
if they did not. Then one of the committee asked why 
we had come to them to secure their Church— why we 
had not secured one of the several halls in the city. I 
answered that I had nothing to do with that matter, 
but that the reason doubtless was because our brethren 
were aware of the fact that the Disciple Church professed 
to be an unsectarian Church, having no creed, 
and held that all who believed in Christ as Savior and 
Lord were their brethren in Christ; and as their 
Church was the only Church of this character in the 
city, it was quite natural for them to ask this favor of 
their brethren in the cause of Christ. This had the 
effect of silencing the brother, and appealed to the 
"Disciple pride" of the others. 

I then said that we recognized the peculiar circumstances 
under which they were placed and that possibly 
under similar circumstances we might act as they 
were doing, and on this account, to avoid getting them 
into difficulty, we would relieve them of any responsibility 
by giving up the use of the Church and would 
try to secure another place. 

Just at this point in the conversation a man who 
had been listening very attentively stepped up and 
said, "I think you are all wasting time. The meeting 
has been given out for tomorrow night, and there were 
quite a number of strangers here who will come tomorrow 
expecting to hear this man, and I can't see any 
reason why this committee can't let the meeting be 
held as announced. I am not a member of the committee, 
but I am of the Church, and have a voice in the 
matter. I myself was interested in the discourse, and 
I want to hear the brother to a finish." This had an 
instantaneous effect upon the committee, who then, 
after a few moments consultation, decided to let us 
have the Church for the next evening. 

On leaving the building, a sister, who was a member 
of the Disciple congregation, approached me and 
said, "The committee did not tell you what their chief 
objection was to your having the use of the Church. 
The fact is that you are under the bann. It is reported 
that some time ago you spoke at a Disciple Church at 

P , and were instrumental in splitting the Church 

there." I told her I did speak in P two years ago, 

but that it was in a private house, and that it was at 

the invitation of the President of the Women's Foreign 

Mission Society who had previously been reading the 

literature of the W.T.B. Society and had, three 

months before the time of my visit, withdrawn from 

the Disciple Church. Further, that the minister of the 

Disciple Church was present with several of his congregation, 

but that they came of their own free will. 

I told her further that our work, which had been going 

on for years, did not have the object of establishing a 



new sect, but simply to bring the truth within the reach 
of all lovers of Christ and his Word. 

The next evening quite a number of the Disciple 
Church were present at the meeting, including all the 
committee. We spoke on "How to Study the Bible Intelligently," 
giving an outline of the ages, dispensations, 
etc. The interest was much deeper than on the 
previous evening, and I have learned since that it had 
the effect of awakening an inquiry concerning what was 
to become of those who have never had a full opportunity 
to be saved in the present life. The literature was 
taken quite freely and is being read. 

At our visit to P after this we found a Methodist 

minister who had been obliged to give up his labors in 
his Church on account of physical weakness, and had 
on this account found time to read the DAWN series and 
had come into the Truth. He attended all the meetings, 
and expressed a desire, if his health was restored 
to him, to engage in some active part of the harvest 
work— the colporteur work preferably. 

In S we found a Presbyterian minister who had 

read all the DAWNS, and was so favorable to the teaching 
that he allowed us to have the use of his chapel for 
a public meeting. We had a very good hearing, and 
trust the results to the Lord's keeping. 

At S J at one of the meetings six ministers 

were present. They doubtless were stirred to look after 
their flocks. 

We found the friends in all the places were more 
zealous in their efforts to bring the Truth within the 
reach of the people, and had advertised the public 
meetings quite extensively. They were all very demonstrative 
in expressing their appreciation of the efforts of 
yourself in ministering to their spiritual needs; they 
also expressed their deep sympathy for you in your 
trials, and desired that we convey to you an expression 
of their complete confidence and full sympathy for you 
in all your work and labor of love. There is a great 
desire in all the different places to see and hear you. 
It would be of great help to the furtherance of the harvest 
message. 

With Christian love to you and all the dear friends, 
I am, as ever, yours in Christ, 

R. E. STREETER.-Pilgrim. 



page 33 



SEMI-MONTHLY 
VOL. XXVIII FEBRUARY 1 No. 3 
A.D. 1907--A.M. 6035 



CONTENTS 

"Love as Brethren" 35 

Berean Bible Studies on the Tabernacle 37 

The Lesson of the Flood 37 

The Cause of the Flood 39 

Giants in These Days Also 40 

"The Gifts and Callings of God" 41 

The Divine Promise 42 

"This is the Way; Walk Ye in It" 42 

"Which Seed is Christ" 43 

Sure to Both the Seeds 44 

The Danger of Covetousness 45 

"Lead Us Not Into Temptation" 46 

How Readest Thou?— Carefully? 47 

page 34 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-24 EVERSHOLT ST., LONDON, N.W. 
GERMAN BRANCH-MIRKER STR., 45, ELBERFELD. 
AUSTRALASIAN BRANCH-EQUITABLE BLDG., COLLINS ST., MELBOURNE 

PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 

TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR AS FOLLOWS:- 

All Bible Students who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity or 
adversity, are unable to pay for this Journal, will be supplied FREE if 
they send a Postal Card each June stating their case and requesting its 
continuance. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on 
our list continually and in touch with the Studies, etc. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



THIS JOURNAL IS PUBLISHED IN THE 

FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, DANISH AND ITALIAN LANGUAGES. 

SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



R3931 : page 34 

OUR ACTIVE COLPORTEUR LIST 



We like to think of all the friends of the Truth as being 
Colporteurs at heart, even though not privileged to engage actively 
in this blessed harvest work which the Lord has so 
greatly favored. Our Colporteur list has grown to over five 
hundred, but many of these dear friends, who originally 
started in with the intention of giving all or a considerable 
portion of their time, have met with disappointments and been 
unable to fulfil the desires of their hearts in this regard. We 
appreciate the love and interest of all these, but for practical 
purposes it has become necessary for us to trim down this list, 
so that it will contain only the Active Colporteurs. This does 
not signify that the others may not do all they can, but merely 
means that those who are not active in the service, but who 
do what they can, will all be treated alike and served to the 
extent of our ability, but not by the regular Colporteur Department 
which handles the letters and fills the orders of the 
active workers. 

Hereafter those recognized as active Colporteurs will be 
expected (1) to have definite written assignments of territory 
before sending in orders; (2) they will be expected to send 
orders for never less than twenty-five volumes of the Scripture 
Studies or DAWNS in one order, and this order on regular order 
blanks, supplied free from this office; (3) they will be expected 
to make regular reports the first and fifteenth of each month 

R3932 : page 34 

on report blanks, also supplied free from this office; (4) all such 

are requested to use the printed Colporteur envelopes supplied 

free, or if temporarily out of these to use another envelope, 

writing on the lower left corner the words, "Colporteur Department.' 

Others than active Colporteurs will please not use 

these envelopes. Those selling DAWNS or STUDIES at odd 

times, purchasing not over 25 books at a time by mail or express 

at rates usually given on page 2 of TOWER need no 

assignment and will be hereafter known as "Sharp Shooters." 

We are sure that all the dear friends will be glad to assist 
in any manner, and a compliance with these suggestions will 
be one way of assisting the office force, which, with the increase 
of orders, is kept exceedingly busy. The prospects for 
new Colporteurs and for a very widely extended field of service 
for the present year encourages us greatly, and we bid them all 
God speed!— all the dear co-laborers looking shortly for the reward 
and the "Well done" of our Redeemer. 

THE PASSOVER MEMORIAL, MARCH 28, 1907 



The date for the observance of the Memorial of our Lord's 
"Last Supper" this year will be Thursday night (after 6 p.m.) 
March 28th. We trust that our readers in Asia, Africa, Australia 
and Alaska will get this notice in season and celebrate in 
unison with us the great event which sealed the Abrahamic or 
"Everlasting Covenant" for us, and will seal the "New Covenant" 
for Israel and the whole world, shortly. 

page 34 

HEAVENLY MANNA--NEW EDITION 



Our supply of "Heavenly Manna" (cloth) is exhausted, 
and we trust that every copy of the first edition of 20,000 is doing 
good service every day. We still have nearly 100 in leather 
binding— 60 cents, postpaid. We propose a new edition with 
twice as many leaves (alternately blank for autographs and 
birth-dates). Due notice of these will appear in these columns; 
but do not expect them for at least six months. 

HYMNS OF DAWN WITH MUSIC 



Our readers have for years inquired for this book. We 
now have it for you in handsome cloth binding and at cost 
price. It is the best and the cheapest hymn book in the world 
at 35 cents per copy, postpaid, and contains 333 of the choicest 
hymns of all ages. By express, collect, 25c each, in any quantity. 



R3932 : page 35 

"LOVE AS BRETHREN" 

-1 PETER 3:8- 

LOVE for the brethren is set forth in the Scriptures 
as one of the indisputable evidences of our 
having attained membership in the body of 
Christ. This love may be of varying degrees, but it 
must be ours in some degree if we are the Lord's, for "if 
any man have not the Spirit of Christ he is none of his." 
(Rom. 8:9.) But this flame of sacred love for the brethren 
kindled in our hearts is not sufficient; it must blaze, 
burn, and produce in us not merely a warmth of love 
but a consuming love— love which will not only overlook 
various weaknesses and imperfections in the brotherhood, 
and will carefully note every good quality, but 
love which is ready to lay down life on behalf of the 
brethren because they belong to Christ, because they 
are of his consecrated ones, however much they may 



need to strive against sin and weaknesses. 

As we have previously pointed out, the Gospel 
message fails to attract many of the noblest, least-fallen 
members of the race, because they have a self-satisfied 
feeling, and do not realize their need of a 
Savior, but think of him as necessary only to the more 
degraded of the race. On the contrary, the less known, 
more depraved, realizing to some extent their miserable 
condition, are more likely than the others to respond to 
the invitation, "Come unto me, all ye that labor and are 
heavy laden, and I will give you rest." The sin-sick 
and heavy laden, therefore, constitute the majority of 
true believers. And in harmony with this we have the 
words of the Scripture that not many wise, not many 
noble, not many learned, not many great according to 
the flesh have been called of God to the privileges of his 
Church, the elect class. Consequently when any of the 
more noble minded or better educated or more talented 
accept the Lord's grace, it becomes somewhat of a trial 
to them to find amongst those whom they must recognize 
as brethren (because of faith in Christ and desire 
for the higher things) some of the ignoble, whose company 
and fellowship according to the flesh they would 
have scorned. This is another reason why not many 
great, wise, learned and noble will not make their calling 
and election sure— many such will allow their fleshly 
instincts to govern, and repudiating the humblest 
member of the body of Christ they are to that extent 
repudiating the Head, who has accepted that member, 
and who demands of all who would be his members 
that they shall love one another as he loved them. 

True, the Lord does not say that we should love all 
the brethren with the same degree or intensity of love: 
on the contrary, he showed by his own conduct that we 
may indeed more highly esteem those who have most 
of his Spirit, those whose hearts are most in accord 
with the divine will. Thus our Lord, while he loved 
all of his disciples, had some special favorites, Peter, 
James and John. His special love for these was doubtless 
because of their special interest and zeal for him 
and for the cause he served. So, therefore, may we, 
followers in the footsteps of Jesus, have special love 
for all who are specially zealous and true hearted. But 
this love ignores wealth, education, earthly standing- 
ignores the flesh and takes cognizance of the spirit, the 
will, the heart. 

Tested by this love for the brethren, many who had 
a loving respect for the Lord as their Redeemer have 
apparently hindered their own spiritual development, 
slackened in their race for the prize— running the risk 
of losing the great reward because of their failure to 
come up to this divine requirement, "Love as brethren." 
The proper course for all such is to think of the matter 
soberly from the Scriptural standpoint, and to decide 
that the humility requisite to an acceptance of some of 
the naturally less noble is undoubtedly a necessary 



element of character for them to develop. Amongst 
the fruits of the Spirit the Apostle names meekness. 
The unmeek, the proud, are not in the condition of 
heart for the Kingdom; and the higher stations of life, 
intellectually, morally and socially, are unfavorable to 
meekness, humility and long suffering with the weaknesses 
and frailties of others. We see, then, that while 

R3932 : page 36 

the weaker brethren, the naturally more impaired, have 
more to struggle against, more to overcome in one 
sense of the word, the others of more noble birth and 
talents have a harder battle along other lines. Let 
both classes be encouraged, for although the lessons 
they must learn are considerably different, the results 
to be obtained are the same, and the instructor, the 
great Teacher, is the same. He is able to assist the 
ignoble to gradually overcome their natural meanness 
and depravity, and to war more and more a good warfare 
in his name and by his assistance; and he is likewise 
able to assist the more noble minded to exercise 
patience, sympathy, toward the less reputable. They 
have an illustration in himself: he who was rich in 
every sense of the word and beyond all compare, perfect 
in every element of character, talented, noble— he 
for our sakes became poor, he humbled himself on our 
behalf, he took the bondman's place, he suffered in 
our room and stead, he died the just for the unjust. 
He has therefore set us an example that we may walk 
in his steps, and the more nobility we may have naturally 
the more readily we shall be able to do this, and to 
appreciate and exercise the fruits of the Spirit, and 
grow up more and more in accord, in sympathy, in 
likeness to him. 

"LOVE YOUR ENEMIES" 

There is a difference between the injunction to love 
as brethren and to lay down our lives for the brethren. 
Whatever we may do for any member of the body of 
Christ, for any consecrated believer, the Lord tells us 
he will esteem as though it were done unto him. Hence 
as it would be our duty and our privilege and our joy 
to lay down our lives in the service of the Lord, we 
must attain to such a love for the brethren, because 
they are his, that we will delight to lay down our lives 
for them as a means of demonstrating to the Lord our 
loyalty to him and his cause. This does not necessarily 
mean the laying down of physical strength and 
health and life in the physical services and ministries 
to the brethren, though these may be and are in many 
instances very profitable. It is not according to the 
flesh that the Lord's followers are brethren but according 
to the spirit, and hence the injunction to lay down 
our lives for the brethren would more particularly signify 



the laying down of our physical health or strength, 
knowledge, talents and means in the service of the 
spiritual interests of the Lord's people. As for instance, 
in the preaching of the Truth, if there be sacrifices 
or self-denials, loss of strength, etc., in connection 
with this service, it is the laying down of that much of 
one's life for the brethren, for the fellow-members of 
the body of Christ. 
These brethren for whom we are to lay down our 

R3933 : page 36 

lives are not merely those who are with us in fellowship 
of spirit, in the enjoyment of Present Truth. Perhaps 
we may have fewer opportunities for laying down our 
lives for such than for other brethren. For instance, 
there are brethren, true believers in the Lord, truly 
consecrated to him, who are yet in Babylon— in bondage, 
in darkness. These especially need that we 
should devote some of our time or influence or means 
for their aid, for their deliverance. True, the Lord 
himself could deliver them, because all things are in his 
power, including all the gold and silver and the cattle 
upon a thousand hills. But he has graciously left 
opportunities for us, that we may use the time, talents 
and means put within our control and which we have 
consecrated to his service. How much it would be to 
our disadvantage were we so situated that we had no 
opportunities for exercising these talents in the service 
of our King; how much we would lose of the joys of the 
service and sacrifice; how much we would miss of the 
spiritual exercise and the growth which this exercise 
assures. God, therefore, has left open before us doors 
of opportunity for service to the brethren, and the degree 
of our love for the brethren is measured in his 
sight by the zeal with which we endeavor to use the 
talents in our control. Let this thought of our love, 
zeal and devotion for the brethren, which testify to the 
Lord our love and zeal for himself nerve us to greater 
energy and faithfulness in his joyful service. 

We remarked above that loving as brethren is a 
different matter. As we grow in grace and knowledge 
—as the love that is of God, that is inspired by his 
Spirit, grows in our hearts and fills us, being "shed 
abroad in our hearts" (Rom. 5:5)— we are led to still 
wider love— beyond the household of faith, for whom 
we delight to lay down our lives. We learn to love 
all mankind, yea, even those who misunderstand us 
and are therefore our enemies— we learn to love all 
these as brethren. Not as brethren in Christ— that is 
a very special, very dear relationship— but we learn to 
love them as brethren of the one family of Adam, redeemed 
by Jesus and hence by purchase the family of 
the second Adam. 

As we grow in grace and knowledge we are able 
more clearly day by day, year by year, to appreciate 



the fact that the whole world was born under sin and 

are children of wrath, blinded by ignorance and superstition, 

mentally and physically unbalanced through 

the fall, and really in a terrible state, as the Apostle 

declares, a "groaning creation." In proportion as we 

are able to take God's standpoint in looking at the poor, 

fallen world, we are able to sympathize with them, even 

as the Scriptures declare that God looked down and 

beheld the groans of the prisoners— prisoners of sin, in 

captivity to death, going down to the tomb. (Psa. 102:19,20.) 

We realize that they were born in sin, 

shapen in iniquity, that in sin their mothers conceived 

them— that in addition to this their associations with 

evil have all tended to drag them downward, and that, 

furthermore, Satan the great adversary, a wily foe to 

our race, is continually exerting his powers to blind 

the minds of their understanding and to misrepresent 

the divine character and plan. 

With all this before our minds, what sympathy it 
gives us for our brothers according to the flesh, sinners, 
strangers, aliens, foreigners, yet redeemed, and in 

R3933 : page 37 

God's gracious plan en route for the glorious blessings 
of the Millennial age. We say to ourselves, If God so 
loved these, if Christ died for them as well as for us, 
why should not we be very merciful, very compassionate, 
very sympathetic with them, and do all in our 
power to assist them out of darkness into God's marvellous 
light, out of the ways of sin into the ways of 
righteousness, out of bondage to Satan into the liberty 
wherewith God has made us free— the liberty of the 
sons of God, which he has promised shall be available 
to all peoples, kindreds, nations and tongues in the 
sweet by and by. 



page 37 

BEREAN BIBLE STUDIES ON THE TABERNACLE 
THE FIRST ATONEMENT-DAY SACRIFICE 
"TABERNACLE SHADOWS," CHAP. IV. 



In the references below, Z. represents this journal 
and T. stands for Tabernacle Shadows. The references 
should be given to brethren and sisters for reading 
in the classes. Free comment should be permitted 
either before or after each reading. 

FEBRUARY 10 



1. What did the Day of Atonement signify? T.49, par. 1,2. 

2. In what way was it related to all subsequent types? 

3. Who was the antitype of the Chief or High Priest in 
his relation to the under priests? T.49, par. 2. 

4. Who was the antitype of the High Priest in his relation 
to all Israel? T.49, par. 2. 

5. In this latter sense whom did Israel typify? T.49, par. 2. 

6. What period of time in the antitype is indicated in 
the consecrating of the priesthood? T.50, par. 1. 

7. What period of time is typified in the sacrifice of 
the "sin offerings"? and when do they cease? 

T.50, par. 2. 

8. When are the blessing and glory for the world under 
this glorious High Priest due to begin? T.50, 

par. 2,3. 

FEBRUARY 17 

9. Of what order of priesthood will the glorified Christ 
be? T.50, par. 2. 

10. What will be the three-fold work of the completed 
Christ? T.51, par. 1. 

1 1. Did Jesus thus offer himself to the Jewish people 
at his first Advent? and why? T.50, par. 4 and top 

of 51. 

12. What did the rejection of Jesus by the Jews and its 
consequences foreshadow in this age? 

13. What will be required of the world after the triple 
work of the Christ has been fulfilled? T.50, par. 3. 

14. What will be the consequences upon any who fail 
to measure up perfectly to all requirements? 

T.50, par. 3; Acts 3:23. 

15. What clear distinction between the human nature 
and the "new creature" is shown in these types, 

and how? Lev. 8:14; 16:11,15; T.51, par. 3; A.179, 
par. 3; B.126, par. 1,2, and 127, par. 1. 

16. Why was it necessary for our Lord to become a 
man? T.52, par. 1. 

FEBRUARY 24 

17. As Jesus gave himself as our "ransom" price, taking 
Adam's place in death, how could he ever live 

again without annulling his work as Redeemer? 
T.52, par. 2. 

18. What hope or promise did the Father set before Jesus 
as a reward for becoming man's "ransom"? 

T.52, par. 3, and top of 53. 

19. When was the death of the antitypical bullock, "the 
man, Christ Jesus," reckoned as having taken 

place? T.53, par. 2,3,4; 54, par. 1. 

20. Where was the bullock slain? and what did this 
typify? T.54, par. 3. 

21. For whom was the blood of the bullock shed? and 
what did this signify? T.55, par. 2; Lev. 16:12. 



22. Why were Aaron and his sons washed before being 
clothed with the holy garments or entering the 
"Holy"? Ex. 29:4-9; Lev. 16:4. 

23. Did the High Priest wear the same garments during 
the Day of Atonement as he wore at the time 

of his consecration to the priesthood? and if not 
why not? Lev. 16:4. 

24. As the garments of glory and beauty represented 
the glorified Christ, Head and body, why did he 
wear them at the time of his consecration and 
anointing to the priesthood? See Lev. 8:7-10. 

ANS.— This shows how God foreknew and had 
foreordained the entire office and work of the antitypical 
priest, before Jesus was anointed. Those robes 
represented the high priest's future work. 

MARCH 3 

25. Why did Aaron make the "sin offering" "for himself" 
as well as for all "the members of his house"? 

and what did this typify? T.55, par. 2. 

26. What was the typical significance of the High 
Priest's filling his hands with "sweet incense," 

and taking it with the blood into the "Holy" and 
offering it upon the "golden altar"? T.55, par. 2. 

27. What was the meaning of the censer of burning 
coals upon which the incense was crumbled? 

T.55, par. 2. 

28. What was typified by the cloud of smoke therefrom 
that penetrated beyond the "vail" into the "Most 
Holy"? T.55, par. 2. 

29. Why must Aaron tarry for a time in the "Holy" before 
proceeding with the blood of the bullock into 

the "Most Holy"? T.56, par. 1,2. 



R3933 : page 37 

THE LESSON OF THE FLOOD 

-GENESIS 8:1-16.-FEBRUARY 3.- 

Golden Text:— "The salvation of the 
righteous is of the Lord."— Psa. 37:39. 

BEFORE seeking the lesson of the flood it is appropriate 
that we inquire, Was there a flood? The 
answer of the oldest histories attest the fact that 
there was. The Bible record itself we may estimate as one 
of the oldest, if not the original, of these histories, for reliance 
cannot be placed upon the dates assigned by scientists 
to the baked clay tablets found in the ruins of Nineveh. In 
their endeavor to find something older than the Bible, from 
which they claim the Bible account was made up, they add 
thousands of years to the antiquity of the flood, and thus 



quite disagree with the Bible records, which we hold are in 
nowise invalidated by their guessing. The genealogy from 
Noah to Abraham and Moses is clearly set forth, with a 
directness not even imitated in the Babylonian records. 

The Apostle forewarns us that the wisdom of the world 
is foolishness to God, even as the wisdom and plan and revelations 

R3933 : page 38 

of God are foolishness to these "wise men." In 

their efforts to disprove the faith of Jews and Christians— 

in their endeavor to ignore all divine revelation and, if possible, 

to ignore a personal Creator, they make an attack upon 

the book of Genesis, affecting to be able to distinguish the 

interweaving of two different accounts, assuming that if this 

were true the credibility of the Scriptures would be impaired, 

and that the world would be obliged to reject the thought 

of a divinely inspired account and to accept as scientific 

truth the conjectures of these "wise men." On this subject 

we quote from Reverend Peloubet, D.D. He says:— 

"The contradictions or criticisms are from those who 
not only see two narratives, but take for granted that each 
one is the whole. The Babylonian traditions of the deluge, 
which many critics regard as the source of the Bible account, 
contain the combined narrative. There are almost 
universal traditions of a flood, with great similarity of details. 
The most important of these is the Chaldean account, 
written on clay tablets found among the ruins of Nineveh 
and now in the British Museum. There is nothing in geology 
to discredit the story of the deluge, but much to confirm 
the fact." 
On this subject another writer, LeNormant, says:— 
"The account of the deluge is a universal tradition in 
all branches of the human family, with the sole exception 
of the black race. And a tradition everywhere so exact 
and so concordant cannot possibly be referred to an imaginary 
myth. ...It must be the reminiscence of an actual 
and terrible event... near to the primitive cradle of mankind, 
and previous to the separation of the families from 
whom the principal races were to descend." 
Professor Willis J. Beecher, D.D., on this subject, says:— 
"Whatever inspiration one holds that they have must 
be predicated on the Scriptures rather than of the sources. 
It is the Scriptures in their present form that have won 
their way to universal acceptance as a great literature.... 
The literary excellence of the passage is due to the authors 
who put the Scriptures in their present form. As for the 
alleged contradictions, they do not exist." 

In reply to the criticism that one part of the account 
mentions the fact that seven pairs of clean animals were 
preserved and another verse relates that the animals went 
in two and two, Professor Beecher remarks properly that, 
"The statement that all the animals went in by pairs is entirely 
consistent with the statement that some of them went 
in by sevens." 



THE EXTENT OF THE DELUGE 

We have discussed this matter in "Scripture Studies" 
(DAWN), Vol. VI., chapter I., but here give a quotation from 
Peloubet. He says:— 

"It is the opinion of almost all, even the most conservative, 
that the deluge was limited in extent. Earth' is frequently 
used where it must mean the land, the 'region,' 
where men existed. When the account says that 'all the 
high hills that were under the whole heaven were covered' 
by the waters of the flood, and that 'every living substance 
was destroyed,' a reasonable interpretation in accordance 
with our own knowledge of the frequent use of language in 
literature— often exemplified in the Bible itself— would regard 
it as from the standpoint of the observer, and not necessarily 
imply that the total earth was covered, but only the 
regions known to man and inhabited by man. Thus, when 
the Savior said that the Queen of Sheba came from the uttermost 
parts of the earth, and the Acts report that in Jerusalem 
at Pentecost were people 'out of every nation under 
heaven,' they would not be proved untruthful nor even inexact 
if land should be found further away than Sheba or a 
tribe that was not represented at Pentecost." 

THE PREPARATION OF THE ARK 

Some skeptics have made sport of the Scriptural record 
of the size of the Ark, and again of the Bible's declaration 
that up to the time of the flood there had been no rain on 
the earth— that vegetation was sustained by a mist that 
arose. (Gen. 2:6.) The latter objection we have answered 
quite at length in "Scripture Studies" (DAWN), Vol. VI., 
chapter I., showing that the waters of the deluge up to that 

R3934 : page 38 

time had constituted a heavy film or envelope which encased 

the earth, and which by divine arrangement broke and descended 

upon the world partly in heavy rain and partly by 

a great flood from the two poles. As for the objections to 

the size and proportions of the Ark we quote the following:— 

"Modern vessels, being built for swift sailing, are much 
longer in proportion to their width than was the Ark. The Ark 
was of three stories, built of gopher wood, probably cypress, 
a resinous fir. It was made water tight by covering it with 
bitumen (asphalt), which abounded in that region as well 
as around the Dead Sea. Around it, close to the roof for 
safety, an opening for light and ventilation, one cubit high, 
ran around the four sides, interrupted by beams or poles 
supporting the roof. Rooms, literally nests or cells, were 
made in three tiers for the accommodation of the animals. 
They would strengthen the whole structure. There was a 
single door. The dimensions given of the Ark, compared 
with our large modern ships, are:— 

LENGTH WIDTH HEIGHT 



The Ark, 300 cubits, 450 ft; 50 cubits, 75 ft.; 30 cubits, 45 ft. 
"Wilhelm der Grosse," 648 " 65 " 45 " 

"Great Eastern," 680" 82.5 ft.; 58" 

"Geike writes: In the beginning of the seventeenth 
century, says J. D. Michaelis, a ship was built with 
a round hull, after the proportions given in Genesis 6, and 
it was found to the astonishment of all, that these proportions 
given in the oldest book in the world were precisely 
the most advantageous for safety and for stowage. Peter 
Jansen, a Mennonite, who lived at Hoorn in North Holland, 
was its builder; and his Ark differed from Noah's only in 
size. When launched it proved to be able to bear one-third 
more freight than other ships of the same measurement. 
The Dutch at once began to build others like it, calling them 
Noah's arks, and they ceased to be used only because they 
could not carry cannon." 

THE PERIOD OF THE FLOOD 

The very minute account of the flood seems to indicate 
that from the time Noah and his family and his sons' families 
and the beasts, birds, etc., entered the Ark and the raining 
began, until the time that the earth was totally dried, 
was a full year of 365 days. We read that Noah was 600 
years old when the flood of waters was upon the earth 
(Gen. 7:6); and again, "It came to pass in the six hundred 
and first year, in the first month and the first day of the 
month, the waters were dried up from off the earth." (Gen. 8:13.) 

R3934 : page 39 

The record seems to be that it rained for forty days 
and forty nights (Gen. 7:12), and that the great fountains of 
waters were completely ruptured, broken up (the main body 
of the flood coming to the earth from the poles), so that the 
waters continued to increase or prevail upon the earth for 
150 days after it ceased raining— a period of six months or 
more. Then not only was the rain restrained but the windows 
of heaven were stopped and the fountains of the deep. 

Gradually the waters began to assuage until on the 
seventeenth day of the seventh month the Ark rested or 
grounded upon the Ararat mountains (Gen. 8:4), the waters 
continuing to decrease for another month, when surrounding 
and lower mountains were plainly visible; and forty days 
thereafter Noah— by way of determining how greatly the 
flood had subsided— sent forth a raven and a dove, which 
flew away and returned repeatedly until the dove returned 
to him with a green olive sprig, by which he knew that the 
waters were assuaged even to the valleys, and a week later 
the dove returned not to him, indicating that habitable conditions 
prevailed in the earth. Under the direction of the 
Lord, Noah and all under his care left the Ark on the twenty-seventh 
day of the second month; and since he entered the 
Ark on the seventeenth day of the second month, this would 
apparently imply a period of one year and ten days, but 



the difference is accounted for by the fact that the time is 
measured in lunar months. 

THE CAUSE OF THE FLOOD 

As already shown (Vol. VI., chap. I.), Noah's flood was 
a result of the breaking of the last one of the great rings 
which originally surrounded the earth, after the manner 
that we now see the rings of Saturn. But the time of the 
breaking of this envelope of water causing the deluge was 
so timed by divine wisdom and foreknowledge as to meet a 
crisis in the affairs of mankind. Had God foreseen that 
Adam would not have sinned, and that subsequent events 
respecting the race would not have transpired, he doubtless 
would have predestinated that the rain of waters should 
have occurred before creating man in the earth. The crisis 
is particularly explained Scripturally by the statement, 
"The earth was corrupt before God and the earth was filled 
with violence." (Gen. 6:11.) We naturally and properly 
inquire how this could be, since God had created man in 
his own image and likeness? 

The answer Scripturally given is that the sin of disobedience 
was the start and that the blemish extended to all 
of Adam's race, of whom it is declared that they "were born 
in sin, shapen in iniquity." (Psa. 51:5.) But more than 
this, the record is that the violence caused by human deflection 
was accentuated from an outside source— the angels, 
the "sons of God," who, singing together in the morning of 
creation, had been given a supervisory work to do in respect 
to mankind. But the example of sin and degradation 
proved to be contagious, so that, as the apostles Peter and 
Jude describe, some of those angels left, abandoned, their 
first estate— their angelic estate— and assuming human 
organizations, which they had been privileged to do for the 
purpose of benefiting and assisting mankind, they misused 
those bodies and preferred to be men rather than to be 
angels, and, as the account in Genesis 6:1-5 shows, these 
angels in their assumed human bodies had improper intercourse 
with humanity.— 2 Pet. 2:4; Jude 6. 

Those "sons of God" saw the daughters of men that 
they were fair, and took them wives of all that they chose. 
As a result giants were born to them, "mighty men," "men 
of renown." The intimation is that these of illegitimate 
birth— contrary to divine arrangement and order— were far 
superior to the race of Adam, which by that time, centuries 
after the fall, were considerably degraded. The race of 
Adam were not matches at all for these giants and renowned 
ones, who both intellectually and physically were their superiors 
and ruled them ruthlessly and filled the earth with 
violence. How widespread was this corruption of the race 
by improper intercourse with the sons of God is shown by 
two statements: first, "All flesh had corrupted his way"; 
and again, "Noah only have I found perfect," not corrupted 
by these improper practices. This probably included Noah's 
family as well as himself, they being under his influence 
and direction. 



This accounts to us for the utter destruction of the human 
race. It was no longer of purely Adamic stock, as God 
had designed; it was unfit, not proper for his further use in 
connection with the divine plans, except Noah and his family. 
Nor could Noah's preaching on the subject influence 
his relatives, friends and neighbors; they were so thoroughly 
ensnared and under the influence of the nephilim (giants), 
"mighty men," that they scoffed at Noah and his work and 
his preaching righteousness instead of repenting. The 
result was their taking away in death through the flood 
and the sparing only of Noah and his family, who were "perfect 
in their generation"— not impaired, not blemished, not 
commingled with the seed of angels, but of purely Adamic 
stock— to perpetuate the human race and carry out the 
divine purpose in its creation. 

The redemption of Adam and his race by our Lord's 
sacrifice, and the securing thereby of an opportunity for 
their resurrection to perfection, eternal life, that was lost in 
Adam, in no sense of the word affects those "giants" of 
renown, for they were illegitimate. Their life came not 
through father Adam, and hence was not redeemed by Christ. 
They were an unlawful and in every way illegitimate race, 
and are hopelessly extinct. 

THE LESSON OF THE FLOOD TO US 

Our Lord Jesus calls our attention to the flood and the 
incidents connected therewith, and clearly intimates some 
parallel in the end of this Gospel age, describing which he 
says, "As it was in the days of Noah, they were eating and 
drinking, planting and building, and knew not until the 
flood came and took them all away, even thus shall it be in 
the coming [parousia] of the Son of Man." True, our Lord 
does not say that the similarity will be in the wickedness 
nor in the taking away, but merely in the knowing not of the 
time. However, he does intimate that some great catastrophe 
or calamity is to be expected in the end of this age 
which in some sense or degree will correspond to the calamity 
in the days of Noah. Turning to the Epistle of Peter 
(1 Pet. 3:20,21) we find there a reference to Noah, and the 
suggestion that Noah and his family saved in that flood typified 
or represented the Gospel Church saved in the flood or 

R3935 : page 40 

calamity which is about to overwhelm the world. This 
seems a further corroboration of our Lord's intimations and 
becomes the more impressive, especially as Peter is describing 
the incidents connected with the ending of this age and 
the inauguration of this new dispensation, just as did Jesus 
in his reference to Noah's day. Peter says that the Ark salvation 
"was a like figure whereunto baptism doth now save 
us." What is the figure? We reply that the flood of water 
which there submerged the world meant the death of the 
world, while Noah and his family although submerged in 
the same water were hidden in the Ark, and thus by the 



Ark their lives were spared. Similarly here we who are 

baptized into Christ, who become members of his body, 

enter the Ark of safety, although we are baptized into his 

death according to the flesh, are raised or saved, and on the 

other side the flood, on the other side the great calamity of 

death, in the new dispensation, in the "new earth" which 

the Scriptures describe, we shall live and be the representatives 

of God in establishing the new order of things. It is 

in harmony with this that the Scriptures represent Jesus as 

the Father of the everlasting age— the Life-Giver to all who 

will ever attain life eternal. All lost their lives through disobedience, 

through sin; our Lord Jesus paid the ransom price 

redeemed us with his own precious life, and proposes to succor, 

to give life to as many as will obey him. The whole 

period of the Millennial age is apportioned to this opportunity, 

and we who now accept of his grace are to be made 

participants with him in that glorious work— as the Bride, 

the Lamb's Wife. 

GIANTS IN THESE DAYS ALSO 

St. Peter intimates that as a flood of waters destroyed 
the human family in Noah's day, so fire will destroy in the 
end of this age. Elsewhere we have seen that the fire will 
be on a higher plane— symbolical fire or destruction— a time 
of trouble such as was not since there was a nation, in the 
which not only the heavens of religious authority and power 
shall pass away with a great commotion, a fire, but the 
earth also (the present social structure, financial, political, 
social) shall melt with fervent heat— the various elements, 
such as the labor element, the capitalistic element, the political 
element, the religious element, shall melt in the fervency 
of the heat and passion and discord of that time. 

We remember Zephaniah's description of the same great 
event when, after telling that the whole earth will be devoured 
with the fire of God's jealousy, he adds, "Then will 
I turn unto the people a pure message that they may all call 
upon the name of the Lord to serve him with one consent." 
(Zeph. 3:8,9.) Thus we are shown that the fire which shall 
devour the whole earth will not be a literal one, but the 
people will be left, though the social structure will be entirely 
consumed, and that then the Lord will give unto the people 
his message in its purity. The Sun of Righteousness shall 
arise with healing in its beams, and the whole earth shall 
be filled with the knowledge of the Lord as the waters 
cover the great deep.— Mai. 4:2; Isa. 11:9. 

It was the improper blending of spiritual and natural 
matters that brought to pass the giants of olden times, 
through whom came the violence in the earth preceding the 
cataclysm of the deluge. Is it remarkable that we find a 
correspondency in our time? Have we not giants today— 
of renown— of almost illimitable power amongst men? Are 
not these what are termed the "trusts" and financial princes 
of the earth, financially strong beyond any dream of the 
past? Is it not through the operation of these that the 
great time of trouble and violence is coming upon the world? 



Surely the picture is this precisely. 

Now, then, in what sense were these giant corporations 
and trusts and massive fortunes developed? Are they of 
heathen origin? O, no! The heathen never dreamed of 
such things, never imagined the might and power over men 
which is in the grasp of these institutions. The heathen 
themselves indeed suffer from these very giants, who are using 
the machinery of government in Germany, Great Britain, 
Belgium, France and elsewhere to training their hands to increase 
their power and their revenues by the coercion of the 
heathen peoples, as in South Africa and elsewhere, for 
filthy lucre's sake, for the increase of the strength of the 
giants. Do not these giants really manage the wars and 
rule the kingdoms of earth? Surely it is so. But if not of 
natural or heathen origin whence came these giants? We 
answer that they are the offspring of a misdirected spiritual 
energy. The Spirit of the Lord operating in his consecrated 
people has exercised an enlightening influence all around 
them, amounting to what is known as present-day civilization. 
The majority of those thus civilized are far from being 
truly, Christianized; nevertheless the enlightenment 
which they have comes, proceeds, from Christianity. 

It is this enlightenment, improperly received and improperly 
exercised in the world, that has begotten the spirit 
of selfishness, which has reached its development and maturity 
in these giants. The whole earth will shortly be in their 
power, in their grasp, unless the Lord in his providence shall 
permit some great calamity to overthrow present institutions. 
This he tells us he is about to do. He is about to 
permit the "wrath of man to praise him," to work the overthrow, 
to enkindle the fire between capital and labor, between 
the giants and those who are more and more coming 
under their pressure and control— to wage a battle to the 
death, which will really mean the perishing of our civil, 
religious, political, social, financial institutions of this present 
time, in the great time of fire and trouble— in anarchy. 

Who will be saved in this time? Who will survive 
this storm? The Word of the Lord to his consecrated followers 
is, "Watch ye, therefore, that ye may be accounted 
worthy to escape those things coming upon the earth and to 
stand before the Son of man." We are to watch that we may 
not fall into this general trouble and snare that is coming 
upon the whole world to try the hearts of men, to run deep 
the ploughshare of trouble which eventually, under the new 
dispensation, shall be a blessing, but which in the present 
time will be only a most terrible trouble. Thank God 
that there is a rainbow promised, yea, a rainbow that is seen 
by those who have the eye of faith and look upon matters 
through the Word of God. The rainbow is the divine promise 
that never more shall there be such a great calamity 
upon the world, that with this calamity will be introduced 
the Kingdom of God's dear Son, and that never again shall 
the world be left, neither to fallen man nor to demons of the 
prince of this world nor to the kingdoms of this world, but 

R3935 : page 41 



he who redeemed the world shall be its Lord and King, and 
the dominion shall not be given to other people nor left to 
others; but when Messiah shall have conquered and put 
down all insubordination, and everything contrary to the 
divine will, then the Kingdom shall be delivered to God, 
even the Father, that he may be all in all. 



R3935 : page 41 

"THE GIFTS AND CALLINGS OF GOD." 

--GENESIS 12:l-8.-FEBRUARY 10.- 

Golden Text:— "I will bless thee and make 
thy name great, and thou shalt be a blessing." 

OUR LESSON relates to the call of Abram (high 
father), whom God renamed Abraham (father of a 
multitude), although indirectly the special point of 
the lesson refers to the calling of Abraham's seed, natural 
and spiritual, and the divine bestowments to them, constituting 
them the centers of hope to the world of mankind. 
Already they have been greatly used of the Lord, but the 
Scriptures indicate that their influence and usefulness toward 
their fellow-creatures have only begun, and will reach 
their glorious culmination during the Millennium. Abraham's 
early life was spent at Ur of Chaldea, the ruins of which 
(now known by the name of Mugheir) are being excavated 
and explored. They indicate that it was once a seat of business 
activity, and Professor Sayce says that the name Abram 
(Abu-Ramu) is found on early Babylonian contract tablets, 
and some tablets recently unearthed at Ur contain part of 
the story of the deluge. Scholars are hoping to find in these 
ruins the Babylonian library, containing the original tablets 
form which the narratives of the creation and flood were 
copied for the library of Nineveh. 

We are to remember that Abraham was born two years 
after the death of Noah, and that Noah's father, Lamech, 
was born fifty-six years before Adam's death— hence the 
chain of tradition had few links up to Abraham's time, even 
though the period was nearly 2,000 years long. It is not 
strange, therefore, that the story of the creation and of the 
flood are found in the land of the Chaldeans at a date prior 
to Moses' writings— the Pentateuch. It should always be 
borne in mind that the Scriptures make no claim that Moses 
was present at the time of creation or at the time of the flood, 
nor that the writer was a witness of the other incidents recorded 
in Genesis. Moses was merely the recorder who, 
under the same divine supervision and direction that enabled 
him to be the Law-giver and commander of typical Israel, 
was used as God's amanuensis in recording for our benefit 
such events in the lives of individuals, as well as their chronologies, 
as would help to perfect the chain of previous history. 



We should remember, also, that the records of God's 
doings would be appreciated by those who are loyal to him, 
amongst whom must be included Noah and his family, and 
that Abraham, as we have seen, was directly in this line— a 
scion of one of the best branches of Noah's immediate 
posterity. 

THE REIGN OF SIN 

The indications are that idolatry and immorality had 
taken firm hold upon that branch of Noah's family (Shem) 

R3936 : page 41 

of which Abraham came, and which is recognized to this 
day as the highest and noblest branch and the one most 
favored by the Almighty. The assumption is not unreasonable, 
therefore, that Abraham's father, Terah, and his two 
elder brothers, Haran and Nahor, were considerably influenced 
by this spirit of idolatry. The record is that God first 
communicated with Abram while he resided at Ur, indicating 
the propriety of a change of residence to Canaan. Apparently 
he had considerable influence with the family, so that 
they all removed from Ur, a distance of about six hundred 
miles northward to Haran, possibly a place of their own 
establishment and named after Terah's eldest son, who died 
about that time. 

Whether it was God's revelation to Abraham or the 
death of his son Haran that influenced Terah and the family 
to remove from Ur we cannot know— possibly both incidents 
had their influence. However, it was not God's design 
to call Abraham's entire family but merely himself. 
Hence, apparently with the Lord's approval, Abraham remained 
in Haran for five years, until the death of Terah. Then, 
with his share of the property, with his wife Sarah, who was 
also his half sister, and with Lot, the son of his deceased 
brother Haran, Abraham carried out the divine arrangement 
by removing from Haran into the land of Canaan, a journey 
of about three hundred miles more. The clear intimation of 
the Scriptures is that in this matter Abraham acted in harmony 
with God's directions, along the lines of faith and 
obedience. We may infer that this obedience was rendered 
at the cost of earthly name and fame, and that Abraham 
must have been out of accord with the idolatry and licentiousness 
and immorality of his native place, as well as full 
of faith in God and fully in harmony with the divine principles 
of righteousness, and glad to be obedient to the Lord. 

ABRAHAM WAS WEALTHY AND POWERFUL 

A lesson for us here is, God first, righteousness first— 
before earthly prosperity, especially that which might be 
obtained through evil methods or other fellowship with the 
unrighteous. True, as the Apostle says, to have no dealings 
with the unrighteous might imply that we need to go out of the 
world, since unrighteousness is so prevalent; but as in Abraham's 



case the Lord's invitation to us is to separate ourselves 
as much as possible from people and circumstances and 
conditions whose tendency is downward toward sin, and to 
affiliate ourselves as much as possible with those influences 
which would help us to a closer walk with God. Although 
Abraham had no children he had a large number of persons 
under his care. These were his servants, and how numerous 
they were may be judged from the fact that a little 
later Abraham was able to muster 318 fighting men amongst 
them— the company who went after those who had taken 
Lot's property. This number of fighting men would imply 
a considerably larger number in the aggregate. It would 
appear, therefore, that Abraham was a very powerful sheik 
or prince of that time, the number of whose flocks and herds, 
requiring so many servants must have been large indeed. 
No wonder his servant was able to tell Rebecca that Abraham 

R3936 : page 42 

was very rich. Much of those riches, of course, was 
gained in Canaan, but a considerable portion of it evidently 
went with him into Canaan. 

FURTHER SEPARATION FROM IDOLATRY 

When Abraham and his company had come into the 
land of Canaan under the Lord's direction, he settled for 
awhile at Shechem, that portion subsequently known as 
Samaria. But he did not remain there long, for, as we read, 
the Canaanite was still in the land. It was doubtless to be 
free from the immoral influences of the Canaanites, and to 
have his people separated from these, that Abraham removed 
subsequently to the mountainous country near Bethel. There 
he established his home, there he reared an altar to the 
Lord and prayed. Would that each head of a family were 
thus careful to look out for the interests of those under his 
charge, that these interests should be advantageous to their 
welfare everywhere! Would that more could realize how 
indispensable it is to have an altar to the Lord in their 
home, where the prayer incense would ascend to the Father 
through the merit of the Redeemer. The true altar not having 
been provided of the Lord, Abraham and others of his 
time reared altars of stone for use in the Lord's worship. 
But we have the Golden altar of the Holy, and are permitted 
to offer thereupon, as members of the body of the great 
High Priest, under him as our Head and glorious 
representative. 

THE DIVINE PROMISE 

Whenever God calls any for any purpose he sets before 
the called ones an object, a reason, a motive, and this he 
did with Abraham. He not only called him out of his own 
country to a life of separation from sin, but he attached to 
that a great promise, which had a mighty influence upon 
the mind of Abraham and his children and all the Jewish 



nation, and since then upon all the spiritual Israelites, 
the Israelites indeed. The promise was that not only 
would Abraham receive a blessing, but that in and 
through him "all the families of the earth shall be blessed." 
This must have seemed a very obscure promise to Abraham, 
and his obedience to it was the more remarkable, so that he 
is held up to be as an example of a proper unquestioning 
faith in the word and wisdom of the Almighty— "Abraham 
believed God, and it was counted to him for righteousness." 
He might have objected that he could do more good in Ur, 
where wickedness prevailed, than he could accomplish in 
the mountains of Palestine, where he and others under his 
godly influence were comparatively separate from others of 
the world. His faith was shown in that he did not attempt 
to argue the matter with the Lord, but obeyed implicitly. 
So it is with many of God's spiritual Israel of the present 
time: the call of the Lord comes, and his direction of word 
and providence seems perhaps from our standpoint to be 
not in harmony with our anticipations respecting his will 
and the attainment of his purposes. 

And alas! how few of nominal spiritual Israel 
take Abraham's course and get Abraham's blessing. 
The obedient are only "a little flock," to whom it 
will be the Father's good pleasure to give the Kingdom 
and its great work of blessing all the families of 
the earth. Many of them are inclined to resist God's providences, 
not exercising a sufficiency of faith. Some determine 
that it is their mission to convert the world; others that 
they must engage in political reform; others that their efforts 
must be used in temperance work, thus bringing about a 
reign of righteousness. We are not disputing that all of 
these are good works, and that good motives are behind them; 
but we do claim that many of the dear friends who are zealous 
in these ways are not sufficiently attentive to the Word 
of God to be obedient to it. As a consequence, many of 
them are disappointed and numbers are sidetracked. 

How many temperance workers have become discouraged 
at the paucity of results they are able to attain! How 
many interested in foreign missions are disappointed that, 
whereas the number of heathen a century ago was estimated 
at about 600,000,000, statistics today tell us that they now 
number 1,200,000,000. We appreciate, and feel sure that God 
appreciates, their good intentions, their good endeavors; yet 
they are liable to make shipwreck of their faith because not 
heeding with sufficient care the voice of him that speaketh 
from heaven and who directs us,— 

"THIS IS THE WAY, WALK YE IN IT" 

The spiritual lesson in the story of Abraham is that 
God is pleased to honor faith, and that the experiences of 
life which he permits to come to the faithful are intended 
for their development in faith and in the graces of the holy 
Spirit, and that these all are unitedly a preparation for 
God's still greater work of the future. 

Abraham was not sent as a missionary back to Haran 



or to Ur, nor indeed to the people who surrounded him. The 
Lord's message was, "Walk thou before me and be thou perfect." 
God, of course, knew that Abraham was actually 
imperfect, tainted by the fall, and this command, therefore, 
signified that his heart should be perfect— his will, his intentions, 
and his conduct as nearly as possible in harmony 
with God's perfect will. The Apostle Paul shows us that he 
was not justified on account of any righteousness of his own, 
for he puts Abraham with the list of ancient worthies who 
were justified not by the works of the Law but by faith, and 
who, because of their faith, "had this testimony that they 
pleased God." It was his faith that led Abraham into a 
strange country away from his kindred, because he trusted 
God; it was faith that enabled him to stand various tests by 
the way, including the command to offer up his son as a 
sacrifice, his only son, in whom centered all the promises. 

It was his faith in the promise of God— that in a future 
time through his seed a reign of righteousness would be 
established in the earth— that led Abraham to look for that 
city [government] of sure foundation upon principles of 
righteousness— the heavenly city, the government or kingdom 
of God's dear Son, which is to put down all insubordination 
and bring everything into subjection to the divine 
will. The seed of Abraham, the elect Church of this Gospel 
age, is to exercise divine power in the earth and cause every 
knee to bow and every tongue to confess; and after instituting 
a reign of righteousness and blessings thereby to all the 
families of the earth, is to deliver up the Kingdom, perfect 
and complete, to God, even the Father, at the close of the 
Millennial age. This was the promise made to Abraham, 
"In thee and thy seed shall all the families of the earth be 

R3937 : page 43 

blessed." And he was willing to waive his share in the 
governmental position and power of the present time under 
present adverse conditions, that he might have some share 
in the glorious Messianic Kingdom of the future. 

"YE SHALL SEE ABRAHAM, ISAAC AND JACOB" 

When Messiah's Kingdom, itself invisible, shall establish 
a reign of righteousness in the earth, it will have amongst 
men visible representatives, "princes in the earth." (Psa. 45:16.) 
And we are assured that Abraham will be one of 
these, and will thus have to do actively, prominently, with 
the establishment of the reign of righteousness and the demonstrations 
of justice and mercy and love to the world of 
mankind, "to all the families of the earth." He is mentioned 
as one of this class in Hebrews 1 1:39,40. At one time, in 
company with others, we surmised that Abraham would have 
been placed in the heavenly Kingdom of the spiritual class; 
but a more careful consideration of the matter shows us, to the 
contrary, that he belongs to the class of ancient worthies of 
whom the Apostle declares that God has provided some better 
thing for us than for them, although their blessing shall 



be a great one. Abraham, styled the father of the faithful, 
the Redeemer says, "rejoiced to see my day: and saw it and 
was glad." (John 8:56.) By faith he saw the day of Christ, 
the Millennial day, the Kingdom well founded; by faith he 
rejoiced in the glorious reign of righteousness then to be 
established. 

But while this blessing is to come to the world through 
the seed of Abraham, the Scriptures indicate that a great 
change takes place by which the seed, the child of Abraham, 
Christ, becomes greater than Abraham, as it is written, "Instead 
of the fathers shall be the children, whom thou mayest 
make princes in all the earth." Abraham, instead of 
being viewed any longer as the father of Messiah, will be 
recognized as one of his children, perfect on the earthly 
plane and made a prince amongst men, to be used as an 
active agent of the glorified Christ in dispensing the blessings 
secured by the great redemptive sacrifice. Referring to 
the matter, our Lord points out the fact that these ancient 
worthies will be visible to men, but properly enough says 
not a word about himself and the apostles or any of the 
Bride class being visible. The statement is, "Ye shall see 
Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, and all the prophets." The fact 
that the still more notable ones in the Kingdom are not referred 
to as seen is an evidence that they will not be seen 
by the world, and this comports with the Lord's statement to 
some in his day, "Yet a little while and the world seeth me 
no more." It agrees also with the declaration, "We shall be 
like him, for we shall see him as he is." Only those 
changed from human to spirit nature, under the terms of the 
Lord's arrangement of this Gospel age, will be spirit beings, 
and they alone therefore will be able to see, discern, the 
Lord and other spirit beings. 

"WHICH SEED IS CHRIST" 

The Apostle points out to us most distinctly that the 
seed of Abraham according to the flesh was Jesus, our Lord, 
who is now of the flesh no more, having sacrificed it and received 
the begetting of the Spirit to the new nature. He is 
now the glorified one, the Christ, Abraham's Lord and David's 
Lord. And the Apostle points out to us as a great 
mystery the fact that God during this Gospel age is selecting 
from amongst mankind some to be joint-heirs with Jesus in 
the Kingdom— to be members of the seed of Abraham. 
(Eph. 3:9; Acts 15:17; Rom. 8:17.) We ask how could this 
be, since the Law Covenant was added, and since Jesus alone 
fulfilled the terms of the Law Covenant and ended all the 
hopes and prospects it contained? Surely no Jew preceded 
our Lord in the matter, and surely, since our Lord has finished 
his course, the offer of the Law Covenant is no 
longer open to a Jew, as it never was open to a Gentile. 
Where, then, is the prospect for either Jew or Gentile being 
joined with Christ, in joint-heirship with Christ in this Abrahamic 
Covenant? 

We reply that we are accepted of the Lord, as the 
"Bride of Christ," the "Lamb's Wife." The Church, composed 



in the beginning exclusively of Jews, and subsequently 
almost exclusively of Gentiles, is as a whole accepted by 
the Lord as his Bride, and by becoming joined to him and 
by union or marriage with him these, whether Jews or Gentiles, 
are made his joint-heirs. This is the Apostle's clear 
statement of the matter, for after telling that Christ is the 
seed of Abraham (Gal. 3: 16) he adds a word respecting the 
Church, his prospective Bride, saying, "If ye be Christ's then 
are ye Abraham's seed and heirs according to the promise." 
(Gal. 3:29.) In the one figure we are accepted as members 
of the Lord's body, that is, when the Apostle says, "Ye 
brethren, as Isaac was, are the children of promise;" in 
another figure we are accepted as members of his Bride. 

THE WIFE MADE READY 

As our Lord was tested in all points yet without sin, so 
all of these who are counted worthy to be his members must 
similarly stand the testing to demonstrate their character-likeness 
to him and their worthiness of a share in his glorious 
Kingdom. Hence it does not surprise us that everywhere 
throughout the Scriptures appeals are made to the 
Lord's people, not so much respecting what they shall do for 
others as what they shall do for themselves and for each 
other. We are not opposing the thought of doing good unto 
all men as we have opportunity, but emphasizing the other 
thought that we are to do good "especially to the household 
of faith." We are to "build one another up in the most 
holy faith," we are to "lay down our lives for the brethren," 
we are to "comfort one another," "edify one another." In 
a word the Bride, the Lamb's Wife, is to "make herself 
ready"— not without the Bridegroom's supervision and assistance, 
but with it and as a part of it. 

As the trial of faith was the most prominent feature of 
Abraham's testing, so it must needs be with us, his true children. 
It is the trial of your faith that is much more precious 
than gold, as the Apostle says, and he assures us that "without 
faith it is impossible to please God." For this reason it is 
required of those who now walk in the narrow way that 
they shall walk by faith and not by sight. When the time 
comes for the shining forth of the Sun of Righteousness and 
the scattering of the darkness and mystery that surrounds 
the divine character and word and the permission of evil, 
there will be plenty ready and able to walk by sight; but 
the Lord is now looking for the few, the little flock, able and 
willing to walk by faith, through evil report and good report, 

R3937 : page 44 

to trust him where they cannot trace him, and to demonstrate 

their loyalty by their faithfulness and their endurance 

even unto death. The trials of the present time upon 

the Gospel Church are with a view to testing the character, 

with a view to determining who are worthy and who are unworthy 

to constitute the seed of Abraham, which God promised 

shall ultimately bless all the families of the earth. 



SURE TO BOTH THE SEEDS 

The Apostle declares that God promised not the blessing 
through the seeds of Abraham, as of many, but "in thy 
seed," as of one. We have already seen that this one seed 
is the Christ, but we now notice that while there are not 
many seeds there is another seed beside this Messianic class 
—a seed's seed, as it were. The Apostle clearly intimates 
this in his declaration respecting the Law and the Gospel, 
that the object was "that the promise might be sure to both 
the seeds," not only that which is according to the Spirit, 
but also that which is according to the Law. This was 
intimated also in the fact that a promise was made 
to Ishmael as well as to Isaac. But the promise to Ishmael 
proceeded through Isaac, the one seed of promise. Similarly 
the Lord's blessing on all the families of the earth must proceed 
through the one seed, which is Christ— the Messianic 
seed of Abraham. 

St. Paul makes very clear that there is a double allotment 
of divine mercy and provision— one portion to the spiritual 
seed and another portion to the natural seed of Abraham. 
In Romans 11, where, after describing the rejection 
of the natural seed of Abraham and the acceptance of the 
spiritual seed, he points to the fact that at the end of this 
Gospel age the spiritual seed will be complete, and then he 
declares that the divine blessing shall go to the natural seed 
of Abraham again— to those who were once broken off, rejected 
and blinded because they were unable to realize and 
appreciate the spiritual part of the promise. For them then 
remains an earthly or natural part, and blessing will surely 
come to them, because God has already declared that "the 
Deliverer shall come out of Zion and turn away ungodliness 
from Jacob, because this is my covenant with them, when I 
shall take away their sins. As concerning the Gospel they 
were enemies for your sakes, but as touching the promises of 
God they are beloved for the fathers' sakes: for the gifts 
and callings of God are things not to be repented of."— 
Rom. 11:26-29. 

After thus most clearly specifying that God's gifts and 
callings from the remote past included the restoration of the 

R3938 : page 44 

Jews to divine favor at the close of the Gospel age, the 
Apostle proceeds to show how this blessing must come 
through the spiritual seed, saying, "They shall obtain mercy 
through your mercy"— through the mercy of the Gospel 
Church, the spiritual seed of Abraham, under Christ their 
Head. 

"ALL THE FAMILIES OF THE EARTH" 

The turning of God's blessing to Israel at the close of 
this Gospel age will include the exaltation to honorable service 
of the worthy ones of the past dispensation, Abraham, 



Isaac, Jacob and all the prophets— "princes in all the earth" 
— ensamples of perfect manhood, leaders of the people. 
But it will mean more than this, for the promise was not 
merely that through the seed of Abraham, spiritual, the natural 
seed of Abraham should be blessed, but "In thy seed 
shall all the families of the earth be blessed." Hence, as 
the Apostle points out, the Gospel Church is a "first-fruits 
unto God of his creatures" in one sense, a first-fruits on a 
spirit plane, and natural Israel will be a first-fruits of his 
creatures on an earthly plane; and in proportion to their 
willingness, under the guidance of the ancient worthies, 
they may be helpful to all the families of the earth in 
spreading knowledge of the great Messiah and the rules and 
regulations of his Kingdom, for the blessing and uplifting of 
all the families of the earth. 

Mark how the Apostle declared that if the rejection of 
Israel meant a blessing to the Gentiles, will not the regathering 
of Israel signify life from the dead to the world in 
general. (Rom. 11:15.) It surely will. In order for the 
seed of Abraham according to the flesh to realize the blessings 
God has promised, an awakening from the sleep of death 
will be necessary, since God is no respecter of persons. In 
a general sense it follows that these blessings which he has 
covenanted to give first to Israel, he is equally willing and 
able to give to all mankind in due time. O, how much of 
goodness and mercy God can crowd into a few words! How 
little Abraham was able to comprehend the lengths and 
breadths and heights and depths of divine blessing that was 
conferred upon him when the Lord said, "Because thou hast 
done this, in blessing I will bless thee and in multiplying I 
will multiply thy seed, and it shall be as the stars of heaven 
and the sand upon the seashore." 

How little Abraham could have understood that the 
seed that was to be as the stars of heaven is the spiritual 
seed, and that the seed that shall be as the sand upon the 
seashore is the natural seed. In a word, not only those of 
fleshly Israel who accepted the blessings and favors of the 
Kingdom, but humanity in general, all the families of the 
earth, will be privileged to become the seed of Abraham 
through faith and obedience, even as we of this Gospel age 
who are Gentiles have been privileged through faith and 
obedience to become joint-heirs in spiritual Israel with those 
Jews who were Israelites indeed at the first advent. 

THE GOLDEN TEXT 

God's promise to Abraham was abundantly fulfilled in 
his own person: it was fulfilled also in his natural seed and 
in his spiritual seed. Surely, of all, the latter is the most 
blessed. What more could God say to us or do for us than 
he has already said and done? Lifting us from the horrible 
pit and miry clay of sin and condemnation, he has 
placed our feet upon the Rock, Christ Jesus, and put a new 
song in our mouths. Yea, more, he has adopted us into his 
family and made us heirs of God, joint-heirs with Jesus 
Christ our Lord "to an inheritance incorruptible and undefiled, 



and that fadeth not away, reserved in heaven for you, 

who are kept by the power of God through faith unto salvation 

ready to be revealed in the last time."— 1 Pet. 1:4,5. 

The declaration is added, "I will bless them that bless 
thee, and I will curse him that curseth thee." This does not 
refer to blessing by the lips or cursing by the lips merely, 
but rather appertains to conduct— he that does good to you, 

R3938 : page 45 

who favors you, I will favor; he that injures you I will permit 
to be injured. How this has been fulfilled in the case of 
the natural Jew, even in his outcast condition! Those nations 
which have maltreated the Jew have suffered, those which have 
treated him with kindness have been more or less blessed. 
And if we apply the same test to the Spiritual Seed of Abraham, 
does it not fit even better? Has there not come a 
blessing of the Lord to all those who have either said or 
done kindness to his true people, his faithful? and has not 
blight followed upon those who in any sense of the word 
have sought to do injury to the Lord's Anointed? "If God 
be for us who can be against us?" 



R3938 : page 45 

THE DANGER OF COVETOUSNESS 

-GENESIS 13:1-13.-FEBRUARY 17.- 

Golden Text:— "Take heed and beware 
of covetousness."— Luke 12:15. 

IN OUR last lesson we left Abraham located at 
Bethel, where he had erected an altar to the Lord, 
indicating his continued reverence and his determination 
to accept the Lord's terms in all of his affairs. 
A famine in the land shortly after must have served to 
test the patriarch's faith. Was this the goodly Canaan, 
flowing with milk and honey? and would it be subject 
to drouths and famines? and if so, would it compare 
at all with the rich country of Ur of the Chaldees, 
whence he had come? Had he made a mistake? Was 
God as good as his word? Why was the famine permitted 
to be more disastrous to him than to the 
Canaanites, who were not a herding and shepherding 
people? Never questioning the Lord's wisdom, Abraham 
moved southward through the promised land and 
into Egypt, in whose rich lowlands of Goshen, well 
watered, there was usually an abundant pasturage— 
possibly, too, he made sale of some of his stock. We 
are not told that this visit to Egypt was contrary to the 
divine word or will, but the record does show that it 
brought Abraham into trying experiences. His wife 
Sarah was very beautiful, and, as he had surmised, the 



king was charmed with her and desired her for a wife. 

Here it was that Abraham showed a weakness in suggesting 

that Sarah should be known only as his sister 

—that her relationship as his wife should be kept 

secret, lest the king should kill Abraham in order to 

possess his wife. This is perhaps the only blemish we 

find in the history of Abraham. And doubtless the reproof 

administered by the human king for his lack of 

faith and lack of sincerity in the matter proved ultimately 

a great blessing to the patriarch; even as many 

a Christian has been made stronger through a realization 

of his blemishes. 

How improper it would be for us to judge Abraham 
according to that one misstep, and how equally improper 
it would be to judge Christians in so harsh a 
manner. If he who is styled "the father of the faithful" 
on one occasion exhibited so great a lack of faith, yet 
profited by his rebuke and became stronger than ever 
and more than ever the "friend of God," what may we 
not hope from others who have made some missteps? 
Not that we encourage such lapses from duty, but that 
we encourage those who have unwillingly stumbled to 
be not utterly cast down thereby, but to arise and take 
a more firm hold upon the hand of the Lord and to 
press with vigor on. Another lesson is in respect to 
the faithfulness of the Word of the Lord in portraying 
the weaknesses as well as the strong elements of 
character of those with whom it deals. In this respect 
it is not, like other histories and narratives, so 
arranged as to hide their blemishes and to disclose 
their virtues. The Bible sets forth matters very plainly, 
truthfully, in a manner that carries conviction respecting 
the honesty of the recorder and the faithfulness of 
the record. 

"NONE RIGHTEOUS; NO, NOT ONE" 

Perfection is a thing we cannot hope to find in any 
member of the human race. The Scriptures are clear 
upon this (Rom. 3: 10), and when Jesus the Messiah is 
introduced it is especially pointed out that he was distinctly 
separate from the Adamic race— that his life 
came not from Adam but from the heavenly Father, 
and that, therefore, he was "holy, harmless, undefiled, 
separate from sinners," suited to be the Redeemer of 
Adam and his race— able to give to God a ransom 
price. Respecting the race in general the poet has well 
said:— 

"There is a fleck of rust on a flawless blade, 

On the costly armour there is one; 
There's a mole on the cheek of the lovely maid, 
There are spots upon the sun." 
While God sets before us the standard of perfection, 
saying, "Walk thou before me and be thou perfect" 
(Gen. 17:1); and again, "Be ye perfect even as 
your Father which is in heaven is perfect" (Matt. 5:48), 



it is nowhere intimated that it is possible for us while 
still in the flesh to attain to such perfection. On the 
contrary it is clearly set forth in the Scriptures that 

R3939 : page 45 

the perfection that is possible to us is that of the heart, 
the mind, the will, the intent, which will insure the 
conduct of the mortal body being as nearly to this 
standard as possible. It is right that the standard before 
us should be a perfect one, even as we set for our 
children the writing lesson that is flawless, without expecting 
that they will be able to duplicate its perfection, 
but desiring that by observation of the proper 
standard they may approximate thereto better than if a 
low standard had been set. Besides, God could not set 
an imperfect standard: for him to do so would mean 
his agreement in a measure with sin. 

When judging ourselves it is proper that we keep 
this perfect standard before us, and yet— lest we should 
become utterly discouraged, and faint by the way— we 
must remember that it was because of our inability to 
do perfectly that the ransom price of our Lord was provided 
at all. When criticising the imperfections and 

R3939 : page 46 

weaknesses of others through heredity we can but imperfectly 

judge, and it is well that we use great liberality 

—indeed we are forbidden to judge the motives of 

the heart, and are assured that God alone could properly 

do this. It is when we see evil fruits, and find 

the heart, the will, taking them up and assisting and 

endorsing and not denying them, that we may be sure 

of the wickedness of the person; but even then we are 

incompetent to be judges, and are not permitted to pass 

sentence or inflict penalty, but rather to say, "The 

Lord rebuke thee."— Jude 9. 

Our lesson properly starts with the return of Abraham 
and his family, servants, flocks and herds, accompanied 
by his nephew Lot, who had separate interests. 
The record is that Abraham was very rich, literally 
heavy in cattle, in silver, and in gold. The statement 
is apparently made to indicate that the journey from 
Egypt back to Bethel was a slow one; it was referred 
to as journeys, as though there were frequent stops. 
Indeed we may well suppose that, with his faith in the 
promise of God— that his posterity would ultimately 
possess that entire land— Abraham was looking about 
with great interest upon this future inheritance, taking 
especial pleasure in the slow journeys. Returned to 
Bethel, his previous place of settlement, we find him 
again a worshiper, a sacrificer, presenting offerings to 
the Lord with prayers and thankfulness. 

Fertile though the soil of Canaan was, the flocks 
and herds were numerous and required a great deal of 



room, and no doubt it was with difficulty that they were 

well watered; and since Lot had a separate establishment 

of his own, servants, flocks, herds, etc., it is not 

to be wondered at that some strife arose between the servants 

of Abraham and those of Lot. There is a lesson for 

all the Lord's people in the generous manner in which 

Abraham dealt with this quarrel. Pointing out the 

necessity for a separation, and that it was better to 

separate than to engender quarrels between their servants, 

which might ultimately culminate in a quarrel 

between themselves, Abraham gave Lot his choice of 

land. "Blessed are the peacemakers," said our Lord, 

and surely we have evidence here that Abraham was a 

man of peace and a peacemaker. Had Abraham been 

of a selfish spirit he would have made the choice, asserting 

his right by reason of seniority and the fact 

that the Lord had brought him thither and given the 

land to him, and that Lot was merely there by his sufferance 

and as his friend anyway, and hence should be 

satisfied with whatever portion would be assigned to 

him. 

Abraham had faith in God that all things would 
work for his good, and that the land would ultimately 
be for his posterity. Thus at rest in his mind, selfishness 
found no room for lodgment, and the Lord overruled 
the matter in such a manner as to be for Abraham's 
ultimate welfare. This generous conduct on 
Abraham's part assures us that he had been similarly 
generous with his nephew before, and we remember the 
testimony of the Lord that "the liberal soul shall be 
made fat"; and again, "There is that scattereth and yet 
increaseth; and there is that withholdeth more than is 
meet, but it tendeth to poverty." (Prov. 11:24,25.) All 
of the Lord's people, according to their circumstances 
and conditions, should be generous— not merely in 
earthly matters but especially in their hearts, in their 
minds, in their thoughts, benevolent and kindly. 

LOT'S COVETOUS CHOICE 

The journey into Egypt opened the eyes of Lot to 
the luxuries of life: so now, when he attempted to make 
a choice for a home separate from that of Abraham, he 
chose that which most nearly paralleled the richness 
of Egypt, namely, the valley of the Jordan near its 
mouth, and accordingly he pitched his tent toward 
Sodom— that is to say, he established his headquarters 
at Sodom, where he would have the luxuries of town 
life while the herdsmen and shepherds cared for his 
flocks in the nearby green pastures. From a worldly 
standpoint Lot chose wisely, but from the true standpoint, 
in view of his highest interests, he made a bad 
choice. He should have considered the character of 
the people with whom he was about to dwell, their influence 
upon himself, his wife and daughters, for the 
record is that the people of Sodom were exceedingly 



wicked. Abraham would not have so chosen, but as 
he avoided Shechem and went apart by himself, so he 
would have gone again even had he chosen the Jordan 
valley for a pasturage. He would have established a 
separate village for himself and for his people, and not 
have led them into the temptations of Sodom. 

We are not to think of Lot as a bad man, who took 
delight in the wickedness of Sodom and chose it on 
that account. The Scriptures, on the contrary, designate 
him as "righteous Lot," and tell us that he was 
"sore distressed" by the lascivious life of the wicked 
Sodomites, "for that righteous man dwelling among 
them, in seeing and hearing, vexed his righteous soul 
from day to day with their unlawful deeds." (2 Pet. 2:7,8.) 
What then was the failure or wickedness of 
Lot's character that led him to choose and to remain 
in this undesirable locality to his own discomfort and 
to the injury of his family? Apparently it was his 
worldly mindedness, probably his desire to please his 
wife and his daughters. We are not intimating that he 
should have ignored the proper opinions and desires of 
his family, but, giving these legitimate weight, he 
should have decided that their moral interests were far 
above all others and should have marked his course 
accordingly. 

There are many amongst the Lord's people today 
who are much in the position of Lot. They do not in 
time take counsel of the Lord as to what they shall do, 
where they shall locate, but rather run to their own understanding 
and yield to the wishes of those over 
whom the Lord has made them the responsible caretakers. 
They love their families, but not wisely; they 
do for them, but not to their best interests and eternal 
welfare. They are vexed from day to day by the wickedness 
around them, and yet they get themselves into 
that very position deliberately and intentionally. The 
lesson is that we should follow Abraham's course and 
not Lot's— we should think more of the eternal interests 
and less of the temporalities. We are not meaning 
to say that all who would train their families properly 
must live in the country and not in the city, for circumstances 
alter cases, and with many of us the Lord's 
work and our own spiritual advancement can be better 
served in the city than in the country. What we do 
urge is that all the Lord's true people should seek first, 
primarily, the will of the Lord, his righteousness, his 
service, the things that would make for their peace and 
their everlasting blessing, rather than the things of 
time and sense and ease and worldly pleasure. 

"LEAD US NOT INTO TEMPTATION" 

Our Lord taught us to pray daily, "Abandon us not 
to temptation, but deliver us from the evil one," and 
probably the majority of the Lord's people offer the 
sense of this prayer daily. But how foolish to pray 



thus and not to watch to the same end— to escape the 

temptation! How foolish to pray for deliverance from 

a thing and then to walk deliberately into it! Yet this 

very evidently is the course of the majority of the 

Lord's people. And in proportion as this is so, in proportion 

as they do not seek first the Kingdom of God 

and his righteousness, making it the paramount issue 

R3939 : page 47 

of life, they are laying themselves open to many trials, 
some of which the Apostle intimates may pierce them 
through with many sorrows. (I Tim. 6:10.) Let us 
all resolve, that in the momentous affairs of life and in 
the little matters as well, we will decide our course not 
according to covetousness, which is sure to blind us to 
the true situation and to make us unwise as respects 
the highest interests, but let us on the contrary make 
our choice with an eye single to the glory of God and 
to the best interests of our families and of ourselves; 
and having so decided, let us with kindness and with 
love stand forth for the right after the manner of Abraham, 
and like him be generous in our avoidance of 
quarrels or in the settlement of those quarrels which 
have already arisen. 

As a rule, quarrels in the family and in the Church 
arise from selfishness and covetousness; and it is the 
privilege of those who are nearest to the Lord and most 
developed in his character-likeness to be the most generous 
in any quarrel. The majority of quarrels are 
over trifles, which can as well as not be compromised 
or yielded to; only in the case of principles may the 
Lord's people contend earnestly. And even then the 
contention should be in the spirit of love and benevolence 
—the spirit of willingness to yield to the other so 
far as personal preferences are concerned, but a firmness 
for the Word of the Lord and the principles of 
righteousness. In the Church when quarrels arise it 

R3940 : page 47 

will generally be found that the basis of the quarrel is 
a misunderstanding or selfishness, covetousness, a desire 
to be chief and greatest. It behooves each of the 
Lord's people under such circumstances to examine 
well his own heart, and to see that his own eye is good 
before he attempts to assist his brother who has the 
opposite view. Having made sure of his own generosity 
of heart, and intent and willingness to yield, and to 
see and admire and approve the good in others, he will 
then be prepared to reason with others and to help 
them to also take the proper, broad, generous view of 
the situation. 

"Let nothing be done through strife or vain glory," 
urges the Apostle— neither in the Church nor in the 
home. Love is the only motive power that should be 



recognized amongst those who have passed from death 

unto life, who are New Creatures in Christ Jesus. 

There is generally a peaceful way of settling all differences, 

and our Lord himself has set it forth, and we 

have presented the matter in detail in DAWN, Vol. VI., 

chap. VI. But, where all fails, rather than allow the 

spirit of brotherhood to fail and enmity or anger to 

prevail, it were far better that those who find themselves 

totally unable to fellowship in love together should 

seek to maintain fellowship in spirit by a separation, 

as in the case of Abraham and Lot. Nevertheless while 

this is to be approved as a final resort rather than to have 

internal strife, the necessity for such a course would 

certainly be lamentable— it would certainly imply that 

some if not all of the company were very immature 

as respects the new nature, very deficient as respects 

the powers of a peacemaker, very lacking in the brotherly 

love which can hide a multitude of faults, and 

endure much with long-suffering and patience, gentleness, 

kindness and love. 



R3940 : page 47 

HOW READEST THOU7-CAREFULLY? 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL: I am perplexed 
by what I have read in the January 1 issue of 
the TOWER, respecting the bullock sacrificed 
for the Levites and the goat for the other tribes,— p. 11. 
Am I right in understanding you to teach that Jesus 
redeemed the Church and the Church is to redeem the 
world? If so how could this be harmonized with these 
Scriptures: (1) "Jesus Christ. .tasted death for 
every man"; (2) "As all in Adam die, even so all in 
Christ shall be made alive"; (3) "He is the propitiation 
for our sins, and not for ours only, but also for the 
sins of the whole world"; (4) and that "he gave himself 
a ransom for all." 



We reply: No, dear brother, you have misread and 
misunderstood the article, considerably. You have 
never read in any of our articles or books or sermons 
the statement that the Church redeems any thing or 
any body. Quite to the contrary: we have often been 
accused of making a hobby of the ransom doctrine,— 
that our Lord Jesus "tasted death for every man," 
"gave himself a ransom for all." Surely no other writings 
ever more zealously upheld the ransom as the very 
center of Christian faith. 

The trouble, dear brother, is that you have read 
into our article things which are not in it. This over-brilliancy 
is a fault common to many of us. Do we not 



see it illustrated in all of our experiences with the Word 
of God? Which of us has not had his principal difficulty 
along this line of reading into or out of the Word 
of God enough to confuse us? We cannot, therefore, 
chide you for misreading our message. 

Reading the article in question more carefully you 
will perceive that it is not discussing the Redemption, 
but the Sin-Offering, which is a different view of the 
great transaction. Briefly examining the texts you 
quote we find: (1) They teach that the death of Christ 
is the foundation upon which the hope of every man's 
salvation rests. Whatever blessing ultimately shall 
come to every man must result from the death of Jesus, 
however others may subsequently be associated with 
him in the work. (2) The grand truth that none can 
ever have eternal life except by relationship with Jesus 
in no way hinders the Lord from using the Church as 
his assistant and agent in bringing the world into that 
blessed state. (3) Truly our Lord is already the propitiation 
for the Church's sins, because he "appeared in 
the presence of God for us." It is also true that the 
satisfaction of justice which he effects will ultimately 
be extended to all mankind at the close of this age and 
the opening of the Millennium; but this does not hinder 
our Lord from accepting the Church as "members of 
his body" and sacrificing them as such during this antitypical 
Atonement Day. (4) Our Lord truly gave 
himself "a ransom for all" eighteen centuries ago, but 
evidently he has not yet applied the benefits to any 
except "the household of faith." And meantime what 
difference does it make to the world if by the Father's 
plan our Redeemer reckons to adopt the Church as 
"members of his body" and allows these to participate 
in the sufferings of Christ in this present time and thus 
also to share coming glories? 

Summing up the matter: We, believers, have no 
personal standing before God nor share in the sacrifice 
of the sin-offering. It is only those who are "beheaded," 
and thus cease to be themselves and are accepted as 
members of the Anointed One— the Christ— only these 
share the sufferings or the glory of Christ. Jesus the 
Head does all the sacrificing. All of the under priests 
are represented in the High Priest as his members. 
They all are associated, but the Head is the recognized 
representative of all. 



page 49 

SEMI-MONTHLY 
VOL. XXVIII FEBRUARY 15 No. 4 
A.D. 1907-A.M. 6035 



CONTENTS 

Views from the Watch Tower 51 

Current Affairs in Germany 51 

"Tongues of Fire" 52 

The Doctrine of the Virgin Birth of Christ as 

an Essential 53 

News from Kingston, Jamaica 53 

Take Heed to Yourselves 53 

Harvest Work Amongst the Blacks 54 

The Oath-Bound Covenant 56 

Abraham's Prayer for Sodom 59 

Some Interesting Questions- 
Trading with our "Pounds" 63 

Love the Fulfilling of the Law 63 

page 50 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-24 EVERSHOLT ST., LONDON, N.W. 
GERMAN BRANCH-MIRKER STR., 45, ELBERFELD. 
AUSTRALASIAN BRANCH-EQUITABLE BLDG., COLLINS ST., MELBOURNE 

PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 

TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR AS FOLLOWS:- 

All Bible Students who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity or 
adversity, are unable to pay for this Journal, will be supplied FREE if 
they send a Postal Card each June stating their case and requesting its 
continuance. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on 
our list continually and in touch with the Studies, etc. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



THIS JOURNAL IS PUBLISHED IN THE 

FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, DANISH AND ITALIAN LANGUAGES. 

SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



R3942 : page 50 

SHALL WE SING UNITEDLY? 



"Many men of many minds," writes the poet; but God's 
people are striving daily to have "the mind of Christ" and to 
"all mind the same things." We commend this same course 
in respect to our hymns. When we meet in One-Day Conventions 
and General Conventions let us be able to sing unitedly. 
We now have, prepared at considerable trouble and expense, 
two hymn books with music: one of these, Hymns of Dawn, 
containing beyond all dispute 333 of the best of all hymns of all 
denominations, is supplied in cloth binding, 35 cents, postpaid, 
about one-fourth the usual price; the other is a choice collection 
of 54 new hymns, Zion's Glad Songs, at 5 cents, postpaid. 
Are not these enough? Do we know them all so as to sing 
them well? Each one, of course, has the liberty to buy and to 
sing as he may please, but is it expedient to distract with too 
great variety? We incline to think not; and hence keep in 
stock and supply only the above described. 

page 50 

EXTRA COPIES OF MONDAY'S "DISPATCH" 



We are privileged to send extra copies of Monday's Pittsburg 
Dispatch, containing Pastor Russell's sermons, to anyone 
who is a regular subscriber. Thus many friends at one place can 
get supplies through one of their number. Such papers, however, 
require extra wrapping and postage. The following will 
be the rates:— 

7 copies Monday's Dispatch for 12 weeks $1.50 

15 " " " " 12 " 3.00 

50 " " " " 12 " 9.00 

For 6 months the prices would be double the above. For 
a year multiply prices by four. 

THE PASSOVER MEMORIAL, MARCH 28, 1907 



The date for the observance of the Memorial of our Lord's 
"Last Supper" this year will be Thursday night (after 6 p.m.), 
March 28th. We trust that our readers in Asia, Africa, Australia 
and Alaska will get this notice in season and celebrate in 
unison with us the great event which sealed the Abrahamic or 
"Everlasting Covenant" for us, and will seal the "New Covenant" 
for Israel and the whole world, shortly. 

WHAT SAY THE SCRIPTURES ABOUT SPIRITISM? 

WHO ARE THE SPIRITS IN PRISON? AND WHY ARE THEY THERE? 



This booklet is now ready and will be supplied at 10 cents 
each: wholesale rates 50 cents per dozen are open to all TOWER 
readers who may desire to circulate these among their friends. 



In leatherette binding, 25 cents. Prices include postage. 
SEND A MARKED COPY TO US 



Slanderous and nonsensical reports respecting the Editor 
of this journal and our Society's work, etc., have appeared in 
various newspapers. Friends are requested on finding such to 
send us a copy of such papers— marked: not merely a clipping. 



Colporteurs will please use our Order blanks and direct 
letters to "Colporteur Department." 



R3940 : page 51 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER 
CURRENT AFFAIRS IN GERMANY 



ACCORDING to the advices received from the Society's 
representative in Germany there is a 
great religious unrest there at the present 
time. Roman Catholics are stoutly resisting the movement 
known as "Los von Rom"— i.e., "Away from 
Rome"— and the tendency of our times to individual 
thinking on the part of its supporters. Its party in the 
German parliament— the Reichstag— is now very necessary 
to the government in connection with the passage 
of government measures, because the Socialist party 
has become so strong. Under the patronage of the 
Emperor, Catholics are proclaiming loudly the duty of 
loyalty to religion and the government, even though 
not a great while ago they were quite willing to inveigh 
against that very same government. The cry now is 
for the necessity of all religious people uniting in opposition 
to infidelity and revolutionary parties. Protestants, 
under similar influences, are taking somewhat 
the same stand, but decline to be brought too closely 
into union with the Church of Rome. Thus the question 
of the hour is held to be outward formalistic religion 
and patriotism to the government. Under this 
plea, no doubt, Socialists and Revolutionists will be 
more and more opposed year by year, and no doubt 
ourselves, and others considered out of line with the 
majority of "Orthodoxy," will be similarly brought under 
the ban, and treated as though we were in some 
way associated with or responsible for the revolutionary 
conditions and their program. 
Unable to secure legislation desired by him Emperor 



William recently dissolved the German Reichstag 
(Congress) and ordered a fresh election at which a 
stout contest was made by the three leading parties, 
one of which, the Social-Democrat, had been too powerful 
for the Emperor's purposes. It is claimed that 
the Emperor appealed to the Pope to influence the 
Catholic vote away from the Socialist party because 
they were a menace to both Church and State. The 
election certainly reflects this, for in it the Socialists 
lost 34 members of the Reichstag. The event was 
celebrated at Berlin, where noisy crowds saluted the 
Emperor and subsequently the Crown Prince. 

The effect will be to more than ever separate the 
religious from the Socialists and drive the irreligious 
to them. Thus we see the cleavage coming along the 
very lines laid down in prophecy— on the one side "the 
Beast and his Image and the Kings of the earth and 
their armies" or supporters, and on the other side the 
army of anarchy, which unwittingly will as "the Lord's 
great army" overthrow all present institutions preparatory 
to the Millennial reign of peace and righteousness. 
But let us never lose sight of the fact that the "saints," 
the "elect," have nothing to do with supporting or assisting 
either side in that awful conflict. It is the Father 
that shall put all things under the control of the Christ. 
It will be accomplished by the letting go of natural 
laws, "the loosing of the winds," which will allow 
human selfishness on both sides to wreck the present 

R3941 : page 51 

civilization in a time of trouble such as was not before 
since there was a nation. 

Emperor William at a banquet recently took occasion 
to emphasize his opposition to all who in any wise 
think or speak pessimistically, as implying and preaching 
trouble,— financial, social and religious— as we do. 
He declares that all pessimists should leave the country, 
and intimated that only those taking a hopeful view 
of matters need expect imperial favors. Nevertheless, the 
newspapers of Germany, religious and secular, are disputing 
both the accuracy and wisdom of the Emperor's 
words. They seem to believe that denying the existence 
of evils will not cure them. They are surely right; 
the Emperor is surely wrong: nevertheless we may 
readily imagine how he and others of like mind and 
political influence, combining with Churchianity, 
Roman and Protestant, will be ready to go great 
lengths in crying "Peace, peace, when there is no 
peace," and in harshly treating those who proclaim the 
message of the Bible respecting "a time of trouble such 
as was not since there was a nation" as being at hand. 

R3941 : page 52 

We are reminded in this connection of the experiences 



of Jeremiah with the king and princes of Judah— that 

time and again he was cast into the dungeon for proclaiming 

the Word of the Lord respecting approaching 

calamities. 

Spiritism is said to be making considerable progress 
in Germany, too. Books on the spirit land, proclaiming 
that the dead are not dead— that all when they 
seem to die pass to a more complete enjoyment of life 
—are having wide sale. As already pointed out, Spiritism 
is bound to have a mighty influence in the next 
few years in deluding the people: everything is surely 
well prepared in that direction. The views of Christendom, 
that the dead are alive, have been thoroughly 
absorbed by the public; and as now doubt is creating 
individual thought along religious lines, Spiritism 
steps to the front, claiming to have the only torch to 
light the gloom beyond, and many are walking in its 
false light. It is difficult to know in advance how serious 
its misleadings may yet become— everywhere 
throughout Christendom. From Germany also comes 
confirmation of a report current there that a certain kind 
of "revival" has sprung up in India, attended with 
peculiar manifestations of an unseen power— apparently 
a counterfeit of some of the manifestations in the 
early Church following Pentecost— speaking with unknown 
tongues, not leading, however, toward intelligent 
knowledge of the Lord and his plan, but toward 
fanaticism. 

"TONGUES OF FIRE" 



From all parts of the world, but especially from 
the Pacific coast, come reports of what its friends call 
a fresh Pentecostal blessing— an outpouring of the holy 
Spirit, etc., and what its opponents call a religious insanity. 
The movement is amongst so-called "holiness 
people" of various sects and parties— "missions," as 
their meetings are generally styled. People who have 
been seeking and claiming "divine healing" seem to be 
among the most susceptible. Amongst these are some 
who give evidence of deep sincerity and a superficial 
knowledge of God's Word. Though generally swift to 
speak and slow to hear, they, through indolence or 
fear, neglect systematic study of the divine message. 
They seem to come under the head mentioned by the 
Prophet (Hosea 4:6), "My people perish for lack of 
knowledge." 

Reports of the movement in various directions 
seemed so absurd that we declined to believe them, 
supposing that since they were sent out by the 
secular press the facts must surely be misrepresented. 
Now, however, the "flame," as it is called, has reached 
Pittsburg, where at one of the Christian Alliance Missions 
we have an ocular demonstration of this 



delusion. 

What we see here corresponds well with the general 
reports from elsewhere. The meetings are "bedlam:" 
everything is confusion, prayers to God are 
yelled or groaned or barked,— yelped. Now and then 
someone "gets the blessing" and falls in a trance-like 
condition on the floor, to remain rigid, perhaps, for 
hours. Another begins to talk some sort of gibberish 
interspersed with English. Another in a different guttural 
mumbles and then gives an interpretation in 
English. These are said to have the "unknown tongues" 
of Pentecost; but we remember that foreigners present 
did recognize those tongues as bona fide and got a gospel 
message from them.— Acts 2:8. 

The people in attendance pay little heed to what is 
uttered by these "tongues" and their interpretations. 
Some are simply curious and attend as a free show: 
others are too engrossed with their desire to have a 
trance or an "unknown tongue" to do anything else 
than groan their prayers to God for those "gifts," as 
evidences of his favor. Frenzied hugging and kissing 
and rolling on the floor (reported from elsewhere) are 
amongst the evidences that these poor people are 
surely under some spirit influence. And it certainly 
does not appear to be "the spirit of a sound mind."— 
2 Tim. 1:7. 

It is quite true that there was confusion at Pentecost, 
caused by so many speaking at once in foreign 
languages; but nothing in the record implies insanity 
or fanaticism: nor could we expect either of such sound 
logicians as the apostolic epistles show them to have 
been. On the contrary our experiences corroborate 
the declaration of St. Paul, that the operation of the 
holy Spirit of God in our hearts and minds has been 
favorable to the development of greater soundness of 
mind, by reason of our heed to the Word and its wisdom, 
which cometh from above. A WATCH TOWER reader 
in Los Angeles, Cal., writes that a neighbor woman 
got this so-called gift of tongues, and that a reputable 
Chinaman hearing her said that he understood 
her quite well— that she spoke his dialect of Chinese. 
Pressed for an interpretation he declined, saying that 
the utterance was the vilest of the vile. 

In our judgment the facts justify the conclusion 
that these "flames" are of an unholy spirit, of Satan: 
that he is now producing a poor counterfeit for the deception 
of a class whom he cannot reach through Spiritism, 
Christian Science, Hypnotic New Thought nor 
Higher Critic Evolution theories. 

Is it asked, Why would the Lord permit Satan to 
delude honest souls? We reply, that he has permitted 
"doctrines of devils" these many centuries amongst the 
heathen (I Tim. 4:1), some of whom doubtless are also 
sincere. The time for the binding of Satan is not yet- 
though we believe it is very near. (Rev. 20:2.) Doubtless 
Satan realizes better than we can how the binding 



or restraining is coming, and is actively maneuvering 
to avoid it; while God on the other hand is willing to 
permit his activity because it can now serve a purpose 
—a sifting work— which must reach and touch every 
class and condition of professed Christians everywhere; 
—to test and prove them. Thus we consider this one 
of the many delusions of our day. Mark the Apostle's 
forceful words respecting this day of trial with which 

R3941 : page 53 

this age ends and the next is ushered in. He says: 

For this cause "God shall send them strong delusion 

that they should believe a lie." Why? "That they 

[who fall] all might be [thus] condemned"— be manifested 

as not right, as out of harmony with God— as 

unfit to be of the "Bride" class. But why so? "Because 

they received not the truth in the love of it," but "had 

pleasure in untruth."— 2 Thess. 2:10,12. 

In other words, the "Present Truth" has been sent 
hither and thither throughout the bounds of Christendom 
that, like as a magnet would attract all the particles 
of steel within the radius of its influence, the 
Truth might attract all the Israelites indeed, for further 
schooling and ripening, preparatory to their 
"change" to Kingdom glory. Meantime, the Lord allows 
Satan to organize various human agencies, 
those not of his "very elect," that such may fall farther 
and farther from the Truth, until finally none will 
"stand" except the elect, and they "on the sea of glass 
mingled with fire." (Rev. 15:2.) All others are to fall 
more or less, through some will subsequently be rescued 
from the catastrophe— "saved so as by fire."— 
I Cor. 3:15. 

THE DOCTRINE OF THE VIRGIN BIRTH OF CHRIST AS AN 
ESSENTIAL 



In the North American Review Professor C. A. 
Briggs, D.D., D.Lit., in an article entitled, "Criticism 
and Dogma," states as follows:— 

"When it is said that the doctrine of the Virgin 
Birth is essential, it is meant that it is essential to the 
system of doctrine and the Faith of the Christian 
Church. The Church can no more dispense with that 
doctrine than it can dispense with the incarnation of 
Christ himself. It is not, however, essential to the 
faith or Christian life of individuals. The doctrine 
may for various reasons be so different to them that 
they cannot honestly accept it. They may content 
themselves with the doctrine of the incarnation and 
refuse to accept any doctrine as to its mode. They may 
even go so far as to deny the Virgin Birth, and hold to 
the theory of ordinary generation without accepting the 



legitimate consequences of that doctrine. Theologians 
are not always consequential. Men are responsible for 
what they believe and teach, not for what others think 
that they ought logically to believe and teach. The 
Church may, and in the present situation and circumstances 
of Christian Theology, ought to tolerate opinions 
which it cannot endorse. 

R3942 : page 53 

"Christian dogma is in a process of reconstruction, 
owing to the partial adoption by theologians of the 
principle of development. Science and Philosophy are 
also in a condition of reconstruction and restatement. 
Confusion of thought is inevitable under these circumstances. 
The Church, the most stable of all human 
institutions, can afford to be patient and charitable, 
and to wait until its scholars have removed the difficulties 
that in this age envelop Christian dogma. 
These can only be overcome in the arena of chivalric 
scholarship, not in ecclesiastical courts ruled by ecclesiastics, 
who are usually more concerned about the 
forms of things than about their reality. Christian 
scholars as a body are not at all dubious as to the Virgin 
Birth. It is not at all a question of Biblical criticism, 
but of Christian dogma. They are generously 
inclined towards those who at present are either doubtful 
about it, or even disposed to deny it. Biblical and 
historical scholars are just as decided in its maintenance 
as dogmatic theologians. For it is a dogma 
which is inextricably involved in the Christological 
principle that lies at the basis of Christian dogma and 
Christian institutions. They cannot possibly recognize 
that the birth of Christ was by ordinary human 
generation, for that would be a revival of the Nestorian 
heresy and be a denial of all the Christian philosophy 
of the centuries, with all the serious consequences 
therein involved. It would turn back the dial of Christianity 
nearly two thousand years: it would break with 
historical Christianity and its apostolic foundation, 
and imperil Christianity itself." 

NEWS FROM KINGSTON, JAMAICA 



DEAR BROTHER:- 

You are aware that on January 14th we were visited 
by a disastrous earthquake which has almost completely 
demolished the entire city. We are glad to 
report that no injury has occurred to any of the Lord's 
people, so far as we have heard, save that one interested 
friend, who was a constant attendant here, was 
killed. 

A remarkable thing is that many of the heads of 
business houses were killed, which will cause some 



delay in business restoration. Hundreds are under medical 
treatment, woefully mangled. But what makes me 
sit in wonder continually is that our meeting hall is 
the only place of religious worship in the city that is 
standing and in a condition to be used; and it is all 
brick like the others, save that the two upper rooms 
which we occupy are of heavy frame set on top of the 
lower building, making it more dangerous. Our faith 
has been greatly strengthened by the experience. The 
Lord be praised! Yours faithfully, 

J. A. BROWNE,-Kingston, Jamaica. 



R3943 : page 53 

TAKE HEED TO YOURSELVES 

ST. PAUL'S words, "Take heed to yourselves and 

to all the flock over which the holy Spirit hath 

made you overseers, to shepherd the Church 

of God, which he hath purchased with the blood of his 

own Son" (Acts 20:28), were never more worthy of our 

attention than now. From our vantage point on Zion's 

watch tower we see clearly that, while the Truth is progressing 

grandly in all directions, the "Evil Day" is 

upon us, the time of testing those already blest and 

enlightened. It is not, therefore, merely a question of 

who shall be blest with the ear to hear the message 

of Present Truth, but additionally, "Who shall be able 

to withstand in that evil day, and having done all to 

stand" the final tests (Eph. 6:13), and be acclaimed— 

"More than conqueror through him who loved us" and 

bought us with his precious blood. 

We perceive the attack of the Adversary, referred 
to in our caption, in every direction;— the grievous 

R3943 : page 54 

wolves of error and ambition among "your own selves." 
We must sound the alarm and tell you that "the hour 
of temptation" is come— the one for which we have 
been preparing for the past thirty years. With the 
knowledge granted us let us not slumber at the critical 
moment; but soberly and prayerfully and faithfully 
meet the situation. 

Let us remember that our knowledge means an 
added responsibility, and that it will avail us nothing 
except as it is combined and active with Love, which is 
the bond of perfectness, the fulfilling of the divine law 
or requirement. How many blessings the Lord has 
granted us, and opportunities to put on the whole armor 
of God that we might be able to withstand the very 
trial now upon us! 

Wisely did the Apostle first say, "Take heed to yourselves." 
That is our first responsibility. We should 



each first examine our own hearts to see whether we 
are to any degree moved by jealousies, or ambitions, 
or any selfish motive. To do this effectively we must 
not measure ourselves with others, nor yet by our own 
imperfect standards, but by the Lord's standard— Perfect 
Love. "Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all 
thy heart, with all thy mind, with all thy being, with 
all thy strength; and thou shalt love thy neighbor 
[and especially thy brother in the Lord] as thyself." 
Oh! what brotherly-kindness, what tenderness 
of word and act, what sympathy of thought 
for each other's weaknesses, what appreciation of 
each other's better traits, what long-suffering kindness 
and patient forbearance in love, what care 
for each other's welfare, rights and liberties, as for 
our own, this would imply and produce! 

"Examine yourselves whether ye be in the faith!" 
writes the same Apostle. Doctrinal soundness is very 
important, but not enough; we must also be "in the 
faith" in the sense of exercising faith in the Lord— in all 
of life's affairs, and especially in all the affairs of his 
Church. If ever we allow expediency to swerve us from 
the Scriptural program in the affairs of the Church it 
manifests that we are not "in the faith" as God designed. 
For confidence in God and his overruling wisdom 
and power would never permit expediency to say, "Let 
us do evil that good may follow"— Let us take an unscriptural 
course for the best interests of the Lord's 
cause. The faith dictates that to obey God is better 
than sacrifice, and that he is able to make all things 
work for good to all who love and serve him. 

Dearly Beloved, let us, then, remember that this is 
our test and now our testing time; and let love for the 
Lord and his brethren and his Word be constantly in 
command of our lips, of our conduct and, above all, of 
our hearts. "If ye do these things ye shall never fail, 
but so an entrance shall be granted us into the everlasting 
Kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ." 

What is thus true of all, is specially true of those 
honored with a special stewardship in the Church— the 
Elders— in this the hour of trial that is upon the whole 
world and peculiarly upon "the very elect."— 
Rev. 3:10. 



R3942 : page 54 

HARVEST WORK AMONGST THE BLACKS 

QUITE recently Present Truth reached our dear 
Brother Booth, who for some years has been 
engaged in missionary work in Central Africa 
amongst the blacks. So greatly impressed was he with 
the Scriptural presentation of the DAWN volumes that 
he made a long journey to Allegheny to confer with us 



respecting the possibilities of presenting the harvest 
message to the Christian converts of Africa, with whom 
he has been considerably in contact. Brother Booth 
was the originator, we understand, of the so-called 
"Industrial Missions" of Central Africa. These established 
industries amongst the blacks, instructed them 
in agriculture and other arts of civilization, at the same 
time bringing the Bible, and the Redeemer and redemption 
taught therein to the attention of the natives. 
Several of these missions started by Brother Booth 
have since passed into the hands of others, and some 
have come under denominational control. 

We informed our dear brother that we, too, were 
interested in the colored people— year, in all mankind; 
but that seeing the way of the Lord more particularly 
than we once did, we no longer feel that the salvation 
of the world is a responsibility upon our shoulders, but 
upon the Lord's, where it belongs; and that as we had 
come to understand his Word we found therein that he 
had not neglected his responsibility to his creatures, 
but had made a full provision through Jesus for all the 
sons and daughters of Adam, and that in due time 
under the Millennial Kingdom all are to be brought to 
a knowledge of the Truth. We assured him of our 
sympathy with mission work and with every kind of 
good work for the reformation and uplifting of all the 
members of our race, but that our understanding is 
that the harvest work differs considerably from a sowing 
work, a planting work. We explained that the harvest 
time into which we have entered is in our view 
designed of the Lord for the ripening or perfecting of 
character amongst those who are his; that from 
amongst these the elect number may be completed, and 
that following their glorification they, with the Master, 
as the King and Priests of the coming age, will promote 
the knowledge of the Lord and every good work, and 
restrain Satan and every evil influence, that every creature 
may come to know the Redeemer— that every knee 
may bow and every tongue confess to the glory of God. 

EARNEST CHRISTIAN CONVERTS 

It was then that Brother Booth surprised us by 
telling us that if manifestations of Christian love were 
to be taken as an indication of Christian character (to 
which we agreed) then he could assure us that there 
were some as true Christians amongst the blacks of 
Africa as any he had ever found amongst the whites 

R3942 : page 55 

anywhere. He surprised us greatly by narratives of 
his own experiences amongst this simple people of 
nature and how much of real kindness he had experienced 
at their hands. Trusting in the Lord, he went 
without spear or sword or gun over hundreds of miles 



amongst savage tribes, some of them cannibals. He 

found them savage toward their enemies, yet kindly 

disposed toward those whom they could trust as 

friends. The white people, however, they did not recognize 

as friends, and this was his chief difficulty. 

They threatened his life, and when asked why, they 

said, "We know you white men: first you come with the 

little book and talk peaceful words; then you inform 

others and they come with guns and kill us and take 

our property and force us to labor in the carrying out 

of their plans, so that we become slaves. We do not 

want you; stay in your own country that your God 

gave you. Let us keep our country and live in happiness 

as heretofore." Brother Booth was obliged to tell 

them that he could not answer for his brethren— that 

he regretted to say that there was considerable truth 

in their charges; but that as for himself they could see 

that he brought no gun, no weapon, but merely the little 

book, and it had a message in it that would make 

them happy as it had made him happy. "Kill me if you 

wish to. If God's time has come for me to die I am 

ready and willing— perhaps this is the place where God 

intends I shall die. But let me tell you about the little 

book and what it says." Thus he would get them to 

listen to him and to listen to the Scriptural story of sin 

and how it came, of the death of Christ and its value 

in the sight of God, and how they all could be partakers 

of the blessings from that sacrifice, and by turning 

from sin and giving their hearts to the Lord could have 

divine joy and peace instead of bitterness and anger 

and strife. 

Brother Booth told us that many of the natives 
are zealous for knowledge, and that some of them have 
become very earnest preachers of the Word and quite 
willing to lay down their lives, if the occasion required, 
in the service of the Truth so far as they understand 
it. He told us that in South Africa quite a number of 
educated negroes are owners and editors of newspapers, 
having gotten their education in various colleges. 
He urged that many of these blacks of South Africa 
and also of Central Africa should be of just the right 

R3943 : page 55 

condition of heart and mind to receive the glad message 
of the Millennial morning and the establishment of 
the reign of righteousness in the hands of the great 
King and the glorified Church. He says that he himself 
had felt so depressed by the conditions surrounding 
him there, and by the thought that all who were 
not brought to a knowledge and love of the Savior were 
going to eternal torment— that his mind was greatly 
distressed, and he felt sure that there was something 
radically wrong with his message. He had returned 
from Africa to Scotland in perplexity as to what would 
be his best course. It was at this time that he came 



into contact with some of the friends of the Truth in 
Scotland and had the DAWNS put into his hands. He 
besought us to undertake some missionary work on 
behalf of the poor blacks, amongst whom he has labored 
for now fifteen years. 

Under these conditions it is not surprising that we 
fell in line with Brother Booth's proposition, inferring 
that the Lord had guided him to us, and was now 
directing us respecting another part of the harvest 
work. The Society accordingly has for a time undertaken 
Brother Booth's expenses as its missionary to 
those peoples with whom he is acquainted. He can 
speak several of their languages, while others he can 
reach through interpreters, and some in South Africa 
can read English. He was quite surprised when we 
informed him that the WATCH TOWER has a regular list 
of subscribers in Africa to the number of forty— not 
very many, it is true, but after all quite a good many, 
everything considered. Brother Booth started on his 
mission shortly after the first of the year, and by the 
time our readers get this he will be at work. It will be 
some time before he will have anything to report, and 
then it will require a considerable time to reach us. 
Meantime we have assured our dear brother of the love 
and sympathy of the Lord's dear people who are rejoicing 
in Present Truth, and bid him God speed, 
and pray for the harvest work amongst the savage 
tribes. Who knows but what there are some true 
grains of ripening wheat in that far-off land, to whom 
the Lord would send the present harvest message for 
their further development and perfecting before they 
can reach the garner. 

NEARER FIELDS WHITE FOR HARVEST 

Already quite a little work is under way amongst 
the negroes of Jamaica and Porto Rico, as was exhibited 
in the report recently published in these columns. 
But Brother Booth's zeal for the black brethren has 
had the effect of stimulating our interest in them, and 
the more we reflect on the subject the more deeply interested 
do we feel in the harvest work amongst these 
people right at our doors. Brother Booth emphasized 
the fact that many colored people have great reverence 
for God and considerable honesty of mind, and that as 
a rule they are ready to investigate, especially when 
the presentation is made by the whites, and when they 
can see consistency of life in the would-be teacher. 

We wish to call the attention of the friends in general 
to this quarter of the harvest field, with the suggestion 
that in quite a good many of the little gatherings 
there is more than a sufficiency of talent for the 
service of the Church as leaders of Berean Studies, etc., 
and that some might find time and good opportunities 
for presenting the Divine Plan of the Ages to colored 
Christians of their vicinity. Would it not be worth while 



to visit some of their meetings, and in a wise and kindly 
manner tell them very briefly something about the 
end of the age, the dawn of the Millennium, and the 
Kingdom that then is to be established in the earth, 
etc., and to proffer a lecture on the Chart of the Ages 
if they desire. We believe that invitations of that kind 
would be frequently accepted, and doubt not that some 
amongst the blacks would respond earnestly. Our 

R3943 : page 56 

hopes along this line are supported by the fact that in 
various parts of our country Berean Bible Study classes 
have already been started amongst the colored friends. 
Indeed, of a number of these dear brethren we could 
surely say that, in rightly dividing the Word and clearly 
presenting it to others, very few amongst the whites 
will be found their superiors. We could also say of 
them that, so far as their knowledge goes, their standard 
of integrity and morality seems to be equally high 
with them as with the white brethren. Our suggestion 
is that the white brethren shall seek to carry the message 
to the blacks as opportunity may afford. This 
does not signify that the colored brethren should desist 
from serving those of their own race and color in their 
own localities. We will be glad to cooperate according to 
our judgment of the Lord's will with any, either whites 
or blacks, who desire to engage in this section of the 
harvest field. 



R3944 : page 56 

THE OATH-BOUND COVENANT 

--GENESIS 15:1,5-16.-FEBRUARY 24.- 

Golden Text:— "He believed in the Lord, and 
he counted it to him for righteousness." 

IN our last lesson we noted the unwise choice made by 
Lot, the result of which was his closer association than 
was necessary with the ungodly of Sodom. Additionally 
it exposed him to the same difficulties to which his 
neighbors, who were not under the special providence of God, 
were exposed. It appears that Sodom and the surrounding 
cities of the Jordan valley had for some time been paying 
tribute to Chedorlaomer, whose capital city was several hundred 
miles further north. When they ceased to pay tribute 
Chedorlaomer sent an army— composed in part of recruits 
from various subject kings on the way— to take possession 
of Sodom as instead of the tribute money. Together with 
spoil of gold and silver and other valuables numerous captives 
were taken, of whom to make slaves. Lot, his family, 
his servants and his property were taken, sharing in all the 



burdens of the Sodomites. We can well imagine his discouragement 

and self-condemnation— that he had not only 

experienced vexation in his new home country by reason of 

the unrighteousness of his neighbors and the contaminating 

influence upon his family, but now he was sharing with 

them in the vicissitudes of his present condition, whereas 

had he remained with Abraham, his uncle, matters might 

have been different: evidently God had a special protecting 

care over Abraham— he was not captured nor despoiled. 

Although Abraham was noted as a man of peace, we 
find him very loyal to principle in connection with this 
trouble. Two of the captured ones escaped and brought 
word to Abraham of the capture of the Sodomites, with Lot 
and his family. The man of God was not long in deciding 
respecting his proper course. Summoning all of his servants 
capable of assisting in such an emergency, 3 18 in number, 
he armed them and set out for the deliverance of his nephew. 
We are not to suppose that the army which captured the 
Sodomites was a large one, even though the names of four 
kings are introduced in connection with it. This was 
not a very long time after the flood, and the entire 
population was not as yet very large. The suggestions of 
higher critics about vast armies, great cities, etc., at this 
time, are out of harmony with the facts— first, the shortness 
of time after the flood; and, second, the ability of Abraham, 
with 3 1 8 men, to even make an attack and disconcert 
and confuse the army and deliver Lot and the Sodomites 
and all their goods. These facts all agree that the cities, 
the armies, the kingly powers of that day, were very meager 
in comparison to what we have in mind when we use similar 
terms in our day. In all probability the armies of the 
four kings combined did not exceed a thousand men, and 
the entire population of Sodom probably much less. The 
building of a city in those times would correspond more 
nearly to the building of a fort in our day. Thus, for instance, 
we read that Cain went to the land of Nod and built 
him a city— a house or villa for himself and his family. 

Abraham's heroism in the matter was fully matched by 
his generosity, for not a particle of the spoil would he take 
for himself. The characters which the Lord loves and 
chooses are those which are unselfish, generous as well as 
just. In these respects Abraham showed that he had a considerable 
measure of the original image of God still remaining 
with him, not obliterated by the fallen conditions through 
which himself and his ancestors as members of the race of 
Adam had passed. On the other hand we see in Lot a less 
noble character naturally, a less strong character. This is 
evidenced afresh in the fact that even after this experience 
and deliverance he continued to reside in Sodom, to choose 
the life of luxury and ease, unfavorable to himself and his 
family, morally and religiously. Abraham chose the better 
part: his God was his friend, in whom he delighted; and 
such experiences in life as would best enable him to comply 
with the divine arrangements respecting him were the ones 
that he chose, and to the attainment of which he pressed 
his energies. 



REPETITION OF THE COVENANT 

We have already referred to the fact that God agreed 
to make a covenant with Abraham while he was still living 
in the land of Chaldea, and that the covenant itself was 
consummated and made applicable to Abraham from the 
time that he set his foot upon the land of promise in obedience 
to the divine call. But for his encouraging and the 
strengthening of his already great faith, God repeated this 
promise over and over in different terms. (See Gen. 12:1-3; 
13:14-17; 15:1,5,18; 17:1-10; 18:19; 21:12; 22:16-18.) 
There was in fact but one covenant, but various statements 
of it. 

In our present lesson we have one of these repetitions 
of the covenant with some peculiar features. (V. 1.) In a 
vision the Lord assured him that he should not fear, that his 
God would be his shield and his exceeding great reward. 
Quite probably a fear had come to Abraham, in connection 
with the deliverance of his nephew Lot, that the kings whom 
he had ignominiously defeated would return better prepared, 
better on guard, and wreak their vengeance upon him, and 
that thus he might be interrupting, interfering, with the 

R3944 : page 57 

promise God had made that he and his posterity should inherit 
the land of Canaan. The declaration, "I am thy shield," 
would set at rest any doubts or fears along this line, as we 
elsewhere read, "When he giveth quietness who then can make 
trouble?" If the Lord would shield him how then could 
all the kings of earth do him harm or interrupt the divine 
program for blessing him and his posterity? The other statement 
is also worthy of notice: "I am thy exceeding great 
reward." Already he was the recipient of God's favors, rewards 
for his faith and obedience, and the promises also 
were in the line of rewards. But the statement here made 
went beyond all this and enumerates a still higher, grander 
truth, namely, that as Abraham had given himself fully to 
God, the latter now declares that in a sense he would give 
himself to Abraham, he would be his reward— to have his 
friendship, his fellowship, his love, his care, would be the 
highest and best reward that could possibly be given to Abraham 
for his fidelity. 

And are not these precious promises applicable to the 
spiritual seed of Abraham? Is not this the essence of the 
Apostle's declaration to the Church— "All things are yours, 
for ye are Christ's and Christ is God's"? Again we hear the 
Apostle saying, "It is God that justifieth, who is he that 
condemneth?" (Rom. 8:33.) Again we hear the Master's 
word to the same class, "The Father himself loveth you." 
(John 16:27.) O, what rest and comfort it brings to our 
hearts, amongst the trials and vicissitudes of life, to realize 
in the depths of our hearts that these are not merely words 
but truths. But only as we are able to realize an obedient faith 
are we able to apply these gracious promises to ourselves or 



to rest therein. This same thought is expressed respecting 
Abraham (v. 6), "He believed in the Lord." The word in 
the original signifies more than mere belief; it signifies 
what only believers can fully comprehend, viz., a rest of 
faith in God. 

"HE COUNTED IT FOR RIGHTEOUSNESS" 

At first we are inclined to say, How strange it is that 
God should count our faith for anything— how simple, how 
easy a matter faith is! Why should it be valuable in God's 
sight? But the more we come to know ourselves the more 
we come to value faith, to realize that it is a scarce commodity 
in the world and even amongst Christians, professed 
believers. Under some conditions faith is very easy; indeed 
to disbelieve would be difficult. After this manner we understand 
nearly all the conditions of the Millennial age will 
be framed, so that the world in general will find it difficult 
to disbelieve in God, his power, his justice, his love. Then 
the reward will be merely for the obedient, though some 
faith will doubtless be required as well. Now, on the contrary, 
the reward is merely on account of faith, though what 
obedience is possible is required, too. "According to thy 
faith be it unto thee," was our Master's expression, and it 
represents a general principle of divine dealing now. 

God is now seeking for a faith-full people, and declares 
that those whom he will find will be peculiar in this respect 
from the majority; not many great, not many wise, not 
many learned according to the course of this world have and 
exercise this faith— chiefly the poor, rich in faith, may be 
heirs of the Kingdom. Let us seek to cultivate continually 
faith in the Lord, in his Word, in his providential care. 
This is not trusting in the creeds and the theories of men, 
which might be merely credulity, but trusting in the Word of 
the Lord, which liveth and abideth forever. As God counted 
such faith to Abraham as so much of righteousness, so he 
counts to us of this Gospel age, who are children of Abraham 
by faith. We are not righteous in a full, perfect, complete 
sense of that word. Even with our hearts turned to the 
Lord, and with the best of intentions, we cannot do the 
things that we would; but as to those who can exercise 
faith, and who do exercise it in harmony with divine righteousness 
to the best of their ability, God will count their 
efforts as though they are perfect! How gracious an arrangement! 
How lovingly we should show our appreciation 
by still greater faith and still harder endeavors to walk in 
the path of righteousness which faith dictates. 

THE STARS OF HEAVEN, THE SANDS OF THE SEASHORE 

In other statements of this promise or covenant God 
directed Abraham's mind to the stars and to the sand of the 
seashore and to the dust of the earth as illustrations of the 
numbers of his posterity. As yet Abraham had no child: 
every testimony of this kind was therefore to him a testing 
of his faith, a suggestion that he should inquire first for a 



R3945 : page 57 

beginning of these matters; and as days and years passed 
by the testing of faith was increased, yet to our joy we find 
that Abraham was full of faith in these promises, never 
doubting the power of God in some way to accomplish all 
that he had given him reason to hope for. Here we find a 
lesson for ourselves. Other promises have been made to us, 
some of which seem to be utterly impossible of attainment. 
Shall our faith stagger and shall we begin to doubt? or 
shall we hold fast to the Word of the Lord, nothing wavering, 
nothing doubting? In order to do so we must discriminate 
clearly between the words of man and the Word of 
God, so that we may reject the words of man, resting nothing 
upon their promises, but our entire weight of trust must 
rest upon the Word of the Lord. 

How solicitous this should make us to have before our 
minds clearly and distinctly just what things God has promised 
to them that love him. In accord with this fact we find 
that God's most earnest and loyal children are continually 
desiring to grow in grace and to grow in knowledge of him 
through his Word and through his providences, and that 
more and more they are cutting and drifting away from the 
creeds and theories of men, those which appear to be good 
and those which are manifestly vile, evil, injurious. The 
Scriptural statement is, respecting all such things, "If they 
speak not according to this Word, it is because there is no 
light in them." (Isa. 8:20.) Hence the Scriptures again 
say that those who have nothing but their own dreams and 
fancies to preach may do so, but those who have the 
Word of the Lord should preach it and not themselves nor 
their fancies and dreams.— Jer. 23:28. 

In the light of the New Testament we may see more in 
these various promises than Abraham or others not thus 
enlightened by the holy Spirit. We can see that the spiritual 
seed of Abraham, Christ and the Church, are represented 
in this simile of his seed being as the stars of heaven, and 
we also see that the other part of the statement— that his 
seed shall be as the sand of the seashore— will have a fulfilment 
in Abraham's natural posterity, the Hebrew people, 

R3945 : page 58 

and in that still larger class of all nations referred to in the 
statement, "I have constituted thee a father of many nations." 
(Gen. 17:5.) How this deeper, clearer view of the 
promise enlarges the horizon of our eyes of understanding, 
and enables us to grasp with more and more distinctness 
the lengths and breadths and heights and depths of the love 
of God, which is yet to be manifested to every creature of our 
race, giving all opportunity of becoming children of Abraham 
—of full faith in and obedience to God. For that glorious 
opportunity the Apostle declares the whole creation is 
groaning and travailing, waiting until now— waiting for the 
manifestation of the sons of God, and, more than this, waiting 



until the sons of God are selected, tested, accepted and 
then manifested in glory. 

THE INHERITANCE OF CANAAN 

It is proper to speak of an earthly and a heavenly 
Canaan, but it is a mistake common to too many to apply 
all the promises of God that are yet future to the heavenly. 
There are earthly promises still unfulfilled, and one of these 
is referred to in our lesson (v. 7). The Lord here distinctly 
informed Abraham again that he intended to give that land 
to him and his posterity. That there might be no doubt as to the 
literalness of this, the Lord said to Abraham on another occasion, 
Lift up now thine eyes and look to the north and south 
and east and west, for all the land thou seest to thee will I 
give it and to thy seed after thee for an everlasting possession. 
(Gen. 13:14; 17:8.) How could the land Abraham 
saw be the heavenly city, which neither he nor we have ever 
seen? To make the matter doubly sure we have the word 
of Stephen on the subject (Acts 7), who declares that it was 
the literal land, and yet that Abraham had not received so 
much as to set his foot upon, but that he had faith that he 
would get that land, and Stephen also had faith that it 
would ultimately be given to Abraham and his posterity. 
Our faith is and should be the same. Abraham is to have 
a grand portion, and the land of Palestine is to be an element 
of his blessing and inheritance. True, we read that 
Abraham dwelt in tents and not in a city, with walls, etc., 
for his protection; he was thus a pilgrim and a stranger, 
with no continuing city. He would not, like Lot, live in 
Sodom, for he desired a better country, even a heavenly. 
That is to say, he was waiting for the time that God intended 
that he should inherit this promise, anticipating the establishment 
of God's Kingdom at the second coming of our Lord, 
and preferring the solidity, the establishment, the security of 
that city, thinking the security of any earthly city of small 
account. And we see that in this he judged rightly. He 
was safer where he was, with God for his companion and 
divine promises for the walls of his salvation, than he could 
have been in any earthly city. Surely the heavenly city, 
the New Jerusalem, the Kingdom of God, will be established 
with great power and glory, and nothing shall injure and 
destroy in all the Lord's holy Kingdom. Then Abraham's 
desires and anticipations will have been realized, and the 
earth shall be filled with the knowledge of the glory of God. 

If we would examine the various promises in detail 
they are that the land of Canaan should be the heritage of 
Abraham and of his seed forever; that he should have a 
son who would be his heir and inherit the promises; that 
his seed, descendants, would ultimately be as the sand of 
the sea and the stars of heaven, innumerable; that he 
should be the father of a great nation; that he should be 
the father of many nations, and that through him all the families 
of the earth shall be blessed. 

"WHEREBY SHALL I KNOW?" 



Abraham had already testified his faith in God's promises 
in a general way. He did not doubt them, but when 
now the Lord reiterated the fact that the land was to be 
his, he thought it not improper to ask for some word indicating 
the way in which the blessing should come— "O, 
Lord God, whereby shall I know that I shall inherit it? 
What outward signs and evidences will help my faith to grasp 
these great promises you have made to me and which I thoroughly 
believe?" It was no more a sin for Abraham to ask 
the Lord to confirm and strengthen his faith than it would be 
for us to ask the same for ourselves. And God seems ever ready 
to help the trustful. How many assistances to faith he 
gives us without chiding when we come to him in a trustful 
and faithful attitude of mind. This is illustrated in our 
day by the difference in the Lord's treatment of those who 
look skeptically upon the Scriptures, the Bible, and those 
who look upon it from the standpoint of faith. The first 
mentioned find plenty to establish their skepticism; all the 
higher critics, the educated of the world, are in their company. 
On the other hand, those who are looking at the 
Word from the standpoint of faith and trust are blessed; to 
them it is opened— "He that seeketh findeth." 

God at once gave Abraham his oath in confirmation of 
the promise. By a peculiar method God bound himself 
to Abraham by what is termed the "covenant of 
blood." A full description of it is given in the lesson: a 
heifer of three years, a she-goat of three years, a ram of 
three years, a turtle dove and a young pigeon were sacrificed, 
and the Lord represented himself as passing between 
the parts of these sacrificed animals, and was thus swearing 
by a covenant or sacrifice of life-blood to the promise he 
had given. The Lord was represented by a lamp of fire. 

Then came the answer to Abraham's question, "Whereby 
shall I know? Give me some of the particulars relating 
to the matter of how my posterity shall inherit. Give 
me a view of the future." The Lord did give Abraham a 
glance into the future of his people, saying, "Know of a 
surety that thy seed shall be a stranger in a land that is 
not theirs, and shall serve them: and they shall afflict 
them four hundred years." This need not be understood to 
mean that Israel would be in bondage for four hundred 
years more that they would be afflicted all the years they 
would be in a strange land. Rather the thought seems to 
be that not until four hundred years would his posterity return 
to that land to inherit it according to the promise; 
that in the meantime they would suffer rigors, hardships, be 
in servitude, suffer affliction. The punishment upon the 
nation holding them in servitude is also mentioned— the 
Lord would judge them, and after four hundred years the seed 
of Abraham would come out of bondage with great substance 
and very rich. It would be in the fourth generation, we are 
told, that his descendants would return to Canaan, and an explanation 
of why the long delay is given in part in the statement, 
"The iniquity of the Amorite is not yet full": as though 



R3945 : page 59 

the Lord had said to Abraham, The Amorite has a prior hold 
upon this land, but I know the outcome with them, that they 
will get worse and worse and that eventually it will be the 
course of justice toward them to expel them— but not yet; 
the time for the change is not ripe. So long as they follow 
a reasonable course they will be permitted to remain, but 
when their cup of iniquity is full the land shall then be 
turned over to your posterity forever. 

Abraham was not told how long it would be before his 
posterity would go into that captivity which would end in 
four hundred years at the fourth generation; he was merely 
told that it would not occur during his lifetime— "Thou 
shalt go to thy fathers in peace, thou shalt be buried in a 
good old age"; none of these calamities can come upon your 
posterity while you still live. We remember the fulfilment 
of this prediction; that for a time Abraham's posterity 

R3946 : page 59 

dwelt in Canaan as he himself had done, in tents, without 
seeking an earthly city or government. We remember that 
the famine drove them out of Canaan and they went down 
into Egypt as the guests of Pharaoh and Joseph, Abraham's 
grandson, who was then governor of Egypt through a divine 
arrangement. We remember that while matters went peaceably 
for a time, by and by Joseph died and Pharaoh died, 
and then began one hundred and ninety-eight years of 
servitude and affliction, which continued until the Lord 
sent Moses and delivered Israel at the close of the 400 years 
mentioned in our lesson. 

LESSONS FOR THE SPIRITUAL SEED 

We may be sure that the horror of great darkness and 
the coming down of the fires to devour the sacrificed carcases 
represented more than merely the dark picture of the 
servitude of Abraham's natural seed before they should 
go back to Palestine. We may be sure that the Lord, who 
made this covenant, had more in mind the spiritual seed 
than the natural. The Apostle Paul tells us so, for referring 
to this Oath-Bound Covenant he declares, "God, willing 
more abundantly to show unto the heirs of promise the unchangeableness 
of his promise, confirmed it by an oath, that 
by two immutable [unchangeable] things, in which it was 
impossible for God to lie, we might have strong consolation 
who have fled for refuge to lay hold upon the hope set before 
us: which hope we have as an anchor to our souls both 
sure and stedfast, and which entereth into that which is 
within the vail." (Heb. 6:17-19.) The holy Spirit here, 
through the Apostle's pen, informs us that this oath was 
given to Abraham, not solely on his own account, as might 
appear, but specially on account of us, the spiritual heirs, 
the heirs of promise. The Apostle points out that Christ is 
the great inheritor, and that we who are Christ's are joint-heirs 



with him in this covenant promise, and that thus 
through Christ and the Church the entire promise will be 
made effective to Abraham and his natural seed as well as 
to all the families of the earth. 

The darkness of that hour suggests to us the sufferings 
of this present time, the fiery furnace of affliction, the "better 
sacrifices" established in and upon the merit of our dear 
Redeemer's death and the ultimate great blessing that is to 
follow. Now what we have is still a hope. Abraham is dead; 
his natural posterity have failed to attain the blessing; the 
higher favor secured by our Lord Jesus through his own obedience 
unto death has been extended to the faithful of the 
Jews and the faithful of every nation, whom the Father has 
drawn through his grace and truth, and yet we have this 
promise as a hope, but it is anchored to Christ, who is within 
the vail, a spirit being. By faith we realize a relationship 
to him, and that the darkness and suffering of this present 
time will soon be ended; by faith we realize that the glorious 
things which God hath in reservation for them that love 
him far more than overbalance the trials and difficulties of 
the pilgrim journey; by faith we see that as soon as the 
entire body of the Anointed One shall be completed and 
glorified, then a great blessing is due to begin with Israel 
after the flesh, and to extend through them also to every 
creature. Ah, how gracious is our Lord's provision! How 
kind for him to give us such a strong consolation through 
not only his repeated testimony of the truthfulness of this 
great matter, but also of his oath which confirms, secures, 
makes positive every element of the promise! What manner 
of persons ought we to be in all manner of holy conversation 
and godliness! What more could the Lord say to us 
than he has said? 



R3946 : page 59 

ABRAHAM'S PRAYERS FOR SODOM 

--GENESIS 18:16-33.~MARCH3.~ 

Golden Text:— "Men ought always to 
pray and not to faint."— Luke 18:1. 

THERE are several very interesting matters connected 
with this lesson. Abraham had been living in 
Canaan and Lot in Sodom for a considerable time, 
when, at the noon hour, three men one day appeared to 
Abraham— strangers. He was prompt to show them hospitality, 
and Sarah his wife joined. The Apostle evidently referred 
to this incident in the words, "Be not forgetful to 
entertain strangers, for some thereby have entertained angels 
unawares." (Heb. 13:2.) Present-day conditions render such 
hospitality less necessary, especially in cities where public 
boarding-houses and hotels are expected to care for the 
strangers. There is danger, however, that the blessing which 



goes with hospitality is to a large extent missed by a considerable 
number of people. While the modern methods have 
some advantages, the general tendency of all of them is 
toward greater selfishness— neglect of our neighbor, whom 
the Lord would have us love as ourselves— not neglecting to 
do good unto all men as we have opportunity, especially to 
the household of faith.— Gal. 6:10. 

To whatever extent these divine injunctions are disregarded 
we are in danger of losing a blessing, of failing to 
cultivate generosity, and, on the contrary, cultivating selfishness. 
God is the great Giver "from whom cometh every 
good and perfect gift"; and in proportion as his children 
would return to his image they must cultivate his spirit of 
benevolence, generosity, kindness, helpfulness— especially 
to the poor and the needy and the strangers. We are 
not wishing to suggest the receiving of any and every person 

R3946 : page 60 

into the home, which might be a very dangerous practice; 

but we do urge that the changed conditions of our time be 

not allowed to make our hearts hard, selfish and unthoughtful 

as respects the interests of our friends or neighbors, and 

the stranger. We cannot afford to do so, for "If any man 

have not the spirit of Christ he is none of his," and this 

would mean the loss of those things which God hath in reservation 

for them that love him. 

THE LORD AND TWO ANGELS 

The three strange men, Abraham afterwards learned, 
were angels, one of them the special messenger of Jehovah. 
We feel confident that this one was the Logos, the Only 
Begotten One, through whom the Father's power was exercised, 
so that by him all things were made that were made. 
(John 1:1.) We are clearly to distinguish between our Lord's 
appearance here as a man and the appearance of his two 
companions, the angels, as men, and our Lord's subsequent 
appearance in the world as the man Christ Jesus. The 
two were totally different. In the first case the spirit nature 
was retained, and a human body was merely created and 
used temporarily for a special purpose, just as our Lord after 
his resurrection as a spirit being appeared in various forms 
as a man, but was not really a man. When the due time 
came for the redemption of Adam and his race it was necessary 
that our Lord should become a man— perfect, complete 
as was father Adam in his original creation— "holy, harmless, 
undefiled, separate from sinners." When he thus became a 
man, or as another Scripture expresses it, "was made flesh" 
(John 1:14), it meant the complete laying aside of the spirit 
nature before enjoyed— a change or transmutation to another 
nature, the human. 

This was necessary, because it was a man who had 
sinned, and because the divine law required a man's life for 
a man's life as the ransom price. But no such transmutation 
was necessary for the work mentioned in our lesson. 



The Lord and his two angelic companions could have appeared 
to Abraham as to Moses as a flame of fire in a burning 
bush, or as the bright angel appeared to Daniel, or as an 
angelic form with less glory and brightness; but God was 
dealing with Abraham according to faith— he wished him to 
learn to walk by faith and not by sight. Hence the angels 
appeared as strange men and were entertained as such, and 
Abraham's hospitality was demonstrated and became a lesson 
to all the children of God. Furthermore, the faith of both 
Abraham and Sarah was tested on this occasion by the 
Lord's predicting the birth of Isaac shortly, to the amusement 
of Sarah, who was then old and who doubted, and to 
the confirmation of Abraham's faith in the promise already 
given him and trusted in for twenty-five years without sign 
of accomplishment. 

THE CRY OF SODOM 

Still hospitable, Abraham accompanied his visitors, 
whom he had now discerned to be celestial beings appearing 
in human form. As they moved in the direction of 
Sodom the Lord is represented as holding a colloquy with 
himself as to the propriety of intimating to Abraham what 
might be expected as a judgment upon Sodom, of whose 
wickedness Abraham certainly was aware. We are given to 
understand that the fact that Abraham thus far had proven 
faithful, and that to him belonged the ultimate promise of 
the blessing of all the families of the earth, was one reason 
why he was informed respecting the fate of Sodom, "For I 
have known him [become intimate with him, made a covenant 
with him, revealed myself to him], to the end that he 
may command his children and his household after him, that 
they may keep the way of the Lord to do justice and judgment; 

R3947 : page 60 

that the Lord may bring upon him that which he has 
spoken of him." Thus we see by this indirect teaching that 
there is method in the Lord's revelation. Matters are made 
known to his people not merely to satisfy curiosity, but 
especially because they are in relationship to the Lord and 
because they are to learn certain lessons in connection with 
their experiences of life that may be helpful to them in the 
ultimate work to which they have been called. 

In this case, we remember that Abraham had the promise 
that in his seed all the families of the earth should be 
blessed, and this included the Sodomites as well, as we shall 
see later. Abraham then, believing the Word of the Lord, 
had a right to expect that in some way or other, either then 
or in the future, he and his posterity would have to do with 
righteous judgment upon the Sodomites. Besides, the Lord 
is pleased to have those who are in harmony with him know 
the equity, the justice of all his dealings. "Come, let us 
reason together," shows us this principle. (Isa. 1:18.) But 
the Lord never reasons with any except those who have faith 
in him and trust in his promises. These are the truly wise, 



of whom it is written, "The wise shall understand [matters 
as they become due], but none of the wicked shall understand" 
(Dan. 12:10); and again, "The secret of the Lord is 
with them that reverence him, and he will show them his 
covenant."— Psa. 25:14. 

Explaining his mission the Lord declared that a great 
cry had come up to heaven from Sodom and that he was 
about to investigate, which implied that forbearance had 
ceased to be of avail and that the time for Sodom's punishment 
was at hand, and so Abraham understood the matter. 
We are not to suppose that merely rumors of matters reached 
the Lord, and then special investigating committees were 
sent, but rather that this affair was stated in simple language, 
so that Abraham and all who have read the record since 
might know that the Lord takes full cognizance of the affairs 
of earth, that he does not ignore our conditions, and that 
while he is plenteous in mercy, and long-suffering and 
patient, he nevertheless "will not always chide, neither hold 
back his anger forever": a time of retribution shall come. 

This is the same thought to which the Apostle Peter 
draws our attention in connection with the end of this Gospel 
age and the trouble which will then be precipitated 
upon the world of mankind. He represents God as having 
great mercy, long suffering and willingness, that all might 
turn unto him and live. Nevertheless he shows that a change 
of dispensation will come, that justice will be laid to the 
line and righteousness to the plummet, and that all who will 
not obey that great Prophet shall be ultimately destroyed. 
(Acts 3:23). In this connection the New Testament refers to 
Sodom and its sister cities as illustrations of the fact that 
God will not always chide. We read that the calamity 
which came upon the cities of the plain were set forth as an 
example, "suffering the vengeance of eternal fire"— [utter 
destruction, not eternal torment]. (Jude 7.) Thus 
eventually God will destroy all evil doers with an "everlasting 
destruction [not preservation in torment or otherwise] 

R3947 : page 61 

from the presence of the Lord and the glory of his power." 
-2Thess. 1:9. 

LOVE IN ABRAHAM'S CHARACTER 

This one little incident in Abraham's life shows us 
something of the loving benevolence of his heart, and causes 
us to love and appreciate him more than ever. The intimation 
that judgment upon Sodom was near would upon a 
cruel and loveless heart have suggested a very different 
course from that pursued by Abraham. Such would have 
said, "Well, that is an awfully wicked community; they certainly 
deserve all you could give them; they could not be 
worse. I told my nephew Lot that he was making a mistake 
in going to live with such a deplorable set, and having his 
family intermingle with them; it will serve them all just 
right whatever kind of punishment you mete out to them." 



But Abraham was not at all of this disposition: his 
heart at once went out in sympathy, and benevolently he 
surmised that although the plain was notoriously wicked 
there might at least be fifty righteous persons there— not 
righteous in the absolute sense of being perfect, but in a 
relative or accommodated sense of doing right to the best of 
their ability. (Rom. 8:4.) Abraham had the spirit of a mediator: 
he said to himself, God has been wonderfully gracious 
to me everyway, and now that he has opened this subject to 
me I will make bold to tell him of my heart-sympathy for 
the people, and to express a hope that he will be generous 
to them. Then he adds, "Wilt thou consume the righteous 
with the wicked? Peradventure there be fifty righteous in 
the city, wilt thou consume and not spare the place for the 
fifty righteous that are therein? That be far from thee to 
do after this manner, to slay the righteous with the wicked, 
that so the righteous should be as the wicked; that be far 
from thee. Shall not the Judge of all the earth do right?" 

If these words surprise us— to think that Abraham 
would dare to call in question the righteousness of the Lord 
—we should remember that he did not have the blessed 
advantage that we possess, namely, of the guidance of the 
Word of God and the enlightenment of the holy Spirit, 
whereby the Lord's people since Pentecost have been begotten 
again and granted insight into the deep things of God. 
We may indeed esteem that this was Abraham's way of putting 
a question to the Lord rather than criticising him— "If 
you would destroy the righteous with the wicked, show no 
difference, would it be just? Lord, show me how this would 
be just? surely you would do right. I would like to see 
how justice would be compatible with the course I understand 
you to have in mind." 

PARALLELS IN OUR EXPERIENCES 

Similar questions come to us now. Financial disasters 
come, and probably as often affect the righteous as well as 
the wicked; storms and tempests do injury to their interests; 
indeed, sometimes the Lord seems not only not to show favor 
to the righteous, but, if anything, permits, as in Job's case, 
more peculiar disasters to fall to their lot. Under the instructions 
of the great Teacher and his various assistants, 
the apostles, we have learned that our interests as New 
Creatures are sometimes best served by difficulties in the 
flesh, and that God's promise that all things shall work 
together for good to them that love him and are called 
according to his purpose, is true. The Lord supervises the 
experiences of his faithful, so that these afflictions shall 
seem but light, and shall work out for them a far more exceeding 
and eternal weight of glory as New Creatures, in the 
life to come. 

Abraham's love of righteousness and sympathy for 
all who desired to do right was manifested in this petition. 
It suggests to us that God, in choosing him as one through 
whom some of his blessings should flow to the world of mankind 
in due time, made a good choice. We may be sure also 



that all who will be associated with Christ in his Millennial 
Kingdom, either as members of the Bride class on the Spirit 
plane, or as members of the great company, or of the ancient 
worthy class of princes (Psa. 45:16), must all have such a 
broad benevolence and desire to do good and to favor the 
righteous in every way, else they would not be fit for the 
great work to be entrusted to them. 

And as we have noted the character which God chose 
in Abraham, we may feel sure that the calling and drawing 
of the Father are chiefly if not exclusively to the same class 
of benevolent hearts. We cannot say that God has not 
drawn some very selfish persons into close fellowship with 
himself, and that none of this class will ever attain to a 
share in the Kingdom itself or in its work; but we may 
surmise that this would be very nearly the truth, "The liberal 
soul shall be made fat." The stingy, the selfish, the 
ungenerous, we incline to think, will not be drawn, not be 
called to a participation in the Kingdom. Not that any of 
us have anything whereof to boast in the way of generosity 
—not that the grace of God is not able to effect a wonderful 
transformation from selfishness to generosity— but because 
those who are most selfish have proportionately less of an 
eye to see and less of an ear to hear of the message of God's 
mercy and grace and boundless goodness, and therefore will 
be less in sympathy with the various features of the divine 
plan as respects the present and the coming age and its 
work. So that as a measure of love would seem to be indispensable 
to our drawing, we see most assuredly that a 
full development of love is absolutely necessary to our attaining 
the prize of our high calling. 

GROWING IN GRACE, IN MERCY, IN LOVE 

The Lord answered Abraham that if there were fifty 
righteous, well-intentioned people in Sodom it would not be 
destroyed, and Abraham perceived that he was not more 
just nor more generous than the Lord. But as he thought 
over the matter it occurred to him that there might perhaps 
be one or two less than fifty, and so he asked if the city 
might be spared if there were only forty-five. The reply 
was, Yes: the Lord was still as benevolent or more benevolent 
than Abraham: he was merely finding out the goodness 
of the Lord. His own courage increased, the spirit of 
love and benevolence having begun to operate, and he 
queried of the Lord whether now forty would secure mercy 
upon the city. The answer was, Yes. Abraham had not yet 
touched the bottom in seeking to measure the Lord's goodness. 
Step by step he increased his request. Would it be 
spared for thirty? Then would it be spared for twenty? 
until finally he asked the Lord if he would spare the city 
for ten. In every case the answer was, Yes. In every case 
the Lord was proven to be no less just, no less generous, 
than his servant. He had not yet been blessed as we have 

R3948 : page 62 



been with the anointing of the eyes of his understanding to 
an appreciation of the lengths and breadths and heights and 
depths of the love of God, which passeth all understanding. 

There is a lesson for us in all of this— a lesson that we 
should be more and more like our Father which is in heaven, 
whose message is, "Blessed are the merciful, for they shall 
obtain mercy"; and again, "If ye do not from the heart forgive 
those who trespass against you, neither will your heavenly 
Father forgive your trespasses."— Matt. 5:7; Mark 11:26. 

THE DEPTHS OF GOD'S MERCY 

Abraham's solicitude was not for the wicked but for the 
righteous, and so our sympathies should be with all who in 
every place love righteousness and hate iniquity— to do them 
good, to serve their interests, to render them assistance, doing 
good to all men, especially to the household of faith. Abraham's 
prayers were not for the wicked but for the righteous. 
"Shall the righteous suffer as the wicked?" was his plea. It 
is to be remembered, however, that some who now pray for 
the wicked do so under the misconceptions handed down 
from the "dark ages," that the wicked are not destroyed, but 
preserved either in a purgatory of suffering or an eternity 
of torture. This ungodly, unscriptural, unreasonable thought 
had not yet been introduced to the world; the plain word 
death still meant death, and the hope for a future was that 
of a resurrection of the dead in God's due time, and under 
more favorable conditions than in the present— when God's 
Kingdom would be in power, in control. 

When Abraham subsequently heard the result of the 
disaster— that only his nephew Lot was found a righteous 
man, and that the Lord delivered the one from destruction, 
and delivered on his account some who were not as worthy 
of his favor, members of his family, it must have brought a 
blush to his cheek— to think that he had questioned the 
justice of God in supposing that he was about to destroy, 
with the wicked in the city, as many as fifty righteous when 
here he beheld God's loving mercy even to the extent of 
delivering the one righteous person and some of his dear 
ones. Thus it is with us all: we are finding continually that 
the "heart of the Eternal is most wonderfully kind";— that 
in our poor, imperfect, fallen condition we have no measures 
that will reach to those lengths and breadths and heights 
and depths of the love of God, which passeth all understanding. 
Truly, as the Word declares, "As the heavens are 
higher than the earth, so are my ways higher than your 
ways and my plans loftier than your plans." 

STILL NEW BEAUTIES SEEN 

While our minds are contemplating the glories of God 
in connection with this incident of the destruction of Sodom, 
let us remember that now he has shown us a still deeper 
degree of sympathy and love in his provision for the whole 
world of mankind through the great Redeemer, Abraham's 
son, our Lord. What more do we see? Ask the Lord himself 



and hearken to his answer, "It shall be more tolerable 
for Sodom and Gomorrah in the day of judgment than for 
you"— of Bethsaida and Chorazin and Capernaum. What is 
this? A day of judgment? Is not the judgment of Sodom 
past? Yes, truly they were declared of the Lord unworthy 
of life and were cut short. To quote the words of inspiration, 
They were haughty, they neglected the poor and the 
needy and committed abomination, and the Lord took them 
away from life in the great catastrophe which came upon 
their city "as he saw good." (Ezek. 16:49,50.) That our 
Lord had these very people of Sodom in his mind is evidenced 
by his own words, "fire came down from God out of 
heaven and destroyed them all." They had a day of judgment 
and now met their doom and were made an example 
of, illustrating God's indignation against all unrighteousness, 
and his will that all evil-doers shall be destroyed. What 
then did our Lord mean by referring to a day of judgment 
future? Will they be judged again? 

We answer, Yes. They will be judged again, not in the 
sense of punishing them a second time for their evil deeds— 
they have already suffered for those. The promised day of 
judgment means a fresh time of trial pending. But how can 
this be? Is God not satisfied with his previous judgment 
respecting this people? Is he not satisfied respecting his 
decision concerning Adam and the entire race— that none 
are fit for eternal life because of the impairment of sin, because 
under the sentence of death? 

"A RANSOM FOR ALL, TO BE TESTIFIED" 

Ah! the key to this promise of a judgment day in the 
future for the world of mankind, including the Sodomites, 
lies in the fact that by divine arrangement "Jesus Christ by 
the grace of God tasted death for every man"— "gave himself 
a ransom for all, to be testified in due time." Thus we 
see that he paid the penalty for the Sodomites and for all 
the rest of us— the death penalty. Hence God's original 
sentence or judgment, which would have meant the everlasting 
destruction of us all, has been met, has been satisfied. 
It was from this standpoint that God spoke to Abraham 
in advance about the coming day of judgment, and 
predicted that then Abraham's seed, Christ, would bless all 
the families of the earth. It was not explained to Abraham 
how divine justice would be met and the sinner released 
through a ransom. This we see because it is in the past, 
and, more clearly than he, we may understand, guided by 
the Apostle's words, that "God hath appointed a day [the 
Millennial age] in the which he will judge the world in 
righteousness [grant the world a fair trial that will take 
cognizance of these weaknesses and frailties through the 
fall] by that man whom God hath ordained"— Jesus and 
his Church, his Bride.— Acts 17:31. 

From this standpoint of present truth, unfolding of the 
divine plan, how we perceive the riches of God's grace and 
loving kindness, not only toward us who have accepted of 
his favor through Christ and received of his holy Spirit 



as his servants and handmaidens, but his proposed blessing 
in due time upon the world of mankind in general, the majority 
of whom are in the great prison-house of death, of 
which Jesus has the key (Rev. 1:18), that in due time the 
holy Spirit shall be poured out upon all flesh— that all the 
blind eyes may be opened and all the deaf ears unstopped, 
to the glory of God and for the assistance of all mankind, 
who, under those favorable conditions, will turn wholly and 
completely to the Lord to serve him with full purpose of 
heart— and as for the remainder who will not so do, after 
all this opportunity, they shall be utterly destroyed from 
amongst the people.— Acts 3:23. 



R3948 : page 63 

SOME INTERESTING QUESTIONS 
TRADING WITH OUR "POUNDS" 



Question.— In a recent article in the WATCH TOWER 
you interpret the Parable of the Pounds and say that 
the "pound" that is given to each of the servants is 
Justification. How then can the pound be taken away 
from the unfaithful servant and be given to the most 
faithful one? Is it possible to thus transfer 
Justification? 

Answer.— Possibly we should have been more explicit 
in the article you refer to. We probably left too 
much for inference. We should have explained in detail 
that while what the Lord gives to each servant is 
Justification, the effect of that gift is the possession by 
the servant of special opportunities as a justified person 
that he would not have had without. Suppose the ten 
persons of the parable presented themselves for service 
—desiring to be the servants of the nobleman- 
desiring him to grant them some opportunity for rendering 
him service. Suppose that in order to be recognized 
as his servants and to be able to trade at all it 
was necessary for them to receive and wear a livery or 
costume provided by the nobleman. The gift of the costume 
would be the acceptance of them as servants and 
constitute their opportunity for serving him. 

So it is with us: However much we may desire to 
be the Lord's servants we are imperfect, weak through 
the blemishes of the flesh, through our fallen nature. 
We are incapable of doing anything in the Lord's service 
that would be acceptable until first of all he justifies 
us. This all-important justification places every 
servant of God on the same footing in relationship to him 
and his service— each one justified reckoned as being a 
perfect man from the divine standpoint— all his blemishes 
are fully covered by the precious merit of our 



Redeemer, the Nobleman. So long as we wear 
this livery (Justification) we have opportunity in 
God's sight of rendering acceptable service; and 
since he will count to us not according to the flesh but 
according to the spirit, mind or heart's desires, therefore 
the one who has least as respects his natural talents 
has the same standing before God as the one who 
has the most, because both are justified or made equal 
and right as perfect men, reckonedly. This, then, is 
the "pound" that is thus given to each one who enters 

R3949 : page 63 

the Lord's service. It is the same in every case. Nothing 
else that we have is common and equal— talents, 
opportunities, educational advantages, etc., are all 
variant, as well as physical and mental capabilities. 
Only from this standpoint of God's reckoning us perfect 
through Christ have we in any sense of the word a 
"pound" apiece to use in the divine service. 

Each one during his life time is to use his pound, 
his opportunity secured through his justification. Each 
must trade with his "pound," must exchange it, if he 
would make increase. We do lay down or exchange 
justified earthly rights, earthly interests, for heavenly 
ones,— and in proportion as we have zeal and energy in 
so doing will be our standing at the inspection when 
the nobleman returns. He who sacrifices most zealously 
his justified human nature, not only by consecrating 
it, but by daily sacrificing it, will be the one who 
will have the ten pounds at the conclusion of the test, 
and to such the Lord would say, Have thou dominion 
over ten cities. 

If, then, our reward at our Lord's hands is to be in 
proportion as we shall be diligent in using this "pound," 
opportunity received through our justification, let us 
lay aside every weight and every besetting sin, and 
strive with patience to do with our might all that our 
hands find to do. The faithful ones seeking opportunities 
will find them; the less faithful, the less zealous, 
will find fewer, while others will pass them by, and 
ultimately miss the reward, and the opportunities previously 
theirs through justification will be given to those 
more zealous. 

LOVE THE FULFILLING OF THE LAW 



Question.— In the Berean Bible Study on Love 
Question V. is, "What is the difference between duty 
love (filio) and disinterested or divine love (agapee)? 
I am somewhat perplexed regarding this difference, and 
would thank you for a little more light on the subject. 

Answer.— Three different words in our Greek New 
Testament are translated love. The principal word, 



which well corresponds to our word love in English, is 

agapee. This word is used whenever the highest type 

of love is described; hence we have designated it disinterested 

or divine love, as representing the highest 

type of love when used respecting the Lord and his 

people. Nevertheless, just like our English word love, 

agapee is also used in an inferior sense, as for instance 

when describing love for the world in the text, "If any 

man love [agapee] the world, the love [agapee] of the 

Father is not in him."— I John 2:15. 

The Greek word Philadelphia signifies brotherly 
love, and of course is always used in a good sense, 
because the brethren of the Lord are all "holy brethren." 
We are exhorted to develop this love for the 
brethren (Philadelphia), and it is given as a mark or indication 
that we are New Creatures in Christ. Nevertheless 
the Apostle exhorts that we go on beyond this 
degree of love (Philadelphia) and attain to the broader 
or divine love, the disinterested love (agapee). Note 
an instance of this: "Add to your faith patience, 
and to patience godliness, and to godliness brotherly 
kindness [philadelphia], and to brotherly kindness, 
charity— Love [agapee]." (2 Pet. 1:7.) The Apostle thus 
uses the word agapee to indicate the broader and more 
comprehensive love as the highest attainment of Christian 
character. Similarly, when describing the greatest 
thing in the world, in I Corinthians 13:2,3,4,8,13, 
the Apostle uses the Greek word agapee, love— in our 
common version translated charity. The culmination 
of his argument is, "Now abideth faith, hope, charity 
[love— agapee], and the greatest of these is charity [love 
—agapee]." Agapee is also used in I John 3:1, where 
the Apostle says, "Behold what manner of love [agapee]"; 
and "He that dwelleth in love [agapee] dwelleth 
in God." In the next verse also we read, "Herein is our 
love [agapee] made perfect." Again we find agapee 
used by the Apostle in the statement, "God commendeth 
his love [agapee] toward us"; and again, "Love 
[agapee] worketh no ill to his neighbor; therefore love 
[agapee] is the fulfilling of the law."— Rom. 5:8,13. 

The Greek word filio, rendered love, we have designated 
"duty love," but we fear that this does not give 
a sufficiently clear understanding of its meaning. The 
noun which is the basis for the verb is frequently translated 
kiss in the New Testament, and by implication 
the kiss belongs to the family and implies a love that 
is more or less respect, or we might say exclusive or 
selfish— not general— not for everybody. It represents 
more of an individual or family love, and is used 
either in a good or an evil sense, as, for instance, we 
read, "The Father loveth the Son" (John 5:20); and 
again, "The world will love its own."— John 15:19. 



page 65 



SEMI-MONTHLY 
VOL. XXVIII MARCH 1 No. 5 
A.D. 1907--A.M. 6035 



CONTENTS. 

Views from the Watch Tower 67 

Concerning Falling Stars 67 

"The New Theology" 68 

Religion in France 69 

"After the Order of Melchisedec" 69 

"Transformed" (Poem) 71 

Berean Bible Studies on the Tabernacle 71 

Isaac's Peaceful Career 72 

Rebecca's Faith and Its Reward 73 

"Blessed are the Peacemakers" 74 

Selling the Birthright 74 

Obtaining the Blessing 75 

Jacob's Deception of Isaac 76 

Encouraging Words from Faithful Workers 78 

page 66 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-24 EVERSHOLT ST., LONDON, N.W. 
GERMAN BRANCH-MIRKER STR., 45, ELBERFELD. 
AUSTRALASIAN BRANCH-EQUITABLE BLDG., COLLINS ST., MELBOURNE 

PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 

TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR AS FOLLOWS:- 

All Bible Students who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity or 
adversity, are unable to pay for this Journal, will be supplied FREE if 
they send a Postal Card each June stating their case and requesting its 
continuance. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on 
our list continually and in touch with the Studies, etc. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



THIS JOURNAL IS PUBLISHED IN THE 

FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, DANISH AND ITALIAN LANGUAGES. 

SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



R3951 : page 66 

NEW TABERNACLE ILLUSTRATIONS 



The Berean Studies of the Tabernacle has stirred up a great 
interest amongst the friends of Present Truth. To meet a 
growing demand we have prepared a good-sized diagram of the 
Tabernacle, showing the various parts and furnishments in 
colors. These are printed on fine paper and have metal 
mountings and hangers. Another sheet of fine paper shows 
the High Priest in "garments of glory and beauty," also in his 
sacrificial robes, also one of the under priests. These are 
printed in nine colors and are really quite artistic. 

In the ordinary way of business the two illustrations would 
sell for not less than $ 1 .00, but preparing them in large quantities 
we are enabled to supply both for 35c, postage included, in 
pasteboard tubes; 3 sets together, $1.00. Or by express at 
your charges, 100 sets for $25.00. 

Orders may be sent in at once and will be filled in turn as 
received. 

page 66 

SEND A MARKED COPY TO US 



Slanderous and nonsensical reports respecting the Editor 
of this journal and our Society's work, etc., have appeared in 
various newspapers. Friends are requested on finding such to 
send us a copy of such papers— marked: not merely a clipping. 



Colporteurs will please use our Order blanks and direct 
letters to "Colporteur Department." 



R3949 : page 67 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER 
CONCERNING FALLING STARS 



OUR SOCIETY'S London representative writes as 
follows:— 

London is getting a stir-up over "The New Theology," 
as it is called. A Rev. R. J. Campbell, who took 



Dr. Parker's place in London, thinks he has a mission. 
Ritual and Dogma are nothing to him, and he is laboring 
to break them to pieces. Man and God are indivisible; 
God is the sum-total of the consciousness of 
humanity— whatever that may be! Jesus was a man as 
other men, and was born in the same way: the difference 
in him being that he had more consciousness of 
himself and of things. There is no need for the terms 
Unitarian and Trinitarian, since man and God are one. 
The teaching that the blood of the man Jesus Christ, 
who was killed nearly 1900 years ago, could in any way 
avail to cover a man from guilt and that through faith 
in it a man can find acceptance with God is both 
lamentable and mischievous. These are some of the 
things being said. Other wild things are that a company 
of actors giving their services to interest some 
poor cripples were doing such work as Christ did on 
Calvary, and that the songs they sung, though not as 
fine words as the Psalms, were beyond them in actual 
effort. At any rate, this is to be seen— that the 
preacher in turning so sharply on the creeds will do 
something towards the disintegration of churchianity. 



The Rev. Campbell proclaims himself not merely a 
higher-critic infidel but an atheist as well; but he does 
this in refined terms so as not to alarm the flock he is 
misleading. To him God is either "it" or "him," with 
"it" first and the "him" merely added as a concession 
to the ignorance and superstition of his hearers and 
readers. Then, to give his atheism milder form than 
some, he objects to calling the Creator merely "blind 
force," preferring rather the vague term 
"consciousness." 

And what think you ! This avowed infidel and 
atheist occupying the most prominent pulpit in Great 
Britain is about to instruct the preachers of Great Britain 
along these lines— "at their request." They are to 
assemble in various cities in conventions to hear this 
reverend D.D. prove to them the wisdom of David— 
"The fool hath said in his heart, There is no God." 
(Psa. 14:1.) What better evidence could we have that 
the harvest work is urgently needed? Do we not see 
that as between Infidelity and Atheism in the pulpits 
and Christian Science, Spiritism, fanaticism and demonism 
in the pews, only the "elect" can escape these 
"plagues,"— and that the elect need the Helping Hands 
and Bible Keys speedily? 

We are fortunate in being able to quote Rev. Campbell's 
own words in the following extract from the 
New Haven Union:— 

VIEWS OF THE REV. CAMPBELL-SAYS SAVIOR WAS DIVINE 
AND THAT EVERYONE IS. 



"The great modifications in religious belief which 
are taking place throughout the Christian world have 
recently been manifesting themselves with especial 
prominence in England. The leader in radical revision 
of faith is R. J. Campbell, pastor of the City Temple 
and the recognized head of the English Nonconformists. 
He is about to make a tour of the country, addressing 
gatherings of provincial pastors at their request upon 
the 'Restated Theology.' Inasmuch as Mr. Campbell 
rejects many of the chief dogmas of the Bible, such as 
the story of the fall of man, it will be seen how radically 
different from the old is the new theology, which is 
supplanting the religious beliefs of a generation ago in 
England. 

"Mr. Campbell states his views with the utmost 
frankness in the London Daily Mail, and inasmuch as 
he is almost as well known in America as in his own 
country they will attract equal attention on this side 
of the Atlantic. 

'"We object,' he says, 'to the formal statements of 
belief which have distinguished the theology of the 
past. We object to ecclesiastical labels. Everyone 
knows that for the last twenty years there has been 
considerable uneasiness in the churches, due largely 
to the development of scientific knowledge, the progress 
of archaeology and the study of comparative religion. 
This uneasiness has affected every Church, even 

R3950 : page 68 

Rome. From the side of science the new theology is 
typified in the work of men like Sir Oliver Lodge. The 
lines of divergence between the old and the new go 
down deep, and there is great cleavage. 

GOD AND HUMANITY THE SAME 

'"The new theology in common with the whole scientific 
world believes that the finite universe is one 
aspect or expression of that reality, but it thinks of it 
or him as consciousness rather than a blind force, thereby 
differing from some scientists. Believing this we 
believe that there is thus no real distinction between 
humanity and the Deity. Our being is the same as 
God's, although our consciousness of it is limited. We 
see the revelation of God in everything around us. 

"The new theology holds that human nature 
should be interpreted in terms of its own highest; 
therefore it reverences Jesus Christ. It looks upon 
Jesus as a perfect example of what humanity ought to 
be, the life which perfectly expresses God in our limited 
human experience. So far as we are able to see, 
the highest kind of life that can be lived is the life 
which is lived, in terms of the whole, as the life of 
Jesus. EVERY MAN IS A POTENTIAL CHRIST, or rather a 
manifestation of the eternal Christ— that side of the 



nature of God from which all humanity has come forth. 
Humanity is fundamentally one; all true living in the 
effort to realize that oneness. This is the truth that 
underlies all noble efforts for the common good in the 
world today. 

'"The new theology watches with sympathy the 
development of modern science, for it believes itself to 
be in harmony therewith. It is the religious articulation 
of the scientific method. It therefore follows that it 
is in sympathy with scientific criticism of the important 
religious literature known as the Bible. While recognizing 
the value of the Bible as a unique record of religious 
experience, it handles it as freely and as critically as it 
would any other book. It believes that the seat of religious 
authority is within (not without) the human 
soul. Individual man is so constituted as to be able to 
recognize, ray by ray, the truth that helps him upward, 
no matter from what source it comes. 

"The new theology, of course, believes in the immortality 
of the soul, but only on the ground that 
every individual consciousness is a ray of the universal 
consciousness and cannot be destroyed. It believes 
that there are many stages in the upward progress of 
the soul in the unseen world before it becomes fully 
and consciously one with its infinite source. We make 
our destiny in the next world by our behavior in this, 
and ultimately every soul will be perfected. 

'"The doctrine of sin which holds us to be blameworthy 
for deeds that we cannot help we believe to be a 
false view. Sin is simply selfishness. It is an offense 
against the God within, a violation of the law of love. 
We reject wholly the common interpretation of atonement, 
that another is beaten for our fault. We believe 
not in a final judgment, but in a judgment that is ever 
proceeding. Every sin involves suffering, suffering 
which cannot be remitted by any work of another. 
When a deed is done its consequences are eternal. 

'"We believe Jesus is and was divine, but so are 
we. His mission was to make us realize our divinity 
and our oneness with God, and we are called to live 
the life which he lived.'" 

"THE NEW THEOLOGY" 



Under this caption The Christian World (London) 
says:— 

"It is an old saying that Englishmen have two interests, 
politics and theology. It would be more correct 
to make the duality a trinity, for if a census of 
tastes were taken it would probably show that sport is 
the largest preoccupation of our modern public. But 
that theology is in this country still a very live subject 
is sufficiently illustrated by the daily newspaper columns 
of the last few days. The latest press sensation 



is what is being everywhere called 'The New Theology.' 
Mr. Campbell, of the City Temple, its leading exponent, 
is the topic of the hour. His portrait is exhibited, columns 
are occupied with impressionist sketches of him, 
with interviews, with leading articles, and correspondence 
on his views. Presidents of colleges and well 
known preachers are being solicited for their opinions 
on the disputed points. There is the usual clash of 
diametrically opposite views which we have learned to 
look for as the Englishman's way of expressing himself 
on any subject of interest. The veterans shake 
their heads. Some declare that the new preaching is 
a denial of New Testament Christianity; others denounce 
the preacher as an ignoramus who has had no 
proper theological training. It is simple Unitarianism,' 
says one party. Another demands a resurrection 
of the City Temple trust deed and an arraignment of 
the preacher as violating its conditions. Meanwhile 
the crowd goes to hear Mr. Campbell, and both old and 
young, dissentients and disciples, agree that a crisis 
has arisen for the churches and pulpits of the land. 

"Are we in for a new Reformation? Vinet, himself 
an evangelical theologian, said long ago that one was 
necessary and inevitable, and there are features about 
the present upheaval which remind us curiously of that 
old one of nigh four centuries ago. It is difficult for 
an age to recognize the meaning of its own doings. To 
us Luther's movement comes as part of our orthodox 
creed. But we have only to go back to the literature 
of the time to see the enormous strain it put upon the 
faith of the world. The translation of the New Testament 
and its diffusion amongst the people, to us so 
essentially religious a work, was to orthodox Churchmen 
the most dangerous and subverting of acts. 

"The time is one of sifting, when each man must 
examine his own foundations. Let him not lose his 
temper or his charity in the process. The day of the 
odium theologicum ought to be over. We may leave the 
topic with another word of Milton which could hardly 
be bettered as a present admonition:— 'A little generous 
prudence, a little forbearance of one another, and 
some grain of charity, might win all these diligences 
to join and unite into one general and brotherly search 
after truth.'" 

LEAGUE OF "NEW" THEOLOGIANS 



The Tribune, another English daily, under the 
above title, states that a meeting of ministers interested 
in the new theology was held at the City Temple, 
when the "New Theology League" came into definite 
existence. Its sub-title is as follows:— 

"A society for the encouragement of progressive 
religious thought." The membership is to be confined 



R3950 : page 69 

to ministers and laymen in association with Congregational 
churches. The Rev. R. J. Campbell was elected 
president, and the Rev. T. Gilbert Sadler (Wimbledon) 
and the Rev. W. Evans Darby (of the Peace Society) 
secretaries. It is proposed to propagate the views of 
the League by means of pamphlets, but for the present 
at any rate no attempt will be made to formulate a 
creedal definition of belief. Those present considered 
it was wiser to focus a common outlook and attitude 
rather than attempt creed-making. 



The Tribune publishes the names of sixteen ministers 
who have endorsed Rev. Campbell's position. 
Error grows much faster than does Truth. The people 
are more ready for it, and name and fame and salary 
are not thereby risked. 

Meantime some one has created a sensation by the 
discovery that the trust deed to the London City Temple 
has a clause which restricts its use to ministers who 
teach as well as profess the Westminster Confession. 
Dr. Campbell and his followers are pained that they 
should thus be interfered with. They are willing to 
profess what they do not believe, but think the time 
ripe for telling the people of their unbelief. 

The Express states that it is proposed to ask Parliament 
to pass a law voiding the restrictions of the 
trust deed. It says:— 

"Mr. Campbell's 'New Theology,' as so far 
developed:— 

"1. Denies the 'fall of man.' 

"2. Rejects the Atonement. 

"3. Denies 'final judgment,' and says that judgment 
is always going on. 

"4. Denies the Virgin Birth of Christ. 

"5. Says that sin involves suffering which cannot 
be avoided. 

"Mr. Campbell is not entitled to preach the 'New 
Theology' as pastor of the City Temple, nor is it legal 
for the trustees to allow him to do so, as they are equally 
bound by the deed, and have no power to alter it. 

"The position is so acute that it has been proposed 
to apply for parliamentary power to vary the deeds, 
and at a recent meeting of the Free Church Council 
Mr. Reckitt, M.P., a leading supporter of Mr. Campbell's 
Church, said, 'We must act, because it is competent 
for any one to raise the whole question, and for 
ministers to be ejected from every chapel.'" 

R3951 : page 69 

RELIGION IN FRANCE 



In the days of the Empire the French coins bore 
the usual legend, declaring that the Emperor reigned 
"by the grace of God" (i.e., as authorized by the 
Papacy). When the Republic superseded the Empire 
the coins' inscription was changed and now reads: 
"God protect France." The French Congress has recently 
directed that this be changed, and new coins 
will instead bear the words, "Liberty, Equality and 
Equity." 

This is quite proper. The Government no longer 
recognizes the Papacy or its appointees, and gradually 
the French are realizing that their Government is no 
part of the Kingdom of God, and that special divine 
protection is not to be expected. When will other nations 
similarly awaken? They are all "kingdoms of 
this world," under "the prince of this world"— Satan. 
Only when he shall have been bound by the new King 
of glory will the French and others be prepared to become 
Kingdoms of God's dear Son. 

The bishops' mansions, the seminaries, etc., vacated 
by their former occupants because of their unwillingness 
to obey French laws, are to be fitted up for and devoted 
to educational and museum purposes. 

Some Catholics, in accord with the new French 
law, began the organization of a "Cultural Association," 
so as to have the use of the Church edifices; but 
the bishop of that diocese, Mgr. Dizien, following instructions 
from the pope, ordered the withdrawal of 
their parish priest as a punishment— for this means to 
Catholics no one to forgive their sins, no one to help 
their dead out of purgatory, no one to baptize their infants 
or preserve those dying from an awful future. 

Thus is the poor world staggering on out of the 
darkness toward the light, but still hopeless except as 
our Lord's prayer shall be fulfilled, "Thy Kingdom 
come, thy will be done on earth as in heaven." 



R3951 : page 69 

"AFTER THE ORDER OF MELCHISEDEC" 

"Jehovah hath sworn and will not repent, Thou art a priest 
forever after the order of Melchisedec."— Ps. 110:4. 

A PRIEST, in the only true sense, is a mediator 
between God and fallen creatures, the object 
of such mediation being to restore and establish 
harmony on a legal basis. 

The office of the priest or mediator between God 
and man is to restore to perfection and consequent harmony 
with God a race of human beings condemned to 



death or already dead or dying. Hence the priest of 
necessity must be "mighty to save." (Psa. 89:19.) He 
must have both the right and the power to recall the 
dead to life, and ability to instruct and discipline, and 
thus to lead every willing subject back to the perfect 
estate from which Adam and the race in him fell. To 
secure this right he must first satisfy the demands of 
justice, which required the extinction of the human 
race; and these demands of justice could only be met 
by a corresponding sacrifice— a human life for a human 
life. The life of Adam and all in him could only be 
redeemed by another perfect human being. And so it 
was— "Since by man came death, by man came also the 
resurrection from the dead." (I Cor. 15:21.) By the 
sacrifice of a perfect human existence is secured the 
right of the priest to restore. 

But beyond the right or privilege of restoring, the 
priest must have the power, and power would of necessity 
presuppose his own everlasting existence. He 
must have power to create, since to restore to being 
that which had completely lost existence is to re-create 
it, and is a greater work even than the first creation; 
he must also have perfect knowledge, both of God's requirements 

R3951 : page 70 

and of human necessities, as well as perfect 
ability to guide a race so destitute back to the glorious 
heights of perfection and blessed harmony and communion 
with God. 

What an office! Who would presume to assume 
such a title? It belongs really and only to Jehovah's 
Anointed. Even Jesus, "the Anointed One, did not 
glorify himself to become a high priest," but he has 
"been declared by God a high priest according to the 
order of Melchisedec." (Heb. 5:4,5,10— Diaglott.) Jehovah 
honored him by inviting him to that position, 
and giving him all power to fill it. In harmony with 
God's plan, not only has Jesus, his Anointed one, been 
chosen as the chief, or high priest, but the "little flock," 
who follow him in sacrifice now, are called to be joint-heirs 
with him in the same honor. "If we suffer with him 
we shall also be glorified together." Jesus alone is the 
great High Priest; but the Gospel Church, redeemed 
by his death and associated with him now in sacrifice, 
and to be associated with him in divine power hereafter, 
is counted in with him, and, together with him, 
will constitute the great Prophet, Priest and King 
promised, to liberate and bless the groaning creation 
-the Seed of promise. -Gen. 22:18; 28:14; Gal. 3:29; 
Acts 3:20-23; Psa. 110:4. 

From these considerations it should be plain to all 
that our High Priest is truly a King, in whose hands 
absolute power is vested. And in looking back to the 
types God has given us we find Melchisedec, to whom 
we are cited as an illustration of this priesthood both 



by the Psalmist and the Apostle Paul. (Psa. 110:4; 
Heb. 5:5,10.) They show that Melchisedec, who was 
a priest upon his throne, represented the Christ in 
glory and power, while in the Aaronic priesthood the 
special features of the redemptive sacrifice were shadowed 
forth— its perfection, its completeness, its acceptableness, 
as also the share which the Church has with 
Christ in that sacrifice. 

Christ was not constituted a priest of the Aaronic 
order: that priesthood was only the type or figure. 
The Aaronic priesthood sprang from the tribe of Levi, 
while "our Lord [according to the flesh] sprang from 
the tribe of Judah, of which tribe Moses spake nothing 
concerning priesthood"; and the members of his body, 
the Church, are chosen chiefly from among the Gentiles. 
As a man Jesus was not a priest, neither as men 
are the saints members of the royal priesthood; but 
as "new creatures" they hold and execute their office. 
Jesus as a "new creature," "partaker of the divine nature" 
(to which he was begotten at the time of his baptism), 
was the priest, and as a priest he offered up his 
perfect human nature an acceptable sacrifice to God. 
He consecrated or offered himself in sacrifice on becoming 
the priest, and he received a special anointing for 
the office which was necessary to enable him to accomplish 
the sacrifice as well as to apply its benefits to 
men. His human nature, when sacrificed, could do 
nothing more— it must remain a sacrifice forever; but 
the new nature, fully developed in the resurrection, has 
"all power in heaven and in earth."— Matt. 28:18. 

The priestly office of the new nature is not of the 
Aaronic order; it does not trace its lineage to any human 
source. This fact is strikingly typified in the 
priesthood of Melchisedec, whose lineage and death are 
not recorded. He was a priest without having inherited 
the office from his father or his mother— thus typifying 
Christ's priesthood, which came not of the lineage 
of the flesh, as did the Aaronic priesthood, which 
Israel thought to be the real. Neither was Melchisedec's 
death recorded nor a successor named (Heb. 7:3, 
Diaglott), that thus might be typified the continuity of 
Christ's priesthood. In this type the work of sacrifice 
is not shown, as Melchisedec represents the Christ glorified 
and reigning after the work of sacrifice has been 
completed, and the divine nature fully perfected. 

In Heb. 7:4-10 Melchisedec is declared to be greater 
than Abraham, thus showing that the divine Christ 
will be greater, and therefore able to bless every "friend 
of God" on the human plane. 

"Wherefore he [Christ] is able to save them to the 
uttermost that come unto God by him, seeing that he 
ever liveth to make intercession for them. For such a 
High Priest became us, who is holy, harmless, undefiled, 

R3952 : page 70 



separate from sinners, and made higher than the 
heavens [lifted higher than the highest— to the divine 
nature]." (Heb. 7:25-27.) And this blessed assurance 
of such a priest, so "mighty to save," is confirmed unto 
us by the oath of Jehovah. (Heb. 7:21; Psa. 110:4.) 
What strong consolation, then, may those have, who 
have fled to Jehovah's Anointed for refuge: "Jehovah 
has sworn and will not repent: Thou art a priest forever 
after the order of Melchisedec." What believer, 
justified by faith, who has offered himself a living sacrifice, 
may not read his title clear to joint-heirship with 
the Head in that glorious anointed body? He is authorized 
and is able to save completely all that come unto 
God by him now, as well as all who shall hear and 
come in the Millennium. 

"Wherefore, holy brethren, partakers of the heavenly 
calling, consider the Apostle and High Priest of 
our profession, Christ Jesus;. ..for we have become 
associates of the Anointed, if indeed we hold fast the 
beginning of our confidence firm to the end."— Heb. 3:1,14, 
Diaglott. 

We conclude then, that while the Aaronic priesthood 
furnishes typical illustrations of the sacrifices 
and sufferings of Christ and the blessings 
to follow, it did not completely illustrate the glorious, 
everlasting and unchangeable character of 
his priesthood during the Millennial age; and 
for this cause Melchisedec was presented as a type, 
that thus might be shown his glorious office of 
priest and king— a priest upon his throne. Here, too, 
the body of Christ is no longer shown as separate individuals, 
but as one, complete. In the work of sacrifice 
we have seen the head or chief priest and the under 
priests more or less separately sacrificing, as represented 
in Aaron and the under priests; but all will 
unitedly share in the future glory represented in Melchisedec 
alone. 

R3952:page71 

"TRANSFORMED" 

Through a cloud of earthly senses 

Bursts upon my raptured sight 
Such a vision of my Father 

In his glory and his might, 
In his justice and his wisdom, 

In his tender, watchful care, 
Manifested in my Savior, 

Rich in blessings everywhere. 

Oh, it thrills with love and longing 

Every fiber of my soul, 
To be with thee, in thy presence, 

While the countless ages roll. 
Then a voice, "This be thy pattern, 



See that thou in all thy ways 
Make according to the pattern, 
To my glory and my praise." 

Thou the pattern, blessed Savior, 

How can I a copy be 
Of that gracious, sweet perfection 

Manifested, Lord, in thee? 
"Keep thine eyes upon the pattern, 

Look not thou aside, behind, 
And beholding but my glory, 

Thou shalt be transformed in mind." 

Oh, my Father, in thy mercy 

As I gaze with unveiled face, 
Let me see, as in a mirror, 

All thy brightness, all thy grace. 
So in looking, so in longing, 

Shall my homely features glow 
With the radiance of thy glory, 

And thy matchless beauty show; 

All my days be crowned with gladness, 

From the center of my heart, 
Praise to thee that in the blessing 

Thou wilt let me have a part. 
So then, in a faithful service, 

For the loving service' sake, 
Changed from glory unto glory, 

I shall in thy likeness wake. 

I shall see thee in thy beauty, 

I shall in thy beauty shine, 
All the loving, all the longing, 

Merged in purest love divine. 
Satisfied with the full sweetness 

Of the bliss of heaven above, 
All my future spent in blessing, 

All my being lost in love. 

—Carrie Beatty. 



page 7 1 

BEREAN BIBLE STUDIES ON THE TABERNACLE 

In the references below, Z. represents this journal 
and T. stands for Tabernacle Shadows. The references 
should be given to brethren and sisters for reading 
in the classes. Free comment should be permitted 
either before or after each reading. 



THE FIRST ATONEMENT-DAY SACRIFICE 



(Continued) 
MARCH 10 

30. What simultaneous work was progressing in the 
"Court"? and what did this typify? T.57, par. 1,2. 

3 1 . What was represented by the burning upon the 
Brazen Altar of the fat and inward organs of the 
bullock? T.57, par. 1,2. 

32. What did the great volume of smoke typify? T.57, par. 2. 

33. In whose presence was this done? and what effect 
was produced? T.57, par. 1,2. 

34. What period of time in the antitype was indicated 
by the time spent by the Priest in the burning 

of the fat and vital organs, as well as in the burning 
of the sweet incense? T.56, par. 2; 57, par. 2; 
I Pet. 1:7. 

35. While the sweet incense was burning in the "Holy" 
and the fat and vital organs were burning in the 
"Court," what work was going on simultaneously 
outside the camp? T.57, par. 3; Lev. 16:27. 

MARCH 17 

36. What was typified by the stench of the burning of 
the hoofs and hide and entrails of the bullock of 

the sin offering? Heb. 13:13. T.58, top of page. 

37. When did all the sacrifices and sufferings of our 
Lord end? T.58, par. 1; Jno. 19:30. 

38. What three pictures did our Lord thus portray during 
the three and a half years of his ministry? 

and to what three classes did these refer? T.58, 
par. 1. 

39. By what act did the High Priest foreshadow our 
Lord's resurrection and entrance into heaven, 
"there to appear in the presence of God for us"? 
T.58, par. 2; I Pet. 3:18; I Cor. 15:44. 

40. How long did our Lord tarry under the "second 
vail"? T.58, par. 2; Jno. 19:31-33; 20:1. 

41. What was pictured in the High Priest's carrying 
the blood of the bullock into the "Most Holy" and 
there sprinkling it upon the "Mercy Seat" and also 
before it? T.58, foot of page, and 59, top of page. 
See also T.63, par. 3. 

42. When and where was the work of atonement, accomplished 
by our dear Redeemer, completed? 

T.59, top of page; Heb. 4:14; 9:24. 



THE SECOND ATONEMENT -DAY SACRIFICE 
MARCH 24 
43. What was typified by the two goats for a sin-offering? 



and why were two chosen? T.59, par. 2,3; 
Lev. 16:5-10. 

44. Why were they presented at the "door of the Tabernacle"? 
T.59, par. 2,3. 

45. Why was Aaron instructed to "cast lots" upon the 
goats? T.60, par. 3; 61, top of page; Rom. 8:17. 

46. Could we think of any other means than the casting 
of lots, by which the Lord could as well have indicated 
that he made no choice amongst those represented 

by these consecrated goats— as to which 
should be the sacrificers of the "little flock"? 

47. Why was the "scapegoat" presented alive before the 
Lord to make an atonement with him, while the 
"Lord's goat" was killed? T.59, par. 3; p. 60; 

Heb. 2:15. 

48. Why were both goats taken from the "Camp," from 
among the children of Israel? T.59, par. 3. 

MARCH 3 1 

49. Why were not the goats taken into the "Holy" instead 
of being presented before the Lord at the 

door? 

50. Will all who make the consecration to be "dead 
with Christ" gain the "prize" for which they consecrated? 
If not, why not? T.60, par. 1; Matt. 16:24. 

51. Was the same treatment applied to the "Lord's 

page 72 

goat" as to the bullock? and why? T.61, par. 2; 
Lev. 16:14,15. 

52. For whom was the "Lord's goat" offered in sacrifice? 
Lev. 16:15; T.61, par. 2. 

53. Does a goat have as much fat as a prime bullock? 
and what is thus typified? T.61, par. 2. 

54. Were any offerings save "sin offerings" burned 
without the camp? T.62, par. 1; Lev. 16:27; 

Heb. 13:11. 

55. What did the burning outside the camp of the hide, 
flesh and offal of the goat typify? T.62, par. 2; Col. 1:21; 
Matt. 5:11. 

APRIL 7 

56. Must all who are footstep followers of Christ and 
who hope to share his glory expect to suffer the 

same experiences of disesteem and ignominy experienced 

by our "Head"? Matt. 10:24,25. T.62, 

par. 2. Quote corroborative Scriptures from memory. 

57. How can we go unto him without the camp? T.60, 
par. 2,3; Heb. 13:13. 

58. What class alone can fully appreciate the value of 
the sacrifice of the "Lord's goat" company? T.62, 

par. 2; I Cor. 2:9-14. 

59. What other class can appreciate it to some extent? 



T.62, par. 2. 

60. What lessons should we learn from these facts? 
T.62, par. 3; Heb. 4:1; Jas. 5:20; I Pet. 2:23. 

61. Is it possible for those who have once entered the 
"Court" and also the "Holy" to leave or be cast 

out of either or both? T.63, top of page. Heb. 6:4-8; 
10:26-31. 



R3952 : page 72 

ISAAC'S PEACEFUL CAREER 

-GENESIS 26: 12-25. -MARCH 10.- 

Golden Text:— Blessed are the peacemakers, for they 
shall be called the children of God. "-Matt. 5:9. 

ISAAC, the child of promise, in whom centered for the 

time the riches of God's gracious provision for the 

world of mankind, was not remarkable, either as a 

boy or a man. His experiences were rather commonplace 

as a rule. But is it not so with the majority of the Lord's 

people? Not many great, not many wise, not many learned, 

not many noble, not many rich, hath God chosen, but chiefly 

the poor of this world, rich in faith, heirs of the Kingdom. 

(1 Cor. 1:26-29; Jas. 2:5.) If all the characters of the 

Scriptures were notable, the majority of us would feel ourselves 

so commonplace as to excite our fears that the Lord 

would have no place for us amongst his elect. We are glad 

that in divine providence some have prominence, greatness, 

almost thrust upon them by the necessity or interests of the 

Lord's plan. We are glad also for those less prominent, in 

whose hearts the Lord works equally a work of grace, purification, 

strength of character, to make them meet for the 

inheritance of the saints in light. A lesson in this connection 

is that strong characters may be developed and high 

ideals attained in the heart and in deed amongst the lowly 

and obscure. The majority of the Lord's elect are of this 

kind— "Even so, Father; for so it seemed good in thy sight." 

-Matt. 11:26. 

The name Isaac signifies laughter, yet it would appear 
to be a misfit so far as the boy and the man were concerned. 
Retiring, peace-loving, meditative, quiet, he had not the rollicking 
disposition that might be represented by the name. 
A probable suggestion is that the laughter connected with 
his name was the remembrance of the experience of his parents 
in that matter. (1) We read, for instance, in Genesis 17:17 
that Abraham laughed at the idea of a son being born 
to those so old. (2) In Gen. 18:12 we read that Sarah 
laughed at the idea of her having a son in old age. (3) 
In Gen. 21:6 we read that Sarah laughed with joy at the 
birth of her son. Another thought is that as Isaac was a 
type of Christ (Gal. 4:28), and the joy typified by his name 
was a prophecy of the blessing that is yet to come through 



the glorified Christ to all nations, in harmony with the prediction 
of the angels— "good tidings of great joy which shall 
be unto all people." (Luke 2:10.) But as Isaac was not 
peculiarly mirthful or joyous, neither was Jesus, his great 
antitype, nor yet the Church, the body of Christ. Nevertheless 
there are joys of the Lord which the world cannot 
appreciate— the experience of all of those who have the 
divine peace and blessing. 

ISAAC'S YOUTH AND MARRIAGE 

Of a very different character indeed was Isaac's elder 
half-brother, Ishmael— domineering, tyrannical. Not amenable 
to restraints and reproofs, he made life miserable for 
Isaac until Abraham, in harmony with the Lord's direction, 
treated him as an incorrigible, and refused to him and his 
mother the privileges of the home. (Gen. 21:12.) We are 
informed that Hagar also had a sneering spirit. (Gen. 16:4.) 
Separation was not only wise but necessary to the type, as 
St. Paul shows. Ishmael was 13 years old, or 18 if, as some 
think, this occurred in Isaac's fifth year. We are to remember 
the Apostle's explanation of this incident, that it was typical: 
that Hagar and her son Ishmael represented the Law Covenant 
and the Jews, while Sarah and her son represented the 
original Abrahamic Covenant and the Church of this Gospel 
age. The persecution of the Isaac class at the first advent 
was very manifest, and as a result the Ishmael class, the 
Jews, have been cast off from divine favor and have had a 

R3953 : page 72 

time of trouble ever since. It is with pleasure that we see 
in the type, as well as in the direct statement of the Apostle, 
that the time will come when God's favor shall return to 
them and they shall return to the Lord, and he shall abundantly 
have mercy upon them, and we rejoice that this time 
is now near at hand, even at the door. 

When Isaac was forty years of age, according to the 
custom of the time Abraham selected a wife for him— not 
that this was an invariable custom of the time, either, for 
we find that Isaac's two sons, Jacob and Esau, selected their 
own wives; but as Isaac was intended to be the type of 
Christ, so the bride of Isaac was intended to be the type of 
the Church. Hence the selection of the typical bride must 
be after the manner of the selection of the antitypical Bride. 
Thus as Abraham sent his servant to select the bride for 

R3953 : page 73 

Isaac, so the Scriptures inform us the heavenly Father sends 
the holy Spirit to make selection of those who may constitute 
the Bride of Christ, for, as Jesus declared, "No man can 
come unto me except the Father which sent me draw him." 
The story of the selection is a beautiful one, and fits well to 
the calling of the Church, thus:— 
The divine guidance was sought and had in the 



matter of the selection, and this guidance was along practical 
lines— the approved maiden showed herself hospitable 
and kindly disposed in that she proffered the drawing of 
water for the camels which Abraham's servant had brought. 
It demonstrated her physical strength as well as her quality 
of heart. So those who are drawn of the Father to the Son 
must have certain elements of character to begin with, however 
these may be afterwards shaped and polished. The 
kindly, the generous, seem always to have the divine approval; 
hence we all should be on the alert to cultivate 
these qualities in our hearts and lives, and as parents and 
preceptors of the rising generation we should endeavor to 
cultivate this same quality in those under our care, having 
in mind the fact that such will be the more likely and the 
more ready to receive divine blessings of various kinds. 

REBECCA'S FAITH AND ITS REWARD 

As soon as Abraham's servant recognized the character 
of Rebecca he perceived that she would make a suitable 
wife for his master's son— that the Lord had guided him to 
her. He at once rewarded her kindness with an earring 
and bracelets and went with her to her home, where the 
matter was related to the family, and where Rebecca, with 
the consent of her parents, accepted the marriage proposal. 
Thereupon the servant brought forth more jewels and presented 
them to her, and they came on the journey and met 
Isaac at the well Lahairoi. 

As the limitation for Isaac's bride was that she must 
belong to the family of Abraham, so the limitation of those 
called to be members of the Bride of Christ is: (1) That they 
shall not be sinners, not of the world, but of the "household 
of faith." Sinners are called to repentance, but not called 
to be the Bride of Christ— only believers are honored by 
this call. (2) Only those who have something of generosity 
and amiability in their characters are approached. (3) The 
self-sacrifices of these bring blessings in advance from the 
Lord, typified by the earring and bracelets of Rebecca; for 
no one can receive the truth and render service thereto 
without experiencing a blessing from the Lord. (4) After 
this came the information respecting the riches of God's 
grace and the invitation to become members of the Bride, 
the Lamb's Wife. The acceptance of the proposition could 
not be possible if it were with hesitancy; it must be prompt 
and hearty, and then the servant, the holy Spirit, opens up 
further treasures and presents them to the betrothed, and 
the journey begins. (5) That journey not only represents 
the individual experiences of our lives as we travel on under 
the guidance of the holy Spirit, looking forward to the time 
when we shall meet the Bridegroom, but it represents also 
the experiences of the Church as a whole for the past eighteen 
centuries, approaching to and hoping for the meeting of 
the Bridegroom and the marriage feast, the joys and blessings 
that are to follow when we shall be forever with our 
Lord, the heavenly Bridegroom. (6) As Isaac went out and 
met the bridal party on the way, at the well, so Christ meets 



his Church at the end of the journey. (7) The account 
tells us that when Rebecca recognized Isaac she put on a 
vail and alighted from the camel. Applying this to the 
antitype we see that at the end of our journey the Church 
shall pass beyond the vail and alight from the accessories 
of the present journey, and be thenceforth under the direct 
guidance and blessing and in the presence of the heavenly 
Bridegroom. What joys, what blessings, what glories are 
implied in this! As Isaac had but one wife, so Christ has but 
the one Bride, and the present period is for the testing of 
those who will be acceptable for that position. Respecting 
the type, Rebecca, Doctor Abbott writes that "Rebecca's 
noblest monument is found in the fact that in the prayer-book 
of the Church of England in the marriage service is 
the statement, 'that as Isaac and Rebecca lived faithfully 
together, so these persons may truly perform and keep the 
vow and covenant between them.'" 

ISAAC PROSPEROUS BUT PEACEABLE 

The record shows that Isaac inherited the great wealth 
of his father Abraham, flocks, herds, gold, silver, servants, 
etc. And that he increased this considerably is shown in 
our lesson— "The man waxed great and grew more and 
more until he became very great: for he had possessions of 
flocks and of herds and a great household: and the Philistines 
envied him." At the time of this lesson a drouth had 
prevailed in the more southern part, and Isaac had moved 
his establishment to the vicinity of Gerar north to the Mediterranean 
coast, because of the better pasturage and water. 
The Philistines had recognized God's favor with Abraham in 
his great growth, and now they saw the same in respect to 
Isaac. Not wishing to encourage this growingly influential 
family they had stopped the wells that the herdsmen of the 
north should not come their way; but Isaac's herdsmen, not 
taking the hint, had dug the wells afresh, and this led the 
king or chief of the Philistines to come out plainly and request 
Isaac and his retainers to move to other parts, saying, 
"Go from us; for thou art mightier than we." They knew 
not when the strife between the herdsmen might mean a 
civil war, and in the interests of peace they urged Isaac not 
to remain too close a neighbor. 

We see a similar spirit manifested in various parts of 
the world today toward the posterity of Isaac— Russians, 
for instance, use these very words to the Jews, "Go from us, 
for you are mightier than we." The Lord's blessing has 
been with the seed of Abraham in a very remarkable manner, 
notwithstanding their chastenings during this Gospel age. No 
wonder, then, that other men feel somewhat envious of them 
and desire not to sit under their shadow. If the Russians 
merely asked the Jews to remove it would not be so bad, so 
unjust, provided, of course, that they would purchase from 
them their property at a reasonable value. But, coming far 
short of the spirit of the Philistines, they are ready to kill, to 
rob, to destroy the Jews. 

In compliance with the request, Isaac did change the 



seat of his encampment a distance down the valley, but 
again trouble broke out. The Philistines were still jealous 
and claimed the water wells found by Isaac's herdsmen. But 

R3953 : page 74 

the man of peace would not permit of strife and moved his 
home again. Still angry feeling continued, and again he moved 
still farther away, and rejoiced that although the country 
was poorer, less advantageous every way, nevertheless he 
had peace for himself and his possessions. 

"BLESSED ARE THE PEACEMAKERS" 

There is a lesson for the Lord's people here, a lesson of 
peace: Blessed are those who are peaceable and who are 
peacemakers— blessed of God. They may not always prosper 
as well in outward and temporal matters, but they surely 
will be prosperous in their hearts, in their heart experiences, 
in their relationship to the Lord; they surely will 
make the better progress in the fruits and graces of the 
Spirit, and be the better fitted and prepared for the glorious 
opportunities soon to come, when, as the antitypical Isaac, 
associated as members of the Prince of Peace, they shall engage 
in the work of uplifting and refreshing and blessing all 
mankind. True, there are times when "backbone" is necessary, 
when principle is involved, and when retreat would be 
absolutely wrong; but these cases are rare. Undoubtedly 
we can often yield, and, as Isaac did, in so doing may find a 
provision of the Lord for our prosperity. Had the requirement 
of Abimelech been that Isaac should renounce the worship 
of the true God we can readily see that the principle 
involved would have hindered Isaac from yielding; and so 
with us, we are to note carefully and stand by everything 
involving principle. 

Had Isaac and his servants been less numerous than 
the Philistines there would have been less merit in his conduct. 
We are to remember that, according to the words of 
the Philistines themselves, Isaac's clan was greater than that 
of the Philistines. For the greater to be submissive, yielding, 
peace-loving, is peculiarly commendable. Too frequently 
it is the case that might makes right, and the stronger 
one declares to the weaker, "Go yourself," with the result of 
clashing, bitterness, resistance, etc. Let us as the followers 

R3954 : page 74 

of the Lord in such matters take the course of Isaac, and, as 
the Apostle exhorts, "So far as lieth in you live peaceably 
with all men"; do not stand upon your rights— be willing 
to sacrifice for the interests of others, or at least to preserve 
peace between yourselves and others. 

"THE LORD HATH MADE ROOM FOR US" 

The Scriptures exhort, "In all thy ways acknowledge 



him." This is a matter which we feel is too frequently 
neglected in our day, even amongst the Lord's consecrated 
people. But Isaac did not forget the source of his blessing 
—the naming of the well indicates this, "Now the Lord hath 
made room for us and we shall be fruitful in the land." 
Our blessings increase in value and in efficacy and in the 
joys they bring to us in proportion as we recognize that they 
come from above. Let us then more and more— in all the 
little affairs of life as well as in the great— look to the Lord 
for his blessing and guidance, and give him thanks and 
acknowledgment as we perceive his hand in our affairs. So 
doing we learn to trust him more, and to have blessing ourselves 
as well as become blessings to others. 

It was at this time that the Lord appeared to Isaac in 
a vision, or through an angel perhaps, and assured him that 
the promise made to his father Abraham under divine blessing 
was sure to him, and he built an altar unto the Lord, 
rendering worship. Possibly Isaac was fearful that the 
course he was pursuing, the course of peace, was an unwise 
one, and that the Philistines thereby would be encouraged 
to more and more take advantage of him. Many in his 
place would have thought, However much we are disposed 
for peace we must give these Philistines a lesson, and let 
them know there is a limit to our gentleness— a point beyond 
which if they go they will find a stern resistance and 
serious injury. Such would have been worldly wisdom and 
quite probably such thoughts did come to Isaac. It was at 
this time, then, that the Lord manifested himself especially 
to him and gave him especial assurances of his protecting 
care, and that all the good promises made to Abraham respecting 
that land and his own posterity would be absolutely 
fulfilled. 

ABIMELECH SEEKS A TREATY 

To Isaac's surprise Abimelech, the king of the Philistines, 
with Phichol, the chief captain of his army, visited him 
at his new home. "Isaac said unto them, Wherefore art 
thou come unto me, seeing ye hate me, and have sent me 
away from you?" "And they said, We saw plainly that the 
Lord was with thee, and we said, Let there now be an oath 
betwixt us, even betwixt us and thee, and let us make a covenant 
with thee; that thou wilt do us no harm, even as we 
have not touched thee, and as we have done unto thee nothing 
but good, and have sent thee away in peace: thou art 
now the blessed of the Lord." 

What an illustration Isaac here had of God's overruling 
providence! By his course of peace he had not only gained 
the respect and friendship of those who were envious of him, 
but additionally he had honored his God and incidentally 
honored himself in that these men recognized the fact that 
the favor of God was with him. And is not this the case 
with the Lord's people who seek to follow the counsel of 
his Word? Is it not better that we should suffer some disadvantages 
at times and keep the peace and accept the 
Lord's Spirit, thus holding up a light before the world, than 



that we should give way to wrangling and quarreling and 
give evidences of a carnal spirit and of doubt of God's 
power to protect us? Surely we may learn a lesson in this, 
and appreciate more and more the Master's words, "Blessed 
are the peacemakers: for they shall be called the children 
of God." 



R3954 : page 74 

SELLING THE BIRTHRIGHT 

--GENESIS 27:15-23,41-45.-MARCH 17.- 

Golden Text:— "Lying lips are an abomination to the Lord, 
but they that deal truly are his delight."— Pro v. 12:22. 

TO REBECCA were born two sons, twins, Esau being by 
a moment the elder. They were the heads or fathers 
of two nations nearly as dissimilar as themselves. 
The family of Jacob became known as Israel, God's peculiar 
people, inheritors through their father of the great Abrahamic 
promise. Esau's posterity were subsequently known as 
Edomites, and are well represented today in the Bedouin 
tribes of Arabia. At the birth of the twins the divine prophecy 

R3954 : page 75 

was that the elder should serve the younger, and the 
Apostle Paul called attention to this as an indication of 
God's foreknowledge of the difference in the characters of 
the two, and which he would choose to be the one through 
whom the Abrahamic promise would descend.— Rom. 9:12. 

The narrative seems to show that these were very different 
types of men— the one, a jolly hunter, evidently lived 
what might be termed at that time a fast life, associating 
with the heathen peoples surrounding, and, as the heir-apparent 
of two-thirds of his father's estate under the Hebrew 
custom, he was doubtless well received everywhere. On the 
contrary, we are told that Jacob was a plain man, dwelling 
in tents— that is, he was a plain farmer, who gave his attention 
to caring for the estate. When the brothers were 
thirty-two years of age an incident occurred which had a 
most important bearing upon the interests of both for all 
future time. Esau had been away on a hunting expedition, 
and returned ravenously hungry at a time when Jacob had 
just prepared for himself a dinner of red lentils, of which 
both brothers were very fond. Alexander White thus narrates 
the incident in graphic style, and we believe truthfully. 
He says:— 

"Esau was a sportsman, boisterous, wild, clumsy, full of 
the manliest interests and purposes, and was a proverb of 
courage and endurance, a success in the chase. ...He had 
an eye like an eagle. His ear never slept, his arrow never 
missed the mark. A prince of men, a prime favorite with 



men, women and children— all the time more animal than 
man." 

But his tastes and appetites, desires and pleasures, 
were surely of an earthly kind. He had little interest in 
his father's God and the great Abrahamic promise in which 
his father trusted. From this standpoint he had already 
sold his birthright— that is to say, it had already in his estimation 
lost all of its great value, it was not comparable with 
the sensuous pleasures in which he delighted. Jacob, on 
the contrary, inherited more of his father's disposition of 
steadfastness and earnestness, and had great respect to the 
Abrahamic covenant, deploring the fact that by the apparent 
accident of birth he had lost the birthright which his 
brother did not appreciate. Doubtless, too, he had heard 
through his mother of the prophecy that the elder should 
yet serve the younger, which implied that in some sense of 
the word it might be God's will that he should eventually 
become the heir of that promise. 

GOD'S PROMISE APPRECIATED 

How Jacob's heart dwelt upon the possibilities of so 
great an inheritance, the blessing of God, and that his posterity 
should be ultimately used of the Almighty in blessing 
all nations, peoples, kindreds and tongues! Doubtless for 
years he had sought opportunity to purchase from Esau the 
birthright which the latter evidently did not appreciate. 
And now, when his brother was hungry and desired the mess 
of pottage, was not this his opportunity for giving his brother 
what the latter preferred and for getting from him what he 
did not appreciate, but which Jacob esteemed beyond all 
things of earthly value? On this Mr. White says: "Everybody 
knew that Esau's birthright was for sale: Isaac knew, 
Rebecca knew, and Jacob knew. Jacob had for a long time 
been watching his brother for a fit opportunity." This at last 
came when his brother returned hungry from the chase just 
at the time Jacob's dinner was ready. So when Esau said, 
"Jacob, I am ravenously hungry; figuratively speaking, I 
am famishing for some of those delicious red lentils of your 
cooking," Jacob's answer was in effect, "Yes, you may have 
them and I will go hungry, but on one condition: You are the 
elder, and therefore will have the right to inherit the birthright 
blessing. But what is that to you? What do you care 
for Grandfather Abraham's blessing? If now you want this 
pottage more than you want the blessing say so and it shall 
be yours. The blessing is a matter of faith, the pottage a 
matter of fact. I know you have little faith respecting the 
promise, and I know that you are quite hungry and quite 
fond of this pottage. I am fond of it also, but I will go 
without if you give me the birthright blessing in exchange." 

Esau's retort was in effect, "Take it, Jacob; it may be 
good some day, though I confess I have not much confidence 
in it. It seems to me that these people round about that 
father Isaac calls heathen are good fellows, some of them fine 
neighbors, and I might say without prejudice to you, Jacob, 
that I think that your doting over that promise has had the 



R3955 : page 75 

effect of making you too sober, almost morose. Why do you 

not come out and have a good time with the rest of us? However, 

if you want my share in the Abrahamic promise for 

that soup you are welcome to it— give me the soup." "Wait 

a moment," said Jacob; "let us do this thing properly. 

Make an oath to the effect that this is a bona fide transaction 

for all time." "I will do it," says Esau; "here goes 

—now give me the soup." Thus was bartered the great 

oath-bound covenant of God and the wonderful blessings 

which it embraces, present and future. Neither man knew 

fully what he was doing, for not until this Gospel age has 

the mystery of God in respect to that covenant been disclosed; 

and now, as the Apostle tells us, it is made known 

only to the saints, to those who receive the holy Spirit of 

adoption. 

OBTAINING THE BLESSING 

Twenty-five years rolled around after the above barter 
of the birthright. Esau, still a hunter, still fraternizing 
with the heathen peoples about, and married now to two 
Canaanitish women, was, despite his profligacy, his father's 
favorite. Jacob was still a God-fearing man, hoping for the 
realization eventually of his purchase, so highly prized. 
Isaac was old and had become blind, and considered that it 
was the right time to put the management of the estate in 
the hands of the elder son, Esau. Accordingly he made it 
known that he was about to bestow the patriarchal blessing, 
and under his instruction Esau had gone forth to prepare 
some savory venison as a feast for his father before the formal 
pronouncement of the blessing. Rebecca remembered 
the prophecy that the elder should serve the younger, and 
Jacob confided to her the fact that he had purchased the 
blessing of his brother and taken the latter's oath. They 
watched to see whether or not Esau would regard his oath 
and the sale of the blessing, but finding that he was disposed 
to disregard it and to violate all of his obligations, 
mother and son determined to use their every power to secure 
the fulfilment of Esau's engagement respecting the 
blessing. But considering that Isaac would not hear to 
this, they conspired together to deceive him. 

As Esau's name indicated, he was a hairy man: so 

R3955 : page 76 

they arranged that Jacob should put on Esau's fine raiment, 
speak as much as possible in his tone of voice, and present 
kid's flesh to his father and receive the blessing while Esau 
was still absent hunting. Lest Isaac should mistrust the 
deception, Jacob's neck and arms were covered with the fine 
hairy skin of a new-born kid. The deception was carried 
out, and Isaac— after saying, "The voice is Jacob's voice, but 
the hands are the hands of Esau"— gave the blessing. Of 



course the unprincipled Esau, who, after selling the birthright 
and confirming the sale with an oath, was about to 
take it to himself, was angry that his brother should have 
outwitted him and obtained the blessing— not apparently 
that he cared so much for the Abrahamic promise and blessing 
thus entailed, but he feared that in some way his prominence 
in the family would be jeopardized and that he might 
perhaps lose the major part of the inheritance, the two-thirds, 
and get only Jacob's portion, namely one-third. Anger, 
malice, hatred, strife, envy, murder, were in his heart, and 
he said to himself, "It will not be very long until father 
dies; then will I slay my brother Jacob, and the entire 
inheritance will be mine." 

JACOB A FUGITIVE BECAUSE OF HIS FAITH 

Esau's murderous intentions reached the ears of Jacob's 
mother, who informed Jacob and advised that he go for 
a time at least and live with her father. Jacob, then over 
fifty-seven years of age, following this counsel, started out to 
carve his own fortune, leaving the entire estate in the hands 
of Esau, holding on only to the covenant promise. Here 
was another demonstration of his faith in God. He might 
have regretted his bargain, he might have renounced the 
blessing in Esau's favor. But, no; he would hold to this, 
cost him what it might— possessions, a home, family association. 
He would go out in the fear of the Lord; he would 
attest his devotion to God and his faith in his promise. Is 
it with any wonder that we read that in his journey the Lord 
appeared to him at Bethel and assured him that he would 
be his exceeding great reward? Jacob's faith and zeal were 
of the kind which God approves, the kind which he has 
blessed from Abraham's day until the present time. 

JACOB'S DECEPTION OF ISAAC 

Do we excuse Jacob and his mother, and approve of 
their telling lies to Isaac both by word and act? No, we 
cannot approve of this course, and yet it seems evident to us 
that we must not judge Jacob's actions according to the 
standards which we would apply to ourselves. We, as New 
Creatures in Christ Jesus, begotten of the holy Spirit, have 
and ought to have still clearer views of the Lord's will in 
such matters, still greater faith than Jacob exercised. But 
what more could we expect of a natural man than we find 
in Jacob's conduct? We must gauge our conceptions of 
right and wrong by the divine standard, and while we cannot 
suppose that God approved of the course adopted by Jacob 
and Rebecca, we must check ourselves and others from too 
rabid denunciation of Jacob's proceeding by noting the fact 
that, according to the record, at no time did God charge up this 
matter against Jacob or reprove or punish him for it. On the 
contrary, we find the Lord appearing to him and manifesting 
his favor in visions and revelations and assurances of divine 
protection and care, without mention of the deception by 
which the ends were gained. Where God keeps silence, is 



it wise for us to say very much in the way of reproof? 

What better course could Jacob have taken? We answer 
that if he had possessed still greater faith he might 
have waited for the Lord and permitted divine providence to 
bring to him a blessing which he craved, which God had 
foretold should be his, and which he had purchased at more 
than its value according to the estimation of Esau, though 
at far less than its value according to Jacob's estimation. Some 
point us to the difficulties and trials and perplexities which 
came to Jacob as a result of fleeing from his father, declaring 
that these were God's punishments upon him. But we reply 
that Jacob did not so regard these; that the Scriptures remind 
us that whom the Lord loveth he chasteneth, and he 
particularly told Jacob of his love for him. So it is with 
the best and truest of the Lord's people today. The fact 
that they have trials and difficulties and disappointments 
and persecutions, so that sometimes they must flee for their 
lives, by no means proves that the Lord's favor is not with 
them; rather these things, as the Apostle assures us, are 
working out for us a far more exceeding and eternal weight 
of glory. Similarly, Jacob's trials and difficulties and sorrowful 
experiences worked out for him a blessing of heart 
and character. 

Here our Golden Text applies— "Lying lips are an 
abomination unto the Lord, but they that deal truly are his 
delight." Jacob was not one of those who made clean the 
outside of the cup while within it was impure. He was at 
heart of the character mentioned in the Golden Text, "They 
that deal truly." Neither can we say that he was graspingly 
selfish with his brother, for we find in his general 
character a breadth of liberality rarely met with. We recall 
that he never asked even for the younger son's one-third 
interest in the estate, but that returning later he instead 
proffered Esau a present of cattle, sheep, etc. If we must 
charge Jacob with the lying lips we can at least credit him 
with the honesty of heart. He lied in order to secure justice 
and because his faith was not sufficiently strong to permit 
him to trust the Lord implicitly respecting a matter 
which he so highly esteemed and was willing indeed to give 
everything but life to possess. 

A lesson for the spiritual Israelite is that we not only 
should esteem as Jacob did the value of the divine promise 
and favor and blessing, but that to a similar zeal we should 
add still more faith, so that we could trust the Lord to give 
us the blessings he has promised. This was the example 
which Abraham set, but which Jacob evidently had not fully 
appreciated. Abraham was called upon to sacrifice his son 
Isaac, the heir of the promise, through whom the Lord had 
declared the promise should be fulfilled. Abraham's faith 
was sufficient, and in due time God settled the matter in 
that Isaac was received from the dead in a figure. (Heb. 11:19.) 
We cannot doubt that if Jacob had possessed a similar 
degree of faith God in some manner would have given 
him the blessing, despite his father's intentions to the contrary 
and Esau's dishonesty and violation of his oath. 



THE APOSTLE'S APPLICATION OF THIS 

The Apostle refers to the main incident of this lesson, 
the sale of the birthright, and in very round terms denounces 

R3956 : page 77 

the spirit of Esau— the spirit that is not appreciative of 

God's mercy and blessing which he has in reservation for them 

that love him. He speaks of Esau as that "profane person 

who for one morsel of meat sold his birthright." (Heb. 12:16.) 

He was profane in the sense that all the Gentiles 

or heathen were recognized as profane— godless, not reverent, 

unbelieving, preferring the things of this present time, 

the good and the bad, to the better portion of the future, 

which they have not the faith to realize nor the appreciation 

to enjoy. The fact that Esau was evidently birth-marked 

and by heredity a wild man, loving the more animal and 

natural things, so far from being to his condemnation is 

rather in his favor. If his failure to appreciate the spiritual 

things was the result of an inherited depravity of taste, then 

we can say that the redemption provided in Jesus' sacrifice 

covers that entire blemish and guarantees eventually to Esau 

an opening of the eyes of his understanding and an enlightenment 

of his mind to appreciate the better things— when 

in due time, during the Millennial age, the Redeemer shall be 

the Restorer. (Acts 3:19-21.) For Jacob to have taken the 

course of Esau would have been a much more heinous matter, 

because by nature he had a loftier mind, a more reasonable 

soul, less impaired by the fall. 

So, too, when we apply this principle today we find 
that there are many natural men of the Esau type who have 
no interest in or appreciation of spiritual things: we sympathize 
with them rather than blame them, and look forward 
with pleasure to the time when the Lord's mercy shall be 
extended toward them in measure proportionate to the degree 
of their share in the fall— to assist them by the judgment 
of the Millennial age (its rewards and punishments) 
to see the right way and to learn righteousness therein, and 
eventually (if they will) to attain perfection and eternal 
life. On the other hand, if by the grace of God we have 
been favored in being better born, born the children of believers 
—especially if by the grace of God our eyes have 
been opened to an appreciation of the heavenly spiritual 
promises— how great is this blessing! What advantage we 
have every way over the others of the Esau type. What 
manner of persons ought we to be in all holy conversation 
and godliness! Surely the Lord may expect much more of 
us, and we should expect much more of ourselves than of 
our Esau neighbors. 

SELLING THE SPIRITUAL BIRTHRIGHT 

Examining the Apostle's argument still more closely we 
find that he especially addresses the Church, not the world, 
in this exhortation that we appreciate God's grace and do 



not sell our birthright. The world has no birthright to sell 
at the present time: as children of Adam they were all 
themselves "sold under sin." The Lord addresses those who 
have by the Lord's grace escaped from this slavery, being 
justified by faith in the precious blood of Christ. We were 
in bondage, but are now made free— and "whom the Son 
makes free is free indeed." (John 8:36.) After being made 
free we received, as a further grace of God, an invitation to 
be heirs of the Abrahamic Covenant— the very one for which 
Jacob was willing to sacrifice everything. We come into this 
relationship, as the Apostle points out, by our acceptance of 
our Lord Jesus and our full consecration unto death with 
him. The point of the Apostle's argument is that all of the 
consecrated ones are in the position of these two sons of 
Isaac: the inheritance of that Abrahamic Covenant lies between 
us somewhere— some will get it and some will not. 

The Apostle wishes us to see the character of this class 
that will inherit the promise— they must not be, like Esau, 
careless, worldly minded, thoughtless of God and unbelieving 
respecting the future provision. If they are thus disposed 
they will be sure to find opportunities for bartering 
their inheritance— it would surely slip from them to others 
who have a higher appreciation of its value, as the inheritance 
of this covenant slipped from Esau and was secured 
by Jacob. 

"FOR ONE MORSEL OF MEAT" 

True, Esau had a whole mess of pottage, yet the Apostle 
in speaking of it minimizes it, saying, "One morsel." 
He felt that what Esau got was of such trifling value that 
he could hardly express it in terms; it seemed as nothing, 
as merely a bite, though to Esau himself, doubtless, the pottage 
made a very good dinner for the time. So it is with us: 
from one standpoint we could sell our birthright for considerable, 
from the other standpoint we get practically nothing 
for it. 

Let us notice various ways of selling the birthright, 
remembering that only those who have come into covenant 
relationship to God through Christ have the birthright at all, 
so they could dispose of it. 

The Esaus amongst the Lord's people are those who 
love the world and the things of the world, who set great 
store by the pleasures of the present time. The enjoyment of 
these means the approval of the world, fine houses, fine 
clothing, plenty to eat. If in the Lord's providence such 
blessings come to us they would necessarily be trials, testings 
of our faith, because the world at the present time is in 
an undone condition through the fall and through the machinations 
of the Adversary. The testing time comes when we 
see duty and faithfulness to the Lord to be on one side of 
the question and either the rejection of these blessings or the 
securing of them on the other side. We cannot serve both 
God and Mammon, and we must then choose. Happy is he 
that chooses as Jacob did, to lose all earthly advantages that 
he may gain the heavenly promise. Unhappy it will be for 



him who loves the present world, its joys, its pleasures, its 
emoluments and wealth, so that he is willing to dispose of 
his birthright that he may have these. True, the seller does 
not always realize what he is parting with, nor perhaps intends 
to part with it at all, even as in the case of Esau, 
but the testing comes nevertheless, and each one must be 
prepared therefor. 

Perhaps no class of the Lord's people have more temptation 
along the line of selling their birthright privileges than 
have the preachers. As the truth comes to them it brings 
responsibilities, and they realize these, and if then they allow 
love of ease or name or fame or wealth or standing to lead 
them to unfaithfulness the effect will be the loss of the inheritance. 
We do not say that they will be eternally tormented, 
God forbid! We do say with the Scriptures that 
the inheritance of this Abrahamic Covenant can only go to 
those who appreciate it and are willing to let it cost them 
everything to gain it. This is God's arrangement that he 
might test, might prove, every son whom he receiveth under 

R3956 : page 78 

this Abrahamic Covenant, every member of the body of 
Christ. 

A little while and the clouds will pass, and we shall 
see clearly the riches of God's inheritance in the saints and 
the exceeding greatness of their reward; a little while, and 
how miserable appears the choice of those who, like Esau, 
have sold their birthright for business advantages, emoluments, 
honors of men, etc. O, how in the light of that glorious 
day all these things that are so highly esteemed 
amongst men will be counted as less than one morsel of 
meat— one moment of trifling earthly pleasure or satisfaction! 
Now is the time for all to choose of which class we 
will be; now is the time to lay aside every weight and 
every besetting sin and to fully count the cost, to lay everything 
on the Lord's altar, sacrificing all of the earthly interests 
that we may be heirs of God and joint-heirs with Jesus 
Christ our Lord, if so be that we suffer with him, that we 
may also be glorified together.— Rom. 8:17. 



R3956 : page 78 

ENCOURAGING WORDS FROM FAITHFUL WORKERS 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

I desire to acknowledge receipt of route sheet. I 
cannot express how deeply I appreciate your kind 
words. I am well aware that the indicated necessities 
of the field govern the routes of the Pilgrims, and you 
may be assured that I am sufficiently grateful to the 
dear Lord for the privilege of the service that the place 
and the time are gladly left to the disposition of his 
will. 



Beloved Brother Russell, the joy of this blessed 
service is more like such as one might expect to experience 
beyond the vail than that which would be known 
in the flesh. The Spirit of the dear Master as it is manifested 
in his true-hearted ones is seemingly becoming 
more and more precious and like that of the other side. 
If the closing scenes of our earthly experience are to 
be especially severe, surely he is preparing us for them 
by the abundant outpour of his blessings now. 

As we often have painful examples of the power of 
a strong personality in doing evil among the classes it 
is most refreshing to observe the beneficent influence 
of complete devotion to the Lord. From every side 
come most heartfelt expressions of love and greeting 
to yourself, dear Brother Russell. My own deep love I 
earnestly desire to add to the large measure from the 
Lord's dear ones I am communicating, and my appreciation 
of the comfort and strength that the knowledge 
of your sympathy, your prayers and your love gives me. 

In the sacred bonds of Christ, your brother in his 
service, M. L. HERR,— Pilgrim. 



page 78 

DEAR PASTOR:- 

It is with sorrow that I inform you that I will have 
to give up the colporteur work for the winter, on account 
of my health. Giving it up after being such a 
short time in it was like getting just a sip of water when 
one was thirsty and wanted a big drink; but I know 
and realize that "all things work together for good" to 
the Lord's children, and I am glad and thankful that I 
had the honor and privilege of selling 77 books for the 
Lord. Oh! that those who have strength and opportunity 
could realize what a privilege it is to spend it for 
the Lord in introducing his truth to the weary ones 
who are looking for something, they know not what; 
and could also realize what a blessing goes with this 
work! 

I want everything to be just as the Lord would 
have it be and I praise him for all the wonderful help 
and enlightenment that is coming to me through the 
Bible by the means of the DAWNS and WATCH TOWER. 
The way is growing narrower and rougher, but it is 
also growing brighter, and my prayer is for you, dear 
Pastor, that you may be kept safe to the very end. 

When you are so busy I don't expect an answer to 
this, because I know just how you sympathize with 
those who are set aside through no fault of their own. 
My determination is, by God's grace, to be on the lookout 
for every opportunity, no matter how small seemingly, 
to witness for the Truth and to send it to others; 
and I ask an interest in your prayers that I may be 
faithful in trading with the talents given me. 



I remain, your sister in Christ, 

, Ontario. 



R3957 : page 78 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

After two years' walking in the light of Present 
Truth, may I add a few paragraphs to my glad testimony 
of its blessing? Recalling that from the Methodist 
hymnal we used to sing: 

"We praise thee that the Gospel light 
Through all our land its radiance sheds," 
and remembering that I then believed we were singing 
the truth and that Methodism was a very great factor 
in spreading that Gospel light, no wonder I esteemed 
mine a very happy experience. But, oh! to know 
God's glorious Plan of the Ages— to be able to discern 
as error what I once believed as truth, and consciously 
to turn away from blind misstatements having but a 
"form of godliness," and receive, in place of husks, the 
satisfying portion of God's meat in due season— is delight 
inexpressible. 

And then, out in the great harvest field, to be 
counted worthy of association as laborers together 
with the great Chief Reaper, our Lord; to be privileged 
to bear his message, which is to garner the true wheat; 
to have, in contact with those "who oppose themselves," 
a little taste of enduring hardness and trying that it be 
"as a good soldier of Jesus Christ"; to know just the 
little, even, that I have been privileged to learn, of suffering 
with him; knowing also the great and precious 
promise of which our light affliction is the condition— 
Oh, when I try to pin down, with pen or pencil, expression 
of these experiences, I feel how powerless I am! 

To realize that one is making progress, instead of 
going over the same ground year after year, knowing 
no more at the close than at the beginning— the sordid 
matter of so many dollars raised for expenses being 
the acme of one's attainment, growth in grace and in 
knowledge of our Lord being only incidental matters, 
if not entirely omitted from consideration; or, at "revival 
time" to "work for souls," mainly for the purpose 
of their financial help— oh, what a relief to have forever 
laid aside such mockery of religion and really to have 
that knowledge that causes one really to grow in grace! 
What joy to experience that Christ dwells in our hearts 
by faith; that we may be rooted and grounded in love 
and be able really to comprehend with all saints what 
is the breadth and length and depth and height and 

R3957 : page 79 

really to know the love of Christ, which passeth knowledge 
that we might be filled with all the fulness of God! 



This makes the narrow way bright with his radiance, 
for 

"We are traveling home to God, 
In the way our Savior trod." 
Yes, and 

"In the hour of trial we 
Watch thy footprints, Lord, to see," 
because we are able to recognize God's loving purpose 
in even the persecutions that are heaped upon "this 
way," and find that their outcome is to bind us all more 
and more closely together and to him whose prophecies 
those persecutions fulfil. 

Gratefully and lovingly remembering always that 
through you, dear Pastor, the exposition of God's great 
plan and of the real, true meaning of his wonderful 
Word of Truth, was given, as "meat in due season for 
the household of faith," 
Yours in his ever blessed service, 

ELIZABETH GILLET,-Colporteur. 



MY DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

I have often thought of writing to you and asking 
if you would bear with me if I would tell you a little 
experience of how the Truth came into my life, and now 
I take this opportunity to carry out my intention, trusting 
that you will bear with me. About four years ago 
my most intimate friend got hold of Vol. I. She received 
it from a young Jewess who said she was not 
interested in it. My friend about ten years previously 
had united with the Baptist Church, and I did likewise 
the following year. She was very devoted to the 
Church until within two years of receiving "The Plan 
of the Ages," when she became cold and indifferent to 
everything connected with the Church and was determined 
to see some of the world. I prayed for her and 
did all that I could to get her back, but she seemed to 
think there was nothing there to hold her. Sunday after 
Sunday I stopped for her to go to Sunday School or 
Church service, and thinking I could get her to promise 
me she would go the next week, but all my efforts 
failed. After this dear sister got Vol. I. in her possession 
and began to devour its contents, I was the first 
to whom she told the "glad good news." We both 
lived in the country, and on Sunday afternoons as 
I came from Sunday School I would stop on my 
way home, and she would always walk part of the 
way home with me and carried "The Plan of the Ages" 
under her arm. As we came to the wood between our 
two homes we sat down and talked until dark, and I 
well recall the tears running down her cheeks as she 
explained to me God's glorious plan. She seemed completely 
carried away by its teachings, and I was led to 
question, Could this possibly be true? or is this dear 
acquaintance being led astray? The latter I believed 



to be the fact, but never criticised her to another because 
I saw her earnestness and believed it to be genuine. 
Well, she gave me no rest, kept at me continually, 
gave me Vol. I., and I read it to please her; then Vol. 
II. I read also to please her, and finally Vol. III. 
Then she began to question me concerning certain 
teachings. With some I could agree with the author, 
with some I could not; in fact, I had not studied them 
enough to know whether or not they were Scriptural; 
in short, I did not know what to do. I was very uneasy; 
we had been friends so long that I did not like 
to drop her, for I realized her worth. She talked some 
of going west with some friends; I was only hoping 
that she would decide to go and then I would be at my 
ease. 

I thank our dear heavenly Father that now I rejoice 
in that comfort and ease of mind and that "peace 
which passeth all understanding." I believe it was 
through this sister's prayers and also the prayers of 
some others of the Lord's dear ones that I at last became 
interested and that the interest grew and still 
grows. It was while reading Vol. V. that I became 
alive to my duty of making an entire consecration- 
presenting my body a living sacrifice, which is my reasonable 
service. But, oh, "the Adversary goeth about 
as a roaring lion, seeing whom he may devour." I ask 
you to pray for me, dear brother, that I may become 
more like our Pattern, the Lord Jesus. 

Yours in the one faith, 

(MISS) M. A. THOMPSON,-Pa. 



DEAR BROTHER IN CHRIST:- 

The other day, having read the 15th chapter of 
Genesis, the 9th verse seemed to suggest that the years 
mentioned had some meaning, and, doing a little figuring, 
here is the result. In the 8th verse Abraham asked 
some proof that he should inherit the land promised 
him in the seventh verse. In verse 9 the Lord said to 
Abraham, "Take me an heifer three years old, and a 
she goat three years old, and a ram three years old, 
a turtle dove and a young pigeon." Now a bird is 
usually considered young up to one year old. So I figured 
three years each for the heifer, goat and ram— nine 
years— and one year each for the birds, eleven years in 
all. Eleven prophetic years of 360 days each equals 
3,960. A day for a year gives us 3,960 years. On page 
42, Vol. II., of the DAWNS we have the chronology as 
follows: 

From the Covenant to the giving of the Law 430 years 

To the division of Canaan 46 " 

Period of the Judges 450 " 

" " Kings 513 " 

" " Desolation 70 " 

Thence to A.D. 1 536 " 



Total from the Covenant to A.D. 1 2045 " 

2045 taken from the 3960 years leaves 1915 years 
from A.D. 1, which seems to be the proof Abraham 
asked of the Lord whereby he should know that he 
would inherit the land. This seems at least to be a 
remarkable coincidence. 

Wishing you God's rich blessing, I remain yours 
in the blessed Redeemer, 

GEO. MATTHEWS,-Ohio. 



DEAR FRIENDS :- 

In our Volunteer work last year we put out 155,000 
tracts, or over 3-3/4 tons. These, if laid out flat, tightly 
pressed, would make a pile 260 feet high, or 35 feet 
higher than Bunker Hill monument. This report encouraged 
the friends here greatly. All through the 
dark ages the truth has been kept down to earth, but 
now we can see where 

Truth 

Rises 

Up 

To 

Heaven 
in a glorious fashion, both in a figurative and a literal 
sense. About an average of fifty workers were in the 
field. Yours in his name, 

JOHN R. JONES,-Mass. 



page 81 



SEMI-MONTHLY 
VOL. XXVIII MARCH 15 No. 6 
A.D. 1907-A.M. 6035 



CONTENTS 

Views from the Watch Tower 83 

A Wall Street View of the Decline of Faith.... 83 

Comparative Failure of Christianity 84 

Hell a Failure, a Clergyman Says 84 

The Blood of Sprinkling of the Passover 85 

"As Oft as Ye Do This" 87 

"Drink Ye of the Same Cup" 89 

The Wine of False Doctrine 89 

The Table of the Lord versus the Table of 
Devils 91 

The Lord Knoweth Them that are His 92 

Responding to Divine Promises 93 

The House of God the Gate of Heaven 94 



Noting and Marking Blessings 95 

page 82 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-24 EVERSHOLT ST., LONDON, N.W. 
GERMAN BRANCH-MIRKER STR., 45, ELBERFELD. 
AUSTRALASIAN BRANCH-EQUITABLE BLDG., COLLINS ST., MELBOURNE 

PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 

TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR AS FOLLOWS:- 

All Bible Students who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity or 
adversity, are unable to pay for this Journal, will be supplied FREE if 
they send a Postal Card each June stating their case and requesting its 
continuance. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on 
our list continually and in touch with the Studies, etc. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



THIS JOURNAL IS PUBLISHED IN THE 

FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, DANISH AND ITALIAN LANGUAGES. 

SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



BROTHER RUSSELL'S WEEKLY SERMONS 



We generally give a discount rate on all journals that print 
Brother Russell's sermons, and are chiefly interested in encouraging 
the Pittsburg Dispatch. However, some who cannot subscribe 
regularly can help the cause by patronizing locally the 
journals which publish the sermons in the following cities: 
Fort Wayne, Ind.; Wheeling, W.Va.; Easton, Pa.; Scranton, 
Pa.; Greensburg, Pa.; Pictou, Nova Scotia. Encourage the 
publishers, too, by an occasional letter or card of appreciation. 

THE MEMORIAL IN ALLEGHENY 



The annual celebration of the Memorial Supper, commemorating 
our Lord's death and our participation therein, will be 
observed by the Church at Allegheny on Thursday evening, 



March 28, at 8 o'clock, in the auditorium of the Third Ward 
School building, cor. North Ave. and James St. (entrance on 
James and Third Sts.) The building can be reached by any 
"West View" or "East St. and Madison Ave." car. 

At 2 p.m. of the same day there will be a baptism service 
in the Bible House Chapel, for the convenience of visiting 
friends who may desire to symbolize in water their baptism 
into Christ's death. For the benefit of any friends for whom 
the above baptism arrangements will not be convenient, a similar 
service will be held at Bible House Chapel, on the preceding 
Sunday (March 24) at 10 a.m. Robes and conveniences will 
be provided for both occasions. 



R3958 : page 83 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 
A WALL STREET VIEW OF THE DECLINE OF FAITH 



SOME striking editorials on the question of the 
decline of the belief in a future life have been 
appearing in recent issues of The Wall Street 
Journal (New York). From such a source the inquiry 
carries peculiar weight, especially to the type of mind 
which forms the majority in our commercial civilization. 
The articles in question, written by Mr. Sereno 
S. Pratt, the editor of that paper, expresses the "intense 
interest" of that journal "in the economic and 
political effects of any change in the thought, the habits 
and the lives of men." If there has been a decline 
in religious faith, Mr. Pratt asserts, that fact "alters 
the basic conditions of civilization," because a factor 
in the markets," "changes the standards and affects 
the values of things that are bought and sold," and 
"concerns the immediate interests of those who never 
had such a faith almost as much as it does the lives of 
those who have had the faith and lost it." Along this 
line Mr. Pratt continues: 

"The question, therefore, of practical, immediate, 
and tremendous importance to Wall Street quite as much 
as to any other part of the world, is, Has there been 
a decline in the faith in the future life? and if so, to 
what extent is this responsible for the special phenomena 
of our time— the eager pursuit of sudden wealth, 
the shameless luxury and display, the gross and corrupting 
extravagance, 'the misuse of swollen fortunes,' 
the indifference to law, the growth of graft, the abuses 
of great corporate power, the social unrest, the spread 
of demagogy, the advances of Socialism, the appeals to 
bitter class hatred? To find out what connection exists 
between a decadence in religious faith and the social unrest 
of our time, due, on one side, to oppressive use of 



financial power, and, on the other, to class agitation, 
might well be worth an investigation by a commission 
of government experts, if it were possible for the Government 
to enter into such an undertaking." 

Whatever may be a man's own personal beliefs, 
continues Mr. Pratt, "there is no one who would not 
prefer to do business with a person who really believes 
in a future life." If the world holds fewer men of such 
faith, it makes a big difference, and if faith is to continue 
to decline, this will require new adjustments. So 
the writer views the situation, adding these reflections: 

"There are certainly, on the surface, many signs 
of such a decline. Perhaps, if it were possible to probe 
deeply into the subject, it might be found that faith 
still abounded, but is no longer expressed in the old 
way. But we are obliged to accept the surface indications. 
These include a falling off in Church attendance, 
the abandonment of family worship, the giving over of 
Sunday more and more to pleasure and labor, the separation 
of religious from secular education, under the 
stern demands of non-sectarianism, the growing up of 
a generation not instructed as our fathers were in the 
study of the Bible, the secularization of a portion of 
the Church itself, and its inability in a large way to 
gain the confidence of the laboring people. If these 
are really signs of a decay of religious faith, then indeed 
there is no more important problem before us than 
that of either discovering some adequate substitute for 
faith, or to take immediate steps to check a development 
which has within it the seeds of a national 
disaster." 

The alternative of the "adequate substitute" does 
not recommend itself to the mind of Mr. Pratt, as may 
be seen from his view expressed in a more recent editorial, 
which deals with the materialism underneath 
both "the Socialism of Karl Marx and the financial concentration 
of which we may take that represented by 
E. H. Harriman as a type." Balancing the virtues of 
the two, Mr. Pratt sees in Socialism "the more attractive 
and impossible program," while "financial concentration" 
he believes to be "the safer for the social order 
and civilization." In neither, however, is the remedy 
adequate to the ill. He concludes: 

"The supreme need of the hour is not elastic currency, 
or sounder banking, or better protection against 
panics, or bigger navies, or more equitable tariffs, but 
a revival of faith, a return to a morality which recognizes 
a basis in religion and the establishment of a 
workable and working theory of life that views man 

R3958 : page 84 

as something more than a mere lump of matter."— 
Literary Digest. 

COMPARATIVE FAILURE OF CHRISTIANITY 



BY REV. W. GALBRAITH 

(The following is published by the Toronto (Ont.) 
Methodist Publishing House): 

"It [Christianity] has fallen far short of its divine 
purposes and marvellous capabilities. What is the 
reason of this comparative failure? 

"We answer, first, that in the days of Constantine 
it was baptized with the spirit of heathenism, and 
these foreign and enfeebling elements, transfused 
through the entire Christian system, grew upon it 
like a parasite for more than a thousand years, and 
are still a formidable obstacle to its progress and 
achievements. Heathen doctrines, usages and habits 
still linger to a greater or less degree in all branches of 
the Christian Church. 

"We answer, secondly, that Christianity at this 
hour is largely baptized with the spirit of the world. 
Worldly maxims, methods and motives have invaded 
the heritage of Jesus. These are eating out its life, 
and obstructing all its efforts. 

"Great and grievous wrongs are still rank and rampant 
in the Church and in the world. The Church, by 
her individual members, and in her collective capacity, 
is doing a great and glorious work for God and humanity, 
but, unhappily, mediaeval religion protrudes itself 
into the last quarter of this nineteenth century. 

"Fashionable and formal churches are found 
everywhere. The heathenish system of caste grows in 
Christian lands. Expensive churches, with heavy 
debts, popular preaching, artistic music, wealth and 
self-indulgence, have invaded the fair heritage of God. 
Mission churches have become a necessity to meet the 
needs and the condition of the poor. If Christianity 
were in its normal state there would be no mission 
churches. 

"Goodness would be recognized as the only basis 
of true brotherhood, and the rich and poor would meet 
together. 

"Intense, inveterate, stereotyped selfishness is 
crushing and blighting the world. It is seen 
everywhere. 

"You cannot enter a street car, railway coach, 
shop, mart or stock exchange, church or legislative 
hall, but selfishness manifests itself in forms which 
must be offensive to a righteous God, and in striking 
contrast with the spirit and teachings of Jesus Christ. 
It forms immense monopolies and combinations on the 
one hand to grasp the wealth of the world. It forms 
protective associations and strong unions on the other 
hand for self -protection and to resist those grinding 
monopolies and combinations. It is manifested at 
both sides of the counter. On the one side, the would-be 



buyer wants goods at less than a living price, and 
drives the vender to deception and lying advertisements. 
Human beings, like wild beasts, prey on each other... 

"What is known as the "sweating system" in industrial 
life is a disgrace to humanity, and should not be 
tolerated in any Christian land. Hard workers are 
often inadequately remunerated for faithful toil. Often 
on the other hand, the time is put in and wages demanded 
for work that was never performed. Paul's 
counsel to servants and masters (Eph. 6:5-9) ought to 
be placarded in every store, factory and workshop. 

"Is pure Christianity, if rightly applied, competent to 
correct all these wrongs, and to bring society into loving, 
happy, righteous harmony? I have no hesitation in 
affirming that it is thoroughly competent for this work. 
It operates along two distinct, yet not conflicting lines 
—Gospel and law. The Gospel teaches what men 
ought to be, and how they ought to live. 'Provide 
things honest in the sight of all men.' 'Look not 
every man on his own things, but every man also on 
the things of others.' 'Let no man seek his own, but 
every man another's wealth.' 'Whatsoever ye would 
that men should do to you, do ye even so to them, for 
this is the law and the prophets.' 

"The Gospel provides the example we should follow. 
In spirit and life all men should be like Jesus 
Christ. They should transact business just as Christ 
would do if he were in their place. 'He that saith he 
abideth in him, ought himself also so to walk even as 
he walked.' 

"The Gospel presents us with the highest motives 
to a merciful and righteous life. It offers as an inducement 
for obedience to its teachings, the highest, truest 
and most mature manhood here, and the fullest felicity 
and glory hereafter. 

"The Gospel provides us with the necessary inspiration 
and power to live this life. In other systems of 
religion and philosophy, there is much excellent teaching, 
but there is no motive power. The strongest and 
best machinery is of no practical utility without an 
adequate power to put it in operation. 

"All the proposed plans and schemes for the reformation 
of society, outside the Gospel, are utterly devoid 
of the necessary motive power. To expect them to 
transform society, correct its abuses and redress its 
wrongs, is to expect from the human what can only be 
effected by the divine." 



The writer of the foregoing sees something, evidently,- 

R3959 : page 84 

he sees that the nominal Church is not even 
approximating the divine standard. But he does not 



at all see the cause of the failure, for he proceeds to 
express post-millennial views— that the Church should 
convert the world! The trouble lies in the abandonment 
of the faith once delivered unto the saints respecting 
the second coming of Christ, the resurrection hope 
and the Kingdom then to bless the world. How strange 
that one could recognize the need of divine aid to overthrow 
the power of sin and death and Satan and yet expect 
this through humanity after 1800 years of trial and 
knowing that there are twice as many heathen today 
as there were a century ago. 

HELL A FAILURE, A CLERGYMAN SAYS 



St. Louis.— Fear as an incentive to righteous living 
has gone out of date, according to the Reverend Doctor 
Gifford, of Buffalo, who spoke before the Baptist Congress 
at the Second Baptist Church. He said:— 

"Seventy-five years ago the preacher scared his 
listeners into obedience by opening back the creaking 
iron doors of an awful hell, where they saw the burning 
of the livid flesh. Then the motive was fear. Now if 

R3959 : page 85 

a preacher were to present such a picture his audience 
would sit and look at him with the same curiosity as 
they would examine an old dusty spinning wheel. 
There is not enough heat in hell to drive the machinery 
of foreign missions at the present time." 



Is it not quite apparent that the preaching of a 
burning hell of eternal torture for ninety-nine out of 
every hundred of our race is a matter of policy? Ministers 
seem to guide their conduct by expediency rather 
than by conscientious conviction. Their query seems 
to be, not What is the Truth on this great subject? but, 
What will my congregation approve? What will bring 
me popularity and another call at a better salary? 
What will increase the membership of my Church? 
Each seems to "look for gain from his own quarter."— 
Isa. 56:11. 



R3959 : page 85 

THE BLOOD OF SPRINKLING OF THE PASSOVER 

THE Passover season draws near its beginning, 
as celebrated by the Jews, on the 29th of this 
month; but the interest of Christians centers 



especially in the slaying of the lamb, which preceded 
the Passover feast, and their celebration, therefore, 
properly begins on the evening of March 28th. We 
greatly regret, however, that while millions of Christians 
and Jews will in some formal ceremonies and in a 
perfunctory manner celebrate this great event of history, 
but few of either religion discern the real signification 
of the celebration. 

THE PASSOVER INSTITUTED 

Could their minds be awakened thoroughly to its 
true significance it would start a religious revival such 
as the world has never yet known. But, alas! as the 
Apostle declares, the god of this world has blinded the 
minds of many, and even some whose eyes of understanding 
are partially opened he describes as being 
blind and unable to see afar off, or holden and unable 
to see the deep things of God in respect to these ceremonies, 
which have been celebrated in the world for 
now more than 3300 years. And, by the way, it must 
be admitted even by the higher critics and agnostics 
in general that an event so prominently marked, so 
widely observed for so long a time, must have a foundation 
in fact. There must have been just such an occurrence 
in Egypt: the first-born of Egypt must have perished 
in that tenth plague, and the first-born of Israel 
must have been preserved free from it— all that observed 
the rule to remain under the blood— else this widespread 
celebration of the event would have been inexplicable. 

We need not remind you of the particulars connected 
with the institution— that the Israelites were held in a 
measure of serfdom by the Egyptians, and that when 
the time, in the Lord's providence, arrived for their 
deliverance, their masters sought selfishly to maintain 
their bondage and refused to let them go forth to the 
land of Canaan. One after another the Lord sent during 
the year nine different plagues upon the people of 
the land of Egypt, relieving them one after another 
when their king craved mercy and made promises which 
he afterwards broke. Finally the servant of the Lord, 
Moses, announced a great crowning disaster— that the 
first-born in every family of Egypt would die in one 
night, and that in the home of the humblest peasant as 
well as in the home of the king there should be a 
mourning, as a result of which they would be glad 
finally to yield and let the Israelites go— yea, urge them 
to go, and in haste, lest the Lord should ultimately 
bring death upon the entire people if their king continued 
to harden his heart and resist the divine 
mandate. 

The first three plagues were common to all in 
Egypt, including the district in which the Israelites resided: 
the next six plagues affected not the district 
occupied by the Israelites; and the last, the tenth 
plague, was declared to be common to the entire land 



of Egypt, including the land of the Israelites, except 
as the latter should show faith and obedience by providing 
a sacrificial lamb, whose blood was to be 
sprinkled upon the sides and lintels of their doorways, 
and whose flesh was to be eaten in the same night, 
with bitter herbs and unleavened bread, the eaters 
standing staff in hand and girded ready for the journey 
—with full expectancy that the Lord would smite the 
first-born of the Egyptians with death and make them 
willing to let the Israelites go, and with full faith also 
that they would share in this calamity were it not for 
the blood upon their door-posts and lintels. 

"WHEN HE SEETH THE BLOOD THE LORD WILL PASS OVER 
THE DOOR AND NOT SUFFER THE DESTROYER TO 
SMITE YOU. "-EXODUS 12:23 

The Israelites were commanded to celebrate this as 
the first feature of the Jewish Law and one of their 
greatest memorials as a nation. As a matter of fact, 
we find that in some degree the Passover is celebrated 
by Jews in all parts of the world— even by those who 
claim to be agnostics and infidels. They still have a 
measure of respect for it as an ancient custom. But is 
it not strange that, with the bright minds which many 
of them possess, our Jewish friends have never thought 
it worth while to inquire the meaning of this celebration? 
Why was the lamb slain and eaten? Why was its 
blood sprinkled upon the door-posts and lintels? Because 
God so commanded, of course; but what reason, 
motive, object or lesson was there behind the divine 
command? Truly a reasonable God has reasonable 
commands, and in due time will be willing that his 
faithful people should understand the significance of 
every requirement. Why are the Hebrews indifferent 
to this subject? Why does prejudice hold their minds? 
It is for them to answer, and, answering, to get light 
and joy from the knowledge. 

Although Christianity has the answer to this question 
we regret that the majority of Christians, because 
of carelessness, would be unable to give a reason and 

R3959 : page 86 

ground for any hope in connection with this matter. 
If the Jew can realize that his Sabbath day is a type or 
foreshadowing of a coming epoch of rest and blessing 
and release from toil, sorrow and death, why can he 
not see that similarly all the features of the Mosaic 
Law institution were intended by the Lord to be 
foreshadowings of various blessings, to be bestowed 
in due time? Why can it not be discerned by all that 
the Passover lamb typified, represented, the Lamb of 
God? that its death represented the death of Jesus, the 
Just for the unjust? and that the application of its 
blood symbolizes, represents, the application of the 



merit of the death of Jesus to the entire household of 

faith? Blessed are those whose eyes see that Jesus 

was indeed "the Lamb of God that taketh away the sin 

of the world"— that the cancellation of the world's sin 

is effected by the payment of man's penalty— that as 

the whole world lost divine favor and came under 

divine sentence of death, with its concomitants of sorrow 

and pain, it was necessary before this sentence or 

curse could be removed that a satisfaction of justice 

should be made, and that therefore, as the Apostle declares, 

Christ died for our sins— the Just for the unjust, 

that he might bring us back to God. Thus he opened 

up a new and living way— a new way to life 

everlasting. 

"A KIND OF FIRST-FRUITS" 

Those familiar with the Bible have noticed that 
therein the Church of Christ is called the Church of 
the First-born, and again a kind of first-fruits unto God 
of his creatures. (Heb. 12:23; Jas. 1:18.) This implies 
others ultimately of God's family later born; it implies 
after-fruits. Christian people seem to have overlooked 
these Scriptures so far as making application of them 
is concerned, and have generally come to believe that 
only those who are of the first-fruits will ever be saved 
and that there will be no after-fruits. But let us look 
at this type of the Passover— let us notice that it was 
God's intention to save all Israelites, and that as a 
nation they represented all mankind that will ever come 
into harmony with God and be granted eternal life in 
the land of promise. Let us notice that there were two 
passovers: a great one, when the whole nation by 
divine power was miraculously delivered by the Lord 
and led by a sandbar across the channel of the Red 
Sea especially prepared for them by the accentuation 
of winds and tides. 

That picture or type shows the ultimate deliverance 
from the power of sin and Satan of every creature 
who will ultimately come into accord with the Lord and 
desire to render him worship— not an Israelite was left 

R3960 : page 86 

behind. But that passover at the Red Sea is not the one 

we are discussing particularly on this occasion— not 

the one we are about to celebrate. No, the event which 

we celebrate was merely the passing over or sparing of 

the first-borns of Israel. Only the first-born were endangered, 

though the deliverance of all depended upon 

the salvation of the first-born. Applying this in harmony 

with all the Scriptures we see that the little flock, 

the first-fruits unto God of his creatures, the Church 

of the first-born alone, is being spared at the present 

time— being passed over, provided they are under the 

blood. We see that the remainder of mankind who 



may desire to enlist and to follow the great antitypical 
Moses when he shall ultimately lead the people forth 
from the bondage of sin and death are not now 
endangered— merely the first-born. 

"THE CHURCH OF THE FIRST-BORNS" 

The first-born— the "Church of the First-Born"— 
are those of mankind who in advance of the remainder 
have had the eyes of their understanding opened to a 
realization of their condition of bondage and their 
need of deliverance and to God's willingness to fulfil to 
them his good promises. More than this, they are such 
as have responded to the grace of God, have made 
a consecration of themselves to him and his service, 
and in return have been begotten again by the holy 
Spirit. With these first-born ones it is a matter of life 
and death whether or not they remain in the household 
of faith— behind the blood of sprinkling. For these to 
go forth would imply a disregard of divine mercy. It 
would signify that they would do despite to divine goodness, 
and that, having enjoyed their share of the mercy 
of God as represented in the blood of the Lamb, they 
were not appreciative of it. For such the Scriptures 
declare, "There remaineth no more a sacrifice for their 
sins"; they are to be esteemed as adversaries of God, 
whose fate was symbolized in the destruction of the 
first-born of Egypt. 

We do not mean to say that the first-born of 
Egypt who died in that night and any of the first-born 
of the Israelites who departed from their 
homes contrary to command and who died therefor, 
have gone into the Second Death. Quite to 
the contrary: we understand that all these matters 
were types, figures, illustrations, foreshadowings 
of matters on a higher plane, and that the 
realities belong to the Church of Christ during 
this Gospel age since Pentecost. If we sin wilfully 
after that we have received a knowledge of the truth, 
after that we have tasted of the good Word of God, 
after that we have been made partakers of the holy 
Spirit and thus members of the Church of the First-born, 
if we should fall away— it would be impossible to 
renew us again to repentance— God would have nothing 
further for us, our disregard of his mercy would 
mean that we would die the Second Death. From this 
standpoint the Church of the First-born, through the 
begetting of the holy Spirit and the greater knowledge 
and privileges they enjoy everyway, have a greater 
responsibility in the world, for they are the only ones 
as yet in danger of the Second Death. This is the lesson 
of the type and applies to Christians only. 

By and by the night will have passed, the glorious 
morn of deliverance will have come, and the Christ, the 
antitypical Moses, will lead forth, will deliver all Israel 
—all the people of God— all who when they shall 



know shall be glad to reverence, honor and obey the 

R3960 : page 87 

will of God. That day of deliverance will be the entire 
Millennial age, at the close of which all evil and evil 
doers, symbolized by the hosts of Egypt, will be utterly 
cut off in the Second Death. 

"AS OFT AS YE DO THIS" 

The Apostle clearly and positively identifies the 
Passover lamb with our Lord Jesus, saying, "Christ 
our Passover is slain for us; therefore let us keep the 
feast." (I Cor. 5:7,8.) He informs us that we all need 
the blood of sprinkling, not upon our houses but upon 
our hearts. (Heb. 12:24; I Pet. 1:2.) We are also to 
eat the unleavened bread of truth if we would be strong 
and prepared for the deliverance in the morning of the 
new dispensation. We also must eat the Lamb, must 
appropriate Christ, his merit, the value that was in 
him, to ourselves. Thus we put on Christ, not merely 
by faith, but more and more to the extent of our ability 
we put on his character and are transformed day 
by day to his glorious image in our hearts. We are 
to feed upon him as the Jews fed upon the literal lamb. 
Instead of the bitter herbs, which aided and whetted 
their appetites, we have bitter experiences and trials 
which the Lord provides for us, and which help to 
wean our affections from earthly things and give us 
increasing appetite to feed upon the Lamb and the 
unleavened bread of truth. We, too, are to remember 
that we have no continuing city, but are en route as pilgrims, 
strangers, travelers, staff in hand, girded for 
the journey, that we may ultimately reach the heavenly 
Canaan and all the glorious things which God hath 
in reservation for the Church of the First-born, in 
association with their Redeemer as kings and priests 
unto God. 

Our Lord Jesus also fully identified himself with 
the Passover Lamb. On the same night that he was 
betrayed, and just preceding his crucifixion, he gathered 
his disciples in the upper room, saying, "With desire 
have I desired to eat this passover with you before 
I suffer." It was necessary that as Jews they should 
celebrate the Passover Supper on that night— the saving 
of the typical first-born from the typical prince of 
this world— but as soon as the requirements of the 
type had been fulfilled our Lord instituted a new Memorial 
upon the old foundation, saying, "As often as 
ye do this [celebrate the Passover— annually] do it in 
remembrance of me! (I Cor. 11:24,25.) Your Jewish 
neighbors, whose eyes of understanding have not been 
opened, will not appreciate the matter in its true antitypical 
sense, but you— who recognize me as the Lamb 
of God, who in God's purpose has been slain from the 



foundation of the world— you who recognize that I am 
about to give my life as the world's redemption price, 
you will note this Passover with peculiar and sacred 
significance, different from all others. Henceforth you 
will not celebrate any longer the type but memorialize 
the antitype, for I am about to die as the Lamb of God, 
and thus to provide the blood of sprinkling for the 
Church of the First-born and meat indeed for the entire 
household of faith. 

"THIS IS MY BODY, BROKEN FOR YOU" 

That the Lord's followers should no longer gather 
as the Jews had done previously to eat the literal lamb 
supper in commemoration of the deliverance in Egypt 
our Lord shows by choosing new emblems— "unleavened 
bread" and the "fruit of the vine"— to represent 
him as the Lamb. Thenceforth his followers, in accord 
with his injunction, celebrated his death as their Passover 
Lamb every year until after the apostles had 
fallen asleep in death, and a great falling away had 
confused the faith of nominal Christendom, producing 
the epoch known as the "dark ages." Even during the 
"dark ages" the teaching that Christ was the antitypical 
Passover Lamb persisted, though the celebration of 
his death in the Passover supper which Jesus instituted 
fell into disuse. It was crowded out by that most terrible 
blasphemy which has deceived and confused so 
many millions of Christendom— the Mass, introduced 
by Roman Catholicism. This in the Scriptures is called 
"the abomination of desolation," because of the disastrous 
influence it has had upon the faith and practice 
of the Lord's people. Although Protestants in general 
have repudiated the Mass, as being wholly contrary to 
the teachings of Christ and the apostles, nevertheless 
the practices of Protestants are largely influenced yet by 
that terrible error, from which they have only partially 
escaped. 

THE MASS IS NOT THE EUCHARIST 

Many Protestants will innocently ask, Is not the 
Mass merely the Eucharist, the Lord's Supper, under 
another name? O, no! we answer— it is wholly different. 
The Lord's Supper celebrates the death of Christ 
accomplished at Calvary; the Mass represents a new 
sacrifice for sins made every time it is performed. Our 
Roman Catholic friends believe that when the priest 
blesses the wafer it becomes the actual body of Christ 
in his hands for the very purpose of sacrificing him 
afresh. High Mass is a particular sacrifice of Christ 
for a particular sin by a particular individual. Low 
Mass is a sacrifice of Christ for the general sins of a congregation. 
Roman Catholics claim to believe in the merit 
of Christ's sacrifice at Calvary— that it covered original 
sin, general sins that are past; but they claim also that 



the daily sins, shortcomings, blemishes of every individual, 

require to be cleansed by fresh sacrifices of Christ 

from time to time. Thus, from their standpoint, as represented 

in the Mass, and as practised by the Roman 

Catholics and Greek Catholics and high Church Episcopalians, 

Christ is being sacrificed afresh all the 

world over every day. This in the Scriptures is called 

an "abomination" in God's sight, because it disregards, 

sets at naught, the statement of the Scriptures that 

Christ dieth no more, that by one sacrifice he hath perfected 

forever all who come unto the Father through 

him.— Rom. 6:9. 

It will be readily seen that the repeated sacrifices 
represented in the Mass would have the general effect 
of nullifying and minimizing the value of the great sacrifice 
at Calvary represented in the Passover and its 
Memorial Supper. How could those who had come to 

R3961 : page 88 

look especially to the Mass for the cancellation of their 
sins be expected to look with as deep concern and as 
high an appreciation as otherwise, back to the antitypical 
Passover? While, therefore, the celebration of 
Good Friday has continued, the celebrations of the 
Memorial Supper preceding it fell into disuse long ago. 

As for Protestants, repudiating the dogma of the 
Mass as wholly unscriptural, they have abandoned it 
and returned to a celebration of the Lord's Supper. 
Meantime, however, accustomed to the frequency of 
the Mass, they have considered it merely a matter of 
expediency how often the Lord's Supper should be celebrated; 
hence we find some celebrating it every four 
months, some every three months, some every month, 
and some every Sunday. This general laxity and failure 
to reach a common ground of conformity is due to 
two things: (1) Because Christian people generally 
have overlooked the fact that our Lord's death was as 
the antitypical Passover Lamb, and that its celebration 
is the antitypical Passover Supper; (2) Because they 
have misunderstood our Lord's words, "As oft as ye 
do this," to mean, Do this as often as you please, 
whereas the words really signify, As often as you, my 
disciples (all of whom are Jews and accustomed to 
keeping the Passover), keep this Passover Supper, 
keep it in remembrance of me— not in remembrance of 
the literal lamb and the typical deliverance from typical 
Egypt and its bondage through the passing over of 
the typical first-born. 

Those who celebrate the Lord's Supper weekly 
consider that they have Scriptural precedent for so doing, 
because in the Bible we read that the early Church 
met together on the first day of the week and on such 
occasions had the "breaking of bread." It is a great 
mistake, however, to confound such breaking of bread 
with the Memorial Supper, for the former was merely 



an ordinary meal. There is absolutely nothing whatever 
in the record to indicate otherwise; the wine, the 
fruit of the vine, is not mentioned in connection with 
it, and it is never said to represent the broken body of 
our Lord. It was a cheerful social custom in the early 
Church to celebrate our Lord's resurrection on the first 
day of the week, and this common social custom helped 
to unite the bonds of brotherhood and fellowship. In 
many places the Lord's people follow this custom still. 
The Bible House congregation at Allegheny has such a 
breaking of bread every Lord's Day between the afternoon 
and the evening services— as a convenience for 
those living at a distance, especially as a desirable 
opportunity for extending fellowship amongst the 
Lord's people. 

THE DATE OF THE MEMORIAL SUPPER 

As we all know, the Jews used the moon more than 
we do in the reckoning of their time. Each new moon 
represented the beginning of a new month. The 
new moon which came closest to the spring equinox 
was reckoned the beginning of the ecclesiastical year, 
and beginning the fifteenth day of that month the Feast 
of Passover lasting a week was celebrated. That week 
of seven days represents the joy, the peace, the blessing, 
which result from the passing over, and typified 
the complete joy, peace and blessing which 
every true Christian experiences through a realization 
of the passing over of his sins through the merit of 
Christ's redemptive sacrifice. All true Christians, 
therefore, in their hearts have a celebration of this 
feast of Passover continually— the completeness of the 
matter being represented in the seven days, seven being 
a symbol of completeness. Not seeing the matter 
from the same standpoint, the Jew thought less of the 
killing of the Passover lamb and the eating of that supper 
than he did of the week following it; but our Lord 
emphasized the importance of the killing of the Passover 
lamb when he announced himself as its antitype 
and when he invited us to celebrate his death on its 
anniversary until, at his second coming, our entrance 
into the Kingdom would signify the complete fulfilment 
of all blessings. 

It would be a great blessing, doubtless, to many 
Christians if they could see this subject in its true 
light, lay more weight upon the value of the death of 
Christ, and join more heartily in its celebration on its 
anniversary, instead of at various other times and seasons, 
irregularly and without special significance. 
However, there have sprung up all over the civilized 
world little groups of the Lord's people who are taking 
heed to this subject, and whose delight it is to celebrate 
the Master's death according to his request— "As often 
as ye do this"— annually— "do it in remembrance of 
me." We believe that such a celebration brings special 



blessing to both heart and head. The nearer we 

come to the divine requirements the greater is the measure 

of our blessing, the more closely are we drawn to 

our Master and Head, and to each other as members 

of his body. The date of this celebration this year will 

fall on March 28 after 6 p.m., because at that hour begins 

the fourteenth day of the month Nisan, according 

to the Jewish reckoning. We urge upon all of the 

Lord's people everywhere to gather as may best suit 

their convenience in little groups or families to do this 

in remembrance of our Lord's great sacrifice. The 

fact that it is the anniversary makes the matter more 

impressive. 

"LORD IS IT I?" 

We recall the circumstances of the first Memorial, 
the blessing of the bread and of the cup, the fruit of 
the vine, of our Lord's exhortation that these represented 
his broken body and shed blood, and that those 
who are his followers should participate— not only 
feeding upon him but being broken with him, not only 
partaking of the merit of his blood, his sacrifice, but 
also in laying down their lives in his service, in cooperating 
with him in every and any manner. How precious 
these thoughts are to those who are rightly in 
tune with the Lord. Following this they may think of 
the course of Judas, who, though highly favored, loved 
filthy lucre to the extent that he was willing to sell his 
Master, but who was bold enough even while his treachery 
was being exposed toward the Lord to cry, "Is it I?" 

R3961 : page 89 

The very thought that any who had companied with the 
Lord could thus deny him and betray him to his enemies 
causes a proper loathing of such conduct, and 
should properly fill us with caution if not with fear 
lest in any sense of the word we should for the sake of 
honor or wealth or any other matter sell the Truth or 
any of its servants, the members of the body of Christ. 

Let our minds, then, follow the Redeemer to Gethsemane's 
Garden, and behold him with strong cryings 
and tears praying to him who was able to save him out of 
death— expressive of the Master's fear of death lest in 
some particular he might have failed to follow out the 
Father's plan and therefore be thought unworthy of a 
resurrection. We notice how our Lord was comforted 
by the Father through the angel with the assurance 
that he had faithfully kept his consecration vow and 
that he would surely have a resurrection as foretold. 
We behold how calm he was thereafter, when, before 
the High Priest and Pilate, and Herod and Pilate again 
—as a lamb before her shearers is dumb so he opened 
not his mouth in self defence. We see him faithful, 
courageous to the very last, and we have his assurance 



that he could have asked of the Father and had more 
than twelve legions of angels for his protection; but 
instead of petitioning for aid to escape his sacrifice, 
his petition was for aid to endure it faithfully. What 
a lesson for all who are his footstep followers! 

On the other hand we remember that even amongst 
his loyal disciples the most courageous forsook the 
Lord and fled, and that one of them even in his timidity 
denied his Master! What an occasion is this 
for examining our own hearts as respects the degree 
of our faith and courage and willingness to 
suffer with him who redeemed us ! What an opportunity 
is thus afforded for us to buttress the 
mind with resolutions that we will not deny our 
Master under any circumstances and conditions— that 
we will confess him not only with our lips but also by 
our conduct. Next we are shocked with the thought 
that it was the Lord's professed people, the Jews, who 
crucified the Prince of Life! Not only so, but that it 
was the leaders of their religious thought, the chief 
priests, scribes, Pharisees and Doctors of the Law 
rather than the common people. We hearken to the 
Master's words saying, Marvel not if the world hate 
you, for ye know that it hated me before it hated you; 
and we see that he meant the religious world in our 
case. 

DRINK YE OF THE SAME CUP 

The lesson to us, then, will be that we shall not be 
surprised if the opposition to the Truth and the persecutions 
to the light-bearers in the footsteps of Jesus 
should come from the most prominent exponents of 
Christianity. This, however, should neither cause us 
to hate our opponents nor those who persecuted our 
Lord to the death: rather we are to remember the 
words of the Apostle respecting this matter— "I wot 
that in ignorance ye did it, as did also your rulers." 
Ah, yes! ignorance, blindness of heart and mind, are 
at the bottom of all the sufferings of Christ— Head and 
body. And the Father permits it to be so now, until 
the members of the body of Christ shall have filled up 
that which is behind of the afflictions of Christ. With 
the completion of the membership of the body, the 
very elect, and the completion of their testing as to 
faithfulness unto death, will come the conclusion of 
this Gospel age, the resurrection change of the Church 
to be with and like her Lord. Then, as our Master declared, 
those who now partake of his broken body and 
are broken with him in the service of the Truth, those 
who now participate in his cup of suffering and self-denial, 
will by and by with him drink the new wine of 
joy in the Kingdom— beyond the vail. 

With that glorious morning will begin the great 
work of the world's release from the bonds of sin and 
death— the great work of uplifting, or, as the Apostle 



calls that great epoch, "The times of restitution of all 
things spoken by the mouth of all the holy prophets 
since the world began." (Acts 3:19-21.) The thought 

R3962 : page 89 

before the minds of those who participate in this Memorial 
should be the Apostle's words, "If we suffer with 
him we shall also reign with him"; "If we be dead with 
him we shall also live with him"; "for the trials of the 
present time are not worthy to be compared with the 
glory that shall be revealed in us." (Rom. 8:17; Rom. 6:8.) 
With these thoughts respecting the passing over 
of our sins of the First-born through the merit of the 
precious blood we may indeed keep the Feast of the 
Passover with joy notwithstanding trials and difficulties. 
So doing, continuing faithful as his followers, 
very soon we shall have the great privilege of leading 
forth the Lord's hosts— all who ultimately shall hear 
and know and obey the great King— out of the dominion 
of sin and death, out of Egypt into Canaan. Yes, 
dear brethren, in the language of the Apostle, "Christ 
our Passover is slain, therefore let us keep the Feast." 



R3962 : page 89 

THE WINE OF FALSE DOCTRINE 

-ISAIAH 28:7- 13. -MARCH 24.- 

Golden Text:— "Wine and new wine 
take away the heart."— Hosea 4:11. 

THE Scriptures refer to two kinds of drunkenness— with 
both the results are disastrous. It would be quite 
unjust to charge all the troubles of the world against 
intoxicating liquors, and yet when one considers how far 
reaching are the baneful effects of alcohol it certainly does 
appear to be one of the worst foes of the human family- 
even though it be, as one of the latest scientific discoveries 
shows, the integral part of the heating or stimulating influence 
of the blood in all animals. Evidently nature has provided 
in her own laboratories for the proper amount, and all 
additions thereto are dangerous. We like to hear young 
people, and especially young men, able to say that they 

R3962 : page 90 

have never tasted a drop of intoxicating beverages. Such a 
testimony does not, of course, prove them to be saints, but it 
does demonstrate that in this one particular they have good 
judgment. He that never tastes can never be injured by this 
adversary. Before leaving this phase of the subject we quote 
words credited to the great agnostic, Robert Ingersoll, as 



follows:— 

"I believe that alcohol to a certain degree demoralizes 
those who make it, those who sell it and those who drink it. 
I believe from the time it issues from the coiled and poisonous 
worm of the distillery until it empties into the hell of 
crime, death and dishonor, it demoralizes everybody that 
touches it. I do not believe that anybody can contemplate 
the subject without becoming prejudiced against this liquid 
crime. All you have to do is to think of the wrecks upon 
either bank of this stream of death— of the suicides, of the 
insanity, of the poverty, of the ignorance, of the distress, of 
the little children tugging at the faded dresses of weeping 
and despairing wives, asking for bread, of the men of genius 
it has wrecked, of the millions who have struggled with the 
imaginary serpents produced by this devilish thing. And 
when you think of the jails, of the almshouses, of the prisons 
and of the scaffolds upon either bank— I do not wonder 
that every thoughtful man is prejudiced against the awful 
stuff called alcohol." 

OUR LESSON GENERALLY MISUNDERSTOOD 

In our judgment those who provided the present lesson 
failed to grasp its real import as part of Isaiah's prophecy. 
We do not dispute that there may have been drunkenness of 
a most literal kind in Palestine at the time the Prophet 
Isaiah uttered these words. But we certainly do doubt that 
the drunkenness was so general as to justify this language 
except in some hypothetical and prophetic sense. Undoubtedly 
those of Isaiah's day were ready to accuse him of gross 
exaggeration in his statements— for instance, that all tables 
were full of vomit and filthiness, so that there was no place 
clean. It is only when we apply this chapter as a prophecy 
relating to the harvest time of the Jewish age, and again to 
the parallel time of the harvest of this Gospel age— only 
then do we begin to see that the Prophet's words were strictly 
true to the conditions they detailed. 

The Apostle Paul, in 1 Cor. 14:21, quoted the eleventh verse 
of our lesson and applied it distinctly to the "gift of 
tongues," which, in apostolic times, the Lord used in connection 
with the establishment of Spiritual Israel— to demonstrate 
divine power to natural Israel and to instruct those 
who would hear respecting the glorious message of salvation 
through Jesus; and again, in Romans 9:33 and 10:11, the 
Apostle quotes from this chapter (Isa. 28:16), and continuing 
his argument he quotes Isa. 29:10 in Romans 1 1:8. So surely 
as the Apostle was right in this application of this lesson, 
we are correct in claiming that it was not originally merely 
a temperance lesson to certain profligates of Isaiah's day. 

At the time of our Lord's first advent Israel knew not 
the time of its visitation, and because outwardly moral, 
respectable, godly, they drew nigh to the Lord with their 
mouths while their hearts were far from him, having the 
form of godliness but denying its real power. (2 Tim. 3:5.) 
We have no reason to think that alcoholic intoxication was 
a special feature of that time amongst that people, but we 



do know that they were drunk and blind and stumbled and 
were out of the way through the strong drink of false doctrine. 
Our Lord declared that they made clean the outside 
of the cup and platter, but that inwardly it was full of all 
manner of corruption: he cautioned the disciples to beware 
of the leaven, the corruption, of the Pharisees and Sadducees 
—that their teachings were not supported by their lives. 
He declared that they made void the law of God through 
their traditions— they were drunken with the traditions of 
the ancients— so stupidly drunken that they knew not the 
time of their visitation, and that when the Redeemer came 
unto his own his own received him not, but crucified him. 

The Apostle Paul, in Rom. 9:10, shows that in their 
blindness the Lord allowed the Jews to stumble, and in Rom. 1 1 
he assures us that this stumbling would continue until 
the full election of Spiritual Israel, after which the Lord 
would bless them and pour out his Spirit upon them and 
upon all flesh through the elect of this Gospel age. It was 
because of this intoxicated condition of their hearts that the 
Lord's messages were line upon line, precept upon precept, 
so that it was necessary to speak to them in other tongues 
in the early Church, to gather out the less intoxicated, those 
who had any ear to hear the message of divine mercy. As 
the last verse of our lesson declares, and as the Apostle 
Paul corroborates, all the messages of the Lord failed 
because of this drunken condition— "And they did fall 
backward and were broken, snared and taken." Thank God 
that the time of their deliverance and the opening of their 
eyes is near at hand! 

APPLICATION TO SPIRITUAL ISRAEL 

We have heretofore seen that the Jewish dispensation 
was a type or parallel of the Gospel dispensation, only on a 
lower plane. It is proper, therefore, that we should expect 
in the present harvest time similar conditions of drunkenness, 
similar stumblings in nominal Spiritual Israel. Is it 
not written that the Lord would prove to be a stone of 
stumbling or a rock of offence to both the houses of Israel? 
Do we not see how the first house stumbled because of intoxication 
with the wine of false doctrine? and do we not 
hear the Lord's messages in the symbolical book of Revelation 
telling us of the intoxicated condition of nominal spiritual 
Israel?— all nations made drunk by the wine of Babylon's 
fornication, corruption, misapplications of the blessings 
and mercies and privileges granted in this time. It is in 
full harmony with this that the Apostle urges that the Lord's 
people have the right kind of wine, the right kind of joy, 
the right kind of stimulation, saying, "Be not drunken with 
wine, wherein is excess, but be ye filled with the Spirit"— 
the Spirit of the Lord, the spirit of the Truth, the spirit of 
righteousness, the spirit of a sound mind— quite contrary to 
the spirit of error, the spirit of deference to the traditions of 
men, the spirit of Antichrist, the spirit of superstition. 

The application of the lesson to the Jewish harvest is 
eminently proper. It is quite evident that the harvest of this 



Gospel age, being in many respects much more important, 
the application should be made here with still greater force, 
and we have so done— as will be seen by noting the references 
to the various volumes of the MILLENNIAL DAWN series 
and ZION'S WATCH TOWER in the margins of our special 
Bible. 

R3963 : page 91 

"THEY ERR IN VISION, THEY STUMBLE IN JUDGMENT" 

The prophecy that great Babylon would make all 
nations drunken with her false teachings (Rev. 18:3) has 
been most literally fulfilled. The professed followers of the 
Lord of every nation and kindred seem to be under the 
delusions of these false doctrines; hence they err in vision, 
they cannot see the riches of divine grace: the nightmare of 
eternal torment at the hands of demons is vividly before 
their minds as the truth, so that they really blaspheme the 
gracious Creator unintentionally, misrepresenting his glorious 
arrangements for the redemption and recovery of the 
children of men. Many of them so stumble in judgment that 
they preach, as did Jonathan Edwards, that the eternal torment 
of the great majority of the race was foreknown and 
premeditated by the Almighty before Adam was created, and 
that such treatment of his creatures must be recognized as 
just— yea, more, as loving— so that the Lord's true people, 
with all this in mind, should praise God the louder and 
should consider that his justice was thus made manifest. 
Alas! what erring in vision, what stumbling in judgment, 
what inculcation in the spirit of Antichrist and the "doctrines 
of devils."— 1 Tim. 4:1. 

"TABLES FULL OF VOMIT" 

Today as never before this Scripture is fulfilled— "All 
tables are full of vomit"— not literal tables, but symbolical 
tables of the various denominations. Each denomination has 
gathered together at the table of the Lord, to be fed of him 
upon his words of truth and grace, "Wonderful words of 
life." But today, having gotten rid of some of the ignorance 
and superstition of the "dark ages," the Lord's people of 
various denominations, as they gather at their respective 
tables, feel sickness, nausea, as they contemplate the spiritual 
food provided for them and which they have pledged 
themselves to eat. The various dishes are garnished with 
choice rhetoric, and the table is grand with flowers of lovingkindness, 
mercy and benevolence. Few eat at all, but 
all gather regularly as a matter of duty. The odor of the 
dishes is sufficient, and even this is occasionally so strong as 
to produce nausea and vomiting— the rejection by the more 
enlightened of the doctrinal monstrosities and horrible misrepresentations 
of divine justice and love, inconsistent and 
unpalatable to the last degree. 

Truthfully the Prophet says, "All tables are full of 
vomit." Of which creed is it not true? at which denominational 



table do we find intelligent Christians gathering 
and really feasting upon that which they declare to be the 
divine revelation of the divine purposes toward the children 
of men? Surely it is true that each denomination is ashamed 
of its own table. Surely it is true that no one will be found 
in any denomination willing to defend in public the sectarian 
creed which he has professed. Is it any wonder that the 
whole head is sick and the whole heart is faint amongst the 
Lord's nominal people? The wonder rather is that these 
sick and disgusted ones do not rise and repudiate the tables 
at which they can no longer eat and be nourished and comforted, 
and that they seek for the true table of the Lord, of 
which the Scriptures tell us, "Thou hast furnished me a 
table in the presence of mine enemies." Respecting which 
the Scriptures again assure us that our Lord at his second 
advent will gird himself as the servant of his true people 
and come forth and serve them, presenting to them things 
new and old from the storehouse of grace and Truth. O, 
surely all who are of the right character of heart, hungering 
and thirsting for righteousness, will find the true table of 
the Lord and will be satisfied, filled thereby. 

THE TABLE OF THE LORD VERSUS THE TABLE OF DEVILS 

The Lord does not hold himself responsible for the false 
doctrines that were so generally received during the "dark 
ages" and which the Apostle describes as "doctrines of 
devils." All the while he has had the true table for those 
who were of true heart, for those who hunger and thirst for 
righteousness, but he has permitted also that the great Adversary 
prepare a table for those who are not of the spirit 
of the truth. It is the Apostle who asks, "What communion 
hath light with darkness? and what accord hath Christ with 
Belial? or what part hath he that believeth with an unbeliever?" 
(2 Cor. 6:14-16.) It is the same Apostle who again 
points out the distinction, separateness of those who are 
truly the Lord's people, saying, "Ye cannot drink the cup 
of the Lord and the cup of devils; ye cannot be partakers 
of the Lord's table and of the table of devils."— 1 Cor. 10:21. 

True, the various tables of the various sects of Christendom 
were started as tables of the Lord, and adorned to 
some extent with food from his storehouse, the Word. But 
the great Adversary placed upon these tables various errors, 
delusions, doctrines of devils, which have blemished them as 
a whole; wherefore it is appropriate now to apply to them 
the words of the Scriptures, "Come out from amongst them 
and be ye separate, touch not the unclean thing." "Babylon 
is fallen, is fallen [rejected of the Lord], Come out of her, 
my people, that ye be not partakers of her sins and receive 
not of her plagues." (2 Cor. 6:17; Rev. 18:4.) Surely she 
shall fall utterly, as a great millstone cast into the sea of 
anarchy.— Rev. 18:21. 

"WHOM SHALL HE TEACH KNOWLEDGE" 

Ah, here we have it! The knowledge of the truth contrasted 



with the confusion and drunkenness of the error in 
the present condition, with the Lord's people gathered 
around various sectarian tables, failing to recognize that 
there is but one table of the Lord as there is but one Lord, 
one faith, one baptism, and one God and Father of all. Under 
these conditions the Lord through the Prophet inquires, 
"Who can receive instruction?" Who would be ready for 
the Truth? Evidently only a few is the implication— peculiar 
people, more zealous for the favor of the Lord than for 
name and fame amongst men or earthly honors and emoluments. 
These and these alone are in the attitude of heart 
to be taught of the Lord, these he will teach knowledge. 
And he is teaching them; the saints are being gathered from 
one end of heaven to the other, away from the various tables 
of men to the spiritual food and refreshment which the Lord 
himself is providing at this time according to his promise. 
Amongst these never was there such rejoicing, such feasting, 
such pleasure— at last they have found the meat in due 
season for the household, the Lord's provision, and they find 
it strengthening and joy-inspiring. 

As a further part of the question, as an explanation of 
the kind of teaching, of the needs of the hour, the Apostle 
says, "Whom shall he make to understand doctrine"— the 
message of the Lord? The majority of those who have 

R3963 : page 92 

already vomited, rejected, the creeds of men feel so great a 
disgust for everything in the way of doctrine that they can 
barely endure to hear that word. They are inclined to say, 
"We have had enough of doctrine for the rest of our lives, 
let us hear no more of that, let us think nothing in particular, 
decide nothing in particular, know nothing in particular, 
merely hope something, hope that in some way unknown to 
everybody God will eventually do for the human family 
that which it really needs." No wonder, then, the Prophet 
inquires, "Whom shall he teach doctrine?" with the implication 
that few will be ready or willing to receive doctrine 
at this time when the creeds of Christendom are being rejected 
by all thinking people— at heart, if not outwardly. 

But our dear friends go to an extreme. It is not the 
doctrine of God and his Book that is wrong; it is not the 
divine plan that is in error; it is the teaching of the Adversary, 
which he combined with the Word of God, that caused 
the drunkenness and subsequently the sickness, the nausea. 
What need there is to realize that the defilement came from 
the Adversary, from human traditions, and that then while 
rejecting human traditions we must learn to go to the Word 
of God, the real storehouse of food and Truth, the real table 
of the Lord, with greater zeal, hungering and thirsting for 
the Truth that we may be filled. We have need to look to 
the great Master himself, who promised to be present in this 
time and to send at the hands of his servants the things new 
and old to the tables of his people. We need to scrutinize 
all that we receive, lest we ever be taken again by the delusions 
and hallucinations of the Adversary, the doctrines of 



devils. 

"WEANED FROM THE MILK" 

The Prophet describes the class that will be ready to 
receive the Truth— that they must pass the stage of infancy 
and be ready for the stronger meat of the divine Word. In 
this connection we notice that while theologians have prepared 
the malodorous doctrines of devils as the standards, 
they have for some time been withholding these from the 
people and endeavoring to have them, as "babes," use merely 
the "milk of the Word." This certainly is better than partaking 
of the adulterated, sickening, doctrinal presentations 
of the various sects; but, as the Apostle here intimates, it 
will not be sufficient in this time that one should be a babe 
in Christ and use merely the milk of the Word. In order to 
be an overcomer he must grow in grace and knowledge, and 
possess the fruits and graces of the Lord's Spirit, and this 
cannot be obtained merely through the milk of the Word. 
As the Apostle declares, we have need of strong meat, that 
as men we may be strong in the Lord and in the power of 
his might. This strong meat that he refers to is the strong 
doctrines, the strong teachings, the deep things of the divine 
Word. Only those who are weaned from the milk, drawn 
from the breasts, who have ceased to be babes and made 
some development— only these will be prepared for the instructions 
that the Lord now has to give, precept upon precept, 
line upon line, here a little and there a little. 

As in the harvest of the Jewish age the Lord took the 
unlearned and gave them foreign tongues and inspirational 
powers for the dissemination of the Truth then due, and did 
not use the tongues of Scribes and Pharisees and Sadducees, 

R3964 : page 92 

so in the present harvest time he is also using other tongues 
than those which had previously been used. The table of 
the Lord will not be established within the lines of sectarianism, 
but outside of them, and those who listen merely for 
the voices of the doctors of divinity will miss the instruction 
which the Lord will give in this time, and which will be 
given by other tongues outside of Babylon entirely. Thus 
it is written, "In her [Babylon] shall be heard no more the 
voice of the Bridegroom and the Bride." The Bridegroom's 
voice is outside, and all who have the Spirit of the Lord and 
who are therefore true virgins, eligible to be his Bride, will 
hearken to his voice and speedily come out of Babylon, in 
harmony with this declaration. But this will be but a little 
flock as compared with the mighty hosts of nominal Babylon; 
for the latter the same blinding, rejection, stumbling is as 
certain as it was to natural Israel in its harvest time. "He 
shall be for a stone of stumbling and rock of offence to both 
the houses of Israel."— Isaiah 8:14. 



R3964 : page 92 

"THE LORD KNOWETH THEM THAT ARE HIS" 

-2 TIMOTHY 2: 19. -MARCH 31.- 

THIS lesson is intended as a review for the quarter— 
from the Creation to Jacob. The Golden Text which 
we have chosen as the caption gives the key-thought 
of this lesson, namely, that the Bible, while incidentally dealing 
with many things that appertain to the earth and its people, 
mainly has reference to those who manifest a reverence for 
the Lord and to whom he correspondingly manifests his 
favor in various ways in various ages, cooperating with them 
for their present joy and their everlasting welfare. 

The Scriptures everywhere represent the Almighty Creator 
as benevolent, generous, kind toward his creatures, desiring 
their welfare, and, where punishment is necessary, 
inflicting it merely with a view to their recovery out of 
wrong conditions or to make examples for others who may 
thus be deterred from wrong doing. True, the Scriptures do 
also present Satan and the forces of evil, but always picture 
them to us as adversaries of the Almighty and of all who are 
good and in harmony with righteousness. Thus the Bible is 
in many respects a history of the conflict between good and 
evil, and it faithfully shows us, as an artificial record would 
not, that the general tendency of our race is sinward— that 
the smaller proportion escape the delusions of the Adversary, 
develop a reverential love for the Creator, and manifest 
loyalty and obedience. However, the Scriptures are very 
explicit in their assurances that it shall not always be thus: 
that the time for the triumph of right over wrong, of God 
over Satan, is arranged for, its time fixed, and its accomplishment 
certain. Everywhere also they point us to the 
fact that the reign of righteousness could never be accomplished 
without divine assistance— that our race is so impaired 
and weak through the fall that perfection is a matter 
of impossibility on our part, and hence that our help cometh 
from the Lord. 

It was this promise of a coming blessing that worked 
so marvellously in the hearts of the patriarchs, fixed their 
minds upon the Lord and separated them from the ways of 

R3964 : page 93 

evil. And it is the same gracious promise which, in proportion 
to our faith in it, helps us of today as it helped the 
patriarchs of old. "According to thy faith be it unto you," 
is still God's rule, and those who have much faith and loyalty 
of heart to the Lord are sure to be blessed of him, for 
"the Lord knoweth them that are his." Moreover, it is the 
high reward which God has promised to these his faithful 
ones that constitutes a large proportion of the incentive 
which strengthens us in our battle with the world, the flesh 
and the Adversary. It was so with the patriarchs and so 
it is with us of this Gospel age. 



"AS THE HEAVENS ARE HIGHER THAN THE EARTH" 

It is when we get the grand sweep of the divine plan 
that we can see God's ultimate purpose of vanquishing sin 
and blessing all the families of the earth with the knowledge 
of his goodness and with a favorable opportunity for reformation 
—when we come to see that the election of the Jewish 
age and also of this Gospel age are but means to that grand 
end of blessing the world. Then we begin to discern how 
high are God's ways above man's ways and God's plans 
above man's schemes, and to discern the heights and depths 
and lengths and breadths of God's love and provision for 
the blessing of the world. And proportionately as we look 
upon this glorious picture we are strengthened by his might 
in the inner man, and lifted out of our narrowness and selfishness, 
and more and more constituted images of God's dear 
Son, and thus also images of the heavenly Father. O, then, 
that we might each and all be of those who are known of 
the Lord as the "very elect"— of those whom he will use in 
the present time in connection with his present work of 
electing the little flock, and will be used by and by in his 
great work of blessing all the families of the earth. What 
trials and difficulties we might well endure with such a 
prospect! 

If from five to twenty years are counted a reasonable 
portion for the education of children for the duties of a life 
of half a century, how much education would be reasonably appropriate 
for an eternal life? Nay, more, how much of an 
education would be necessary for the kings and priests who 
will be the teachers and judges of the world of mankind to 
develop them for eternal life? We are lost in amazement 
of thought, and wonder how any can be developed in the 
brief space at our disposal. How valuable, then, is every 
moment, every day, as it sweeps past, for the development 
of this character which our Lord seeks for, the learning of 
the lessons so necessary to our present joy and our everlasting 
usefulness in the Master's service. Let us heed the 
Apostle's exhortation to lay aside every weight and every 
besetting sin and to run with patience the race set before us 
in the Gospel, looking unto Jesus, the Author of our faith, 
until he shall become the Finisher of it. 



R3964 : page 93 

RESPONDING TO DIVINE PROMISES 

-GENESIS 28:1-5, 10-22.-APRIL 1 .- 

"Behold I am with thee and will keep thee in 
all places whither thou goest."— Gen. 28:15. 

JACOB, perceiving that his esteem for the Abrahamic 
blessing and his perseverance in procuring it, 



had brought upon him the ill will of his brother 
Esau, showed that it was not the elder son's share of his 
father's possessions that he sought, and proposed a journey to 
the home of his mother's brother. Rebecca, in sympathy 
with the program, urged it upon Isaac, saying that she was 
vexed by the heathen wives of Esau and desired that Jacob 
should select his companion from amongst their God-fearing 
relatives. To this Isaac assented, and when Jacob was ready 
for the journey blessed him and confirmed to him again the 
Abrahamic blessing, saying, "And God Almighty bless thee 
and make thee fruitful and multiply thee that thou mayest 
be a multitude of people, and give thee the blessing of 
Abraham, to thee and thy seed with thee; that thou mayest 
inherit the land of thy sojournings which God gave unto 
Abraham." 

The journey was undertaken on foot and alone. Jacob, 
after the custom of the people of that country even today, 
at night wrapped himself in his outer garment and slept in 
any convenient place, using a stone for a pillow. On the 
evening of probably his third day from home he slept in a 
place near to the town of Luz, and was there granted a vision 
or dream in which he saw a ladder extending from earth to 
heaven and on it holy angels ascending and descending, 
and at its top the Lord himself, who spoke to him precious 
words of encouragement. Thus did the Lord comfort one 
who trusted in him— one who had so great respect for the 
divine covenant made with his grandfather Abraham that he 
esteemed it of more value than all earthly riches and comforts. 
It was largely on account of his faith in the Abrahamic 
Covenant that Jacob was now practically an outcast 
from his home, fleeing in reality through fear of his brother 
Esau. It is not wonderful that God rewarded such a heroic 
faith, neither does it surprise us that it was because of the 
lack of this faith that God took the inheritance of this Covenant 
from the unbelieving Esau, "profane Esau," as the 
Apostle describes his sacrilegious disrespect to the divine 
Covenant. 

It is so still: God always honors faith. Those who now 
for his sake and because of their respect for the divine 
promises suffer the loss of earthly home and privileges and 
comforts may be sure that these testings of their loyalty to 
God will not go unrewarded. The Lord seeketh such to 

R3965 : page 93 

worship him as worship him in spirit and in truth, only with 

such is he well pleased, only to such does he let down the 

golden ladder, only to such do the angels of heaven minister, 

for we read, "Are they not all ministering spirits, sent forth 

to minister to those who shall be heirs of salvation?" 

(Heb. 1:14.) That golden ladder fitly pictures our dear Redeemer, 

who is the Way to God as well as the Truth and 

the Life. His own words are, "No man cometh unto the 

Father but by me." Upon this Mediator between God and 

man all the blessings of God descend to us, and through 

him our prayers and our offerings are acceptable to the 



Father. And as the Father spoke to Jacob from the farther 
end of this ladder, so with every one of us: it is the Father's 
drawing, the Father's message, the Father's love that our 
dear Redeemer has revealed to us, and brought us into contact 
with every good and every perfect gift coming down 

R3965 : page 94 

from the Father of Lights. All things are of the Lord, and 
all things are by the Son. 

THE PROMISES RENEWED 

From the further end of the ladder Jacob heard the 
Lord's voice saying, "I am the Lord, the God of Abraham 
thy father and the God of Isaac: the land whereon thou 
liest to thee will I give it and to thy seed; and thy seed 
shall be as the dust of the earth, and thou shalt spread 
abroad to the west and the east, to the north and south: 
and in thee and in thy seed shall all the families of the 
earth be blessed. And behold I am with thee and will keep 
thee in all places whither thou goest, and will bring thee 
again into this land; for I will not leave thee until I have 
done that which I have spoken to thee of." 

Here was the very comfort and encouragement that 
Jacob needed; here he had the assurance not only that his 
grandfather Abraham had a covenant with God, and that 
this had not passed to Ishmael but to Isaac, and that now 
it had not passed to Esau but to himself. He was content 
with the loss of all things else since he still had the divine 
favor and was thus acknowledged of God as being the heir 
of this wonderful promise, the full import of which he could 
but faintly appreciate. And so it is with all who have heard 
the Father's voice and been drawn or attracted by his promises, 
and who have surrendered all other ambitions in life 
that they might attain to the divine favor and chief blessing 
as heirs of God and joint-heirs with Jesus Christ our Lord. 
No conditions under such circumstances could really be 
heard; hence, as the Apostle says, we are enabled to rejoice 
even in tribulation, knowing that even our tribulations are 
working for us patience and the various experiences of life 
necessary to our preparation for the glorious position to 
which we have been called of God. With the Apostle then 
we can say, "I count all things but loss for the excellency 
of the knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord: for whom I have 
suffered the loss of all things, and do count them but dung 
that I may win Christ and be found in him.— Phil. 3:8,9. 

AS THE STARS AND AS THE SAND 

It will be noticed that in this blessing the Lord likens 
the seed of Jacob to the dust of the earth, but not to the 
stars of heaven. We remember that in the divine promise 
to Isaac (Gen. 26:4) the reverse of this is stated: the posterity 
like unto the stars of heaven is mentioned, but no illustration 
of the dust of the earth, while to Abraham God used 



both of these illustrations, saying, "Thy seed shall be as the 

stars of heaven and as the sand of the seashore for multitude." 

In the Abrahamic promise both the spiritual seed, 

likened to the stars of heaven, and the natural seed, likened 

to the sands of the seashore, are properly mentioned, because 

both the heavenly and earthly seeds and the heavenly and 

earthly blessings proceed from that original Covenant. We 

remember in this connection the Apostle's statement, "We, 

brethren, as Isaac was, are the children of promise": we 

are the spiritual Seed of whom in the First Resurrection the 

Prophet says, "They shall shine as the brightness of the 

firmament and as the stars forever and ever." (Dan. 12:3.) 

The Apostle refers to the same class as celestials, comparing 

them to the stars— "as one star differeth from another star 

in glory, so also is the [first] resurrection of the dead— it is 

sown a natural body, it is raised a spiritual body." (1 Cor. 15:40-44.) 

Similarly Jacob is referred to by the Apostle as a 

representative of natural Israel: for instance, telling us of 

the blessing that shall come upon natural Israel at the end 

of this Gospel age, when the Spiritual Israel shall have been 

glorified, he says, "A deliverer shall come out of Zion and 

shall turn away ungodliness from Jacob. For this is my 

Covenant with them when I shall take away their sins."— 

Rom. 11:25-30. 

Not only did the Lord assure Jacob that he was in the 
right way as an heir for the promise, but, further, that whatever 
his experiences might be he should remember that the 
Lord was with him and would not let go of him until he 
had fulfilled toward him all these gracious promises. What 
a force, what a power, this experience and the Lord's testimony 
must have been to Jacob in future years! And it still 
appertains to natural Israel. The Lord has held that people 
under his care nor let them go for over thirty centuries, 
and as surely as it is here written he will accomplish for 
them the promised blessing and will yet make them a blessing 
to all nations. Nevertheless, as Jacob had trying experiences 
in the interim, so his posterity have had and will 
have until the blessing of the Lord under the New Covenant 
shall come to them at the hands of the great Mediator of the 
New Covenant, the glorified Christ Jesus and the Church, 
which is his body— Spiritual Israel. 

A comforting lesson comes to all of us who are Spiritual 
Israelites also, for we reflect that it is the same unchangeable 
God who has given us the chief blessing, which 
the natural Israelite failed to receive, as it is written, "Israel 
hath not obtained that which he seeketh for, but the election 
hath obtained it, and the rest were blinded." We, the 
elect, Israel spiritual, may feel sure that if God's promises 
to natural Israel are all to be fulfilled his promises to Spiritual 
Israel are yea and amen in Christ. To us he has also 
promised that, into whatever situation we may be brought in 
his providence, he is able to make all things work together 
for our good, and to bring us off conquerors, yea, more than 
conquerors, through him that loved us and bought us with 
his precious blood. 



THE HOUSE OF GOD--THE GATE OF HEAVEN 

When Jacob awaked from this refreshing vision, dream, 
he said, "Surely the Lord is in this place and I knew it not. 
What a place for awe is this! It is none other than the 
house of God, the gate of heaven." He was awe inspired, 
and if the dream inspired the future patriarch with awe, 
what should the knowledge of the reality bring to us, we 
who with the eyes of faith see Jesus as the ladder reaching 
from our humble, fallen condition clear to the heights of the 
heavenly glory and presence! With what reverence should 
we look up and hear the Father's voice coming to us through 
him. How little we should feel ourselves to be, how great 
the Giver of every good and perfect gift. Surely, as Jacob 
said, the resting-place of this ladder must be the house of 
God, the place where we may meet with our Almighty Creator. 
It was this that was symbolized by the Tabernacle 
of old, which was called the tent of meeting, not because 
the Israelites entered it, but because Jehovah could enter 
and there meet with the people through their representative, 
the priest, the Lord's presence being indicated by the light 
on the Mercy Seat, the Shekinah glory. 

R3965 : page 95 

Similarly the Temple was a house or meeting-place 
between God and his people, and similarly now with Spiritual 
Israel— Christ at the lower end of the ladder is the 
meeting-place between God and man. This meeting-place 
for the present time is not a building made with hands— is 
not a Temple nor even a tent, but a house or household of 
faith, the house or Church of God. Wherever this may be is 
"Bethel,"— "wherever two or three of you are met in my 
name there am I in the midst"; there the ladder, at the upper 
end of which is the Father, touches the earth. And every 
such assemblage is truly a gate of heaven. What wonder, 
then, that the Scriptures encourage the Lord's people to 
meet in his name, to have fellowship with the Father 
through him, and to have their petitions borne upward to 
the Father and the blessings to come down from the Father 
upon them. What wonder that the Apostle exhorted that 
we should not forget the assembling of ourselves as the 
manner of some is, and so much the more as we see the day 
approaching.— Heb. 10:25. 

"And I knew it not," said Jacob. And so with us. We 
knew not at first about the Lord's gracious arrangements 
and provisions for our blessing. It was only after we had 
heard his voice and come to an appreciation of his grace 
and forgiveness that we learned to love him, and that perfect 
love casts out our fear. The fear or reverence, however, 
which we had at the beginning of our experience, was 
a proper and useful one. Whoever comes not to the Father 
through a reverential fear does not appreciate the privilege 
of relationship and contact with the great King of the 
Universe. 



NOTING AND MARKING BLESSINGS 

After he had awakened, thought over his dream and 
experienced reverential sentiments, Jacob arose, although 
it was still early, before the breaking of day. He must take 
time to acknowledge the divine favors he had just received. 
He did this in three ways: 

(1) He took the stone upon which his head had rested 
and set it up as a monument at that spot and poured oil 
upon it as signifying honor, distinction and appreciation; 

R3966 : page 95 

(2) He gave the place a name, calling it Beth-el, the 
house of God, in commemoration of the blessing. 

But this was not enough: he said to himself, Although 
I have been a follower of the Lord, and am even now here 
because of my faith in the divine promise to Abraham, yet now 
that God has personally favored me with these assurances of 
his presence with me and his assistance along the journey of 
life and his ultimate fulfilment in me of all these promises, 
what should I render unto the Lord for all his benefits? 
He resolved that he would (3) make a vow, a covenant of 
fidelity to the Lord. It was this: Since God will be with 
me and will keep me in this way which I go, and provide 
me bread to eat and raiment to wear, so that I shall return 
hither again in peace, and in view of this promise he shall 
be my Lord, my God, which signifies that I shall be his servant, 
his creature. The stone set up as a monument served 
as a corroboration, a witness to the vow, and additionally 
Jacob vowed that of all that God gave him he would surely 
give a tenth part to the divine service. 

We consider such a consecration of himself and of his 
income as the reasonable proper course on Jacob's part. 
The man or woman who receives blessings from the Lord or 
from anyone without thought, desire and wish to make returns 
according to his ability, shows thereby his degradation, 
because surely every noble-minded person would be prompted 
to consecration by a realization of the Lord's favors and privileges. 
So the Apostle declares respecting the Spiritual 
Israelite, that we have received of the Lord exceedingly great 
and precious promises. Having come to this place where we 
are at the foot of the ladder and in touch therewith, and 
recipients of the blessings from heaven and the privilege of 
this association, we should consider it, he tells us, a reasonable 
service to present our bodies living sacrifices to him. 
-Rom. 12:1. 

We should esteem it a great joy, a great privilege, to be 
the Lord's servants. We do not become his servants in 
order to get his blessings, but his blessings have been conferred 
upon us conditionally: we are pleased to present our 
bodies living sacrifices to his service. Jacob vowed one-tenth 
of his income to the Lord's service, and this proportion seems 
to have been in general recognized at that time and probably 
previously, as we know it was subsequently incorporated 
in the Mosaic Law. Abraham gave a tithe, one-tenth, 



of the spoils to Melchisedec, and the king of Sodom made 

a similar offering to Abraham, which the latter rejected, preferring 

to receive gifts from the Lord only. 

Theoretically the Christian gives his all to the Lord, 
and theoretically the Lord accepts our all of time, talent, 
influence, money, all. But actually, when we consider the 
time necessary for rest and for the reasonable care of our 
earthly interests, we are fortunate indeed if we are able to 
give directly to the Lord one-tenth of our time. Similarly 
with all of our gifts, privileges and opportunities— so many 
of them are necessary to ourselves, our reasonable well being, 
the providing of things honest in the sight of all men, 
it is doubtful if very many, therefore, give to the Lord much 
more than one-tenth of all their substance. And surely if 
this was a command to natural men, we, as New Creatures, 
would feel ashamed to proffer the Lord less. We 
certainly should set apart at least one-tenth for the Lord, 
and then add thereto as much as possible according to the 
Lord's blessing and the possibilities of the case. We, too, 
should set up pillars or memorials as marking this special 
blessing received of the Lord. 

A provision has been made for us along this line by our 
Lord. Has he not provided the Memorial season, in which 
annually we are privileged to celebrate our Bethel?— that 
we are the house of God because with us is the Son of man, 
the Ladder, the connecting way between earth and heaven, 
between us and the heavenly Father. How earnest we 
should be to perpetuate this Memorial, and how we should 
appreciate the fact that its recurring lessons are amongst 
the most helpful that could possibly be our experience. 
And did not our Lord provide for us another Memorial, 
and set us the example in the use of it, too, when he symbolized 
his consecration to death by baptism into water? 
How glad we are that we can set up this Memorial also, 
that it is our privilege to be symbolically buried and symbolically 
raised as a manifestation and expression of our 
faith and our hope and our joy. Whoever neglects the vow 
of consecration, and whoever neglects to set up this Memorial, 
is thereby to this extent evidencing a carelessness and a 
deficiency in the spirit that is pleasing to the Lord; and in 
the same degree he fails to have the witness that he pleases 
the Lord and is making his calling and election sure. Let 
us, then, like Jacob, arise early. We may set up these memorials 
and make these vows of consecration. Those who 
have done these things early in their Christian experience- 
early after coming to the foot of the cross, the foot of the 
ladder— have received proportionately the greater blessing as 
they have gone on in life's pathway. 



page 97 



SEMI-MONTHLY 
VOL. XXVIII APRIL 1 No. 7 
A.D. 1907--A.M. 6035 



CONTENTS 

Views from the Watch Tower 99 

Will Baptists and Christians Unite? 99 

Social System Doomed Unless it is Reformed.... 99 

American Farmers Forming a Union 100 

Berean Bible Studies on the Tabernacle 101 

A Renovated Earth 101 

A New Name— God-Given 103 

Confirmed by Better Promises 104 

The Church's New Name 105 

Hated of His Brethren 106 

God's Word Superior to Dreams 107 

Patient Endurance in Adversity 108 

"Abandon Us Not in Temptation" 109 

Encouraging Words from Faithful Workers Ill 

page 98 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-24 EVERSHOLT ST., LONDON, N.W. 
GERMAN BRANCH-MIRKER STR., 45, ELBERFELD. 
AUSTRALASIAN BRANCH-EQUITABLE BLDG., COLLINS ST., MELBOURNE 

PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 

TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR AS FOLLOWS:- 

All Bible Students who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity or 
adversity, are unable to pay for this Journal, will be supplied FREE if 
they send a Postal Card each June stating their case and requesting its 
continuance. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on 
our list continually and in touch with the Studies, etc. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



THIS JOURNAL IS PUBLISHED IN THE 

FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, DANISH AND ITALIAN LANGUAGES. 

SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



PILGRIM MEETING EXPENSES 



We have decided that it will be proper and advisable to 
credit each little congregation, on the Tract Fund, the amount 
expended on Pilgrim meetings. Please have your scribe report 
to us. As our financial year began December 1st, 1906, 
we will be glad to have reports that far back. 

TABERNACLE ILLUSTRATIONS DELAYED 



The pictures of the Tabernacle are all ready, but the illustrations 
of the Priests required some alterations, which have 
caused delay. We hope to begin sending these out before May 
1. We find that we can make a still closer price, viz., 30c for 
one of each and $1.00 for four of each. Hence those who have 
already sent $1.00 for three will receive four, and those who 
have sent 35c for one set will receive in addition one copy of 
the Tabernacle pamphlet. 

R3967 : page 98 

DAILY HEAVENLY MANNA 



Our new edition of the "Manna" will contain the same 
texts and comments as the former one; but it will have twice 
as many pages. Every alternate leaf will be blank ruled, for 
use as an Autograph and Birthday Record. It will be printed 
on fine bond paper and bound in handsome dark blue cloth. 
It would be well worth $1 or more in any bookstore. 

NEW PRICES, WHOLESALE AND RETAIL 

The new "Manna" will be sold by Manna Colporteurs and 
others at 50 cents each (60c when gotten by mail or prepaid 
express). The wholesale rates, open to any TOWER reader, 
are as follows— cash with order: 

1 copy, postpaid, each 35 cents 

10 copies or more, by express, prepaid 30 " 

10 " " " at your charges. 20 " 
30 " " by freight 20 " 

We of course prefer the DAWNS or STUDIES to be colporteured; 
but a good follow-up work can be done with "Manna" 
by those who cannot do the regular work with DAWN-STUDIES. 

R3968 : page 98 



"METHOD" OF SELLING DAILY HEAVENLY MANNA 



"Good morning! If you are at all interested in religious 
matters, I would like to show you what some have styled 
"Heavenly Breakfast Food." It will cost you nothing to see 
it, and only take a few moments of your time, for I am in 
haste myself. (If now asked into the house, take from your 
pocket your sample MANNA and continue.) This volume 
contains a Scripture text on a practical topic for every day 
in the year, with a very brief remark on its salient features 
—entirely unsectarian. To start each day in the year under 
such helpful influences results in untenable blessings. It is 
good for ten years, and all that blessing you may enjoy for 
50c, or only 5c per year. The Bible and Tract Society believes 
that in circulating this "Heavenly Manna" it is helping 
people to both physical and spiritual health: food digests 
better under good influences. 

"Another feature is this (pointing to lined pages): An 
Autograph and Birthday Record of your friends, which by 
the end of ten years would make it priceless to you. May I 

take your order? I will deliver next day: you pay 

then. Perhaps you would want more than one copy— for 
friends near or afar. You could scarcely present a more 
suitable gift, nor one which they would more appreciate." 



R3966 : page 99 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 
WILL BAPTISTS AND CHRISTIANS UNITE? 



WITH a proposition before it looking towards the 
merger of two great religious denominations, 
the ninth annual congress of the Disciples of 
Christ, which will meet at the Central Christian Church 
in Cincinnati the first week of April, will be of national 
importance and of great significance in the religious 
world. At the 1906 congress, held in Indianapolis, a 
committee of ten was appointed to make overtures and 
formulate a plan for "closer relations between the Baptists 
and the Disciples of Christ." This committee 
will report at the conclusion of the three-days' session 
of the congress in Cincinnati. Its report will advocate 
the merger of the two churches, and it is probable that 
an agreement will follow, which, within the next few 
years, will bring about consolidation.— Cincinnati 
Times-Star. 



These two great denominations claim to have "no 
creed but the Bible." They, however, advocate very 
different views of baptism, which is one of the cardinal 
doctrinal tests of both. Nevertheless, if the preachers 
can unite, undoubtedly their flocks will follow them, 
for they generally do not comprehend the doctrinal 
difference. The people of both would be quite ready 
for the clearer Bible teachings presented in ZION'S 
WATCH TOWER were it not for the power of their preachers, 
exercised to suppress thought and Bible study and 
liberty. 

SOCIAL SYSTEM DOOMED UNLESS IT IS REFORMED 



Dr. Jacob Gould Schurman, president of Cornell 
University, in an address delivered recently in Old 
Trinity Church, New York, attacked the present industrial 
system and declared that, unless something was 
done for the wage-earner by the big capitalists, the 
end would be social revolution. Dr. Schurman's remarks 
created a sensation. He said in part: 

"Steam, electricity and consolidated capital are in 
our own days eliminating the small producer and the 
small trader. The chance of young men becoming independent 
producers and traders, when business is conducted 
on the scale of millions, instead of thousands 
or hundreds of dollars, is vastly less than it was in the 
time of our fathers. 

"The wage-earner, feeling himself and his children 
doomed to poverty, rises in rebellion against the 
economic system which makes such things possible. 
He protests that capital gets too large a share of the 
product which laboring men create. His remedy, when 
he has a remedy, is confiscation of private capital in 
the public interests and the establishment of a socialistic 
State, in which all such workers shall receive compensation 
in proportion to their deserts. 

"Somehow— I know not how, but somehow— the 
organizers and financiers and managers of our modern 
establishments of production and transportation must 
devise a method whereby the men whose labor builds 
them up shall become shareholders in the enterprises. 
The present discontent and rankling sense of injustice 
must be got rid of, if our economic and industrial system 
is to survive." 



Thus we note from time to time that some see what 
is coming, even though they follow not with us and are 
ignorant of the Bible's teaching on this subject. They 
"fear for looking after those things coming upon the 
earth." Our Lord says that his followers, better instructed, 



may lift up their heads and rejoice, knowing 
that their redemption draweth nigh. 

INSANITY IN CHICAGO 



A newspaper dispatch from Chicago says:— "The 
State Board of Charities, in an official report to the 
Governor, declares one in every ninety Chicagoans is insane 
and needs watching, and that 58,000 persons in 
the State are unfit to be at large." 



Insanity is greatly on the increase, proving that 
this is not the "brain age," in a good sense of the term. 
New York State statistics show 25,000 insane, or one 
out of every 300 population. Worse still, if applied 
to adults, these figures show one out of every 150 of the 
population so badly gone as to be in an asylum. The 
"fall" has wounded some worst physically, others 

R3967 : page 100 

worst morally and others worst mentally. Oh, how the 
poor world deserves the Apostle's term, "the groaning 
creation." Oh, how much it needs the great Restorer 
and his work during the "times of restitution. "— 
Acts 3:19-21. 

AVERAGE HUMAN BRAIN SHOWS NO IMPROVEMENT 



The average human brain is not only no better 
than it was thousands of years ago, but it is really deteriorating 
according to Professor William I. Thomas 
of the University of Chicago, in an article in the January 
number of the Journal of Sociology, issued by the 
University. 

"Nature is not producing a better average brain 
than in the time of Aristotle and the Greeks," says the 
professor. "The brain is less likely to improve now 
than in earlier time, because the struggle for existence 
has been mitigated so that the unfit survive along with 
the fit. Indeed, the rapid increase in idiocy and insanity 
shown by statistics indicates that the brain is deteriorating 
slightly on the average as compared with 
earlier times." 

A KANSAS BOAST 



"The Kansas press is just now boasting of the superior 



moral conditions of their State, and they have 
good reason for the boast, for 85 out of its 105 counties 
have not a single officially reported pauper, and 25 of 
these counties have no almshouses and 35 are without 
a criminal case on the docket. Something more than 
twenty years have passed since Kansas adopted prohibition. 
The present condition of the State is a splendid 
object-lesson to the rest of the country; and yet we 
still hear the cry 'prohibition takes away the people's 
liberty' and 'you can't make people moral by law.'"— 
Homiletic Review. 

AMERICAN FARMERS FORMING A UNION 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

I enclose a farm paper which I am sure will interest 
you. The farmers are joining forces with the labor 
unions. This paper is the official organ of the "American 
Society of Equity," published weekly. 

I am a reader of MILLENNIAL DAWN; was formerly 
a member of "Dr. Dowie's Church"; excommunicated 
because of the enclosed letter. 

May God our Father continue to bless your work. 

Yours in the Christ, CHARLES C. STEWART. 

Following is the letter above referred to:— 

Overseer W. G. Voliva, Zion City, 111: 

Dear Brother,— I want to make a gentlemanly, 
Christian protest. I love the work of the Kingdom— I 
want to see its servants honored. I desire what Solomon 
did— wisdom— the kind that cometh down from 
above. I invoke the Father for his guidance in writing 
this letter. 

In looking over the Leaves (Oct. 30, 1906) I find a 
reference to MILLENNIAL DAWN, in which you say that 
certain, or rather many, of its statements are "gross 
misinterpretations of the plain Word of God," that it is 
largely "Seventh Day Adventism spiritualized," etc. 

I know not how far you have read into Mr. Russell's 
works (now in six volumes), but you could not 
have followed his plain directions: "to prove by Scripture 
each statement he makes." If you had you would 
never say that he "grossly misinterpreted" God's Word. 
There is not a man in the Christian Catholic Apostolic 
Church (that I have heard) who knows one-twentieth 
of God's plan as Mr. Russell. Our Church is almost 
as barren of true exposition as the apostatized denominations. 
My soul longs for some true bread. Elder 
Cossum is the only man who really does expound— a 
grand, good, noble Christian gentleman. 

I have studied the Scriptures with MILLENNIAL 
DAWN and the tracts since 1899— seven years. I read 
the WATCH TOWER— glad, happy, to see it come into 



the house. The WATCH TOWER reflects a kindly, 
Christlike power that edifies and draws one toward 
the great Father. I understand Greek and Latin and 
can translate. I have compared many of Mr. Russell's 
claims with the original. He is right. He has a 
sound mind, given by the Spirit of Jehovah. He is 
Scriptural, reasonable, consistent. He has no vituperative, 
striving spirit in any of his writings nor in his 
addresses. 

Here are some of the points that I have studied 
and am convinced that the Scriptures endorse them as 
Mr. Russell expounds:— 

The pre-existence, birth and resurrection of Jesus. 

The impersonality of Jehovah's Spirit. 

The difference between the Christ's trial, the 
Church's trial, the world's trial. 

The doctrine of Sheol (and Hades), Gehenna and 
Tartarus, in that the dead are waiting for the call of 
Jesus, that they are not in heaven or hell (so-called 
place of torture). 

The difference between mortality and immortality. 

These are only a few of those I might mention. 

As you will see by this enclosed postal I have interest 
in this work (the Lord's). I inquired for these 
tracts to give to Overseer Piper and Elder Hammond 
that they might get right on the subject of the "Holy 
Spirit." 

I am not a Russellite, Dowieite, Volivaite. I am 
truly striving to grasp the knowledge of the Plan of 
God and run for the prize— patiently, intelligently, 
diligently. 

This study has helped me greatly in my junior 
work. I have charts that I have used and will soon 
plan another to explain to the children what God expects 
to do with them. I study the Scriptures and then 
teach what I find. 

The people don't need scolding— they need systematic 
teaching. They need to get the "mark in their 
foreheads." 

I have a full new set of "Millennial Dawns" at home 
waiting for some consecrated follower of the Lord 
Jesus. I should be glad to send them (or lend them) 
free if you would like to read them. I am sure your 
opinion would change. May I send them? 

Your brother in the Kingdom, 

CHARLES C. STEWART. 



We are glad to know of Brother Stewart's progress 
in the knowledge of the Truth and thank him for the 
paper referred to in his letter. On its margin he wrote, 
"James 5 in process of fulfilment." From the paper we 
clip the below items:— 

"Better farming has had the attention of colleges, 
institutes and the press, increased production has been 



the slogan, and several increased crops, with diminished 
value, proved that doctrine's fallacy, when 
taught alone, until the bumper crops of some of our 
most important products compelled the Secretary of 
Agriculture to figure on them a money loss to the farmers 
of $120,000,000. 

"Up-to-Date Farming says again, as it has so many 
times said before, raise big crops, they are all right, 
we are glad to hear of them, but learn to so market the 
crops, big or little, that they will yield commensurate 
reward to those who produce them. 

R3967 :page 101 

"Farmers cannot get anything from Congress until 
they are organized. Other farm papers have been doing 
these things for years, and their readers applauded, 
but what did Congress do for the farmers? Very little. 
We do not believe in such a foolish waste of good time 
and energy. We want to see farmers organized and 
then they won't need to petition— beg— for what is their 
right, but they will demand and get what they want 
or in equity should have." 



We quite agree that the cry of the reapers will ere 
long be heard. We have just had seven years of wonderful 
crops and great prosperity: will we perhaps now 
have seven lean years? And will trade arrangements 
make this an extra burden to all workers? We shall 
see! 

R3968 :page 101 

THE PASSOVER DATE THIS YEAR 



When the new moon comes a little before the Spring 
Equinox it starts the Jewish ecclesiastical year;— provided 
the full moon be not before the Equinox. It was 
so this year: our reckoning March 28, evening, as the 
beginning of the 14th of Nisan was in accord with Jewish 
observances. 



page 101 

BEREAN BIBLE STUDIES ON THE TABERNACLE 

THE SECOND ATONEMENT -DAY SACRIFICE 

(Continued) 



APRIL 14 

62. Would it be proper for those in the "Holy" to revile 
or ill-treat those who have left the "Holy" or even 

left the "Court"? T.62, par. 3; Jude 9. 

63. What was the significance of the "Mercy Seat" or 
"Propitiatory"? T.61, par. 2; Lev. 16:14,15; Rom. 3:25, 
Diaglott. 

64. Why did Aaron sprinkle the "Mercy Seat" with the 
blood of the bullock seven times? T.61, par. 2. 

65. What did the impartation of the holy Spirit at Pentecost 
signify to the Lord's consecrated ones? 

T.64, par. 1. 

66. Why could not the Spirit have been imparted to the 
disciples before the day of Pentecost? T.64, par. 1. 

67. How was the baptism of the holy Spirit at Pentecost 
foreshadowed in the type? T.64, par. 2; 

Lev. 16:15. 

APRIL 21 

68. By what means was our Lord enabled to faithfully 
carry out his covenant of sacrifice even unto death? 
and by what power will each member of his body 

be so enabled? T.64, par. 2. 

69. In what way could the words of the Apostle Paul 
be true, "I live, yet not I, but Christ liveth in me"? 
T.65, par. 1; Gal. 2:20; Phil. 3:8-10. 

70. By what means are the Lord's consecrated followers 
in the "Holy" condition enlightened and nourished? 
T.65, par. 2. 

7 1 . Is there any intrinsic merit in our sacrifices as 
members of Christ's body? T.66, par. 1,2; Col. 1:24; 
Gal. 5:17; Psa. 49:7. 

APRIL 28 

72. Will the day come when all sacrificing will end? T.66, 
par. 2. 

73. Is that day near at hand? T.66, par. 2. 

74. What glorious reward is promised at the end of the 
way? T.66, par. 2; 2 Pet. 1:4. 

75. What will passing beyond the "second vail" mean 
to the Lord's true saints? T.66, par. 3; 

Heb. 6:19,20. 

76. What stupendous event will speedily follow the presentation 
of the blood (the sacrificed life) of the 

"Lord's goat" class to the Father after the last 
member has "passed behind the vail"? T.67, par. 2,3; 
Lev. 9:22,23. 

77. Why were all things in the type sprinkled with the 
blood? T.67, last par. 

MAY 5 



78. What was done with the live goat, after lots had 
been cast, in the type? T.68, par. 1; Lev. 16:20-22. 

79. What class is represented in the live goat, or "scape 
goat"? T.68, par. 2; Rev. 7:13-15. 

80. Does this goat typify wilful sinners also? T.68, 
par. 2. 

81. How long has the "scape goat" class existed? T.68, 
par. 3. 

82. Will this class be perfected, as a class, while any 
member of the "Lord's goat" company is still in 

the flesh? T.69, par. 1. 

83. Are the members of the "scape goat" class loved by 
the Lord? and how will they be dealt with for 

their purification? T.69, par. 2. 

MAY 12 

84. What will be the reward and station of this class? 
T.70, par. 1,2; Rev. 7:15. 

85. What is signified by the "scape goat" being sent 
into the wilderness? T.70, par. 3. 

86. Are all the "scape goat" class or great company to 
be developed in the great tribulation with which 

this Gospel age will end? T.70, par. 3; 71, par. 1. 

87. How will these "bound ones" be set free after the 
glorification of the "very elect"? T.71, par. 2; 72, par. 1. 

88. Do the faithful ones of the "more than conquerors" 
also suffer great tribulation? and in what respect 

does their suffering differ from that of the great 
company"? T.72, par. 2; Acts 14:22; Jno. 16:33. 



R3968 :page 101 

DISCUSSING A RENOVATED EARTH 

REV. J. A. SEISS, D.D., LUTHERAN (DECEASED) WROTE: 

THESE words occur in connection with the Apostle's 
endeavor to impress his Jewish brethren 
with a sense of the greatness and glory of the 
Lord Jesus and of the salvation which is preached in 
His name. He begins the epistle by announcing the 
Savior to them as the Son of God— the appointed Heir 
of all things— the Maker and Upholder of the worlds 
—the brightness of the Father's glory and the express 
image of his person, who has been exalted to the right 
hand of the Majesty on high. These were sublime 

R3968 : page 102 

statements, and needing to be well substantiated to be 
made acceptable. He therefore instituted various 
lines of argument, adapted to the Jewish mind and 
founded upon the Scriptures, which all held to be 



divinely inspired. And as the Jews regarded angels as 
the highest created orders, and as standing next in the 
scale to the eternal Father himself, Paul's first effort 
was to prove from prophecy that 

CHRIST IS SUPERIOR TO THE ANGELS 

He introduces three points in which the super-angelic 
dignity is shown. The first is that Christ is assigned 
a higher name than the angels. The second is 
that he is clothed with a sublimer honor than the 
angels, and the third is that Christ is invested with a 
sublimer office than the angels, they being only ministering 
spirits, while he is spoken of as a divine King, 
whose throne is forever and ever, and the sceptre of 
whose Kingdom is a sceptre of righteousness. The 
princely investiture and reign of the Messiah is thus 
distinctly deduced from the Old Testament, and used 
by the Apostle as the sublimest demonstration of the 
Savior's personal dignity. And this Messianic dominion 
he applies particularly to what is hereafter to grow 
out of the gospel economy. He tells us that it is peculiarly 
"the world to come" over which the Messiah's 
reign is to be exercised. "For unto the angels hath he 
not put into subjection the world to come, whereof we 
speak," thus proceeding upon the implied assumption 
that it has been by promise put into 

SUBJECTION TO CHRIST, 

and that all those allusions to the Savior as a King 
have their chief application and ultimate fulfilment in 
that "world to come." The Messiah's reign and this 
world to come accordingly belong together and coexist 
in the same period and locality. By determining, then, 
what is meant by this "world to come," we may form 
an idea of what is included in the Messianic Kingdom; 
or, if we already know what the consummated Messianic 
reign is, and where it is to be, we have it already 
decided what we are to understand by this "world to 
come." 

If any stress is, therefore, to be laid upon the conclusion 
evolved in the preceding discourses, there is 
no alternative left but to understand this "world to 
come" as the Millennial World, or the world as it shall 
be when Christ shall have restored the throne of David 
and entered upon his glorious dominion as the Sovereign 
of the nations and Lord of the whole earth. And 
to this agrees exactly the original word, oikoumene, 
which means the habitable earth— the domiciliated 
globe on which we dwell— and not some remote supernal 
region, as we sometimes imagine. The world to come, 
then, is nothing more nor less than this self-same 
world of ours in its final or Millennial condition. The 
earth is not to be annihilated. 



GOD NEVER OBLITERATES 

His own creations. The dissolving fires of which 
Peter speaks are for "the perdition of ungodly men," 
and not for the utter depopulation and destruction of 
the whole world. They may consume cities, destroy 
armies and effect some important meteorological and 
geological changes; but men and nations will survive 
them and still continue to live in the flesh. The earth 
is to be renovated and restored from its present depression 
and dilapidation, and thus become "the new 
earth" of which the Bible speaks. It is to pass through 
a "regeneration" analogous to that through which a 
man must pass to see the Kingdom of God; but there 
will be a continuity of its elements and existence, just 
as a regenerated man is constitutionally the same being 
that he was before his renewal. It will not be another 
earth, but the same earth under another condition of 
things. It is now laboring under the curse; but then 
the curse will have been lifted off and all its wounds 
healed. At present, it is hardly habitable— no one 
being able to live in it longer than a few brief years; 
but then men shall dwell in it forever without knowing 
what death is. It is now the home of rebellion, injustice 
and guilt; it will then be 

THE HOME OF RIGHTEOUSNESS 

It is now under the domination of Satan; it will 

then come under the blessed rule of the Prince of 

Peace. Such, at any rate, is the hope set before us in 

the Word of God, and this I hold to be "the world to 

come," of which the text speaks. It cannot be anything 

else. It cannot be what is commonly called heaven, for 

the word oikoumene cannot apply to heaven. It is 

everywhere else used exclusively with reference to our 

world. Neither can it be the present gospel dispensation, 

as some have thought, for that began long before 

this epistle was written and could not, therefore, have 

been spoken of by Paul as yet "to come." We are consequently 

compelled to understand it to mean our own 

habitable world in its Millennial glory. And as the 

prophecies concerning the Messiah's eternal kingship 

are here referred to as having their fulfilment in the 

subjection of the Millennial world to his dominion, we 

are furnished with another powerful argument of Scripture 

in favor of the doctrine of Christ's personal reign 

as a great Prince in this world. Indeed, the Bible is so 

full of this subject, and its inspired writers are so constantly 

and enthusiastically alluding to it that I am 

amazed to find so many pious and Bible-loving people 

entirely losing sight of it. Ever and anon the Scriptures 

return to it as 

THE GREAT AND ANIMATING HOPE 



of the Church in all her adversities and depressions, 
and it does seem to me that we are depriving ourselves 
of much true Christian comfort by the manner in which 
we have been neglecting and thrusting aside that glorious 
doctrine. My present object is to show, from the 
Scriptures, and by just inferences from them, what sort 
of a world this "world to come" is, and to describe, as 
far as I can, what we are to look for when once this 
earth has been fully subjected to that divine King 
whose throne is forever and ever, and the sceptre of 
whose Kingdom is a sceptre of righteousness. 
That "the world to come" is a highly blessed world, 

R3969 : page 103 

and a vast improvement upon the present scene of 
things, will be inferred on all hands without argument. 
It could not be a subject of hope if it were not. The 
Savior himself exhibited a model of it when in the 
Mount of Transfiguration,— from which, perhaps, we 
may obtain as deep an insight of its glories as from any 
other portion of Scripture. That he designed 

THAT SCENE AS A MINIATURE MODEL 

of what his future coming and Kingdom is to be, is 

obvious. A week before it occurred he told his disciples 

that "the Son of man shall come in the glory of 

the Father, with his angels or messengers with him"; 

and that there were some standing there when he made 

the declaration who should not taste of death till they 

saw the Son of man coming in his Kingdom." This 

coming in his Kingdom, which some of the disciples 

were to live to see, is not the final advent, for the disciples 

are all dead, and the final advent is still future. 

Neither is it the destruction of Jerusalem, for but one 

of the apostles lived to see that catastrophe, and the 

Son of man did not then come in his Kingdom. And 

yet some of the apostles were to have ocular demonstration 

of the Son of man's coming in his Kingdom 

before tasting of death. Search through apostolic history 

as we will we shall find nothing but the transfiguration 

to which the Savior's words will apply. That, 

then, was in some sense the coming of the Son of man 

in his Kingdom. It was 

NOT, INDEED, THE COMING ITSELF 

but it was an earnest and picture of it. It was the coming 
of the Son of man in his Kingdom, as the bread 
and wine in the eucharist are Christ's body and blood. 
Peter says: "The power and coming of our Lord Jesus 
Christ" are not "cunningly devised fables." He declares 
that he was certified of their reality by the testimony 
of his own senses. We were "eye-witnesses," says he, 
"when we were with him in the holy mount." We thus 



have clear, inspired testimony that the scene of the 
transfiguration was a demonstrative exhibition of the 
coming of Jesus in his Kingdom. Hence, whatever we 
find in the descriptions of that scene, we may confidently 
expect to be realized in that "world to come 
whereof we speak." As Christ appeared in that glorious 
scene, so he will appear when he returns to this 
world. As he was then personally present as the Son 
of man, so he will be personally present in the Millennial 
Kingdom. And as he was there attended by different 
classes of persons, so will his glorious Kingdom 
consist of similar classes. 

Let us, then, endeavor to draw out before us some of 
the more striking features of "the world to come," and, 
by the contemplation of its attractiveness, endeavor to 
school our hearts into more ardent thirst to participate 
in its blissful scenes. 

I do not wish to depreciate in the least those gracious 
arrangements of heaven under which we now 
live. It is a blessed thing to have the Bible and to attend 
properly on the means of grace and to enjoy the 
renewing and comforting influences of the holy Spirit. 
In giving to us these things God has endowed us with 
mercies for which we never can be sufficiently thankful. 
But he authorizes us to look for greater things 
than these. The present economy is only preparatory 
to something higher and more blessed. 



R3969 : page 103 

A NEW NAME--GOD-GIVEN 

--GENESIS 32:9-12,22-30.-APRIL 14.- 

Golden Text:— "Rejoice, because your names 
are written in heaven."— Luke 10:20. 

OUR last lesson saw Jacob en route for his Uncle 
Laban's home, a journey of about 500 miles. His 
subsequent experiences in the service of his uncle, 
and how he became a wealthy owner of flocks and herds, 
and the father of a large family, belong to the interim. The 
present lesson finds him nearing his old home. Remembering 
the anger of his brother Esau when they parted 20 years 
before, he sent at the hands of servants several valuable 
presents of cattle, sheep, etc., with the message that he was 
coming on in peace. In reply he learned that Esau with 
400 mounted men was coming forth to meet him, and he 
feared that this meant an unkind reception. Our present 
lesson opens with Jacob's prayer to the Lord at this time 
when he was in fear of his brother. It is 

THE FIRST RECORDED PRAYER OF THE BIBLE 



Scholars have pronounced this a perfect prayer as 
measured by the standard of the Lord's prayer; for it seems 
to follow the same general lines: (1) Adoration to the 
Almighty; (2) humiliation and self-effacement in the presence 
of the Lord; (3) petition for divine care and protection; 
(4) repetition of the divine promises as the ground for faith 
and hope. The various parts of the prayer thus indicated 
are: (1) "O God of my Father Abraham, and God of my 
Father Isaac, the Lord which saidst unto me, Return unto 
thy country and to thy kindred, and I will do thee good: 
(2) I am unworthy of the least of all the mercies and all 
the truth which thou hast showed unto thy servant; for with 
my staff [without other possessions] I passed over this Jordan; 
and now I am become two companies [referring to his 
large possessions of flocks and herds and herdsmen, etc., 
which he had divided into two bands or companies]: (3) 
Deliver me, I pray thee, from the hand of my brother; from 
the hand of Esau; for I fear him lest he come and smite me 
and the mother with the children [i.e. root and branch]: 
(4) And thou saidst I will surely be with thee, and make 
thy seed as the sand of the sea, which cannot be numbered 
for multitude." 

It cannot be claimed for Jacob nor for any of the 
ancient worthies (nor for anyone else for that matter) that 
they were perfect and that therefore the Lord favored them. 
The one thing that stands out sharply, distinctly, above any 
other thing in the character of Jacob, as in that of Abraham 

R3969 : page 104 

and of Isaac, is his faith. Let us remember that he did not 

live under the favored conditions which we enjoy of fellowship 

with the Lord through the Scriptures, through the holy 

Spirit and through communion with the brethren— that on 

the contrary he was alone in his faith. Nor had anything in 

particular been explained to him respecting the grand ultimate 

consummation of the divine plan as it is our privilege 

now to see this through the telescope of the divine Word 

and the illumination of the Spirit of Truth. He merely 

knew that a promise had been made to Abraham that seemed 

to imply the ultimate blessing of the world through his posterity, 

and his faith had grasped this promise, so that to him 

it had become a reality, the predominant power and influence 

in his life. For that promise he had endured and was 

still enduring, and confident even in the face of hostility, 

even though he trembled in fear of his greater antagonist— 

for by this time Esau, the possessor of Isaac's wealth and 

the lord over his servants, was known as the "prince of 

Edom." 

CONFIRMED BY BETTER PROMISES 

The lesson to us is that a still greater promise being 
left to us— that is to say, the same promise having further 
developed and divided into two parts, and the higher or 
spiritual feature having been bestowed upon the Church of 



Christ— we who realize ourselves to be heirs of this same 
promise, and who now see its spiritual force and signification, 
have still more reason than had Jacob to humble ourselves 
before the Lord, to acknowledge our dependence upon 
him, to ask him for deliverance from the great enemy and 
from every foe to our best interests, and to plead his gracious 
promise, confirmed unto us in the death of Jesus our Lord. 
Ah, yes! the Apostle clearly indicates this when he says 
to us, "If ye be Christ's then are ye Abraham's seed and 
heirs according to the promise."— Gal. 3:29. 

Jacob indeed will come in as one of the heirs of the 
earthly phase of the blessing, but the distinguished honor 
of sitting in the throne has passed to the Spiritual Israel, 
and we who are now called according to the divine purpose 
should be very alert to make our calling and election sure; 
and still more intelligently and more fervently should we, 
who have now been brought nigh by the blood of Christ, 
glorify our Father in heaven in respect to the riches of his 
grace, to which he assures us we are welcome upon a manifestation 
of the necessary faith and obedience. Shall we not 
cry day and night unto the Lord respecting the exceeding 
great and precious promises given unto us, and our expectation 
of realizing them— that we may have grace and strength 
to overcome, to come off conquerors through him who loved 
us and bought us with his precious blood? 

WRESTLING IN PRAYER 

Jacob was not content merely to pray; he labored also, 
and set his affairs in the best possible order for the ordeal 
of the morrow and in arranging his company into two great 
bands. Then the prayer probably was continued, only a 
synoptical statement being given us. The particulars are 
not recorded, but apparently an angel of the Lord appeared 
to him in human form with some communication respecting 
his prayers and his fears. In his earnestness to have the 

R3970 : page 104 

divine blessing Jacob laid personal hold upon the angel, 
urging a blessing— feeling that it was a matter of imperative 
need, that he could not be fit for the events of the morrow 
unless he had this blessing. 

Jacob's experience here reminds us of our dear Redeemer's 
experiences in the Garden of Gethsemane, when he 
wrestled with strong cryings and tears, pleading with him 
who was able to save him out of death, out of the hands of 
the great enemy. Our Lord agonized for long hours and 
finally got the blessing. And so it was also previously in 
Jacob's case here narrated: he urged, he pleaded, he wrestled 
with the Lord for the thing which he knew the Lord had 
promised him— the divine blessing upon his home-coming 
and in respect to his future as a servant of God and an heir 
of the oath-bound promise. The entire procedure of the 
night is briefly summed up in a few words in our lesson, 
"They wrestled until the breaking of the day"— the angel 



apparently endeavoring to avoid giving him the blessing, 
and Jacob determined so much the more that the blessing 
was necessary and that he must have it. It was then that 
the angel touched Jacob's thigh, wrested the sinew. But in 
spite of all Jacob held on and got the blessing with the 
break of day. 

We are not to suppose that God was averse to the giving 
of this blessing and that Jacob prevailed to secure it in 
opposition to the divine will. On the contrary, we are to understand 
that it was God's good pleasure to give the blessing. 
He had already intimated this; but that the blessing 
might be valuable to Jacob it was withheld for a time until 
he would more and more feel his need of it and cry out and 
struggle to obtain it, that when obtained it might be the more 
highly esteemed, and effect thereby the greater influence 
upon his heart and faith and future course. And it is so 
with our prayers. "The Father himself loveth you," is the 
Master's word; nevertheless, Jesus said we should pray and 
not faint, not grow weary, not lose our interest in the things 
desired if they are the things that God has indicated to be 
in harmony with his will. If, for instance, we read in the 
Scriptures that the Lord is more pleased to give his holy 
Spirit to them that ask him than earthly parents are to give 
good gifts to their children, then it cannot be amiss for us to 
watch and pray with patience and continuance for this 
holy Spirit— that we might obtain this great blessing, the 
character-likeness of our Lord. 

"THE TRIAL OF YOUR FAITH" 

We have found that it was often by bringing us into 
severe trials, ordeals, putting us under crucial tests, that the 
Lord develops more and more our faith, our love, our trust, 
our hope in him. He would have us learn well our lesson, 
that without him we can do nothing, but that with his blessing 
and favor all things are ours, because we are Christ's 
and Christ is God's. Let us, then, in all the important 
junctures of life, be sure that we are seeking chiefly the 
divine will, as expressed in the divine promise, the Oath-Bound 
Covenant: let us seek it patiently, earnestly, persistently 
—let us wrestle with the Lord that thereby we may be 
made the stronger, that when the proper and advantageous 
experiences have been enjoyed the blessing will come— at 

R3970 : page 105 

the proper moment to do us the most good and in the manner 
that would be most helpful. 

In some respects this return of Jacob to the promised 
land shadowed the coming return of his posterity, which is 
even now at hand. As a nation they are even now trembling 
for fear of extermination in all parts of the world; they 
know not when the blow will fall nor in what manner their 
interests will be injured, but those of them who are in the 
right attitude of heart toward God will, we believe, very soon 
come to this praying point. The Lord intimates this, saying 



respecting the day just before us, "I will pour upon them 

the spirit of prayer and of supplication, and they shall look 

upon me whom they pierced." (Zech. 12:10.) The result of 

this praying, supplicating, will be the blessing of the New 

Covenant under which, with the Lord's favor, they will go 

on to the grand fulfilment of the gracious things already declared 

more than 3,000 years ago. 

THE NEW NAME--A PRINCE WITH GOD 

As a part of the blessing granted by the angel in the 
name of the Lord, Jacob's name was changed to Israel, explained 
to signify that he was a prince with God, or had 
great power with God, as exemplified by the fact that he had 
secured this blessing by the demonstration of great faith 
and loyalty and zeal. This name, Israel, is the one by which 
all his followers prefer to be known— they are Israelites. 
As the Gospel Church is termed in the Scriptures Spiritual 
Israel, and as the head of the Church is Christ, we see 
another parallel or foreshadowing by Jacob of Jesus— of 
Jesus' struggle and our Lord's ignominy in the garden. It 
was because our Lord overcame, because he exercised faith 
and obedience, that he indeed is the great Prince of the 
Lord, appointed the great Prince and Savior for the people. 

Already Christ is the Prince of the Church, which in 
obedience to his call is seeking to walk in his steps, that 
they may be joint-heirs with him in the glorious Oath-Bound 
Covenant which he has inherited, just as the Israelites sought 
to follow Jacob and become heirs of the same promise. But 
as there were tests upon Jacob, so also there needed to be 
tests upon his people: and likewise as there were tests upon 
our Redeemer, so there must be tests upon all of his people, 
his followers, his Gospel Church. Many of the people of 
Natural Israel stumbled because of lack of faith— not holding 
on to the divine promise they were overcome by the 
spirit of the world, the spirit of selfishness, etc. Similarly 
today, in this harvest time of the Gospel age, we find the 
indications to be that many more have been called than will 
be chosen— than will be worthy of acceptance as footstep-followers 
of the Redeemer, the true Israel, the Spiritual 
Prince with God. As Jesus was the prevailing Prince with 
God, so all of those whom he accepts as members of his 
body, his Church, must also have the same spirit and be, in 
the language of the Scriptures, "overcomers." 

THE CHURCH'S NEW NAME 

By his faith Jacob obtained a rank, a standing, amongst 
his posterity with his father Isaac and his grandfather Abraham, 
and in olden times no Israelite would appropriate any 
of these three names— they were considered too sacred for 
others than the originals. The changing of Jacob's name 
reminds us of other similar changes: for instance, amongst 
our Lord's disciples Simon was renamed Peter, and again 
Saul of Tarsus was renamed Paul, and this gradually led 
to the custom prevalent throughout Christendom of giving to 



every convert a new name, a Christian name, and this 
principle was eventually applied to children of believers 
and ultimately to all children. 

But God proposes a new name for his people— his 
Church— the Bride, the Lamb's wife. As Jesus was our Lord's 
name and he became the Christ, the Messiah, so all who 
become members of his body come under his new name, and 
are recognized of the Lord and may be recognized of each 
other as members of the Christ (Rev. 3:12); and again, the 
Lord, prophetically speaking of Christ, says, "This is the name 
whereby he shall be called, The Righteousness of Jehovah," 
(Jer. 23:6): and again, speaking of the Bride of Christ, we 
read, "This is the name by which she shall be called, The 
Righteousness of Jehovah." (Jer. 33:16.) The name of the 
Bridegroom is given to his Bride— "They shall be mine, saith 
the Lord, in that day when I make up my jewels." (Mai. 3:17.) 
And those who will get this new name, we may be 
sure, will all be called upon to demonstrate that they will be 
overcomers. They must all pass approval before the Lord 
for their faith and their persistency in holding to him and 
his gracious promise— the Oath-Bound Covenant. 

"DO IT NOT, WORSHIP GOD" 

The answer of the angel, when Jacob in turn asked for 
his name, reminds us of the words of the poet,— 
"O! to be nothing, nothing— 

To him let their voices be raised; 
He is the fountain of blessing, 

Yes, worthy is he to be praised." 

The angel seemingly had no desire to flaunt his own 
name and have it handed down to posterity. He was content 
that he was the mouthpiece and representative of 
Jehovah God, and desirous that the Lord alone should 
have the honor and distinction of having conferred the 
blessing, and that the instrument through which the 
divine favor was extended might not be in evidence to 
detract from the glory of the Lord. Would that all of 
us who are the Lord's people could take exactly this unselfish 
view of our various opportunities to serve the Lord 
and his brethren— to be willing to be out of sight ourselves 
that all might the more clearly see that the blessings conferred 
are from the Lord alone. This thought is brought to 
our attention in Rev. 19: 10, where John, as a representative 
of the Church, having heard and seen wonderful things, fell 
at the feet of the angel to worship him who had showed him 
these things. The command was, "See that thou do it not, 
for I am thy fellow-servant— worship God." So if there 
come to any of us a thought of doing homage to the Lord's 
messengers or servants through whom his blessing has been 
bestowed upon us it will be proper for him to give the admonition, 
"Do it not, worship God"; and in any event it 

R3971 :page 105 

would be our duty to fully recognize that our blessings come 



not from any human being but from God, however much he 
may use human instrumentalities in conveying his blessings. 
He alone is to be honored and reverenced and appreciated 
as the Author and Giver of every good and perfect gift. — 
James 1:17. 



R3971 :page 106 

"HATED OF HIS BRETHREN" 

--GENESIS 37:5-28. -APRIL 21.- 

"Where envying and strife are, there are 
confusion and every evil work."— Jas. 3:16 

THE Bible story of Joseph is one of the most interesting 

known to literature in any age and in any language. 

The portion which belongs to this lesson might easily 

be termed a tragedy. It illustrates human nature good 

and bad, and in its various types and incidents furnishes 

valuable lessons, prominent among which is the oft-repeated 

one referred to in the Golden Text— that envy is one of the 

principal roots of human depravity— selfishness— and that 

from this root have sprung some of the most injurious influences 

and experiences known to man— "every evil work." 

As we study the present lesson let us have this thought in 

mind, and apply each to himself the moral. If in our fallen 

condition envy can produce such terrible fruitage, how much 

on guard against it every true follower of the Lord should 

be. How each should realize that to permit the growth of 

even the smallest shoot of this root in his daily life might 

lead on to most disastrous consequences to him as a New 

Creature. 

Realizing this, each should be on guard for the extermination 
of this weed from the garden of his own heart. 
One writer has even said, "There is but one man who can believe 
himself free from envy, and it is he who has never examined 
his own heart." Undoubtedly this evil root of selfishness 
is to be found in every imperfect son and daughter of 
Adam, whether it is flourishing under favorable conditions 
or dormant for lack of them, or from the overmastering 
power of grace. Only the heart that is aflame with love for 
God supreme and for his neighbor as himself is in a condition 
so sterile as respects envy that the latter has no opportunity for 
development. With an abatement of our love for God and 
man comes a corresponding increase of favorable influence 
for the development of this root of envy and its concomitants 
of anger, hatred, strife and every evil work— yea, murder 
—all of which the Apostle tells us are works of the flesh and 
of the devil, and hence to be shunned by all those who 
now and by and by would have the Master's approval. Whatever 
may have been the natural tendency of our flesh, the 
new nature begotten of the holy Spirit of the Lord, the 
spirit of love, is expected by the Father to dominate and render 



sterile to envy all whom he recognizes as children of 

God. "Blessed are the peacemakers, for they shall be called 

the children of God." 

"JOSEPH, THE BELOVED SON" 

At the time of our lesson Joseph was about seventeen 
years old, next to the youngest of Jacob's twelve sons, and 
his father's favorite. He was the son of the gentle Rachel, 
the specially loved wife of Jacob. Evidently he partook in 
large measure of his mother's gentleness as well as of his 
father's courage and faith, as all of his subsequent history 
shows. His elder brothers were of coarser type, so that all 
the circumstances and conditions justified Jacob in having 
a preference for Joseph, in considering him his specially beloved 
son. His father procured for him what in the common 
version is called a coat of many colors, and in the 
revised version a coat of extremes. It is presumed that the 
extremes were not of colors but of lengths— that the coat 
was long and had long sleeves, thus differing from the 
ordinary coats of the working people and corresponding 
to the style worn by the aristocratic. It is suggested, 
however, that the coat may have been of many colors, 
because upon some of the ancient monuments of Egypt 
such long coats are pictured as having been made of 
material of bright colors joined together in a kind of patchwork; 
thus it is possible that both translations are correct. 

In any case the coat was a distinct one, and, in conjunction 
with Jacob's acknowledged preference for Joseph, it 
helped to fix the jealousy and bitterness of his brethren, 
who in it saw the suggestion that in their father's opinion 
Joseph would eventually be a ruler amongst his brethren 
—his father's successor as the chief of the household, the 
tribe. We need not here stop specially to criticize the unwisdom 
on the part of the father in manifesting so pronounced 
a favoritism. We can, however, realize that Joseph 
had such peculiarities as justified favoritism and special 
love. In this, as well as in many other respects, the Scriptures 
clearly indicate that Joseph was a type of Jesus. The 
latter was the heavenly Father's beloved Son, and he similarly 
was rejected by his brethren, he similarly was sold for silver, 
he similarly was delivered, we are told, for envy. (Matt. 27:18; 
Mark 15:10.) More than this, Joseph typified the entire 
body of Christ, every member of which is to some extent 
represented in his experiences— to every member of which 
our Lord's words apply, "The Father himself loveth you." 
-John 16:27. 

THE VALUE OF DREAMS 

Certain dreams which Joseph had and which evidently 
were in some manner inspired by the Lord, and prophetic, 
tended to further embitter his brethren, serving to fertilize 
the root of bitterness and envy which was in their hearts. 
One of these dreams represented a wheat-field in which were 
twelve sheaves, one of which arose and stood upright while 



the others fell before it, as though doing homage. Joseph, 
without evil thought, apparently, told the dream to his 
brethren, and they, lacking faith in the Lord and submission 
to the divine will, were angered by the very suggestion 
that their younger brother should ever be their superior— 
"And they hated him the more for his dreams and for his 
words." The words referred to Joseph's report of misconduct 
on the part of some of his brethren. Righteousness, 
justice, seems to have been an integral part of Joseph's natural 
character, and his report of his brethren was not a 
slander but merely what he considered to be proper, that 
his father should know the manner in which his business 
was conducted. (V. 2.) 

Another of Joseph's dreams enkindled the anger of his 
brethren, and even drew a protest from his father, as though 
Joseph's ambitions were the groundwork of his dreams. 
Nevertheless, Jacob pondered these things in his heart, and 
doubtless wondered how great his favorite boy might some 
day be. This second dream pictured the sun, the moon and 
the stars bowing to one star, and was interpreted to mean 
that the whole family would some day acknowledge Joseph 
as their superior. How preposterous this must have seemed 
to them all, including Joseph. Poor boy! His subsequent 

R3971 :page 107 

lessons in life doubtless taught him to be more secretive, 
not to tell every dream and hope, not to cast his pearls to 
those who could not appreciate them, but who would be 
angered thereby. How necessary to us all is the lesson of 
wisdom along the lines of secretiveness. Our Lord illustrates 
this, saying, "I have many things to tell you, but ye 
cannot bear them now." There is a time to tell and a time 
to refrain— we all need to watch and to pray, "Set a guard, 
O Lord, before my mouth; keep the door of my lips." — 
Psa. 141:3. 

GOD'S WORD SUPERIOR TO DREAMS 

With the Scriptural record of inspired dreams before 
us it would be folly to denounce them and to declare them 
unworthy of any consideration. We remember the other 
miraculous dreams that Joseph interpreted, also Jacob's, Peter's, 
Paul's, etc. On the other hand we need to guard ourselves 
lest dreams should be given undue importance. We are to 
remember that there was an appropriate necessity for 
dreams in the olden times which does not exist at the present 
time; because the Gospel Church is expected to walk 
by faith and not by sight— is expected to listen to the voice 
behind them saying, "This is the way," rather than to expect 
a miracle or a dream to indicate the path of righteousness. 
The path beyond us is shown by the divine Word, and 
we are to cultivate the ears of our hearts that we may have the 
proper direction. In harmony with this the Scriptures say, 
"He that hath a dream let him tell a dream, but he that 
hath my Word let him speak my Word." (Jer. 23:28.) Here 



the Lord indicates that a dream might be told if we have 
nothing better to tell— nothing more direct, nothing more 
authoritative; but that the Lord's Word, his revelation, his 
inspired testimony is to be put far above all dreams of our 
own and of others. If a dream, therefore, corroborates some 
plain statement of the Word of God it may be used and 
appreciated in the same sense that we use and appreciate a 
type— not to teach a doctrine or duty, but to illustrate and 
call attention to the statements. 

"COME, LET US KILL HIM" 

Joseph's faithfulness in reporting facts led Jacob to 
make him a kind of overseer, and it was probably in this 
capacity that he was again sent to his brethren to Shechem, 
a three days' journey— to carry to them some home delicacies 

R3972 : page 107 

and to bring word again to Jacob of the general conditions 

prevailing, the prosperity of the flocks, condition of 

the pasturage, etc. Not finding his brethren at Shechem 

Joseph followed directions to Dothan, manifesting in the 

whole procedure a considerable degree of courage and self-reliance, 

sleeping outdoors at night as was the custom of 

the time and braving the dangers of the way. This shows 

us, too, that Jacob's love for his favorite son did not lead 

him to spoil him entirely, and that the boy himself was recognized 

as one who could be trusted in a general way to 

care for himself. Many parents today are less wise, and 

fail to cultivate courage, determination, etc., in the children 

they favor— sometimes shielding them from difficulties in 

a manner which proves ultimately very prejudicial to their 

interests. 

The brethren as shepherds were accustomed to keep a 
sharp look-out for wild beasts likely to injure the flock, and 
discerned their brother at a distance. Forthwith the circumstances 
and conditions tended to a rapid germination of 
their root of envy and bitterness, and in a few moments had 
sprouted and brought forth in their hearts the spirit of murder. 
Nine of the ten at once agreed to kill their brother. 
The only one to object, and he covertly, was Reuben, who 
knew too well the bitterness of his brethren to venture to 
oppose them, and as a counter suggestion he urged that they 
do not murder him but put him into one of the dry cisterns 
of those parts, intending in his heart to subsequently return 
and secretly deliver his brother. 

In these brethren we see illustrated the heart of the 
natural man, which might at one moment fight for justice 
and shortly thereafter violate every principle of justice. 
Was it not these same men who now, in violation of all 
brotherly love, were planning their brother's murder, who 
only a short time before had avenged the dishonor of their 
sister by slaying the population of a whole village— in what 
they considered a righteous indignation against sin? The 
transforming influence of the holy Spirit is necessary to 



correct these violent extremes of the fallen flesh; hence the 
Scriptures tell us that those who are begotten again of the holy 
Spirit alone have the "spirit of a sound mind." (2 Tim. 1:7.) 
Truly in the natural man pride is an important factor, and 
often leads to murders and lynchings, ostensibly in the defense 
of righteousness— really in the gratification of an 
element of selfishness. It was then similarly pride, one of 
the roots of selfishness, that led to that wholesale murdering; 
and it was envy, another root of selfishness, which now 
led them to attempt to murder their brother. 

"STRONG CRYINGS AND TEARS" 

Reuben's plea was effective. Joseph was put into a 
pit and the brethren sat down to eat bread, doubtless consuming 
some of the very delicacies that Joseph had brought 
to them from home, while the poor boy's cries and entreaties 
and appeals rang in their ears. They were stony-hearted, 
unmerciful, as well as unjust: and indeed the natural heart 
is usually unmerciful. Mercy is often extended through 
shame or fear or policy amongst worldly people, but mercy 
in itself is an element of love which, although it originally 
belonged to human nature, has very generally been lost, and 
is principally an evidence amongst those who have been begotten 
again in heart-likeness to their Lord. 

Our lesson does not mention the cries and entreaties 
and pleadings of the imprisoned Joseph, but another Scripture 
does when later these same brethren were forced by 
the famine in Canaan to go to Egypt to buy wheat. Their 
brother Joseph was governor there, and he, affecting to consider 
them spies, put them in jail three days. It was 
while they were there that their minds were more or less 
awakened to the wrong doings of previous years, and 
they said one to another, "We are verily guilty concerning 
our brother in that we saw the anguish of his soul when he 
besought us, and we would not hear; therefore is this distress 
come upon us." Reuben's reply to them was, "Spake 
I not unto you saying, Do not sin against the child; and ye 
would not hear? Therefore, behold, also his blood is required." 
Apparently Reuben departed from that vicinity 

R3972 : page 108 

after Joseph was imprisoned, intending to return later for 
his deliverance, but upon his return he found that his brethren 
had sold him to a company of merchantmen who had 
taken him as a slave into Egypt. 



R3972 : page 108 

PATIENT ENDURANCE IN ADVERSITY 
-GENESIS 39:20-23; 40:1-15. -APRIL 28.- 



Golden Text:— "Be thou faithful unto death, and 
I will give thee a crown of life."— Rev. 2: 10. 

THE story of Joseph's trials and difficulties is a 
most pathetic one: yet we see that in all these 
things the blessing of the Lord was with him, 
and he, faithfully responding, his experiences, instead 
of doing him injury, were on the contrary greatly to his 
advantage. Although Joseph lived long before the 
Pentecostal blessing as we experience it— long before 
the bringing to light of the exceeding great and precious 
promises of the heavenly nature and Kingdom glories 
and invitation to the elect to share therein— though 
Joseph had only the indefinite revelation of God's 
mercy contained in the great Oath-Bound Covenant 
given to Abraham, nevertheless his faithfulness and 
patient endurance constitute a wonderful lesson to the 
household of the Spirit-begotten sons of God of this 
Gospel age. If he could endure so patiently and so 
faithfully, what should not we, so much more highly 
favored, be able to endure? The secret of his success 
and ours is the same, namely, a fast hold by faith to 
the Abrahamic Covenant, which, as the Apostle says, 
we have as an anchor to our souls, sure and steadfast, 
entering into that which is beyond the vail. (Heb. 6:19.) 
The consideration of this lesson should nerve, energize, 
every one of the Lord's consecrated people to still 
further endurance and faithfulness under the circumstances 
and conditions that the Lord's providence may 
mark out for them. 

JOSEPH A SLAVE IN EGYPT 

The Ishmaelitish traders, to whom Joseph's brethren 
sold him for twenty pieces of silver, took him to 
Egypt, where he was exposed for sale in the open 
market, as was the custom of the time. We can well 
imagine the anguish of the poor boy. Delivered from 
the pit in which his brethren had put him to die he 
soon realized that they had not repented at heart, but 
merely changed the form of their murderous envy. 
Passing not many miles distant from his father's abode 
the dejection of the boy of seventeen can be better imagined 
than described, and arriving in the Egyptian 
metropolis, the center of civilization at that time, and 
beholding there wonderful things entirely new to him 
as a shepherd's son, his heart must have been full of 
suspense and wonder as to who would purchase him 
and what would be his future lot in life. There was 
plenty of room in all of these experiences he had recently 
passed through for him to lose faith in God— to 
wonder why he should be left to the mercy of his pitiless 
brethren, why he should be allowed to become a 
slave, separated from his father's home. Yet we have 
no intimation that his faith forsook him. 

In the Lord's providence he was purchased by a 



wealthy official of Egypt named Potiphar. As a servant 
in this man's house he was faithful to his duties small 
and great, and grew in his master's confidence and 
esteem until, at the age of twenty-two, he was made 
manager of his entire estate. When twenty-seven years 
of age— ten years after coming to Egypt, in the prime 
of young manhood, he unwittingly attracted to himself 
the love of his master's wife, but when it manifested 
itself he persistently resisted it on the lofty grounds 
of faithfulness to God and faithfulness to his master. 
Dr. Blakie pointedly remarks of this 

TRIAL OF JOSEPH'S VIRTUE, 

"We may believe that it was no ordinary temptation 
when, day after day, the mistress of the house, 
expert in amorous arts, came to spread the net, with 
every allurement which her skill and her passion could 
devise. We may conceive how even Joseph might be 
moved by the thought that, slave as he was, he had attracted 
the admiration of a woman of such rank, and 
how the vision might flit before him that through her 
influence he might recover his liberty and in a bright 
career realize his dreams after all." 

The conduct of Potiphar's wife well illustrates how 
love may be changed to bitterest hate. In her determination 
she grasped Joseph by the coat, but he 
slipped out of it, and then her rage and resentment 
became bitter. She kept the coat and told her husband 
that his favorite servant had endeavored to entice her 
to do evil, and that when she made outcry he fled, leaving 
his coat in her possession. What a turn this was 
in Joseph's affairs! Why should the Lord permit him 
to be thus scandalized, not only in the eyes of his master, 
but amongst all those with whom he had formed 
an acquaintance in the ten years of his residence there? 
Why should the Lord permit his virtue to be so evil 
spoken of? 

This probably seemed to Joseph a mysterious providence, 
yet in the light of the subsequent story we can 
see how the Lord's providence had not forsaken him, 
but was ready to make even this experience work out 
to his further instruction in righteousness, patience, 
experience, faithfulness, and to prepare him for still 
greater blessings by and by— on the throne. The lesson 
for us of this spirit dispensation is most evident and 
most striking: as it was not because of Joseph's unfaithfulness 
that the Lord permitted this trial to come 
upon him, so it does not speak unfaithfulness on our 
part and retribution from the Lord if trials and difficulties 
may be permitted to come upon us. Are we not 
learning every day more and more to trust the Lord 
where we cannot trace him in his providences, when 
we cannot see the end of the way? If we could see the 
end would it be faith at all? Is it not our lack of 
knowledge of the future that constitutes the very virtue 



of faith in the present time? 
R3973 : page 109 

"ABANDON US NOT IN TEMPTATION" 

The great Spurgeon once remarked, "In contending 
with certain sins there remains no mode of victory 
but by flight. The ancient naturalists wrote much of 
basilisks, whose eyes fascinated their victims and rendered 
them easy victims; so the moral gaze of wickedness 
puts us in solemn danger." In harmony with this 
thought the Apostle wrote to Timothy, "Flee youthful 
lusts." (2 Tim. 2:22.) Jesus' example in this matter is 
a wonderful lesson to us all respecting loyalty to the 
principles of righteousness even to the extent of 
hazarding the brightest hopes and prospects of an 
earthly kind. And if we may well copy this lesson of 
fleeing from temptation, we may also note with the 
Prophet another lesson in this connection, for when 
Joseph's master Potiphar was very angry with him, so 
far as the evidence shows, Joseph contented himself 
with merely denying the allegation without attempting 
to demean Potiphar's wife by relating the facts of the 
case. What a noble example is here given us of avoiding 
evil speaking, even when that would be the truth! 

Joseph's noble heart probably reasoned that while 
it would have been no more than justice to have revealed 
the wickedness of the woman, such a course would 
not only have damaged the wife but have dealt an 
irreparable blow to Potiphar's affection for her, thus 
destroying his master's confidence and breaking up 
his home. Willingness to endure under such conditions 
is a marvelous illustration of high and noble integrity 
—character. Such a man was indeed fit for a throne- 
but not yet; God had other experiences for him before 
he would be ready for the exaltation intended. So with 
us: God has called us to the throne of the Millennial 
Kingdom to be associated with our Lord and Redeemer 
in his great work; but first we must be made meet for 
the inheritance of the saints in light, and trials and 
buffetings and testings of patient endurance are essential 
to the development of such character as the Lord 
seeks. 

THE STRENGTHENING OF CHARACTER 

A lump of rock candy is pure carbon and a diamond 
is pure carbon, yet there is a difference between 
them which consists mainly in the fact that the diamond 
has been crystallized to an extreme degree of 
hardness, firmness, solidity. So there is a difference 
between the states and conditions of the New Creatures 
in Christ. At one time we are mere "babes in Christ," 
but if faithful through patient endurance and the 
Lord's instructions and disciplines of providence we 



are to become strong in the Lord and in the power of 
his might— the "babe in Christ" corresponds then to 
the pure carbon in the form of rock candy, while the 
mature Christian, developed in the furnace of affliction, 
etc., corresponds to the diamond. We remember in this 
connection the Lord's assurance that at the close of 
our trial time in the end of the Gospel age, at his second 
coming, he will make up his "jewels." 

At that time undoubtedly an official of Potiphar's 
rank would have been permitted to kill his slave under 
such a charge, and the fact that, instead, Joseph was 
imprisoned, may therefore be taken as an intimation 
that Potiphar was not fully convinced of the treachery 
of the man who had served him faithfully for ten years. 
But a prison in olden times differed greatly from a 
modern prison in civilized lands. Joseph, in mentioning 
the prison, "dungeon" (v. 15) in the Hebrew calls 
it a "hole," and a minister familiar with oriental prisons 
of today says:— 

"We have visited many a prison in the Levant; we 
have seen.. .intolerable filth and want of ventilation, 
the excess of vermin, the unmerciful stocks in 
which the feet are made fast. We may well pity virtuous 
Joseph, who was indeed, as claimed by tradition, 
put into the prison dungeon of the present city of 
Cairo, which is composed of dark, loathsome and pestilential 
passages where the prisoners are chained to 
the wall." 

Joseph's experiences in prison are referred to by 
the Psalmist (Psa. 105:18), saying, "Whose feet they 
hurt with fetters; he was laid in irons." 

What was the effect of this new experience upon 
Joseph? Was he discouraged, cast down, embittered 
in soul? Did he say to himself or to others, If this be 
the reward of virtue, give me vice? Did he repine 
against the Lord's providences in permitting this experience, 
or was he patiently submissive, trustful? 
Joseph was in all these experiences the most wonderful, 
model example of the proper course of a true 
Christian and saint. And again we suggest that if he 
could be faithful with as little light as he enjoyed respecting 
the Lord's permission of this evil, what might 
not the Lord reasonably expect of us who have been blest 
with so much greater light and instruction, and with 
the noble example of Joseph and scores of others in 
the Scriptures and in our own experiences— what manner 
of persons ought we to be in all holy living and 
godliness and faith in God? 

For very shame's sake we should strive at least to 
come up to the standard of Joseph— we who have the 
exceeding great and precious promises— we who have 
the explanation of why our trials and difficulties are 
permitted and how they are to prepare us for the Kingdom 
and its glorious work. Can we not readily see 
how Joseph's trials and difficulties developed character 
in him? and how, as he overcame in one instance 



after another, he was becoming stronger— his character 
was crystallizing? Ah! no wonder he will be 
amongst the "ancient worthies" who, in the future, 
after the glorification of the Church, will be made 
princes in all the earth for the ruling and blessing and 
uplifting of the entire human family, under the guidance 
and direction of the Christ, Head and body. 
Most evidently the Lord knows how, not only to 
select the wonderful characters for his service, but 
also to develop these characters and prove and test 
them, and make them strong for his service and their 
blessing. 

"THE LORD WAS WITH HIM" 

Joseph's experience in the stocks was a limited 
one. Evidently the prison-keeper discerned that he 
had a prisoner of no ordinary character and ability, 

R3973 :page 110 

whatever might be charged against him. His reverence 
for the Lord and his faithfulness to duty made 
him a marked man, and the keeper of the prison was 
glad to give over one responsibility after another into 
Joseph's hands. According to the story, Joseph's own 
experiences made him tender hearted toward the other 
prisoners, whose degradations and sorrows he was enabled 
to enter into by reason of his own experiences. 
He was learning noble lessons, which would fit and 
prepare him for higher usefulness as the governor of 
Egypt. The secret of the whole matter is told in the 
lesson in a few words, "The Lord was with him, and 
that which he did the Lord made to prosper." 

Whoever has reverence for the Lord in any degree 
will be proportionately blessed: much faith, much reverence, 
much obedience will surely lead to much blessing 
in heart and life— to much supporting and steadying 
of character, whatever it may have been by nature 
—to much of the spirit of a sound mind, however 
erratic the person may have been naturally to begin 
with. In all these respects we who have the instructions 
of the Lord's Word or the encouragement of his 
promises and the guidance of the spirit of a sound 
mind are greatly blessed. In proportion as we make 
use of them and develop the proper character we 
shall have the ultimate reward and hear the Master's 
voice, saying, It is enough, come up higher. Thou 
hast been faithful over a few things, I will make thee 
ruler over many things; enter thou into the joy of thy 
Lord. 

We should never forget, as "New Creatures in 
Christ Jesus," the exhortation of the Golden Text to 
faithfulness— to the Lord (which includes faithfulness 
to the brethren, to the truth, to righteousness in every 
sense of the word). This faithfulness must be tried, 



tested, proven, clear down to the end of life's journey 
—until we go into the prison-house of death. "Be 
thou faithful unto death and I will give thee a crown 
of life." The Lord whom we serve is able and willing 
to open the prison-doors and bring us forth in the First 
Resurrection to a share in the glory, honor and immortality 
of his own Kingdom. Hallelujah, what a Savior! 
what a salvation! and for what a peculiar people these 
are intended! Such thoughts incite us— as was the 
divine intention— to strive to make our calling and 
election sure. 

PROSPERING IN PRISON 

Well might the chief jailor be content to leave the 
care of the prison in Joseph's hands. We may well 
imagine the cleaning up of the dungeon effected under 
his direction, and that a measure of peace would reign 
within those dark walls quite in contrast with the bedlam 
that had previously prevailed. Wisdom, mercy, 
gentleness, patience, were all, we may be sure, needed 
and exercised; and the model prison not only effected a 
blessing upon those who were incarcerated, but brought 
a blessing also to Joseph in his own heart-development, 
and additionally in that our own joy and peace 

R3974:page 110 

are always ministered to when we endeavor to solace 
the woes of others. 

A picture of how Joseph dealt with the prisoners is 
given in the lesson: instead of treating them rudely 
and roughly, he looked after their interests to such an 
extent that he noticed one morning that two of the 
prisoners were of peculiarly sad countenance, and he 
tenderly inquired, "Wherefore look ye so sadly today?" 
They had dreamed, and they were in trouble lest their 
dreams boded further adversity. Joseph said unto 
them, "Do not interpretations belong to God? Tell 
me them, I pray you." How evidently the secret of 
Joseph's faithfulness and strength of character lay in 
the fact that he had faith in God— that he believed in 
the great Oath-Bound Covenant that God had made 
with his great-grandfather Abraham, confirmed to his 
grandfather Isaac, and again to his father Jacob, and 
of which he was an heir. What a power faith has in 
life to hold it steady in every storm and cloudy 
trouble! 

One of the dreams bore a most favorable interpretation, 
and Joseph requested the one who would so 
shortly be set at liberty and restored to the king's 
favor that he would remember him and his kind attentions 
to him while in the prison, and speak a good word 
to the king on his behalf, that he might be relieved 
from the dungeon. And in explaining the matter let 
us not overlook the fact that he neither incriminated 



his brethren nor Potiphar's wife, but merely said as 

an excuse for his being in prison, "For indeed I was 

stolen away out of the land of the Hebrews, and here 

also have I done nothing that they should put me into 

the dungeon." It was not necessary that he should 

speak evil of any in order to plead his cause, and he 

abstained. What an evidence we here have that our 

race 3,000 years ago were neither monkeys nor savages. 

On the contrary, this natural man, not begotten 

of the holy Spirit (which did not come upon any until 

the Gospel dispensation— Pentecost), had such a marvelous 

development of generosity, love, that he 

seems not even to have been severely tempted along 

the lines of evil speaking— and that without any instruction, 

either oral or written. 

How this story should shame many who have 
named the name of Christ and have professed to turn 
their backs upon sin and every evil work and who well 
know that evil speaking is closely related to the works 
of the flesh and of the devil. Joseph had not the instructions 
of our Lord and the apostles to the effect 
that love is the principal thing, that love thinketh no 
evil, suffereth long and is kind, is not easily provoked, 
etc.; and that this love is not only appropriate amongst 
the Lord's people, who should love one another as he 
has loved us, but must be extended also to our neighbors, 
that we may love our neighbors as ourselves— 
yea, beyond this, to our enemies, who are to be fed and 
clothed by us if they need our assistance. Thank God 
for the lesson of Joseph— enduring affliction, yet full 
of faith, mercy, gentleness, patience, kindness. How 
evidently the mind had to do with all this character-development. 
Without the hopes set before him in the 
Abrahamic promise, Joseph might have been as dispirited 
and characterless as the majority of mankind. 
Remember, too, that it is the same promise that we are 
heirs to, as the Apostle declares— Christ is the heir, 
and if we be Christ's then are we Abraham's seed and 
heirs according to the promise.— Gal. 3:16,29. 

"Virtue may be assailed but never hurt; 
Surprised by unjust force, but not enthralled; 
Yea, even that, which mischief meant most harm, 
Shall in the happy trial prove most glory." 



R3974:page 111 
ENCOURAGING WORDS FROM FAITHFUL WORKERS 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

I received a letter a short time ago that was so very 
encouraging to me that I feel I must tell you about it 
in order that you may be encouraged also. While canvassing 
last summer I met a man who when I told him 



that I was introducing STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES, remarked 

that I had perhaps stopped at the wrong 

house, as he did not or could not believe the Bible. 

He said he was very sorry that the Bible taught eternal 

torment, that only for that he might be able to believe 

it. When I assured him that the Bible did not teach 

the doctrine of eternal torment he seemed very much 

surprised that I would make such a statement and said, 

"It surely does teach it." I told him that the Bible 

teaches that the wages of sin is death, that the soul 

that sinneth shall die, and that the wicked shall be destroyed, 

etc. I then briefly told him what a loving 

heavenly Father we have, and how far he would be from 

torturing any one, and that the books which I was 

selling clear up these false accusations which people 

have been making against our heavenly Father, and 

that they would also strengthen his faith in the Bible. 

When I had finished he asked me when I expected to 

deliver. When I told him he said he would like 

to have them sooner if possible, as he was getting old 

and might not have much longer to read. So I promised 

to deliver his books the next day and did so. I was 

in the town only about two weeks afterward, but called 

a number of times to see him and always found him 

with either DAWN or Bible in hand. I gave his name 

to the friends in the town so that they might keep in 

touch with him. The letter above referred to is from 

one of the brethren there, who says that this man, once 

an infidel, is now one of the happiest men in the world, 

that he is now fully in the Truth and has four of his 

friends interested also, two of whom have subscribed 

for the TOWER. They are all rejoicing together and we 

rejoice with them, not only because we are being so 

greatly blessed but because the time for the establishment 

of the Kingdom is so near, when all the families of 

the earth are to be blessed. 

Sister D joins me in much love to yourself and 

all of the Bible House friends. 

Yours in the one good hope, 

H. W. DICKERSON,-Colporteur. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

It is with a rejoicing heart that I am writing to you 
to tell you of the deep things of God that I am enjoying. 
My dear husband and I have only been in the 
Truth three months. What great joy the reading of the 
DAWNS has given us! So many questions arise and 
all seem to be answered in the DAWNS. We did so 
wonder whether we be of the true wheat, since learning 
that the call ended in 1881; but we have just finished 
Vol. 3 of the DAWNS and found the answer. The dear 
Lord would not give us a taste of these things if he did 
not mean that we should fully attain them. How good 
and gracious he is to those that try to follow in his 



steps! But how many tumbles we do have! Then I get 
up and start afresh. I wish I could express in words 
what the DAWNS have done for us. We now feel more 
contented about the at present unsaved. It did seem 
such a terrible thing for those that did not believe to 
be eternally tortured. How such teaching has blasphemed 
God's character, the one who is all Love. How 
beautifully his character is set forth in his marvelous 
plan! It seems so wonderful that everything in the 
plan had been arranged in the beginning and also how 
grandly all is being carried out! My mind seems too 
small to grasp such wonderful truths. 

My husband and I came out from the Brethren and 
they think us among those false prophets who are to 
arise. Little do they realize of the deep, deep joy to be 
had in knowing our dear Lord and to be led by his 
loving hand. I have in this little time realized to 
some extent the steepness and narrowness of the way 
which leadeth unto life. But I do so much long for that 
Christ-like character and to shine for his sake, to 
shine for him who has done so much for all mankind. 

We are having the WATCH TOWERS now. How helpful 
they are. I do thank our dear heavenly Father for 
raising you up to give us this meat in due season. The 
Lord has provided all that is needful for his Church. 
It seems to me to be like a great big feast and the more 
you eat the more you want. My husband joins in 
sending Christian love and may God bless you in your 
labors is the prayer of us both. 

Yours in our dear Redeemer, 

G. & M. HINE,-Eng. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

May the Lord, guide, uphold and bless you through 
all the coming year, and, dear Brother, I ask your prayers 
that he may be with me and keep me safe from 
evil, toward which I am so prone. I am learning to 
distrust myself more each day and I want to learn to 
trust him more for the grace and strength to overcome 
my many weaknesses and failings. 

Would say that I am learning to love the Colporteur 
work more each day and while at first it was 
somewhat unpleasant work, to which I had to force 
myself, owing partly, however, to much natural timidity 
and backwardness in approaching strangers, it is 
now a pleasure, especially as I often meet persons who 
appear to be hungering for something better than they 
have. 

At present I devote the first four days of the week 
and Friday morning to the Colporteur work. I have 
other duties Friday afternoons and Saturdays. Am 

R3975 : page 1 1 1 



doing very nicely and am making expenses, and so feel 
satisfied to continue. Again thanking you for so kindly 
remembering me, I am, with much Christian love, 
Yours in the harvest work, 

ALBERTA CROSBY,-Colporteur. 



DEAR BRETHREN:- 

You will find enclosed my first report. It covers, as 
you see, somewhat more than half a month, but I hope 
you will accept it as it is and make allowances for mistakes 
or omissions, remembering that it is new to me. 
It shall be my effort to make each report more satisfactory 
than the last. Your words of instruction and encouragement 
have, I assure you, been greatly appreciated. 
It seemed to me that I esteemed the Colporteur 
work a great blessing and privilege, but since reading 
the report in the January 1 TOWER I feel much ashamed 
and pray the heavenly Father for a like earnest zeal as 
that shown by the Colporteurs in Jamaica and Costa 
Rica. May the heavenly Father's blessing attend all 
your labor of love in the new year. 

Your Sister in the Anointed One, 

ELLEN ZELLER,-Colporteur. 



page 113 



SEMI-MONTHLY 
VOL. XXVIII APRIL 15 No. 8 
A.D. 1907--A.M. 6035 



CONTENTS 

Views from the Watch Tower 115 

Speaking with Tongues as a Modern Religious 
Mania 115 

Likens Protestantism to a Cerberus 116 

Psychological Phenomena 116 

Get Them to Study Millennial Dawn 117 

A Presbyterian Minister's Pointed Criticism of 
his Creed 117 

Getting Ready for the Millennium 117 

The Wilderness Path (Poem) 118 

Memorial Supper Reports 118 

Them that Honor Me I will Honor 119 

Blessed are the Merciful 123 

Behind a Frowning Providence 126 

page 114 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 



BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-24 EVERSHOLT ST., LONDON, N.W. 
GERMAN BRANCH-MIRKER STR., 45, ELBERFELD. 
AUSTRALASIAN BRANCH-EQUITABLE BLDG., COLLINS ST., MELBOURNE 

PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 

TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR AS FOLLOWS:- 

All Bible Students who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity or 
adversity, are unable to pay for this Journal, will be supplied FREE if 
they send a Postal Card each June stating their case and requesting its 
continuance. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on 
our list continually and in touch with the Studies, etc. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



THIS JOURNAL IS PUBLISHED IN THE 

FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, DANISH AND ITALIAN LANGUAGES. 

SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



DAILY HEAVENLY MANNA-READY IN MAY 



Our new edition of the "Manna" will contain the same 
texts and comments as the former one; but it will have twice 
as many pages. Every alternate leaf will be blank ruled, for 
use as an Autograph and Birthday Record. It will be printed 
on fine bond paper and bound in handsome dark blue cloth. 
It would be well worth $1 or more in any bookstore. 

NEW PRICES, WHOLESALE AND RETAIL 

The new "Manna" will be sold by Manna Colporteurs and 
others at 50 cents each (60c when gotten by mail or prepaid 
express). The wholesale rates, open to any TOWER reader, 
are as follows— cash with order: 

1 copy, postpaid, each 35 cents 

10 copies or more, by express, prepaid 30 " 

10 " " " at your charges. 20 " 
30 " " by freight 20 " 

We of course prefer the DAWNS or STUDIES to be colporteured; 
but a good follow-up work can be done with "Manna" 



by those who cannot do the regular work with DAWN-STUDIES. 
CHARTS OF THE TABERNACLE 



We have arranged to supply beautiful Charts of the Tabernacle 
on cloth, carriage prepaid, for two dollars each. Very 
choice, and very cheap for the quality and size— 5 ft. 



R3975 :page 115 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 



SPEAKING WITH TONGUES AS A MODERN RELIGIOUS 
MANIA 



SPEAKING with tongues has been a feature of 

recent revival meetings held in various cities 

of Ohio. As reported in the secular and religious 

press these manifestations have taken the form 

of articulate but unintelligible utterances for the most 

part. In one instance, however, a young woman is reported 

to have "babbled for nearly an hour in what is 

said to be the Greek language," though in her normal 

condition she disclaimed all knowledge of the ancient 

tongue. These involuntary utterances appear to be a 

part of the sign manual of the "Apostolic Faith Movement," 

which we are informed by a writer in The Wesleyan 

Methodist (Syracuse), "originated in the Pentecostal 

experiences of Evangelist Charles F. Parham 

and colaborers in Topeka, Kans., in A.D. 1900, January 

1." At that time a Miss Agnes Ozman, a member 

of the Bible school previously founded by Mr. Parham, 

"received the gift of the holy Spirit and spoke with 

other tongues as the Spirit gave utterance." On January 

3 following "twelve students were filled with the 

holy Spirit, and spoke with other tongues as the Spirit 

gave utterance." On January 3 following "twelve students 

were filled with the holy Spirit, and spake with 

other tongues as the Spirit gave them utterance, while 

some in the room were said to have seen cloven tongues 

of fire as they appeared on the day of Pentecost." In 

these events is said to reside the origin of a more or 

less wide-spread movement frequently referred to as 

the "present Pentecost." The adherents of this movement 

make the claim that "speaking with tongues" is 

"the only Bible evidence of the baptism of the holy 

Spirit." An examination of the manifestations was 

made by S. A. Manwell and reported by him in The 

Wesleyan Methodist (February 20). He writes as 

follows: 



"Those with whom the writer has talked who claim 
this gift, say that the spirit takes possession of their 
vocal organs and uses them as he wills, while their 
minds are at rest. They say they are conscious that 
their vocal organs are being used, but do not know 
how, nor do they know what they are saying. They 
have no power to stop speaking when once the spirit 
possesses them. In the meeting I attended, two women 
were thus wrought upon. One remained in that condition 
four or five minutes; the other but a few seconds. 
The first indication I had of anything out of 
the ordinary was a low muttering sound without articulation. 
This muttering lasted but a few seconds, then 
the voice raised to a more natural tone and volume and 
it would be hard to imagine how a more rapid succession 
of sounds could come from the mouth of a human 
being. For the most part, these sounds appeared to be 
articulate, but if she spoke a language no one knew it. 
She herself knew not the meaning of any sound she 
made. In the same series of meetings on another occasion, 
another lady was similarly possessed, and when 
it was time to go home her tongue was yet speaking, 
and instead of taking a street car, as she had formerly 
done, she walked, not desiring to enter a car with her 
vocal organs beyond her control. If I remember correctly, 
her tongue did not cease until she had nearly 
or quite reached her home. Some are said to have 
spoken in as many as twelve different languages, but 
in all this I had no evidence that what they uttered 
were languages of earth or heaven. That these people 
were sincere in their belief that the Spirit of God was 
moving them, I have no doubt. They believed they 
were talking a foreign language." 

In trying to "identify" this movement Mr. Manwell 
quotes Isaiah respecting "the spirits that peep and 
mutter," with this addition: "To the law and to the 
testimony; if they speak not according to this word, it 
is because there is no light in them." Certain other 
historic phases of aberrant religious manifestation 
seem, according to Mr. Manwell, to classify with the 
present outbreak. Thus: 

"History records that during the early part of the 
last century, the affliction known as the jerks raged 
with violence. Young men and women were seized 

R3975 :page 116 

with it and fell in convulsions. Wicked men were 
seized, swearing at every jerk. Some not affected with 
the regular jerks ran through the woods till exhausted; 
others crawled on the ground as a religious exercise; 
while some jumped and some barked for the same reason, 
and a few spoke in 'unknown tongues,' from which 
facts arose those obscure classes of sectaries derisively 
known as Jumpers, Barkers and Mutterers.... 
"It is also a matter of history that in the early 



days of the Mormon Church, whole days of 'speaking 

meetings' were devoted to it. We find that the claims 

made by the Mormons are the same now being made 

by the 'Apostolic Faith Movement' Mr. Parham 

says, 'We truly are in the days of the restitution 

of all things which God hath spoken by the mouth 

of all his holy prophets since the world began.' 

In an announcement of the 'origin, purpose and 

methods of the movement,' we find the following: 

'Handkerchiefs blest in behalf of the distant 

sick.' We do not remember that many people since 

the days of Paul have dared to go to this extreme. We 

are forcibly reminded that a few years since a man by 

the name of Schlatter practised sorceries, blest handkerchiefs, 

and otherwise played with the credulity of 

the people. So much so that special railroad trains 

were run to carry the hundreds of sick to him for healing. 

That Paul had extraordinary power of this kind 

we do not doubt, but what promise or intimation have 

we that such power would be continued? If this one 

feature of the movement were all, it would be enough 

to brand it as a counterfeit. 

"In these days the devil is working in every possible 
way to destroy the work of Christ. 'He comes as 
an angel of light, deceiving if possible the very elect.' 
He counterfeits everything that is good. Many honest 
souls are being deceived and the work of God is hindered. 
In the meeting where I made my observations 
not a sinner was converted to God, and I am credibly informed 
that the manifestation of the so-called 'tongues' 
brought no conviction to sinners, but to the contrary, 
the number thrown into doubt and greater unbelief 
was greater than those who professed to have the 
'tongues.'"— Literary Digest. 

LIKENS PROTESTANTISM TO A CERBERUS 



"Protestantism is a modern kind of Cerberus with 
125 heads, all barking discordantly," says the Rev. 
Charles Edward Stowe, son of the late Harriet Beecher 
Stowe, and himself a prominent Protestant divine, 
being pastor of the Central Square Congregational 
Church at Bridgewater. He is of the opinion that in 
many respects life was brighter in the so-called "dark 
ages" than it is today. This condition is due, he says, 
in part to the many sub-divisions of sects and creeds 
in religion. 

He exceedingly regrets the condition of Protestantism 
in America and England today, there being, 
according to him, 125 different sects in these countries. 
"There is great unrest and hunger among the 
Protestants of today that refuses to be allayed by critics 
or aesthetics," he says:— 

"There were but few, very few colonists in numbers, 



and their material wealth was entirely inconsequential; 
how can we account for the stupendous influence 
which this tiny commonwealth exerted and still 
exerts on the history of mankind? 

"There is one, and only one, possible answer to this 
question. It was their devotion to the invisible, the 
eternal, the moral order of the universe, the glory of 
God! They endured, and yet endure, as seeing him 
who is invisible. All the history of mankind for them 
centered about his cradle and his cross, and for them 
there were none of those unusual benefits and privileges 
which we enjoy in this enlightened age, of being illuminated 
by the dark wisdom of the blind moles and 

R3976 :page 116 

bats of a godless, Christless scholarship that burrows 
in the holy ground of Sinai and Calvary alike, finding 
there only common dirt. 

"Alas! It is only too true that the heavenly city 
which our Puritan fathers yearned for and sought with 
prayers and tears has become to many of their Christian 
descendants a frigid city of ice palaces, built of 
pale negations, cold, cheerless, shining in a pale winter 
sun with an evanescent glitter of a doubtful and unsubstantial 
intellectual worth. 

"The full, rich, glorious Christ of Catholic Christianity 
has been dragged from his throne by these 'advanced 
thinkers'— God save the mark!— and reduced to 
beggary. A pale, bloodless, emaciated Syrian ghost, 
he still dimly haunts the icy corridors of this twentieth 
century Protestantism, from which the doom of his 
final exclusion has been already spoken. 

"Then in their boundless arrogance and self-assertion 
they turn upon those of us who still cry with 
Thomas before the Risen One, 'my Lord and my God,' 
and tell us that there is no middle ground between 
their own vague and sterile rationalism and the Roman 
Catholic Church. If this be so, then for me most 
gratefully and lovingly I turn to the Church of Rome 
as a homeless, houseless wanderer to a home in a continuing 
city. 

"We are hungry for God, yea, for the living God, 
and hence so restless and dissatisfied. The husk of 
life's fruit is growing thicker, and its meat thinner 
and dryer every day for the vast majority of our people. 
In many and important respects life was brighter 
in the so-called 'Dark Ages' than it is today. The 
seamless robe of Christ is rent into hideous fragments 
and trampled in the dirt. 

"It is not all good that we have inherited from our 
Puritan and Pilgrim sires. We have been talking 
about civil and religious liberty as if that were the only 
thing in the world. Noting the use the average man 
and woman makes of this boasted liberty today, one is 
inclined to think it would be far better for them if they 



had less liberty and more law."— Boston American. 
PSYCHOLOGICAL PHENOMENA 



"There are others beside economists who have 
turned to psychology in order to explain great movements, 
economic, socialistic or governmental. The 
master of them all is Gustave Le Bon, author of the 
famous study on the "Psychology of Crowds." In that 
work are the full explanations of such phenomena as 
this country is now witnessing in the ever-increasing 
hostility to corporations, corporation managers, bankers, 
capitalists and men prominent in affairs. There 
is usually, unfortunately, a basis for the fearful antipathy 

R3976 :page 117 

which is finally engendered among the "crowd" 
against the leaders. But this antipathy, small in the 
beginning is fostered and cultivated by pure reasoners 
and demagogues alike, until each offence, big or 
little, is magnified into some monstrous crime. Calm 
men are converted into ravening wolves, reasoning 
creatures lose their sense of proportion, mere suspicion 
becomes confirmation of dreadful offences and men are 
condemned unheard and executed unshriven. The 
French Revolution is a case in point, a psychological 
demonstration, and the spirit of one is developing 
now." 



There is truth in the above clipping. We are not 
defending thefts great or small, but readily agree that 
public indignation is apt to be unjust— not only in including 
the better with the worse, but also in showing 
no mercy on the erring, even though it would be conceded 
that the majority would have done the same if 
they had possessed the opportunity. We cannot suppose 
that the rich of other lands are superior in morals 
either. They may have seen less opportunity, or have 
not been exposed to such a searching public examination. 

However, all this is exactly what the Bible led us 
to expect. A revealing from the housetops and a consequent 
breaking down of the respect of the masses 
for the upper classes, whose wealth is more and more 
coming to be recognized as illegitimately secured. Thus 
is our present Lord guiding in the affairs of earth 
toward the great climacteric of selfish and embittered 
anarchy— the predicted "time of trouble such as was 
not since there was a nation." 

We agree, then, that G. Le Bon is quite correct in 
his declaration that crowds and classes are often moved 
en masse to do things that would not be considered by 



them as individuals, and that the experiences of the 
French Revolution will be duplicated throughout 
Christendom. Thank God that we can see a silver lining 
to this cloud: that it will be followed speedily by 
the rise of the great Sun of Righteousness to heal and 
bless and enlighten "all the families of the earth." 

GET THEM TO STUDY MILLENNIAL DAWN 



The Westminster Teacher publishes with implied 
approval the following item from the columns of The 
Baptist Teacher:— 

A LAMENTABLE LACK 

"Never were there so many Bibles in the world as 
there are today. And never was the Bible so much 
praised. Never were there so many Sunday schools as 
now, and the one great purpose of the Sunday school 
is the study of the Bible. Yet even among the teachers 
in our Sunday schools the ignorance of the Bible is 
nothing less than deplorable; the proportion of gray 
heads among them is comparatively very small. The 
great majority of them are but novices in the Christian 
life, and they have enlisted in this service not because 
of any special fitness for it, but because there was a 
lack of teachers, and their youthful zeal prompted them 
to enter a door that seemed to open up a field of usefulness. 
But their zeal was not according to knowledge. 
They were utterly unfurnished for so responsible 
a task. They have been doing the best they could 
—poor things!. ..How few of our Sunday school 
teachers have any conception of Scripture truth in its 
entirety— in its glorious symmetry! How few of our 
Bible school teachers have any definite knowledge of 
the way in which our Bible, as we have it, came into 
being— of the canon of Scripture, of the proofs of the 
authenticity of the Scriptures, of the meaning of the 
inspiration of the Scriptures, of the relation of the Old 
and New Testament Scriptures, and the meaning of all 
this hullabaloo that has been lately raised about the 
'higher criticism.' When confronted with questions 
raised by modern skepticism they are dumb and 
ashamed because of their utter ignorance. And these 
questions are apt at any time to be raised in the very 
classes that they teach. They have never had the advantage 
of any theological training, and why should 
they be expected to answer them? 

"Now something ought to be done to remedy, if 
possible, this lamentable lack, and that teachers themselves 
should first be taught, so that when they come 
to teach they should not 'mutter and peep,' but speak 
with no uncertain sound, and not only know, but know 
that they know, and so be able to render to every man 



that asketh them a reason for the hope that is in them." 

A PRESBYTERIAN MINISTER'S POINTED CRITICISM OF 
HIS CREED 



The Toronto Evening Telegram gives the following 
as the language of Rev. Dr. Carter in regard to the 
Westminster Confession of Faith:— 

"The Westminster Confession in fact says that 
God is a monster; modern theology says that he is 
not. Tamerlane built a pyramid of two thousand men 
of the garrison of Herat, laid in brick and mortar, and 
history calls him a monster for doing it. Lord Jeffreys 
presided over the 'bloody circuit,' in which he condemned 
700 to execution, and he stands scorned and by 
himself on the scroll of England's Chancellors. But 
Tamerlane and Jeffreys were sweet souls compared 
with a God who could condemn a whole race to endless 
torment for a single sin. 

"Readers of 'Lorna Doone' will remember how the 
robber Doones of Bagworthy looted a farmer's cottage 
and found a little babe in its cradle. One of them 
called to his comrade to have a game with him. He 
tossed the infant to the other, who caught it upon the 
point of his pike. We call these men fiends, but they 
were bright angels and seraphs compared with a God 
who could send millions of infants to eternal torments. 

"The moral sense of the people is shocked by the 
shilly-shallying of the Presbyterian Church as to the 
Confession. The present connection of the Presbyterian 
Church with the Confession, if it were not so 
serious, would be a farce; being so serious, it is a 
crime. A sham theology is sure to make a sham 
religion." 

GETTING READY FOR THE MILLENNIUM 



Our amazement is excited by a proposition to convert 
two-fifths of the area of the United States from 
arid lands into fertile farms. Yet this stupendous enterprise 
is seriously entertained by the youngest division 

R3976 :page 118 

of our government. It contemplates nothing less 

than the ultimate solving of the 50,000,000 acres of 

waste comprising the great American desert. The undertaking 

will involve the expenditure of $1,500,000, 

but it will create $2,350,000,000 worth of taxable property, 

and will provide homes for 3,000,000 of our future 

population. This is the prospective goal to which the 

bureau aspires, and its engineers declare that it is 



attainable within the present half-century.— Merchants' 
League Advocate. 

R3977 :page 118 

THE WILDERNESS PATH 

Beside me walks— O hallowed thought! — 

The Maker of the Universe, 

The God and King of Heaven and Earth— 

My Father! Tenderly he leads 

My stumbling steps. I hear rare words 

Of wisdom, warnings of the snares 

On right and left; encouragement 

To overcome the obstacles 

Which here and there obstruct my way. 

And as he brings before mine eyes 

Grand visions of the glory bright 

Awaiting (if I hold in him 

My confidence firm to the end, 

Inspiring me with promises 

Of grace abundant for each need) 

I oft forget the landscape drear, 

And dangers imminent, and walk 

In ecstasies of light and hope. 

Now brightly shines upon my path 
The glorious sun! The air is fresh 
And sweet, and hopes run high of what 
I shall accomplish for my Lord. 
The melody within my heart 
Has tuned my lips; and songs of praise 
And gladness tell the peace and joy 
Which they alone can feel who know 
The secret of his will, and walk 
In child-like trustfulness therein. 

And still, when chilling mists enshroud, 
And storms my wondering faith appal, 
I know that he is nigh and will 
Preserve my steps. Why should I fear 
As landmark after landmark fades 
To shadow, and I find myself 
Alone with him who knows them all? 
Can I but wait with shoulders bent 
And visage set, until he calm 
The tempest, and the way be cleared? 
Then, stronger for the test endured, 
Shall I by his unchanging grace 
The paths of peace again pursue. 

O Lord, how precious is this walk 

With thee! Nor height, nor depth, nor length, 

Nor breadth, nor creatures near or far, 

Can separate thy child from thee. 

Strong in thy strength, I tread 



On scorpions, quench the adder's fang, 
The roaring lion subjugate,— 
E'en tempting angels, clothed in light, 
And powerless to work their charm, 
Since Christ in me doth conquer all. 

Lord, hear my prayer, and ever keep 
In me this constancy of faith. 

— R. B. Henninges. 



R3977 :page 118 

MEMORIAL SUPPER REPORTS 

EXCELLENT reports of Memorial observances are 

reaching us by every mail. We give below 

a few samples. Evidently a great blessing 

and refreshment have been experienced, as usual. Our 

Lord's blessing, promised to the twos and threes meeting 

in his name and "doing this" in remembrance of 

his death and of their fellowship in his sufferings, has 

again been experienced. 

At Allegheny the report shows smaller than last 
year for two reasons: (1) Because it was on Thursday 
night some found it impossible to attend who got out 
last year on Sunday night. (2) We got a more accurate 
numbering this year than last. However, in respect 
to the holy joy of this last occasion, it was by far 
the most blessed of all our experience. It was good to 
be there! and the sacred blending of sorrow and joy 
then experienced we believe will long abide in many of 
our memories. 

The attendances of 15 or over reported up to going 
to press, are as follows:— Waukesha, Wis., 15; Chattanooga, 
Tenn., 15; Fort Wayne, Ind., 15; Waterbury, 
Conn., 15; Dubuque, Iowa, 15; Weatherford, Tex., 
16; Niagara Falls, 16; Carbondale, Pa., 16; Spokane, 
Wash., 17; Easton, Pa., 17; Muncie, Ind., 17; 
New Albany, Ind., 17; Clio, Mich., 17; Rockford, 111., 
18; Big Sandy, Tex., 18; Harrisburg, Pa., 19; Lancaster, 
Pa., 19; Magnet, Ind., 21; Jacksonville, Fla., 21; 
New Brunswick, N.J., 21; St. Petersburg, Fla., 21; 
Knoxville, Tenn., 22; Worcester, Mass., 22; Mansfield, 
O., 22; Hartford, Conn., 23; Hamilton, Ont, 24; Allentown, 
Pa., 25; Canton, O., 27; Louisville, Ky., 28; 
Wheeling, W.Va., 29; New Brighton, Pa., 30; Baltimore, 
Md., 31; Schenectady, N.Y., 31; Buffalo, N.Y., 
34; Binghamton, N.Y., 36; Richmond, Va., 36; Kansas 
City, Kans., 38; Tiffin, O., 39; San Antonio, Tex., 40; 
Altoona, Pa., 40; Denver, Colo., 41; Youngstown, O., 
42; St. Joseph, Mo., 47; Dayton, O., 48; San Francisco, 
Cal., and vicinity, 50; Marquez, Tex., 50; Seattle, 
Wash., 52; Scranton, Pa., 60; Cincinnati, O., 60; Columbus, 
O., 65; Providence, R.I., 65; St. Paul, Minn., 



66; Toronto, Ont., 79; Cleveland, O., 94; St. Louis, 
Mo., 95; New York, N.Y., 102; Washington, D.C., 
115; Los Angeles, Cal, 133; Philadelphia, Pa., 146; 
Boston, Mass., 190; Allegheny, Pa., 451. 

We subjoin a few samples of the many interesting 
letters received, as follows:— 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

The Church at Weatherford observed the memorial. 
We were blessed spiritually, and I think all felt the importance 
of the occasion. Sixteen partook of the emblems 

R3977 :page 119 

representing our Lord's broken body and shed 
blood. Two brethren came 200 miles to participate in 
the Lord's supper and two came 100 miles. Tears of 
joy were shed and the occasion was one of solemnity. 
We renewed our vows of consecration to our dear Lord, 
realizing that we are nearing the end of these precious 
meetings. Yes, dear Brother, the time is short. May 
God bless you with such blessings as he sees are best 
for you and all the colaborers, is the prayer of us all. 
Your humble servant in the Lord, 

WILSON SUTCLIFFE, -Texas. 



MY DEAR BROTHER:- 

I am writing a few lines to tell you that ten of us 
met at the appointed time to celebrate our Lord's supper, 
and we had a blessed season, certainly the best 
communion we ever had. One dear Brother who had 
not yet withdrawn from the Methodist Church, and was 
with us for the first time, said he had thoroughly enjoyed 
the meeting. One dear Sister came about thirty 
miles from the country and was nearly all day in getting 
here. A brother left his work eight or ten miles 
away, and reached us just in time. There were a few 
others whose hearts were with us, I know, and were 
unable to attend. 

I believe I can say truthfully that all here are 
growing in knowledge and love for the Lord and for 
his brethren. We have of late been feeding on the 
Truth more than ever. Thanks— yea, many thanks to 
that servant who is sending out to the household of 
faith meat in due season, especially these Berean 
lessons. 

We are all striving to follow in the footsteps of the 
Master as we see them; willing, yea anxious to share 
the cup with him, and we know what it means. And 
soon we hope to drink the new wine with our Lord in 
his Kingdom. We remembered you all in our prayers. 
We know that we cannot help to bear our Lord's cross, 
but we can and will, D.V., help to bear that of the brethren, 
knowing that the Lord will reckon it as done unto 



himself. 

We notice that we have a Pilgrim coming this way, 
Brother Mitchell. Thank you very much. We will welcome 
him, and pray that the Lord may use him here 
for his honor and glory. We would all like to have a 
visit from Brother Russell, but we know that you must 
have your hands full. With Christian love to all I am, 

Yours in Christ, 

CHURCH AT TRURO,-Can. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

I am sure you will be glad to know of the little 
gathering last night in Muncie to commemorate the 
death of our dear Redeemer. There were seventeen 
of us met together in remembrance of Him, all but five 
of this number having come into Present Truth during 
the past few months, and thus partaking of the supper 
for the first time, with the right understanding of its 
significance. We first sang Hymn 122, and after 
prayer read as Scripture lesson Mark 14:1-50, then 
spoke briefly of the memories which gathered round 
the anniversary of our Lord's death, calling attention 
to the Father's love and our Savior's sacrifice; to the 
significance of the bread and the cup, and to his invitation 
to us to fellowship, to take part with him in his 

R3978 :page 119 

death. Then, after giving thanks for the bread and 
cup, respectively, the friends were served, and after 
singing Hymn 276 we went out. 

We had a most solemn, impressive and blessed 
season with the Lord, remembering in our prayers all 
the dear brethren, yourself in particular, and praying 
that another anniversary may find all of us more fully 
developed in the spiritual life, and more meet for the 
Kingdom. 

With Christian love from all the friends here, including 
the writer, I am, as ever, 

Your brother and fellow-servant, 

G. B.RAYMOND,-Ind. 



DEAR BROTHER:- 

Our little class at Columbus celebrated the Memorial 
of our Lord's death last night, six being present 
and five participating. Some were prevented from 
being present by reason of a storm. And as we remembered 
our beloved Pastor, and all the balance of 
the flock, known and unknown, and especially those 
we have met and known in the flesh, and with whose 
trials and afflictions we were more or less acquainted, 
our hearts grew warm in gratitude and love to the 



Father for the past experiences of our lives which made 
this occasion possible for us. With great regard, 
Your brother in the Lord, 

G. M. HUNTZINGER,-Kan. 



R3978 :page 119 

THEM THAT HONOR ME I WILL HONOR 

--GENESIS 4L38-49.-MAY 5.- 

Golden Text:— "If any man lack wisdom 
let him ask of God."— James 1:5. 

JOSEPH'S three years' experience as a prisoner, most of 

it as the superintendent of the prison, undoubtedly 

brought to him a rich experience of patience and 

sympathy, and tended to confirm and deepen those beautiful 

elements of his character manifested in his boyhood. 

The Lord had him in training for a great work: not only 

was it appropriate that his character should be developed, 

but also that his faith should be tested and made very 

strong. We have seen that although he trusted the Lord implicitly, 

this did not hinder him from appealing to Pharaoh's 

butler, whose dream he interpreted favorably, asking him 

that when restored to the king's favor he would remember 

Joseph's kindness to him as a prisoner and speak a word in 

his interest to secure his liberty. Perhaps he expected much 

from this man, who certainly would have had many opportunities 

for requiting his kindness, yet two years rolled 

around without relief— two years in which, nevertheless, 

Joseph maintained his confidence in the Lord and waited 

patiently for the outworkings of his plan. 

There could be no better illustration than this for the 
proper course of all who belong to the New Creation. In a 
special sense all of our interests are the Lord's, because we 

R3978 : page 120 

have presented ourselves to him wholly, unreservedly, and 
have been accepted as members of the body of Christ. It is 
for such to remember the Master's words, "Your Father 
knoweth what things ye have need of," "The Father himself 
loveth you," "No man is able to pluck them out of my 
Father's hand," "All things shall work together for good 
to them that love God." While, therefore, it is proper for 
us to make use of any and every reasonable means for the 
securing of what we consider to be our best interests, we are 
not to rely upon these but upon the Lord, and to wait 
patiently for his time and his way for our deliverance from 
every evil condition. 

WAIT PATIENTLY FOR HIM 



The Lord's time and method for delivering Joseph from 
the prison transcended all of Joseph's expectations; and 
lifted him from the prison to the palace of the greatest 
nation of that time. It came about eventually through the 
mediation of the butler, but to the latter's shame it was not 
because of his appreciation or thoughtfulness. Pharaoh had 
two dreams which impressed his mind deeply, and he 
earnestly sought the interpretation of them. He dreamed of 
seeing seven cows come up out of the river Nile, very fat, and 
feed upon luxuriant grass of the river side; next he saw 
seven lean cows come up out of the river, and they devoured 
the seven fat ones, yet seemed none the fatter themselves. 
This dream was followed by another in which the king saw 
a stalk of Egyptian wheat, known as compound wheat; its 
top was exceedingly large, dividing into seven distinct 
branches or spikes, indicating a most prolific yield; and following 
it came up another stalk, with seven thin ears or 
branches, of the kind common to a time of famine, when 
lack of moisture and a southeast wind would injure the crop 
and make it worthless. This last stalk of seven branches 
devoured the first one. 

We are to remember that the Lord in those ancient 
times gave important dreams not only to some of his own 
people, as in the case of Joseph, Daniel and others, but also 
sometimes to the heathen; for instance, to Nebuchadnezzar 
a dream of the golden image, and again of the fruitful tree, 
and in the present instance Pharaoh's dreams. We are not 
to wonder, then, that the king of Egypt desired assistance 
in the interpretation of his dreams and called for it of the 
wise men of his court, who, however, were unable to offer 
any satisfactory solution. After we have Joseph's interpretation 
the whole matter seems so simple and plain that we 
wonder that the wise men and priests had not guessed it: 
but thus it is with our wisdom; it seems simple after we 
have it, understand it and appreciate it. Thus it is, too, 
with the inventions of our day. We wonder why they were 
not thought of centuries ago. 

We are sure that the world is not inclined to give 
proper credit for wisdom to the great Revealer of secrets, 
and we are sure, too, that the majority of Christian people 
are not sufficiently inclined to honor God in respect to such 
matters. Could the world but realize what we see from the 
Scriptures— namely, that the present activity of thought 
along the lines of invention are of divine prearrangement as 
elements of the "Day of God's Preparation" for the Millennial 
Kingdom— how it would prick its bubble of pride in 
our present-day wisdom; how it would show us most effectively 
that all wisdom comes from above, and that we might 
be groping almost as blindly as our ancestors were it not that 
the Lord's due time has come for lifting the vail and helping 
us to develop the forces of nature as a preparation, not 
only for the Kingdom, but also a preparation for the great 
time of trouble by which it will be introduced. 

"IN ALL THY WAYS ACKNOWLEDGE HIM" 



When the wise men of Egypt were unable to interpret 
Pharaoh's dream, his butler naturally enough called to mind 
his own dream and how accurately it had been interpreted 
by the kind and sympathizing Joseph, and his own promise 
to do something for the interpreter, and his neglect until 
this time. Perhaps he was not entirely to blame; he could 
only be useful to Joseph when God's time for favoring the 
latter had come. When Pharaoh heard the story of the 
wonderful interpretation of the dreams of his butler and 
baker he sent with haste to the prison, eager to know the 
meaning of his own dreams. Here we have a further test of 
Joseph's character. Let us notice carefully how he demeaned 
himself in the presence of the king. Was he haughty, boastful, 
self-assertive? Did he throw around himself a mystery 
and seem to call from the recesses of his mind some deep 
wisdom? Not so. He was the very personification of modesty, 
and when the king expressed the hope that he could 
interpret his dreams he answered, "It is not of me: God 
shall give Pharaoh an answer." 

Here we have one of the secrets of the greatness of 
Joseph: he honored God, and was therefore of the kind whom 
God is pleased eventually to honor and exalt. How the 
Scriptures bear out this thought! Mark our Master's words, 
"He that humbleth himself shall be exalted, he that exalteth 
himself shall be abased." (Luke 14:11.) Mark the 
Apostle's words, "Humble yourselves, therefore, under the 
mighty hand of God, that he may exalt you in due time." 
(1 Pet. 5:6.) O, that we all might have this lesson deeply 
impressed upon our hearts and minds, so that with us it will 
be true, as with Joseph, in harmony with the instruction, 
"In all thy ways acknowledge him."— Prov. 3:6. 

While such an acknowledgment of the Lord is proper 
in all the affairs of life, it certainly is especially appropriate 
in connection with the study of the divine Word and any 
attempt to give an interpretation thereof. Let none of us 
speak as of ourselves, nor appropriate wisdom to ourselves, 
but rather, with hearts full of gratitude to the Lord for 
blessings received, let us acknowledge him and his Word 
and his arrangements in connection with his Truth. Especially 
is this appropriate in those who occupy positions of 
responsibility in the Church— whom the holy Spirit has 
made overseers to "feed the flock of Christ." To whatever 
extent self-seeking is indulged, to whatever extent the honor 
of men is craved, the Lord as the fountain of wisdom and 
the channels which he uses in dispensing his Truth are 
ignored or belittled by any of us, to that extent we may be 
sure we are in a dangerous situation and not likely to make 
real progress in the good way. 

SEIZING FAVORABLE OPPORTUNITIES 

Pharaoh related his dreams, and after hearing them 
Joseph promptly gave the interpretation and explained that 
the two dreams were one— that they taught the same lesson: 
that thus the Lord had indicated to Pharaoh that there 



R3979 : page 121 

would be seven years of very bountiful harvests which would 

be followed by seven years of drouth and famine, in which 

all the surplus of the first seven years would be necessary 

for the preservation of the lives of the people. A lighter-headed 

man than Joseph, a man who felt that in interpreting 

the dream he had confounded the wise men of Egypt, 

had done a wonderful thing, would have been so overwhelmed 

with the sense of his own importance that he doubtless would 

have stood there and received the king's thanks, and have 

passed out a free man, to be noted by the people as the 

wise man. 

The humility of Joseph was not merely assumed: his 
crediting of the wisdom to the Lord was the genuine sentiment 
of his heart, so that he did not feel thus elated when 
he had delivered the Lord's message, but with coolness and 
self-possession he proceeded to suggest to the king what 
might be the proper steps to be taken so that the dream 
might indeed prove a blessing. He said, "Let Pharaoh look 
out a man discreet and wise, and set him over the land of 
Egypt, and let him appoint officers over the land, and take 
up the fifth part of the land of Egypt in the seven plenteous 
years; and let them gather all the fruit of those seven 
years as the property of Pharaoh, to be kept in store in 
cities for use in the seven years of famine that will follow." 
We cannot suppose that Joseph had the slightest suspicion 
that he would be the one appointed to this work. It would 
be a most unnatural expectation that Pharaoh would take 
from the prison a man of foreign birth and exalt him to a 
station above the other officers of his empire. Yet this is 
just what Pharaoh did, and it is here that our lesson proper 
commences. 

COULD WE CHOOSE MORE WISELY THAN GOD? 

Addressing his court officers Pharaoh said, Could we 
find such another one as this Joseph, in whom is the Spirit 
of God, to be at the head of this great work of preparing 
for the years of famine of which God has thus forewarned 
us? Not waiting to have the consent of the officers of his 
court, but after the manner of the time as an autocrat, he 
decided the question and said to Joseph, "Forasmuch as God 
has showed thee all this, there is none so discreet and wise 
as thou art: thou shalt be over my house [kingdom], and 
according unto thy word shall all my people be ruled: only 
in the throne will I be greater than thou. See, I have set 
thee over all the land of Egypt." 

So thrilling a transition from slavery and the dungeon 
to the governorship of the greatest country of the world, 
and honor and distinction and power next to those of the 
king, outrivals the pen of fiction in the most attractive 
novels. It seems so wonderful that it is difficult to believe 
its truthfulness. Hence it is well for us to remember that 
while such transitions would not be possible under the democratic 
conditions of our day and country, they were not out 



of harmony with the conditions of their time and place. For 
instance, we know that Daniel was a Hebrew captive and 
slave, and yet that he was chosen by Nebuchadnezzar to be 
one of the rulers of the empire of Babylon. We remember 
also that Daniel was brought to the King's notice in a very 
similar manner, namely, by the interpretation of a dream. 
Professor Sayce says, "It was not an unheard-of thing for a 
Syrian to be thus raised to the highest offices of the Egyptian 
State, and in the days of Hyksos' dominion it was 
naturally easier than when a dynasty of purely native origin 
was on the throne.... For many centuries during the 
Mohammedan age none but a slave could govern Egypt." 
We are also reminded that in 1852 the prime minister of 
Persia, the second in rank in the kingdom but first in power, 
was the son of a donkey driver; and that the Sultan of 
Turkey once rewarded a poor dentist who relieved him of 
pain by making him a peer of the realm. 

The exaltation of Joseph from the condition of a slave 
and from a dungeon to be the second person of power in 
the world suggests to us further the typical character of 
Joseph's life. Did not our Lord Jesus take a bondsman's 
form? and did he not enter the great prison-house of death? 
and was he not suddenly raised up to the throne— to be 
next to the Father, the Governor of the universe? And did 
not the experiences of Jesus under God's providence have to 
do with preparing him for his great work of the future, the 
blessing of the whole world? And as Joseph saved the 
lives of the people of Egypt, will not the antitypical Joseph 
save the lives of the world? While thinking along these 
lines let us remember, too, how we are invited to be members 
of the body of Christ, if so be that we suffer with him, 
that we may also be glorified together. (Rom. 8:17.) With 
this thought in our minds, the trials, the difficulties, the sufferings 
of this present time, its afflictions, disappointments, 
may all be endured with cheerfulness if we have the proper 
faith— knowing that all things shall work together for good 
to them that love God, to the called ones according to his 
purpose. 

"UNTO HIM EVERY KNEE SHALL BOW" 

When the time came for King Pharaoh to introduce the 
new governor or prime minister of the empire to the people 
he first provided for him suitable apparel, to indicate the 
rank; next, the second state chariot, and, third, that he 
should be escorted in parade before the people by criers, 
who should announce his rank and call upon the people 
to bow the knee— to acknowledge him as the king's representative. 
How this reminds us of the Apostle's words respecting 
our Lord Jesus and his high exaltation after his 
trials were concluded. Paul says, "Wherefore God hath also 
highly exalted him and given him a name which is above 
every name, that at the name of Jesus every knee should 
bow, of things in heaven and things in earth." (Phil. 2:9,10.) 
And while we contemplate this high exaltation of the Master 
let us not forget that his Bride is to be joint-heir with him 



in all of his glory, honor and immortality, and that the 
privilege of becoming members of the Bride class belongs 
to the "called, chosen, faithful," the "very elect" of this 
Gospel age. 

If we could but have this in mind continually, what 
manner of persons would we be in all holy conversation 
and godliness— how trifling all earthly pleasures and sorrows, 
all riches and poverty, all weakness and debasement 
would seem to us! so intense would we be in our desire to 
make our calling and election sure to those exceeding great 
and precious promises. Pharaoh gave Joseph a new name, 
the meaning of which is suggested to be something like- 
Deliverer from death by the bread of life. We remember 
how our dear Redeemer said of himself, "I am the bread 

R3979 : page 122 

that came down from heaven." God provided in Jesus the 
bread of life, by which the whole world may be saved 
eventually from Adamic death if they but eat of the divine 
Word, appropriate its lessons and experiences, under the 
ministry and discipline of the great Redeemer during his 
glorious Kingdom. And all this was considerably illustrated 
in Joseph's course as the governor of Egypt. 

DID JOSEPH ENSLAVE THE EGYPTIANS? 

Some have severely criticised Joseph's course in dealing 
with the people on this occasion, but we find no criticism of 
it in the Scriptures. His first work was to journey throughout 
the entire land of Egypt, select suitable sites as granaries, 
and to give contracts for the building of these. Then 
throughout the seven years of bountiful harvests he first of 
all collected from the people their usual tax of one-fifth of 
the product for the king. Additionally he bought from the 
people with the king's money all the surplus grain they 
could spare and thus laid up vast stores of wheat. When 
the years of drouth and famine came the people in turn 
were glad to buy from the government the very same grain 
that they had previously sold. We have no intimation that 
an exorbitant price was charged for the wheat, no intimation 
that advantage was taken of the people. 

But after the people had spent their money still the 
famine prevailed, and Joseph, the governor, purchased their 
cattle and all the people had, which thus became the property 
of the king. This was not an ideal condition according 
to our conception of matters, because it left too much of 
a centralization of power and authority in the hands of an 
autocrat; but if we could imagine divinely appointed and 
divinely guided and divinely willed kings and priests in the 
world, such an autocratic power would be one of the very 
greatest blessings imaginable to all the people. Indeed we 
know through the Scriptures that this will practically be 
the condition of affairs that will prevail during the Millennial 
age— that the world will not be asked to vote for its 
rulers and to determine its laws, but simply be required to 



obey the great Governor of divine appointment, unto whom 
every knee must bow and every tongue confess to the glory 
of God. 

Here, then, in Joseph we see another illustration or 
type of the Christ of glory and the manner in which he will 
bless the world. Our Redeemer has already laid up in store 
a complete provision of the bread of life, sufficient for every 
member of our race. In him was life, and he gave it on our 
behalf. We who are now accepted as his members, and who 
at once receive this life by faith when we accept him, and 
will receive it actually in the First Resurrection, are the 
predecessors of the world in the matter of these blessings. 
Only the little flock is now being developed, now being fed, 
now passing from death unto life, through accepting the 
bread from heaven— only the Bride and the virgins, her companions. 
The great work which God has in mind, and for 

R3980 : page 122 

which he has appointed our Redeemer, is the work of saving 
the world, and the time and means for this salvation of the 
world is the Millennial age, the reign of the Kingdom of 
heaven amongst men. 

THE BREAD FROM HEAVEN 

During the Millennium the great Provider of the Bread 
of life and his associated Bride will dispense to the world, 
through the agency of the ancient worthies, the Bread of 
life as they will need it and be able to appreciate it. Day 
by day and year by year, during all that time, the world 
must bow the knee to the great Ruler and Representative of 
Jehovah. And during all that time they will be required to 
give up one thing after another for the attainment of the 
eternal life, until finally, at the end of the Millennial age, 
all who remain— not cut off in the Second Death— shall 
have given their property, their all, including themselves, in 
exchange for the eternal life represented by this living 
Bread that came from heaven, of which if a man eat he 
shall never die. 

The abundance of corn gathered by Joseph typically 
assures us of the abundance of God's provision for granting 
eternal life to every member of the human family willing to 
receive it from the Son upon the terms of loving obedience 
to the extent of full surrender. While the surrender of the 
will and of all that we possess to a fellow-mortal would be 
a very dangerous matter indeed, against which we should 
properly strive, it is not so as respects the Lord. He is the 
grand exception. To give ourselves wholly and unreservedly 
to him is to bring to each of us, through his blessing, the 
peace of God which passeth all understanding, and to have 
him mould and fashion our characters with all our interests of 
life to our highest welfare and his glory. What a blessed 
prospect then is before the world! and how we who by faith 
eat of this Bread in advance, and participate with the antitypical 
Joseph in all of his trials and sufferings for righteousness' 



sake, may rejoice in our privilege. 

"IF ANY MAN LACK WISDOM LET HIM ASK" 

Our Golden Text should not be forgotten here. Surely 
we all lack wisdom, and we appreciate our lack the more as 
we come to clearly and yet more clearly appreciate the 
lengths and breadths and heights and depths of God's loving 
provision for us in Christ. 

Once life was to us a maze, like as to the remainder of 
the world,— a round of duties and responsibilities for which 
we could see no adequate result or reward. We are born, 
we eat, we drink, we sleep, we learn in the school, we labor, 
and, to a greater or less extent, we enjoy our life of mingled 
labor, suffering and pleasure, but appreciate not the purpose 
of all these. Now, with increasing wisdom from on high, 
some of us see with the eyes of our understanding the great 
divine plan of the ages, and the divine purpose and lovingkindness 
toward us in Christ Jesus, and that we shall be 
heirs of God and joint-heirs with our Redeemer if so be we 
suffer with him. 

Seeing this has changed the entire current of life for 
us. Now, indeed, to be living is sublime— full of interest, full 
of importance. The days, hours, go swiftly by, and we feel 
them none too many for the grand purposes of God which we 
see are being accomplished in us and for us, and with which 
we are in fullest accord and sympathy. Still, we lack wisdom, 
and the more we gain the more we see we still lack. 
We need, therefore, to continually go to the fountain of all 
grace and wisdom and truth, that we may profitably use 
each experience of life as it comes to us, to the intent that 
ultimately we may come off conquerors— yea, more than 
conquerors— through him who loved us and bought us with 
his precious blood.— Rom. 8:37. 



R3980 : page 123 

"BLESSED ARE THE MERCIFUL" 

-GENESIS 45:1-15; 50:15-21.- 

Golden Text:— "Be ye kind one to another, tenderhearted, 
forgiving one another, even as God for Christ's sake 
hath forgiven you."— Eph. 4:32. 

THE climax of Joseph's story is reached in this lesson. 

Truly no one can read the simple narrative in the 

Bible and not be blessed by it. The present lesson 

dates twenty-two years after Joseph came into Egypt a slave. 

Seven years of bountiful harvests had passed, and the second 

year of the famine seven had come. If we are inclined to 

wonder why in all those twenty-two years Joseph had 

not communicated with his aged father, remembering especially 

that he had plenty of opportunity for so doing after 



he became governor of Egypt, let us remember also how 
particularly his affairs were guided of the Lord, and that 
quite possibly in this matter he was acting under divine 
direction. He evidently was expecting his brethren, knowing 
that the drouth and consequently the famine extended 
to Palestine and over a wide range of country. Through 
trusted servants a watch was evidently kept for the Hebrews, 
anticipating that the famine would drive them to Egypt for 
supplies. Thus on the arrival of the ten sons of Jacob Joseph 
was immediately apprised of the fact. They were 
arrested and brought before him, treated with suspicion and 
accused of being spies, and put into prison for three days. 

Joseph, the governor, addressed them through an interpreter, 
that he might the more thoroughly conceal himself, 
and that they might be more frank in their utterances in his 
presence. He interviewed them after they had spent three 
days in prison, and heard their admissions the one to the 
other that their adversity in this matter was esteemed as a 
judgment from the Lord on account of their wrong course 
toward their brother twenty-two years previous. He noted 
that they still remembered his cries as they had put him 
into the pit to die; he perceived that the matter had made 
a deep impression upon their minds, and that they were now 
in a different attitude of heart. He kept one of their number 
as a hostage and gave the others a small amount of 
food, bidding them return and, as a proof of their story, to 
bring with them the younger brother whom they had mentioned, 
assuring them that with this proof of their sincerity 
they would be privileged to traffic without interruption. 

The brethren properly enough associated their experiences 
in the dungeon with those of Joseph, and evidently 
took to heart the lesson of their wrong course. Although in 
a previous lesson we saw that these men with one exception 
were murderers in their hearts, we will see further in the 
present lesson a marked change in their characters. This 
was brought about perhaps partly by their father's grief 
over the loss of Joseph, and partly, no doubt, by their own 
remorse in respect to their wrong doing. Thus an evil deed 
is not always a precursor of further evil, but sometimes becomes 
the pivotal or turning point of character. What 
Christian has not had an experience along this line— that 
his point of failure, demonstrating his weakness in some particular 
line of character, has really been to him a valuable 
lesson, making him the stronger in that particular, the better 
able to stand future trials and temptations from the 
same quarter. Thus all of our experiences in life rightly 
received (even life's stumbling-stones) may prove to be 
stepping-stones to better things. 

TEN VERY CHANGED MEN 

On arrival at home their experiences were related to 
their father Jacob, who now also mourned the loss of Simeon, 
the hostage, but utterly refused to allow Benjamin to 
go from him. It was here that Reuben, noting his father's 
sorrow, offered himself and his children as hostages for the 



safe return of Benjamin. It was not until the famine pressed 
them sorely and starvation stared them in the face that Jacob 
consented to allow Benjamin to go with his brethren to 
Egypt, upon the assurance of Judah that if anything happened 
to him he would bear the blame. How evidently 
these men had learned sympathy from their father during 
those twenty-two years. Once so indifferent that they 
brought trouble upon him, they now were willing to pledge 
their own lives for his comfort. We are to remember that 
these men were the heads of the tribes of Israel, some of 
whose children were the most notable in history: for instance 
Levi was the father of the entire priestly tribe, including 
Moses and Aaron; Judah was the progenitor of 
David and Solomon and Jesus our Lord. It was evidently a 
part of the divine purpose to give these men a great lesson in 
connection with their father, the famine, etc.— a lesson that 
not only would be beneficial to themselves but have an influence 
upon all future time. 

Arrived back in Egypt from their father's house, the 
ten brethren were astonished when they were directed to 
enter the governor's palace. The money for their previous 
purchase they had found in their sacks when they emptied 
them, and this they explained to Joseph's steward, saying 
that they had brought it back with additional money for the 
purchase of more wheat. Their trepidation was lest it 
should be claimed that the money was stolen, the penalty 
for theft under the Egyptian law being slavery. Joseph's 
steward gave evidence of having to some extent his master's 
confidence and some knowledge of his religion, for he answered 

R3981 :page 123 

them kindly, "Peace be unto you: the money returned 

to you was from the God of your father." He further restored 

their confidence by bringing Simeon to them at liberty. 

They washed and prepared for dinner at the governor's 

house, as they were instructed. What could it all 

mean? 

Farmers, they felt strangely out of place in the palace, 
and queried why the governor, who had treated them previously 
as spies, should now treat them so generously. Their astonishment 
grew momentarily as they noted the peculiarities of 
the situation: the seats assigned them were in the order of 
their birth, and when portions were sent from Joseph's separate 
table they noted that five portions were sent to Benjamin, 
as indicative of the governor's favor especially upon 
him. They knew not that the governor, able to understand 
their tongue, was listening to know whether or not they still 
were envious, or how they would receive this manifestation 
of special favor to the younger brother. They stood the 
test. They showed that their envy was dead, that they rejoiced 
in their younger brother's favor. 

Yet another step of testing was to be taken: the men 
were allowed to depart with their supplies, but into one of 

R3981 :page 124 



Benjamin's sacks of wheat upon his beast the steward by 

direction placed the governor's silver cup, and then, ere the 

men had gotten far from the city, they were overtaken by 

the palace guard and accused of dishonorable conduct, rendering 

evil for good in the theft of the "divining cup" of 

the governor. They all professed their innocence, and declared 

that if the cup were to be found not only the one 

who had it should be a slave but the entire company. The 

search for the cup began with the eldest and concluded 

with the youngest, Benjamin, the cup being found in his 

sack. We can well imagine the dismay upon the brethren; 

they all returned, although the steward said he wanted only 

the culprit for his slave. How could they face their father 

Jacob and tell him of this calamity? Returning to the palace 

the governor, Joseph, was still there. They prostrated 

before him, and knowing the futility of protestation as to 

innocence they spoke of the matter as a calamity and resigned 

themselves to their fate as bondsmen. 

The governor replied, "Not so! we of Egypt are not 
unjust to take you all for bondsmen for one man's fault. 
Let the guilty one serve, the rest may go free. Return to 
your home and your families and take with you your wheat." 
Then it was that Judah, once hard hearted in respect to his 
brother Joseph and his father Jacob, addressed the governor 
a most pathetic plea, which for its simplicity and directness 
and pathos stands out preeminently amongst all the records 
of history. He detailed to the governor the circumstances 
connected with the bringing of Benjamin, his father's 
grief in parting with him, his assurance that it would 
mean the hastening of his death if anything happened to 
him, the fact that he, Judah, had become surety for his 
brother, etc.; then he concludes, "Now, therefore, I pray 
thee, let thy servant abide instead of the lad as a bondsman 
to my lord, and let the lad go up with his brethren, for how 
shall I go up to my father, and the lad be not with me, lest 
peradventure I shall see the evil that shall come on my 
father?"-Gen. 44:18-34. 

THE SILVER LINING OF THE CLOUD 

The final test put upon the brethren by the Lord and 
by Joseph was met successfully. It was demonstrated that 
they were changed men, that instead of coldness, indifference 
and gross brutality, they were tender hearted, sympathetic 
and willing to suffer one for the other. The time, 
therefore, had come for the clouds and shadows that had 
been over them for some time to break away. Joseph, the 
governor, could refrain himself no longer. He ordered the 
place cleared of the attendants that he might be alone with 
his brethren— the matter was too sacred for the eyes of others. 
The time had come for him to throw off his reserve 
and reveal himself to them. Alone with them he wept, and 
his voice shook with emotion as he told them who he was 
and how their designs against him of twenty-two years before 
had, under God's providences, been overruled for his 



good. What wonder that the guilty men trembled now as 
much or more than ever. What resentment might their 
brother feel against them? how might he now requite them 
evil for evil, and send them to the house of bondage or to 
the dungeon? 

But through his tears of joy Joseph spoke graciously to 
them; and, at first disposed to flee, they gathered to him 
as he said, "Be not grieved with yourselves, that ye sold me 
hither; for God sent me before you to preserve life.... 
So now it was not you that sent me hither, but God, and he 
hath made me a life-giver to Pharaoh. ...Haste ye and 
go up to my father and say unto him, Thus saith thy son 
Joseph, God hath made me lord of all Egypt, come down 
unto me, tarry not." A more dramatic scene could scarcely 
be imagined, yet through it all runs the thread of simplicity 
and honesty, and above all the spirit of love and mercy, 
which could emanate only from the one great instructor, 
God, and could be exemplified only by those who have been 
near to him and received his instructions. 

"TENDER HEARTED, FORGIVING ONE ANOTHER" 

Had Joseph been a saint of this Gospel age, begotten 
of the holy Spirit and illuminated thereby through the manifold 
revelations of the divine purpose and character as we 
have them in the Bible, his conduct would still be worthy 
of the very highest type of Christian development. But 
when we think of the circumstances and conditions under 
which his character was developed, in a heathen land and 
with but a small revelation of the divine character and plan, 
we stand amazed. Do we not properly say to ourselves, 
while studying this lesson, What manner of persons ought 
we to be considering our great advantages every way? 
Would we have proven as noble and generous as Joseph under 
the same circumstances and conditions? If not, why 
not, except that we have not made the proper use of the lessons 
provided us in the school of Christ? And we know 
that unless we do learn these lessons and develop at heart 
such a character of mercy and generosity we will not be 
meet for the inheritance of the saints in light— not be acceptable 
to the Lord as members of the elect, the Bride 
class. 

When sending them home Joseph kissed his brother 
Benjamin and tarried with him quite a while, the two weeping 
upon each other's necks. Then came the turn of the 
other ten brothers. How would he deal with them? Surely 
he would not manifest the affection of kissing them after 
the custom of eastern lands, because surely he could not 
feel toward them a perfect love and good will. But he did 
kiss every one of them, and since the matter was neither of 
constraint nor for effect, it evidenced the fact that his heart 
was full of generosity and loving kindness. "Blessed are 
the merciful," they are the kind to whom the heavenly 
Father will be pleased to extend his mercy and his favor. 
They are the only ones who will be in a proper attitude to 
receive the great blessing of the Kingdom— others not having 



developed this character for mercy will be unfit for the 
exaltation whatever may be their portion. 

"AM I IN THE PLACE OF GOD?" 

Our lesson skips over that part of the narrative which 
relates to the coming of Jacob and his household in wagons 
sent for them by the governor of Egypt, with the full knowledge 
and consent of Pharaoh the king, and how they were 
settled in the land of Goshen and prospered there. By and 
by the aged Jacob died in the land of Egypt, but was taken 
for burial back into Palestine. The funeral over, Joseph's 

R3981 :page 125 

brethren were in some trepidation. Joseph's course in rendering 
so much good in return for so much evil seemed so 
unnatural that they feared that it was only a temporary 
matter for their father's sake, and that now since his death 
they would be entirely out of favor with the governor. 
They came to Joseph again and, apologizing for the past, 
asked assurances of his forgiveness, telling him they were 
the servants of God and that they were quite willing to be 
Joseph's servants also. Note the noble answer they got:— 
"Fear not: for am I in the place of God? But as for you, 
ye meant evil against me, but God meant it for good, to 
bring it to pass as it is this day, to save much people alive. 
Now, therefore, fear ye not; I will nourish you and your 
little ones," and he comforted them, speaking kindly to them. 

Generous Joseph! Not a complaint, not a bitter word, 
only excuses for their villainy. Since the matter had worked 
out good why should he think evil of the agencies or 
agents which God had permitted and used? His expression, 
"Am I in the place of God?" signifies, Is it for me to 
judge you or attempt to punish you in any manner? Is it 
not God alone to whom you have responsibility in this matter? 
and if you can make the matter right with him it 
already is right with me, for vengeance belongeth unto the 
Lord and not to his creatures, all of whom are more or less 
imperfect in one way or another. 

Let us apply this lesson each to himself, not only as 
respects the brotherhood in the Church of God but also in 
regard to the dealings with our brethren in the flesh and 
with our neighbors. What matters it to us whether they 
meant us evil or meant us good, have we not God's assurance 
that all things are working together for good to them 
that love him— to the called ones according to his purpose? 
And this being the case, why should we have the slightest 
anger or resentment against the persons or instrumentalities 
in any way used of the Lord in connection with our 
affairs. Those who thus trust in the Lord, and they only, 
are able to properly view and meet the affairs of life, and 
they alone are able to rejoice in tribulation, in persecution, 

R3982:page 125 



in suffering for righteousness' sake, because they know, as 
the Apostle assures us, that all these things are working out 
for them a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory, 
and that present difficulties and trials are not worthy to be 
compared with the glories that shall be revealed in us by 
and by— when we with our dear Redeemer shall sit upon 
the throne of earth for the blessing of all the families of 
the earth. 

"THE SPIRIT OF PRAYER AND SUPPLICATION" 

If the story of Joseph, his sufferings and exaltation to 
power as the governor of Egypt next to the king, represents 
the story of Jesus and all those who follow in his footsteps 
in the narrow way of self sacrifice and suffering, incidental 
to their exaltation to power in the Kingdom of God under 
the whole heavens; and if the preparation and afterward 
the distribution of the wheat, the bread of Egypt, for the 
saving of the lives of that whole people represents well the 
blessings and glorious opportunities that are to come to the 
world of mankind during the Millennial age through the 
glorified Redeemer, it does not seem amiss to suppose that 
Joseph's eleven brethren are somewhat typical also. We are 
to remember that it was his own that received Jesus, not 
those who cried, "Crucify him, his blood be upon us and 
upon our children." 

We perceive that in the Lord's providence that nation 
has passed through severe experiences and ordeals since. 
We may hope that these are proving beneficial, and that ere 
long the famine for the Word of the Lord will reach them 
and cause them to come to the great Governor for the 
Bread of Life. The Scriptures intimate that this will be the 
time of "Jacob's trouble" (Jer. 30:7), but he will be delivered 
out of it. The Apostle assures us of the same, saying 
that God's gifts and callings he will not repent of or alter, 
and that ultimately the natural Israelite shall obtain mercy 
through the favor of the spiritual Israelite. (Rom. 11:30,31.) 
The Prophet (Zech. 12:10) takes up the theme, and 
tells us of how they shall yet look upon him whom they 
have pierced, and how they shall mourn as these brethren 
mourned, and how then the Lord will pour upon them the 
spirit of prayer and supplication, and upon their manifestation 
of repentance his forgiveness, and how ultimately their 
sins and iniquities he will remember no more— that instead 
he will be very gracious to them and kiss them. 

We close this lesson with the Apostle Paul's exhortation 
of our Golden Text, "Be ye kind one to another, tender 
hearted, forgiving one another, even as God for Christ's 
sake hath forgiven you." The more we each realize our 
own indebtedness to the Lord for the forgiveness of our sins 
and for our adoption into his family and for the blessings 
that come to us as the sons of God, the more should we seek 
to copy after his glorious character and be copies of our 
dear Redeemer, the essence of whose character is nothing 
less than justice to every one— with as much additional of 
love and mercy as we can possibly attain to. The larger 



our attainments of this God-like quality the more pleasing 
we will be in the Father's sight and the better fitted for 
joint-heirship in the heavenly Kingdom, in the dispensing of 
the bread of life to all the world of mankind. 

He who sees not these things and follows not this 
course according to the Apostle's word is blind and cannot 
see afar off— cannot see and appreciate the blessings which 
the Lord has promised to those who faithfully copy him. 
Those who do see, find the eyes of their understanding opening 
more widely day by day to the lengths and breadths 
and heights and depths of the love of God which passeth 
understanding; and to make this progress in joyful appreciation 
of our benefactor, our Lord assures us means a corresponding 
growth in benevolence, kindness, gentleness and 
mercy to those with whom we have to do. While this rule 
must obtain, especially in the household of faith, it will 
also extend not only to our own immediate relationship in 
the flesh, but also to our neighbors and friends— yea to our 
enemies and to the brute creation. All of these will more 
and more realize the changing of our characters and dispositions, 
and it will be to their general blessing as well as to 
our joy. 



R3982 : page 126 

BEHIND A FROWNING PROVIDENCE 

-EXODUS L1-14.-MAY 19.- 

Golden Text:— "Then they cried unto the Lord in their trouble, 
and he saved them out of their distress."— Psa. 107:13. 

OUR present lesson treats of the virtual enslavement of 
the nation of Israel and their tribulations connected 
therewith. Our preceding lesson showed Joseph 
the governor of all Egypt, and the coming of his father Jacob 
and his entire household to live in the land of Goshen, 
a portion of Egypt well suited to herdsmen. This, we are 
informed, was with the full knowledge and consent of the 
reigning monarch. The entire family of Jacob, surnamed 
Israel, at this time consisted of seventy souls, persons, but 
since these are all said to have come out of the loins of 
Jacob, we are to understand that the actual number exceeded 
seventy perhaps considerably, the additional persons being 
probably wives and servants. 

The record (v. 6) that Joseph died, and all his brethren, 
and all that generation, seems to cover a lapse of considerable 
time, since Joseph himself lived seventy-three years 
after the coming of his father and brethren to dwell in 
Egypt, and apparently until his death Joseph was the governor 
—next to the king. Meantime the Israelites under 
special divine providence multiplied greatly. The number 
of adjectives used to express this increase intimates that the 
writer recognized the multiplication as abnormal, miraculous. 



He declares (1) they were "fruitful," that is prolific; 
(2) they "increased abundantly"; (3) they "multiplied"; 
(4) "waxed exceedingly mighty"; (5) "the land [Goshen] 
was filled with them." 

ANOTHER KING WHO KNEW NOT JOSEPH 

From the time Jacob entered Egypt until the exodus 
was two hundred and fifteen years, and the wonderful increase 
is shown by the statement of Numbers 1:45,46 that 
the Israelites, exclusive of the tribe of Levi, numbered 
603,550 of twenty years old and upward, capable of military 
duty. These figures imply a total number, including women 
and children, of some two or three million persons. This 
was at a time when there arose a new king which knew not 
Joseph. Excavations made in Egypt show that it was about 
this time that the government of Egypt was revolutionized. 
In Joseph's time, and for quite a while before, it had been 
governed by what were known as the Hyksos or shepherd 
kings— supposed to have been invaders and not of pure 
Egyptian stock. The revolution brought in a change of 
dynasty, supposed to have been commenced with Rameses I. 
It is quite generally claimed amongst scholars that Rameses 
II. was the Pharaoh who specially harried the Israelites in 
the endeavor to prevent their increase in numbers and influence, 
and his son Menephtah I. is supposed to have been 
the Pharaoh reigning at the time of the exodus of the 
Israelites. 

The change of dynasty brought the change of ambitions 
and methods, and Rameses II. is credited with having 
been the most wonderful builder of great edifices of his 
time. It is doubtless in connection with these expensive 
public improvements that the Israelites were so rigorously 
treated. The method employed was not that of chattel slavery, 
as was practised in the United States and elsewhere 
until recently, but a slavery of a different kind: Solomon 
similarly oppressed the Israelites, though not with the same 
degree of severity and rigor, in conjunction with the building 
of his palace, the public roads, Temple, etc. The 
method was to demand a certain percentage of the younger, 
stronger, vigorous males to serve without pay and on very 
scanty rations in the work on the public buildings, cities, 
etc. The same method is today employed in some parts of 
Africa, particularly by the Portuguese, who taking possession 
of certain portions of the dark continent, demand a 
certain amount of service from the natives, who are marched 
off in bands as slaves and hired out for a period of time to 
the gold and diamond industries without pay except the 
plainest food. The sum paid by the miners to the Portuguese 
government for the use of these poor creatures is 
credited up as taxes for defraying the expenses of their 
oppressors. 

ISRAEL PERSECUTED YET PROSPERED 

King Rameses II. was evidently a very ambitious man 



who feared and prepared for wars with his neighbors, to the 

north and east especially. Hence he built fortified cities, 

"store cities," where food and implements, chariots, etc., 

were held in readiness for use on emergency for repelling 

foes expected from that quarter. The land of Goshen, inhabited 

by the Israelites, was in the same general direction, 

and this presented a double cause for fear. The Israelites 

held aloof from the Egyptians, not intermarrying or otherwise 

amalgamating. They were animated by certain hopes of 

their own future greatness, of which, no doubt, they sometimes 

boasted. What should be done with this people? 

was the query of Rameses II. Although the Egyptians were 

more numerous, the king is represented as saying, "They be 

R3983 : page 126 

mightier than we." Dwelling largely with their flocks and 

herds in the open air they were probably a stronger, more 

rugged race than the Egyptians. Even to the present time 

the natural seed of Abraham seem to have the Lord's blessing 

upon them physically in good degree. The king did not 

meditate driving the Israelites out of Goshen— no! that 

might prove a troublesome and expensive operation. Besides, 

he was shrewd enough to realize that if he could use 

that people as his slaves they would do much for the enrichment 

of the Egyptians by furnishing labor at the mere nominal 

cost of the commonest sustenance. 

The first step was to take the most rugged from their 
homes and families for service in the Egyptian public 
works under taskmasters who were directed to work them 
so hard as to make their lives burdensome— to wear them 
out or drive them to suicide. In Central Africa quite a 
great many of the natives impressed into public service after 
this manner have been known to commit suicide rather than 
continue their toil unrewarded. But the increase of the 
Israelites continued more and more, and Rameses II., fearful 
of trouble with them, commanded the midwives to murder 
all the male children at birth. Not succeeding in this, 
he displayed far more cruelty than the notorious Herod, 
who slaughtered the babes of Bethlehem, for Rameses II. 
commanded every parent to slaughter his own male children, 
and held responsible all who failed so to do. It was 
under these trying conditions, we remember, that Moses was 
born, and it was this rigorous law that prevented his parents 
from rearing him at home, as their own lives would 

R3983 : page 127 

have paid the penalty of the preservation of his. Apparently, 
in spite of everything that the king did, the Israelites 
flourished, and this persecution, we remember, continued 
until Moses was eighty years of age, and as God's representative 
delivered the people. 

CORROBORATIONS OF THE BIBLE NARRATIVE 



In confirmation of the Bible record, in recent times the 
ruins of the city of Pithom has been discovered and it corresponds 
exactly to what should be expected. It evidently 
was a large warehouse, and apparently its only openings 
were at the top. Scholars describe the city thus:— 

"Pithom was discovered in 1883-4 by M. Naville, near 
the Suez canal, and about twelve miles west of Ismalia. The 
town is altogether square, enclosed by a great wall 22 
feet high and measuring 600 feet around each side. The 
area contained within the wall is estimated at about ten 
acres. Nearly the whole of its space is occupied by solidly 
built square chambers divided one from the other by brick 
walls from eight to ten feet thick unpierced by window or 
door or opening of any kind. The access to these chambers 
was from the top. Granite statues were found representing 
Rameses II. Amongst the inscriptions occurred the name of 
the city, Pi-Tum (Pithum) meaning 'the house of Turn,' the 
Egyptian god of the setting sun. An unfinished temple of 
Turn was also found. Specimens of the brick can be found 
in the British Museum and the Metropolitan Museum in New 
York. They are usually four to eight inches square and 
one and a half to two inches thick, unbaked, but very hard. 
An especial confirmation of the Bible story, and proof that 
this is one of the very cities that the Hebrews built, is the 
fact that the lower courses of these walls and for some distance 
up are of well-made brick with chopped straw in them; 
but higher up the courses of brick are not so good, the straw 
is long and scanty, and the last courses have no straw at 
all, but have sedges, rushes and water plants baked in the 
mud."— Exodus 5:6-18. 

THE VALUE OF THESE EXPERIENCES 

Whoever regards these experiences of Abraham's posterity 
as amongst the ordinary vicissitudes of life to which all 
mankind are subject, makes a mistake. To rightly understand 
the history of Israel we must remember that the divine 
purposes as represented in the Oath-Bound Covenant made 
with Abraham were behind and intermingled with all of 
Israel's experiences. And more than this, the natural seed 
of Abraham were to furnish a type, illustration, picture, of 
the experiences of Spiritual Israel on a higher plane. Looking 
first at the effect of the bondage and tribulation upon 
natural Israel we can readily surmise that they served to 
make that people of much stronger character than they otherwise 
would have been. To be a subject race would undoubtedly 
help to develop, in many at least, a humility of 
mind which was markedly illustrated in the person of Moses, 
who is declared to have been the meekest man in all the earth. 

Furthermore, their tribulations would tend to bind them 
in sympathy more closely together as one nation, one people. 
Additionally their rigorous treatment as slaves would 
impress upon them more than ever their Abrahamic heritage 
in the promise of the Lord that they should be a great 
people and ultimately be used of him in the blessing of all 
the nations of the earth. This properly enough led them, as 



we read, to cry unto the Lord in their sore distress. Who can 
estimate the value of these lessons given to this nation at the 
very beginning of its existence— a nation from which the 
Lord designed to develop some of his chosen servants, 
amongst whom would be the Messiah himself and his chosen 
apostles, the foundation of the new dispensation, Spiritual 
Israel. Well has the poet said that behind a frowning 
providence God hides a smiling face. The Israelites had an 
experience of this kind: for a time divine favor was hidden 
from them, but the Lord was merely waiting for the appropriate 
time to be gracious to them, in a time and in a manner 
that would be most favorable to them and most in accord 
with his own arrangements for the blessing of themselves 
and all mankind. 

The Psalmist in the Golden Text touched the vital 
point of Israel's experiences. Before being used of the Lord 
and prepared for further great things at his hand Israel 
needed to learn dependence upon him. And not only they 
but all of us have learned that trouble is a great teacher: 
that it appeals to the heart far more than does prosperity; 
that it points us to the Lord as the great care-taker. The 
Prophet has declared that before he was afflicted he went 
astray; and similarly Israel evidently would have been far 
more astray if deprived of the tribulations which led them 
to call on the Lord, and which brought to them his deliverance 
out of their distresses at the hands of Moses, the mediator 
of the Law Covenant. 

LESSONS FOR SPIRITUAL ISRAELITES 

Very similar are the lessons which the Spiritual Israelites 
are day by day receiving individually in the great school 
of experience. How often does the Lord allow Egypt, the 
world, to oppress those who are his. This oppression sometimes 
comes along financial lines and sometimes socially. 
It is sometimes severest in the home, at other times in the 
shop. The great oppressor typified by Pharaoh is Satan. 
He is the great taskmaster. To what an extent he has 
gained a power over the flesh of those who are trusting in 
the Lord along for deliverance! And who will doubt that 
the great Adversary's special attacks are not upon the world 
and the wicked, but upon those who are the Lord's peculiar 
people, upon those who are his jewels, who have made a 
covenant with him by sacrifice, and whose deliverance at 
the hands of the antitypical Moses, Christ, he has promised. 
Hearken to the Master's words, which assure us that in all 
of our tribulations we may reckon on his sympathy and loving 
interest and his power to make all things work together 
for our good. Let us give attention, too, to the prayer he 
taught us, "Abandon us not in temptation, but deliver us 
from the evil one." And again the Apostle's assurance that 
he will not suffer us to be tempted above that we are able, 
but with every temptation will provide a way of escape. 

As the effect of Israel's tribulation was to turn their 
hearts toward the Lord and to lead them to cry out for his 
promised assistance, so all of our trying experiences with 



the world, the flesh and the Adversary and the bondage of 
sin and death— all these appeal to the New Creatures in 
Christ who have the Father's promise. All this leads us 
more and more to look unto the Lord from whom cometh our 
help, and to wait for his Son from heaven, and to expect the 
deliverance of the groaning creation at his second advent. 
Is it not true, then, that present distresses and tribulations 
are all working out for us a far more exceeding and eternal 
weight of glory, if we are rightly exercised thereby? And 
if as true Israelites we have confidence in the Abrahamic 
promise, we have it, as the Apostle describes, as an anchor 
to our souls both sure and steadfast, entering into that which 
is beyond the veil, whither our forerunner is entered for us— 
and made atonement for us— and from whence he provides 
us the blessed deliverance which we hope soon to experience 
in the resurrection change, when in a moment, the twinkling 
of an eye, we shall be made like him, see him as he is and 
share his glory. 



page 129 



SEMI-MONTHLY 
VOL. XXVIII MAY 1 No. 9 
A.D. 1907--A.M. 6035 



CONTENTS 

Views from the Watch Tower 131 

State Churches in Disruption 131 

The Situation in France 132 

Berean Studies on the Tabernacle 133 

Yearly Requests for Pilgrims 134 

Filthiness of the Flesh and Spirit 134 

Fighting the Good Fight 135 

The Cleansing Power 136 

Perfecting Our Holiness 137 

A Lesson on Divine Providence 137 

Foreordained of God a Leader 138 

Assuredly God was with Him 140 

"Thou Mayest Bring forth My People" 142 

Some Interesting Letters 143 

page 130 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-24 EVERSHOLT ST., LONDON, N.W. 
GERMAN BRANCH-MIRKER STR., 45, ELBERFELD. 
AUSTRALASIAN BRANCH-EQUITABLE BLDG., COLLINS ST., MELBOURNE 

PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 

TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR AS FOLLOWS:- 

All Bible Students who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity or 
adversity, are unable to pay for this Journal, will be supplied FREE if 
they send a Postal Card each June stating their case and requesting its 
continuance. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on 
our list continually and in touch with the Studies, etc. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



THIS JOURNAL IS PUBLISHED IN THE 

FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, DANISH AND ITALIAN LANGUAGES. 

SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



INDIA PAPER STUDIES 



Our printers, after waiting for months for the India paper 
on which to print for us an edition of STUDIES in six volumes, 
found after printing some of the first volume that the paper is 
not up to the standard guaranteed to us. They have placed 
another order for the best India paper, but it may be six 
months before they receive it; and we need not expect the 
books before November. 

KARATOL-INDIA EDITION VOL. I 

Two thousand copies of STUDIES I. had been printed before 
the defect in the paper was discovered. These we have procured, 
bound limp in imitation leather, called karatol, so that 
we can supply them at 25c each— any quantity— charges prepaid. 
There will be no more after this lot. Describe them in 
ordering as "Karatol— India Studies." 

MUSIC PRACTICE FOR CONVENTIONS 



As the friends become acquainted with the music in our 
new Hymns of Dawn (cloth, 35c, postpaid; 25c by express, 
collect— 333 of the choicest hymns of all ages) they find the 
melodies grand indeed. They are of the sort that never wear 
out. And many of them are grandly solemn and helpful to a 
spirit of reverence and worship. 

It is proposed to use these Hymnals at the General Conventions 
this year, and we urge the dear friends everywhere to 
practice these tunes that our Convention singing may be a specially 
inspiring feature. At the upper right corner of many of 
the pieces will be found a reference to another tune considered 
appropriate, indicated thus: "Alt(ernative) 129," or other hymn 
number. Where a tune given is unfamiliar try the alternate, 
until you have time for practicing the former. 

COLPORTEURS AND SHARP SHOOTERS 



All are sharpshooters who do what they can to sell DAWNS 
or STUDIES amongst friends and neighbors. Colporteurs take 
and work territory systematically, giving a part or all of their 
time. Sharpshooters who order 25 volumes at a time by express 
or 30 copies by freight, charges collect, are granted colporteur 
rates, viz., 16c each for Vols. I., II., III., and 20c each for Vols. 
IV., V., VI. 

Colporteurs desiring partners in the work should send 
postal card request for an aide. They will find the General 



Conventions very favorable opportunities for such alliances. Appliances 
for use on bicycles for delivering will be exhibited. 

DAILY HEAVENLY MANNA--READY IN MAY 



Our new edition of the "Manna" will contain the same 
texts and comments as the former one; but it will have twice 
as many pages. Every alternate leaf will be blank ruled, for 
use as an Autograph and Birthday Record. It will be printed 
on fine bond paper and bound in handsome dark blue cloth. 
It would be well worth $1 or more in any bookstore. 

NEW PRICES, WHOLESALE AND RETAIL 

The new "Manna" will be sold by Manna Colporteurs and 
others at 50 cents each (60c when gotten by mail or prepaid 
express). The wholesale rates, open to any TOWER reader, 
are as follows— cash with order: 

1 copy, postpaid, each 35 cents 

10 copies or more, by express, prepaid 30 " 

10 " " " at your charges. 20 " 
30 " " by freight 20 " 

We of course prefer the DAWNS or STUDIES to be colporteured; 
but a good follow-up work can be done with "Manna" 
by those who cannot do the regular work with DAWN-STUDIES. 



R3984:page 131 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER 
STATE CHURCHES IN DISRUPTION 



THE State Churches— religious institutions supported 

by the general government— owed 

their beginning to the theories of Antichrist, 

when Satan, the great deceiver who beguiled mother 

Eve, in the third century beguiled the majority of those 

who believed in Christ. The deceptive theory by which 

he accomplished this was that the Church had misunderstood 

the teachings of the Lord and of the apostles 

respecting the second coming of Christ and the establishment 

of the Kingdom of God at that time. Satan's 

new theory was that God had laid this responsible 

work upon the shoulders of the Church now— not waiting 

for the second coming of Jesus; that it was the 

duty of the Church to convert the world, and that then 

Christ would come and approve the work. The theory 

further was that this conversion of the world at the 



hands of the Church was to be accomplished by a vicegerent 

of Christ— that is to say, that the Lord would 

select from amongst the clergy one who would represent 

Jesus and reign in his stead; and others (cardinals, 

bishops, etc.) would represent the apostles and 

faithful of the "little flock," who were promised a 

share in the Kingdom. The theory gradually developed, 

and in the fourth century the Bishop of Rome 

was recognized as the head of the Church and Christ's 

vicegerent or reigning representative in the world, and 

to himself about that time he gathered the "Sacred 

College," or "little flock," composed of cardinals. 

From that time on, quietly, the people were instructed 
to regard the Pope as the king of the world, 
God's representative, Christ's vicegerent, and the 
head over all kings and princes. As this idea prevailed 
amongst the people they were taught to look to the 
popes for their approval of kings and princes and laws, 
until finally a wonderful power was built up, and any 
king or prince out of accord with the Papacy could 
very easily be dispossessed of all authority. Another, 
having the papal sanction, would make war upon him; 
and the people, believing that the papal sanction 
meant the divine sanction, would support the papal 
decree. It was under these conditions that the public 
government was required to set aside from the public 
revenues money for the support of Roman Catholic 
churches and ministers throughout their domains. 

This custom, once universal throughout Europe, 
received a severe shock, a set-back, in Reformation 
times. But the kings and princes supporting the Reformation 
movement, wishing to have some religious or 
spiritual approval to sanction their authority in the 
minds of the people, voluntarily accepted the Reformers 
and their approval as instead of the papal sanction. 
Thus it was that Reformed churches in Great Britain, 
Sweden, Norway, Denmark, Germany and Switzerland 
were organized and became Protestant State churches 
as thoroughly as they had previously been Roman 
Catholic State churches. The principle was the same 
—it was merely a different Church which was now supported. 
Roman Catholic dominion still prevails in 
Italy, Hungary, Spain, Portugal and, until very recently, 
in France. These governments, authorized by the 
Papacy, supporting the Papacy financially, have been 
known as Christian governments, and they in turn 
have inscribed upon their coins and in their official 
documents that they reign over the people by the grace 
of God (indicated to them through the Papacy). Similarly 
the Protestant countries above named, carrying 
the State Church idea with them, are known as kingdoms 
of God, and they also on their coins and in their 
official documents declare that their kings and princes 
reign by the grace of God, as indicated through their 
recognition by the Reformers and by their support of 
the Church. 



In some countries, particularly in Germany, all 
religions are recognized by the State, and a provision 
made for salaries to pastors and teachers, whether Lutheran, 
Roman Catholic, Presbyterian, Methodist, 
Jews, or what not— so long as a congregation of German 
people, recognized by the government as a denomination, 
desire such ministers. 

Now, however, we are coming to a time of general 
disruption along these lines. The people are getting 
awake to the fact that the kings and princes are reigning 
under a law of selfishness instead of under a divine 

R3984 : page 132 

code and authorization. They are learning, too, gradually, 
that a majority of ministers are preaching and 
teaching as a matter of business, and with a view to 
getting as much as possible of the butter of honor of 
men and salary along with their daily bread. Popular 
government is consequently tending more to the thought 
that those who believe certain doctrines should pay for 
them, and that the public should not be taxed for its 
religion, which should be free and should be provided 
by those in accord with the promulgated tenets. This 
is the program followed in the United States, and 
the progress of this country in every way has been 
a wonderful lesson to the people of other countries, 
who in various ways are seeking to copy our methods, 
thus corroborating the thought set forth by Bartholdi's 
Statue of Liberty, that personified in this nation Liberty 
is enlightening the world. 

Word comes from various quarters of Europe to 
the effect that Church and State union is threatened 
with dissolution. In Great Britain, in Sweden, in 
Switzerland, in Spain, the matter is being actively discussed, 
and the indication is that the accomplishment 
will not be far off, while in France there is a great turmoil 
through the dissolution of the Roman Catholic 
Concordat or agreement with the French government 
by which now the French are free from all State support 
so far as Roman Catholic and all other religious 
systems are concerned. 

THE SITUATION IN FRANCE 

At the time of the French Revolution all the Church 
property of France was confiscated, but in 1801 Napoleon 
Bonaparte entered into an agreement with Pope 
Pius VII., long known as the Concordat. It is this 
Concordat or agreement that has just been dissolved 
in France, and which returns to the care of the people 
all of the Church property, which is presumed to be 
theirs because it was built at their expense. 

Under the terms of the Concordat the French government 
became responsible for the maintenance of the 
clergy and the churches, and the clergy were recognized 



as civil servants of the French nation. French 
bishops and others of the Roman Catholic clergy could 
be appointed only by the approval of the government. 
Thus the Catholic Church was completely under State 
control. The Papacy, naturally enough, did not very 
highly appreciate this arrangement, which placed her 
interests so much in the hands of the French government, 
and consequently there was continual friction, 
the clergy striving in various ways to ignore their responsibility 
to the government, and the Papacy seeking 
more and more to maintain the control of the 
clergy and to oppose any and every interest and matter 
in the French government that seemed to be inimical 
to Roman Catholic interests. The light of our day 
upon every subject strained this relationship more and 
more, and the intriguing on the part of the Jesuits 
against the Republic and in favor of a monarchy- 
esteemed to be more desirable for the Papacy's interests 
—had the effect of leading the government in 1881 
to endeavor to expel the Jesuits and to control other 
Roman Catholic orders, with a view to the protection 
of the interests of the Republic, the foes of which 
they were realized to be. The movement was only 
partly successful because of the blindness of the people 
to the real situation. Not until the beginning of 
the present century did the government have a sufficient 
support from the people to take its stand— to 
resent papal influence in its affairs. 

On December 11, 1905, the French Congress passed 
a bill which provided for the separation of Church and 
State, but giving one year during which the churches 
could make their arrangements for conforming to the 
law. Meantime inventories of all the Church paraphernalia 
were made, and everything was prepared for the 
proper taking over of the property for the State on 
December 1 1, 1906. The essence of this law set forth 
that the State should no longer provide for the salaries 
of the clergy nor for the expenses of religious services, 
and that thenceforth the use of the Church edifices and 
equipments would be for the people— that no foreign 
religious power such as the Papacy would be recognized. 
On these terms all who desired to use the 
Church buildings were invited to organize congregations, 
whose representatives or trustees would be dealt 
with by the government, and receive the right or permission 
to use the buildings for religious purposes. 
These trustees would be answerable to the government 
for the proper use of the buildings. Thus the churches 
of France would have been put practically on the same 
basis or footing as the churches in the United States, 
except that here the title-deeds may be in the name of 
the Pope, while a congregation not in harmony with 
the Pope or head or the holder of the title could be 
legally expelled; whereas under the new laws of France 
each congregation is independent and cannot be expelled 
from the Church edifice or by order of presbyteries 



or synods or bishops or the Pope, since the 

title-deed is in the government, by which the possession 

is guaranteed to the congregation. This 

feature of the law really places religion in France 

upon the most independent plane imaginable, permitting 

the congregation to formulate its own creed, and 

R3985 : page 132 

if desirable to change the same from time to time. 

The law provided that if its terms were not met by 
December 1 1, 1906, the churches should be closed and 
the property confiscated to the State. After this law 
was framed, about a year ago, the Pope condemned it, 
but gave no positive instructions as to procedure; and 
matters standing thus, the French government, just 
before the law went into effect, to avoid a conflict with 
the Papacy, announced that regular services might be 
continued another year if the congregations would comply 
with the law of 1881, which required application to 
the police department for the privilege of holding services, 
and a declaration of loyalty to the government. 
But just before the law was to go into effect the Pope 
precipitated matters by issuing an encyclical instructing 
all the priests and church-wardens to abstain from 
any declaration or application to the authorities. 

This was esteemed by the French government an 

R3985 : page 133 

attempt on the Pope's part to intermeddle with its 
affairs and an endeavor to block the laws of France— 
an incitement of the French people to rebellion against 
the laws of their country. Consequently the government 
took prompt steps, and in resentment of the interference 
deported the papal representative at Paris, 
and gave orders that bishops or priests or others who 
attempted either by word or act to interfere with the 
execution of the law should be placed under arrest. 
Thus the dissolution of Church and State arrangements 
in France was effected without special disorder, though 
the Pope and his representatives in a quiet way, so as 
not to become amenable to the law, are seeking still to 
arouse the people to resentment against the government 
by refusing to perform various acts and functions 
which Catholics are led to believe are all important 
and to be performed only by the clergy, viz., baptism, 
rites for the dead, etc., etc. Evidently the time when 
the Pope could overthrow governments by giving a 
hint to the people through the clergy is about past. 

It is high time that these unscriptural unions of 
Church and State come to an end. They were built 
upon fraud to begin with, and have prospered through 
frauds continually. As God never authorized the Pope 
to be the vicegerent of Jesus, never authorized his 
reign upon earth over kingdoms and peoples, never 



authorized him to set prince against prince and to 

cause awful bloodshed for the maintenance of papal 

influence, and never authorized the governments recognized 

by Papacy to call themselves Christendom 

(Christ's kingdom), and as the Protestant unions of 

Church and State had no more authority than the 

papal, it is well that all of these human institutions 

go down, that the shackles of superstition should be 

broken, and the people should be the better prepared 

to learn that all the kingdoms of this world are man-made 

and selfish in origin and practice, and that the 

Kingdom of God's dear Son, the Millennial Kingdom, 

which will shortly be inaugurated, will be the only 

rightful spiritual empire to have control of all the 

affairs of the world of mankind. Its control of human 

destinies will be to the advantage of every creature— 

to lift them up, to set them free from superstition and 

by restitution processes to bring back into harmony 

with God and into the divine likeness all who will obey 

the great King of that day. O Lord, thy Kingdom 

come; thy will be done on earth as it is in heaven. 

OPPORTUNITIES FOR THE TRUTH IN FRANCE 

At this distance it would appear that the present 
crisis in religious affairs in France would be a most 
favorable opportunity for the presentation of the Truth 
amongst the people of that land. While Protestants 
there are very few, undoubtedly there are many Catholics 
who are generally enlightened and now being set 
free from their superstitious reverence for Romanism. 
These as well as the Protestants should be ready for 
the glorious message of the Millennial Kingdom and 
the better government, spiritual and temporal, which 
the Lord is providing and which shortly will be established. 
We would like to encourage the dear friends 
of the Truth under such conditions to be vigilant for 
the use of every opportunity— to go forward in the 
name and strength of the Lord with holy courage, to 
lift high the light and the royal banner. Similarly 
conditions are growing more favorable in Italy and 
Austria and Hungary. He that reapeth receiveth 
wages, and each one desiring to reap should first see 
what lies nearest to his hand and in which department 
of the service he could most effectively and most economically 
enlist his talents. "He that reapeth receiveth 
wages and gathereth fruit unto life eternal."— 
John 4:36. 



page 133 

BEREAN BIBLE STUDIES ON THE TABERNACLE 
THE ATONEMENT-DAY BURNT OFFERINGS 



MAY 19 

89. Why was Aaron instructed to bring two rams for 
burnt offerings? Lev. 16:3,5; T.73, par. 1. 

90. Why did he remove his linen garments and put on 
"the garments of glory and beauty" before he 
offered the "burnt offerings"? T.72, par. 4; 73, par. 3. 

9 1 . Were both rams then treated in the same manner? 
Lev. 9:12-16; T.73, par. 2. 

92. What was thus typified? T.73, par. 2. 

93. What was the difference between the "burnt offering" 
and the "sin offering"? T.73, par. 3. 

MAY 26 

94. When will God manifest his acceptance of the complete 
sacrifice for the sins of the world? Lev. 9:22-24; 

Rev. 14:1-7. 

95. Why are the sacrifices of Christ and the members 
of his body called the "better sacrifices"? Heb. 7:19; 
9:23. 

96. Must we expect God to bestow upon us, as his chosen 
Priesthood, honor and dignity before men, 

while we still "tabernacle" in the flesh? Phil. 2:5-10; 
I Cor. 4:8-14; T.73, par. 3. 

97. Where did the High Priest offer the sacrifice of 
burnt offering? Lev. 16:24; T.74, par. 1. 

98. Explain the difference in the significance of the 
garments worn by the priests during the "Day of 
Atonement" and those assumed by the High 

Priest at its close? T.74, par. 2. 

JUNE 2 

99. What did the washing of his person in water by the 
High Priest, after finishing the sin offering and 

before sacrificing the burnt offering, signify? 
Lev. 16:24; T.74, par. 2. 

100. Why was there "no man in the tabernacle of the 
congregation," the "Holy," when Aaron went 

into the "Most Holy" with the blood, both of the 
bullock and the Lord's goat? Lev. 16:17; T.74, 
par. 4; 75, par. 1,2. 

101. Will any special punishment be visited by the 
Lord upon those who, by reproaches, persecutions, 
etc., aided in destroying the humanity of 

page 134 

Christ (the bullock) and the little flock (the 
goat)? Lev. 16:28; T.75, par. 4. 

102. Will those who succeed in destroying the humanity, 
the flesh, of the great company (the scapegoat) 



receive any special retribution? Lev. 16:26; 
T.75, par. 6; 76, top of page. 



THE BLESSINGS FOLLOWING THE ATONEMENT-DAY 
SACRIFICES 

JUNE 9 

103. What was the standing of the children of Israel 
before God, after the Atonement-Day sacrifices 
were ended? Lev. 16:33,34; T.76, par. 1. 

104. To whom or to what are the sacrifices of Jesus 
and his Church offered? Lev. 16:14,15; T.76, 

par. 2. 

105. For what sins did they atone? Rom. 5:17-19; T.76, 
par. 2. 

106. When will God for the first time recognize the 
race of mankind? Lev. 9:8-23; Rom. 8:19-21, 
Diaglott; T.76, par. 2. 

JUNE 16 

107. What will be the glorious results of that recognition? 
Rev. 22:1-3; Isa. 11:6-9; 25:6-9; 35:1-10; 

29:18-20; T.76, par. 2. 

108. Will the blessings resulting from the reign of 
righteousness established after the close of the 
antitypical Day of Atonement come instantaneously 
or gradually? Isa. 62:10-12; John 5:28,29, 
Diaglott; I Cor. 15:23-25, Diaglott; Isa. 65:20, 
etc.; T.77, par. 1. 

109. Was this gradual work shown in the typical sacrifices 
of the children of Israel? and how? T.77, 

par. 2. 

110. How can we "rightly divide" and understand these 
different typical sacrifices of the Jewish age? 

T.77, par. 3. 

111. What are the two features or parts of At-one-ment? 
T.77, par. 4. 

112. How and when is the first part of this At-one-ment 
to be effected? T.77, par. 4. 

JUNE 23 

1 13. How and when is the second part effected? T.77, 
par. 4. 

114. Does the selection of the Bride of Christ, during 
this age, to be associated with him in the future 
uplifting and regenerating of the world, indicate 

that, naturally, they are any better or purer than 

the remainder of mankind? I Cor. 1:26-29; Rom. 3:10; 

Psa. 49:7; T.78, par. 1,2. 

115. In whom then does all the virtue of the great 
Atonement sacrifice lie? T.78, par. 2. 



page 134 

YEARLY REQUESTS FOR PILGRIM VISITS 

OUR "Pilgrim" service is becoming a very important 

factor in the "Harvest" work. While the 

brethren chosen for this service are not sent 

forth as perfect, the Society considers them worthy 

brethren everyway— ensamples to the flock in doctrine 

and practice. They travel continuously, as per announcements 

on the last page of the TOWER. All of 

their expenses, of every kind, are met by the Society: 

they do not solicit money or anything else, either for 

themselves or the Society. The service is free— the expenses 

being borne by the contributors to the Tract 

Fund. We seek divine guidance as to who shall be 

engaged in this service and where it shall be rendered. 

With the means put at our disposal we seek to do our 

best for the general welfare of the Lord's cause. 

The routine of the Pilgrims is in circuits arranged 
in harmony with the interest shown and requests received; 
and since many changes occur during a year 
we desire that REQUESTS FOR PILGRIM VISITS be made 
yearly, in May. Please answer the following questions, 
or as many of them as apply in your case. These responses 
are filed for our information for twelve months. 
You need not repeat the questions, but merely indicate 
them thus: (a), (b), etc. A postal card will serve our 
every purpose and be easy to file away. All interested 
classes please attend to this matter at once. 

(a) How many "Bible Students" reside in your vicinity? 

(b) Are weekly meetings held by you? 

(c) How many are usually in attendance? 

(d) Where do you now meet? (Full street address.) 

(e) At what hours are the Sunday studies held? 

(f) Was a vote taken on the "Pilgrim" invitation? 

(g) How many voted for the invitation to be sent? 
(h) How many, if any, voted against the invitation? 
(i) Would a suitable place be found for a public 
meeting? 

(j) What attendance do you think could be secured for 

the public session by such notification and advertising 

as your class would give? 

(k) Would a suitable place be found for semi-private 

meetings for the interested? 

(1) Have the members of your class chosen leaders in 

accord with DAWN VOL. VI., chapters 5 and 6? If 

so, give names and full addresses. 

(m) Give full names and full addresses of the two to 

whom notification of a coming Pilgrim should be 

sent, and please notify us of any change. 

(n) If your town is not on a railroad give name of proper 



railroad station to stop at, and tell how Pilgrim 
could get from station. Would he be met? 
(o) Give writer's name and address in full. 



R3985 : page 134 

FILTHINESS OF FLESH AND SPIRIT 

"Having therefore this promise, dearly beloved, let us cleanse 
ourselves from all filthiness of the flesh and spirit, perfecting 
holiness in the fear of the Lord."— 2 Cor. 7:1. 

WE ARE not to understand the Apostle here to 
mean that we are to cleanse ourselves from 
the condemnation of original sin. Time and 
again the Apostle Paul and all the writers of the New 
Testament reiterate in various forms the declaration 
that by the deeds of the law no flesh can be justified in 
God's sight. This signifies that nothing that we can 
do can enable us to live perfectly, even if original sin 

R3985 : page 135 

were cancelled for us; hence it would be a still greater 
impossibility for us not only to live perfectly now but 
to accumulate a merit which would cancel for us our 
share in the original transgression. On the contrary, 
the Scriptures with united voice declare that only by 
the shedding of blood could there come a remission of 
original sin— that only "by his stripes are we healed:" 
that the "Lord laid on him [Jesus] the iniquity of us 
all," "He died the just for the unjust that he might 
bring us to God," and that by virtue of his sacrifice for 
our sins we are made acceptable with God, and the 
condemnation against us as members of Adam's race 
is set aside that we may have a new start. (Heb. 9:22; 
Isa. 53:5,6; I Pet. 3:18.) Not only so, but knowing that 
in our fallen flesh dwelleth no perfection, the Lord has 
graciously arranged to cover all our blemishes that are 
of heredity and not of intention, not of our willing. 
Thus we have what is Scripturally known as justification 
by or through faith in the great atonement which 
God has effected through the death of his Son. 

It is this class, already justified "through faith in 
his blood" (Rom. 3:25), that the Apostle addresses in 
the words of our text— urging them to cleanse themselves 
from all filthiness of the flesh and the spirit. 
What does he mean? If we were cleansed by faith in 
Christ why address us thus along the line of works of 
our own for our own cleansing? We reply that our justification 
by faith was granted to us as the basis for 
our consecration to God as disciples of Jesus, as "followers 
of the Lamb." None were thus accepted unless 
in their hearts they turned from sin, desiring to be in 



harmony with God and his righteousness. Their consecration 

to God on the basis of their justification signified 

that they had not only turned from sin but that 

they had united their hearts and lives with Jesus— that 

they had enlisted under him as the Captain of their 

Salvation, to fight the good fight against sin in its 

every form, within and without, under his guidance 

and direction. Should these now after enlisting rest 

content and do no fighting against sin, either in their 

own mortal bodies or in their surroundings, it would be 

an indication that they had not the Spirit of Christ, 

which calls to mind the declaration of the Apostle, "If 

any man have not the Spirit of Christ he is none of 

his. "-Rom. 8:9. 

"FIGHTING THE GOOD FIGHT" 

We see then that it is God's will concerning us that 
we should do more than renounce sin in our minds— 
we are to give our hearts to the Lord, desiring fellowship 
with him: we are to be imbued with his spirit of 
opposition to sin, so that as New Creatures we will 
fight the good fight of faith against the Adversary and 
the world's spirit of selfishness, and against the weaknesses 
and blemishes and sinwardness of our own 
mortal bodies. These were the conditions of our enlistment, 
the conditions under which we were accepted 
of the Lord, and we must fight this fight of faith, as 
the Apostle says, if we would lay hold upon eternal 
life— if we would ever get the great reward of glory, 
honor and immortality with our Captain. Our text does 
not relate to our resistance of the Adversary and the 
world, but confines itself to our dealings with ourselves, 
which certainly is our chief concern, our chief 
battle— he who rules his own spirit, his own mind, is a 
greater soldier, a greater hero, than he that captures 
a city in literal warfare. This is the Lord's estimation 
of the matter, and hence should be ours.— Prov. 16:32. 

The Lord requires such a demonstration on our 
part— of activity against the motions of sin in our flesh, 
in our minds, as a demonstration that the New Creature 
is alive to the responsibilities of its conduct as a 
soldier of the cross, and additionally because he has 
decreed that none shall be of the little flock of joint-heirs 
with his Son who do not in these respects of loyalty 
to the Father and to righteousness and opposition 
to sin demonstrate their heart-likeness to Jesus. The 
Apostle affirms this, saying that we are "predestinated 
to be conformed to the image of his Son." (Rom. 8:29.) 
Whoever refuses or neglects the development of such a 
character-likeness or copy of Christ's mind, disposition, 

R3986 : page 135 

is refusing or neglecting the only terms and conditions 
on which he may hope to make his calling and 



election sure to a place in the Kingdom class. In view 
of this how zealously we should strive to fulfil the 
urgent admonition of the Apostle— to demonstrate and 
to increase to fervency our love for righteousness, for 
truth, for all the ways of the Lord, by opposition to 
sin, especially in our own bodies, cleansing ourselves 
of all filthiness of the flesh and of the spirit (mind). 

FILTHINESS OF THE MIND 

The cleansing of our minds is far more important 
than the cleansing of our flesh, because we might succeed 
measurably in cleansing the flesh while the mind 
might still be impure. In such a case we would remember 
the Pharisees whom the Lord rebuked, saying, 
Ye make clean the outside of the cup or platter, but 
within are full of all manner of uncleanness, impurity. 
(Matt. 23:25.) Out of the mind proceedeth evil 
thoughts, as the Apostle declares, and these evil 
thoughts, these wrong conceptions, have to do with all 
the filthiness of the flesh. It is mainly, therefore, to the 
mind that the Lord appeals throughout his Word during 
this Gospel age. He invites us first of all to set 
our hearts right, our wills, and then having done this 
to allow the new will to rule our minds, and thus the 
new will through the cleansed mind institutes a rule 
and order and purification of the flesh. 

Were we perfect there would be little difficulty in 
ruling our minds and our bodies as soon as the will 
had been fixed for righteousness; but six thousand 
years of falling from the image and likeness of God 
have wrought great havoc in us all. Hence, as the 
Apostle declares, "In my flesh dwelleth no perfection"; 
and again, "We cannot do the things that we would"; 
and again, "The spirit [here the New Creature, the 
will] indeed is willing, but the flesh [the old nature, 
mental and physical] is weak." (Rom. 7:18; Gal. 5:17; 
Matt. 26:41.) This discrepancy between the new will, 
the new mind, and the mind of the flesh and the flesh 
itself, both reckoned as dead but really quite alive, 

R3986 : page 136 

requiring continual vigilance to restrain them and keep 
them in line with the New Creature's intentions, means 
quite a fight, and success in this fight means a victory, 
and victory in this fight is what the Lord proposes to 
reward with the special honors and blessings proffered 
during this Gospel age. It is quite unnecessary here 
to detail the various forms which this filthiness of the 
mind may assume— all of them selfish, all of them more 
or less degraded, all of them tending downward, and 
hence in opposition to the resolutions and covenants 
of the New Mind, the New Creature. A part of this 
filthiness of the mind is selfishness, which frequently 
is so mean as to be ashamed of itself, to seek to hide 



itself under various pretexts of generosity, etc., and 
by outward ostentation, gifts, etc. Other features of 
the filthiness of the mind are jealousy, covetousness, 
ambition. These various forms of selfishness are all 
to be recognized, as the Apostle declares, as of evil 
origin, works of the flesh and of the Devil. Lasciviousness 
or sensuality is a further part of this filthiness— 
another form of selfishness or love of self-indulgence. 
With all of these conditions of the mind, the New Creature 
should be in opposition to the extent of despising 
them, fighting against them, destroying them. 

"FILTHINESS OF THE FLESH" 

Although, as our Lord's words intimate, an outward 
cleansing of the flesh and making clean of the 
outside of the cup would not prove a purity within of 
the mind, of the heart, the proposition is reversely true 
that outward filthiness does indicate a filthiness of the 
mind, because the mind controls, and if it were purified 
the result would be a cleaning up of the outside. 
Indeed we may be pretty sure that the love for the approval 
of others would lead almost everyone to keep his 
externals, seen by men, fully up to the standard of his 
mind if not above it. It is easier to cleanse the flesh 
than to cleanse the spirit, the mind. The Apostle's 
urgent exhortation is that all who are the Lord's people 
should cleanse themselves of all filthiness of the flesh 
and of the spirit. 

A brother once said to us, "How does it come that 
the reading of MILLENNIAL DAWN affected my outward 
life as nothing else ever did? I used to drink in moderation, 
I used to smoke immoderately, occasionally I 
played a game of cards with the rector of the Episcopal 
Church to which I was attached, I chewed tobacco, 
and occasionally used strong language, of which I am 
now ashamed. My friends gave me tracts and booklets 
on smoking and on the use of intoxicating liquors, 
but they had no weight with me. I replied, in substance, 
'Mind your own business, I am able to take 
care of myself.' But after reading MILLENNIAL DAWN 
a change took place. I gave up all those things of 
which before I had not been ashamed. They all appeared 
in a new light— as unworthy of me as a son of 
God and follower of the Lamb. Now the strange thing 
to me is this: I looked all through the DAWNS to see 
what I had read there that had influenced me thus, and 
to my surprise I could find no condemnation of the 
things I had renounced. Now my question is, How 
does it come that the book which says nothing on this 
subject has had such a powerful influence over me, 
while the other books which said much on the subject 
had no influence?" 

We replied, "Brother, the DAWN is merely a restatement 
of the Bible itself and puts matters in the 
Bible way. Hence it did not ask you as a New Creature 



to lop off some of the unsightly branches of your fallen 
disposition, but it did hand you the axe of Truth and 
suggest to you that you cut down the whole tree, 
branches and all, pointing out to you that the New 
Creature would live and flourish and finally be perfected 
only as it would master the old nature and thus become 
"more than conqueror," and be counted worthy of 
a share in the Kingdom, because of its character-likeness 
to our Lord.— Luke 3:9. 

THE CLEANSING POWER 

Does some one say that it requires great strength 
of character, great power of the will, to cleanse our 
minds and our flesh? We answer, Yes, and that is exactly 
what the Lord seeks to develop in us. All of his 
joint-heirs in the Kingdom will be found to be strong 
characters, and that because of the development of 
character in the present time in the conflicts with the 
flesh. Does some one else suggest that with the cravings 
of the flesh such a victory is impossible? We reply 
that the Apostle's words do not indicate that the flesh 
will be made absolutely pure and perfect. His suggestion 
is that it may be cleansed of its filthiness— 
so that everything coarse, rude, slovenly, dirty, 
filthy in thought or in deed, in mind or in person, would 
be reprehensible to us, offensive. Moreover, we gain 
this desirable and glorious condition not suddenly but 
gradually. The cleansing process must begin at once, 
but it will continue until our latest breath, for although 
we can and do quickly become pure in heart, pure in 
intention, pure in our wills, it certainly does require 
time to accomplish the purification of the mind and the 
flesh. The power which begins this cleansing, which 
continues it acceptably in the Lord's sight, is the new 
will; and this very fight against sin and uncleanness 
strengthens the will so that each victory makes it more 
ready and more capable for the next conflict. By use 
our wills grow stronger. Hence the necessity not only 
of a thorough consecration at the beginning, but the 
necessity also for keeping this in memory, that the will 
may always be firm, prompt, unflinching as respects 
loyalty to God, righteousness, truth, holiness, love. 

"GOD WORKETH IN YOU" 

The Apostle elsewhere declares along this line, 
"Work out your own salvation with fear and trembling, 
for it is God that worketh in you to will and to do of 
his good pleasure." (Phil. 2:12,13.) We have just been 
considering how we should work out our salvation, 
that the new will must hold its dominating influence 
over the fleshly mind and body (reckoned dead) in 
order to gain our ultimate victory. But now we inquire, 
How does God work in us to will and do his good 
pleasure? We answer that he strengthens our new 



minds, our consecrated wills, by revealing to us more 

R3986 : page 137 

and more clearly the significance of the exceeding 
great and precious promises of his Word. Thus is the 
power of God exercised toward all those who are his 
through his Word, through his providences, through 
the brethren in whom he has already worked, and a 
part of whose business it is as his representatives to 
build one another up in the most holy faith, and to assist 
one another in the cleansing of the flesh and the 
spirit. 

This thought is brought out in the context. We 
quote, "What part hath a believer with an unbeliever, 
and what agreement hath a Temple of God with idols? 
For we are the Temple of the living God, even as God 
said, 'I will dwell in them and work in them: and I 
will be their God and they shall be my people.' Wherefore 
come ye out from among them [the untrue, the unbelieving, 
the unclean] and be ye separate, saith the 
Lord, and touch not the unclean thing, and I will receive 
you and will be to you a Father. And ye shall be 
to me sons and daughters, saith the Lord Almighty. "~ 
2 Cor. 6:15-18. 

Now notice the Apostle's argument— "Having, 
therefore, this hope, dearly beloved, let us cleanse 
ourselves." Ah, yes! there is a promise in these 
words, "the power of God unto salvation to everyone 
that belie veth"— the power of God that, in proportion 
as it is received into good and honest hearts, will work 
in them not only to will aright but also to do aright, 
thus leading to the cleansing both of the mind and of 
the flesh. Whoever can comprehend what it is to be a 
member of God's holy Temple class, must realize the 

R3987 : page 137 

holiness, sacredness, purity that would properly attach 
to any and everything connected with it. As the Apostle 
again says, referring to these gracious hopes and 
promises, whoever has such a hope in him will purify 
himself even as he is pure. (I John 3:3.) The thought 
of being accepted as the sons and daughters of the 
Lord Almighty must be impressive to every heart in 
proportion as it is appreciated. Few are so gross as 
to suppose that God would have any fellowship with 
that which is unclean and impure. And when we see 
that the divine arrangement through Jesus' sacrifice 
covers all of our unintentional blemishes and weaknesses, 
surely we cannot ask for more— that it should 
cover from the divine sight intentional weaknesses, 
intentional blemishes or even slackness on our part in 
putting away all filthiness of the flesh and of the spirit. 

PERFECTING OUR HOLINESS 



While we are reckoned of the Lord as perfect, as 
holy from the moment we are accepted as members of 
his family, covered by the precious robe of Christ's 
righteousness, he expects of us, as we have seen before, 
a manifestation of energy in the vanquishing of 
the motions of sin in the flesh, and in the perfecting of 
holiness in our lives. God has but one standard, and 
that standard is perfection of holiness. His direction 
to us is, "Be ye perfect, even as your father in heaven is 
perfect." (Matt. 5:48.) At the same time our Lord 
knew well that in the present life, under present conditions, 
and acting through our present mortal bodies, 
it would be an absolute impossibility for any one of his 
followers to ever attain perfection in the sense or degree 
that the Father is perfect. Nevertheless it was 
proper that our Lord should give the perfect standard 
or pattern just as the school-book sets before the child 
a copper-plate engraving showing the perfect, the desirable 
standard of writing, not with the expectation 
that the child will ever succeed in exactly copying the 
engraving, but with the desire that the child shall improve 
itself by attempts at copying. So the Lord 
wishes us to be continually attempting to copy his perfection 
and to recognize no inferior standard. Hence 
our text's declaration respecting our perfecting holiness 
can mean no more than that we shall do our best 
to reach the standard of perfection in holiness to the 
Lord— come as near to that standard as is possible, a 
little nearer every day we live. 

Our text declares that this perfecting of holiness 
is to be attained through a reverence for the Lord— an 
appreciation of his greatness, his perfection. The 
Christian who according to the flesh is deficient in 
veneration will have greater difficulty along this line 
of perfecting holiness than one who has naturally large 
veneration. A great deal of reverence for God and 
holy things is surely a great aid in our appreciation of 
the Lord's wonderful greatness and wisdom, power, 
justice, love; and the greater our appreciation of him, 
the higher our esteem of the pattern set before us, the 
better undoubtedly will be our success in the copying 
of it. A person who has naturally little of reverence 
for God and holy things, and who is naturally coarser 
and more self-centered and self-satisfied, has correspondingly 
a harder work before him if he would make 
his calling and election sure. He will the more need 
to remember his deficiency, and to cultivate reverence 
for the Lord and to humble himself— "He that humbleth 
himself shall be exalted; he that exalteth himself 
shall be abased. "-Matt. 23:12. 

In view of these things we urge upon all of the 
Lord's consecrated people a fresh determination to follow 
the counsel of the Apostle, and to allow the divine 
promises and prospects to work in our hearts to the 
cleansing of our minds and our flesh from all filthiness, 



to the perfecting of our new natures in holiness, 
in the reverence of the Lord. 



R3987 : page 137 

A LESSON ON DIVINE PROVIDENCE 

--EXODUS 2:1-15.-MAY 26.- 

Golden Text:— "And Moses was learned in all the wisdom 
of the Egyptians, and was mighty in words and in 
deeds."— Acts 7:22. 

OF the greatness of Moses the renowned Gladstone 
said:— 

"We have in the history of Moses a great and powerful 
genius, an organizing, constructing mind. Moses belongs to 
the great class of nation-makers; to a class of men who 
have a place by themselves in the history of politics, and 
who are among the rarest and highest of the phenomena of 
our race." 

Another says:— 

"He was great as a lawmaker and organizer, a general, 
a historian, a poet, an orator, and a saint who walked with 
God. It is not too much to say that our modern civilization 

R3987 : page 138 

is built upon his work. And his greatness is enhanced 
enormously when we remember that his only material was 
a disorganized horde of emancipated slaves, encamped in a 
desert. Probably the majority of thinkers would rate Moses 
as the greatest man of earliest history." 

FOREORDAINED OF GOD A LEADER 

The proper view of Moses' career must surely take 
into account that he was a special servant of God and under 
special divine providence. While this view may not 
commend itself to the world, it surely does increase the interest 
of all who are in heart accord with the teachings of 
the divine Word. We shall see that all of the Lord's providences 
regulated the affairs of this wonderful man from his 
earliest infancy; and some of us may see still further that 
there was an interposition of divine providence in respect to 
the development of the babe even before its birth. Saint 
Paul, who was another of those remarkable characters 
whose interests were superintended by divine power, said of 
himself that the Lord "called me from my mother's womb." 
The inference we draw from this statement is that the Apostle 
recognized that certain traits of character and disposition 
were his from the moment of his birth— traits and dispositions 
which specially prepared him for his subsequent work 
as a minister of the Gospel. Applying this principle to 



Moses, we may well attribute much of the fineness and 
breadth of character and the extreme humility of this "meekest 
man in all the earth" to prenatal influences. 

He was born so: God had him in mind as a suitable 
one for his purposes, and equipped him with those qualities 
so necessary to one whom he would so largely use in so 
great a work as the deliverance of his people from the bondage 
of Egypt. Nothing in this implies a divine interference 
with free moral agency. As it was possible for the Apostle 
Paul to have declined to preach the Gospel, and even to 
have repudiated the Lord and be a "castaway," so also it 
was possible for Moses to have repudiated his mission and 
to have chosen the pleasures of sin for a season. Had 
either of these men taken the wrong course we may be sure 
that the divine plan would not have been interfered with, 
so diverse is the wisdom and power of God. Another could 
have been raised up to do the work of the Apostle or the 
work of Moses, and divine providence could have so arranged 
for their instruction and development that the divine plan 
would have suffered no loss. Nevertheless, so complete, we 
may be sure, were the arrangements of God in respect to 
Saint Paul and Moses, that it was more natural for them to 
take the course which they chose than to have taken the 
opposite one. 

HIDDEN IN THE BULRUSHES 

As we begin to look for divine providence in the affairs 
of Moses we find them standing out at every juncture. He 
was born at that particular time when Pharaoh Rameses II. 
had laid commands upon all the Hebrew parents that their 
male children should be promptly strangled at the time of 
birth, under dire penalties upon themselves and the child 
they would permit to live. We know not how long this law 
remained in effect, but it served in this particular juncture 
to introduce Moses into the royal family by a most remarkable 
chain of circumstances. Miriam, his sister, was born 
about nine years before, and Aaron, his brother, in time to 
escape this law; and when Moses was born his mother "saw 
that he was a goodly child, and hid him three months." 
Apparently there was something extraordinary in the appearance 
of the child, not only in the eyes of its own parents 
but also in those of the princess who subsequently adopted 
him. Stephen says of him, "He was exceeding fair,"— margin, 
"fair to God," (Acts 7:20)— and Josephus recounts that 
as a man he was so handsome that passers-by would turn 
to gaze after him, and even laborers forgot their tasks in 
the spell of his rare beauty. 

To hide the child for three months must have been 
quite a task, especially when the law respecting infants 
was known and probably a reward offered for the detection 
of those evading it. At last it was necessary for the mother 
to part with the babe, and the ark or basket made of bulrushes 
was prepared and overspread on the outside with pitch to keep 
it dry. With the babe therein it was placed near the bank of 
the river amongst the rushes, which would prevent it from 



floating down the stream and hide it from the curious. 

The spot was selected, too, somewhere near the royal palace, 

and near that portion of the river set apart for bathing 

for the use of the royal family, and at a time when the princess 

was known to take her daily bath. The location was 

R3988 : page 138 

on the river Nile. Rawlinson says:— 

"The capital of Egypt, the abode of the royal family at 
that time, was most probably Memphis, occupying nearly the 
site on which now stands the great city of Cairo. The 
household of Amram dwelt under the shadow of the three 
great pyramids, those 'artificial mountains,' the most impressive 
monuments that have ever been raised by human 
hands." 

BROUGHT FORTH-FROM THE WATER 

In harmony with the expectation Pharaoh's daughter 
took her usual bath on the day in which Moses was placed 
in the ark amongst the rushes, and at an opportune moment 
the babe cried. The princess is said to have been a married 
woman but childless, and we may well imagine the 
interest and curiosity aroused in her heart and the hearts of 
her maidens in attendance when the cry of the babe was 
heard. An attendant brought the ark and opened it before 
the princess, and the weeping babe excited the compassion 
of the womanly heart. At once she guessed the truth, that 
this must be a Hebrew child, whose parents, unwilling to 
strangle it, had disposed of it in this manner, perhaps in 
hope. 

Watching at a distance, little Miriam, Moses' sister, then 
about nine years of age, following her instructions, ran to 
see the find and to promptly propose to the princess that 
she might get one of the Hebrew women to act as a nurse 
for the child. This was approved, and of course Miriam 
called the mother. The princess gave direction that the 
nurse should take full charge of him and receive pay for so 
doing. Thus the family fortunes were helped, and at the 
same time full protection assured, for the child was recognized 
as the adopted son of the princess. It is supposed 
that about seven years elapsed before Moses was brought to 
the princess, and that meantime he enjoyed the care and 
instruction of a godly mother. Meantime, we know not 
just when, the princess gave the child the name Moses, 
which signifies, "delivered from the water." Some translate 

R3988 : page 139 

the word to mean, "born from the water," supposing 

that the princess probably meant by this to signify that she 

had borne Moses as her son, borne him from the water. 

To those who have eyes of faith to see it, there is a 
great chain of providential circumstances here; to others, 
who have no such eyes, these were merely accidents and 



happen-sos. Each one of course will be strongly convinced 
of the correctness of his own view, but in this case as in 
many others truth is stranger than fiction, and all these 
things were, under divine providence, working together for 
the accomplishment of the divine purpose in connection 
with that child, with that man, and with the nation which 
God intended he should subsequently lead out of bondage 
as the typical people of God. Dean Alford expresses this 
thought beautifully in the words,— 

"The bark is wafted to the strand by breath divine, 
And on the helm there rests another hand than mine." 

"MIGHTY IN WORD AND DEED" 

Our Golden Text from Stephen's discourse reminds us 
that "Moses was learned in all the wisdom of the Egyptians 
and was mighty in words and deeds." What a wonderful 
preparation that wonderful boy needed in order to make of 
him the great Captain of the Lord's hosts. Egypt at that 
time had two great universities, one at Heliopolis, the other 
at Hermopolis. Moses is said to have been instructed in 
the former, situated about twenty miles north of Memphis. 
Giekie describing it says: "Shady cloisters opened into lecture 
rooms for the students and quiet houses for the professors 
and priests, in their many grades and offices." Another 
writer says: "A splendid library was at his disposal. The 
library of the Rameseum at Thebes— a structure built by 
Rameses II.— contained 20,000 books." 

It seems almost a miracle that the boy Moses could 
pass through such experiences as he had in the palace and 
in the school without being seriously injured by the vain 
philosophies prevailing and honored in these places. Evidently, 
however, he was not only well born as respected his 
religious instincts, but the influence of his mother, his nurse, 
undoubtedly had much to do with shaping his child mind 
and holding him firm in the faith of the Hebrew— the faith 
in the Oath-Bound Abrahamic Covenant, to the effect that 
his race at some time would be blessed by the Lord and 
made very great, influential in the world, and thus be the 
divine channel for the blessing of all the families of the 
earth. At all events we have every indication that Moses 
was not only not spoiled by his education, in the sense of 
having his faith overthrown, but that his natural modesty, 
humility, meekness, continued with him to manhood's 
estate. 

WHEN MOSES WAS GROWN 

This date according to the Scriptures was his fortieth 
year, for the life of Moses was divided into three distinct 
parts of forty years each. An eminent writer says, "According 
to Josephus, the Ethiopians made an incursion into 
Egypt and routed the army that was sent to resist them. 
Panic spread over the country, and Pharaoh trembled at 
the approach of the swarthy savages. The oracles, well 
aware of his remarkable abilities, advised that the command 



be entrusted to Moses. He immediately took the field, surprised 
the enemy, defeated them with heavy slaughter, drove 
them back into their own territory and followed them up so 
hard, capturing one city after another, that they found no 
asylum until they reached the swamp-girdled city of Meroe. 
Moses is said to have returned from this campaign the most 
popular man in the kingdom, having also learned thoroughly 
the weakness and strength of the people and of Pharaoh." 

MOSES THE PATRIOT 

The favor enjoyed as the adopted son of the princess 
in the palace and throughout the land did not quench the 
sympathy and patriotism of Moses' heart. He perceived the 
injustice heaped upon his brethren, and in his sympathy for 
one of them he smote a taskmaster so that he killed him. 
He buried him in the sand, thinking that nothing further 
would come of this, that his brethren the Hebrews would be 
helped to that extent, and that they would surely keep the 
secret of his favor and defence. In this, however, he found 
himself mistaken, for when endeavoring to correct a dispute 
between two Hebrews the fact that he was the murderer of 
an Egyptian was flung in his face by the one who was at 
fault. Soon the word reached everywhere, even to the king, 
who began quietly, as the Hebrew word signifies, to seek an 
opportunity for slaying Moses— not so easy a matter, however, 
as the latter was very popular; but in fear Moses, 
beginning the second fortieth year of his life, fled into the 
land of Midian, where he remained for forty years, returning 
for the deliverance of his people when he was eighty years 
of age. 

We cannot say as some might that each child, each 
youth, each man, by giving attention to the divine guidance, 
might become a Moses. Very few are prepared by nature 
and providence for so exalted a position, and generally there 
are comparatively few opportunities for them. Israel did 
not need more than one Moses. We can, however, say that 
divine providence has a general charge of all the affairs of 
his people. If it is not in our province to be a Moses, it is 
a part of the Lord's providence to be one of his people, to 
be cared for by the Lord through a Moses, through a Deliverer. 
We cannot all be reared in palaces and educated in 
great institutions of learning nor become mighty in word and 
deed, but we should each look for the leadings of divine 
providence in our own experiences and be glad to fill any 
position marked out to us therein, assured that,— 
"God's providence is kind and large; 

Both man and beast his bounty share. 
The whole creation is his charge, 
But saints are his peculiar care." 

But while we cannot occupy so prominent a place in 
earthly affairs as did Moses, let us look to the divine providences 
in the affairs of our lives, and let us note that still 
greater privileges, opportunities and honors are ours through 
Christ. 

If the adoption of Moses by Pharaoh's daughter was a 



remarkable matter, much more wonderful is our own experience 
in that God first of all redeemed us by the precious 
blood of Christ, and then without our consent and upon our 
consecration adopted us into his family as the Bride of his 
Son, to be "heirs of God and joint-heirs with Jesus Christ 
our Lord, if so be that we suffer with him, that we may also 
be glorified together." (Rom. 8:17.) There is nothing in all 
the novels and romances in the world that in any degree 

R3988 : page 140 

compares with the marvels of this glorious grace of God bestowed 

upon consecrated believers of this Gospel age. Do 

we really believe it? So surely as we do the effect will be 

manifested in our words and thoughts and doings. Imagine 

a young peasant woman invited to become the bride of a 

king of a prominent earthly throne: would not the thought 

of her espousal and the coming honors and blessings and 

privileges fill her heart almost to the exclusion of every 

other subject? Would not the preparation for the wedding 

day be to her and to her friends the all-absorbing topic of 

interest, engaging time, talent, influence, attention, in every 

sense of the word? And yet all this would be to a view of 

an earthly honor that might be very fleeting, with a prospect 

of earthly happiness; or it might prove bitterly disappointing, 

and at the very most, and considered from the 

most advantageous standpoint, could only be a blessing for 

a few years. 

Compare this with the glorious prospects that are set 
before the Lord's espoused virgin Church— glory, honor, 

R3989 : page 140 

immortality, eternal life with him who loved us and bought 

us with his precious blood and with the Father. Truly those 

who really believe this message, who recognize of a truth 

that they have been begotten to the new nature and have 

received the spirit of espousal— surely these could have no 

greater power and influence operate in their lives to sanctify 

them and separate them from the world, and to bring 

them into close fellowship of spirit with their Redeemer. 

Another thought: As Moses was learned in all the wisdom 

of the Egyptians and proved himself mighty in words and 

deeds, so those whom the Lord is now selecting for joint-heirship 

in the kingdom of his dear Son are required to 

learn lessons in the great school of experience, in the school 

of Christ, and they are required to manifest character and 

be overcomers— strong in the Lord and in the power of his 

might— mighty in words and in deeds for the Lord and for 

the Truth. And thank God, however humble our speech, 

or insignificant our station, he is reckoning these matters to 

us according to our attitude of heart; and the smallest word 

or act done through loyalty to him and to principles of 

righteousness is counted as mighty through God to the 

pulling down of the strongholds of error, and to the establishment 

ultimately of the Kingdom of God under the whole heaven. 



R3989 : page 140 

ASSUREDLY GOD WAS WITH HIM 

--EXODUS 3: 1-14. -JUNE 2.- 

Golden Text:— "And he said, Certainly 
I will be with thee."-V. 12. 

UNDOUBTEDLY God's providences had to do with the 
general character of Moses, even before his birth, 
as well as with his educational training for the 
great work he was intended to perform. Nevertheless we 
see it would be quite contrary to all divine usages for the 
Almighty to have coerced his free moral agency. The 
natural trend of character being developed, it was necessary 
for Moses himself to decide respecting its use. The central 
feature of this lesson is that, with all the preparation and 
all the fitness of the man Moses for the great work of delivering 
Israel from Egypt, the secret of his success lay in the 
fact that God was with him— God was the Deliverer of 
Israel; Moses was merely his servant and representative in 
connection with the work, as the Lord himself declared— 
"I am the Lord thy God, who brought thee out of the land 
of Egypt and out of the house of bondage. Thou shalt have 
no other gods before me." 

LONG YEARS IN PREPARATION 

When we consider the eighty years of Moses' life, in 
which he was in preparation for the great work of the Lord, 
it helps us to appreciate better the fact that our God is 
never in haste— "Known unto the Lord are all his works 
from the foundation of the world." He has no need for 
haste; he knows the end from the beginning, and every 
feature of the divine plan is properly timed. Thus 4000 
years and more passed before Jesus was born, and yet the 
Scriptures assure us that it was in due time that God sent 
forth his Son, born of a woman. (Gal. 4:4.) This thought 
should give us great confidence in the certainty of the development 
of the Lord's plans at the proper time. He is not a 
man that he should err in judgment; he is working all 
things according to the counsel of his own will. In this 
thought all his true people may rest in confidence; whether 
matters seem to culminate rapidly or slowly, each feature 
will be in its "due time." Although so much time was consumed 
in preparation for the deliverance of Israel, yet when 
the appropriate hour was come, in that one morning the 
whole nation started to move. Let us all learn the lesson 
more and more to wait on the Lord, and then to be ready to 
move promptly when he indicates that his appointed time 
has arrived. 



EIGHTY YEARS OF SCHOOLING 

The life of Moses is divided into three parts of equal 
length. The first forty years brought him to ripe manhood 
and made him familiar with all the learning of the Egyptians. 
The second forty years began when he fled after 
killing the Egyptian and had found that his brethren were 
not prepared for deliverance nor willing to accept his assistance 
as their friend and brother, and ended when he returned 
to Israel, under the divine direction, and successfully 
led them forth from Egypt. The third forty-year period of 
his life, beginning with the exodus, terminated with his 
death at the end of the forty years in the wilderness, just as 
the people of Israel were about to cross over into Canaan. 
The period of Moses' life from forty to eighty years of age 
was spent as a shepherd in the service of his father-in-law 
Jethro, otherwise called Ruel. We may be sure that in that 
long period of time this meek man, who was ready to do 
with his might whatever his hands found to do, had large 
opportunities for learning lessons of patience. 

Doubtless like David, the shepherd, Moses learned to 
think of the sheep and his care over them, and to consider 
God the great Shepherd of his flock, and probably often 
wondered why, after giving the gracious promise to Abraham, 
God had left his flock, the children of Abraham, in apparently 
hopeless bondage. Doubtless, too, he thought of his 
own endeavor to help the people, and how they had shown 
such a spirit of discord as made it impossible for him to aid 

R3989 :page 141 

them as he would. Doubtless he had thought many times 

of how it would have advantaged his own earthly interests 

had he followed the course marked out for him by his foster-mother, 

Pharaoh's daughter, and remained a member of the 

royal family of Egypt and a sharer in the honor and dignity 

of those who oppressed his people. Doubtless he thought 

of how he had apparently blighted his entire life and spoiled 

all of his earthly prospects by his desire to do good to his 

brethren— his desire to serve their best interests. Doubtless 

he thought of their ingratitude and failure to appreciate him, 

their resentment of his kindly-meant assistance, saying, 

"Who made thee a ruler or judge over us?" 

Probably in the mind of Moses the matter resolved 
itself in the thought that he had done his duty, the best he 
knew how to do, although the entire matter had resulted in 
failure; and it is probable he was more or less despondent 
respecting the future, as a meek, humble-minded man would 
be apt to feel. Meantime under the Lord's providence he 
went hither and thither with his flocks and herds to the very 
land in which later on he was to lead the people of Israel. 
In those forty years he must have become very familiar with 
the vicinity of Sinai and lower Palestine. Little did he 
know the value of the teachings he was then learning. The 
lesson in all this for us is faithfulness to God and to duty as 
he gives us to see it, leaving all the results with him. 



Another lesson is that present experiences, trials and difficulties 
may be fitting and preparing us for a future useful 
service for the Lord and his people, even though at the time 
we see no relationship or connection between the two. 

THE BURNING BUSH 

Here our lesson opens, showing Moses at eighty years 
of age shepherding his flock on the rearward side of Mount 
Horeb, called Mount Sinai, where subsequently the law was 
given. As Moses looked, behold a bush burned near him, 
supposedly a thorn-bush, which sometimes grows to quite a 
height and quite a thickness in that country, and is known 
as shittim wood— the kind of wood used in the construction 
of the Tabernacle. As Moses looked at the flame he perceived 
that the bush was not consumed, and considering this 
a most remarkable phenomenon he turned aside and drew 
near to it to observe the matter. It was then that the Lord 
spoke to him from the midst of the burning bush, and Moses 
at once knew that what he had witnessed was a miracle by 
which the Lord would attract his attention with a view to 
communicating some important lesson. 

God usually has a symbolical meaning in every miracle, 
and in this one the representation is supposed to be Israel 
in the midst of tribulation, yet not consumed. Later on, in 
Reformation times, the Church of Scotland appropriated this 
burning bush as its emblem on its banner, because its experience 
had been similar in that it had passed through severe 
afflictions and distresses and trials, yet had not been consumed. 
And is not the burning bush a good illustration of 
the experience of Christ and all of his members? Are they 
not indeed surrounded by fiery trials? and do they not 
emerge from these unscathed, uninjured?— on the contrary, 
blessed, developed, strengthened, made meet for the inheritance 
of the saints in light? 

Well do the Scriptures declare that the fear, reverence, 
of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom. We greatly deplore 
the growth of irreverence in our day, and urge upon all of 
our readers for themselves and for their families the cultivation 
of this proper attitude of mind, so helpful to our preparation 
for the life that now is and that which is to come. 
Liberty and independence, while excellent qualities, are 
always to be valued and conserved and protected, are never 
to become license, never to lead in any degree to irreverence. 
This is the more necessary to us for two reasons: 

(1) Because of the growing irreverence of the world about 

us, born of a declining faith in God and everything supernatural; 

(2) because of our growing enlightenment in the 

R3990 : page 141 

Truth, by which we see that the fears of an eternity of torture 
were groundless, there is a danger of losing that proper 
reverence for God which belongs to and is an integral part 
of love. 
The Prophet David writes, "Keep thy foot when thou 



goest into the house of God"— take heed to your standing, 
take heed to your walk, take heed to your conduct. Whether 
the house of God be a great temple, as in past times, under 
divine direction, or whether it be the temple of God, which 
is the Church of Christ in the flesh, we should realize that 
reverence is befitting to us in connection with everything 
that is holy and consecrated. We should realize that whoever 
neglects the cultivation of reverence in respect to these 
matters is making his own pathway slippery and dangerous. 
He who reverences little and is careless is much more likely 
to stumble, to fall, and be utterly cast down. If even Moses, 
the "meekest man in all the earth," needed from the Lord as 
his first instruction a lesson of humility, shall we not suppose 
that such a lesson is necessary to us? Yea, verily! 

Let us honor the Lord in our hearts, in our outward 
demeanor. Whether we bow to give thanks for our daily 
bread, whether we bow our knee night and morning in 
acknowledgment of divine care and providences, or whether 
we meet with those of like precious faith, let us see to it that 
reverence marks our conduct and our words as well as rules 
in our hearts. Let us, too, take off our shoes, let us lay aside 
the ordinary conduct of life by which we are in contact with 
the world, and in all our ways acknowledge him, especially 
when we hearken to his voice in the study of his Word as 
his people. 

"SEEN THEIR AFFLICTION"-"HEARD THEIR CRY"-"KNOW 
THEIR SORROWS" 

With these words the Lord informed Moses briefly that 
he had not been negligent of the interests of Israel. By these 
words he allows him to understand that not until this time 
had the appropriate moment come for interference on behalf 
of Israel. And this thought of the divine knowledge, sympathy 
and care, and waiting for a due time, would give Moses 
all the more confidence in the Lord's ability to do according 
to his own good purposes when his time had come. 
And so it is with us: If we look back over the 1800 years 
and more of this Gospel dispensation, and perceive how the 
Lord's cause has been permitted to be overwhelmed by the 
forces of evil during the "dark ages" and even yet, we stand 
amazed, and might be inclined to say, "Does God not know? 
does God not care? that he allows his own name to be dishonored 
and his Truth to be trampled under foot and his 
faithful people to suffer?" 

The Lord assures us, too, that he knows all about these 

R3990 : page 142 

matters and is very sympathetic, far more so than we, and 

he is both able and willing to grant the deliverance needed 

at the appropriate time. What confidence it gives us now 

when we look back and behold that Spiritual Israel has 

been preserved through all these centuries! that notwithstanding 

the fiery affliction and adversity that burned 

against them, they have not been consumed! How it comforts 



and cheers us now to hear the Lord's voice telling us 
of the deliverance that is just at hand, and sending by us 
his messages of love and power to all those who have and 
are to hear, and who are desirous of having liberty from the 
power of the world, the flesh and the Adversary. O, yes! 
we occupy holy ground, we hear the holy voice, our eyes 
are opened to see the wonderful things. The Lord be praised! 
Let us give heed to his Word. 

"THOU MAYEST BRING FORTH MY PEOPLE" 

First of all the Lord informed Moses, "I am come down 
to deliver them out of the hand of the Egyptians," etc.; 
then he adds, "Come now, therefore, and I will send thee 
unto Pharaoh that thou mayest bring my people, the children 
of Israel, out of Egypt." It is to be noted that God 
expressly declares himself to be the Deliverer, and had 
Moses been then disposed to boast of his own powers and 
doings we presume that the Lord would not have used him, 
but would have found some one else for the work. Whenever 
the Lord sends us on any special mission, we may be 
sure that he does not wish us to undertake it as our own 
mission, nor to claim the honor of the success attending it. 
He merely deigns to use us as his instrumentalities, whereas 
he could do the entire work much easier, we might say, 
without us. How wonderful it seems that God throughout 
all his dealings, past and present, has been willing to use 
his consecrated people. Telling them on the one hand that 
they are unworthy, he assures them on the other hand of his 
willingness to use their imperfections and to overrule and 
guide in respect to their services for him and his cause. 

The prime essentials evidently in the faithful performance 
of such a commission would be reverence for the Lord 
and humility as respects our own talents and abilities. It 
was so with Moses, the "meekest man in all the earth." 
Not stopping even to tell the Lord of his appreciation of the 
facts that he had been chosen for and had undertaken this 
great work, Moses was overwhelmed with the thought that 
the Lord would deign to use him as a messenger, and he 
promptly disclaimed any special qualifications therefor. 
Indeed, he evidently felt, as well as said, that there were 
others much more capable of the work than himself. But 
was it not this very appreciation of his own unworthiness 
that helped to make him suitable for the Lord's business? 
And so with us: we may be sure that when we feel strong 
then we are weak, and when we feel weak in our own 
strength then we are best prepared to be strong in the Lord 
and in the power of his might and to be used of him as his 
instruments. It was so with the great Apostle; it must be 
so, we believe, with all whom the Lord will deign to use and 
acknowledge in any part of his service. 

Overwhelmed with a realization of the responsibilities 
of the work suggested, Moses protested to the Lord that he 
had not the qualifications, and the Lord's answer was that 
this was true, but that his weakness would be perfected in 
the Lord's strength— "Certainly I will be with thee." And 



this being true, how could the mission be a failure? It is 
equally true with us today: if the Lord be for us and with 
us, who could be against us? How could the work fail? 
Many of the Lord's people are being called out of Babylon 
and its confusion and darkness, its oppressions and its 
bondage, to creeds of the "dark ages," and its social boycotts, 
etc., to worship the Lord in spirit and in truth, to give 
their hearts, all that they have, to him and his service. 

And all the members of the body of Christ, the antitypical 
body of Moses, are permitted to have a share, as the 
Lord's representatives, in this work of declaring the fall of 
Babylon, the presence of the King, and the gathering together 
unto him of all who have made a covenant with him 
by sacrifice. While feeling our unworthiness of so great an 
honor, and our inability as respects so great a work, let us 
remember that the Lord himself is with us, and that since it 
is his work it will go onward and accomplish the designs 
intended, and gather out eventually all who are truly the 
Lord's, whether we are faithful or whether we are unfaithful. 
But let us be faithful, and thus maintain the relationship 
to the great antitype of Moses, and ultimately be associated 
with him in the glories of the Kingdom, in the 
dispensing of the blessings and judgments of the future age. 
--Acts 3:23. 

Not only did the Lord assure Moses of his presence and 
power and cooperation in the mission, but also that it would 
result successfully— that he would bring the people out of 
the land of Egypt and into this very mountain, and to the 
very place where the Lord was then communing with him. 
The matter began to take tangible shape before Moses' 
mind: as God said it would be so, undoubtedly his word 
would be fulfilled. So the Lord's assurances to us, that the 
results will come anyway, are an encouragement to us to go 
forward and to do our parts. The Lord will do the 
work, and the whole question is whether or not we will have 
a glorious share in it as his members and representatives. 

"I AM THAT I AM "-HE WHO IS-JEHOVAH 

Whatever confidence Moses had in his brethren, and 
their readiness to believe the promises of God and to accept 
deliverance from Egypt, he seems to have lost. Even while 
God was telling him of the success of the mission upon which 
he was being sent, Moses' mind was reverting to the attempt 
he had made forty years before, and so he objects: "Lord, 
when I come unto the children of Israel and shall say unto 
them, The God of your fathers sent me unto you; and they 
shall say unto me, What is his name? what shall I say unto 
them?" The people of Israel, long in association with the 
Egyptians, had doubtless lost much of their faith in the one 
God of their fathers. Their heathen neighbors and 
masters of the Egyptian nation recognized various gods, 
and seemed to be greatly prospered, and it is altogether 
probable that the Israelites had by this time come to wonder 
which god they should count as theirs and what his name 
might be. Moses' question seems to imply that his thoughts 



ran in this channel. God's reply was the giving of his name, 
Jehovah, for the words, "I am that I am," signify the same 
as the name Jehovah— the self-existent one, the one who 
always exists. 
Perceiving that the question only covered a part of 

R3991 :page 143 

Moses' meaning, the Lord proceeded to prove to his servant 
that this name would not be an empty sound in his mouth, 
but that he would be with him and exercise powers which 
would exemplify his greatness, his dignity, his ability to deliver 
the people. Taking advantage of the common things, 
the Lord referred to the shepherd's staff which Moses carried 
and bade him throw it to the ground; it at once became 
a serpent. Moses' faith was again tested, and the 
Lord bade him take it up again, and it became a staff in his 
hand as at first. The assurance that he would be able to 
give the people this demonstration and other demonstrations 
that God had sent him to them strengthened Moses' confidence 
in God and made up for his lack of confidence in 
himself. And this should be the case with all of us; we 
are not to have confidence in ourselves, but if we go forth 
strong in the Lord and in the power of his might, confident 
and rejoicing because he is with us, we are not only safe as 
respects ourselves but in the proper condition for the Lord 
to more and more use us in his service— "He that humbleth 
himself shall be exalted; he that exalteth himself 
shall be abased," is the divine method of procedure. 

Moses urged further that he could find some one much 
more capable of telling the good tidings than himself. He 
said, "I am slow of speech," I never was an orator that 
could answer, reason out, this matter with Pharaoh. I 
should feel so abashed upon coming into his presence, and 
so feel my insignificance, that even though I were your representative 
I fear that I would not be able to present your 
message in a proper manner. Meeting this objection, the 
Lord told Moses that he would give him his brother Aaron 
as a mouthpiece. Thus strengthened and encouraged, the 
meekest man in all the earth set out upon his mission to 
meet the greatest king of earth at that time, Pharaoh 
Menephtah. 

Let each of us then, dear readers, impress upon our 
hearts the essence of this lesson, that if God be with us and 
for us, however humble and weak of ourselves, we may be 
mighty through him to the pulling down of the strongholds 
of error and for the building up of his people in 
the most holy faith, and for their deliverance from the 
bondage of error. Let us in the name of the Lord do 
with our might what our hands find to do, but always 
with the thought that we serve the Lord. Let his words, 
"Certainly I will be with thee," be the strength in our 
every endeavor in his name and cause. 



R3991 :page 143 

SOME INTERESTING LETTERS 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

The last three months of 1906 were quite trying to 
me. My occupation brought me too much in contact 
with the world, so much so that I am not at all satisfied 
with myself; but I am starting in the new year 
with much experience and a full resolve to profit 
thereby. I am going to seek the Lord more diligently 
through his Word, and through association with his 
people. I intend giving up my present employment to 
seek a position elsewhere, where I can have more time 
to give to active service for him who bought me with 
the great price. Here I am completely penned up. I 
do not have even nights or Sundays in which to meet 
with the Lord's people, so I must get out where I can 
keep the rust from collecting on my armor. I shall put 
at least one-half of my time in spreading the glad news 
of the great Rest Day just at hand for all who are weary 
and heavy laden. Remember me at the heavenly Court, 
that I may have that grace that is all-sufficient. Trusting 
in him, I am 

Your brother and fellow-servant, 
J. W. B.,-Wash. 



Following is a letter written by a business customer 
to one of our friends:— 

"I want to thank you for the little pamphlet you 
sent me last year when you answered my letter 
saying you could not fill my order. It was one 
of those 'Old Theology' tracts you sent. I do not know 
you or your faith, but that little paper has done more 
for me than money could buy. Whoever you are I hope 
it has done even more for you. So I heartily thank you 
for sending it. It was bread cast upon the water and 
a hungry soul found it. I have now, from that pamphlet, 
the MILLENNIAL DAWN series and am reading the 
fourth volume, having read the first, second and third 
and liked them very much. 

I feel I owe it all to you, for I never knew of that 
kind of literature. I said all to you, but I will take that 
back; I owe it all to God, but believe that you or whoever 
sent it to be the instrument he used in answer to 
my prayers. I hope many other hungry souls may be 
fed by the same means. Our efforts in scattering the 
precious truths will be a blessing to us as well as to 
those they reach. 

I thought I was a Christian for a good many years, 
but I have only found out what a true Christian is, and 
know the mass of people will not accept that doctrine. 
But I hope there are still more Truth-hungry souls who 
may find it, and that it will prove a blessing to them as 



it has to me. 

I might say more, but as I do not know the sender 
will only say in conclusion, may the Lord bless you 
and keep you faithful for that high calling he has in 
store for the faithful. 

Yours in the blessed hope, 

J. H. S.,-Neb. 



page 143 

DEAR BROTHER IN CHRIST:- 

When I wrote my last letter I was entirely without 
peace. But I believe as a humble penitent that the 
fault lay with myself. I was very much disappointed 
with this life and could not make up my mind to commence 
at the bottom of the spiritual ladder like a humble, 
trusting child when I thought I was very near the 
top. But yet I have been brought to see that that is 
the very thing I must do. And now the Lord has given 
me the peace for which I prayed so long in vain. I get 
up each morning with the earnest desire to feel myself 
to be a perfectly unknowing being, ready to be led and 
taught by him. And I have come to the realization that 
while I may not have to commence from the bottom it 
is better for me to see myself only one-fourth up 
instead of three-fourths. 

Very humbly and gratefully your sister, 
I. F.,-Cal. 



page 145 



SEMI-MONTHLY 
VOL. XXVIII MAY 15 No. 10 
A.D. 1907-A.M. 6035 



CONTENTS 

Laying Up Heavenly Treasure 147 

Sealed in Heart and Forehead 147 

When the Door Shall be Shut 148 

Additional Bible Study Helps 149 

New Watch Tower Bible 149 

Little Opportunities (Poem) 150 

Some Plagued— Some Passed Over 150 

Understandable Yet Miraculous 151 

The Salvation of the Lord 151 

A Bright Cloud-A Dark Cloud 155 

Entangled in the Land 156 

The Song of Moses and the Lamb 157 

Belated Reports from Foreign Branches 158 



page 146 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-24 EVERSHOLT ST., LONDON, N.W. 
GERMAN BRANCH-MIRKER STR., 45, ELBERFELD. 
AUSTRALASIAN BRANCH-EQUITABLE BLDG., COLLINS ST., MELBOURNE 

PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 

TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR AS FOLLOWS:- 

All Bible Students who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity or 
adversity, are unable to pay for this Journal, will be supplied FREE if 
they send a Postal Card each June stating their case and requesting its 
continuance. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on 
our list continually and in touch with the Studies, etc. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



THIS JOURNAL IS PUBLISHED IN THE 

FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, DANISH AND ITALIAN LANGUAGES. 

SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



BROTHER RUSSELL'S WEEKLY SERMONS 



All orders for newspapers containing Brother Russell's 
sermons would best be sent direct to us. We can secure to you 
the best terms; and besides the influence for the cause is greater 
thus. 

MUSIC AT THE CONVENTIONS 



We urge all the dear friends to practise singing from 
"Hymns of Dawn" for the One-Day Conventions as well as the 
General Conventions. Visiting friends will please bring their 
hymn books with them, as only at the General Conventions 
will they be on sale. 

COLPORTEURS AND SHARP SHOOTERS 



All are sharpshooters who do what they can to sell DAWNS 
or STUDIES amongst friends and neighbors. Colporteurs take 
and work territory systematically, giving a part or all of their 
time. Sharpshooters who order 25 volumes at a time by express 
or 30 copies by freight, charges collect, are granted colporteur 
rates, viz., 16c each for Vols. I., II., III., and 20c each for Vols. 
IV., V., VI. 

Colporteurs desiring partners in the work should send 
postal card request for an aide. They will find the General 
Conventions very favorable opportunities for such alliances. Appliances 
for use on bicycles for delivering will be exhibited. 



R3991 :page 147 

LAYING UP HEAVENLY TREASURE 

THE present is the time for laying up heavenly 

treasures which cannot be stolen from us and 

which cannot corrupt. We fully agree that our 

Lord and the gracious things which he has in reservation 

for them that love him— the elect— are our treasures 

and that the store of them becomes larger and 

larger as we seek to set our affections on things above 

and not on the things of earth. But just now we wish 

to think of these heavenly things in respect to our 

earthly life, and to note the importance of laying up 

some heavenly treasure on earth. 

According to our understanding of the Scriptures 
the Lord is now permitting a very tranquil period, which 
probably will not last long. In this time the winds 
are being held, the storm is not allowed to break until 
the servants of God are sealed in their foreheads. The 
thought is that just as soon as the sealing process has 
been accomplished the restraints will be released and 
the storm will sweep down upon us— upon the whole 
world to some extent, but especially upon the sealed 
ones, to try them, to prove them, and to test them. 
Not a pleasant prospect, some may say; but we answer 
that all of our heavenly Father's provisions for us are 
agreeable when we are rightly in harmony with 
him and his precious Word. We are symbolically represented 
as being enabled during that time of trouble 
to stand upon the sea of glass and to sing the song of 
Moses and the Lamb, the meanwhile harping upon our 
harps— making melody from the Word of God and 
greatly rejoicing therein. This time of trouble, when 
the winds of persecution shall be loosed, will be the 
time of fiery trial which shall try us; and since the 
Lord's people are not to think strange of it, it is proper 
that it should be called to their attention repeatedly, 
and that they be helped in their preparation for it. 
He shall give his messengers charge concerning thee 



[the Christ], and in their hands they shall bear thee 
up [the feet members] lest ye stumble against stones 
and difficulties in this evil day.— Psa. 91:11,12. 

SEALED IN HEART AND FOREHEAD 

The Scriptures refer to the sealing of the holy 
Spirit as necessarily essential to membership in the 
Lord's family at all. Whoever does not receive the 
seal, the impress of the holy Spirit, will not be a copy 
of God's dear Son in heart, in character, and cannot be 
associated with him in the Kingdom. The sealing process 
is a gradual one, the impression becoming more 
permanent daily. We are not to understand sealing in 
the forehead to be identical with this sealing in the 
heart, although the two are closely related. Many of 
the Lord's dear people throughout the past have had 
the seal of the Lord upon their hearts and characters 
but not upon their foreheads— they did not have that 
intellectual knowledge of God and his glorious plan 
which he has provided for all of his faithful of the 
present time, and which now becomes a test, a proof, 
an evidence to us that we are in the Lord's favor and 
that he is showing us his deep things. 

The question with each one of us should be, How 
am I prospering? How am I profiting by these provisions 
which the Lord has made for my preparation for 
the coming trials and tests? Am I living carelessly, 
thoughtlessly? Am I improving or am I wasting the 
precious moments, the blessed hours, the golden opportunities 
presented to me by God's favor? Surely 
the Lord has been faithful in all of his engagements; 
surely he is doing for us exceedingly more abundantly 
than we could ask or think; surely if we fail to make 
our calling and election sure the fault will not be his, 
for he is faithful who has called us, he also will do it. 
If, therefore, he has done all that he has promised and 
all that is necessary and all that is proper for our aid, 
if there be any failure in the matter it will surely be 
our own fault. It is well that we should see how the 
Lord has placed the responsibility upon us, as is implied 
in his direction that we work out our salvation 
with fear and trembling, remembering that it is God 
that worketh in us to will and to do his good pleasure. 

R3992 : page 148 

All our blessings come from God, and come to us as 
gifts; but these gifts, to be of value to us in the end, 
must be received, must be used, must be appropriated, 
must be worked out in mind and heart, and so far as 
possible in our mortal bodies. The inspiration of 
God's promise first worked in us to will and to do his 
will, to lay down our all at his feet; and secondly, as 
we followed on, these promises continued to work in 
us to the point of doing service, putting into practice 



our good wills, good intentions— but only those who 
do put them into practice will get the eventual blessing 
of the Kingdom. 

"O, FOR A THOUSAND TONGUES TO SING MY GREAT 
REDEEMER'S PRAISE" 

It is well that we have the sentiment here expressed, 
and the desire to praise the Lord a thousand-fold 
more than we have ability; but we do well to remember 
that the Lord looks for something more than songs 
and thankfulness: he looks for evidences of appreciation 
of his grace and his promises, he looks for evidences 
of our appropriation of these, in harmony with 
his design in giving them. If, then, he has fulfilled 
his promise that at his second presence he will gird 
himself as a servant and come forth to serve those who 
hear his knock and open their hearts to receive him, 
we may properly infer that the strengthening food he 
is now providing for his people is in some sense of the 
word necessary to them. It is so necessary that if 
they receive it not, if they feed not upon it, if they are 
not made thereby strong in the Lord and in the power 
of his might, it will ultimately be greatly to their 
disadvantage. 

We write thus because we observe that some 
who rejoice greatly in the bountiful supply provided 
by the Lord and who love to sing of his blessings, 
mercies, etc., seem not to be giving sufficiency of attention 
to the repast itself. They remind one of the 
man who purchased an encyclopedia and never used 
it, but often praised it and took great pleasure in it, 
with the thought that the information was there if ever 
he should need it. Some of the Lord's dear people 
seem disposed to do after this manner with the precious 
things of divine truth which are now in their 
hands. They would keep the volumes in their libraries, 
they would praise them, they would talk about them 
to their friends, but many of them neglect to read- 
many permit the cares of this life, the deceitfulness of 
riches, etc., to consume their time, the precious moments, 
the precious hours, the golden opportunities, 
so that they do not feast upon the viands provided by 
the Lord. The time is surely coming when the rejoicings 
of this class will be less— when the winds of 
persecution and opposition shall be let loose and play 
upon them. We fear that many will not have the sufficiency 
of foundation for their faith and love to stand 
the crucial tests of that time. 

WHEN THE DOOR SHALL BE SHUT 

The shutting of the door mentioned in one of our 
Lord's parables seems to imply something quite in 
harmony with the loosing of the winds when the sealing 
in the forehead shall have been accomplished. We 



cannot surmise just how this trouble will be precipitated 
and the door for further fellowship and promulgation 
of the Truth be closed. It would not surprise 
us, however, if in some manner it should be accomplished 
through the Post Office Department. We cannot 
now think of what plea or pretext could be used to 
interfere with our legal rights and privileges under the 
law, but we are to expect that in a very few years the 
federation of the various Christian denominations will 
give them a political influence they have never before 
had, and we are to expect that politicians will be ready 
at that time to obey the united voice of the people, if 
not the voice of God, and that, however illegal or unjust 
the procedure, they would be prepared to put a 
stop to our work. When that time shall come we will 
consider it to be our duty to use all reasonable energy 
to maintain our legal rights and privileges and to keep 
the door open. When it shall close, in spite of our every 
endeavor, we will accept the result as being of divine 
providence and apply the Master's words, "Thou couldst 
have no power at all over me except it were given thee 
from above."— John 19:11. 

AN ILLUSTRATION-A HINT 

Such proceedings in any other nation under the 
sun might be more reasonably expected than in this 
land. Nevertheless our attention has recently been 
drawn to an illustration of such a power in this country 
as we would not have imagined. The publishers 
of the Woman's Magazine of St. Louis started a banking 
arrangement amongst their subscribers, permitting 
banking and checking by mail. So far as we are 
able to understand the matter the entire arrangement 
was entirely honest and aboveboard. But about the 
time that the banking institution was ready to open, 
the Post Office Department prohibited it, declaring it 
to be fraudulent, and the publisher was cut off from 
all communication with the outside world because no 
mail was permitted to be delivered to him. Subsequently 
his journal, the Woman's Magazine, monthly, 
10c per year, was prohibited from the mails as second-class 
matter under the claim that it was sold below 
cost. The publisher, apparently quite a wealthy man, 
seems to have spared no expense in his endeavor to 
obtain a hearing in the courts and a public examination 
of everything pertaining to his bank and to his 
magazine. He claims that he has thus far been unable 
to do this, and that he is practically helpless so far as 
any court of justice is concerned. 

Without going into the merits of this case, of which 
we acknowledge we have little information aside from 
the publisher's plea, we nevertheless see in this feature 
of the law— so different from anything we could have 
anticipated in this land— something which could readily, 
we believe, be made applicable to this journal and the 



work of our Society in general when the time would 
come that it would be demanded by a large, influential 
party— when the time would come for the letting loose 
of the winds, the storms. 

R3992 : page 149 

HEAVENLY TREASURES SAFE 

If these conditions should come about speedily, 
how would they find you and me, dear brother and sister? 
Could we look up to the Lord and say that we had 
been faithful over the few things committed to our 
care and had done what we could to advance the honor 
of the Lord's name and to bring his Truth, his gracious 
plan, to the attention of his followers? And 
could we thankfully acknowledge that we had received 
into good and honest hearts the precious message of 
the Truth, and that there we had the thing in our minds 
which we would not only be able to appreciate ourselves 
but be able to communicate to others if the time 
had passed when we could give them tracts or books? 
This is a very important question, dear friends, for it 
takes time to lay up this spiritual food in reserve, so 
that we could not only have it for the immediate present, 
but also enough for the coming emergencies. 

Let us remember that it is not sufficient that we 
have the Bible, the DAWN STUDIES, upon our shelves 
or upon our tables. We need to use them, we need to 
partake of this bread, this meat in due season, this refreshment 
which our present Lord has supplied to us. 
In this connection we commend to all the dear friends 
afresh the suggestion thrown out by a dear sister about 
a year ago and commented upon in these columns. She 
remarked that herself and daughter had concluded to 
read over again the entire series of DAWN STUDIES, 
and that they found that the entire six volumes could 
be read through in a year by reading twelve pages 
each day. How much blessing would surely come to all 
by such a re-hungering, re-investigation, re-assimilation 
of the meat in due season. We call to your attention 
the fact that, so far as we are aware, no one has 
ever come fully, clearly, thoroughly into the light of 
Present Truth from the hearing of it preached orally— 
that all who have attained to a high development of 
knowledge and appreciation of the plan have done so 
by reading, studying. We suggest that this should 
govern us in respect to our endeavors to serve the 
flock and to strengthen ourselves. 

ADDITIONAL BIBLE STUDY HELPS 

Some not far advanced in the Truth may get the 
thought that the DAWN STUDIES, Berean Studies, etc., 
are not Bible studies. But all those who have made 
progress in the Truth are able to set them straight 



upon the matter, and to point out to them that this is 
Bible study of the most profitable kind they have ever 
engaged in: indeed that all of their previous study of 
the Bible amounted to nothing in comparison. Those 
familiar with the subject can readily show that the 
DAWN STUDIES merely give the Bible in arranged order 
which simplifies our comprehension of the divine plan 
and the divine book, and that the reference to the 
Scriptures continually keep before the mind of the 
students the fact that all stress, all authority, is laid 
upon the Word of God and not upon any human 
opinions. 

We have a bit of news to communicate which we 
know will cause great rejoicing amongst the Bereans. 
It was apparently the Lord who put it into the heart of 
Brother C. J. Woodworth to go through the Bible from 
Genesis to Revelation and through all the volumes of 
the DAWN series and to make note of every sentence of 
Scripture treated or explained in the DAWNS. He 

R3993 : page 149 

started this work for his own benefit, beginning with 

the book of Ephesians. He writes us that he was astonished 

to find how very much of the text had been discussed 

in the various volumes of DAWN. He assures 

us that he never got so much blessing from anything in 

his life as he got in that preparation. He then determined 

to go through the entire Bible in the same manner. 

He suggested the desirability of putting this in 

the hands of all the dear friends, so far as possible. We 

acquiesced in the suggestion and inquired how long 

time would be needed for the preparation. The dear 

brother bent his energies to the labor of love and sent 

us the whole of the manuscript about the first of this 

month. He is a rapid workman, and in the Lord's 

providence was able to devote seven hours of each day 

from the last of November to the first of April to this 

work. So far as we have had time to examine it will 

prove a most valuable aid to the dear household of 

faith. One can turn to this and find in its columns 

first the words of Scripture, secondly a condensed interpretation 

taken from the DAWNS, and thirdly the 

reference is given, so that one can turn to the DAWN 

and have the argument in detail. This brief Bible Commentary 

is already in the hands of the typesetters. 

With it we propose to republish the Topical Index 
which appeared in the back of the special WATCH 
TOWER BIBLE published some years ago, the entire edition 
of which, five thousand, was promptly taken by 
the friends. Additionally we have had prepared an 
"Instructor's Assistant," which groups under various 
heads brief quotations of appropriate proof-texts, citing 
the references in the Bible and also in the DAWN 
STUDIES. With this little compilation in his hand 
every WATCH TOWER reader may be an able and efficient 



teacher of the Word, qualified to give to him that 
asketh not only a reason for the hope within him but 
the proof-texts, and, beyond this, an ability to call to 
his assistance in expounding the subject the help in 
the DAWNS. With every reader thus an Evangelist we 
may hope that the progress of the Truth may be greatly 
enhanced. The two last-mentioned compilations 
have been made by Sisters Seibert and Sherman. 
It is proposed that all three of these helps in the 
study of the Word and in the location of the DAWN 
references thereto, shall be published under one cover 
in a limp binding of a suitable size to carry under the 
cover of an ordinary portable Bible. The price will be 
such as to bring it within the means of all, and any 
WATCH TOWER readers too poor to purchase will be 
supplied with a copy free. 

A NEW WATCH TOWER BIBLE 

Instead of getting out another edition of the WATCH 
TOWER BIBLE published in 1902, it is proposed that we 

R3993 : page 150 

shall have another, very different in style, and in some 
respects a great improvement upon the former edition. 
The new WATCH TOWER BIBLE will be quite small, 
4-5/8 x 7 inches, large pocket edition. It will be printed 
on India paper, be about 3/4 of an inch thick and very 
light in weight, and in addition to maps will have our 
own special helps above mentioned bound in at the 
back, namely: (1) The DAWN Study Commentary, 
with references; (2) The Topical Index, with Scriptural 
and DAWN Study references; (3) The Instructor's 
Assistant with references. These will all be bound with 
round corners, red under gold edges, divinity circuit. 
The binding will be of three grades, namely, the 
so-called French Seal will be the cheapest: including 
postage it will cost our subscribers $1.25 per copy— any 
quantity. The second grade will be the same, except 
that it will have linen linings, price $1.38. We will 
have no intermediate grades, our third being 
the very best Genuine Sealskin, calf-lined, silk-sewed. 
The price of this grade, including postage, 
will be $2.85— any quantity. 

The patent index can be supplied on any of these 
Bibles at an additional cost of 25c per copy, but we do 
not recommend the index on so small a book. It is 
easy to place the fingers at the upper corner and run 
through the leaves so as to find any book desired. 

The above prices are very special, obtained by 
reason of our ability to place a very large order. We 
have ordered 10,000 copies in these assorted bindings, 
and this is probably the largest order ever placed for 
India paper Bibles of one style. We feel confident that 
the book will be exactly what every WATCH TOWER 



reader will want, and have fixed the price at absolute 

cost. Six thousand of these Bibles are promised us 

this year and the remainder next year, but their preparation 

will require time. Do not expect them before 

next September. We are merely giving you timely announcement. 

Send in no orders until notified later on 

the second page of this journal. 



LITTLE OPPORTUNITIES 

"We all might do good where we often do ill; 

There is always a way, if we have but the will: 

For even a word, kindly breathed or suppressed, 

May guard off some pain, or give peace to some breast. 

"We all might do good in a thousand small ways; 
Forbearing to flatter, yet giving due praise: 
In spurning ill rumor, reproving wrong done, 
And treating but kindly the heart we have won. 

"We all might do good whether lowly or great— 

A deed is not judged by the purse or estate; 

If only a cup of cold water is giv'n, 

Like the mite of the widow 'tis something for heav'n." 



R3993 : page 150 

SOME PLAGUED-SOME PASSED OVER 

-EXODUS 12:21-30.-JUNE9.- 

Golden Text:— "When I see the blood, 
I will pass over you."— V. 13. 

MOSES, accompanied by Aaron, his brother and appointed 
mouthpiece, appeared before Pharaoh 
and informed him of his mission in part. He 
made no reference to the complete departure of the Israelites 
never to return, though Pharaoh evidently understood 
this to be the program. The request was to go a day's 
journey into the wilderness and to offer sacrifices to the 
Lord, no reference being made as to what would be done 
thereafter. To Pharaoh it seemed preposterous that the 
Egyptians should let go from them a skillful people, who 
had been serving them now for a good while as bond-servants, 
and helping along amazingly in their general prosperity 
and wealth. Pharaoh determined that he would not 
encourage such a thought by the slightest sign of timidity, 
but on the contrary he would discourage it and cause, if 
possible, that the people should feel that Moses and Aaron, 
their representatives and delegates, had done them an injury 
by the agitation. Accordingly Pharaoh not only refused 



their request, but imposed additional burdens upon the people 
as a penalty for making it. All this might be termed 
human nature— the natural thing for any person in power 
to do. 

It was the natural thing, however, only because of 
man's depravity; it would have been a very unnatural thing for 
any perfect man to have done. A man more nearly perfect in 
the image and likeness of God would, on the contrary, have had 
a spirit of fairness, a spirit of equity, which would have 
said, We have not been treating these people right; we have 
not been treating them according to the Golden Rule, as we 
would that they should have dealt with us. We have been 
taking advantage of their situation and of our power as a 
dominating race, and have been taking their labor by browbeating 
and by force. We will seek to make amends, not 
only by giving them their liberty, to which they have a right, 
but by pressing upon them as their rightful due a certain 
proportion of the wealth we have secured through their 
energies. We will then say to them,— Now, whether you go 
to another land or whether you stay here is a matter for 
yourselves to decide; but we will be glad to have you for 
neighbors and for friends, and to deal with you as fellow-members 
of one race, according to the Golden Rule. 

But the depraved heart never has such suggestions, or, 
if it has them, promptly stifles them as foolish, unbusinesslike. 
The Lord's people, begotten again of the holy Spirit, 
enlightened through the Word of Truth and taught in the 
school of Christ, are not to take the worldly view on any 
such question, but in all their affairs to act in harmony with 
the Golden Rule. If any reader of this article has not been 
in the habit of so doing in the past, it is time that he should 
begin at once. Time is short in which to cultivate this 
proper view and to learn to use this Golden Rule. If our 
hearts do not attain to this standard of love for our neighbors 
as for ourselves, the Apostle assures us that we may 
seriously doubt that we have any love for God that would 

R3994:page 151 

be acceptable to him. (1 John 4:20.) True, not many are 
in the position of Pharaoh, and even Pharaoh might have 
been unable to carry out the Golden Rule in connection 
with his dealings with the Israelites by reason of a contrary 
spirit amongst his counsellors and others of influence in the 
nation. Similarly we may not be able to do all that we 
could do and would like to do in harmony with the Golden 
Rule in our dealings with neighbors, employes, etc., but we 
are to cultivate this spirit in our hearts, in our minds, and 
to live as nearly in accord with this rule as present conditions 
permit. Our hearts must be up to this mark, whether 
we are able to conform all of our affairs of life to this standard 
or not. Otherwise we may be sure that we shall come 
short of the required standard, and unless we correct the 
matter we will have no part in the Kingdom, and would be 
totally unfit to be of that glorious class of kings and priests 
and judges who, according to the Lord's foreordination, are 



shortly to bless all the families of the earth in conjunction 
with their Lord and Head.— 1 Cor. 6:2,3. 

"LET MY PEOPLE GO THAT THEY MAY WORSHIP" 

One after another ten different plagues came upon 
Egypt to compel them to let the Israelites go. We can readily 
see how God could have made the matter much easier 
for them even in their wrong condition of heart. He could 
have raised up to the throne of Egypt a weaker man, who 
would have more readily yielded; but, on the contrary, the 
Scriptures inform us that God raised up to the throne a man 
of that particular character which would be strong in resistance, 
dogged. We read, "For this very purpose have I 
raised thee up, that thou might show forth my power." The 
means by which the Lord raised up that Pharaoh to the 
throne is not particularly stated, but we have illustrations 
of similar exaltations under divine providence. For instance, 
the present Emperor of Germany was raised up to power by 
reason of his father's death, which the Lord could easily 
have hindered. The Czar of Russia was raised up to his 
position by reason of his brother's incapacity for the office. 
Theodore Roosevelt was raised up to the presidency by reason 
of President McKinley's assassination. 

Thus God has it in his own hand to set up or pull 
down rulers, and he orders the matter evidently to a considerable 
extent with a view to the impressing of the lessons 
which he desires to impart; and these lessons and providences 
have to do with other peoples than those apparently 
most particularly interested. For instance, the present Czar 
has had much to do in the matter of bringing forward the 
Japanese to notice; and so the Pharaoh of the Exodus, supposed 
to have been Menephtah, was raised up particularly 
on account of the Israelites and the divine intention respecting 
their deliverance, and the punishment of the Egyptians 
for the injustices that were done them. With a weaker man 
on the throne the Lord's power would have been less displayed 
and the Egyptians would have received far less 
chastisement. 

THE TEN GREAT PLAGUES 

The first nine of these plagues seem to divide themselves 
into three groups of three each, and the entire ten are supposed 
to have covered a period of nine months— not that 
they were continually enforced in that time, but that considerable 
intervals occurred between them. In the first three 
Aaron's rod was used as a symbol of divine power; in the 
second three the rod was not used; in the last three Moses' 
rod was used. In each of the three series the first was with 
full warning, the second with less warning, the last with no 
warning. The first plague is supposed to have occurred 
in June and the last one in the following April. 

To the ordinary reader the story of these plagues and 
the deliverance of the Israelites is a wonderful one, but to 
those who have made some progress in the knowledge of the 



Truth and who discern in the experiences of the Israelites 

something typical of the experiences of the Lord's people in 

the end of this age, the entire lesson has a still broader, 

deeper and stronger significance. From this standpoint the 

Pharaoh on the throne and the powers of Egypt represented 

Satan, the prince of this world, and the powers of 

this world. From this standpoint the antitype of Israel 

would be all of God's people who desire to worship and 

to serve him, but who are in bondage to sin and Satan. 

From this standpoint the deliverance of the Israelites 

from Egypt typifies the deliverance in the end of this 

age of all who desire to come into harmony with God. 

And correspondingly, the plagues that came upon Egypt and 

which forced the deliverance of the Israelites typified the 

great time of trouble coming upon the world in the end of 

this age, by means of which ultimately the power of the 

oppressor will be broken, and all who desire full liberty to 

worship and serve the Lord will be granted the opportunity; 

and as Pharaoh and his hosts, in seeking to interfere with 

the divine program, were destroyed, so Satan and all sympathizers 

and colaborers with him, seeking to restrain and 

interfere with the labors of those who would serve the Lord, 

will ultimately be overwhelmed and destroyed in the Second 

Death. 

Noting that these ten plagues prefigured the time of 
trouble in the end of this age, we are not surprised to find 
similarly ten plagues mentioned in connection with the time 
of trouble portrayed in Revelation as constituting the consummation 
of this present age and this "present evil world." 
There the first three plagues are called the woe trumpets, 
and following them come the "seven last trumpets." The 
first three apparently affect all, the last seven are restricted 
to those who are in opposition to the Lord. And so it was 
in the plagues of Egypt: the first three affected the Israelites 
as well as the Egyptians, but from the last seven the 
Israelites were exempted. 

UNDERSTANDABLE YET MIRACULOUS 

While these plagues were very remarkable they were 
less so than might occur to us, because many of them were 
merely intensified experiences along lines from which the 
Egyptians had previously suffered. The intensity of these, 
and the fact that they came in harmony with preannouncements, 
constituted the main features that would commend 
them to the Egyptians as miracles. For instance, the first 
two the Egyptian magicians were able to imitate on a small 
scale. The names of these magicians are given us in the New 
Testament, where it is stated that as Jannes and Jambres 

R3994 : page 152 

resisted Moses, so certain ones today resist the message of 
God at the hands of his servants and seek to produce counterfeit 
effects by the power of Satan.— 2 Tim. 3:8. 
The first plague— the waters turned to blood— caused 



serious inconvenience for the Egyptians, who are noted as 

the most cleanly of all the Orientals. They were obliged to 

dig wells near the river, using the soil as a purifier or 

strainer of the water. Of course the thought must be that 

the water became bloodlike. Gieke offers a not unreasonable 

suggestion respecting the basis of this miracle— that it 

was "the presence and inconceivably rapid growth of microscopic 

animals (infusoria) and minute cryptogamous plants 

of a red color. Ehrenberg, in 1823, saw the whole bay of 

the Red Sea at Sinai turned into the color of blood by the 

presence of such plants. In Silliman's Journal there is an 

account of a fountain of blood in a cave in South Africa. It 

grew solid and burst bottles in which it was put, and dogs 

ate it greedily. The cause of these wonders is a minute 

alga which grows so rapidly that it actually flows, and is so 

small that there are from 40,656,000,000 to 824,736,000,000 

plants in a cubic inch." 

Another writer says concerning the Nile, as he saw it 
one morning, "The entire mass of the waters was opaque 
and of a dark red, more like blood than anything else to 
which I could compare it."— Monumental History of 
Egypt, I., p. 10. 

The fact that we can imagine the process by which 
divine power produced this miracle does not interfere with 
its miraculousness, which is fully attested by its appearing 
just at the time indicated by Moses, and by the fact that it 
affected the water everywhere, even in household vessels. 

THE SECOND PLAGUE-THE FROGS 

Among the numerous Egyptian deities was the frog-head 
goddess, Heka. The supposition therefore is that 
this plague was a special reproach to that goddess and her 
worshippers, and particularly severe because it was not lawful 
for the Egyptians to kill their tormentors. They were 
so abundant as to constitute a plague in the truest sense. 
Frogs were everywhere, in the fields, in the streets, in the 
homes, in the beds, in the kneading troughs. Of the physical 
basis of this miracle Gieke remarks that frogs in distressing 
numbers frequently come from the river Nile: "In 
the height of inundation, the abounding moisture quickens 
inconceivable myriads of frogs and toads which swarm 
everywhere, even in ordinary years." 

The third plague— lice. The revised version margin 
renders the word lice sandflies, or fleas, and apparently 
with some reason. Sir Samuel Baker says of modern North 
Africa that, "At certain seasons it is as if the very dust of 
the land were turned into lice." He then describes the 
sandfly as a "sort of tick, not larger than a grain of sand, 
which when filled with blood expands to the size of a hazel 
nut." This miracle the magicians were unable to duplicate, 
and their words are the first historical definition of a miracle: 

R3995 : page 152 

they said, "This is the finger of God." 



The fourth plague— flies or beetles. The Hebrew word 
used in this connection is held to signify a mixture, that is 
various swarms of insects. The Septuagint translators, who 
lived in Egypt, considered the word to mean dog-flies; others 
hold that it signified beetles, a peculiarly serious plague to 
the Egyptians, because the beetle was considered the incarnation 
of Kephna, the Sun god, and was forbidden to be 
killed. A writer says,— 

"Modern Egypt is sometimes visited with enormous 
swarms of beetles which inflict very painful bites, gnaw and 
destroy clothes, household furniture and leather, and consume 
or render unavailable all edibles." 

This plague was also removed at Pharaoh's entreaty and 
his false promise to permit the people to go. 

The fifth plague— murrain. This is supposed to have 
been a kind of epizootic or contagious fever affecting all 
domestic animals. Rawlinson declares, "There were several 
murrains in the years 1842, 1863, 1866, in which last-named 
year nearly the whole of the herds were destroyed." It was 
marked as one of these plagues by its prediction for a definite 
day and from the exemption of the cattle of the 
Hebrews. 

THE SIXTH PLAGUE-BOILS 

This plague was started by the symbolical scattering 
toward heaven of ashes of a furnace— possibly in allusion 
to the furnace of affliction through which the Hebrews had 
been passing, or possibly in sarcastic imitation of the methods 
of the Egyptian priests, who yearly offered sacrifices of 
burnt human bodies, sometimes Hebrews— to Typhon, the 
god of evil, scattering the ashes thus in the air. 

The seventh plague— hail. This also was a very unusual 
experience for the Egyptians, for in their country thunder 
and lightning, snow and hail, are very rare. All the 
more it would be to them a demonstration of divine power; 
it terribly impressed them, besides causing serious loss not 
only to men and beasts but to vegetation. Pharaoh, alarmed, 
again proposed to accede to the demands, but again hardened 
his heart and refused when the plague was withdrawn. 

The eighth plague— locusts. A German writer says it 
often happens that immense swarms of locusts come to Egypt 
from Nubia. Wherever they appear they cover the ground 
for miles and sometimes to considerable depth. It is in vain 
to attempt to drive them away. Only when the last bit of 
grass and grain is devoured will they depart, leaving behind 
those which in the dense mass of insects were hurt and could 
not go further. It takes weeks to kill these remnants. A 
newspaper remarks that in 1881 two hundred and fifty tons 
of locusts were buried in Cyprus, each ton numbering over 
90,000,000 of these pests. In 1873 the writer witnessed a similar 
visitation of locusts or grasshoppers in the western part 
of the United States. They came in great clouds, obscuring 
the light of the sun as would a snow-storm, and greatly resembling 
it. Wherever they alighted it meant destruction. 
They were so plentiful that they could have been shoveled 



were they not continually in motion, and railway travel was 
greatly delayed in those parts by reason of the slipperiness 
of the tracks from the large numbers that were crushed. 
This also would be recognized as a plague because of its 
announcement and because of the usual exemption of the 
land of the Hebrews. Again Pharaoh repented, this time 
his courtiers urging upon him acquiescence with the command. 

R3995 : page 153 

Pharaoh even confessed sin, and yet subsequently 
hardened his heart and refused the people liberty. 

The ninth plague— darkness. The physical basis of 
this miracle is thus stated: "In April, about Easter, there 
begins in Egypt a period of fifty days called Chemsim, 
meaning fifty. During this period the south wind at times 
brings a storm of fine sand, which sometimes is terrible. 
Wherever the storm passes a crackling sound is heard, as of 
electric sparks. A nervous depression seizes mankind and 
domestic animals. This is the Egyptian darkness." 

Gieke says, "Artificial light at such times is of little use. 
The streets are practically emptied and a deep silence reigns 
everywhere." This plague of "deep darkness" impelled 
Pharaoh to grant the request of Moses provided the flocks 
and herds of the Hebrews did not go with them— a compromise 
which Moses promptly rejected. 

THE TENTH AND LAST PLAGUE 

The tenth plague— the death of the Egyptian firstborn. 
Ample opportunity had been given for repentance, 
and the record is that Pharaoh once more refused to let the 
children of Israel go, and subsequently it is recorded that 
God hardened his heart. We are not to suppose that God 
interfered with his free moral agency in the matter, but that 
this hardening of his heart was accomplished through the 
Lord's leniency— his prompt granting of release from one 
plague after another when Pharaoh repented and proposed 
obedience. The fact that he and his people had weathered 
so many of these storms and plagues doubtless encouraged 
the monarch to hope that eventually he would retain hold 
upon the Hebrews, despite all the threats and plagues. However, 
there was a limit to divine favor, and it was so arranged 
that that limit would not come until the people of Egypt 
had suffered a severer chastisement in punishment of their 
injustice toward the Hebrews. Although we are not living 
in a time when God is judging the world— rewarding and 
punishing every act of mankind, as will be done when Christ 
shall take to himself his great power and the Millennial 
reign shall begin— nevertheless we see that in the case of 
the Church there is a judgment already enforced along spiritual 
lines, so that those who have made a covenant with 
the Lord by sacrifice, if willing and obedient, receive an 
hundredfold more in the present time as well as in the 
blessings of the future, while those who neglect their covenant 
receive correction and stripes, and fail to enjoy the 



riches of God's grace and peace. The Scriptures inform us, 
however, that the world will not entirely escape the wrong 
doings of the present time— that every misdeed will work 
an injury to character in proportion as it was wilful and 
against the light, and that all such undermining of character 
will require repairs and rectification under the restitution 
processes of the Millennial age. Thus, on the whole, 
has been arranged a very just and equitable system of rewards 
and punishments, measured according to the knowledge 
and perversity of each individual. It is in line with 
this that the Scriptures speak of the time of trouble, which 
is now near at hand, as being a just compensation upon 
Christendom for its failures to recognize the principle of 
equity. The collapse of the world's institutions of civilization 
in a period of anarchy will be the penalty of disregard 
for the Golden Rule. 

WHY THE FIRST-BORN SUFFERED 

The smiting of the first-born of Egypt contained two 
lessons: (1) It was the most severe blow because the first-born 
of the nation would be the more prominent persons in 
each family. (2) But the special object in confining the 
plague to the first-born was to show that only the first-born 
of the Hebrews were spared or passed over. The other members 
of the Hebrew families were in no more danger of that 
plague than were the other members of the Egyptian families. 
Only the first-born were marked, indicated as in danger, 
while the rest were to be saved. The Scriptures clearly 
show that the Lord thus intended to indicate the passing 
over or sparing of the Church in the present time. The type 
therefore has nothing whatever to do with the world. Only 
the household of faith, known in the Scriptures as the 
Church of the First-born, have that degree of light and 
knowledge that would permit them to be on trial for eternal 
life, with the danger of losing the same in the Second Death. 

The world in general is not in this danger; they are 
still under the original condemnation, and hence not subject 
to the second condemnation or the Second Death. This type 
marks clearly what all the Scriptures so forcefully express, 
namely, that the present is the trial time of the Church, as 
the Apostle expresses it, "If we sin wilfully after that we 
have received a knowledge of the truth there remaineth no 
more a sacrifice for sin, but a certain fearful looking forward 
to of judgment that would devour us as adversaries of God." 
Again he says, "As touching those who were once enlightened 
and have tasted of the heavenly gift, and were made 
partakers of the holy Spirit and tasted the good Word of 
God and the powers of the age to come, if these fall away it 
is impossible again to renew them unto repentance; seeing 
that they crucify to themselves the Son of God afresh and 
put him to an open shame."— Heb. 6:4,6; 10:26,27. 

Not only is the Gospel Church scripturally termed the 
"Church of the First-born," but it is also spoken of as the first-fruits 
unto God of his creatures. (Heb. 12:23; Jas. 1:18.) The 
two thoughts are in full accord; first-born ones imply later-born 



ones, first-fruits imply later-fruits. Thus does the Lord 

draw our attention to the fact that, while his plan has had 

its most gracious beginning with the elect of this Gospel age, 

his favor will not end with these, but ultimately proceed to 

all the families of the earth in accord with his great Oath-Bound 

Covenant to Abraham, "In thy Seed shall all the 

families of the earth be blessed." The First-born constitute 

the Seed class. Christ is the Head or first of this First-born 

company, but it will not be complete until the last 

member of the body of Christ shall have been passed over 

from the earthly to the heavenly life and nature. 

LIFE ONLY UNDER THE BLOOD 

We have already noted that only the first three of the 
plagues extended to the habitations of the Hebrews, but in 
announcing to the people the tenth plague Moses informed 
the Hebrews that they also would be subject to this plague, 
except under the one condition— that they should remain 
inside their houses during this Passover night, and that the 

R3996 : page 154 

outside of the doorposts and lintels of their homes should be 
sprinkled with the blood of a specially sacrificed lamb, 
whose flesh was to be eaten during that night by those within 
the house. The message to them was, "The Lord will 
pass through to smite the Egyptians, and when he seeth the 
blood upon the lintel and the two side posts, the Lord will 
pass over the door and will not suffer the destroyer to come 
into your house to smite you." 

How profoundly simple yet strong are the divine testimonies 
and types in their instruction of the Spiritual Israelites 
respecting the necessities for faith in the precious blood 
as the only ground of acceptance with God, the only protection 
from the Second Death of those begotten of the holy 
Spirit. We do not think it strange that the world despises 
the blood, speaks lightly of the blood sacrifice of the Hebrews; 
but we are amazed that any of the Lord's people, 
after having once tasted in the sense of appreciating the 
merits of God's favor through the sacrifice of Christ, the 
Lamb of God— after once having realized that Christ died 
the Just for the unjust that he might bring us back to God's 
favor— after once having appreciated the fact that the death 
penalty was upon the race, that Christ died as father 
Adam's substitute, thus to redeem him and all who lost life 
in him— after all this we marvel greatly that any such could 
do despite to the blood of the Covenant with which we are 
sanctified— we marvel that any such could go out from 
under the blood, thus repudiating it and doing despite to 
the divine favor thus manifested on our behalf. It is not 
for us to determine positively those who have been begotten 
of the holy Spirit and who have subsequently repudiated 
the merit of our Lord's atonement sacrifice on our behalf, 
but it is for us to recognize that all who take such a step 
wilfully, intelligently, deliberately, have fallen out of divine 



grace and have become a second time children of wrath, and 
that their case is a hopeless one, that they will be subject 
to the Second Death. It is respecting this form of sin that 
the Apostle declares, "There is a sin unto death: I do not 
say that you should pray for it." Prayers for those who 
have taken themselves deliberately out of the Lord's hands 
and rejected the precious sacrifice which he provided for 
their covering would be unavailing, useless. 

We picture before our minds the scenes of that night: 
the Hebrews by instruction were prepared for their journey 
into Canaan, and merely waiting for the morning light and 
the preparation which the tenth plague would effect by discouraging 
the Egyptians and leading them really to facilitate 
the departure of their bond-servants. Each family group 
had its lamb roasted with fire and without a bone broken. 
Each group must feed upon the lamb with unleavened bread 
and bitter herbs, with sandals on and staff in hand as sojourners. 
All of these details represented the household of 
faith during this Gospel age, the bitter herbs representing 
the trials and difficulties of life, which will only tend to 
sharpen our appetite for and our appreciation of the Lamb, 
and of the unleavened bread, which also symbolizes the 
flesh of Jesus. We are still eating, still waiting, still under 
the blood, but the morning is now very near, when all the 
passed-over ones, represented thereafter in the priestly type 
of Levi, will be the first to pass beyond the power of the 
antitypical Pharaoh, the Adversary— and lead forth all the 
remainder of mankind, willing to become Israelites indeed. 
Under the New Covenant arrangement typified by the Law 
Covenant, the Royal Priesthood, Christ and his Church in 
glory, will antitype the Aaronic priesthood, while the associated 
Great Company will be the antitype of the tribe of the 
Levites. 

A WELL -ATTESTED MIRACLE 

For over 1600 years the people of Israel, by divine commandment, 
celebrated this passing over of their first-born on 
the night before they left Egypt; and our Lord, in the same 
night in which he was betrayed, his last night of earthly 
life, not only celebrated this Passover Supper but gave his 
followers a new Memorial as a substitute for it, unleavened 
bread and the fruit of the vine as the symbol of our greater 
Passover, through faith in his blood, and as perpetuating the 
central thought of the original Passover we have under consideration. 
Here then is a celebration observed throughout 
the whole world today, and which we know has been in 
force as a Memorial for over 3500 years! Can anyone of reasonable 
mind doubt the origin of this sacred Memorial, whether 
its significance is seen or not— whether its value is recognized 
or not— whether its antitypical meaning is seen or not? We 
hold that this Memorial is one of the strongest confirmations 
of the divine plan and purpose, and we much regret that 
many intelligent people observing the Memorial of our Lord's 
death fail to grasp the fact that it is a Memorial of that 
which was typified in Israel's Passover. If this fact were 



generally recognized, in how brief time all Christian people 
would celebrate the Memorial on its anniversary, actual or 
approximate, as did the Lord and his apostles and the early 
Church— and as we still do. 

WHAT MEAN YE BY THIS SERVICE? 

Most particularly did the Lord direct in respect to the 
observance of the type and its signification. Parents were 
to tell their children the story of the passing over of the 
first-born and of the favor of God thus manifested toward 
them, and of the deliverance thus effected on their behalf. 
And judging from the observance of the matter today 
amongst the Hebrews, we can well imagine that the divine 
injunction was never at any time overlooked. The Passover 
is the most important of all the Jewish festivals, corresponding 
in the spring of the year to the Atonement Day Memorial 
six months later. And if it was appropriate that the typical 
Israelite who knew only of the typical passing over should 
tell his children of the Lord's goodness and mercy, how 
much more should the spiritual Israelite, who discerns the 
antitype, and who recognizes the Lord Jesus as the antitypical 
Lamb, and the period of this Gospel age as the antitypical 
night of passing over, and the merit of Christ's sacrifice as 
the antitypical sprinkling of the blood, and the feeding upon 
Christ in our hearts, and the acceptance of his meritorious 
sacrifice as the antitype of Israel's going out of Egypt— how 
much more shall we feel it not only to be a duty but a privilege 
to tell our children, yea, and all who have ears to hear, 
respecting the grace of God in Christ, and the blessed opportunity 
of being passed over granted to all those who now by 
faith accept the divine favor, and present their bodies living 

R3996 : page 155 

sacrifices and become partakers of the holy Spirit. If any 
of us have been slack or remiss in respect to the telling of 
this great message, let us resolve that we shall be on the 
alert hereafter, and that we will more and more appreciate 
the opportunity to show forth the praises of our Lord. 
Let us remember the Golden Text, "When I see the 
blood I will pass over you." Let us all see to it that the 
blood of Christ is ever recognized, not only within our hearts 
but confessed, sprinkled, manifested, and declared outwardly 
to others. Let us remember the Apostle's words that 
without the shedding of blood there is no remission, and 
applying this thought let us recognize that we have remission 
of sins only in proportion as we recognize the merit of the 
great sin-offering effected by our Lord, finished at Calvary. 



R3996 : page 155 

THE SALVATION OF THE LORD 



--EXODUS 14: 13-27. -JUNE 16.- 

Golden Text:— "Thus the Lord saved Israel that day 
out of the hands of the Egyptians: and Israel saw the 
Egyptians dead upon the seashore."— Exodus 14:30. 

THE tenth plague, the death of all their first-born, convinced 

the Egyptians of the advisability of getting 

rid of the Hebrews. Forthwith they were as anxious 

to have the people go from them as they previously 

had been anxious to retain them. They now helped them 

and urged them, and when the Israelites asked for (in 

the text "borrowed") mementos, such as jewels, etc., 

they gave to them, urging their departure, and probably 

feeling that with this generosity they were to some extent 

making good for the long years of compulsory labor they 

had exacted. By preconcerted arrangement, the Hebrews 

quickly gathered to Succoth, en route for Palestine, nearly 

two millions of them, with flocks and herds which must have 

been of quite large numbers. If it seems impossible to us that 

the people should depart so suddenly, it is well that we remember 

that they had been waiting and preparing for the auspicious 

moment when Pharaoh should say that they might 

go. It should be remembered, too, that the people of that 

time, and to this day the people of that land, are much less 

encumbered by what we would consider necessities. The 

fellaheen of the Egyptians and the Arabs of the desert think 

R3997 : page 155 

nothing of lying down to sleep for the night by the roadside, 
wrapped in their outer garments, sometimes with a stone for 
a pillow as did Jacob. Stanley mentions a somewhat similar 
case, saying: 

"In illustration of the event, a sudden retreat is recorded 
of a whole nomadic people— 400,000 Tartars— under 
cover of a single night, from the confines of Russia into their 
native deserts, as late as the close of the last century." 

Bishop C. H. Fowler offers a helpful comment, as 
follows:— 

"In our own times, in this very century, we have witnessed 
an exodus from near that very land of Goshen where 
the Israelites dwelt. Mohammed Ali wished to manufacture 
silk, so he planted Jerusalem with mulberry trees and attracted 
Syrians from Damascus and Bedouin Arabs from 
Arabia, to whom he gave fertile pasture lands and freedom 
from taxation and military practice. They prospered and 
multiplied for many years. After the death of Mohammed 
Ali an attempt was made to tax and conscript them. Protestations 
were disregarded; therefore in one night the whole 
population, with their herds and flocks, moved away to their 
kinsfolk to the east of Egypt, leaving their homes empty and 
the valley a desolation, in which condition it was when De 
Lesseps dug his fresh-water canal." 

The hosts of the Israelites first moved northward and 
eastward to Etham, then turning about went southward. 



This has the appearance of vacillation on the part of Moses, 
the leader, and on the part of God, his director. But we 
may be sure that known unto the Lord are all his ways, 
and hence that this movement was of design. The original 
intention probably was to follow the usual route out of 
Egypt to Palestine through the land of the Philistines, but 
the people were in no condition to battle with the latter. 
Another route would have been through the desert, but it 
would have been almost impossible because of their numbers 
and their flocks, and the fact that there would have 
been no pasturage, a deficiency of water, etc. 

A BRIGHT CLOUD--A DARK CLOUD 

They were guided south by the Lord directly by a 
cloud which was bright at night and dark in the daytime, 
affording them a measure of shelter from the heat of the 
sun. This phenomenon would probably not be noticed by 
the Egyptians and others, but was recognized by the Israelites 
because of their instructions, and because they had 
learned to have confidence in God as their leader. It was 
not, we are sure, anything like what some have pictured it 
—so radical a violation of nature as to be a demonstrated 
miracle. It was present with the people through all their 
wanderings in the wilderness for forty years, and was an 
evidence of the Lord's special care over them, and should 
have been a great aid to their faith. Only when they had 
finally crossed Jordan into Canaan was this phenomenon 
discontinued. 

While following the narrative of Israel's deliverance 
and divine guidance, spiritual Israel must not overlook the 
fact that our deliverance from the world, symbolized by 
Egypt, is a still more wonderful one. As we under the 
Lord's providence began our escape from the power of the 
world, the flesh and the Adversary, there are different ways 
of escape possible, some more and some less favorable. Left 
to ourselves we might choose the wrong way of the Philistines, 
where the battles would be too hard for us, or the 
way of the desert, where we would be discouraged and famished. 
It is for us to look for the Lord's providences in our 
affairs at this time, and to find them guiding us, sheltering 
us from the heat of persecution and tribulation and trial, 
and again at other times enlightening us, refreshing us in 
the dark seasons. And this leading of divine providence is 
intended to be ours so long as we are of the true Israel of 
God, until we pass over Jordan into heavenly Canaan and 
need such special providences no further. Blessed are those 
whose faith is awake and on the alert, and who discern the 

R3997 : page 156 

Lord's favors which the world will not discern, and which 
only those in the right attitude of mind can appreciate. O, 
Lord, help us more and more to appreciate thy leadings, thy 
providences, and to trust to thy wisdom in all of life's affairs, 
until thereby we shall be guided by thy Word and 



thy grace to the heavenly Canaan and its rest! 
ENTANGLED IN THE LAND 

The Israelites took the change of journey from northeast 
to south with full confidence because of their recognition 
of the leading of the Lord in the cloud that was dark 
by day and bright by night. But the Egyptians viewed 
the matter differently. Several days had now elapsed, their 
mourning for the first-born was ended, and they began to 
think of the loss they had sustained. The fact that the 
Israelites were probably efficient servants, the fact that the 
Egyptians had been accustomed to using them in their own 
interests for a long time, and that the people were without 
military qualifications and arms, suggested to the Egyptians 
that it would be an easy matter to overtake them, to turn 
them back again— to say, Now you have had a few days as 
you desired, turn back again into the old lines. As they 
perceived the changed course of the Israelites, first northeast 
and then south, they concluded that they were entangled 
in the land— that is to say, that they were lost, did 
not know where they were going. Indeed this would be 
the natural conclusion, for as we look upon the map we 
find that they were marching to the Egyptian side of the 
Red Sea, whereas they wished really to go to the opposite 
side, to enter Palestine. We can imagine the Egyptians 
saying, "Poor, foolish people! they were far better with us 
even at hard bondage than free; they know not what to do; 
they will scatter by and by, and the majority doubtless will 
come back to us anyway." Selfishness may even have suggested 
that it was their duty to hold them in restraint— to 
turn them back again to be the bond-servants of the Egyptians. 
The Egyptians had not yet learned the lesson that 
it was the God of Israel they had to contend with. Neither, 
perhaps, had the Israelites sufficiently learned that it was 
God who was bringing them forth and not themselves and 
not Moses. 

The hosts of the Israelites had by this time gotten well 
to the westward of the Bitter Lakes, which lengthen out the 
northernmost tongue of the Red Sea, when the word reached 
them that Pharaoh's six hundred chariots were coming. 
Terror spread throughout the mixed multitude: children 
cried, mothers wrung their hands and wept, and the strongest 
hearts of the Israelites were sore perplexed. As children 
to a father they came to Moses, saying, Is it because 
there was no grave-room in Egypt that you brought us away 
to die in the wilderness? Why did you thus— to bring us 
out of Egypt? Why did you not hearken to us when in 
Egypt we said, Let us alone that we may serve the Egyptians? 
Would it not have been better for us to serve them 
than that we should die in the wilderness? 

SPIRITUAL ISRAELITES ENTANGLED TOO 

It is the same with many spiritual Israelites: having 
started to leave the world they are of insufficient faith, and 



when beset by temptations and difficulties they are inclined 

to wish they had never started in the better way and toward 

the freedom wherewith Christ makes free, and toward the 

Canaan rest and blessing which he has promised but which 

to them seems so far off— so utterly impossible to be reached. 

But Moses was of better faith and courage, as well he might 

be, because of his superior advantages every way. He represented 

our Leader, under whose direction and encouragement 

we have left the world behind. And so our Leader 

says to us, as Moses said to them, "Fear ye not! stand still, 

and see the salvation of the Lord which he will accomplish 

for you this day. And as for your enemies the Egyptians, 

whom ye fear, ye shall see them no more again forever." 

Evidently Moses was in very close touch with Jehovah when 

he could prophesy such an outcome in the face of such disastrous 

appearances. Similarly we may have confidence in 

our Lord Jesus when he assures us that the power of the 

Adversary is limited, that it shall not go beyond the limitations 

of this present evil world; that tomorrow, in the Millennial 

age, we shall witness the overthrow of all the powers 

of evil. Moses added, "The Lord shall fight for you and 

ye shall hold your peace." This is the promise to the spiritual 

Israelites— "Greater is he that is on our part than all 

they that be with them," however mighty they may appear: 

"If God be for us who can be against us?"— to ultimate success; 

therefore "I will fear no evil, for thou art with me; 

thy rod and thy staff they comfort me." 

THE ISRAELITES COMMANDED TO GO FORWARD 

Before the Israelites was the tongue of the Red Sea, 
the chain of the Bitter Lakes; behind them the land of 
Egypt, and immediately in their rear Pharaoh's chariots and 
charioteers. The Israelites had not yet approached the water's 
edge. The command was that they should go forward, 
and no explanation was made of how the path would be 
opened for them through the waters. Not only was the 
faith of Moses demonstrated in the command, but the faith 
of the Israelites was also tested in their obediently going in 
the direction of the water. Is it not thus with spiritual 
Israelites? Does not the Lord sometimes allow adversity, 
difficulties, oppositions, to hedge us in? Does he not sometimes 
lead us by a way from which there seems to be no 
escape from some impending evil? This is the time to 
hearken to his voice and in faith to go forward, nothing 
doubting— trusting that he who has begun the good work 
in us will complete it unto the day of Jesus Christ— in the 
Millennial morning. 

R3998 : page 156 

By divine direction Moses lifted up his rod and stretched 
out his hand over the sea, with the assurance that it 
would divide and furnish the necessary exit from their impending 
difficulties. Those who read this narrative and in 
their minds imagine the Israelites at one side of the Red 



Sea, and an intervening fifty miles or so across to the other 
shore, and who further imagine that the waters of the sea 
opened and stood upright hundreds of feet in perpendicular 
walls on either side, while the Israelites first went downward 
to its bottom and then upward along its shores on the other 
side, are taxing their faith unnecessarily. Not that we are 
to doubt that if necessity arose God could wipe out the Red 
Sea entirely, but that it is not necessary to so suppose when 
circumstances and conditions are rightly understood. We 
may well suppose that God does not make his miracles 
more stupendous than necessary. Let us look at this miracle 

R3998 : page 157 

as it really occurred, and then see its reasonableness. 
The fact that we can understand the procedure should not 
make the matter any less a miracle in our estimation. 
Let us have in mind the fact that the Red Sea at its 
upper end connects with a stretch of low country in which 
are a number of lakes, called Bitter Lakes, the water being 
brackish. At this time the Red Sea, which is merely a 
large lake, must have been very nearly connected with the 
Mediterranean Sea. At its upper end, the junction point 
with marshy lands and the Bitter Lakes, the water is at no 
great depth, so that at times when the tide is low cavalry have 
forded it— for instance, Napoleon and an escort, the former 
nearly losing his life on the occasion. When the tide comes 
in the condition of things is very different indeed, for the 
tide-rise at this point seems very high. 

THE PHILOSOPHY OF A MIRACLE 

The entire narrative of the lesson is in accord with what 
we have seen. A strong wind blew to the northward, and, 
cooperating with the tide, exposed a wide sandbar across 
which the Israelites passed in safety toward morning, aided 
by the light from the cloud, which at this time was to their 
northward and served as a cloud of darkness to the Egyptians 
and of light to the Israelites, so that the pursuers had 
difficulty in the chase and probably were guided more by 
the sound of the confusion and flight of the Israelites than by 
anything else. It is entirely probable that the Egyptians 
were not aware that the tide and the wind had formed the 
sandbar, and that they were on it pursuing the Israelites. 
By the time the latter had reached the further bank of the 
sea, possibly two miles across, Moses again stretched forth 
his hand with his rod, and the wind's course again changed, 
the waters began to return, aided by the turning of the tide. 
Meantime the Egyptians in the midst of the sea found their 
chariot wheels choked by the soft sand, their horses sinking 
and struggling broke the wheels, there was general confusion, 
which held them until the tide was upon them and 
many if not all of them were drowned. 

"An east or southeast wind arose and moved the upper 
water of the shallow bay toward the northwest, while probably 
a strong ebb tide set in at the same time and drew the 



lower water southwards, so that the bed of the sea was for 
a considerable space laid bare."— Rawlinson. 

"This was soon after the full moon of the vernal equinox, 
when there would be a very low ebb and a very high 
flood. The tide rises from five to seven feet opposite Suez, 
and from eight to nine feet when aided by strong winds, 
returning with unusual suddenness and power after the 
ebb."— Newhall. 

"M. DeLesseps mentioned to me the extraordinary facts 
of this kind which he had witnessed in storms which occurred 
at intervals of fifteen or twenty years. He had seen 
the northern end of the sea in places blown almost dry, 
and again had seen the waters driven far over the land 
toward the Bitter Lakes."— President Bartlett. 

"It is God's usual method to make the most of natural 
causes, to make the supernatural begin only where the natural 
ends."— Blakie. 

"The coming of the wind at once, in connection with 
the symbolical act of Moses, is as much a miracle as the 
immediate division of the waters without the intervention of 
any secondary cause would have been."— Taylor. 

"The waters were a wall unto them on the right hand 
and on their left": this need not imply a perpendicular 
wall, but rather a protection, a shield on either side. The 
Israelites could go forward, knowing that their only danger 
was in the rear because the waters protected their flanks. 

THE EGYPTIANS OVERTHROWN 

If we still entertain the thought we once had that all 
mankind are on trial for eternal life in the present existence, 
and that all failure to gain eternal life means eternal torment, 
we would be inclined to wonder why Moses and the 
Israelites did not face about and begin to preach to the 
Egyptians. Indeed we might wonder why they left Egypt 
at all— why they did not become missionaries amongst 
them— why God delivered them from such a glorious opportunity 
for mission work. Then we would wonder, too, how 
Moses and the Israelites could rejoice in the thought that 
thousands of their enemies had gone to eternal torment. 
We thank God that in his providence he has enabled us to 
see the teachings of his Word more clearly. We see that 
the time had not yet come for the preaching of the Gospel, 
because the time had not yet come for the atonement for 
sin. Hence there could not be any offer of eternal life to 
the Egyptians, for Christ did not come to die for man's sins 
for more than sixteen centuries later; and even after he 
came his work was not for the world, even as he prayed not 
for the world— "I pray not for the world, but for those whom 
thou hast given me." (John 17:9.) The work of gathering 
the elect is the first item on the divine program: with its 
consummation the present age will end, and then will begin 
the work for the world. Then those Egyptians and the 
Sodomites, with all the families of the earth, shall be blessed 
through Abraham's seed— Christ and the Church, the spiritual 
seed, and the natural Israelites, the earthly seed. 



We see then, that as the Sodomites went down into 
death, so those hosts of the Egyptians went down into 
death, and all mankind go down into the great prison-house, 
the tomb, sheol, hades. We rejoice, too, that the Master 
says that surely "all that are in their graves shall come 
forth" (John 5:28,29)— the few, the faithful, into the perfection 
of life, the masses unto a time of trial and testing 
and opportunity in connection with judgments and disciplines, 
so that if obedient they may ultimately also attain 
everlasting life through the knowledge of God's dear Son 
and obedience to him. Remembering our Master's words, 
that it will be more tolerable for Sodom and Gomorrah in 
that day of the world's judgment than for many who had 
greater enlightenment, we may wonder if it will not also be 
true that some of these Egyptian charioteers, who in blindness 
and selfishness pursued the Israelites, will not be found 
more excusable than some of the natural seed of Abraham 
whom Moses led out, but who, because of lack of faith, died 
in the wilderness. The overthrow of the Egyptian hosts at 
the hand of Moses prefigured the ultimate overthrow of the 
powers of evil and sin and bondage at the hands of Christ. 

"THE SONG OF MOSES AND THE LAMB" 

If evidence were necessary to disprove the claim of evolution 
—that the people of early times were one remove from 
monkeys— that proof would be found in the way the Israelites 
accepted the victory the Lord had given them in their 

R3998 : page 158 

own passage of the sea in safety and of the destruction 

therein of their pursuers and enemies. Did they riot in a 

carnival of vice? Did they have a war-dance with tom-toms? 

Quite to the contrary. Overflowing with religious 

sentiment, they gave thanks unto the Lord God, recognizing 

him as their Deliverer. Moses composed a hymn of praise 

in which the people joined, while Moses' sister Miriam and 

the singing women prepared a response to the various parts of 

the hymn of praise. Hebrew scholars have remarked on the 

evidence of the antiquity of the song of Moses, recorded in 

Exodus 15: 1-20, some even noting the fact that a few of the 

words showed an intermingling of the Egyptian language. 

It is further authenticated by the reference made to it in the 

book of Psalms, where the entire matter of the deliverance 

of the people and the overthrow of their enemies in the sea 

is graphically described by the sweet singer of Israel. (Psa. 106:7-12.) 

The incident and the Song of Moses are further 

corroborated by our Lord in his last message to the Church, 

in which he represents in symbol a certain class of his followers 

experiencing a great deliverance in the end of this 

age and singing, "The song of Moses, the servant of God, 

and of the Lamb."— Rev. 15:2,3. 

If it was appropriate, as we all admit that it was, that 
the Israelites should give glory to God for their deliverance 
from the bondage of Egypt, much more is it appropriate 



that spiritual Israel should recognize the still greater deliverance 
from the power of Satan and the thraldom of sin, 
accomplished for us through the blood of the Lamb of God 
who died for our sins. If the illiterate people who had been 
in a measure of slavery for a long period and who had not 
the advantages of this Gospel age were prompted to give 
thanks to the Lord, how much more should we, who have 
tasted of his grace and goodness, show forth the praises of 
him who hath called us out of darkness into his marvellous 
light." (1 Pet. 2:9.) What wonder, then, that the Scriptures 
everywhere refer to the Lord's people as being ministers, 
servants, of the Truth, and declare that the Lord has 

R3999 : page 158 

not only lifted our feet from the horrible pit and miry clay 
of sin and death, but has additionally "put into our mouths a 
new song, even the loving-kindness of our God."— Psa. 40:2,3. 

This song can now be sung by us who can exercise 
faith in the Lord, in his Word, in his providence, but it is 
not its complete fulfilment: that will be attained when all 
the people of God shall have been found— when the Lord's 
mercy during the Millennial age shall have opened the 
blind eyes of the world, unstopped the deaf ears, caused the 
knowledge of the Lord to fill the whole earth, and gathered 
all who are truly the Lord's to himself, and during the Millennial 
age shall have lifted them out of the bondage of sin and 
death and brought them into full harmony with the divine 
standard by the processes of restitution, according as it is 
written— There shall "be times of restitution of all things 
which God hath promised by the mouth of all the holy 
prophets since the world began." (Acts 3:19-21.) Then 
will be the great fulfilment of this passage of the Red Sea, 
and the overthrow of the enemies of the Lord and his people. 
It will be then, at the end of the Millennial age, that 
Satan and all who are on his side, enemies of righteousness, 
will be forever destroyed, and at the same time all who love 
righteousness and hate iniquity and avail themselves of the 
Lord's favors, privileges, will then be saved to the powers of 
an eternal life, under the leadership of the great antitypical 
Moses, as it is written— "A Prophet shall the Lord your God 
raise up unto you from amongst your brethren like unto 
me [Moses]; him shall ye hear in all things whatsoever he 
shall say unto you. And it shall come to pass that the soul 
that will not obey that Prophet shall be destroyed from 
amongst the people."— Acts 3:22,23. 



R3999 : page 158 

BELATED REPORTS FROM FOREIGN BRANCHES 
FOR THE YEAR 1906 
Melbourne, Australia. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

Once more it is my duty and privilege to send the 
Annual Report from this Branch. 

The past year has been one of progress in some 
directions, particularly so in the number of DAWNS 
sold and new interest in the Truth developed. The 
increase in the circulation of DAWNS has been more 
than 100 copies per week above the rate for the previous 
twelve months. Most of these have been circulated 
through the faithful efforts of the Colporteurs, 
who have been very successful in these colonies. 

Although a good deal has been accomplished in 
this direction, much more remains to be done; and it is 
still appropriate for us to ask the Lord of the harvest 
to send more laborers into his vineyard. Many of our 
friends who have become interested in these things in 
the past year have reason to thank God for the Colporteur. 
And this fact should encourage not only those 
who are now devoting their energies to this work, but 
also any who may be considering the feasibility of giving 
up all earthly hopes and ambitions for the privileges 
(sometimes laborious) of this service of the 
Truth. We shall be glad to hear from such, and to 
encourage and assist them in any way we can. The 
greatest number of orders secured by any one of our 
Colporteurs in one day in the past twelve months was 
for 126 volumes. 

The Volunteer work of tract distribution has also 
had attention in the past year, albeit the total number 
of pages circulated is under the record for the previous 
twelve months. Probably some of our new friends do 
not clearly understand the opportunities, or are diffident 
about asking for the tracts free— enough to put 
them into every house in their districts. Let such hesitate 
no longer; the tracts are available, and the 
Lord's blessing has been so markedly upon this form 
of service in past years, that we may feel confident 
he will acknowledge it again. 

Pilgrim service has been somewhat hindered in the 
past twelve months. No extended tour has been made, 
but several series of Chart Talks have been given in 
the vicinity of Melbourne. God willing, we hope to 
travel some in 1907, and we now request the friends in 
all parts of Australia and New Zealand, who would be 
able and willing to arrange for two or three days public 
or cottage meetings, to send their answers to the 
"Pilgrim Questions," as published in ZION'S WATCH 
TOWER, to the Melbourne Office, so that the dates may 
be fixed. Promptness in this matter will be appreciated, 
as we may not be able to alter a route, once it is 
arranged. 

The tale of the Australasian Branch Tract Fund is 
still rather a melancholy one. Conforming to the 
principles governing the Society's work since its inception, 
we have never solicited a donation, all that 



we report being entirely voluntary on the part of the 
donors, as the Spirit has prompted them. Up to now, 
we have to acknowledge the favor of God as expressed, 
in this particular direction, through the Head Office, 
which has enabled us to go so far as we have done with 
the work of circulating free literature, Pilgrim Service, 

R3999 : page 159 

etc., etc., the expenses of which are charged to this 
Fund. 

As we observe the progress of events in this peculiar 
time, we see that some are drinking in the Truth 
as it were the "new wine" of the Kingdom joys; and 
are being refreshed thereby. Others are drinking the 
"mixed wine" (confused doctrine of Babylon) and are 
being stupefied thereby. So drunk are these last becoming 
that they will presently have quite lost their 
senses. (Obadiah 16.) But the sight of these is a 
good token for those who are of the day, for such can 
realize that the deliverance is even now on Mount Zion. 
Let us, then, feel encouraged to lift up our heads, always 
remembering that one more year behind means 
one less in front, between us and the goal, at which 
having arrived we shall not have to think of one less, 
but always more and more. 

Soliciting a continued interest in your prayers and 
in those of all saints, on behalf of the Australasian 
Work and Harvest Workers, I remain, dear brother, 

Your brother and Christ's, E. C. HENNINGES. 

AUSTRALASIAN BRANCH SUMMARY 

Publications Circulated 

Copies of "Millennial Dawn" 21,389 

Tower Dawn" 1,560 

" " Booklets 2,010 

Total 24,959 

Copies of Tracts and Z.W.T. sent free 249,700 

These represent tract pages 3,935,800 

Letters and cards received 1,699 

" " " sent out 2,367 

Total 4,066 

Expenditures L. s. d. 

Deficit from last year 438 3 5 

Printing, paper, postage, freight (in and out), 

rent, gas, Tracts, etc 306 118 

Pilgrim Work, Meeting Expenses, etc 38 6 11 

Total 783 2 

Receipts 
Receipts from Australasia 176 4 11 



Deficit, owing to Head Office at Allegheny, 
Pa., U.S.A 606 18 1 



Stockholm, Sweden. 
DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

When I in the last issues of the TOWER read with 
great pleasure and thankfulness to God, the reports 
of the WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY'S work 
the last year by its different branches, then I have also 
at the same time felt a little ashamed, or sorry, because 
of my lack of opportunity to make and send a report 
from this branch to you in due time— this so much 
more as I never during the eight years since the 
work here was started, have been able to give you as 
detailed reports from this place as could have been 
desirable. 

We are, of course, not so many in Present Truth 
here, nor is the work so advanced amongst us as in the 
more important parts of the great harvest field, but we 
feel sure that it is the Lord that has guided us hitherto 
in grasping the Truth and in keeping us active in 
the service, and we trust that he will enable us to still 
better appreciate, with all the saints, the privilege in 
having opportunities to be his co-laborers and also to 
use the same still better in the future. I think we are 
now at least one thousand in this country which rejoice 
in the Lord and in his great plan of salvation, as it has 
been revealed to us by the MILLENNIAL DAWN and 
other publications of you, his servant, and I have herewith 
the privilege to bring you our deep and thankful 
greetings and Christian love. We remember you continually 
in our prayers and we rejoice in the thought 
that by and by you will see better how much your service 
has profited us. 

R4000 : page 159 

Nevertheless, I will now state some few facts of 
the work done through this branch during the past 
year, 1906. We have yet some reasons for believing 
that we in some lines at least will be able to do two 
times so much in this new year 1907 as in the past 
year. Indeed the "fields are white to the harvest" here, 
and we are zealous to be used of the great King in his 
reaping work, as he will grant us opportunities before 
the closing of "the door." Besides the wide territory 
yet untouched in this country, we have the whole of 
Finland, where we hope to find a good number of our 
Lord's jewels. My dear wife has lately tried to do 
some colporteur work there and the results were very 
encouraging. God willing, she will soon go to Finland 
again to pursue the work there, and besides we have 
now five other good colporteurs engaged here in Sweden 



and hope for still more. 

During the year we had one General Convention 
in Stockholm, attended by 200 interested friends, and 
besides this some smaller conventions in other parts of 
the country. The Pilgrim work by Brother Edberg 
and other dear brethren has been very much appreciated 
amongst the friends, and has given good results. 
The mileage covered in preaching tours was 11,501, 
and about 400 meetings were held. 

The Swedish Zion's Vakt-Torn (now 16 pages 
monthly) has had 1,184 subscribers during the year, and 
we know by a great multitude of letters that it has been 
useful and helpful for many (I would hope for all) of 
them. We have printed 3,000, as minimum, of each 
issue, which allows a good deal for sample copies, answers 
of special questions to new friends, etc. We 
have had the privilege to publish the fifth volume of 
MILLENNIAL DAWN in a Swedish edition (7,000 copies), 
and we feel that this solid and precious book has an 
important mission to fill amongst the Lord's Swedish 
people. 

Praying divine grace and guidance for yourself 
continually and for all the dear brethren everywhere 
(whom we hope to meet before long "on the other 
side") and asking your prayers for us here in this part 
of the harvest field, I am, 

Your thankful and happy brother and co-laborer, 
AUG. LUNDBORG. 

WORK ACCOMPLISHED THROUGH THE SWEDISH 
BRANCH, 1906 

"Dawns," various bindings, sold 5,129 

Various booklets, "About Hell," "Tabernacle Shadows," 

etc., sold 2,184 

Annual sets Swedish "Tower," cloth-bound and unbound 261 
Sample "Towers" and tract numbers of Zion's Vakt-Torn 

free 60,719 

Expressed in usual form of tract pages 2,026,816 

Letters and cards sent out from this office 845 

FINANCIAL SUMMARY 

Expenditures 
Pilgrim, Convention and other meetings, kr. 1,544.71 $ 411.92 

For translation, printing, etc " 6,647.07 1,772.55 

Freight and postage " 889.57 237.22 

Office expenses, rent, inventory, light, 

heat, telephone, etc " 3,596.12 958.70 

From Allegheny 802.75 

$4,183.14 
Receipts 
Voluntary Donations to the Tract Fund., kr.3,227.16 $ 860.58 

Swedish "Tower" subscriptions " 1,312.17 349.91 

Sold books and other incomes " 5,437.14 1,449.90 



2,660.39 
Deficit, 1906 $1,522.75 



page 161 



SEMI-MONTHLY 
VOL. XXVIII JUNE 1 No. 11 
A.D. 1907--A.M. 6035 



CONTENTS 

"Go Ye Also into the Vineyard" 163 

Volunteers, Sharpshooters, Colporteurs, 
Pilgrims 164 

Laboring Amongst the Colored People 165 

Is the Fate of a Soul Fixed at Death? 165 

Berean Bible Study in Tabernacle Shadows 167 

The Faithful Approved and Tested 168 

In the School of Discipline 169 

The Trial of Your Faith 170 

Things Lawful Not Expedient 171 

"Am I My Brother's Keeper?" 172 

"Eat, Asking No Questions" 173 

"All to the Glory of God" 174 

An Encouraging Letter 175 

page 162 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-24 EVERSHOLT ST., LONDON, N.W. 
GERMAN BRANCH-MIRKER STR., 45, ELBERFELD. 
AUSTRALASIAN BRANCH-EQUITABLE BLDG., COLLINS ST., MELBOURNE 

PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 

TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR AS FOLLOWS:- 

All Bible Students who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity or 
adversity, are unable to pay for this Journal, will be supplied FREE if 
they send a Postal Card each June stating their case and requesting its 
continuance. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on 
our list continually and in touch with the Studies, etc. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



THIS JOURNAL IS PUBLISHED IN THE 

FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, DANISH AND ITALIAN LANGUAGES. 

SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



1907--THE GENERAL CONVENTIONS-- 1907 



The design of these General Conventions is spiritual refreshment 
by mutual upbuilding along spiritual lines. "The 
fellowship of kindred minds is like to that above." Those who 
have never enjoyed these "feasts" know not what they are 
missing. So say we all! Assuredly the Lord will make up 
the loss to those not permitted to join us; but when it is reasonably 
our privilege we do well not to forget these assemblies 
of ourselves.— Heb. 10:25. 

GET READY PROPERLY 

Prepare your heart for a blessing. Come to the Convention 
in the proper spirit— as a disciple, a learner. Come intent 
also on doing good as well as getting good, of consoling and 
encouraging others, as well as to be yourself comforted. Above 
all, come realizing that the Lord himself is the fountain of 
blessings, and remembering his word— not by might, nor by 
power, but by the Lord's Spirit are we to expect the blessings 
we hope for. In making ready and en route do not forget this 
important item, for on it your share of the Convention's blessings 
greatly depends. 

PLEASE PRACTISE THESE HYMNS 



We urge all who expect to attend the Conventions to practise 
the following selections from the Hymns of Dawn: (333 
choice hymns and tunes— cloth bound, 35c, post prepaid.) 
Numbers 7, 8, 12, 15, 19, 23, 24, 32, 55, 59, 71, 72, 75, 77, 83, 
87, 93, 100, 105, 110, 114, 116, 119, 123, 124, 126, 147, 152, 155, 
165, 166, 174, 178, 195, 196, 198, 201, 203, 235, 249, 251, 255, 
259, 268, 273, 280, 283, 296, 310, 321. 

Many of these are familiar to all of you, but please learn 
them all so as to be able to sing them with spirit as well as 
with understanding. 

THE INDIANAPOLIS CONVENTION 



Friends from Pennsylvania, West Virginia, Maryland, 
New York, New Jersey, etc., desirous of attending the Convention 
at Indianapolis should ADVISE US AT ONCE, so that we 
may procure for them from the railroads orders for two-cent-per-mile 
rates. 

Reports seem to indicate that there will be a large gathering 
at Indianapolis. 



ACCOMMODATIONS 

In private residences accommodations can be had for 50c 
and $1.00 each per night. In hotels board and lodging can be 
procured for $1, $1.25, $2, and upward to $5 per day. 

Write at once, if you wish us to procure accommodations, 
stating briefly and pointedly what kind, number of persons, 
sex and color, and if married couples wish to room together. 
Do not expect any alteration of your party's location after 
writing. If others join it later they will be accommodated in 
the order of notification. Address all letters to C. A. Wise, 
1 1 12 W. 30th St., Indianapolis, Ind. 

CHARTS OF THE TABERNACLE 



We have arranged to supply beautiful Charts of the Tabernacle 
on cloth, carriage prepaid, for two dollars each. Very 
choice, and very cheap for the quality and size— 5 ft. 



R4000 : page 163 

"GO YE ALSO INTO THE VINEYARD" 

"Sow beside all waters; thou knowest not which shall 
prosper, this or that."— Isa. 32:20; Eccl. 11:6. 

IF the sowing has been a general one with a view to 
the gathering of the Lord's little flock from every 
nation, people, kindred and tongue, we must expect 
the harvest work to be similarly broad, widely 
extended. In reply to inquiries respecting the African 
mission: Returns from Brother Booth are meager 
as yet. He arrived at Cape Town and at once proceeded 
to bring the good tidings to the attention of the 
English-speaking whites and blacks in that city. He 
has met with some success in the sense that a few are 
hearing gladly. We hope that some of them will be 
convinced. Some are inquiring whether or not reaping 
work could be done in India, Japan and China. We 
reply that we have a few WATCH TOWER subscribers in 
those far-off lands, who doubtless are doing everything 
in their power, and they will, we feel assured, be 
prompt to tell us if there are openings there for the 
services of the Truth and for the harvest message. 
Meantime let us not forget that our own land is 
the gathering-place for people from every nation under 
heaven, and is therefore a fruitful field in a larger 
sense than any other. The Lord seemingly held back 
the discovery of this continent until the due time, 
when it would become the gathering-place for the 
oppressed of all nations; for the oppressed are specially 
amenable to the Truth, as our Master's words 



indicate, "Come unto me, all ye that labor and are 
heavy laden, and I will give you rest. Take my yoke 
upon you and learn of me, and ye shall find rest unto 
your souls." As an illustration of the advantages of 
the freedom of conscience secured by many who come 
to this favored land, we mention two instances which 
came under our personal observation. Meeting an 
Italian workman casually and finding him to speak 
broken English we had a conversation with him, as 
follows:— 

"Are you an Italian?" 

"Yes, me Italian." 

"Are you a Christian?" 

"Yes, me Christian." 

"Are you a Catholic Christian?" 

"No, me Protestant Christian." 

"How does that come? I thought that nearly 
everybody in your land was Catholic. How does it 
come you are a Protestant now?" 

"Me friend comee here, join Baptist Church; me 
comee here, he takee me. Now me no pray to Mary, 
me pray to Jesus." 

Another case was that of a Greek who kept a confectionery 
store in Virginia, and was reached with the 
Truth by one of the brethren of his city. His own 
story to us was:— 

"I never knew anything about other religions until 
I came to the United States some years ago. I was 
then surprised to find various denominations of Protestants, 
and that the Roman Catholics here were in 
the minority. I noticed that many of the Protestants 
were quite intelligent, and some of them apparently 
good people. I visited various churches, saying to myself, 
I want to find the Truth, whatever it is. A Methodist 
minister had a talk with me and urged me to 
join his congregation. I told him that I would do so 
if I could be convinced that it was the right one— that 
I was looking for the Truth. It was not long after 
this that one of the brethren handed me a tract, and 
subsequently I got into conversation with him and his 
presentations were more satisfactory than anything I 
had ever heard. He brought me the DAWN in English, 
and with patient perseverance I was able to read it and 
to understand it, and so the other volumes." 

This brother promptly made some donations to 
the Tract Fund, sold out his business in Virginia and 
returned to Greece, where he has gotten out a translation 
of several of the tracts and the first volume of 
DAWN. His latest letter says that the translators are 
working on the second volume, which he hopes will be 
ready this year. The dear brother is throwing his entire 
heart into the matter, desiring to help the brethren of his 

R4001 :page 164 

own nationality. Meantime also he visits the ships 



that enter his port, and canvasses the passengers and 
seamen for English, French, Italian and Greek DAWNS. 

Surely, as the Master said at the first advent— 
The fields are ripe for the harvest, and he that reapeth 
receiveth wages. (John 4:35,36.) What wonderful 
opportunities lie right at our hand! Let us be wise in 
the use of these, not only praying but laboring. We 
must not think of the immigrants ungenerously; they 
come from countries poorer than ours, but many of 
them are bright, and some of them apparently honest-hearted, 
and quite likely some of them are at heart 
true Christians— the Lord's brethren and hence our 
brethren. Let us be on the alert to do them all the 
good in our power— to serve them with that which will 
do them more good than anything else we know of. 

We earnestly commend the course followed by some 
of refusing better situations that would pay larger salaries, 
because the labor involved would be more taxing 
and leave less opportunity for the service of the 
Truth. We recommend that situations that pay well 
and absorb every moment of time except that requisite 
for providing the things that perish be sacrificed in 
favor of situations paying less wages but affording 
greater opportunity for volunteer work, colporteur 
work, etc. We are glad to say this spirit prevails more 
and more amongst those who have received the Truth 
in the love of it. 

VOLUNTEERS, SHARP-SHOOTERS, COLPORTEURS, PILGRIMS 

Try, dear friends, if possible, to secure a blessing 
by laboring in one of these departments of the harvest 
work. All cannot be Pilgrims, all are not qualified 
for the work, neither will the funds of the Society permit 
the engagement of large numbers, nor are many 
necessary, as each little class should have amongst its 
own number some possessed of talents which should 
be consecrated and actively used in the service of the 
brethren. All cannot be Colporteurs, though there is 
a much wider door of opportunity here. This service 
can only be engaged in by those who are comparatively 
free from earthly responsibilities and ties, or who can 
make themselves free by shaping their affairs to this 
end. They must be strong enough to endure a considerable 
amount of walking and the carrying of the 
books: they must be neither too young nor too old. 
Nevertheless this is a branch of the work which has 
been greatly blessed of the Lord, and laborers in this 
department are usually greatly blessed spiritually as 
they seek daily to lay down their lives for the Truth 
and for the brethren. 

HOW CALLED TO COLPORTEURING 

Mistaken ideas respecting calls to the ministry 
have troubled the Lord's people for centuries. Many 



seem to think that a mental impression is a call to 
preach, and insist that they must preach whether they 
have a natural ability or not, and whether they have 
opportunity or not, and whether people desire them to 
preach or not. A call to the Lord's service comes 
through the Truth and our acceptance of it. Whoever 
has the Lord's Spirit must feel interested in all of the 
Lord's work, and feel called upon to do anything and 
everything in his power to forward the same. Who 
needs more of a call to the use of his talents in the 
Lord's service than is given in our Lord's message, 
"Go ye, therefore, and disciple amongst all nations 
...teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I 
have commanded you: and lo, I am with you alway: 
even unto the end of the age." 

God's message is so good, so grand, that whoever 
receives it into a good and honest heart receives a 
blessing which so rejoices him that he must desire to 
live it, to tell it to others. That desire is a spirit of 
the Truth. He should follow that desire, that leading, 
that love of the Truth, that desire to lay down his life 
in its service just so far as possible— his limitations 
being according to his talent and according to the incumbrances 
and responsibilities which are properly 
his. A call to the Colporteur work implies that the 
person called has already turned from sin and is endeavoring 
to live reasonably, soberly. It involves 
more, that he has presented himself a living sacrifice 
to God. It involves further that he is so situated in 
life that it is possible for him to arrange his affairs 
without injustice to his own family or to his neighbors, 
so that he can be free to take up this work. The call 
to it consists of the desire to serve God, to serve the 
brethren, to serve the Truth. This holy spirit or holy 
desire should be gratified to the extent of ability, and 
should be restrained only by the necessities above 
mentioned. If all could realize this privilege and opportunity 
how many there would be to promptly enter 
this field of service. 

Sharpshooters are those who have no particular 
time that they could devote to the Colporteur service, 
but who, nevertheless, make it their business to sell a 
considerable number of DAWNS to their friends and 
immediate neighbors. They differ from the Colporteurs 
in that they do not cover the territory. Any one 
who regularly and systematically canvasses territory 
spoils it as such for another for some years. All such 
are rated as Colporteurs, and need to have an assignment, 
that we may know what has and what has not 
been thoroughly worked. Nearly all of the Lord's 
dear people should be Sharpshooters, and we hope that 
they are. 

"Volunteers" is a name applied to those who systematically 
undertake the distribution of the WATCH 
TOWER tracts free, in their own city or town, etc. 
Many of the dear friends do their volunteer work on 



Sunday mornings, going from house to house, perhaps 
having a son or a daughter assist by taking the 
opposite side of the street, placing the tracts carefully 
under the doors and ringing the door-bells. Very many 
indeed have been reached in this manner— and the 
tracts are free and the freight paid for you. We recommend 
that the dear friends in each city and town cooperate 
in this work so that it may be systematically done 

R4001 :page 165 

everywhere. The present rulings of the post-office department 

prevent us from sending tracts by mail at the 

usual newspaper rates as heretofore; hence we are 

more than ever dependent upon the dear friends for the 

scattering of the "hail" everywhere. "Do with your 

might 

WHAT YOUR HANDS FIND TO DO" 

An illustration of the blessed influence of this 
work comes to our mind as told by a brother who is 
now deeply interested in the Truth. At the time mentioned 
he was a railroad accountant, and an attendant 
of one of the principal churches of Washington City. 
He was born in China, where his parents were missionaries, 
and had become accustomed to the religion of 
formalism. One Sunday as he came from Church he 
was handed a tract by one of the brethren, whom he 
recognized as a merchant, owner of several stores in 
the city. He said to himself, That man is not doing 
that work for pay, he must be sincere; I will read the 
tract. Slightly interested from the reading of the 
tract he obtained further reading matter, the DAWNS. 
Now a bookkeeper in one of Washington's principal 
banks, he is one of the most aggressive of the volunteer 
force there, as well as an Elder of the Church. 

We are not to hold back from the service of the 
Truth because we are well known by our neighbors nor 
because the majority of those who distribute tracts and 
handbills are illiterate or forced to the service by poverty. 
Rather we are to remember that we have given 
our all to the Lord, not only our lives but our physical 
strength, our mental strength, our reputation and influence 
and our money. If we made a full consecration 
to him we gave our all, and we must judge of our 
Lord's estimation of our attitude by his words, "He 
that is ashamed of me and my Word,. ..of him also 
shall the Son of man be ashamed" (Mark 8:38); and 
again, we remember the declaration, "They that honor 
me I will honor." It is not surprising then that we find 
that those who are most active in serving the Truth 
and who thus indicate their special love for it and its 
authority, the Lord, should have special evidence of 
his love to them in their spiritual health and progress 
and keeping by his power. 



"I'm not ashamed to own my Lord, 

Or to defend his cause; 
Maintain the honor of his Word, 

The glory of his cross." 
The volunteer ammunition (tracts) is now being 
shipped— two million tracts. How many of them can 
and will you use judiciously, carefully. Let the dear 
brethren and sisters of each place, who have not 
already made application, consider together and send 
in a united order as quickly as possible, now that the 
fine weather is at hand. We know not how many more 
such opportunities will be ours. All around us we see 
evidences that the shackles of error are breaking, the 
darkness of superstition fading away, and that new 
delusions are being brought forward by the Adversary 
to captivate those who are now awakening and beginning 
to see a little light. Let us be faithful, us to whom 
the Lord has been so gracious in the bestowment of 
such clear knowledge of his own character and of the 
harmony of his blessed Word in the "Plan of the Ages." 

LABORING AMONGST THE COLORED PEOPLE 

A short time ago, when first mentioning the African 
mission, we called attention to the opportunities 
that are still nearer at hand and in which many may 
engage in the interests of our black brethren. The 
more we think of this the more it appeals to us. In 
nearly every city of our land there are colored people 
whose parents were brought from Africa as slaves, and 
who in the Lord's providence are now free and able to 
speak and read the English language. Many of them 
give evidence of deep religious sentiment and fervency 
of spirit. Why is not the Truth for these? Perhaps 
the Lord allowed us to overlook them to some extent 
in the past; why may we not now make a general 
movement all along the line for their aid? In many of 
the little gatherings of those in the Truth there is a 
surplus of talent and ability to present the plan of 
God. Why should not this surplus be turned to the 
help of the colored brethren? This may be done by the 
congregation systematically or may be done individually. 
But in either case we would like to be in touch 
with the laborers, and be kept informed as to just what 
is being done. We suggest that the following plan 
would perhaps work to advantage everywhere: 

R4002 : page 165 

Let those who have the time at their disposal and 
who have some ability for public address make a thorough 
study of the Chart of the Ages, with a view to 
giving several discourses therefrom. To those desirous 
of proficiency in this service we now offer free a 
little pamphlet giving outlines of discourses on the 
Chart that will be helpful to many. In writing for these 



please give a very brief statement of your qualifications, 
the time at your disposal, and the number of colored 
churches in your vicinity. 

As soon as we are able to judge as to who would 
be proficient in this service we will send the outlines 
of a little plan of procedure which we believe will 
operate favorably. 



R4002 : page 165 

IS THE FATE OF A SOUL FIXED AT DEATH? 

From the Buffalo Express, March 25, 1907 
--A REMARKABLE SERMON BY REV. DR. HOLMES- 
WESTMINSTER Presbyterian Church was filled 
Sunday afternoon when the pastor, Samuel 
Van Vranken Holmes, D.D., delivered a sermon 
on Eternal Hope. This was the fifth and last in 
a series of Lenten addresses by Dr. Holmes on Life's 
Last Realities. Dr. Holmes said: 

"In concluding our course of studies in Life's Last 
Realities, we come to a problem which, difficult as it is, 

R4002 : page 166 

must not be shirked. It is a problem to which allusion 
has heretofore been made, but which I have purposely 
postponed for discussion until the end: What is to be 
the final destiny of those who die in their sins? 

"You will remember that, in our study of judgment 
after death, we reached the two-fold conviction that 
retribution in the life to come is inevitable because 
grounded in a general moral necessity, and that such 
retribution must necessarily entail moral separation 
from goodness and from God. Now, in the face of 
these facts, is there any hope of better things for sinful 
men hereafter? Or are we shut up to the belief that 
such men must spend an eternity in pain and punishment 
and without hope of moral and spiritual recovery? 
And this problem has an importance and interest far 
greater than any general speculative concern as to 
human destiny. I told you the other afternoon, in our 
discussion of heaven, that one of its most blessed realities 
would be the reunion with those whom we have 
loved and lost. And I am sure that, in almost every 
heart, there is love and longing for some one who has 
passed out of this life, caring little or nothing for 
Christ or the things of the Spirit, and whose last days, 
it may be, were clouded by sin and shame. What, then, 
of such? Must we give up all hope of seeing them 
again, of meeting them by and by, knowing, as we do, 
that inevitable desolation separates the good and the 



evil when the secrets of all hearts are disclosed? 
DESTINY FIXED AT DEATH? 

"Of course, you know what the teaching of the 
Church on this question has been for centuries, and 
what it continues to be in certain quarters today. But 
one must be blind indeed to movements in the modern 
religious world who is not aware that a great change 
has come over the minds of thinking people in regard 
to this matter. For a mighty and ever-growing doubt 
has arisen within a generation as to the irrevocability 
of destiny at death. The conviction has come to be 
very common today among educated men that there is 
every possibility of moral change for a human soul in 
the future life; and this conviction, too, is based, not 
on mere human speculation, but on the unmistakable 
implications of the Master's own teachings. 

"Personally, I do not believe that Jesus taught the 
doctrine that human destiny is fixed at death, that after 
the dissolution of the body the chance of moral change 
is withheld from men, and that those who die in their 
sins are condemned to everlasting torment. I believed 
it once, but I thank God that I believe it no longer; 
and the implied threat in that doctrine is no more to 
multitudes of men today than 'the rattling of a medicine 
man's gourd.' Instead, the world of thought is 
rapidly coming to believe that, for every man who survives 
the death of the body, there is opportunity given 
to be united to God in Christ, and for so long as there 
is the slightest survival of individual spiritual life. 
Moreover, this belief rests upon solid foundations. 

UNDEVELOPMENT HERE 

"In the first place, it is a purely arbitrary assumption 
to affirm that moral finality is reached at death. 
Such a doctrine is not taught explicitly anywhere in 
the Scriptures, and the several passages sometimes 
cited in its support are capable of very different interpretations 
—interpretations more completely in harmony 
with Jesus' teachings elsewhere. No more is 
there anything in the nature of death itself to put an 
end to the possibility of change. Apart from the awe 
and mystery attaching to death, there is no reason for 
assuming that at its crisis man's destiny is irrevocably 
fixed. The entire position of the Augustinian theology 
at this point is pure and gratuitous assumption. 

"On the other hand, a wider observation of this 
life and a deeper knowledge of men have conspired to 
reveal the incomplete and undeveloped state in which 
a vast majority of souls leave the world at death. They 
do not make sufficient moral progress here to settle 
the moral issue involved for all time. Most of those 
who die have by no means reached that stage of character 
where moral change is impossible. They are only 



on the threshold of development. They have just begun 
to recognize the importance of moral choices. And, 
as one of our modern theologians has well put it, 'It 
would be very strange if so solemn an experience as 
death were withdrawn from among the experiences 
that might influence the final decision of the soul.' 

"Moreover, as I tried to point out in a previous address 
in this series, no conceivable life in the future 
can possibly deprive men of moral and spiritual accountability. 
The doctrine that 'moral strain' is only 
for this life, that in heaven man is free from moral 
activity and that in hell his moral responsibility is 
ended and he is compelled to suffer only for the sins 
committed in the flesh— this doctrine is intolerable and 
impossible. The moment a man ceases to be an active 
moral agent, he becomes less than a man, he sinks to 
the level of an automaton. And if, as is clear, the 
future life is as morally active and responsible and as 
full of solemn ethical meaning as the present, then a 
free moral agent will be capable of choosing good even 
if he is in hell. Wherever living spirits are, the law of 
growth and progress, with all the corresponding possibilities 
of degeneration and death, must be carried 
with them and must hold for eternity. 

CHANCE FOR LOST SOULS 

"Now, if all that has thus far been said is true, if 
the final destiny of man is not fixed at death, and if 
moral and spiritual choices are open to him in the future 
life, then is it conceivable that God can fail of 
winning gracious victories of love over countless souls 
whom the world has reckoned lost? Over against the 
dogma of a hard and unrelenting theology at this point, 
I prefer to place the teaching of my Master in the parable 
of the lost sheep, wherein he tells us that the Good 
Shepherd will not cease to search for the one that is 
strayed and is lost 'until he find it.' For God will 
surely never falter in his quest for the sinning and unrepentant, 
so long as opportunity is left to recover 
them. Just because God is good and loving and sovereign, 
just because of that wondrous divine compassion 
which we witness on Calvary, we may have confidence 
that multitudes of souls without number shall 
finally be restored to holiness and happiness and 
heaven. 

"Only let it be remembered that such a restoration 
will come about, not through any forensic process or 
legal fiction, but through the only salvation that can 
ever really avail here or hereafter— the salvation wherein 
God helps man to make an end of sin in his own 
soul, and wherein he imparts to him the life of the 

R4002 : page 167 

Spirit. No man will ever be saved hereafter in any 



way, other than that in which he is saved here. No 
redemption is ever possible that does not involve a 
departure from sin and a humble, resolute quest after 
holiness. Therefore, let no man think that this is an 
easy doctrine, that he can keep on sinning and living 
in selfishness until by and by an indulgent God will 
rescue him from punishment by judicial fiat. This 
universe of ours is a universe of inexorable moral laws, 
and the hope of a final restoration does not mean that 
a single one of those laws will ever be broken. So 
long as men continue in wilful sin, no salvation could 
possibly be accomplished. Moreover, delay only renders 
redemption the more difficult. Hence it is well 
that here and now we turn to the Christ, and begin to 
find life in him, and through him likewise to know 
God; for the Master has told us that this is life eternal, 
to know God and Jesus Christ whom he has sent. 

"And now a single and solemn question remains 
to be answered. What if there be any who shall persistently 
refuse to be recovered, who, in a future life as 
in this, shall spurn the love divine and sink deeper and 
deeper in selfishness and sin? What is to be said of 
their final destiny? It is certain, as has been seen, 
that persistence in sin makes heaven impossible, so 
long as that persistence endures. But, on the other 
hand, to posit an endless hell for wickedness is to posit 
an endless dualism, continuing through the endless 

R4003 : page 167 

reign of sin in certain hearts. Such dualism would 
spell defeat for a sovereign God. 

"There is, however, a simple alternative, and one 
that I believe is implicit in the teachings of both Jesus 
and Paul— that when a soul, through its persistence in 
sin, comes to the point where it is morally irrecoverable, 
it comes also to its final death. Paul distinctly 
tells us that immortality is an achievement, and the 
inference is plain that some souls may finally fail of 
immortality. Moreover, throughout the New Testament, 
immortality is correlated with goodness, 'possible 
where goodness is, impossible where goodness is not.' 
With Jesus the issues of the future are presented, not 
in terms of pleasure and pain, but in terms of life and 
death. 'For God so loved the world that he gave his 
only begotten Son that whosoever believeth in him 
should not perish, but have aeonian life.' 'For what 
shall it profit a man if he gain the whole world and 
lose his psychical life?' These and other utterances 
of Jesus seem to indicate that eternal life is a possibility 
only, and is the alternative of death and extinction. 
The only really indestructible elements of personality 
seem to be the moral and the spiritual. In 
the processes of organic evolution, 'the living creature 
at no stage remains alive so long, and only so long, as 
it conforms to the conditions of living.' Shall we 



think otherwise of the human soul? When a soul has 
reached the stage of moral and spiritual development 
which Paul describes in the phrase 'being in Christ 
Jesus,' it is the possessor of eternal life. But when a 
man has continued in sin, has gone on dwarfing his 
moral and spiritual nature until every appeal of God is 
in vain, is it not in accordance with the analogies of 
life that extinction is the certain outcome?" 



page 167 

BEREAN BIBLE STUDY IN TABERNACLE SHADOWS 

In the references below, Z. represents this journal 
and T. stands for Tabernacle Shadows. The references 
should be given to brethren and sisters for reading 
in the classes. Free comment should be permitted 
either before or after each reading. 



ANOTHER TYPE OF THE ATONEMENT SACRIFICE 
-LEVITICUS DC- 
JUNE 30 

1 . What is illustrated in the further picture of the 
Atonement, given in Lev. 9? Heb. 2:10; Col. 1:24; 
T.79,par. 1-3. 

2. If, as we have already seen, there is no intrinsic 
merit in the sacrifices of the Church, why are we 
called to be sharers with him in his sacrifice? Z.'07, 
p. 47, "Readest Thou Carefully?" 

3. In what sense was our sinless Lord made perfect 
through sufferings? Heb. 2:10,17,18; E.119, 

142. 

4. How does the Apostle Paul show our intimate relationship 
to our Head? Eph. 1:4,6; 2 Thess. 2:14; 

2 Tim. 2:12; T.80, par. 1. 

5. Was it part of our Father's original "plan" that the 
Church should have a part in the work of Atonement? 
Lev. 9:7; Col. 1:24-28; Eph. 1:4,5, R.V.; 

T.80, par. 2. 

JULY 7 

6. How long has the "burnt offering" of Jesus been 
burning? and what class have been witnesses to 
this? Lev. 9:12-14; T.81, par. 1. 

7. In this picture of the Atonement Day, given in Lev. 9, 
why is there no mention of the "scape goat"? 

Is it because here the consecration of the Priest 
is represented, and because the "Great Company," 



represented by the "scape goat," is excluded from 
membership in the "body" of the self-sacrificing 
Priest? 

8. What important teaching does this picture further 
confirm? Rom. 8:17; Luke 9:23,24; 2 Tim. 2:11,12; 
T.81,par. 2. 

9. What is represented in the "peace offering"? Lev. 9:18 
T.81,par. 4. 

10. What is this "better-covenant" referred to, and when 
will it come into existence? Heb. 8:6-13; Jer. 31:31-34; 
T.82, top; C.296, 297. 

1 1 . Who is the Mediator of this covenant, and who are 
to be blessed under it? Heb. 8:6,10,11; T.82, 

top; Z.'97, p. 82. 

12. What particular blessing seems to be typified in 
Lev. 9:22? Matt. 5:13,14,16; 2 Cor. 3:2; T.82. 

JULY 14 

13. State in a general way the difference in the two 
pictures of the Atonement Day given in Lev. 16 
and Lev. 9. T.82, par. 2. 

14. What did Moses typify, and why did both Moses 
and Aaron go into the "tabernacle of the congregation" 
after the different sacrifices of the Day of 
Atonement were finished? and why did they then 
come out, and together bless the people? Lev. 9:23; 
Gal. 3:8,16,29; Gen. 12:3; T.83, par. 1. 

15. Will God's law be to any extent ignored, or sin 

page 168 

excused during the next age? Isa. 28:17,18; 
Acts 3:22,23; T.83, par. 1. 

16. Will the law of "obey and live," "he that doeth 
righteousness is righteous," be then a disadvantage 
or a blessing? Hag. 2:7; Psa. 96:10-13, R.V.; 

Isa. 25:8,9; T.83, par. 1. 

17. Will the blessings of the Millennial reign become 
manifest at once to the entire world as soon as 

the reign begins? Lev. 9:23; Isa. 40:5; T.83, par. 2. 

JULY 21 

18. Are the "priests" included in those who are to be 
blessed under this reign? and if not, why not? 

Lev. 8:22-24; Matt. 25:31,32; Rom. 8:18-22; Rev. 21:2,3; 
2Thess. 2:14; T.84, par. 1. 

19. Is reference made to this blessing of the whole 
world in Heb. 9:28? and does this imply that 
those who "look for him" shall all recognize him 

as soon as he comes at his second advent. Z.'Ol, 
p. 179. 

20. Was Christ manifested to the Jews at his first advent, 
as the sin-offering for them? and has the 

Church been so manifested to the world? and if so, 



did the Jews, or does the world as yet, realize the 
value of this sin offering? 2 Cor. 4:11; Isa. 53:1-3; 
Jno. 15:18,19; John 1:5; Heb. 13:13; T.84, 
par. 2. 

21. What is the difference in the manifesting of Jesus 
and his Church to the world during the Gospel 

age and during the Millennial age? Col. 3:4, R.V.; 
I Cor. 15:42-45; Mai. 4:2,3; T.84, par. 2; D.616; 
A.322, near bottom; T.84, par. 2. 

JULY 28 

22. Will the glorified Christ appear to those who "look 
for him" in a manner that can be appreciated by 

their natural vision? If not, how will he appear 
to them, and how will others be aware of his 
presence? I Tim. 6:16; 2 Cor. 4:18; Heb. 2:9; 
12:2; 2 Thess. 1:8; Isa. 40:5; Luke 17:26-30; 
T.85,par. 1,2. 

23. Will the fact that Christ appears only to those who 
"look for him," imply that there will be some who 

will not "look for him," and who will not recognize 

or realize that the great Messiah is present 

for the blessing of the world? Rev. 1:7; Psa. 22:27,28; 

Psa. 67:2-7; Isa. 52:10,15; 2 Thess. 1:7,8; 

T.86, par. 2,3,4. 

24. Do the Lord's faithful ones "see Jesus" now? And 
in what way? And how does this way differ from 

the way in which we will see him beyond the vail? 
Heb. 2:9;T.85,par. 1. 

25. Will human beings ever be able to see things on 
the spiritual plane? And why? John 8:19; 14:9; 

I Tim. 6:16; John 1:18; T.85, par. 2; 86, top, 
and par. 3. 

26. What other examples have we of unseen spiritual 
power? Eph. 2:2; 6:12, Diaglott; Isa. 8:19; T.86, 

par. 1,2. 

27. What is the meaning of the Apostle's expression 
that God "is the Savior of all men, specially of 

those who believe?" I Tim. 1:40; Isa. 26:19; Hos. 13:14; 

Jno. 5:28,29, Diaglott; T.87, top of 

page. 



R4003 : page 168 

THE FAITHFUL APPROVED AND TESTED 

-REVIEW.-JUNE 23.- 

Golden Text:— "When thou passest through the waters I 
will be with thee; and through the rivers they shall not 
overflow thee.— Isa. 43:2. 

REVIEWING the lessons of the quarter we find that 



they indicate that God was seeking for and approving 

and encouraging and testing those of his 

people who exercised special faith in him— to the extent of 

obedience, to the extent of their ability. Nor should this 

surprise us: what other quality could God seek in any 

member of the fallen race? Surely he could not seek for 

perfection, for his own Word declares explicitly that "There 

is none righteous, no not one." (Rom. 3:10.) As he sought 

not the perfect in mind or morals or features, we ask ourselves 

what quality would especially commend any member 

of the race to the Lord, and our answer is, in harmony with 

the evidences of the quarter, that "God seeketh such to worship 

him as worship him in spirit and in truth"— in honesty, 

in sincerity. Such worship would be impossible except 

as it had a basis of faith: as it is written, "He that cometh 

unto God must believe that he is, and that he is the rewarder 

of those who diligently seek him"; and again, "Without 

faith it is impossible to please God." (Heb. 11:6.) 

True, the Apostle writes that love is the principal thing, 

but the Apostle is writing to those who already have been 

approved in their faith. In another sense of the word faith 

is the principal thing, because it is the basis and only condition 

upon which any other of God's favors are now 

obtainable. 

Abraham— what did he do? What great exploits? 
How is it written? "Abraham believed God and it was 
counted unto him for righteousness." (Rom. 4:3.) According 
to this, faith will hide a multitude of defects? Indeed, 
according to the Word, it is only by the exercise of faith in 
our Redeemer that we are reckoned as covered with the 
robe of righteousness, and made acceptable to the Father, 
and permitted to stand complete in him. 

What was there in Isaac's experiences in life to mark 
him as one of the Lord's. Isaac did nothing great, nothing 
wonderful. He founded no colleges, he built no churches, 
he organized no great relief funds, etc., etc., praiseworthy as 
those things may be; but he had the approval of God because 
he also believed God. 

What wonderful things did Jacob do to give him a 
place of such prominence in the history of God's people, 
and to make him worthy to be the father of the nation of 
Israel? There is no record of any very wonderful works 
on the part of Jacob, aside from the fact that he had a wonderful 
faith in God. He believed in the Oath-bound Covenant 
made to his grandfather Abraham— it saturated and 

R4003 : page 169 

filled his entire life. Everything in his entire course from 
first to last was shaped in accordance with that faith. God 
counted his faith to him also for righteousness, and his 
name has come down to us amongst others who had the 
grand testimony that they pleased God and are ultimately 
to have a share in the great work of God as a reward. 

JOSEPH, THE FAITHFUL 



Joseph accomplished more than his forebears as respects 
great and useful work in the world: in the line of 
God's providences he not only saved the nation of Israel, 
his father's house, but also the nation of Egypt from the 
famine which otherwise might have destroyed them all. 
But Joseph is not brought specially to our attention in the 
Scriptures because of this great deed. Rather the Scriptures 
lay as much emphasis upon some of the smaller transactions 
of his life, and recite all of his affairs as evidences 
of his faith in God. Without that faith Joseph would not 
have been anything. It was his faith that kept him in good 
courage and of restful heart even in the midst of trying circumstances 
and conditions; it was his faith and loyalty to 
the one in whom he believed that kept him from the hour 
of temptation while a member of Potiphar's household; it 
was his faith that triumphed in the prison and gave him 
opportunities for comforting and assisting others, and learning 
himself to sympathize with those in distress. It was his 
faith which prompted him to have that relationship with 
God which brought to him the interpretation of dreams and 
the exaltation to power and influence. It was his faith still 
that enabled him to use those opportunities without losing 
his head, that showed him to have the spirit of a sound 
mind. 

MOSES, THE MEEKEST MAN 

Moses, perhaps more than all the characters of this 
lesson, was a mighty man both in word and deed; but while 
his greatness as a leader and a lawgiver shines out and marks 
him as a wonderful character, his faith is the most remarkable 
feature of his history. Not that in his case or in any 
of these cases the matter of faith is specially paraded and 
held up to our admiration— rather it is told in that simple 
manner which carries with it powerful conviction. We see 
the faith in its operation without being told about it. Moses 
without the Lord would have been nothing; Moses with 
the Lord, without faith, would have accomplished nothing, 
for God would not have used him, but would have found 
another instrument for his service. It was the combination 
—God, Moses, Moses' faith and obedience— that prompted 
the grand exhibit which we find in his life, and constituted 
him in the eyes of the whole world one of the most gigantic 
figures of history. So great was Moses that he could in 
simplicity and without bombast write, "A prophet shall the 
Lord your God raise up of your brethren like unto me"— in 
reference to the great Messiah, King of kings and Lord of 
lords. 

These things being true teach us that the most important 
thing for us, that we may have the divine favor and 
approval and blessing, is first of all that we have implicit 
faith in God. And this faith we find both from the Scriptures 
and from experience is a matter of development, 
growth. Our faith should grow stronger with every day, 
month and year that we live, so that our closing days in 



life would be the fullest of trust. But here we must note a 
danger and difficulty amongst those who seek to cultivate 
faith: the Adversary would present faith in man and in the 
words of man and in the theories of man as instead of faith 
in God and his Word. 

How many have been hindered, turned aside from the 
right path, by a misplaced faith! How many today are 
worshiping the creeds and theories of men and neglecting 
the Word of the Lord! How necessary to us that, while recognizing 
the fact that God has always used mouthpieces and 
leaders amongst his people, we should also recognize the fact 
that Satan has many mouthpieces and provides many leaders, 
and that our method of discrimination as between the true 
and the false prophets must be by their faithfulness to the 
Word of God, as it is written— "If they speak not according 
to this Word it is because there is no light in them." (Isa. 8:20.) 
Let us then not only resolve to cultivate faith, but 
that we make sure that it will have foundation in the Word 
of the Lord. And to thus make sure will imply such a love 
for truth, such an appreciation of the divine Word, as will 
lead us to spend time and energy, money, everything, that 
we may know the truth and be made free by it. Whoever, 
therefore, loves money, praise of men, honors of men, etc., 
more than he loves God or his Word, is not likely to obtain 
or to hold the proper knowledge of God, upon which alone 

R4004 : page 169 

the proper faith and obedience can be built. 

IN THE SCHOOL OF DISCIPLINE 

It was not sufficient that Abraham had faith to begin 
with, so that he was ready to follow the invitation of the 
Lord to leave his own country for another upon which as 
yet he had no claim except the divine promise. It was because 
Abraham had such a faith and was able to exercise 
it that God counted him worthy to receive promises at all. 
Then came the test as to how strongly he would hold to the 
promises— for instance, the test respecting his son, whose 
birth was the very center of all the divine promises. Twenty-five 
years did God test the faith of Abraham on this point 
until he was growing old, and Isaac was born when he was 
a hundred years old. Notice again how God kept Abraham 
in the school of discipline, testing his faith; not testing it 
with a view to breaking it and destroying it, but on the contrary 
applying the tests so as to increase the faith, to make 
it stronger and every way better. Note, for instance, that 
Isaac was allowed to grow up to be a young man, and Abraham 
to pass the time of life when he might hope to have another 
son, when God commanded the slaying of Isaac as a sacrifice. 
How grand was the faith that never faltered, that 
still believed that in his Seed all the families of the earth 
should be blessed! What evidence we have here that Abraham 
was well taught and had learned well the various lessons 
under the divine instruction! He was able to offer up 



his son, and counted that God was able to raise him from 
the dead and thus to fulfil the promise— never doubting. O, 
what a grand summit of faith was thus evidenced! How 
such a character must have pleased God! and it shines out 
the more because of the darkness and idolatry of his time. 

Consider how Isaac and Jacob were also schooled in 
advance, and learned well the lesson of confidence in God 

R4004 : page 170 

and his Oath-bound Covenant. See the same in the case of 

Joseph, whose life was full of adversity and was grandly 

rounded out by these trying experiences, his faith becoming 

stronger, apparently, at every step of the journey of life. 

Note the same in Moses' case from first to last. He who 

was so humble minded respecting his own talents that 

he insisted he was quite unfit to be the leader of the people, 

after being assured that God would lead him and use him 

as his representative and channel merely— then Moses was 

willing and ready and able to do all things through his 

faith in the Almighty God. The lesson clearly is that the 

trials and difficulties, tests and disciplines of faith were 

specially provided of the Lord for the development of the character 

of the ancient worthies chiefly along the lines of faith; 

that they not only had faith prominent to begin with, but 

that God saw to it that this characteristic was more and 

more a pronounced one in them. 

THE TRIAL OF YOUR FAITH 

We are glad to have the testimony of the Apostle that 
these grand characters of the past met with the divine approval, 
and fell asleep in death to await at the resurrection 
a grand reward— their trial and testing having been successfully 
finished. But in the same connection the Apostle 
tells us that in the divine plan the "little flock" of this 
Gospel age has been called to a still higher station and 
privilege and blessing than the ancient worthies. The Apostle's 
words are, "These died in faith, not having received 
the thing promised; God having provided some better thing 
for us [the Gospel Church], that they without us should not 
be made perfect." Their perfection will be to the human 
nature; ours, if we are of the very elect, will be to the divine 
nature, far above angels, principalities and powers. 

What then shall we suppose respecting God's approval 
in the Gospel Church, and the tests that he will apply? 
Can we think that he would make faith a test in the past 
and ignore it as respects the present election? Nay, verily! 
Faith is still the test of all who would please God. So 
then, as God in the past selected for the channels of his 
promises and blessings only those who could exercise faith, 
we may expect that in the present time the Lord has nothing 
whatever to offer except to those who can exercise faith 
in him and in his promises. We know that this must of 
necessity signify that the called of this Gospel age would be 
a very much smaller number than the whole population of 



the world; and then again we have the further declaration 
that of the called few will be chosen. What does this 
signify except that few will prove themselves to have the 
requisite faith and obedience to please God, to be counted 
worthy a share in the Kingdom with his dear Son, our Lord. 

And if only those who have faith have been called 
throughout this Gospel age, what shall we say of the testings 
of faith for these? The Apostle's intimation is that 
their faith will need a great testing. He says, "The trial of 
your faith is much more precious than that of gold which 
perisheth." (1 Pet. 1:7.) Gold has a special value at the 
present time by reason of its scarcity— a value that will 
perish when with the new order of things it will be as easy 
to have gold as to have clay or iron; but the "little flock," 
which the Lord is selecting during this Gospel age, is always 
to be specially precious in that to this class alone of 
humanity, so far as the divine revelation shows, will be 
granted the divine nature, with its glory, honor and immortality. 
Hence the trial of the faith of this class is very 
precious, a very important matter. None shall be admitted 
to that glorious immortality without first being tested and 
proven by the Lord. But here again let us remember that 
our testing is not as respects the flesh, to see whether or not 
we are perfect in the flesh, but on the contrary we are assured 
that God knoweth our condition— that all things are 
open and naked before his sight, and that he declares that 
we are all imperfect. 

What then is God seeking in us? The development 
and perfection of faith! The first element in it is to believe 
in him as a faithful, wise, true God; and secondly to 
believe in his revelation of Jesus as his Son, and the one 
through whom he has provided a covering for our imperfections, 
our blemishes, past, present and future. This is the 
essential phase which must be held on to, and which he will 
therefore test in order to prove our loyalty. This is the 
faith that must grow stronger as the days and months and 
years roll by. This is the faith through which will be 
reckoned to us the merit of Christ's atonement, and through 
which we will have reconciliation. This is the faith that 
must be proven to have such tenacity and strength that it 
will trust the Lord even where it cannot trace him, as did 
Abraham when he believed that God was able and willing 
to fulfil his promise, even though it should imply the resurrection 
of Isaac from the dead. We must learn, we must 
develop, at least that much faith also, so that we will believe 
in God and the fulfilment of his promises even though 
the fulfilment of them signifies not only our own resurrection 
from the dead to glory, honor and immortality, but signifies 
also an awakening of all the families of the earth 
from the prison-house of the tomb, that they may have fulfilled 
toward them the gracious promise made to Abraham 
—"In thy seed shall all the families of the earth be blessed." 
Without such faith in God and in his promises it will be 
impossible to please him and to become of the elect class 
which he is now selecting. 



"IF GOD BE FOR US" 

Nor are we to worry ourselves to make tests for our 
own faith— rather we are to leave the matter in our Lord's 
hands. The tests will probably not come to us along the 
lines of our expectancy, but, on the contrary, from unexpected 
quarters. That many such tests are before us in the 
"evil day" in which we are living, the Apostle assures us. 
He tells us that we will require the whole armor of God in 
order to be able to withstand the assaults upon our faith in 
this time. So subtle will be these assaults that our Redeemer 
tells us that if it were possible the "very elect" 
would be deceived. But, thank God, it is not possible for 
these to be deceived. The Lord has become their refuge 
and their habitation; he has accepted the supervision of 
their affairs; he will not suffer them to be tempted above 
that they are able, but will with the temptation provide a 
way of escape. (1 Cor. 10:13.) While we are not to think 
it strange concerning these fiery trials, our faith in the 
Lord's testimony respecting them will have much to do with 

R4004:page 171 

our preparation for withstanding them: if we believe his 
Word we will improve every opportunity for putting on the 
helmet, the breastplate, the sandals, and for the learning to 
use the sword of the Spirit, the Word of God, and the shield 
of faith, whereby we may quench the fiery darts of unbelief. 
Whoever does not take heed to the Word and thus put on 
the armor of God is thereby showing his lack of faith, his 
unbelief, being disobedient to the word of the Commander. 
When he assures us that every man's work shall be tried of 
what sort it is, and that only the gold and silver and precious 
stones of divine truth will constitute such faith as will 
stand the tests of this day, we may be sure that our Lord 
understood the matter thoroughly; and in proportion as we 
have this faith we will be energetic in getting rid of any 
wood, hay or stubble of our theology, and replacing the 
same with the precious things of the divine Word, that we 
may be able to stand in the "evil day," that we may be 
counted worthy to be helped of the Lord as those who are 
truly his. According to our faith it will be unto us. 

R4005 :page 171 

"FAITH CAN FIRMLY TRUST HIM, COME WHAT MAY" 

Our Golden Text is a very encouraging one. In view 
of the fact that all of the called, chosen and faithful must 
be required to pass through the school of experience, discipline 
and testing with a view to their final approval, how 
encouraging it is to know that the Lord will indeed be with 
us in every trouble, that he sympathizes with us in all of 
our trials, adversities, afflictions, perplexities, etc., and that 
"behind a frowning providence he hides a smiling face." 
The waters of affliction, disappointment, perplexity, trouble, 



will be about us, and we are not to float with the current 
either, but are to endure hardness as good soldiers. But our 
source of strength in battling with the current of life is never 
to be forgotten— "When thou passest through the waters I 
will be with thee." Blessed thought! "I can do all things 
through Christ who strengtheneth me," and he assures us, 
"My strength is made perfect in weakness." (Phil. 4:13; 
2 Cor. 12:9.) Our Golden Text implies rivers of trouble, 
but assures us that when we pass through the rivers they 
shall not overflow us, they shall not extinguish us; on the 
contrary the Lord will pull us safely over to the other side, 
where we shall have life, and that more abundantly, with 
the glory, honor and immortality which he will provide for 
his Bride— his Elect. 



R4005 :page 171 

THINGS LAWFUL NOT EXPEDIENT 

-1 CORINTHIANS 10:23-33. -JUNE 30.- 

Golden Text:— "It is good neither to eat flesh nor to drink 
wine nor anything whereby thy brother stumbleth." 
—Romans 14:21. 

OUR lesson relates to personal liberty, and is interjected 

into the regular course as a temperance 

lesson. It is a fact that no other religious system 

teaches personal liberty in the sense and to the degree that 

it is taught in the Bible— by Jesus and his apostles. Even 

the Jews under the Law were taught a higher degree of personal 

liberty than were others in their day— by the Law 

itself. The essence of all human religion and philosophy 

seems to be the bondage of the individual to the customs, 

the usages, of his forefathers, bound by ignorance, superstition 

and priestcraft. It may be argued that amongst Christians, 

too, priestcraft, ignorance and superstition are quite 

prominent and weighty. We assent to this, but point out 

that such bondage is quite contrary to the teachings of the 

Scriptures. It is written, "Whom the Son makes free is 

free indeed" (John 8:36); and everywhere the teaching of 

the New Testament is that "Where the Spirit of Christ is 

there is liberty."— 2 Cor. 3:17. 

MENTAL POISE OR BALANCE 

If so great personal liberty is accorded under the Gospel, 
the question arises, Why should there be any difficulty 
along this line? We reply that the difficulty lies in the 
fact that the Lord's people, who are given this large liberty 
as New Creatures, find difficulties to its exercise in their 
own flesh— because of inherited weaknesses, mental and 
physical; and they find perplexities and difficulties also 
because of the general undone, fallen condition of humanity, 



and because human weaknesses take so many different 
forms, all of which need more or less restraint in some form 
or other. The difficulty is in knowing how to balance our 
liberties as New Creatures with these blemishes of the old 
nature— the natural man. Nor is it possible to make this 
question entirely clear to the natural man because, as the 
Apostle says, "The natural man receiveth not the things of 
the Spirit of God, neither can he know them, because they 
are spiritually discerned."— 1 Cor. 2:14. 

Even to those whom the Scriptures recognize as "New 
Creatures," begotten again of the holy Spirit, the elucidation 
of this question is difficult, because so many "New Creatures" 
fail to recognize the difference between the new (I) 
and the old (I). The newly begotten spirit is represented 
by the new will, and the old flesh is reckoned dead when 
we are begotten again. The New Creature, having no proper 
body until it shall experience its resurrection "change," 
is permitted to use the fleshly body as its servant, which is 
reckoned alive for that purpose. This body is subsequently 
reckoned as having passed from death unto life to be the body 
and servant of the New Creature until the latter shall have 
eventually experienced its perfecting in the resurrection 
"change," in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye. The Apostle 
explains this new relationship between the spirit-begotten 
mind or will and the body reckoned dead and reckoned as 
awakened again, saying, "If the Spirit of him that raised up 
Jesus from the dead dwell in you, he that raised up Christ 
from the dead shall also quicken your mortal bodies by his 
Spirit which dwelleth in you." The power of God which 
was sufficient to raise Jesus from the dead a quickening 
Spirit is surely powerful enough to operate in our mortal 
bodies so as to permit us (New Creatures) to use them in 
God's service. 

LIBERTY OF THE SONS OF GOD 

Let us get the proper thought: The holy Spirit is a 

R4005 : page 172 

spirit of liberty— God "seeketh such to worship him as 
worship him in spirit and in truth": he seeks not the worship 
and service of slaves under bondage and restraints. 
Hence amongst the angels we may be sure there is no compulsion 
to divine service— they all serve willingly, gladly, 
joyfully. We may be sure that it is the ultimate design of 
God that every creature throughout the universe which has 
not and will not come into absolute harmony with the Creator 
—no other restraint but of joyful willingness— shall 
ultimately be destroyed as unworthy of further divine favors 
unto life eternal. But mankind is not in this free condition. 
The liberty of the sons of God was lost to our race 
through the disobedience of our first parents: we were alienated 
from God, and came under his sentence of death as 
unfit for eternal life. 
The Scriptures tell us that we were "sold under sin"— 



sold into bondage, servitude, into sin, by the disobedience of 
our first parents. The world is still in this bondage, and 
hence is not free in any sense of the word, and should not 
be. As bond-slaves of sin, the world must wait for the 
deliverance which God has willed and will fully provide, 
and of which the Apostle writes, saying, "The whole creation 
groaneth and travaileth in pain together until now," 
"waiting for the manifestation of the sons of God." "For 
the creature itself also shall be delivered from the bondage 
of corruption into the glorious liberty of the sons of God." 
(Rom. 8:19-22.) Here the Apostle tells us that the world's 
liberty awaits the dawning of the Millennial morning, when 
the sons of God, Christ the Bridegroom and the Elect 
Church his Bride, shall be manifest in power and great 
glory as the divinely appointed Royal Priesthood, judges for 
the world— to lift them out of bondage to sin and death, 
and by restitution processes to give back to them, by the 
close of the Millennium, the full perfection of their human 
nature and a perfect home, and divine favor and blessing 
unto everlasting life— all the unwilling and disobedient 
being destroyed in the Second Death. 

"NOW ARE WE THE SONS OF GOD" 

With one voice Jesus and his apostles assure us that 
those of the human family who have had the ear to hear 
and the heart to appreciate the message of God's grace in 
Christ, God has been willing to accept as sons of God, and 
to accord to them the liberty of the sons of God without 
their waiting for the times of restitution to secure these favors. 
Those who by faith have the eyes of their understanding 
opened and who evidently hear, are reckoned as justified 
—as made right in God's sight— because their minds are 
right, their wills are right, however imperfect their flesh may 
be. Those of this class who consecrated themselves irrevocably 
to the Lord and were begotten of the Spirit were 
counted New Creatures, of a new nature, to whom old things 
had passed away and all things had become new— who 
henceforth walked not after the desires of the flesh but 
after the desires of the Spirit. These are the New Creation, 
begotten by the Lord's Spirit. 

It is to these New Creatures that God has accorded 
liberty— not to the world nor even to the flesh of the New 
Creation. The New Creature, because in full accord with 
the Lord, may be granted full liberty; and hence it is that 
the Church, the body of Christ, is left without bondage to 
any law except that they shall love the Lord with all their 
heart, soul, mind and strength, and their neighbor as themselves. 
They are entirely free within these limitations, 
which are the very most that could be granted under the 
divine arrangement, which recognizes only those who have 
the Spirit of God as being sons of God and having any liberty 
whatever as such. 

CONFLICT BETWEEN THE FLESH AND SPIRIT 



Here arises the conflict: the spirit indeed is willing to 
use its liberty only to the glory of God, but the flesh is artful, 
cunning, strong. Although condemned to death, "crucified 
with Christ" and "dying daily," as the New Creature 
grows "strong in the Lord and in the power of his might," 
nevertheless the flesh— always contrary to the spirit on these 
subjects— argues for its rights, its privileges, its liberties, in 
a manner which the New Creature, the new mind, the new 
will, must frequently disregard, deny. It is a trick of the 
condemned flesh to appeal to the New Creature along the 
line of personal liberty, pointing out in the words of our 

R4006 : page 172 

lesson that all things are lawful to it— that is, that there is 
no law restraining its liberty, and that therefore it should 
grant to the flesh larger concessions in some respects, at 
least, than the world would enjoy. 

Our lesson is the Apostle's answer to such an appeal: 
he declares that while nothing is forbidden the New Creature 
under direct divine law, it is also true that there are 
many things that would be inexpedient, ill-advised, contrary 
to its best interests, its strengthening, its development: 
hence such inexpedient things should be noted, and the 
interests of the New Creation should always decide the 
question, although the New Creature, begotten of the Spirit 
of God, loving God supremely and his neighbor as himself, 
is forbidden nothing. It is to be remembered, says the 
Apostle, that not all things edify, profit, strengthen, build 
up, encourage. And whatever is not to edification is not 
profitable, and is not to be entertained or practised regardless 
of law on the subject. 

"AM I MY BROTHER'S KEEPER?" 

Continuing his argument along this line, the Apostle 
shows that the New Creature, while not restrained by law, 
is restrained from many things by his own nature. Begotten 
of the spirit of love, and loving his neighbor as himself, 
he is bound to think not only of what would be harmless to 
himself but also to consider what would be helpful or injurious 
to his neighbor: hence, as the Apostle says, none of 
us should seek his own welfare merely, but each also his 
neighbor's welfare. In a word, the Apostle shows that the 
New Creature is his brother's keeper in the sense that he 
must consider his brother's interests as well as his own. 
Not that he should interfere with his brother's rights, privileges 
and interests, and be a busybody in other men's matters, 
but that he should allow the Spirit of the Lord, the 
spirit of love, to so thoroughly fill his own heart that he 
would be a helper and not a stumbling-block to the brethren 
and to the world. 

These New Creatures to whom the Apostle ministered 
resided in the midst of civilized heathendom, and hence 
were exposed to trials along lines very different from those 



R4006 : page 173 

affecting the converts from Judaism residing in Palestine, 
where the surroundings would be godly at least. Not that 
the Christians of Palestine had no difficulties, for we know 
that they had their special trials in respect to the demands 
of the Law, the usages of the synagogues and the Temple, 
etc., but the Apostle was now discussing the special trials of 
Christians in foreign lands. The custom of that time was to 
offer animals as sacrifices to idols, and then to give the carcasses 
of the animals to the priests, who in turn sold these 
through butchers in the public markets. Hence those who 
would eat meat at all would find it almost impossible to avoid 
eating meat that had been offered to idols. This was a serious 
point and a very perplexing question: what should they 
do? Some were stronger of mind than others, and could 
understand that an idol was nothing, and that therefore the 
offering of meat before nothing could do it no injury. However, 
all were not thus minded: some brethren and sisters 
were weaker— unable to draw such a distinction, and for 
these New Creatures to live conscientiously would mean that 
they must deny themselves frequently the use of such meat. 
The case would be particularly difficult where some of the 
members of the families were Christians and others were 
not. No wonder the Apostle referred to this question in 
more than one of his epistles and indicated its importance. 

There were two sides to the question: The idol being 
nothing, the offering of the food to it being nothing, the personal 
liberty question alone would be in dispute, for there 
was no law given on this matter except the law of love. The 
other side of the argument would be that the brother who 
could not conscientiously partake of such meat might have 
too much pride or an insufficiency of courage to follow his 
convictions, and might thus violate his conscience in trying 
to keep pace with another whose eyes of understanding 
open more widely or more quickly. The Apostle's exhortation 
is that these should be remembered, and that the one of 
broader comprehension should be willing to consider his 
brother and not to stumble his conscience— be willing to 
refrain from eating such meat rather than run the risk of 
injuring his brother, whom Christ so loved that he died for 
him. 

"EAT, ASKING NO QUESTIONS" 

In the verses preceding our lesson the Apostle urges 
great care on the part of believers, pointing out to them that 
God delivered the nation of Israel, but that subsequently, 
because of their lack of loyalty, he permitted them to die, 
some for one offence and some for another. His suggestion 
is that we, having been set free from the bondage of Satan, 
should be careful how we use our liberty, lest it become to 
us a snare, a stumbling-stone. In view of the prevalence of 
idolatry at that time he felt it expedient to urge the Church, 
saying, "Wherefore, my dearly beloved, flee from idolatry." 
(1 Cor. 10:14.) He then proceeds to contrast the feast which 



marks us as Christians— the Memorial of our Lord's death 
—with the heathen feasts to which many of the Lord's 
people would undoubtedly be invited, and in which they 
would be exposed to various misleading influences which 
might prove injurious to them as New Creatures in Christ, 
tending to relax their vigilance over the flesh and to hinder 
them from progress in growth as New Creatures. He points 
out that there is a fellowship, a communion, implied in our 
partaking of our Lord's loaf and the Lord's cup— that we 
thus indicate that all of the New Creation are members of 
the body of Christ, participants in the same joys, blessings, 
hopes, promises and sufferings. Then he declares that in 
the feasts of the heathen not God but devils were worshipped, 
and he asks what communion or fellowship could 
there be between the table of the Lord and the table of 
devils, and between those who feast at the Lord's table on 
the heavenly spiritual things and those who were more or 
less identified with the heathendom of the time. The implication 
is that there is no fellowship, no communion. 

Although in our day conditions are in many respects 
much more favorable, nevertheless there is some similarity. 
Many of our dear friends and relatives fail to worship the 
true God, the God of love and wisdom and power, but the 
declaration is that Christ has been provided as a "ransom 
for all, to be testified in due time." Many on the contrary, 
while thinking that they worship God, really worship "doctrines 
of devils," of which they are ashamed, and by which 
they are hindered and restrained from progress in the Lord's 
good way. While we should sympathize with these and 
with all mankind in their blindness and superstition, yet 
what communion, what fellowship could there be between 
ideas so diametrically opposite? What fellowship of worship 
and teaching could there be between such and those 
who recognize God as the loving, merciful One who willeth not 
the death of him that dieth, but who would that all should 
turn unto him and live, and who has made a full provision 
that the knowledge of Christ shall reach every member of 
Adam's race either in the present age or in the coming Millennial 
age by an awakening from the tomb. Surely there can 
be little harmony between us and those who believe and teach 
that God, before he created mankind, deliberately planned the 
eternal torment of the great majority of them and determined 
a plan by which only a mere handful, a little flock, 
should ever hear of or enjoy a knowledge of the truth and 
an opportunity for salvation. 

The food upon these two different tables is so very different 
as to make a breach. Not that we will be out of 
accord with our brethren and neighbors, but that to the 
Lord and his Word we must be true. We cannot but show 
forth the things which we have seen and heard: we love to 
tell the story, and to refrain from so doing would be woe to 
us, "Woe to me if I declare not the gospel" (1 Cor. 9:16); 
and again the Apostle says, "I am not ashamed of the gospel 
of Christ, for it is the power of God unto salvation to every 
one that believeth"— and we know that all will be granted 
an opportunity of knowing and believing.— Rom. 1:16. 



The Apostle points out the reasonable, proper course to 
be followed under such circumstances. If a Christian of 
that time were invited to a feast he was not bound to suppose 
that the meat had been offered to idols, and therefore 
not bound to refuse it. On the contrary, he might give 
thanks and eat it without injury to his conscience if able to 
see the matter in its true, proper light. But if some brother 
said to him, The meat provided here has been offered to 
idols, and I fear that it would be wrong for us to eat it, 
then, says the Apostle, it should not be eaten for the sake 

R4006 : page 174 

of the brother who indicated his own knowledge and fear— 
for his conscience' sake— lest he should be stumbled. I am 
to be willing, yea, glad to deny myself what otherwise would 
have been my liberty, my privilege, since my conscience was 
not at all involved, but clearly discerned that the idol was 
nothing and did no injury whatever to the meat. How grand 
is this lesson of brotherly consideration;— yet it is strictly 
within the lines of the law of love, for are we not to do to 
our brother or neighbor as to ourselves? and would we think 
it right to risk our own spiritual standing for a morsel of 
meat? How then could we risk our brother's standing 
on such a consideration? The law of our liberty in 
Christ, love, must govern our conduct automatically on 
every occasion. The Lord wishes us to learn, not as children, 
certain fixed rules, but as philosophers the fixed principles 
which can be applied. 

THE PRINCIPLE OF WIDE APPLICATION 

All who have been begotten of the holy Spirit of love 
will perceive that the principles governing the New Creation 
are of very wide application indeed. The committee selecting 
this for our lesson desired that we forget not the application 

R4007 : page 174 

of this principle to the subject of temperance in respect 

to alcoholic liquors. Surely so grave an evil should 

not be overlooked, and to it we might advantageously add 

the influence of other narcotics— opium, morphine, cocaine, 

etc. These evils which so seriously tempt the human race, 

which have wrecked so many lives, blighted so many prospects, 

destroyed so many homes, and which annually consume 

an amount of wealth which, applied properly, would 

mean so much of comfort, blessing and elevation to the race, 

certainly demand thought from all who have been begotten 

of the holy Spirit of love. Such cannot be indifferent to 

the interests of their brethren nor to the interests of mankind 

in general. True, we have neither the word nor example 

of our Lord and his apostles to the effect that we 

should leave the more important work of preaching the good 

tidings of the Kingdom to engage in a temperance work; 

but we may be sure that whatever influence we have that 



cannot be used in the forwarding of the Kingdom message 
could much better go to the restraint of this demoniacal influence 
in the interest of our fellowmen than to almost any 
other cause in the world. 

The reason why the Kingdom message is given precedence 
to all others is that, whatever may be done for the 
world under present conditions, will be merely palliative 
and not radical cures. The Kingdom under the whole 
heavens, the exercise of divine power in the hands of the 
glorified Christ, is the only power to which we can look for 
the overthrow of these venomous evils. We may be sure that 
when the Kingdom of God's dear Son is established and the 
will of God begins to be done on earth as it is done in 
heaven, it will mean the utter abolition of every ensnaring 
and degrading influence— the bringing of all things into 
subjection to the will of God in Christ. We may be equally 
sure that it would be pleasing to the Lord that all who 
would be his true followers should give no countenance to 
these evils, nor to any others in the present time, even though 
we cannot share with our fellowmen in the hope that any 
powers of ours would ever ultimately put down these terrible 
evils. We must still wait for God's Son and his mighty 
power to intervene, and hence we continue to pray and to 
labor for the Kingdom that is to come. 

A TERRIBLE AND TRUE INDICTMENT 

A minister of God makes the following indictment 
against the influence of the saloon:— 

"The saloon is the enemy of God. Its forces are against 
the forces that make for righteousness. It makes a brute of 
the being God created in his own image and likeness. Its 
very atmosphere wreaks with blasphemy. It is destructive 
of all faith, all virtue, all love toward God, reverence for 
God and likeness to God. It is the organized expression of 
the kingdom of Satan amongst men. 

"It is the enemy of man. It bloats his visage, corrupts 
his heart, weakens his will, sears his conscience. 

"It is the enemy of the home. It puts out the fire, 
empties the larder, turns the protector of the family into a 
thing of abhorrence, clothes the wife in rags and brings the 
children to suffering and shame. 

"It is the enemy of the State. It is the breeding-place 
of all the plots and conspiracies that threaten the downfall 
of society. It is the Gibraltar of bad politics. It is the 
gathering-place of thugs and repeaters, the market of the 
purchasable vote, the fountain head of municipal 
wrong-doing. 

"The devil is for it; God is against it. Vice is for it; 
virtue is against it. The brothel is for it; the home is 
against it. Falsehood is for it; truth is against it. The 
anarchist is for it; the statesman is against it. Poverty is 
for it; plenty is against it. Misery is for it; happiness is 
against it. Disease is for it; health is against it. Death is 
for it; life is against it." 



"ALL TO THE GLORY OF GOD" 

The Apostle sums up his argument in favor of loving 
consideration for our brethren and liberty of conscience for 
ourselves— "Whether, therefore, ye eat or drink or whatsoever 
you do, do all to the glory of God." More than thirty 
years ago this text was so impressed upon the mind of the 
writer that he had it beautifully painted on glass and it still 
greets the eyes of visitors to the WATCH TOWER office, the 
Bible House parlor and the Editor's study. It is difficult to 
imagine a more comprehensive statement of the Christian's 
liberty and limitations than is expressed in these words. To 
whatever extent one learns to govern thoughts, words and 
deeds by this glorious precept he is becoming more and more 
filled with the spirit of the law of love, strengthened in 
character and meet for the inheritance of the saints in light. 
This limitation to what would be to "the glory of God" will 
enter into and affect all the affairs of life if we will only 
permit it. A dear brother now deceased told us on the 
occasion of our first meeting that for years he had been a 
nominal Christian, first a Congregationalist and subsequently 
an Episcopalian, and always found of his personal liberty; 
but how, failing to see the other side of the question, he had 
allowed his liberty to lead him into various excesses. He 
felt that he was exercising his personal liberty when he 
drank wine and occasionally played a social game of cards 
with the rector of his Church, and generally he felt at liberty 
to do whatever would not be in violation of the laws of 
the land. 

His inquiry was, "Brother Russell, can you explain to 

R4007 : page 175 

me the change which has come over my life: I do not understand 

it myself. My friends used to hand me tracts in opposition 

to wine and tobacco, etc., but I pooh-poohed them and 

said in effect, 'I am as good as you; mind your own business 

and let me mind mine. I am violating no law, I am merely 

exercising my personal liberty.' But, Brother Russell, since 

I read MILLENNIAL DAWN, Vol. 1, a change has come over me, 

and those practices which I once considered my liberty I 

now esteem to be my snares and avoid them. The matter 

came about in this way: I first asked myself, Is that time 

spent with the rector playing cards a profitable use of 

my time? Are you doing it to the glory of God? And as 

for the wine, do you use that to the glory of God? I was 

obliged to answer both questions in the negative and discontinued 

both practices. It was not long after this that I 

found myself striking a match and about to light my usual 

cigar. The thought of doing all things to the glory of God 

came to my mind afresh and I said, 'Can you smoke that 

cigar to the glory of God?' It took a little time to decide 

the question, for I had been in the habit of smoking on an 

average ten cigars a day. That match went out and I struck 

another while still thinking. I finally decided that I could 

not smoke the cigar to God's glory and I threw it away. It 



was only a short time after that that I found myself feeling 
for my fine-cut tobacco, and about to take it as a substitute 
for the cigar. Again the question arose, Can you chew the 
tobacco to the glory of God? My judgment answered, No! 
and I threw away the tobacco. I have never used either 
since. Conscious that the thing that had influenced me to 
this course was the reading of the DAWN I reexamined the 
volume carefully, but could find in it no tirade against the 
practices I had just discontinued— no recommendations even 
along sumptuary lines. I want to ask you what it was in 
the DAWN that effected such a revolution in my life." We 
replied that the DAWN, instead of attacking the branches of 
evil, followed the Scriptural course of laying the ax to the 
root of the tree. Whoever realizes the true meaning of his 
consecration vow, the true significance of his begettal of the 
holy Spirit, the true meaning of the perfect law of liberty 
under which he has come, the law of love, will find it ample 
for the regulation of all of life's affairs, for he must seek 
thereafter that whether he eats or drinks or whatever he 
does all shall be to the glory of God. 

"GIVE NONE OFFENCE" 

The Apostle carries this thought of our personal responsibility 
in seeking God's glory to its legitimate conclusion. 
He shows that we will be disinclined to do anything that 
will stumble either Jews or Greeks or the Church of God. 
And he declares in the last verse of the lesson that this was 
his own course in life— that so far as possible in line with 
his conscience he sought to be pleasing to all men in all 
things— disregarding his own advantage and considering 
chiefly the profit of the many that he might do all possible 
for their salvation. This noble spirit is the only one consistent 
with our law of liberty— love which is always generous, 
thoughtful of the interest of others, unselfish, not proud, 
boastful, greedy;— not ill-mannered, not careless of the interests 
and feelings of others, either in the great or in the 
small things of life— the present or the future. We are glad 
that the Apostle was able to call attention to his own course 
as an exemplification of his teaching. And this should be 
the rule with all of us, not merely to give precepts but to 
follow them with example. 

The Apostle in the next verse, which should be a part 
of the same chapter, says, "Be ye followers of me, as I also 
am of Christ." It would have been strangely inconsistent of 
the Apostle to set himself up as an example in anything except 
as he had pointed out either directly or indirectly that 
he could be an example only because he was a follower in 
the footsteps of the Redeemer. Christ is the pattern of us 
all, though we may learn to appreciate the grandeur of his 
example better by our closer contact with some who are 
walking in his steps and with whose experiences we may be 
able the more closely to sympathize. O that this lesson of 
the import of our law of liberty in all the affairs of life 
might be with us with increasing force, not only in our own 
affairs but also in our relationship in the Church, the body 



of Christ, that each might be the more careful as the days go 
by to exemplify the love of Christ, the love of God, the love 
of the brethren— the love even of our enemies. 



page 175 

AN ENCOURAGING LETTER 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

I have been to St. Paul, Minn., to the Memorial, 
and learned concerning the prospective Convention 
to be held there in July. Am delighted the Lord is 
thus favoring them, as there are many new ones apparently 
coming in there now. I think that about ten or 
twelve, who have become interested from the sale of 
DAWNS, are attending the meetings, and that about ten 
have made entire consecration. 

I was surprised to see the rapid growth of the 
Church there in zeal and love. You advised them to 
have a Wednesday evening testimony meeting and use 
a verse of Scripture for the text and they are carrying 
it out to the letter. The first Wednesday meeting I 
attended there were twenty-two present, all living long 
distances away, and all seemed ready to give testimony 
along the line of the subject. They use your 
text for the preceding Sunday's discourse published in 
the Pittsburg Dispatch. They meet at a different home 
of the brethren each week until they complete the circuit, 
as some cannot get to meeting at any other time 
than when it is at their home. 

Minneapolis is carrying out the same plan. Sundays 
they all meet together, and the Elders are giving some 
fine discourses. 

My heart has been greatly rejoiced of late to learn 
of three who after being stirred up by your discourse 
at Lynn, Mass., in January accepted the terms of consecration 
and complied therewith. They were from 
my home town in Nova Scotia, some of my warmest 
friends. I gave two of them the "Plan of the Ages" 
seven years ago, but they never read it or valued the 
Truth in the least until they heard you in January. 

I thought I would write you privately about these 
things, as your heart would be rejoiced to learn of 
the prosperity of the Kingdom work anywhere. We 
are always rejoiced when anyone is benefited by the sale 
of the books, and I know you must be even more so. 
I have a friend who is reading with great interest, and 
is accepting the Truth as fast as she sees it. I have 
been almost sure her life has been consecrated to the 
Lord for years, it has been so beautiful. She cannot 
afford to pay for the TOWER and will you kindly place 
her name on the Lord's poor list. 

Yours in him, E. E. M.,— Minn. 



page 177 



SEMI-MONTHLY 
VOL. XXVIII JUNE 15 No. 12 
A.D. 1907--A.M. 6035 



CONTENTS 

Admonitions for the Consecrated 179 

Patience and Forbearance Commended 180 

"Consider One Another to Provoke" 181 

"Love Seeketh Not Her Own" 182 

Led by a Way that They Knew Not 183 

"The Bread that Came Down from Heaven" 184 

"Come Near Before the Lord" 185 

This Doth God Require 186 

The Law Covenant for Israel Only 187 

"Fulfil the Law of Christ" 188 

A Scape-goat Query 190 

Some Interesting Letters 191 

page 178 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-24 EVERSHOLT ST., LONDON, N.W. 
GERMAN BRANCH-MIRKER STR., 45, ELBERFELD. 
AUSTRALASIAN BRANCH-EQUITABLE BLDG., COLLINS ST., MELBOURNE 

PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 

TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR AS FOLLOWS:- 

All Bible Students who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity or 
adversity, are unable to pay for this Journal, will be supplied FREE if 
they send a Postal Card each June stating their case and requesting its 
continuance. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on 
our list continually and in touch with the Studies, etc. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



THIS JOURNAL IS PUBLISHED IN THE 

FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, DANISH AND ITALIAN LANGUAGES. 

SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



THE INDIANAPOLIS CONVENTION, JUNE 14-17 



ALL SESSIONS IN 
"TOMLINSON HALL," COR. DELAWARE AND MARKET STS. 
BUREAU OF INFORMATION IN UNION DEPOT 

RAILROAD RATES 

We have secured a rate of two cents per mile within the 
territory of the Central Passenger Association, embracing railroads 
west of Buffalo, Pittsburg and Wheeling, in Ohio, Indiana, 
Lower Michigan and a considerable portion of Illinois. 
Excursion tickets should be asked for the "Watch Tower Convention, 
Indianapolis." These tickets will require to be signed 
at Indianapolis before using on return passage, and will be 
sold on June 13th and 14th, and be good for return journey to 
leave Indianapolis not later than June 18th, and return ticket 
must be signed in the presence of the Agent. (However, in a 
considerable portion of this territory, the two cent a mile rate 
already prevails without a special excursion ticket.) 

The Western Association has declined to make any special 
concession; friends from that territory must do the best they 
can in the matter of purchasing tickets. Remember the "mileage" 
plan; or, where a number are in one party, the "theatrical rate." 

The Eastern Trunk Lines Association, governing New 
York, Pennsylvania, Virginia, West Virginia, Delaware, New 
Jersey, and Maryland Railroads, will grant us a special rate, 
on a signature ticket, of two cents a mile each way, provided 
we can furnish at once the names and addresses of those desirous 
of attending. Friends within this territory desirous of 
attending the Indianapolis Convention will say so at once; a 
postal card will do. On receipt of it we will procure a special 
order for a ticket and mail it to you. 

Friends from Pennsylvania, West Virginia, Maryland, 
New York, New Jersey, etc., desirous of attending the Convention 
at Indianapolis should ADVISE US AT ONCE, so that we 
may procure for them from the railroads orders for two-cent-per-mile 
rates. 

Reports seem to indicate that there will be a large gathering 
at Indianapolis. 

ACCOMMODATIONS 

In private residences accommodations can be had for 50c 
and $1.00 each per night. In hotels board and lodging can be 
procured for $1, $1.25, $2, and upward to $5 per day. 

Write at once, if you wish us to procure accommodations, 
stating briefly and pointedly what kind, number of persons, 
sex and color, and if married couples wish to room together. 
Do not expect any alteration of your party's location after 
writing. If others join it later they will be accommodated in 
the order of notification. Address all letters to C. A. Wise, 



1112 W. 30th St., Indianapolis, Ind. 



BRITISH PILGRIMAGE OF BRO. A. E. WILLIAMSON 



Thornhill, Eng. 


June 26 East Kirkby, Eng. 


July i: 


Oldham, 


" 27 Liverpool, 


14, 15 


Macclesfield, 


" 28 Warrington, 


16 


Manchester, 


" 29, 30 Atherstone, 


17 


Poulton-le-Fylde, 


July 1 Leicester, 


" 18, 19 


Belfast, Ire. 


" 3,4 Nottingham, 


20,21 


Bangor, 


" 6 Worcester, 


22 


Dublin, 


" 7, 8 Tewkesbury, 


23 


Carlow, 


10 Cardiff, Wales 


24, 25 



R4008 : page 179 

ADMONITIONS FOR THE CONSECRATED 

"I write unto thee. ..that thou mayest know how thou 
oughtest to behave thyself in the house of God, which is 
the Church of the living God, the pillar and 
ground of the truth."— I Tim. 3:14,15. 

IT is one thing to make our consecration to the 
Lord, to be his and to serve him even unto death, 
and another thing to carry out that service day 
by day in all the little details of life. Our Lord's words 
—that he that is faithful in that which is least would 
be faithful also in greater things— is well illustrated 
by the fact that it would be comparatively easy for us 
to finish our sacrifice by suicide, or even by going to 
the stake, and a much more difficult thing to day by 
day hold our sacrifice on the altar in all the little affairs 
of life— in self-denials, in patience, in perseverance, in 
brotherly kindness, in gentleness— to receive reviling 
and revile not again, to be smitten mentally or physically 
and not to retaliate; this endurance of a lingering 
crucifixion-death is much more difficult. But we 
can readily see that the Lord's plan is greatly to our 
advantage, in the sense that while the consecration 
evidences a right spirit, will or intention, the gradual 
carrying out of that consecration tends more and more 
to develop the character-likeness of our Lord in us. 
Hence the Apostle urges that we learn to rejoice even 
in tribulations, knowing that they will work out in us 
various fruits and graces of the Lord's Spirit, as we 
receive them in the proper attitude of heart and seek 
to learn the lessons they teach. 

GOOD BEHAVIOR IN THE CHURCH 



Recognizing that we are all defective according to 
the flesh, that none of us come up to the divine standard 
of perfection, and that our only perfection is that 
of the heart, the will, we must not wonder if occasionally 
we have trials and testings, aggravations, one 
from the other, though it must be the will, the desire, 
the intent of each to provoke one another to love and 
good works and not to anger, hatred and evil works. 
(Heb. 10:24.) For ourselves we must recognize the 
very highest standard of God-likeness, and as for others 
of the Body we must be prepared to allow our love 
for them and for the Lord to cover a multitude of blemishes 
should they appear to us. And each one, in proportion 
as he or she follows this course, is pleasing to 
the Lord, is pure in heart— a copy of God's dear Son— 
and, covered with the robe of the Redeemer's merit, is 
considered from God's standpoint, not according to his 
imperfect flesh, but according to his perfect-intentioned 
heart or will. To us, "in the Church" does not 
signify in a meeting-house, but amongst the Lord's 
people. Neither does it mean merely when we are 
assembled together, but it includes all of our dealings 
with them, every day and all the time. And we all 
should desire to learn the lesson how we ought to conduct 
ourselves in or amongst the members of the 
Church, the Body of Christ, the tabernacle of the holy 
Spirit amongst men. 

Everywhere in the Bible the Lord sets before us 
perfect Love as the standard, and we must therefore 
suppose that all who have passed the standard of 
babes in Christ, and have come to some measure of 
knowledge of the Lord through his Word and Spirit, 
recognize this love standard and are seeking to conform 
to it. We must therefore suppose that the difficulties 
which from time to time arise amongst such are 
largely because of imperfect development of knowledge 
and experience in applying the love standard, as well 
as because of imperfections of the flesh. Hence the 
Scriptural exhortation that we grow in grace as well as 
in knowledge, and that we be more and more filled 
with the Spirit of the Lord, the spirit of love, the spirit 
of a sound mind, the spirit of brotherly kindness, the 
spirit of meekness, the spirit of patience— the holy 
Spirit. 

ARE CONTENTIONS NECESSARY? 

We reply that they are sometimes, but not nearly 
so often as they occur. There is just one ground of 
contention authorized, and we find it in the words, 
"Contend earnestly for the faith once delivered to the 

R4008 : page 180 

saints." (Jude 3.) But since the spirit of contention is 



everywhere in the Bible reprehended, we must understand 
the Apostle to mean that only the important 
points of our faith are to be contended for. We must 
not give place to any who deny the personality of the 
heavenly Father, and who would teach in the Church 
that God is a great big nothing, merely a principle of 
good; and if there is anything good in the sense of 
useful in the piece of iron or wood or stone or in any 
other substance, there is that much of God in it. We 
must contend earnestly against such vain philosophies, 
as being not only foreign to the faith once delivered to 
the saints, but antagonistic to it to the last degree. 
We must contend also for the ransom, because it is the 
very foundation of the faith once delivered to the saints 
—that Christ died for our sins according to the Scriptures 
and that he rose for our justification. This would 
imply a contention against various false claims, such 
as that our Lord was not made flesh but remained a 
spirit being, to whom death was quite impossible— that 
he merely assumed for a time the human body, pretending 
that it was himself, and pretending that he 
died when it died. 

We must hold to the faith once delivered to the 
saints, that our Lord left the glory which he had with 
the Father before the world was, that he humbled himself 
and was made flesh, and that he did this not as an 
example, but that he by the grace of God "tasted death 
for every man"— that he might die the Just for the unjust 
to bring us to God. This means additionally that 
we must contend that his death was a real death, the 
Just for the unjust, else our faith in him as a Savior 
and Redeemer would depart. Furthermore, if we did 
not believe that he really died, really gave himself as 
a corresponding price for father Adam, thus purchasing 
him and his race, how could we believe in his resurrection 
from the dead? How could anyone be resurrected 
from death if he had not gone into it? We must 
also hold to and contend earnestly for the great fact 
that God's work during this Gospel Age is the selection 
of the Bride of Christ— the Church of the First-born— 
and that this election, completed at our Lord's second 
coming, will have its consummation in the resurrection 
of the little flock to glory, honor and immortality in the 
Kingdom, as the Royal Priesthood under Christ their 
Royal Head and High Priest, that as the Spiritual Seed 
of Abraham they may fulfil the Abrahamic Covenant, 
"In thy Seed shall all the families of the earth be 
blessed." For all these fundamentals of our religion, 
including the declaration that sin entered into the 
world by Adam's transgression and that we are all 
partakers of his sin and of its penalty, and all need 
redemption— all these first principles of the faith we 
must stand for, contend for. To be indifferent to these 
and to allow error to creep in and to be promulgated, 
taught in the Church, would be a serious sin and show 
unfaithfulness on the part of those who had pledged 



themselves as soldiers of the cross to defend it. 
But aside from such fundamentals, the Lord's 
people should seek to exercise great moderation 
amongst themselves upon any point of doctrine not 
clearly enunciated— upon the meaning of any parable 
not explained in the Scripture itself. Neither should 
there be any dispute or division as respects Brother 
Russell or any other brother. Each should be allowed 
to exercise his own judgment in respect to things not 
specifically stated in the Word of God. Each should 
feel a delicacy or reserve about promulgating any doctrine 
or matter not specifically and clearly taught in 
the Scriptures, and above all he should be sure never 
to teach or attempt to teach speculations if he himself 
is not thoroughly convinced respecting the same. 
Each one has enough to contend with in the twists and 
kinks of his own imperfect judgment without having 
others add to his difficulties by the rehearsal of matters 
which they admit they do not clearly understand. 
There is so much in God's Word that is simple and 
plain and well substantiated that we can talk about 
and think about, that we are well nigh inexcusable for 
far-away speculations. The Scriptures declare, "The 
secret things belong unto God, but the things revealed 
belong unto us."— Deut. 29:29. 

PATIENCE AND FORBEARANCE COMMENDED 

If some dear brother has a peculiar theory or 
hobby and feels that he cannot rest until he has presented 
it to the Church, there should be some opportunity 
given him to let off steam— even if it would not 
be advisable to hear him in the most public manner 
lest visitors should conclude that his fancies represented 
the general thought of the Church. But if after 
he has been heard on some occasion, and it be the 
judgment of the Church that his theories are unreasonable, 
unscriptural, he should be content with having 
given his view; and if he be not content, but desires 
to ride his theory continually as a hobby, to the annoyance 
of others and to the interference with the general 
spirit of worship and progress in study, it would seem 
to be the duty of the elders to call his attention to the 
fact, and to remind him that he has been heard, and 
therefore his urging the matter is in the nature of a 
contention, not for a fundamental of the truth, but for 
a theory, and that such contention is reproved 

R4009 : page 180 

throughout the Scriptures as contrary to the will of 

the Lord and to the good of his people, themselves included, 

and that therefore they cannot permit the matter 

to continue.— Titus 3:9. 

The Apostle speaks of those who are "contentious 
and obey not the truth." (Rom. 2:8.) The intimation 



is that the contentious spirit or disposition is generally 

to be found amongst those who are not living up 

to the spirit of the truth which they have already recognized. 

They have been attempting to grow in 

knowledge without growing in grace— in love, in kindness, 

gentleness, meekness, patience, etc.; and those 

who are right at heart will be pleased to note this as 

their difficulty, and to correct the same, because what 

would it profit us to contend for our theories and cause 

confusion in the Church of God, and be ultimately reprimanded 

by the Lord and be unable to pass the examination 

for perfect love and Christ-likeness, and 

R4009 :page 181 

therefore be counted unworthy a place in the Bride 
class! Surely such contentions, such theorizings, are 
well worthy of the Apostle's reprimand, and well 
worthy to be heeded by us all. 

The Apostle's exhortation that "nothing be done 
through strife or vain-glory" gives another suggestion 
along this line, namely, that some have naturally the 
spirit of strife, and therefore more to overcome along 
this line than have some others. Some, it is intimated, 
have a vain-glorious spirit, the spirit of pride and ambition, 
which gets themselves and others into difficulty. 
But are we to reject those who are naturally 
combative, naturally ambitious? Are we to say that 
they therefore are not of the Body, and cut them off? 
By no means; rather we should seek to so exemplify 
the proper course in our own conduct as to impress a 
lesson upon them and upon all with whom we have 
contact. Wherever we see a wrong spirit in another 
our first thought should be, Have I any of that disposition 
myself? and our first correction should be in 
our own hearts and conduct. Thus casting the mote 
or beam out of our own eyes we would be the better 
prepared to approach our brother with gentleness and 
kindness, and unobtrusively to render him assistance 
in getting the better of his difficulties. 

BEREANS WHO "FIGHT TO A FINISH" 

Some of the Lord's dear brethren of excellent heart 
and noble intention seem to get the improper thought 
in connection with the Berean studies. They seem to 
say to themselves, There can be but one right thought 
on this subject, and that one the truth; and everyone 
else here should want the truth, and we should contend 
and dispute on this question if necessary all night and 
fight the matter until some one gives up and sees that 
he is wrong. This is an evil thought entirely, and is 
productive of great discomfort and disadvantage, and 
a hindrance to spirituality in various classes. On 
the one hand we are to appreciate more those who do 
some thinking of their own about a subject than those 



who do no thinking, and who merely swallow a statement 
set forth by others. But there is a proper limit 
to be observed: the Lord has had great patience with 
us all in our slowness to learn, and surely we should 
be patient with each other. He lays down line upon 
line, precept upon precept, and is slow to anger and 
plenteous of mercy, and very generous toward all those 
who give evidence of desiring to do his will. 

We certainly are not authorized to do less than this 
in his name and as his representatives. Rather our 
realization of our own obtuseness in the past should 
make us very sympathetic with others who are slow to 
see, slow to hear, slow to understand. Each therefore 
should be content if he have a reasonable opportunity 
for presenting his view on any question, and should 
not attempt to enforce and crowd it in upon another. 
If the Editor has stated his view, and one or more do 
not see the matter exactly so, and the question is not 
fundamental, then it would be the proper course to let 
the matter rest there, and to allow the Lord eventually 
as the great Teacher, through his providences to gradually 
bring us to where we could the more completely 
see eye to eye. In this we have the opportunity for 
learning the lesson of patience and forbearance, 
brotherly kindness, meekness, gentleness— Love. 

"CONSIDER ONE ANOTHER TO PROVOKE" 

If anyone of a contentious mind would set himself 
about it, he would have no difficulty in provoking in 
others resentment and evil works; but the Apostle 
urges, that having the holy Spirit of love dwelling in 
our hearts, we should consider one another to provoke 
unto love and good works. We should study one 
another's natural dispositions from a sympathetic 
standpoint, with a view to helping each other over 
difficulties and weaknesses. And how much of this is 
possible! Frequently it is possible by speaking a 
kind word, gently, sympathetically, lovingly, to help 
some dear brother or sister to keep balanced— to overcome 
some of his or her weaknesses, the expression 
of which would be injurious to himself as well as to 
the Church or others. How we should all study this 
spirit of helpfulness and recognize it as the spirit of 
love, the Spirit of the Lord! Let us remember that a 
soft answer, a kind and gentle word, may be helpful 
and turn away anger, but that grievous words and 
strifeful words, cutting words, sarcastic words, are 
almost sure to stir up anger. (Prov. 15:1.) Let us therefore 
study more and more to be gentle toward all and 
kind and affectionate one toward another, forgiving 
one another, even as God for Christ's sake hath forgiven 
you.— Eph. 4:32. 

Another point upon which forbearance and consideration 
seem very necessary is in respect to the 
choosing of leaders. Some very devoted brethren seem 



to get the impression that they should have no part in 
electing as an Elder anyone they could not endorse in 
every particular. We agree that no immoral person 
should be chosen to eldership under any consideration, 
and that if an Elder be found to be immoral his 
resignation should be immediately called for. But 
usually this is not the ground of difference: the Lord's 
people would never knowingly choose an immoral person 
as a standard-bearer or leader in spiritual things. 
But suppose that in a congregation there be one person 
whom the majority may consider vastly superior 
and better qualified every way than any other of their 
number to be their Elder or leader, and suppose that a 
minority of the congregation have a liking for the presentations 
or manners or what not of another brother, 
and suppose that another minority have a preference 
for still another brother, or at least a desire to see him 
brought forward into the public service of the Church, 
believing that he has talents that could be used of the 
Lord to his glory. What shall each party do?— fight it 
out on political lines and say, We have power, and 
therefore authority to elect our man, and you must 
either join in this or quit the company? By no means! 
This might be "good politics" amongst the worldly, 
but it would be quite out of harmony with the spirit of 
love which must govern in the Church. In gaining such 
a victory we might wound one or more of the Lord's 

R4009 : page 182 

brethren, might offend our Lord, and do ourselves incalculable 

injury in our race for the great prize. Such 

a "victory" would be a defeat of our real aims and aspirations 

—a victory for our great Adversary. Are we 

not to consider one another, and seek not every man 

merely his own preferences, but seek to build one another 

up in the most holy faith? The spirit of love 

would therefore seem to dictate that more than one 

Elder should be elected in such a case— two or three or 

more, as the supply of material and the desires of the 

company could be reasonably interpreted, without violating 

the general directions of the Lord's Word. A 

fair and reasonable decision should be such as would 

be proportionate to the number of the brethren. Some 

might be found specially well adapted to the leading 

of one kind of meeting and others to the leading of 

another kind, and the Apostle points out that we have 

need of every member of the body, so that the eye 

cannot even say to the hand or the foot— I have no need 

of you. The thought we should have in mind is that 

there is plenty of room for all of the Lord's people to 

do service. 

When the Apostle points out the qualifications of 
an Elder he mentions the ideal, just as our Lord mentions 
the ideal to us all when he says, "Be ye like unto 
your Father which is in heaven." We cannot be like 



the heavenly Father fully, completely, but we can have 
him as our standard or pattern to which we are striving 
to attain. Similarly, few elders may come up to the 
standard of qualification mentioned by the Apostle, 
but these qualifications should not be overlooked by 
any in their expression of a choice, or rather in their 
expression of what they believe to be the Lord's choice 
in the matter. "Forbearing one another in love," says 
the Apostle. O, how this forbearance and consideration 
of one another's preferences, tastes, views, would 
help to make us all more and more like the glorious 
Lord himself, and how it would smooth many of the 
wrinkles and difficulties, and bring peace in every little 
company of the Lord's people! We are not thinking 
of nor striving for the kind of peace and quiet that prevails 
in the graveyard or which prevails in the sleeping 
room, but the kind which the Lord would approve 
amongst those who are awake and alive and thoroughly 
consecrated to him, and forbearing and considering 
one another because of their love for the Head and for 
all those who are seeking to walk in his steps. 

R4010 :page 182 

"LOVE SEEKETH NOT HER OWN" 

All of the Lord's people should gradually come 
more and more to be ashamed of a self-seeking spirit 
and disposition and to appreciate more and more the 
spirit of love, which thinks not of personal interests but 
of the good of others, especially those of the household 
of faith. If a brother thinks that he has some talents 
which he would be pleased to use in the Lord's service 
in the Church, it is proper for him to be on the 
alert for opportunity to use these, but also proper for 
him to avoid imposing himself or his services on the 
Church. While glad to serve the Church freely, without 
money or price, while glad to give time, strength, 
energy and every talent to the service of the Truth, 
the spirit of meekness as well as the spirit of wisdom 
should hinder him from crowding his services upon the 
Church more than the latter could appreciate. Better 
go gently, and trust to the Lord to guide and to eventually 
indicate who shall serve the Church and to what 
extent they shall serve and in what capacity. This, 
the Lord's way, the Scriptural way, will be found to be 
the wisest one— any other course will sooner or later 
bring difficulty to all concerned. 

"WHOM THE SON MAKES FREE" 

It is difficult for many of us to keep balanced respecting 
our personal liberties: we are largely influenced 
by the customs and practices of those surrounding 
us, and need continually to hearken to the voice of 
the Lord in his Word. Because in Babylon it is customary 



that nothing should be done without ordination, 

a feeling sometimes creeps in amongst those less developed 

in grace and truth that is somewhat in accord 

with that: the feeling, for instance, that no meetings 

must be held except as they are appointed by the 

Church and conducted by one of the elected elders. 

There are advantages coming from a recognition of the 

oneness of the Church, and the appointing of meetings 

when and where they may be most helpful and to be 

led by those esteemed to have superior qualifications. 

But we must never lose sight of the fact that neither 

the Lord nor the apostles placed any limitations upon 

the liberties of individuals, and hence we may not 

do so. Note our Lord's words— "Where two or three 

are gathered together in my name, there am I in the 

midst of them." (Matt. 18:20.) That promise is as 

true today as it ever was, and places no restriction 

upon any of the Lord's people. 

If, therefore, any of the Lord's flock feel that their 
best spiritual interests are not served by the arrangements 
already made by the Church, they are fully at 
liberty to start a meeting that will be more helpful to 
them— any kind of a meeting not in conflict with the 
provisions of the Scriptures. In case of such a necessity 
seeming to present itself to any, our advice would 
be that they seek to appoint such meetings at a time 
and place that would not be in conflict with the appointments 
of the general congregation. If then it be desirable, 
as we hold that it generally is, that the Church 
should take a general supervision of such matters, it 
should recognize its responsibility and appoint a sufficiency 
of meetings and of the desired kinds, and under 
such leadership as will meet the necessities of the dear 
people— that all may be fed, that all may be strengthened, 
that all may progress, and that all may be maintained 
in unity of heart and in love and fellowship and 
cooperation. 

This may be as suitable a time as any for mentioning 
again, what has already been emphasized in DAWN 
STUDIES, Vol. VI., namely, that in our opinion the 
Lord's dear flock grow most in grace and strength 
where testimony meetings and Berean classes and 

R4010 :page 183 

DAWN studies are given quite a prominent place 
amongst their meetings. In these social gatherings, 
especially in the meetings devoted to testimony, prayer 
and praise, the dear friends have opportunities 
for getting into sympathetic touch with one another, 
which is most helpful, and which binds them more together 
in the bonds of Christian love than perhaps any 
other meetings could do. In the Allegheny Church 
these meetings are held every Wednesday evening, and 
are eight in number, in various parts of Pittsburg and 
suburbs. The average attendance for last quarter 



was more than one hundred and fifty, and the influence 
going out from these meetings is, we believe, excellent. 
How glad we would be if all the dear company who are 
able would attend them and partake of their refreshing 
influences. Many, we are sure, if obliged to choose 
one kind of meeting only would vote for the testimony 
meeting, or else that the testimony feature be made an 
important part of some other meeting. Let us remember 
that this is much of the kind of a meeting described 
by the Apostle in the early Church, as "When you come 
together."--! Cor. 14:26. 



R4010 :page 183 

LED BY A WAY THAT THEY KNEW NOT 

-EXODUS 16:1-15. -JULY 1 .-- 

Golden Text:— "I am the living bread which 
came down from heaven."— John 6:51. 

FULL of exultation at their great deliverance by the 

mighty hand of God, the Israelites, still guided by 

the cloudy pillar, journeyed for the promised land 

by a circuitous route. They started upon the journey, 

which lasted forty years, while it might have been accomplished 

in as many days. The object of the long delay was 

their instruction in righteousness, especially in faith. This 

would have been profitable for any people, but especially 

for a subject people born in a state of serfdom, and hence 

unused to liberty and initiative. But, more than this, natural 

Israel was intended of the Lord to constitute a type or 

shadow of spiritual Israel, and the lessons of the former 

were to be illustrative of the lessons of the latter. Whoever 

has read the story of Israel, and failed to discern that they 

and their experiences were foreshadowings of better things 

coming, has failed to get the gist of the lesson the Lord 

would teach. The experiences and instructions of the wilderness 

journey remind us of the poet's words, "God moves 

in a mysterious way his wonders to perform." 

The first lesson of the journey showed that the people 
had much to learn along the lines of faith and trust in the 
Lord. One would have thought that the plagues upon 
Egypt resulting in their liberty would have been convincing 
proof to them of divine favor, and would have secured them 
from every doubt and fear that he who had begun a good 
work on their behalf would surely not desert them on the 
threshold. Nevertheless, after journeying for three days 
slowly they came to the waters of Marah, and sore was their 
disappointment when they found that they had been appropriately 
named— Marah, signifying bitter. The waters were 
brackish and unpalatable and unfit for use. A great murmuring 
ascended from all sides, the disappointment was intense. 
Where was Moses? Why was the water brackish? 



The cry of the people to Moses was in unbelief, reproach; 
but Moses cried unto the Lord in faith, and the Lord 
showed him a tree which, cast into the waters, acted as a 
medicine, sweetening them, making them fit for use. The 
lesson to the people must have been a valuable one, leading 
them to trust the Lord more fully and to realize his continued 
care for their interests. 

Water, one of the most important elements for human 
sustenance, is used in the Scriptures to represent the Truth 
—the message of God— the hope of everlasting life. In a 
certain sense the Law Covenant made with Israel was such 
a hope, such a fountain of water, of which the Israelites 
might drink and be refreshed and be enabled to gain eternal 
life. But while the Law was good in many respects, it 
had in it certain condemnatory qualities which hindered it 
from giving to the Israelites the refreshment and the life 
everlasting which they had hoped for. The Law made 
nothing perfect, writes the Apostle— yea, he adds, that 
which was thought to be unto life was found to be unto 
death. -Rom. 7:10. 

HEALING THE BRACKISH WATERS 

Moses, the Mediator of the Law Covenant, typified the 
Christ (Head and Body), the Mediator of the New Covenant, 
and the tree that Moses cast into the waters for their sweetening 
represented another tree— the one referred to in the 
statement, "Cursed is every one that hangeth on a tree." 
(Gal. 3: 13.) The tree represented the cross of Christ, the 
agency through which the waters of truth and divine law 
become waters of grace and blessing for the world of mankind 
in general when, in the Millennial Age, they shall be 
delivered from the bondage of Satan and sin, represented 
by the slavery of Egypt. As the Apostle points out, it will 
not be possible for God to make a new law under which to 
bless mankind, for the Law given to Israel was good, was 
perfect, as the law of God must always be. The divine 
promises represented by the water were poisoned by sin- 
by Adam's disobedience— and hence were unsuitable and 
could not give the desired blessing. The cross of Christ, 
by cancelling Adamic sin, cancelled also the condemnation 
of the divine law against mankind, and eventually will permit 
the great antitypical Mediator to make the gracious 
promises of God good, refreshing, applicable to all who seek 
to walk in the ways of the Lord. The New Covenant between 
God and Israel, in which all the families of the earth 
are to share the benefit, will shortly be sealed with the 
precious blood— be confirmed, made operative. It merely 
waits for the completion of the sacrifices of the Day of 
Atonement, and meantime the Church of the First-born are 
counted in as members of the Body of the Mediator, and 
permitted to suffer with him— to share with him in the sufferings 
of the present time, that they may also have a share 
in the glory that shall follow, when the New Covenant shall 
be sealed, and through it the blessing of the Lord extend 
to every creature. 



R4011 :page 184 

"Traveling o'er the desert's scorching sand, 
Father, lead me! grasp my hand. 

Lead me on! Lead me on! 
When at Marah, parched with heat, 
And the sparkling fountain greet, 
Make the bitter water sweet. 

Lead me on ! Lead me on ! " 

The New Creation is not under the Law but under 
grace— not under the Law Covenant nor under the New 
Covenant, but under the original Covenant, the "Everlasting 
Covenant," which reads, "In thy Seed shall all the families 
of the earth be blessed." As the Apostle assures us, it is 
the privilege of the Church of the First-born, who make 
their calling and election sure, to constitute members of the 
"Seed," which under the New Covenant is to bless first natural 
Israel and subsequently all nations: "Ye, brethren, as 
Isaac was, are children of promise." (Gal. 4:28.) "If ye 
be Christ's, then are ye Abraham's Seed, and heirs according 
to the promise." (Gal. 3:29.) The original Covenant, 
as the Apostle explains, was typified by Sarah: 
that Covenant was the mother of our Lord and of all 
his members. We have nothing to do with the Hagar 
Covenant, the Law Covenant, nor with the Keturah Covenant, 
the New Covenant, except that the promise is that in 
and through the elect Seed of the Sarah Covenant the offspring 
of both the other covenants, are to receive their blessings. 

TWELVE FOUNTAINS AND SEVENTY PALMS 

A journey of a few hours brought the Israelites to Elim, 
noted for its twelve fountains, or springs, and its seventy 
palm trees. It was a delightful resting place, symbolical of 
the blessings which may be enjoyed after our trials. The 
twelve springs, fountains, remind us of the apostles, God's 
special gift or blessing to the Church, through whom have 
come the refreshments of the water of life, and who are to 
be prominent also, according to the Lord's promise, in the 
Kingdom— in the work of blessing Israel and all the 
nations. The seventy palm trees remind us of the seventy 
whom our Lord commissioned subsequently to the 
twelve apostles, and whose ministries typified the public 
services of this Gospel Age down to its harvest or close. As 
the seventy were directed to go into every city whither our 
Lord would ultimately go, and were instructed, "Ye shall 
not have gone over the cities of Israel until the Son of man 
be come," it signified that our mission is to all nations, peoples, 
kindreds and tongues, wherever we may find a hearing 
ear, with the assurance that we shall not have more than 
accomplished the work of declaring the good tidings to 
every nation until the second coming of the Son of man in 
the power and great glory of his Kingdom. 

Our lesson opens with the declaration that the Israelites 



removed from Elim, going toward Mount Sinai, on the 

fifteenth day of the second month— just thirty days from the 

time they left Egypt, following the Passover. Apparently, 

therefore, they stayed at Elim about two weeks before entering 

the wilderness region surrounding Mount Sinai, one 

of whose peaks was called Mount Horeb, where God manifested 

himself to Moses in the burning bush. Not only had 

Moses made this journey several times, but Aaron also, for 

we remember that after the Lord's first revelation at the 

burning bush he sent Aaron to Moses and they met in Horeb, 

the Mount of God. That meeting of Moses and Aaron 

prior to the passing over of the first-born, etc., might not 

improperly be understood to symbolize the beginning of this 

Gospel Age, and to be a picture of the two features 

of the work of Christ: Aaron representing the sacrificial 

work as the priest, and Moses representing the future work 

as the leader and commander of the people. The Church 

of the First-born was typically represented in the under-priests, 

the sons of Aaron, and also typically represented 

in the body of Moses, illustrating our participation in 

the sufferings of Christ in this present time and also our 

inheritance in him in the glory that shall follow. 

The journeying of the people toward Mount Sinai, then, 
would represent the carrying out of the great program outlined 
at the beginning, when Moses and Aaron met by divine 
arrangement; the gathering of all the hosts of Israel 
to Mount Sinai typified not the blessings which came to the 
Church at Pentecost, but the blessings which are about to 
come to the world, all mankind who are ready and willing 
to receive them under the New Covenant. The covenant 
made with natural Israel at Sinai by Moses, the mediator 
of that Law Covenant, typified specifically the new and 
better Covenant about to be made with Israel, and incidentally 
with the whole world of mankind through the better 
Mediator, the Christ, Head and Body. The Apostle clearly 
sets this forth in his delineations in Hebrews 1 2, where he 
pictures the time of trouble in the end of this age in connection 
with the sealing of the New Covenant with its type 
at Mount Sinai when and where the Law Covenant was 
sealed and made effective. His intimation is that in the 
trouble near at hand everything that can be shaken, political, 
social, religious, financial, will be shaken thoroughly, 
until only the unshakable, true things, shall remain. And 
these unshakable things he tells us will be related to the 
Kingdom of Messiah in which we shall share, "We receiving 
a Kingdom that cannot be shaken." 

"THE BREAD THAT CAME DOWN FROM HEAVEN" 

Travelers tell us that the wilderness surrounding Sinai 
is far from barren. One declares: "The whole sides of the 
valley through which the children of Israel marched are 
still tufted with brushwood, which doubtless afforded food 
for their beasts. Lastly, the herbage under these trees and 
shrubs is completely covered with snails of a prodigious 
size and of the best sort. However uninviting such a repast 



might appear to us, they are here esteemed a great delicacy. 
These mollusks of the land would aid in sustaining 
the people." 

We can see, however, that so mighty a host would have 
a very limited bill of fare, and realizations of the conditions 
will help us to sympathize with them in their murmuring s 
when they said, "Would to God we had died by the hands 
of the Lord in the land of Egypt, when we sat by the fleshpots, 
and when we did eat bread to the full; for ye have 
brought us forth into this wilderness to kill the whole assembly 
with hunger." It appeared to them that their first 
hopes had died, that no preference of the Lord had been 
shown them, and that they should have continued under 
the Egyptian bondage. We see their lack of faith and that 
the lessons of the plagues and the sea and the healing of 

R4011 :page 185 

the waters of Marah had not given them full assurance of 
faith that the God of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob was leading 
them forth to fulfil in them his glorious promises made to 
the fathers— the blessing of the world. 

But while blaming them for lack of faith we are not to 
blame them for desiring some of the necessities of life, nor 
does the Lord blame them for the latter; rather he was 
waiting for them to appreciate their need, so that they might 
the better appreciate the bountiful provision which he had 
intended. In answer to their cry God sent them bread from 
heaven— not indeed baked, cut in slices and buttered, but 
according to the Lord's usual way he did for them what 
they could not do for themselves: he provided the substance 
from which they might make their bread. The distribution 
of the manna and its daily sending through a long period 
marks it as a miracle. 

There are indeed other mannas from that desert of 
Arabia. One kind is exuded in drops from the tamarisk tree, 
and is a sweet, semi-fluid substance. The manna of commerce 
is an exudation from the flowering ash. But none of the 
known mannas of Arabia correspond to this described in 
Exodus: (1) The supply is very small and only at special 
seasons of the year; (2) they are unsuitable for food; (3) 
they can be kept indefinitely. The manna of the Israelites 
spoiled after twenty-four hours except that gathered on the 
sixth day, which corrupted not for forty-eight hours, leaving 
a rest from the gathering on the seventh day, the Sabbath. 
It was ground in mills, and baked as bread or stewed. By 
this miracle of the manna the Lord taught the Israelites 
faith in him as their great Provider. 

To Spiritual Israelites there is a lesson in connection 
with the manna also: it is Scripturally called the "bread of 
angels," and again, the "bread of the mighty," and again, 
the "bread of heaven." (Psa. 78:25.) It was a food supplied 
by the Lord's providence. Our Lord Jesus tells us that he 
was the antitype of this bread— that it typified the life-giving 
qualities which he possessed and which he sacrificed on our behalf; 
that all the dying race might profit through his death and 



obtain a right to life eternal. Thank God that some of us 
have had the eyes of our understanding opened to hear the 
message of good tidings respecting its value. More than 

R4012:page 185 

this, some of us have already tasted that the Lord is gracious, 
and we have already fed on this bread from heaven, 
rejoicing the while that it is not only for the First-born but 
for all Israel— for all who eventually shall desire to come 
into accord with our God. It was some of this manna that 
by divine direction was put into the golden pot which was 
hidden in the ark with the scroll of the Law under the 
golden mercy seat, typifying, illustrating, the immortality 
which the Lord has provided for the Church of the First-born, 
to whom he has sent the message, "To him that overcometh 
will I give to eat of the hidden manna." (Rev. 2:17.) 
That incorruptible hidden manna in the golden pot 
represents the grace of God in the Church of the First-born, 
and teaches what is elsewhere plainly stated in the Scriptures, 
that the "little flock" shall enjoy the incorruptible life, 
immortality. While these will have inherent life, the remainder 
of God's creatures in their eternal perfection will 
instead of this have supplied to them eternal life. 

"COME NEAR BEFORE THE LORD" 

The lesson of faith was to be so impressed before the 
sending of the manna that its coming was foretold, and the 
Israelites were gathered to behold the glory of the Lord. 
They looked at the cloud which represented the Lord and 
which was caused to shine with resplendent glory. And as 
Aaron spoke to the congregation, telling them that their 
murmurings had been against the Lord and not against 
himself and Moses, and directing their attention to the cloud, 
behold, the glory, the brightness, of the Lord appeared in 
the cloud, and a message, saying, "I have heard the murmurings 
of the children of Israel: speak unto them saying, At 
even shall ye eat flesh and in the morning ye shall be 
filled with bread; and ye shall know that I am the Lord 
your God." How patient was the Lord in his dealings with 
his people— full of compassion and of tender mercy. The 
people should have cried unto the Lord, "Give us this day 
our daily bread," but should not have murmured and stipulated 
that they wanted something as good as the flesh-pots 
of Egypt. 

Many Spiritual Israelites may learn a lesson along this 
line. It is not for us to dictate to the Lord how he shall 
provide for us, but by faith to accept his provision according 
to his promises, and while waiting for the same to make 
our requests, make them unto the Lord— but always according 
to his will. "Thy will be done" should be the spirit of 
our hearts, and hence the spirit of our prayers. Our Father 
knoweth what things we have need of before we ask him, 
and he is more willing to give good gifts unto his children 
than are earthly parents to give good gifts to theirs. 



"He that hath led will lead all through the wilderness; 

He that hath fed will feed; he that hath blessed, will bless." 

QUAIL ABOUT TWO CUBITS DEEP 

Travelers tell us that in the spring of the year large 
flocks of quail frequently cross the Arabian Gulf of the Red 
Sea. They come in great flocks, and, wearied with their 
long flight across the water, they fly low, so as to be easily 
within the reach of man. Tristram says, "I have myself 
found the ground in Algeria in the month of April covered 
with quail for an extent of many acres at daybreak, where 
on the preceding afternoon there had been none." The 
reading of Numbers 1 1:7 seems to imply that on this occasion 
the quail were nearly two cubits deep, and infidels 
have pointed to the fact as an absurdity. It would be entirely 
possible, however, for us to understand the narrative 
to signify that the great quantities of quail flew low, even 
within two cubits of the ground, thus insuring a large catch 
on the part of the flesh-hungry Israelites. The subsequent 
narrative indicates that the quail were not sent regularly, 
but only on rare occasions— so far as appears only here in 
the wilderness of Sinai and in the wilderness of Paran.— 
Numbers 11:31-34. 

The next morning after the shower of quail the Israelites 
had a new experience with the "corn from heaven." It 
came with the dew, and when the latter left the little grains 
of food were scattered all over the country side. Thenceforth 
it became a part of the regular labor of each family to 
gather its portion of the heavenly manna. The word manna 

R4012:page 186 

is supposed to signify, What is it? Moses answered, "It is 
the bread which the Lord hath given you to eat." What a 
constant reminder they would have, in the necessity for gathering 
this grain, grinding it, making bread of it, etc., of the 
Lord's providential care for their interests. How full of 
faith and loyalty to him they should have subsequently become 
—more and more as the days went by. We are, therefore, 
continually astonished to find evidences of lack of faith 
and a disposition to contamination with idolatry, etc. If all 
this seems strange to us we should allow it to make a deep 
impression upon our minds and apply it to ourselves. For 
have not we the true Bread that came down from heaven? and 
has not God so arranged our affairs and interests that it is quite 
necessary for us to go continually to the throne of the heavenly 
grace to obtain mercy and find grace to help in time 
of need? Nevertheless, is it not true that many find their 
hearts overcharged with the cares of this life, and that their 
faith in the Lord continually needs to be refreshed? How 
few there are who go regularly to the throne of grace to 
obtain their supply of daily refreshment! How few who 
belong to the New Creation realize that the New Creature 
needs daily bread as much as does the natural man. 



The supply of manna was a beautiful figure of the supply 
of grace in Christ: it needed to be gathered daily; it 
would not keep over for succeeding days. The lesson of 
this would seem to be that those who accumulate much of 
God's grace and truth must also be dispensers of it. It is 
not provided with a view to the creation of a spiritual aristocracy. 
How often we have seen this exemplified: those 
who study the Word merely for themselves, and who do 
not commingle with the brethren and share their blessings, 
are not in the long run as much advantaged as we would have 
expected. Our gathering of the manna is to be day by day: 
our feeding on the heavenly bread is to be a continuous 
privilege, without which we will not have the strength for 
the journey of life; but with it we would be strong in the 
Lord, and may perchance be permitted to assist others by 
the dispensing of divine grace to them. 

When our Lord declared himself to be the Bread from 
heaven, many of his hearers failed to comprehend the simile, 
and said, "This is a hard saying. Will this man give us of 
his flesh to eat?" They failed to see that our Lord personified 
the Truth, the great plan of God which centered in 
him, the life which he had come to give on behalf of the 
world, that we might live through him. To eat the flesh of 
Jesus literally would have merely produced flesh, but to eat of 
him in the sense of partaking of the blessings and mercies of 
God provided in him, and in the sense of appropriating his 
Spirit and disposition, is the proper thought. As we partake 
of our Lord's qualities they become ours, as we feed upon 
him in our hearts we become strong in faith and in all the 
graces of his Spirit. Let us then daily gather our portion 
of manna and daily seek to use it all, and realize that it 
will be our portion until we reach the heavenly Canaan. 
Surely then all the supply of divine grace experienced by 
the Lord's faithful should be stimulating to our faith and 
confidence in him who has called us from darkness into his 
marvelous light. 



R4012:page 186 

THIS DOTH GOD REQUIRE 

--EXODUS 20:1-11.-JULY 14.- 

Golden Text:— Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with 
all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy 
might.— Deut. 6:5. 

OUR lesson relates to the first four of the ten commandments 

delivered to the Israelites at Mount 

Sinai as the basis of the Covenant which the Lord 

made with the nation of Israel there. The journey from 

Egypt to Mount Sinai is about 150 miles, and with intermediate 

stops nearly fifty days were consumed in reaching it. 

We recall the leading experiences of these fifty days: (1) 



The passing at the Red Sea; (2) the making sweet the 
waters of Marah; (3) the rest at the wells of Elim near the 
palm grove; (4) the beginning of the supply of manna; 
(5) the smiting of the rock from which gushed waters for 
their refreshment— typical, as the Apostle tells us, of Christ 
and the life and refreshment which now come to spiritual 
Israelites by faith (1 Cor. 10:4); (6) the battle with the 
Amalekites, in which Israel, untrained to battle, was victorious, 
while Aaron and Hur upheld the hands of Moses and 
"the Lord fought for them"; (7) the organization of the 
nation by the appointment of seventy elders as judges under 
Moses. 

R4013 :page 186 

All of these experiences were designed of the Lord to 
prepare Israel for further blessings and mercies, and to make 
them typical of Spiritual Israel and the heavenly favors 
to be bestowed upon them in due time. When Moses said 
to Pharaoh that the Lord commanded that the people should 
go into the wilderness to offer sacrifices to him, it was but 
a vague statement of a great fact. The sacrifice which the 
Lord proposed was a consecration of themselves and all that 
they possessed to him and to his service. The experiences of 
the fifty days were calculated to establish faith in the Lord, 
and to ground and establish the hope of the Abrahamic 
Covenant under which they had essayed to leave Egypt to 
seek the promised land where the blessing would be granted. 
They had now arrived at the spot in the wilderness, at 
Mount Sinai, where God proposed to enter into covenant 
relationship with them. This was, therefore, the important 
epoch in their history. God proposed to adopt them as his 
people, and that Moses should be the mediator between him 
and them. 

THE LAW COVENANT SEALED 

The Law was read in the hearing of the elders and 
representatives of the people, and signified the terms and 
conditions upon which the Lord would grant them his 
special favor and blessing. If they would obey his statutes 
and keep his commandments he would make of them a 
great nation; he would give them prosperity of every kind; 
he who would do those things should live, and the blessing 
of the Lord would prosper his every interest. This implied 
eternal life, though it is doubtful if the faith of the people 
could fully grasp this part of the blessing. They all, however, 
could appreciate the fact that they were promised 

R4013 :page 187 

health and wealth if obedient to the Law. On the other 
hand, if disobedient it was to mean to them disease, national 
and individual sickness, pain, sorrow, poverty. They were 
called upon to take their stand once and forever. Would 
they be the Lord's people and nation and enter into this 



covenant, or would they not? They responded favorably; 

they declared, "These things will we do." But little did 

they appreciate the comprehensiveness of these divine commands 

—they saw only the outward aspect and not the spirit 

of the Law. 

The Apostle assures us that it was impossible for them 
or for any other members of the imperfect race to fulfil the 
requirements of that Law in its real spirit and depth— 
that the divine Law measures the full capacity of a perfect 
human being, and hence that no imperfect being, none of 
the fallen race, could possibly keep that Law. He says of 
it, "The commandment which was ordained to life, I [we 
Jews] found to be unto death." (Rom. 7:10.) This was not 
the fault of the Law, for, as the Apostle declares, the Law 
was just and perfect and good. It was the fault of the fall, 
because "there is none righteous, no not one," therefore 
there is none able to keep the perfect Law in its very spirit. 
This fact, however, was kindly veiled from the eyes of the 
Israelites that they might with the greater courage undertake 
to do their best and receive the full measure of possible 
blessing under the circumstances. God from the beginning 
foresaw the entire plan, and meant in this Law Covenant 
with Israel merely their blessing at the time, and to use them 
as a type of Spiritual Israel, who as the great antitypical 
Mediator will in due time provide for them the benefits of 
the New Covenant, which will make allowance for their imperfections, 
and during the Millennium bring them and all 
others of mankind who desire harmony with God back to 
full relationship with the Creator and to eternal life— destroying 
wilful evil-doers. 

THE LAW COVENANT FOR ISRAEL ONLY 

Much needless confusion prevails respecting the application 
of the Decalogue. Few seem to notice that it was the 
basis of the Covenant made with Israel, and that it included 
in its provisions, promises and penalties only the Jewish 
nation. Its commands had nothing whatever to do with the 
Egyptians or any other nation of that time or since, neither 
are they now applicable to Spiritual Israel. Even those 
Jews once under this Law Covenant needed to be freed from 
it before they could become espoused to Christ. The Apostle 
most distinctly states this, saying to the Jews that, so far as 
its blessings and opportunities were concerned, these ended 
at the cross of Christ, that Christ made an end of the Law 
Covenant, nailing it to the cross. (Col. 2:14.) He further 
shows us that every Jew who believed in Christ needed first 
to recognize the death or end of the Law Covenant under 
which he had previously been bound before he could become 
married to Christ, betrothed to Christ as a member of the 
Bride class, Spiritual Israel. 

It will be remembered that the Apostle tells us that the 
Law Covenant was typified in Hagar, whose son Ishmael 
typified the Jewish nation under the bondage of the Law— 
not free, not sons of God in the highest sense, not heirs of 
the Abrahamic Covenant. He points out that this higher 



position of the sons was represented in Isaac, whose mother, 
Sarah, represented the original Abrahamic Covenant, which 
God made 430 years before the Law Covenant was added at 
Mount Sinai. As Hagar, the bondservant, brought forth her 
son first, so Natural Israel was developed before Spiritual 
Israel: as later Sarah bore the true heir to Abraham, so 
later the Abrahamic Covenant bore the antitypical house of 
sons, Spiritual Israel, of which Jesus is the Head and the 
Spirit-begotten ones members. Our Lord also refers to this 
change of dispensation and shows that all who were of suitable 
condition of mind in the Jewish nation were privileged 
to be transferred from the Law Covenant and the Ishmael 
seed to the better Covenant, as members of the Isaac class, 
the house of sons. He says he came unto his own and his 
own received him not [as a nation], but to as many as received 
him, to them gave he liberty [power, privilege] to 
become the sons of God, even to them that believe on his 
name."— John 1:12. 

If the ten commandments, the basis of the Jewish Covenant, 
were only given to that nation and not to the world, 
is the world without a covenant? We answer, Yes: the 
world never has been under any law of God, never has been 
recognized by God, whose time for dealing with the world 
is in the future under the terms of the New Covenant, at the 
hands of the greater Mediator than Moses, namely: Christ, 
Head and Body. Thus we read, "God has appointed a day 
in the which he will judge the world in righteousness." 
(Acts 17:31.) That day has not yet come, hence the world 
is not on trial, is not being judged, rewarded or punished. 
The day of the world's trial will as surely come as Natural 
Israel's time of favor and trial came when they were delivered 
from Egypt, and as surely as Spiritual Israel's day 
of favor and judgment came, beginning with our Lord and 
Pentecost. 

Meantime, since the casting off of Natural Israel at the 
time of our Lord's crucifixion, God has been dealing only 
with Spiritual Israel, rewarding, punishing, chastising, etc., 
"every son whom he receiveth"— but not the world, whom he 
has not received nor entered into covenant relationship 
with. "The world still lieth in the wicked one," is still 
blinded by the "god of this world," is still under Adamic 
condemnation, and therefore still "children of wrath," to 
whom no favor is due until the inauguration of the Millennial 
Kingdom. 

ALL COMMANDED TO REPENT 

With the end of the Jewish Law Covenant, with the accomplishment 
of Christ's sacrifice at Calvary and the application 
of the merit thereof to the household of faith, all men 
everywhere were commanded to repent, and to know that 
God was prepared to give the trial or testing to all, to the 
intent that the willing and obedient might be adjudged 
worthy of everlasting life if assisted thereto through the 
Redeemer. The law of God was originally written in man's 
constitution in that he was created in the image and likeness 



of God, with the qualities of mind which would enable 
him to appreciate right and wrong, justice and injustice, and 
esteem righteousness. But the fall largely erased this law 
from the human heart, until today, in some of the more savage, 
only the merest trace of conscience and appreciation of 
right and wrong remain. Consequently the eyes of their 

R4013 :page 188 

understanding and the ears of their heart remain closed to 
the message that is now promulgated, urging all everywhere 
to repent and turn to the Lord. That this is true is demonstrated: 
our Lord called attention to the fact that few 
have ears to hear and eyes to see, and declared of some who 
received his message, "Blessed are your eyes for they see, 
and your ears for they hear." Furthermore, the promise is 
that eventually, during the Millennial age, all the blind eyes 
shall be opened and all the deaf ears be unstopped. 

"FULFIL THE LAW OF CHRIST" 

The Decalogue is styled the Law of Moses because, as 
the Apostle declares, "The Law came by Moses, but grace 
and truth by Jesus Christ." The Jew who did not receive 
Christ did not receive the grace and truth, and the Christian 
who has received Christ and his grace and truth is "not 
under the Law [Covenant] but under grace." (Rom. 6:14.) 
The Law of Christ is a very different one from that of the 
ten commandments, and yet there is an agreement between 
them, because, though Moses' Law was given to the house of 
servants and the Law of Christ was given to the house of 
sons, both emanated from the Father and both are based 

R4014:page 188 

upon his eternal law of righteousness. 

No wonder, then, that there is a harmony between them. 
The Law of Christ is positive and is called a new commandment. 
It does not attempt to say what we shall not do, as 
did Moses' Law, but taking the positive form tells us what 
all of Christ's followers shall do, must do, in order to be acceptable 
to him. His law is that we shall love God and 
"love one another as I have loved you." Under this divine 
arrangement with the house of sons he that loveth not is 
not of God— "if any man have not the Spirit of Christ [the 
spirit of love] he is none of his," and if he have the spirit 
of love for God and consequently for his fellowmen he would 
not think of doing things forbidden the house of servants in 
the Decalogue. What was proper enough as a prohibition 
to the natural man would be wholly inappropriate to the 
members of the New Creation, the Body of Christ, who have 
been begotten of the holy Spirit of love. What an insult it 
would be to such to command them not to blaspheme God's 
name, not to worship other gods, not to kill, not to steal! 
Would God steal? would God murder? and would any who 
have been begotten of his Spirit have the wish or desire to 



do these things? Surely not! Hence the prohibitions contained 
in the ten commandments are not for the New Creation 
and were never given to them. As the Apostle declares, 
"The law of the spirit of life in Christ Jesus hath made me 
free from the law of sin and death"— the Mosaic Law.— 
Rom. 8:2. 

"MOSES GAVE YOU THE LAW" 

These were Jesus' words, and he adds, "none of you 
keepeth it." (John 7:19.) They could not keep it, could not 
be justified by it. Do we then of the New Creation keep 
the still higher law of love? and if so, how? The Scriptures 
answer— "The righteousness of the Law [its requirements 
—full obedience] is fulfilled in us who walk not after 
the flesh but after the Spirit"— who are striving to the best 
of our ability to be in harmony with the very essence of the 
divine will, Love. Not that we can walk up to the spirit of 
the Law, but that when we walk after it with our best endeavors 
God counts it unto us as though we walked up to 
its requirements— the merit of Christ our Lord and Head 
being imputed to and compensating for all our unwilling 
imperfections. 

Nevertheless, although we are not under the Mosaic 
Law, we— the New Creatures, begotten of the holy Spirit 
and accepted in the Beloved under the Covenant of grace- 
may gain valuable lessons from an examination of the Law 
of Moses, because the study of it will open wider and wider 
the eyes of our understanding to see what are the particular 
and exact requirements of the divine law and our own 
natural shortcomings. Our study of the Law, however, will 
not bring to us condemnation, for we remember that we are 
not under the Law but under grace— not condemned because 
unable to fulfil every requirement of the Law, but justified 
before God and the Law through the merit of Jesus when we 
put forth our best efforts to the accomplishment of the divine 
will. In the declarations of the Law designed for Natural 
Israel we see the outlines of the perfect will of God, and the 
more clearly we discern this the more it will enable us to 
fulfil the desires of our hearts and to come into fuller accord 
with God's perfect will in thought, word and deed. 

THE FIRST TWO COMMANDMENTS 

God properly puts himself first, for he is first, head, 
chief over all beings and all things, and to him properly 
belongs their homage, their reverence, and only as mankind 
come to realize this do they approximate the spirit of a 
sound mind. The Israelites had been in contact with idolatry 
in Egypt, and would again be in contact with it when 
they entered Canaan. The first lesson they were to learn 
was, "Hear, O Israel, the Lord thy God is one"— Jehovah— 
and "thou shalt have no other gods before me." No other 
rulers of any kind were to be allowed to usurp the place 
and honor of the great Ruler, nor should they attempt to 
make any likeness of the true God, for a true representation 



of him could not be made. They were to bow down to 

nothing in the sky or on the earth or in the waters as an 

object of worship, but were to recognize the true God as the 

invisible one, whose energy and power are everywhere present 

throughout the universe. Disregard of this command 

would bring upon them trouble, for God would not consider 

it a light thing, but would visit the iniquities upon them to 

the third and fourth generations of those despising him, and 

would show mercy unto thousands of those loving him and 

keeping his commandments. The application of this commandment 

to Natural Israel is very evident; its language is 

simplicity itself. What lessons can Spiritual Israelites draw 

from this command given to Natural Israel? 

We can, as the Apostle urges, keep our hearts from 
idols; we are not in danger of making idols of wood or stone 
or metal in the image of God. We have too thoroughly 
gotten rid of the ignorance and superstition engendered by 
the fall to take such a course; but we should remember how 
natural it is for us to turn the organs of reverence and worship 
into improper channels, and to give a measure of worship 
to children or parents or husband or wife or minister; 
or to have such an appreciation of and desire for honor of 
men as to reverence their gift of office, or to have such a 
love for money and the honors and blessings it will give as 

R4014:page 189 

to become Mammon worshipers. Thus we may draw valuable 
lessons from what the Lord said to the house of servants, 
and although we cannot apply the letter of the commandment 
to the sons, the latter can get blessings from the 
spirit of it. 

THE THIRD COMMANDMENT 

The command, "Thou shalt not take the name of the 
Lord thy God in vain, for the Lord will not hold him guiltless 
that taketh his name in vain," was evidently very appropriate 
as a limitation upon the Jews, the house of servants. 
It forbade profane swearing of every kind, and 
would be proper for the natural man everywhere and 
always. Why should any profane the name of the Almighty? 
Why should not all the world fear so wrong a 
course? This taking of God's name in vain would include 
perjury, false swearing, which has always been punished by 
all civilized peoples. Under the Jewish Law an offender was 
to be punished with the very penalty which his perjury was 
intended to prevent. It was punished by the Egyptians with 
death or mutilation, and by the Greeks with a heavy fine, 
and ultimately with the loss of civil rights. In the world 
the man who uses the name of the Deity profanely is properly 
esteemed to be no gentleman— to be coarse, rude, vulgar. 
It may well be noted here, however, that nothing in this 
command even among the Jews would have hindered them 
from the taking of a legal oath before a court of law. Such 
oaths are not profane nor taking the Lord's name in vain. 



They are merely affirmations in public that the thing said is 
the truth as God knows it to be the truth. 

What lesson may the Spiritual Israelite learn from this 
commandment? We reply that none who are Israelites 
indeed, begotten of the spirit of love for God, would need 
any command not to blaspheme his name by profane swearing. 
We can make still more deep and suitable application 
of the command, however: we who have accepted Christ, 
who have vowed the full consecration of all we have and are 
to the Lord, have been begotten of his Spirit, and been told 
that we may consider him our Father and ourselves his 
children— we should realize that in one sense of the word 
we have taken upon us the name of the Lord. Just the same 
as a child adopted into a family takes the name of the family, 
so we have taken upon ourselves the name of the sons 
of God in accepting the divine proposition to this effect. As 
we accepted this holy relationship with a realization of what 
it signifies— "Beloved, now are we the sons of God, and it 
doth not yet appear what we shall be; but we know that 
when he shall appear we shall be like him, for we shall see 
him as he is (1 John 3:2)— having confessed this relationship 
before man, it is for us to show and for them and the 
Lord to see whether it has been in vain or with a sincere 
heart. If the latter, we will to the extent of our ability be 
showing forth the praises of him who hath called us out of 
darkness into his marvelous light, and this thought will 
help to hold us firm and loyal to our obligations to the 
Lord and his truth, and to all the members of the household 
of faith, to each of whom we have become related through 
this spirit of adoption. In line with this the Apostle exhorts, 
"See that ye receive not the grace of God in vain." 
(2 Cor. 6:1.) Our adoption into the Lord's family in the 
present life is merely on probation. If faithful the matter 
will be confirmed, and we will be granted our perfect bodies 
in the First Resurrection and a share with our Redeemer 
in his glory, honor and immortality. If we receive this relationship 
in vain sin lieth at the door, and we will be excluded 
from the family in glory whatever may be our portion 
either in the Great Company of Rev. 7 or wherever. 

THE FOURTH COMMANDMENT TO ISRAEL 

In this command the Lord set apart the seventh day in 
each week that thereon the people should do no work. 
This would be a blessing to them in giving rest from toil 
and opportunity for recuperating and for thoughts of him 
who had made this provision for their necessities. The command 
contained no obligation to do good, to preach, to 
teach, nor even to receive instructions on this day. It merely 
commanded rest, leaving it to the individual Jew to determine 
how he would employ his own time. By general 

R4015 :page 189 

consent, however, the nation seemed to recognize the propriety 
of devoting the Sabbath day to consideration of the 



divine Law and the precious promises, and even to the 

prophecies. The appointment of the day was in the interest 

of all; to the poor it would mean protection from the greed 

of capital, and to the enterprising and prosperous it would 

mean a break upon their selfish propensities— the acknowledgment 

of the Lord and of the interests of their fellow-creatures. 

With the command was a reminder that in some 

respects it resembled the course of Jehovah, who, after six 

creative epochs, "rested on the seventh." The lesson to 

Natural Israel was plainly evident; what does this command 

impart to Spiritual Israel? 

We might be at a loss to know what lesson would be 
in this commandment for us did not the Lord through the 
Apostle make the matter very clear, assuring us that the 
Sabbath rest of the Jewish nation was typical of the higher 
and better rest of the house of sons. The Israelites were 
obliged to rest every seventh day, every seventh year and 
every jubilee year, that they might make a type of a better 
rest which God provided, and which would be entered into 
first by Spiritual Israel and subsequently by Natural Israel 
and the whole world. The Apostle explains this matter in 
Hebrews 4, where he speaks of a rest [Sabbath] into which 
the Spiritual Israelites now enter, represented by the Sabbath 
day of the Jew, and also of another rest that remaineth 
for the people of God which we should fear to come short 
of, namely, the great Sabbath, the Millennial Kingdom— the 
seventh thousand-year period. 

As elsewhere more fully pointed out,* Israel's day Sabbaths 
every year pointed to a culmination, for following the 
Passover they counted seven times seven days, which brought 
them to the fiftieth day or Pentecost. As the Passover typified 
the death of Christ, so their fiftieth day pointed out 
the full complete rest or Sabbath of the present time, into 
which the Spiritual Israelites entered at Pentecost, when 
they received from the Father through the Lord Jesus the 
holy Spirit, which indicated that their sins were covered and 
that they were accepted of the Father as New Creatures, begotten 
of the holy Spirit. So all followers of Jesus from 
that time to the present, when begotten of the holy Spirit, 
are accepted into this rest of faith, and, ceasing from all 
hope of self -justification, accept Christ as the end of the Law 



*MILLENNIAL DAWN, Vol. VI. 

R4015 :page 190 

for righteousness, and the imputation of his merit as the full 
satisfaction for their sins and reconciliation with the Father. 
Only those who have had this experience have ever kept the 
real antitypical Sabbath. And so long as they maintain 
this faith and trust they are fulfilling the antitype of the 
Sabbath day given to Natural Israel. 

This, as the Apostle explains, excludes works and the 
Jewish Law as a basis of reconciliation to God, and accepts 



instead the blood of Christ; but it does not exclude works 
as manifestations of our love, thankfulness and devotion to 
God in view of his mercy in the forgiveness of our sins. On 
the contrary, our faith and hope and trust without the works 
of thankfulness would, the Apostle assures us, soon die, for 
a faith not manifested by endeavors to do right would not 
have the divine approval. Indeed, the measure of our rest 
in the Lord and his finished work will depend largely upon 
the measure of our thankfulness and appreciation, and the 
latter will manifest itself in loving devotion to him and the 
righteousness which he represents. 

Thus has God bound together our faith and obedience 
to the extent of our ability and the rest or Sabbath which 
we may enjoy. He who lacks this rest lacks the evidence 
that he is an Israelite indeed and in covenant relationship 
with God through Christ. He who has this rest of heart 
has in it a foretaste, an assurance, of the perfect rest of the 
future. For if now we can rest by faith, notwithstanding 
the besetments of the flesh and the Adversary under present 
adverse conditions, how gloriously we will rest by and by, 
when that which is perfect shall have come, not only in our 
own change to the Lord's character-likeness, but in the 
change of all the outward environments which will then be 
accomplished. On the other hand, the hope and faith respecting 
a future rest or Sabbath is without foundation if 
we do not enjoy the present rest by faith, if the peace of 
God which passeth all understanding is not ours. 

We are not in this repudiating the observance of a day 
of rest every week, but we are repudiating any demands of 
the fourth commandment upon Spiritual Israelites as respects 
any day of the week, for that commandment was not given 
to us but to Natural Israel. Ours is the higher commandment. 
Nevertheless we are to recognize as of divine oversight 
and permission the fact that a weekly Sabbath day is 
enjoined by a civil law throughout Christendom. We rejoice 
in such a privilege, and consider it a great mercy to the natural 
man that he has thus by law a portion of time set apart 
for rest, with the privilege and opportunity for mental improvement. 
This wonderful privilege and blessing should 
be especially appreciated by all those who enjoy the higher 
light of Present Truth. If it is a privilege for the world to 
have one day in seven for rest from physical toil, how much 
more is it a blessing to those whose eyes and ears of understanding 
are gradually opening more and more to the heavenly 
things! We could use profitably two or three Sabbaths 
every week for the study of the divine Word and for building 
one another up in the most holy faith. 

We trust that with this view clearly before our minds 
none will use his knowledge on this subject to his own injury, 
to his own loss, nor to the breaking down of an institution 
which, however falsely based in the minds of the 
public, is so great a blessing to all and almost indispensable 
to us who are seeking to walk not after the flesh but after 
the Spirit. By obedience to the laws of the State respecting 
abstinence from labor and business we not only set a good 
example in letter and in spirit as obedient to the powers 



that be, but we strengthen our influence for the Truth as 
lovers of law and order and righteousness, and thus furnish 
ourselves with better opportunities for presenting to those 
who have the spiritual sight and hearing the true significance 
of the Sabbath to the Israelite indeed. 

While this Sabbath-keeping of rest is especially for the 
consecrated, as the Jew commanded that his children and 
his servants were similarly to rest, so all who come under 
our influence, either as our children or employes, should be 
influenced by our rest and be partakers of our trust and 
confidence in God— through our knowledge of him, which 
they could only partially appreciate. 



R4015 :page 190 

A "SCAPE-GOAT" QUERY 

WHY is it that after telling of the Atonement 
Day sacrifices and of the application of their 
blood— the first for the sins of the priest and 
his house or the Levitical family and the second "for 
the sins of all the people"— then we read of the confessing 
of the trespasses of the people on the head of the 
Scape-goat? What sins would remain after the atonement 
for all with the blood? 

We reply that the antitypical sacrifices of the 
Atonement Day for the sins of all the people cancel all 
of the Adamic guilt and condemnation for all; and 
this includes all hereditary sins and blemishes. None 
of these sins remain to be confessed over the head of 
the Scape-goat. 

But there are other sins of measurable wilfulness 
committed against a measure of light and knowledge. 
These are not Adamic and are not covered by the sin 
offerings. It is these sins and trespasses that are represented 
as put upon the Scape-goat class— the "Great 
Company." In the antitype, shortly to be enacted, the 
"great company" will be allowed to suffer for some of 
the partly wilful sins of the world— especially 
"Babylon's." 

Glancing back to the "harvest" of the Jewish Age 
we see there a picture of what is coming here. There 
the Jewish people, cast off from divine favor, went 
into an awful time of trouble. And our Lord, referring 
to that trouble, said, "Upon you shall come [the penalty 
for] all the righteous blood shed upon the earth— from 
the blood of righteous Abel unto the blood of Zacharias. 
...Verily I say unto you, All these things shall come 
upon this generation."— Matt. 23:35,36. 

Similarly, all the blood of God's holy ones, from 
the beginning of this Gospel Age, will be required of 
the present generation, and will bring about the great 
"time of trouble, such as was not since there was a nation." 
The martyrs of the past, "the souls under the 



altar," are represented as crying out symbolically for 

R4016 :page 191 

this vindication of Justice, saying, "How long, O Lord, 
holy and true, dost thou not judge the world and avenge 
our blood upon them that dwell on the earth." They 
were bid wait until others, their brethren, should be 
killed similarly, when the guilt for all would be 
avenged.— Rev. 6:9-11. 

Why require the full payment for all the wrongs of 
the ages at their closing?— is it asked? 

Because the chief light of each age comes at its 
close, and because those who sin against such light 
are worthy of more severe judgment than similar evildoers 
preceding them who had less light. 

It was on this principle that our Lord charged the 
Jews of his day, who opposed the true light, with being 
more guilty than all their predecessors who had persecuted 
the just. And on the same principle he declares 
to us, "Come out of her ['Babylon'], my people, that 
ye be not partakers of her sins and receive not of her 
plagues." Those who remain in Babylon now, in the 
light of Present Truth, are endorsers of Babylon and 
indirectly endorsers of all of her past wrong doing. 
And to endorse the wrongs of the past in the light of 
the present is to double the responsibility and to deserve 
the plagues of the whole, is the Scriptural 
argument. 

Let us, then, see that in the Scape-goat type the 
Lord pictures the sending into the "wilderness" of isolation 
and persecution the "Great Company," who after 
consecration were unwilling to go voluntarily "outside 
the camp, bearing the reproaches" of the Christ. They 
shared not in the sin-atonement, but will be permitted, 
yea forced, to bear the weight of the world's sins 
and thus to become dead to the world— that their spirit-bein^ 
may be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus. 



page 191 

SOME INTERESTING LETTERS 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

Many, many thanks indeed for your kindness in 
sending me reading matter which I appreciate far more 
than words or pen can tell. 

I now feel like a new person altogether since reading 
the TOWER and tracts. I was brought up a Catholic 
and was, therefore, kept in ignorance of the divine 
Truth. I no longer feel afraid to read the Bible, as 
through your kindness and charity in sending me the 
reading you have I now see everything in a new, more 
reasonable and loving light. With many, many thanks, 



lam, V. K.,-Mo. 



R4016 :page 191 

DEAR BROTHER:- 

I am meeting with larger success than ever before 
in getting people to read Vol. I by using the following 
two simple plans: 

(1) I fold the 5c DAWN and carry it in my hip-pocket 
under my coat. When I find someone that I 

can interest, I immediately tell him I have a book I 
have been reading and pull out the copy. I then give 
him a regular Colporteur's canvass as though to sell it 
to him but finally loan it to him under his promise to 
read and return when through with it. Loaning it gives 
me the right to look it up after a lapse of time. 

(2) Carrying several 5c copies in this way and 
canvassing house after house, beginning right next 
door to my house, I get the right party by inquiring, 
"Is there anyone here who is specially interested in the 
Bible?" My object is to get Vol. I in the hands of the 
most religiously inclined person in each house. I loan 
it saying I will call after two or three weeks. The call 
gives an opportunity to water seed or to secure the 
book. Right in my own block I have found about six 
or seven interested readers already. There is nothing 
like being prepared. 

Your brother, G. H. F.,— Pa. 



page 191 

MY DEAR BROTHER:- 

Having just read the article under the heading, 
"She hath done what she could," I was moved to lay 
the paper down and write you. Of course, I will not 
be able while in the flesh to express my feelings while 
reading and weeping as I realized that I could not 
wash my dear Redeemer's feet. Oh how I longed that 
I could have the honor of washing yours. Yes, I got 
the ready consent of my mind that I could so joyfully 
go through the Bible House bathing the feet of each 
member of the same, even if it required the entire night 
till dawn. For a time I felt I was unfortunate in not 
having an opportunity to bathe the feet of some dear 
brother tonight. Then I was made to rejoice with joy 
unspeakable and full of glory that I had in some sense 
bathed the feet-members of Christ with tears. All 
glory and honor be to him for such ecstacies of peace 
and joy even while in the flesh. 

Bless the Lord, oh my soul, for ZION'S WATCH 
TOWER. If such is the sweetness of the streams, what 
must the fountain be? If such joys are lavished upon 



us here, what must it be to be there? 

Dear brother, enclosed find an increased "Good 
Hopes" offering as a token of my increased love. 

Your brother in the faith, J. T. B.,— Fla. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

Love and greetings! It was too cold here to 
do very much colporteur work this winter, but what I 
could do has been a great blessing to me and we will 
leave results to the Lord. 

He has richly blessed the work the past year. Several 
have, through books it was my privilege to carry, 
already come out of Babylon and are rejoicing in the 
Lord and his Truth. 

The past year has been one of the happiest I have 
known since engaging in the work, as it has been so 
full of opportunities of service. Pray for me that I may 
prove worthy of the vocation to which I am called. You 
are all remembered daily by me at the throne of grace. 

Brother K., who is one of the Cleveland class, has 
sold fifteen volumes since January 1 . These he sold to 
people with whom he comes in contact in his business. 
Reading the last year's report was what made him 
want to have a share in the harvest work. 

Oh that all could see what a privilege it is to engage 
in some way to spend and be spent in the service 
of the Lord. May the Lord's blessing be with you all 
in rich measure. 

Yours in the one hope, T. B.,— Ohio. 



page 193 



SEMI-MONTHLY 
VOL. XXVIII JULY 1 No. 13 
A.D. 1907--A.M. 6035 



CONTENTS 

Views from the Watch Tower 195 

Is Prosperity Waning? 195 

Methodist Teachings Curios 196 

Infidelity in High Places 196 

Remarkable Wesleyan Sermon 197 

War Feared; No World's Fair in 1913 197 

Berean Bible Study in Tabernacle Shadows 198 

Types in Saul, David and Solomon 198 

Adam and Eve— Christ and the Church: A 

Contrast 199 

Our Obligations Toward Others 199 

"Your Father Knoweth" (Poem) 203 

"Keep Yourselves from Idols" 203 

Some Interesting Questions Answered 206 

page 194 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-24 EVERSHOLT ST., LONDON, N.W. 
GERMAN BRANCH-MIRKER STR., 45, ELBERFELD. 
AUSTRALASIAN BRANCH-EQUITABLE BLDG., COLLINS ST., MELBOURNE 

PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 

TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR AS FOLLOWS:- 

All Bible Students who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity or 
adversity, are unable to pay for this Journal, will be supplied FREE if 
they send a Postal Card each June stating their case and requesting its 
continuance. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on 
our list continually and in touch with the Studies, etc. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



THIS JOURNAL IS PUBLISHED IN THE 

FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, DANISH AND ITALIAN LANGUAGES. 

SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



"SCRIPTURE STUDIES "--INDIA EDITION 



We repeat that orders are placed, for the past year, for all 
the volumes of SCRIPTURE STUDIES to be printed on India paper 
and bound in leather, with gold edges. It requires a long 
time to import paper, and our publishers were disappointed 
as to the quality of the first lot of it (afterward used in the 
"Karatol" bound edition). They hope for the new lot of best 
India paper soon, and lead us to hope that we will have all 
the volumes about Christmas next. 

Meantime we are not "suffering" seriously, having the 
regular cloth edition and the regular leather edition, besides 
the first volume in Karatol and in magazine form. 

"MANNA" AND "KARATOL" ORDERS 



Orders for the Karatol edition of STUDIES, Vol. I., have 
been filled. If yours failed to arrive advise us. 

Orders for the new edition of HEAVENLY MANNA have all 
been filled. Some who sent for the old edition have credits 
with us and will please advise if they desire a less number of 
the new edition— as the price is higher, as indicated below: 

NEW MANNA PRICES, WHOLESALE AND RETAIL 

The new "Manna" will be sold by Manna Colporteurs and 
others at 50 cents each (60c when gotten by mail or prepaid 
express). The wholesale rates, open to any TOWER reader, 
are as follows— cash with order: 

1 copy, postpaid, each 35 cents 

10 copies or more, by express, prepaid 30 " 

10 " " " at your charges. 20 " 
30 " " by freight 20 " 

THE TABERNACLE AND THE PRIESTS 



These two beautiful chromos, considerably delayed, are 
now in good supply and should be in all of our homes— to remind 
us of their glorious antitypes, of which we have been 
studying for some time past in our "Berean Lessons." 

By getting them out in large quantities we can supply 
them at 30c per pair, or 4 pairs for $1.00, post or express prepaid 
by us. They are very handsome and easily worth several 
times the price. We merely aim to meet the cost. 

All orders have now been filled. If you did not get yours 
let us know particulars at once. To some who ordered 3 for 
$1.00 we sent four and to others we sent three and a copy of 



TABERNACLE SHADOWS. 

They are mounted with metal and have hangers and are 
packed in tubes. 



BRITISH PILGRIMAGE OF BRO. A. E. WILLIAMSON 



Note change of dates 






Carlow, 


Ire. July 10 Worcester, 


Eng. 


July 22 


Warrington, 


Eng. " 12 Tewkesbury. 


" 


23 


Liverpool, 


"13,14 Cardiff, 


Wales 


" 24,25 


East Kirkby, 


" 15, 16 Plymouth, 


Eng. 


26 


Nottingham, 


" 17, 18 Bristol, 


" 


" 27,28 


Atherstone, 


" 19 Bournemouth, 


" 


29 


Leicester, 


" 20, 21 Oxford, 




30,31 



R4016 :page 195 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 
IS PROSPERITY WANING? 



THE QUESTION whether a period of hard times 
is approaching is one upon which the experts 
are unable to agree. Mr. Jacob H. Schiff has 
predicted an era of great suffering among the poor. 
Mr. August Belmont told the assembled capitalists and 
workmen at Mr. Carnegie's industrial peace conference 
that we were about to have a halt in industry, which 
might not be altogether undesirable. Mr. James J. 
Hill, who has often seemed pessimistic in his views, 
denies that he has predicted a collapse of industry, but 
thinks that there will be a not unhealthy slackening. 
The view that trade has been going ahead too fast, and 
that it will have to slow down to give capital a chance 
to catch up, is pretty generally expressed. On the 
other hand, Chairman Gary, of the United States Steel 
Corporation, can see nothing but bright skies ahead, 
and a number of foreign observers take the same view. 

Upon the theory of periodical crises it is not yet 
time for a great industrial depression. We had such 
disasters beginning in 1819, in 1837, in 1857, in 1873, 
and in 1893. The normal interval between them is 
twenty years. The shortest hitherto has been sixteen 
years, between 1857 and 1873, and the effects of the 
Civil War furnished ample explanation of the curtailment 
in that case. According to experience we should 
not expect another severe crisis until sometime between 



1909 and 1913. There has usually been a mild 
reaction from the prevailing prosperity about half-way 
between two great panics. We had one in 1884, a little 
over half-way from 1873 to 1893. The corresponding 
break in the present period of good times came in 
1903, just ten years after the panic of 1893. According 
to precedent that ought to last us for nine or ten years 
longer. 

In the United States prosperity is largely dependent 
upon the state of the crops. The Baring panic of 
1890 would have brought on our panic of 1893 two years 
ahead of time if the disaster had not been stayed by 
the bonanza harvests of 1891. The present crop prospects, 
therefore, are of vast importance in estimating 
the prospects for 1907. 

If the extraordinary succession of good crops with 
which this continent has been favored can be continued 
for another year, there will be a pretty good assurance 
of another year of prosperity. The next three months 
will tell most of the story.— Collier's Weekly. 



We are glad that the present prosperous times are 
being made use of by many of the dear Truth friends as 
a special opportunity for spreading the good tidings 
of great joy. The "Harvest" work is the most important 
of all. It is "the King's business"— the Father's 
business. The numbers entering the Colporteur work 
lead us to surmise that this year may even exceed last 
year in its phenomenal output of DAWN-STUDIES. 

A NOTABLE PREACHER'S VIEWS 



"I have been twenty-five years in the ministry; and 
I regret to say it, but it is my honest conviction that 
there is more real brotherhood in the lodges than you 
find in the churches, and that there is infinitely more 
charity, sympathy and kindness in those outside of the 
Church than you will find in Mr. Lordly and Milady 
and their coterie who are running the churches as private 
clubs." 



With the above explanation Rev. M. C. Peters 
withdrew from the pastorate of one of the most prominent 
New York City churches. Apparently the "wheat" 
class is getting scarce in all denominations. 

An exchange says:— 

"Rev. Madson C. Peters, pastor of one of the leading 
Baptist churches of New York City, is reported as 
saying that, with an investment of $5,000,000, and an 
expenditure last year of $400,000, the seventy Baptist 



churches in that city had a net increase during that 
time of only nine members. 

"He says also that the other churches of the city 
did little better. What is wrong?" 

POWER OF THE CHURCHES 



"A timely illustration of the tremendous and effective 
power which may be wielded by the churches when 
they unite is afforded by the closing of the gambling 

R4016 :page 196 

dens at Saratoga, a result brought about by the action 
of the Church federation of Saratoga county. Thus a 
condition which has been a notorious scandal and disgrace 
to the State for years, which has hitherto successfully 
defied all efforts at reform, and had come to be 
regarded as practically hopeless, has been effectively 
remedied by the joint action of the churches. What 
has been done at Saratoga can be done elsewhere in a 
similar way. The case is also an example of the practical 
usefulness of Church federations, local, state and 
national, and a good reason why the federation movement 
should receive the cordial support of all good citizens. 
Many public evils other than gambling come 
within the scope of Church federation activities, and 
no organizations existing in the country, of any name 
or nature, have the equipment, the power, and the 
special advantages for effective service such as these 
federations possess. We hope the time is not far distant 
when the churches throughout the entire country 
will be brought into the federation movement. A more 
promising work than this for the good of the world has 
not appeared among the religious activities of modern 
times."— Leslie's Weekly. 



R4017 :page 196 

Sometimes this power may be used for a worthy 
purpose, in which all could rejoice; but, especially 
when the still greater power of the general Church Federation 
comes, there will be naturally a temptation to 
use it to put down whatever the majority disapproves, 
however moral or good. This the Scriptures show will 
be the result: religious persecution. 

METHODIST TEACHINGS CURIOS 



"God save us from theological definitions! The 



doctrines of the Methodist Church are the curios of a 
time that has passed and ought to be put on the shelf. 
God save us from doctrines and help us into a larger 
understanding of Christian fellowship." 

This was the thunderbolt Rev. Davis W. Clark, retiring 
President of the Methodist Ministers' Association, 
hurled into the meeting of his brother divines at 
Wiley Chapel.— Cincinnati Post. 



Poor "Babylon" is catching it on all sides. Bible 
students object to her creeds because they are not sufficiently 
loyal to God's Word: because she has incorporated 
too much of the traditions of men which make 
void the Word of God. We, however, recognize what 
these creeds have of divine truth. 

On the other hand, the speaker above quoted is 
angry because, as a Higher Critic and New Theology 
man, he is not allowed to tear from the Bible the story 
of the Fall, the Redemption and the coming 
Restitution. 

INFIDELITY IN HIGH PLACES 



"In a railway coach recently sat three ministers in 
conversation— one a German Evangelical, one a Methodist, 
and the third an American Reformed. In their 
conversation the M.E. minister stated that among the 
professors of the Garrett Biblical Institute at Evanston, 
Illinois, no two of them believed just alike. He was 
asked if they all believed that Adam was the first man. 
He answered, 'Not one of them.' Another minister inquired, 
'What is their view?' The reply was something 
about 'Prehistoric ages and periods.'" 

The above is an extract from a letter received from 
a brother in the Truth— his personal experience. It 
shows what we have heretofore pointed out, that ministers 
of all denominations are rapidly losing their 
faith in the Bible, and are becoming instead leaders of 
the people into infidelity. If they do not believe in 
Adam as the head of the race, and that by his disobedience 
condemnation passed upon all (Rom. 5:12), how 
can they believe, either, in the redemption accomplished 
by our Lord Jesus once for all for Adam and 
his posterity? "Alas! when the Son of man cometh 
shall he find the faith on the earth?" Assuredly, he 
does not so find it, but increasingly disbelief. Those 
whose eyes of understanding have been opened to a 
precious appreciation of the divine plan cannot too 
highly esteem the favor of God which they enjoy, nor 
too surely realize that in this way the Lord is keeping 
them from falling, according to the promise in his 
Word, "A thousand shall fall at thy side, and ten thousand 



at thy right hand, but it shall not come nigh 
thee." 

A BAPTIST PREACHER'S OPINION ENDORSED 



"From Indianapolis, a city of which every American 
should be proud because of its evident Americanism 
in the best sense of the term, comes this fine bit, 
which originated, it is said, with a Hoosier Baptist 
preacher by the name of Taylor. It's worth cutting 
out, says the Philadelphia North American:— 

'"What America needs more than railway extension, 
and Western irrigation, and a low tariff, and a 
bigger wheat crop, and a merchant marine, and a new 
navy, is a revival of piety, the kind mother and father 
used to have— piety that counted it good business to 
stop for daily family prayers before breakfast, right in 
the middle of harvest; that quit field work a half hour 
early Thursday night, so as to get the chores done and 
go to prayer meeting. That's what we need now to 
clean this country of the filth of graft, and of greed, 
petty and big; of worship of fine houses and big lands 
and high office and grand social functions. What is 
this thing we are worshiping but a vain repetition of 
what decayed nations fell down and worshiped just 
before their light went out? Great wealth never made 
a nation substantial nor honorable. There is nothing 
on earth that looks good that is so dangerous for a 
man or a nation to handle as quick, easy, big money. 
It takes greater and finer heroism to dare to be poor in 
America than to charge an earthworks in Manchuria.'" 

INFLUENCE OF THE BIBLE 

AND OF "MILLENNIAL DAWN" 



"One hundred delegates, representing Church clubs 
in almost all of the large Eastern cities, met in Washington 
last week, and problems of universal interest were 
discussed by prominent Church men. The speech that 
probably provoked the most discussion and called forth 
much comment was made by Bishop Satterlee. 

"He began his speech by calling attention to the 

R4017 :page 197 

fact that, although the country was progressing materially 
and commercially at a wonderful rate, its moral 
progress was not so evident. He did not say that there 
was not a corresponding moral development, but that 
he was unable to see it in the churches. He thought 
the influence of the Church was decreasing, but that 



the influence of Jesus Christ was steadily increasing, 
due not so much to the churches as to the wholesale 
publication of the Bible, which was easily put into the 
hands of the masses." 



We would have appreciated the Bishop's sentiment 
still more had he mentioned that a growingly better 
understanding of the Bible, both by the clergy and the 
laity, has to do with the Bible's influence for good; and 
that this is largely the result of the wide circulation of 
"Bible Keys"-MILLENNIAL DAWN. 

REMARKABLE WESLEY AN SERMON 



Dr. R. P. Downes preached a sermon at the Wesleyan 
Church at Stoke-on-Trent on Sunday night which 
has occasioned much controversy in the town. Taking 
for his text, "God is Love," the preacher declared his 
firm belief that human destiny is not fixed at death. 
He told his congregation that this was a view which 
for some time he had held secretly, and he knew others 
similarly situated, but the time had come when men 
must speak out. The popular doctrine of Christianity 
at this point was being strongly assailed by the sceptic, 
who demanded to know whether the God that was 
preached by the Christian Church, who could damn to 
eternal perdition the overwhelming majority of the 
human race, millions of whom had not had sufficient 
light or probation or privilege on which to base the 
stupendousness of an eternal destiny, could be the God 
of Love so often preached. He himself had heard this 
view expressed by Charles Bradlaugh twenty-five years 
ago at Rochdale, and such irrefutable logic could not 
be escaped from. 

If (said Dr. Downes) I were to withhold the great 
revelation which has come to my soul, I should be like 
the man in the lighthouse who gave to the cottagers 
round the place the oil which was intended for the 
mighty lanterns of the sea. God is Love, which means 
that no man will be damned eternally without a chance, 
no man will be lost until he has had the revelation of 
Christ's body and of Christ's atonement... He 
knew that the general idea had been, and he himself 
had thought it for many years, that man's destiny was 
fixed at death, and that if a man died in a slum area, 
polluted and unworthy, having sinned, he was condemned 
guilty, damned for ever, and had no chance— 
his destiny was fixed. It was not true. 

In John Wesley's fifty-first sermon there was a 
passage which read, "Some have imagined that human 
destiny is fixed at death. There is no passage in the 
Scriptures that confirms any such thing." Passing 



from John Wesley to Dr. W. E. Pope, the greatest, he 

said, of all Methodist theologians and one of the greatest 

theologians the world had ever known, he found 

Dr. Pope saying, "The fixed and unalterable state of 

man is always associated with the day of judgment 

and its issues, and not with the day of death. We 

must not antedate these issues or interfere with the 

full work of probation." "Exactly," said the preacher, 

"the absoluteness of Christianity, the only way of salvation, 

demanded that no human being should be adjudged 

until Christ should be made accessible and 

brought home to him, whether that took place in this 

life or the life after death. This is my view, and I 

mean before I die to drag it before the Methodist 

Church."— English Journal. 

JEWISH LANDOWNERS 

IN EUROPE THEY HOLD 248 TIMES AS MUCH AS THEY DID 
40 YEARS AGO. 



The anti-Jew faction in Russia declares that even 
with the present restrictions the Jews have managed to 
acquire a large portion of land, for which the following 
figures are quoted in the Jewish magazine, the 
Menorah: 

"Within the pale the real estate of the Jews advanced 
from 16,000 dessiatins in 1860 to 148,000 in 1870, 
370,000 in 1880, 537,000 in 1890, and to 1,265,000 in 1900. 

R4018 :page 197 

"In European Russia outside the pale Jewish landholding 
is said to have increased 248 times in forty 
years in the following proportion: In 1860, 3,000 dessiatins; 
in 1870, 18,000 dessiatins; in 1880, 96,000 dessiatins; 
in 1890, 262,000 dessiatins, and in 1900, 745,000 
dessiatins." 

According to these statistics the total holdings of 
the Jews throughout the Russian Empire, which only 
amounted to 70,000 dessiatins in 1860, reached in 1900 
the high figure of 2,381,057 dessiatins. 



It is reported on apparently good authority that 
much of the trouble and bloodshed of the past few 
months in Russia is engendered by the fact that so 
many of the landlords are Jews: the poor, who rent 
their little farms at very high rentals, rarely see their 
landowners; but knowing them to be Jews they hate 
and injure the poorer Jews, their neighbors— as representatives 
of the rich absentees. The love of money is 
a root of all evil. 



WAR FEARED; NO WORLD'S FAIR IN 1913 



Berlin.— Opposition of Kaiser William is expected 
to cause the abandonment of the proposal to hold an 
international exposition in Berlin in 1913. Most significant, 
however, is the reason on which the German 
war lord bases his objection. 

The emperor believes the possibility of Germany 
being drawn into a European war before the time set 
for the exposition is too great for the nation to take 
the risk involved in arranging an international 
exposition. 

The statement that Kaiser Wilhelm opposes the 
proposed exposition on such grounds has caused a 
great sensation. It is argued that the government 
fears that the peace of the world is in constant jeopardy, 
and great uneasiness has been caused among the 
people, who feel that they do not know all the complications 
of the international situation.— Toledo 
News-Bee. 



page 198 
BEREAN BIBLE STUDY IN TABERNACLE SHADOWS 
"AND AFTER DEATH THE JUDGMENT" 
AUGUST 4 

1. What "judgment" is here referred to as following 
death? Heb. 9:27,28; T.87, par. 1. 

2. How is this passage generally understood by Christians? 
and is their idea Scriptural? 2 Pet. 2:9; 

Rev. 11:15,18; Rev. 20:11-13; Psa. 96:10-13. 

3. What was risked by the High Priest in the type 
whenever he entered the "Most Holy" on the Day 
of Atonement? Lev. 16:13,14; T.87, par. 2. 

4. Was the eternal existence of our Lord endangered 
during his earthly career? See Acts 17:31; Heb. 5:7,8; 
T.88, par. 1. 

AUGUST 1 1 

5. What positive evidence have we that the life and 
sacrifice of our Lord was perfect and acceptable 

to the Father? Jno. 20:1-17; Acts 2:1-4; T.88, 
par. 2. 

6. How will the Father's acceptance of the sacrifice of 
the Body of Christ be manifested? Joel 2:28; T.88, 
par. 2. 

7. For what is the "groaning creation" waiting? Rom. 8:19-22 



(see Diaglott); T.88, par. 4. 

8. Are the worthy saints of the Patriarchal and Jewish 
ages also waiting for this manifestation? 

Heb. 11:39,40; A.288, par. 2; 293, par. 2. 

AUGUST 18 

9. Must each member of the Body of Christ pass the 
same "judgment" as our Head? and, if so, how 

can we be acceptable unless we, like him, live perfect 
lives? Rev. 3:21; Col. 2:9,10; Isa. 61:10; 
T.89, par. 1. 

10. How is the acceptance by God of the sacrifice of 
the Church shown in the type? Lev. 9:22-24; 

T.89, par. 2. 

1 1 . Will the world then appreciate the great sacrifice of 
the Christ? and how is this shown in the type? 

Isa. 40:5; 25:9; Rev. 15:3,4, Diaglott; T.89, par. 2. 

12. What must intervene between now and the time 
when "the people will shout and fall upon their 
faces" before the great High Priest in glory? 

Acts 15:13-17; Dan. 12:1; T.89, par. 3. 

AUGUST 25 

13. Will those now dead, as well as the living nations, 
be participants in this great blessing? Heb. 2:9; 

I Tim. 2:5,6; Rom. 14:9; Hos. 13:14; Ezek. 16:44-68, 
etc.;T.90, par. 1,2,3. 

14. How was the "good news"— the Gospel— "preached 
before to Abraham"? Gal. 3:8,16,29; T.91, par. 1. 

15. What is the date of the beginning of the blessing 
to the world? and why can it not come before? 

Lev. 9:15,23,24; Rom. 8:19,21, Diaglott; T.91, 
par. 1, last half. 

16. What was the typical significance of the High 
Priest's going alone into the "Most Holy" once a 
year— on the Day of Atonement? 

17. Did the High Priest and under priests enter the 
"Most Holy" after the Day of Atonement? T.91, 
par. 2. And what was thus typified? Num. 18:10; 
T.91, par. 3. 



R4018 :page 198 

TYPES IN SAUL, DAVID AND SOLOMON 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

May I suggest for your consideration whether there 
are not some lessons to be gleaned from the thought 
that in some respects the forty years of Saul's reign 
were typical of the harvest of the Jewish Age, the forty 
years of David's reign typical of the harvest of the 
Gospel Age, and the forty years of Solomon's reign 



typical of the harvest of the Millennial Age? 

Take, for example, the first seven years of David's 
reign, in Hebron (meaning "ford" or "company"). 
Might they not in some sense represent the years from 
1874 to 1881, before the full establishment of the Kingdom 
in the "New Jerusalem"? 

Again: We know that the 7,000 years rest of Jehovah 
will terminate in the year 2874, so that it seems 
proper to think of the forty years harvest of the Millennial 
Age as the time when the Christ will be at rest 
from all its enemies, in a special sense, as in the days 
of Solomon. 

In the case of Saul: It does not seem perfectly 
clear to me whether the act of presumption which led 
to his rejection and the rejection of his posterity followed 
the second anniversary of his elevation to the 
kingship, or whether it followed the third anniversary. 
(I Sam. 13:1.) But it is noteworthy that his rejection 
was due to his failure to properly recognize his typical 
mediator, Samuel, and this surely was the cause of 
Fleshly Israel's rejection, 3-1/2 years after a share in the 
Kingdom was offered to them. 

If there is any apparent value to you in the above 
suggestion, I respectfully inquire whether you see anything 
in the end of David's reign to illustrate the close 
of the present harvest time? I will not presume to do 
more than suggest a line of inquiry. David virtually 
abdicated in favor of Solomon, Solomon's power gradually 
increasing while his own strength was gradually 
failing. "He must increase but I must decrease." 
Please note the seven years of famine in 2 Sam. 24:13, 
mentioned as three years in I Chron. 21:12. (The 
characters "7" and "3" resemble each other closely, so 
that one of these is probably incorrect.) In your consideration 
of the subject I venture to call attention to 
the seven years famine in the days of Elisha.— 
2 Kings 8:1. 

TYPES IN THE BOOK ESTHER 

Permit me to suggest that Ahasuerus, meaning 
"King," is a type of the "Sun," Christ; that Vashti 
typifies those that were bidden to the feast and would 
not come; that Esther, meaning "The Planet Venus," 
typifies the Bride of Christ (Venus is the most glorious 
of all our planets, reflecting more of the rays of the sun); 
that Mordecai the Jew, meaning "Dedicated to Mars," 
typifies the Ancient Worthies (Mars is, I believe, nearer 
to the earth than any other planet, and is between it 
and the sun); and lastly that Haman, the Agagite, 
the last Amalekite mentioned in the Scriptures (see 
last sentence of Young's Concordance, article "Amalekite"), 
typifies the class that tries to take the power out 
of the hands of the Ancient Worthies in the end of the 
Millennial Age. Please take a mental review of the 



R4018 :page 199 

story of Esther, and see how well this picture fits. If 
this application is correct, the meaning of the word 
Mordecai would be one more suggestion in line with 
your present thought that the Ancient Worthies may, 
after the close of the Millennial Age, attain heavenly 
honors and stations. 
Your brother in Christ, 

CLAYTON J. WOODWORTH. 



R4018 :page 199 

ADAM AND EVE--CHRIST AND THE CHURCH: A CONTRAST 

BRO. JOHN EDGAR, M.D., of Scotland, sends us 
the following, saying: "I am sending you a 
parallel between Adam and Eve and Christ 
and the Church, and would like your criticism of it." 
Our only criticism is that it might perhaps better be 
termed a contrast rather than a parallel: 

ADAM AND EVE 

Adam by his disobedience 
sold the whole human 
race into sin and death. 

Adam's disobedience 
consisted in exaltation of 
self. He ate of the fruit 
forbidden by God. 

The result was humiliation, 
sorrow and death. 

The humiliation was 
from the perfect human 
plane to that of human imperfection, 
the lowest plane 
of existence in the likeness 
of God. 

Adam's children were 
begotten after his humiliation. 
Through the law of 
heredity they have been 
"born in sin and shapen in 
iniquity," and accordingly 
under condemnation to 
death.— Rom. 5:12. 

Eve was the child of God 
and was formed from 



Adam's body. Adam was 
put to sleep for this 
purpose. 

Eve came into being before 
the fall. As Adam's 
bride she shared first his 
glory, joy and life, and 
afterwards his humiliation, 
sorrow and death. She 
shared the loss of the first 
dominion, and access to 
the tree of life was barred 
against both. 

Eve was disobedient 
first, and then Adam. 

Adam was not deceived 
(I Tim. 2:14). He wilfully 
transgressed God's law, 
knowing the result would 
be everlasting death. 

All the blame is placed 
upon Adam. 

Eve shared Adam's 
transgression of God's will 
but her responsibility was 
less. (I Tim. 2:14.) Accordingly, 
she received the 
same penalty as Adam, not 
on her own account, and 
not through heredity like 
other members of the human 
race, but because she 
was Adam's bride and 
shared in his transgression. 
This one-ness is expressed 
in the name "Adam" 
given to both.— 
Gen. 5:2. 

CHRIST AND THE CHURCH 

Christ by his obedience 
bought the whole human 
race for righteousness and 
life. 

Christ's obedience consisted 
in humiliation of 
self. He drank of the cup 
permitted by God. 



The result was exaltation, 
joy and the crown of 
life (immortality).— John 5:26; 
Rom. 6:9. 

The exaltation was from 
the perfect human plane 
to that of the divine nature, 
the highest plane of existence 
in the likeness of 
God. 

Christ's children will be 
begotten after his exaltation. 
The law of heredity 
will cease (Jer. 31:29), and 
each will be given the opportunity 
of justification 
unto life.— Rom. 5:18. 

The Church-members are 
children of God and are 
formed from Christ's body. 
Christ was put to sleep 
(death) for this purpose. 

The Church came into 
being after the exaltation. 
As Christ's Bride she 
shares first his humiliation, 
sorrow and death, and afterwards 
will share his 

glory, honor and immortality. 
She will share the 
gaining of the first dominion 
(Micah 4:8), and both 
will be permitted to eat of 
the tree of life (Rev. 2:7). 

Christ was obedient first, 
and then the Church. 

"By his knowledge shall 
my righteous servant justify 
many." (Isa. 53:11.) He 
voluntarily kept God's law, 
knowing the result would 
be death and afterwards a 
resurrection from the dead 
to immortality. 

All the merit is placed 
upon Christ. 

The Church has shared 
Christ's obedience to God's 



will, but her responsibility 
is less. Accordingly, she 
will receive the same reward 
as Christ, not on her 
own account (Eph. 1:6), 
and not through heredity, 
but because she is Christ's 
Bride and has shared in his 
obedience unto death. 
(Rom. 6:3). This one-ness 
is expressed in the name 
"Christ," given to both. 



R4019 :page 199 

OUR OBLIGATIONS TOWARD OTHERS 

--EXODUS 20:12-17. -JULY 21.- 

Golden Text:— "Thou shalt love thy 
neighbor as thyself."— Lev. 19:18. 

WE CONTINUE our examination of the Decalogue, 
whose first three commands, we have seen, referred 
to Israel's obligations to God. The remaining 
seven pertain to their relationship to each other and to all 
men. The fourth only is a kind of connecting link, being 
applicable to both God and man. Here again we do well 
to remember that not to Spiritual Israel but to Natural 
Israel these commands were given. It would be impossible 
for us to think of God as giving to his Spirit-begotten children 
the commands not to kill, not to steal, etc., for we 
know that the spirit of murder and the spirit of theft could 
not be in any one possessing the Spirit of God, the holy 
Spirit, the spirit of love. 

Whoever, then, has been begotten of the holy Spirit, 
and is a Spiritual Israelite indeed, cannot apply the Father's 
voice in these commandments to himself; but he can through 
these commands given to the natural man gain more and 
more clear conceptions of right and wrong on any subject 
relating to his fellow-creatures. Begotten of the spirit of 
love toward all, he can in the study of these commandments 
learn by antithesis how to exercise his loving disposition 
toward others more and more effectively. By the Lord's 
grace let us seek to appropriate profitable instructions from 
these commands, that we may be more fully conformed to 
the perfect standard in our hearts, and so far as possible in 
our outward conduct toward all. 

R4019 : page 200 

THE FIFTH COMMANDMENT 

In this commandment to honor father and mother we 



have the very foundation of society, because whoever learns 

to respect his forbears will proportionately have consideration 

for others; while those disobedient to parents and without 

natural affection are prepared to be covenant-breakers 

and anarchists when conditions shall favor such procedures. 

Growth of disrespect to parents is one of the notable features 

of our day, and one that the Apostle called attention 

to as marking the day of trouble in the end of this age. 

(Rom. 1:29-31.) He associates it with headiness and highmindedness, 

and we are not to forget that these condemned 

qualities are being inculcated and fostered by all the higher 

teachings of the worldly wise. 

If our forefathers but a little while back were monkeys 
—as all the colleges and seminaries of the world are instructing 
the youth— why should we have much honor or 
respect for them? And why should not each member of the 
rising generation feel heady and highminded, self-conceited, 
puffed up with the thought that he is further from the 
monkey than his parents and nearer to the ideal set before 
him by his instructors? The great increase of knowledge 
along all lines in our day seems to corroborate this teaching 
of the worldly wise, and only those who have the instruction 
of the Word of God can realize that present progress is due 
to another cause than evolution— that it is the result of the 
development of the divine plan, in preparation for the glorious 
Millennial day already dawning. Let not those who have 
been blessed with a knowledge of Present Truth therein 
pride themselves either, but rather let them remember the 
Apostle's words, that we should humble ourselves, and recognize 
that all of these blessings are from the mighty hand 
of God and not of ourselves, and that we have nothing except 
what we have received from him. 

What about Spiritual Israelites in respect to this command? 
Have we not a father and a mother as New Creatures? 
Yea, verily! The Apostle tells us that the God and 
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ hath begotten us as New 
Creatures. Our Lord confirms this thought, saying, "I 
ascend to my Father and your Father, to my God and your 
God." "After this manner pray ye, Our Father which art in 
heaven, hallowed be thy name." The spirit of loyalty to 
the heavenly Father, of obedience to him, should be continually 
with us and prevent any spirit of selfishness or self-seeking 
or boastfulness. The proper spirit of reverence for 
the Father is expressed by our Redeemer in the words, "I 
delight to do thy will, O my God. Thy law is written in my 
heart." The Spirit of God is the law of love, and with that 
in our hearts and abounding more and more we will delight 
to honor the One from whom has come to us every good and 
perfect gift. 

But who is the mother of the New Creature? The 
Apostle tells us: He points out that as the Jew corresponds 
to Ishmael, the son of Hagar, so the Spiritual Israelite corresponds 
to Isaac, the son of Sarah, and that Sarah represents 
God's original covenant with Abraham; and that in 
this sense of the word the heavenly Jerusalem, the heavenly 
promises of the heavenly Kingdom, is the mother of us all. 



We are begotten and nourished of a good hope, a living 
faith. We must respect this faith, this promise, this hope, 
through which we are begotten, as well as respect the heavenly 
Father, by whose gracious provision we are begotten. If 
we thus honor the Father, the God of all grace, and thus 
honor his covenant and the faith which has been begotten 
in us, it will make us loyal in thought and, so far as possible, 
also in word and deed. And as there was a special 
promise of long life to the obedient Jew, so there is a blessing 
of a promise of eternal life, even of immortality, to the 
faithful Spiritual Israelite. 

"THOU SHALT DO NO MURDER" 

This commandment to the Jewish people did not signify 
that they might not kill animals for food or for sacrifice to 
the Lord, nor that they should not kill beasts destructive to 
man's interests. Nor did it mean that they should not put 
to death those who had been judicially sentenced to death 
as injurious to the interests of their fellows— for all these 
things the Israelites did under and in harmony with that 
Law. To them this commandment meant that no individual 
had a right to take human life, that only a legal process of 
the divine sanction could do this. 

The lesson from this command to the New Creature is 
a much broader and deeper one than the Jew or any other 
natural man, not begotten of the holy Spirit, would be able 
to appreciate. To the New Creature the higher statement of 
the Law, "Thou shalt love," has a much more deep and 
searching signification than could be understood to be attached 
to this command, "Do not murder." While the New 
Creature would not think of committing murder, taking the 
life of another, he needs to be still more deeply instructed— 
namely, that any wicked thought or sentiment in his heart 
against his brother, any malice or hatred or anger, is of the 
murder-spirit, which is contrary to his new standard and 
must be thoroughly eradicated. The Lord enunciated this 
when he said, "He that hateth his brother is a murderer"— 
he has the spirit or disposition which, under aggravation or 
excitement or removal of restraint, would imply that he 
would do injury to his brother; and the desire to injure at 
all, to wound, to maim, is the desire to that limited extent 
to murder him, to take away his blessings, to destroy his 
interests. 

THE LETTER AND THE SPIRIT 

The spirit of this commandment, its scope, would lead 
the followers of Christ to be careful of the lives and limbs 
of their employes or whoever might be under their charge 
or care. True, in our day we have laws made for such protection 
of laborers, mechanics, children, etc., and we are glad 
that it is so. We are not, however, to conclude that this signifies 
always a larger amount of the Spirit of the Lord, the 
spirit of justice, on the part of employers. Rather, as a rule, 
we may feel sure that they are a result of a growth of 



knowledge on the part of the masses, and that few laws of 
this kind are enacted that have not first been demanded. 
But Christians, those begotten of the Spirit of the Lord, 
should be forehanded in all such matters— not waiting for 
compulsion of law, but rather thoughtful of the needs of 
others, seeking their good, recognizing their responsibilities, 
and seeking to live up to them. Ah, yes! those who belong 
to the Body of Christ and are taught of God and actuated by 

R4020 : page 201 

his holy Spirit not only ought to be but are peculiar people, 
zealous of good works, zealous for righteousness, justice and 
loving interest in their fellow-creatures. 

What we thus see to be true in our relationship to 
others in the world is, if possible, intensified in the Church 
—between the various members of the Body of Christ. If 
we would properly be careful for the welfare of the world, 
how much more interest we should feel in all whom we 
recognize as brethren in God's family, traveling with us 
against the course of the world and the flesh and the Adversary, 
endeavoring with us to stem the tide of imperfection 
in ourselves and in all with whom we have contact, and live 
according to the divine ideals? What sympathy, what love 
for the brethren we must feel, how careful we must be not to 
kill them. As the Apostle says, Should I permit my meat to 
destroy one for whom Christ died? Should I exercise my 
liberties to that extent, and be careless of the welfare of a 
brother? How could I, if actuated by the Father's Spirit, 
the Spirit of Christ, the spirit of love? Hence, as the Apostle 
points out, no one should be recognized as a leader in the 
Church of Christ, whatever his qualifications, if he be a 
striker, a wounder of the brethren. 

Let us learn to appreciate the Spirit of the Lord as we 
find it amongst his brethren, and let us each be more and 
more zealous for its cultivation, that so far from doing injury 
or wounding any of them it would be our joy to minister to 
them, to serve them, to bind up their wounds, and to assist 
them in every manner within our power. Indeed there are 
some who, while very generous, very well-meaning, very 
self-sacrificing in the Lord's cause, are forgetful of the spirit 
of love toward the brethren and open to this rebuke of 
being wounders. On the other hand, of course, all who are 
the Lord's should seek not to be easily wounded or easily 
hurt, but, on the contrary, to be strong in the Lord, and so 
covered with the armor of the Lord that harsh words or 
harsh deeds, either from the brethren or from the world or 
from the Adversary, would take no effect because of the covering 
of grace and truth in the armor. 

"THOU SHALT NOT COMMIT ADULTERY" 

This seventh commandment was designed to be the protection 
of the home and the family, and we may be sure that 
to the Jew it included fornication and uncleanness in general. 
Obedience to this command is recognized the world 



over, even amongst those who have little or no knowledge of 
God, as being essential to the welfare and happiness of the 
individual, the home and the community— as affecting not 
only the moral interests and health, but also the physical. 
Whoever disregards this law brings upon himself most assuredly 
injurious consequences as respects the present life, and 
a degradation of mind and character which will have more 
or less influence upon his future welfare. 

What lesson can the New Creature in Christ learn from 
this commandment to the old creature? It emphasizes to 
him the value and importance of the new mind, the new 
nature, which in him has already devoted to death the 
natural man with his affections and desires. It emphasizes 
to him the declarations of the Lord's Word that, "If ye live 
after the flesh ye shall die: but if ye through the Spirit do 
mortify [kill, destroy] the deeds of the body, ye shall live" 
(Rom. 8:13)— ye shall correspondingly become strong as 
New Creatures and be acceptable of the Lord to the eternal 
life promised to them that love him. 

The New Creatures are pure in heart, and to them 
everything akin to adultery, adulteration of any kind, must 
be recognized as contrary to the new nature— its foes. It 
recognizes the truth of the Apostle's words, that the flesh 
and the new mind are contrary the one to the other, and 
are at warfare, and that the victory of the new nature means 
the putting to death of all such fleshly desires as would 
lead in the direction of adultery. The general law of love 
which the Lord has given to the New Creation is in harmony 
with the spirit of this command. He who loves his neighbor 
as himself would not wish to destroy that neighbor's home 
and its sacredness, even as he would not wish his neighbor 
to destroy his home and its sacredness. Do unto others as 
you would that they should do to you— the Golden Rule of 
the New Creature in Christ— would effectively bar him from 
any disposition or desire in the direction of this prohibition. 
He would not need this command, because the law of love 
under which he is placed in the school of Christ is still more 
searching, still more effective. 

Our Lord exemplified this higher teaching when he 
said, "He that looketh upon a woman to lust after her hath 
committed adultery already with her in his heart." (Matt. 5:28.) 
In other words, the spirit of God's law is that to 
desire to do wrong and to be merely hindered by circumstances 
and conditions, is in God's sight as serious, as criminal, 
as to have really done that wrong. 

"THOU SHALT NOT STEAL" 

A proper recognition of the rights of others, the property 
of others, is here inculcated. There are no limitations 
here such as a natural man, worldly wise, would be inclined 
to recognize. It does not say, Do not steal if there is the 
slightest risk of your being caught, exposed, punished. It 
does not say, Do not steal a small amount, because it would 
not be worth while, and the risk of being caught would be 
too great— steal only, if you can do so, in a semi-legal manner, 



which could not easily be detected or which, if detected, 
would be shielded by some appearance of legality. It 
plainly and simply meant that each Jew should recognize 
the rights of every other Jew, his property, his interests, and 
not misappropriate them. This command, it will be seen, 
covers every form of theft, both public and private, for the 
most serious of all thefts we may see are the public ones, by 
which under pretense of legality and with the form thereof 
public properties are appropriated, or, in the language of 
the law, "seized" without giving a reasonable equivalent. 

This command relates to justice in general, for the parent 
may steal from his child by failing to recognize the 
rights of the child, and his own obligations as a parent. For 
instance, it is a just obligation that attaches to parentage to 
give, if possible, the offspring a reasonable equipment of 
common education at least, as a preparation for the duties 
of life; and the parent who without necessity deprives his 
children of this is stealing from them, depriving them of 
those things which belong to them of right, of common 
decency, of justice. Children also should recognize an obligation 
toward their parents and toward each other; mine 

R4020 : page 202 

and thine should be recognized in every home as the first 
basis of order, the foundation of all estimation of justice. 
We know of nothing so productive of wranglings and disputings 
in families as the ignoring of one another's rights- 
taking advantage of one another— in other words, stealing 
from each other, perhaps only trifles. The ignoring of conscience 
and justice in trifling matters leads to a general 
searing of conscience, and ultimately to a disregard of the 
rights of others and a selfish appropriation to one's own 
use of any and everything possible where the risk and the 
penalty are not too great. 

As for the New Creature: his law of love, the very 
essence of his mind and heart, is opposed to stealing; love 
rather prompts to giving, to doing: the New Creature delights 
to do good and to communicate, to give, in all good 
things. Not only does he delight to give the Truth to 
others, but in proportion as the Spirit of the Lord fills and 
permeates his heart and his life, he would have pleasure in 
the giving of earthly good things to all in need. Generosity 
is an element of the new heart, the new mind, the new disposition, 
begotten of the spirit of love. Nevertheless, trained 
in the irregularities which generally prevail, practised in 
the little injustices of home and business, it may take the 
New Creature some time to discover that these are out of 
accord with love. He will, however, in proportion as the 
holy Spirit abounds in his heart, consider his words, his 
deeds, yea, his thoughts, to see that justice, the very foundation 
of God's throne, is the foundation of all of his conduct 
in life toward others— that he never gives less than justice 
to anyone. 

Next he will consider how love will even do more than 
justice would demand on suitable occasions, where it would 



not be injurious; and so far as the treatment of himself by 
others is concerned he should be so full of sympathy for 
the world in general in its fallen condition that he would 
neither demand nor expect full justice to be done to him. 
His knowledge of the fallen condition of the race would 
enable him to sympathize with those with whom he had to 
do. He might find it even necessary to spur himself on this 
score lest his love and generosity should do injury, especially 
in his own family, where he holds a responsibility. Some of 
the Lord's people as heads of families need to learn to kindly, 
gently, yet firmly, insist upon justice between the various 
members of their families, even though they may not insist 
on having justice done to themselves in every particular. 

R4021 : page 202 

"Who steals my purse steals trash; 
But he who filches from me my good name 
Robs me of that which not enriches him, 
Yet leaves me poor indeed." 

The New Creature, searching deeply for the spirit of 
love in all the affairs of life, soon learns that one of the 
commonest forms of theft is referred to in the above lines of 
Shakespeare. Common theft may indeed be guarded against, 
but the person who either of malice or of recklessness steals 
his neighbor's good name by starting slander is far more to 
be dreaded, and despised as well. We can see a reason why 
selfishness would permit the appropriation of another's temporal 
goods, even though we cannot justify such a course; 
but who could excuse or justify, either in himself or in 
another, the theft of a good name? This violation of the 
eighth commandment is, alas, so general that almost none is 
exempt from it. 

Sometimes the character of another is traduced for the 
purpose of implying a higher sense of honor or truth or 
righteousness on the part of the traducer; but he who rightly 
judges of the matter will draw an opposite inference, and 
feel a righteous indignation that the one who thus robs 
another of his name should expect the latter to sympathize 
with the act and to be a receiver of the stolen goods. By 
far the greater number, however, traduce their fellows 
thoughtlessly, because they have never trained themselves 
to a proper standard— the Golden Rule. Their tongues are 
loose, they lack secretiveness, and above all they lack love. 
How would love affect such a matter? We reply that love 
affects every matter of life, great or small. The number of 
people who would traduce themselves is fortunately exceedingly 
small, and if they loved their neighbors as themselves 
they would be equally careful in respect to the honor of the 
neighbor's name, equally careful not to cast a reproach by 
statement or insinuation or glance or shrug of the shoulders. 

The New Creatures in Christ must have this spirit of 
love, Spirit of Christ, spirit of the truth. Alas, that it requires 
some of them so long to learn how to properly extend 
this love in all the affairs of life, toward the brethren, toward 



their own kin, toward the world and toward their enemies. 

"If any man have not the Spirit of Christ he is none 

of his," should ever ring in our ears, and we should remember 

that we are in the school of Christ to learn of him, to 

become copies of God's dear Son; and that in no other particulars 

could we so discredit him and his Word than by 

evil speaking, slandering and slander-mongering. Let us 

awake to righteousness and sin not, for many seem not to 

have a knowledge of this truth. After preaching a discourse 

on this very topic, the writer shook hands with a member of 

the congregation passing out, who declared a great appreciation 

of the discourse and a realization of its importance, 

yet while still shaking hands and evidently quite unconscious 

of the fact, unkind reflections were made against a 

fellow-member of the Body of Christ. 

THE NINTH COMMANDMENT 

"Thou shalt not bear false witness against thy neighbor." 
This would not only apply to a case in court— perjury 
—but it would be equally applicable in all the little 
affairs of life. Having this in mind none would dare tell an 
untruth against his neighbor, against his goods, his business, 
his anything, however much the untruth might assist in the 
making of a bargain. Justice stands in defense of the neighbor, 
and whoever violates justice, violates the holy law of 
God. The New Creature, possessed by the Spirit of the 
Lord, would certainly not wish to bear false witness against 
his neighbor, yet with many the flesh is weak, and the temptation 
is strong to favor personal interest in violation of the 
truth— righteousness. The New Creature might be overtaken 
by such a fault, but could never assent to it, never agree to 
it. So surely as he is a New Creature and has the new mind 
of Christ, the spirit of love, he would be obliged to hate and 
abominate such a weakness and to make good any injustice 

R4021 : page 203 

done, to fortify his mind against a repetition of the offense. 
On the contrary, the disposition of the New Creature must be 
that of love to his neighbor, which would prefer to tell no 
evil about him, however true it might be— which would prefer 
to shield him, to guard his interests, and to lovingly 
think no evil or as little evil as possible respecting any conduct 
of his that might seem to us irregular. Love suffereth 
long and is kind; it imagines no evil, but rather imagines 
good. 

THE TENTH COMMANDMENT 

Covetousness is not the desire for more blessings for 
ourselves, but an enviousness of the possessions of others, 
and a desire to appropriate them for ourselves. It is akin 
to envy but worse, because it goes further. Someone has 
said, "Envy makes a weakling; covetousness a fiend." 
Standing as it does as the last of a series of commandments, 



this one, as it were, casts a reflection upon all which precede 
it — it is the climax of all the commandments respecting 
our relationship to our fellowman; it takes hold of the 
thoughts, whereas the others take hold upon the words and 
deeds. Of it Canon Farrar has said:— 

"This is a unique commandment. Search all the laws 
of the world and you will not find one which resembles it. 
The sixth, seventh, eighth and ninth commandments you will 
find in all codes, though only as prohibitions of crimes 
amenable to judicial punishment. The tenth commandment 
is the complement of all the rest. It shows that God requires 
of us not only outward virtue but inward holiness; 
that he demands in us the sacrifice of the will, from which 
wicked actions spring; that sinful imaginings are a crime 
against him, as well as wicked acts." 

The New Creature, guided by the new mind, with the 
spirit of love toward his neighbor, cannot covet anything 
belonging to another. He might desire to have good things 
of his own, but he would rather give to his neighbor than 
take from him. It is even permitted of the New Creature to 
covet— the things which he desires— "Covet earnestly the 
best gifts." (1 Cor. 12:31.) The organ or mental quality 
which leads worldly minds to covet the things of others is 
differently directed in the New Creation, and guides them to 
seek for things on the higher plane, the spiritual, the things 
which God hath in reservation for them that love him. And 
these, as the Apostle remarks, must be sought lawfully— in 
harmony with the law of love which God has given us. Whoever 
seeks for glory, honor and immortality, the great price 
of our high calling, seeks a good thing and may rejoice respecting 
it and in the desire to attain it; but he must ever 
keep in mind that it can be attained only at the cost of the 
sacrifice of earthly interests— going to the Master without 
the camp, bearing his reproach. Let us to whom the Lord 
has given the royal law of love remember well that it is 
much more searching, much more strict, than the law of the 
ten commandments given to the Jew, because ours relates to 
us according to the mind, the heart, as New Creatures, and 
not merely to the flesh and its appetites and desires. 



"YOUR FATHER KNOWETH WHAT THINGS YE HAVE NEED OF" 
MATTHEW 6:8 

Our Father knows what things we need, 
Each step along the way; 

His eye of love doth never sleep- 
He watches night and day. 

He knows sometimes, like ripening grain, 

We need the sunshine bright; 
Again, he sends the peace that comes 

With shadows of the night. 



Sometimes our pride would fain unfurl 

Ambition's flaunting sail,— 
Ah! then he knows we need to walk 

Humiliation's vale. 

Sometimes he takes our eager hands 
And folds them on our breast, 

He gently lays our work aside- 
He knows we need to rest. 

Sometimes we need companionship, 
Sometimes "the wilderness"; 

How sweet to feel he'll know and give 
The state that most will bless. 

Then let us leave it all with him, 
Assured that, come what may, 

Our Father knows just what we need, 
Upon our pilgrim way. — G. W. 



R4022 : page 203 

"KEEP YOURSELVES FROM IDOLS" 

-EXODUS 32:1-8,30-35. -JULY 28.- 

A STRANGE picture of inconsistency is presented in 

today's lesson. The Israelites— who, after witnessing 

many manifestations of divine favor and 

power on their behalf, after reaching Sinai and entering 

into a covenant with the Lord, in which their obligations 

were represented briefly in the ten commandments— are in 

this lesson shown as idolaters, violating the second commandment 

and the spirit of the first. Moses, after declaring 

God's commandments to the people, ascended Mount Sinai 

in their sight into the presence of God, to receive the commandments 

written on tables of stone. Day after day 

passed and he did not return. The forty days absence in 

Mount Sinai must have appeared a long time to the people, 

who were waiting and longing for entrance upon the promised 

Canaan possessions. Yet how strange that they should 

forget the terrible sights and sounds which preceded his going, 

when the mountain shook and out of the clouds and 

darkness and midst flaming fire and the voice of a trumpet, 

God manifested himself to them and only Moses was able to 

approach, with Joshua, his servant. How strange that these 

things should all be forgotten within forty days! What an 

evidence we have here of the instability of human sentiment! 

Yet we must remember that these Israelites were 

born in bondage. 

In the absence of Moses they came to Aaron, his brother, 
a very different man, not a leader in the same sense of 
the word, nor so courageous, nor so governed by principles. 
The people gathered to him, saying in effect, "Bestir yourself; 



R4022 : page 204 

we should be going on our way to the land of promise. We 
know not what has become of Moses who has been our 
leader; he may have deserted us here. We want God to be 
our leader, but we want something that will represent him, 
something that we can see. Moses did very well while he 
was with us, but he has gone and might go again. Make 
us an image of God, that we may always have God to be 
our leader, something that will help us as we seek to worship 
him with whom we have just made a covenant, who has 
promised to lead us into the land of Canaan." The people 
were not irreligious; indeed, exceptionally few of the human 
family are irreligious. In man's very constitution divine 
worship is provided for: the very topmost organs of the 
brain represent this religious sentiment and dispose him to 
worship somebody or something. 

This, which was true of the Israelites, is true of mankind 
everywhere from then until now. Hence the necessity 
for instruction, that all may recognize the proper things 
to be reverenced, to be worshiped, to be most highly appreciated. 
The Israelites were learning this lesson, and with us as 
with them there is necessity often that we should not only 
have the plain statement of a truth, but that its weight and 
conviction should be borne in upon us by some particular lessons. 
The commandment had said that they should make 
no likeness nor graven image to represent God, and what 
they did was only indirectly a breach of this, for the golden 
calf which Aaron made for them was not graven, not carved, 
but cast in a mould, and it did not represent God, but probably 
—like the images they had seen in Egypt— was a nondescript 
thing which merely represented divine characteristics 
—a calf's body with a human head and with wings, symbolical 
of strength, of intelligence, omniscience. So many 
Christians, similarly without a wish to infract a divine law, 
are disposed to take too great liberties and to introduce to 
too large a degree their own conceptions in divine worship 
—without sufficient care to hold to the exact instructions 
of the divine message. This is always a mistake, by whomsoever 
committed. 

The only wise, proper course for any is to take heed 
particularly to the Word of the Lord, and to allow themselves 
little if any liberty beyond the very letter of that Word. 
Thus today we see in the religious services of various denominations 
how, little by little, the simplicity of the apostolic 
pattern for the Church and its worship has been departed 
from. Some have taken little liberties, some have 
taken great liberties, with the result that some have departed 
a little and others have departed a great deal from the 
divine standard, and always to their injury. The lesson to 
Spiritual Israelites here should be, "See that thou make all 
things after the pattern that I showed thee in the holy 
mount." If we need divine instruction at all on the subject 
we need to follow those instructions carefully, explicitly. 
Let us remember that we cannot improve upon them, that 



any alteration means injury to us. 

THE DANGERS OF EXPEDIENCY 

We cannot suppose that Aaron fully sympathized with 
the people in the matter of this making of the golden calf; 
we must suppose that he knew better and meant better, 
and that it was a mere expedient on his part to hold in 
check the rebellion of the people whose discontent was manifest 
in this demand. We must suppose that, in apparently 
acquiescing in the demand, Aaron was seeking to gain time 
until Moses would return. Possibly, too, his demand that 
the people produce their earrings and other ornaments of 
gold was originally a mere subterfuge; that he hoped by 
making this demand they would draw back and decline to 
part with their ornaments, and that thus he would be able 
to say, "Well, I cannot make you what would represent a 
god except out of gold, and I have no gold for the purpose 
unless you sacrifice your jewelry." But, however good his 
intentions, the lesson for us is that his course was an improper 
one. 

Spiritual Israelites should never take this position- 
should never say, let us do evil that good may result, let us 
yield some principles for the sake of harmony and the good 
of the cause. Alas, this seems to be the difficulty with the 
leaders of God's people all through the ages. The fear of 
man, that bringeth a snare, has interfered with the fear of 
God, which is the beginning of wisdom. All Spiritual Israelites 
should learn, should fix it in their hearts, that while 
moderation and a disposition to be obliging and helpful and 
considerate of the wishes of others are prominent elements 
of Christian grace and to be cultivated, nevertheless the 
principles of the divine law are never to be infracted, nor 
even compromised for the sake of blessing others. We are to 
remember that when great emergencies arise God is superior 
to every one of them, and they can never be understood as 
his voice commanding us to violate the principles of righteousness 
which he has set before us. We are to do our 
duty in harmony with his law as kindly, as gently, as wisely 
as possible, and leave all the results to him— the Almighty. 
Whatever others may do, however others may think or compromise, 
let us take the Apostle's standpoint and say, "We 
can do nothing against the truth, but for the truth." (2 Cor. 13:8.) 
Our consciences will not permit us to compromise 
where principles are involved, though we should gladly be 
the readiest of all to compromise where principle is not 
involved. 

THE COST OF WRONG-DOING 

People usually are attracted to wrong-doing by the 
thought that thus they escape difficulties or sufferings, or 
thus they gain advantages and blessings. But this is only 
a theory; as a matter of fact it is the reverse, every misdeed 
is costly. The Israelites stripped themselves of their jewels 
to carry out their misguided religious sentiments. And how 



often we see this amongst Spiritual Israelites! How many, 
in their worshiping of a sect or denomination, will strip 
themselves of some of their most valuable possessions! 
How many sacrifice to these idols what God has not directed! 
idols which are set up contrary to the instructions of his 
Word— devoting to them time, influence, money— time which 
should be devoted to a pure worship of God, based upon a 
study and better understanding of his Word; influence 
which should be exerted in a very opposite direction, to a 
maintenance of the liberty wherewith Christ has made us 
free, and to a fellowship with those who are seeking to stand 
fast in that liberty; money which should be spent in building 
up the most holy faith once delivered to the saints, and 

R4022 : page 205 

in putting down the strongholds of error, the golden calf of 
ignorance and superstition! 

And undoubtedly many ministers and many of the 
more intelligent amongst the Lord's people of all denominations 
realize that Churchianity is merely a golden calf, unworthy 
of the reverence and worship accorded to it. Undoubtedly 
many of this more intelligent class, represented in 
Aaron, reluctantly join in the various sectarian practices and 
customs which have a form of godliness and deny its power. 
They should be more courageous if they would be overcomers; 
they must learn this lesson, and come out from among 
them and be separate, and touch not the unclean thing, (2 Cor. 6:17); 
and again, "Come out of her, my people, that ye 
be not partakers of her sins and receive not of her plagues." 
-Rev. 18:4. 

MANY IDOLS IN CHRISTENDOM 

While Churchianity is the idol which more nearly in 
our day corresponds to the golden calf, there are many more 
idols to which professed Christians are bowing the knees of 
their hearts. Chief amongst these is Mammon, the god of 
wealth, of money. O, how many forget the instructions of 
the Word, that we are to seek first the Kingdom of God and 
his righteousness, and to be content with such things as 
God's providence will grant us along these lines. How many 
are anxious to have something better in this world than 
God's providence has accorded them; how many have the 
love of money, of which the Apostle spoke in his day— the 
root of all evil, which some coveting after have stumbled 
and pierced themselves through with many sorrows.— 
1 Tim. 6:10. 

R4023 : page 205 

Yes, indeed! this idol has many votaries today, more 
perhaps than ever before, and the worship of Mammon is 
being encouraged on every hand— the poor are almost despised, 
the wealthy highly esteemed. The successful worshipers 
of Mammon, who receive his marks of approval in 



prosperity, are everywhere welcomed in society and Churchianity. 

We are not denouncing wealth or the wealthy; we 

are reprehending the love, the idolatry of the wealthy, that 

it is set up as the standard of human ambition— nay, almost 

as the standard of Christian ambition; whereas, on the contrary, 

God has declared that not many great, not many wise, 

not many learned, not many noble, not many rich, will inherit 

the Kingdom; hence not many of the wealthy are identified 

with the true Israel of God. 

There are other idols, too, of name and fame and pride, 
that call for their toll from their worshipers. Each one of 
these idols calls for its devotees to break off their golden 
earrings, their advantages, their riches of time and influence, 
etc., for their service. Does it not behoove every Israelite 
indeed to make an inspection of his own heart to see to 
what extent there are any idols there, and to cast them out, 
that his worship may be of sincerity for the Lord alone? 
This idol-breaking may properly include the idolatry of 
persons, whether it be of Luther or Calvin or Knox in the 
past or of earthly leaders in the present time. Saint John 
the revelator is represented as falling down to worship before 
the angel who showed him certain things in respect to 
the divine plan, and the angel is caused to reprove him for 
it, saying, "See thou do it not: I am of thy brethren... 
Worship God." 

So every proper leader, in whatever degree of influence, 
should see to it that worship is not tendered to him without 
a rebuke. However well-intentioned the homage may be, it 
must be reproved, because there is but one proper object of 
adoration for the Lord's people— God himself; "Worship 
God." Fellow-creatures may be honored, respected, esteemed, 
as the Scriptures direct, "Honor to whom honor is 
due, tribute to whom tribute is due." But God is to be recognized 
as the source of all our blessings, joys, advantages, 
comfort. If God has been pleased to make use of any of 
his children for the blessing of others, it would not be improper 
for us to rejoice in the Lord's providence and to 
acknowledge the same; but in every case the Lord must be 
recognized as the Giver of every good and perfect gift. Had 
he not given the aid through one channel or servant he 
could and would have given it through another. Hence 
to him belongs the praise of the glorious plan of salvation, 
and of our share therein and of our knowledge of it. 

"HE BUILT AN ALTAR BEFORE IT" 

Evils are progressive: one wrong leads to another. 
Thus, after the golden calf had been made the next thing in 
order was to make a golden altar before it to offer sacrifice 
to it. So it is in respect to the idols of Spiritual Israel. 
An altar always implies a sacrifice, and it is but the natural 
thing that we should sacrifice to whatever we set up in our 
hearts as our idol. As we have already pointed out, some 
hearts have many idols, others a few, and it is not difficult 
to determine which idols a man worships. The worship 
will be indicated by the sacrifice. Tell us the things to 



which a man or a woman sacrifices his or her best 
thoughts, best time, chief influence, and we can tell you 
readily the idol which he reverences most and before 
which he has the largest altar and sacrifices most. 

Each should be most interested in examining this question 
from the standpoint of his own heart; each should say 
to himself, "To whom do I render the sacrifice of my heart? 
Where are my chief affections? To whom or to what do I 
render sacrifices of the most precious things I possess?" 
The laws of nature require that a certain proportion of our 
time be spent in sleep; with many a considerable proportion 
is necessary for earthly toil, for the procurement of the things 
needful and the things honest and necessary for the present 
life. A certain proportion is also necessary for our personal 
convenience, partaking of food and care for our bodies. It 
would be easy to use the entire twenty-four hours in this 
way, for the tendency of our day is to greater and greater 
extravagance in every direction and to consider the luxuries 
of the past as the necessities of the present. Hence every 
hour of the twenty-four taken from the affairs of this life 
might be considered as in some sense of the word 
sacrificed. 

Some divide their sacrifices, putting part upon the altars 
of their various idols; but the true Christian, enlightened by 
the Word of the Lord, must abandon all of these idols, and 
must realize that he has very little at most to present as a 
living sacrifice to the Lord. If he can save or redeem one 
hour a day or more, this should be recognized as a part of 
his reasonable service to the Lord and should be conscientiously 
devoted day by day if he would attain the divine 

R4023 : page 206 

favor and blessing for the life that now is and for that 

which is to come. As the steward of his gifts to the Lord 

he may use some of his time and influence in his own spiritual 

development along the lines of the divine Word. Another 

portion he may devote to the assistance of the brethren, 

building them up in the most holy faith, and thus 

strengthen incidentally his own faith. Other portions of this 

sacrificed time and means he may use in ministering to the 

sick or to assisting others along temporal lines, doing good 

to all men as he has opportunity, especially to the household 

of faith. But his sacrifices must not be made to persons 

nor things nor churchly systems, but to God, and be appropriately 

used according to his best ability to understand 

the divine will through the teachings of the divine Word. 

THE BREAKING OF THE LAW 

At the end of the forty days Moses came down from the 
mountain bearing the table of the Law written in stone, 
and, beholding the idolatry, he dashed the table of stone to 
pieces, symbolically representing the failure of Israel to 
keep the Covenant of the Law, and the impossibility of the 
fallen race ever being justified by the Law Covenant. After 



Moses had reproved the people and chastened the more wilful 
and explained to them their sin more fully, he went up 
into the mountain again to the Lord, acting as their mediator. 
In this connection we have introduced to us the grandeur 
of Moses' character, his unselfishness, his love for his 
brethren in all their weakness. The Lord proposed to 
Moses to cut off Israel as a nation, and to make of Moses 
and his family the nation that he would bless as the seed of 
Abraham. But Moses, faithful to his trust as a mediator 
who had undertaken to represent the people before God and 
to represent God before the people, declined the Lord's offer, 
and pleaded for the people, as mediator. 

All of this, we may be sure, was intended as a type of 
how Christ Jesus, as the better Mediator of the New Covenant, 
would be loyal to his trust and stand for and represent 
the whole human family before God faithfully, notwithstanding 
their sinful condition, alienation and disobedience. 
Moses' language is most pathetic— "And now wilt thou blot 
out their sin, and if not, blot me, I pray thee, out of the book 
which thou hast written." As Moses here staked his own 
eternal existence for the benefit of the people, so the life of 
Christ was staked for the race whom he died to redeem, 
and whom he represents and will continue to represent as 
its Mediator until he shall, under the terms of the New Covenant, 
grant to Israel and to all mankind restitution and 
full opportunity to return to divine favor. The course of 
Moses was pleasing to the Lord, and as the Mediator for the 
people he was directed to lead them on and bring the faithful 
to the promised land. Nevertheless the people who 
shared in the wrong-doing received a measure of chastisement. 

The spirit of Moses was not only typical of the Spirit of 
Christ, but illustrative also of the spirit of all who will be 
members of the Body of Christ. We, too, must have this 
spirit of love and devotion, not merely to the members of 
the Body of Christ, our own Body, but a devotion to the 
mission, the work, to which in God's providence we have 
been called. "Ye know your calling, brethren." God has 
called us to be joint-heirs with his Son, to be the Bride, the 
Lamb's Wife, to be participators with him in the great work 
of mediating the New Covenant, and under its blessed provisions 
assisting and uplifting the world of mankind and 
leading them during the Millennial Age along the highway 
of holiness to absolute perfection and eternal life at its further 
end— so many as will obey. It is for us to have the 
spirit of Moses, the Spirit of Christ in respect to this matter 
—to so far as possible measure up to the glorious privileges 
and calling which are ours, and in the present time to do all 
in our power, in harmony with the Lord's providential leadings, 
for the blessing and uplifting of mankind in general, 
for their guidance in the right way, but especially to prepare 
ourselves for the glorious work of the coming age. 

Chief amongst the elements of our preparation will be 
the spirit of sympathetic love which will enable us to be 
copies of our dear Master, who was kind to the unthankful 
and full of mercy and good fruits. Let us take this higher 
plane of thought in respect to our relationship to the world. 



Our Master declared, "Ye are not of the world, even as I 

R4024 : page 206 

am not of the world." We are members of the Christ- 
members of the great Mediator, undergoing schooling and 
preparation for the great work before us of leading the people 
into the promised land of God's favor and life eternal- 
Paradise restored. If we do not learn the necessary lessons, 
if we do not become copies of God's dear Son, in sympathy, 
in love, in benevolence toward the world, we will be rejected 
from membership in the glorious Body, the Kingdom 
class, as unfit, the non-elect. Let us, then, give diligence, 
and remember that the great lesson to be learned is that of 
love— for God, for the brethren, for our neighbors, yea, for 
our enemies. If this love abound in us it shall make us 
neither barren nor unfruitful in God's sight, and so through 
Christ an abundant entrance shall be granted us into the 
everlasting Kingdom as associates with the King of kings 
and Lord of lords in his great work as the world's Mediator, 
the Mediator of the New Covenant, under which all the 
families of the earth are to be blessed. 



R4024 : page 206 

SOME INTERESTING QUESTIONS ANSWERED 

Question.— Does not the foreknowledge of God seal 
our eternal destiny? 

Answer.— However distinctly we may enunciate our 
belief in God's foreknowledge of coming events the 
matter will always be beyond our human powers of 
comprehension. We could easily enough see how God, 
with all power in heaven and in earth, could predestinate 
certain events, and then cause them to come to 
pass, but our difficulty begins when we apply divine 
foreknowledge to human affairs in regard to which we 
recognize, according to the Scriptures, that man is a 
free agent, at liberty to choose his own course, at least 
concerning all moral and religious questions. 

This need have no bearing whatever upon our duty 
and responsibilities, for we know assuredly from the 
Scriptures that God is dealing with us, not from the 

R4024 : page 207 

standpoint of his foreknowledge, but from the standpoint 

of our obedience. If we are willingly obedient to 

him, then he could not have foreknown otherwise respecting 

us. The Lord is dealing with his Church of 

this Gospel Age according to certain principles set 

forth in the Scriptures, and it is for us to obey or disobey 

his instructions, according to our will— God's 

foreknowledge in no sense or degree interfering with 



our liberties. 



Question.— Is the world growing better? 

Answer.— In some respects it is growing better and 
in other respects it is growing worse. It is growing 
better in the sense that a higher moral tone prevails on 
the surface of things, because of knowledge being more 
generally diffused amongst the masses of Christendom. 
While Christian principles have not struck their 
roots deeply into the heart of civilization, they have, at 
least, given a tone to public sentiment which is very 
beneficial. The light of true Christianity, its loving 
spirit, has been exhibited to the world in the Master 
and in the "little flock," who seek to walk in his steps; 
and it has established thus a higher standard of 
thought and deed amongst men— not only of the consecrated 
class, but also of the worldly class. Their consciences 
agree to the principles enunciated, and in 
some degree benevolence has been cultivated, even 
from a worldly standpoint; and even though it be true 
to some extent that many of the benevolences performed 
in connection with the establishment of hospitals, 
libraries, asylums, etc., are for show and for advertising 
and vainglory; and even though some benevolences 
in the care of the sick and the wounded, etc., in times 
of war are probably prompted by love of gain, nevertheless 
all these things attest that there is a generally 
diffused public sentiment which appreciates such things, 
and which it is sought to please. We are glad of this, 
glad to note it, glad to acknowledge it. We regret, 
however, to note that various things indicate that this 
greater benevolence of our day is a very thin veneer, 
covering a great deal of selfishness, malice, hatred, 
envy and strife, which, under certain circumstances, 
show themselves in a very keen ferocity and general 
devilishness which it is difficult for the Christian heart 
to understand. The fact of the matter is that general 
goodness, heart-consecration to the Lord and filling 
with his spirit of love, is apparently decreasing in the 
same ratio as the surface benevolence increases, outward 
moderation and gentlemanliness being accepted 
as instead of heart-consecration and sanctification. 



Question.— Would it be proper for the consecrated 
to spend time in the study of foreign languages, music, 
art, etc., or in attending and belonging to social and 
literary clubs? 

Answer.— It is well that each of us should judge 
for himself in such matters; but well, also, that each 
should leave the judgment of others to themselves. It 
is not for us to lay down any hard and fast rules for 
other men's consciences, but we may suggest some 



lines which each conscience may apply to its own affairs, 
we believe, profitably. 

(1) The consecrated person has given up his will, 
has covenanted that he will henceforth seek to do, not 
his own will, but the Lord's will, whether that agrees 
much or little with his own natural tastes and proclivities. 
This point being decided, it follows (2) that in 
the spending of our time we would consider the Lord's 
will, judging to the best of our ability from his Word 
and our experiences in life what would be his will— 
what would be to his glory and to our own spiritual 
profit and to the spiritual profit of others, and a decision 
on this point must be the rule of our lives as consecrated 
persons, in all of our affairs. (3) With the 
majority of the Lord's people the providing of things 
needful of an earthly kind, for self or family dependents, 
requires much of consecrated time and leaves 
comparatively little for devotion to matters especially 
spiritual. (4) Every truly consecrated person, accepting 
the foregoing views, is bound to admit that the 
amount of time, talent and energy at his disposal for 
special service to the Lord, to the Truth and the brethren 
is very limited indeed. (5) Each realizing this situation 
will use his little time according to the measure 
of his zeal. If he loves foreign languages more than he 
loves the Lord's Word it bespeaks an unsatisfactory 
condition of heart. If he loves the Lord's Word and 
service better than foreign languages, but somehow 
feels that the study of languages, music and art are a 
duty more important than the study of the Lord's 
Word and the service of the brethren, it implies a confused 
condition of mind and an imperfect appreciation 
of the fact that the time is short in which to make our 
calling and election sure. (6) The zeal which we show 
in respect to the use of opportunities in the Lord's 
service and in our attempt to turn the ordinary affairs 
of life to his glory, constitutes the indication we are 
giving to the Lord regarding the amount of our zeal 
for him and his. (7) It is according to the measure of 
this zeal of our hearts for the Lord's will and the 
Lord's service, and not according to the perfection we 
shall attain in the flesh, that we shall be adjudged overcomers 
of the world or not overcomers— worthy or not 
worthy of the prize of our high calling. 



Question.— Will the retributions of the Millennial 
Age be wholly in the nature of corrections in righteousness 
and punishments for transgressions of that 
time? or will the punishments be wholly in the sense 
of or for sins of this present life? or will they take 
cognizance of both of these? 

Answer.— They will take cognizance of both, thus: 
While primarily they will be reproofs and corrections 
for transgressions committed during the Millennial 



Age, and will be reformatory in character, nevertheless 
in a secondary sense they will take cognizance of the 
wilful sins of this present life also, because every wilful 
sin of the present time makes an indelible mark in 
the character, the disposition, etc., and these indelible 
character-marks will be upon all in their awakening for 
trial in the Millennial Age. If the marks be many and 
deep it can be readily seen that the individual will be 
correspondingly at a disadvantage in the next life, and 
have corresponding difficulties and obstacles to hinder 
him, which he will be required to overcome in order to 
obtain the life that will then be offered him. 

Of course, sins committed ignorantly and unintentionally 
have also a degrading effect upon mind and 
body, but far less so than sins committed in violation of 
conscience, sins against light and knowledge. We may 
reasonably suppose, too, that it will be part of the work 
of the Royal Priesthood during the Millennial Age of 
trial to assist mankind the more over the weaknesses 
which were incurred unwillingly. 



page 209 



SEMI-MONTHLY 
VOL. XXVIII JULY 15 No. 14 
A.D. 1907-A.M. 6035 



CONTENTS 

Views from the Watch Tower 211 

"This One Thing I Do" 211 

Seeking Cover of the Mountains 212 

Surpassing Skill of the Ancients 212 

Church Evolution 212 

Methodist Prayers for the Dead 213 

Theatre Annex for Church 213 

The Indianapolis Convention 213 

Report of the London Convention 215 

The Truth in Japan 215 

The Tabernacle of Meeting 216 

"I That Speak Am He" (Poem) 219 

Offerers of Strange Fire 219 

Encouraging Words from Faithful Workers 222 

page 210 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
-OR TO- 



BRITISH BRANCH--24 EVERSHOLT ST., LONDON, N.W. 

GERMAN BRANCH--MIRKER STR., 45, ELBERFELD. 

AUSTRALASIAN BRANCH-EQUITABLE BLDG., COLLINS ST., MELBOURNE 

PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 

TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR AS FOLLOWS:- 

All Bible Students who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity or 
adversity, are unable to pay for this Journal, will be supplied FREE if 
they send a Postal Card each June stating their case and requesting its 
continuance. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on 
our list continually and in touch with the Studies, etc. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



THIS JOURNAL IS PUBLISHED IN THE 

FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, DANISH AND ITALIAN LANGUAGES. 

SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



PLEASE GIVE YOUR FULL NAME AND ADDRESS at the 
head of every letter you write to us, and save our time. 

1907-VOLUNTEER TRACTS-1907 



This year's Volunteer tracts are going out very rapidly. 
We are doing our best to keep up with the increased demand 
and rejoice that an increasing number of the Lord's people 
are appreciating this privilege and will gain a spiritual blessing 
therefrom. We request that all who send in orders specify 
particularly the quantities they can and will use judiciously 
and promptly. We will be glad to double the shipments. 

THE TABERNACLE AND THE PRIESTS 



These two beautiful chromos, considerably delayed, are 
now in good supply and should be in all of our homes— to remind 
us of their glorious antitypes, of which we have been 
studying for some time past in our "Berean Lessons." 

By getting them out in large quantities we can supply 
them at 30c per pair, or 4 pairs for $1.00, post or express prepaid 
by us. They are very handsome and easily worth several 
times the price. We merely aim to meet the cost. 

All orders have now been filled. If you did not get yours 
let us know particulars at once. To some who ordered 3 for 
$1.00 we sent four and to others we sent three and a copy of 



TABERNACLE SHADOWS. 

They are mounted with metal and have hangers and are 
packed in tubes. 



R4025 : page 211 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER 
"THIS ONE THING I DO" 



THE Methodist Review gives a report of a sermon 
by Rev. C. E. Jefferson as follows: 

"No other man can wander so easily from his 
province as the preacher. The fences are low, and if 
he steps over them no one but God will speak to him 
about his indiscretion. Every man in the community 
except the preacher is bound with hoops of steel to the 
task which heaven has assigned him. The physician 
must practice medicine and keep close to his patients, 
the lawyer must practice law and keep close to his 
clients, the editor must gather news and keep close to 
his subscribers, the teacher must teach and keep close 
to his pupils, the banker must keep close to his money, 
the business man must be loyal to his business; but 
the preacher can leave his work and flit like a bee from 
field to field, gathering nectar from a thousand flowers, 
and he himself may think he is making honey when in 
fact he is only buzzing." 

The "buzzing" preachers who are moved to treat 
all manner of "magazine" subjects because of the prevalent 
conviction that the preacher should be "a social 
agitator, a political reformer, a man who stands before 
the community as the sworn antagonist of every form 
of social wrong," are reminded that their day furnishes 
a social environment different only in matter, and not 
in manner, from the day of Christ's preaching. "The 
people of his day wanted him to do everything," says 
Dr. Jefferson. "That was their conception of the Messiah." 
Further: 

"The air was filled with questions, political, social, 
economic, ecclesiastical, but he refused to touch them, 
so eager was he to say just one more word about God. 
Evils lifted their hoary heads on every side— slavery, 
Roman tyranny, the social evil, false customs, economic 
tragedies— but he never lifted a hand to strike 
them. So narrow was he, so blind was he! Men were 
hot in their discussion of problems. No age ever had 
more problems than his. But to him there was only 
one fundamental problem, and that was the problem of 
sin, and he had time for the discussion of none other. 
The estrangement of the heart from God— that to him 
was the root of all tragedies. A will fixed in rebellion 



against the good Father— that was the fountain of all 
the world's woes. All problems of all kinds got their 
complications from the estranged heart, and all tragedies 
got their blackness from the mind that had become 
darkened by going away from God, and he had nothing 
to say about secondary problems and subordinate evils 
because his eyes were fixed on the one plague-spot of 
humanity— a will disobedient to the good God. Such 
a line of action on his part was of course disappointing. 
It was even exasperating. The intellectual people 
of his day had no use for him. Men of acumen and 
large mental grasp smiled at the poor peasant telling 
people little stories about God. Men of patriotic fervor, 
alive to the needs of the day, sneered at him because 
he did not fall in with their plans and adopt their 
panaceas. To all practical men who believed in grappling 
with problems and suggesting solutions he was a 
visionary, a fool. It did seem visionary, so much talking 
about God. 

"The German Strauss is offended because Jesus 
allows the life of the family to fall into the background, 
is neutral toward the State, rejects property, and passes 
all the esthetic intents of the world unnoticed. John 
Stuart Mill declares his Gospel is not sufficient as a 
rule of action, and must be supplemented by instructions 
drawn from non-Christian sources. The Italian 
Mazzini thinks his heart was all right, but his intellect 
deficient because he took no interest in the great ideals 
of political liberty and national progress which made 
the nineteenth century glorious." 

Christ consciously and stedfastly limited the field 
of his activity, says Dr. Jefferson, and so was able to 
say at last, "I have finished the work which thou gavest 
me to do." If he carved out his work with such 
clean-cut edges, the writer remarks, it may be that his 
example was designed "to save us from the tragedy of 
attempting things to which we have not been called." 
We read: 

"Do you not think that the name of God would be 
more glorious in the hearts of men today, and the 

R4025 : page 212 

Kingdom of heaven would have wider limits on the 
earth, if all who have been ordained to preach the 
Gospel had only been willing to confine themselves to 
the one task assigned them? I like to think that a 
preacher should talk differently from any other man in 
the community; that a sermon should be unlike any 
other discourse known among men. I like to think that 
a Christian Church should be different in atmosphere 
from any other building built by man. Public worship, 
so I think, ought to have a different tone from the tone 
of society or the street. On going into the house of 
God one should know at once that it is not a lecture-hall, 
a reform-club meeting-place, a professor's classroom, 



a newspaper office, the rendezvous of a literary 
or musical society. There ought to be in the air a 
mystical something which awes the heart and impels it 
to look upward. There ought to be something there 
which makes one feel like saying, 'This is none other 
than the house of God; this is the gate of heaven.' And 
it is the preacher who must be foremost in creating 
this atmosphere." 

The Monitor (Rom. Cath., Newark, N.J.), in commenting 
on the lament constantly appearing in Protestant 
journals over the dearth in Church attendance, observes 
somewhat similarly: 

"Perhaps the spiritual leaders of our separated 
brethren make a mistake in striving too much after 
novelty. Perhaps the people, especially the men part, 
may prefer the teachings drawn from the everlasting 
and inexhaustible Gospel of Christ; the daily papers 
can supply all necessary comment and criticism on 
passing events. Sincerity is a much better heart-mover 
than sensationalism, and the true preacher will impart 
to his hearers the thoughts and ideals and resolves 
that move himself. If you wish me to weep, you yourself 
must shed tears.' 

"Two generations ago one of the most peaceful and 
Christian parishes in Ireland, and that is saying a good 
deal, was a village near Mitchellstown, County Cork. 
The aged pastor had been in charge for over half a 
century, and he was never known to preach but the 
same sermon in all that time. Every Sunday, after the 
Gospel, he turned to his people and said solemnly to 
them, in the old Gaelic, 'Brethren, avoid the evil and 
do the good.' This fact is historical, and it is also historical 
that this parish was called the parish of saints, 
where a lawyer would starve, a judge throw up his 
position in sheer disgust, and a jail collapse through 
dry rot." 

SEEKING COVER OF THE MOUNTAINS 



We have called attention to the statement of Scripture 
that in the day of the Lord the rich and great and 
mighty will foresee the impending trouble and seek 
protection from the stronger institutions. A poor 
translation says that they will call on the rocks and 
mountains to fall on them to hide them, whereas the 
thought is that they will request of these symbolic 
rocks, etc., hiding, covering, protection from the storm 
of trouble brewing. 

We have already noted that Croker, Astor, Carnegie 
and other wealthy men sought the security of Great 
Britain as greater than that of the United States, and 
removed their residences thither. We now note a different 
move by the millionaire J. Pierrepont Morgan. 
He is far-sighted and seeks a different rock or mountain 



to cover him. For a long time a Protestant he recently 

joined the Roman Catholic Church in a manner 

so public as to advertise him a Catholic all the world 

over. Newspaper reports say that he presented about 

one million dollars to the Catholic Church and then received 

the Pope's public blessing and an amulet which 

the pontiff took from his own neck and fastened about 

the neck of Mr. Morgan. 

In the case of so astute a financier as he, the public 
is justified in supposing that he must have associated 
financial matters with the religious. It is not, therefore, 
far-fetched to suppose that the gentleman sees the 
trouble coming, and concludes that his vast interests 
will be safest if allied with the largest religious system 
of Christendom, and the one whose millions most thoroughly 
obey the voice of their leaders. Nor will it 
surprise us if other wealthy men see the situation in 
the same light, and flee to the same mountain. 

SURPASSING SKILL OF THE ANCIENTS 



"We are losing all our secrets in this shabby age," 
an architect said. "If we keep on the time will come 
when we'll be able to do nothing well. 

"Take, for instance, steel. We claim to make good 
steel, yet the blades the Saracens turned out hundreds 
of years ago would cut one of our own blades in two 
like butter. 

"Take ink. Our modern ink fades in five or ten 
years to rust color, yet the ink of mediaeval manuscripts 
is as black and bright today as it was 700 years 
ago. 

"Take dyes. The beautiful blues and reds and 
greens of antique oriental rugs have all been lost, while 
in Egyptian tombs we find fabrics dyed thousands of 
years ago that remain today brighter and purer in hue 
than any of our modern fabrics. 

"Take my specialty, buildings. We can't build as 
the ancients did. The secret of their mortar and 
cement is lost to us. Their mortar and cement were 

R4026 : page 212 

actually harder and more durable than the stones they 
bound together, whereas ours— horrors!"— New York 
Press. 

CHURCH EVOLUTION 



Northern Baptists are to be less local and more 
national in point of view, less independent and more 
cooperative in their methods of government and denominational 



activity. After a stirring debate the large 

gathering of representatives of the churches, sitting at 

the national capital, finally voted "that in view of the 

growth of our country and our denomination there is 

need of a general body that shall serve the common interests 

of our entire brotherhood." Supplementing this 

steps have been taken to perfect the organization of a 

national council, which shall be to northern Baptists 

what the general convention of southern Baptists has 

been for some time and what the national council of 

the Congregationalists has been for a generation. The 

R4026 : page 213 

first president of the new body is to be Governor 
Hughes of New York State, of whom the Baptists naturally 
are proud. His election also is a fine tribute to 
the Baptist emphasis on laymen's rights in the Church. 
This movement had its origin in Chicago and Boston, 
and has been backed by some of the ablest and 
most forceful men of the denomination.— Boston 
Herald. 

METHODIST PRAYERS FOR THE DEAD 



The editor of The Western Christian Advocate, having 
recently advocated that Methodists hereafter pray 
publicly for the dead, has aroused his brother editor of 
The Central Christian Advocate to a discussion of the 
subject. He notes that not even Romanists pray for 
those in hell, but only for those in purgatory, for whom 
there is a hope of escape. He asks, "Would we [Methodists] 
adopt the word Purgatory?" He proceeds to 
show that John Wesley, when charged with praying 
for the dead, did not deny it, but admitted it 
—denying that prayers for the dead were "popery." 
He concludes:— 

"We do not think that it is strange that Methodism 
has not produced a literature on this thing of prayers 
for the dead. Methodism is practical. The land immediately 
beyond the grave is shrouded in loving mystery; 
there is scant revelation. Therefore Methodism 
is silent." 



So, then, Methodism from Wesley down to the 
present finds nothing to say against future probation; 
but has some considerable leaning toward it. Only 
uninformed Methodists, therefore, have anything to say 
against the main argument presented and proven in 
MILLENNIAL DAWN. 



THEATER ANNEX FOR CHURCH 



Roof garden vaudeville will probably be introduced 
in Philadelphia by and at a church, the Fairhill Baptist 
congregation, Lehigh avenue and Fifth street, whose 
members this morning enthusiastically discussed a 
startling scheme of their pastor, the Rev. Dr. Charles 
B. McClellan. 

Last night at the celebration of the tenth anniversary 
of his pastorate, Dr. McClellan proposed "high-class 
vaudeville" as a feature of his Church's work, 
and asked for $10,000 to complete the auditorium for 
winter and provide a roof garden for summer, where 
every Saturday night a moral "variety performance" 
could be given, with moving pictures and ending with 
a Gospel service. Several thousand dollars were subscribed 
and other contributions were made later.— Philadelphia 
Bulletin. 

HOME RELIGION 



Home religion is as important as personal religion, 
and is essential to it. The relationship between parents 
and children grows pure and dear when they all 
kneel together and ask the peace of God to rest on 
their home. Many of us remember the dear old days 
when at the family altar morning and evening prayers 
were offered together, and the Sunday evening hour, 
when we sang hymns, each choosing his favorite. 

Through the whole community the influence of a 
Christian home spreads. The town seems purer, the 
birds sing more sweetly, the flowers bloom more radiantly. 
Joy sings its anthems in such a home as it 
sings in no other place. And if this blessedness is to 
continue, we must shut out all unkindness, bitterness 
and injustice.— Floyd W. Tompkins, D.D. 

THE VULGATE TO BE REVISED 



In a dispatch from Rome the correspondent of the 
London Times says he learns the Pope has issued a 
decree entrusting the entire revision of the Vulgate to 
the Benedictine Order. This is the most important 
decision yet announced as an outcome of the Biblical 
commission appointed toward the end of the pontificate 
of Leo XIIL, the correspondent says. 



R4026 : page 213 



THE INDIANAPOLIS CONVENTION 

OUR numerous Conventions for this year were designed 

to bring the Convention advantages 

within the reach of larger numbers— not only 

as to location but also as to time. The one at Indianapolis, 

Ind., being the first and at an earlier date than 

usual, we feared might be a comparative failure. In 

this, however, we were agreeably disappointed— both 

as respects interest and numbers. About six hundred 

attended, though not all of them from the opening, 

nor could all of them remain until the close. 

The spirit of the Convention was excellent: we 
can scarcely imagine a better. All of the dear friends 
seemed to overflow with true love for our heavenly 
Father and our blessed Redeemer, and for "one 
another." Enemies were not in evidence, but had 
there been we believe that a broad spirit of charity 
and sympathy for their blindness would have hindered 
harsh or unkind words or actions. And if the 
crowd was smaller than at our last General Convention, 
it afforded all the better opportunity for personal 
fellowship. 

The Convention was opened by an address of welcome 
by Brother Wise on behalf of the local Church, 
introducing Brother Herr as the Society's General 
Chairman of the Convention. Then followed a most 
interesting praise and testimony meeting, participated 
in by many. 

At the afternoon session, following a praise service, 
Brother Draper was listened to with close attention. 
He gave an able address, which was much enjoyed. 
His topic was: "Bible Times and Seasons." 

In the evening, after a service of praise and prayer, 
Brother Herr addressed the Convention. 

Saturday's services opened with a prayer, praise 
and testimony meeting in which many with overflowing 
hearts participated. Some long in the way told that 
they were still following on to know the Lord more perfectly 
and were finding more and more of God's perfect 

R4026 : page 214 

peace and love as they sought more and more to heed 
the words and examples of the Lord and the apostles. 
Others told of how they had only recently learned the 
way of the Lord more perfectly and thanked the Lord 
that he had sent the knowledge through the DAWNS, and 
thanked the Colporteurs for their labor of love in bringing 
it to them and told of how they desired by God's 
grace to show their appreciation of the Truth by 
spreading it abroad as thoroughly and as wisely as 
possible, at any cost. One brother intimated that he 
had "always believed these things" and "got them out of 
the Bible for himself." He was gazed at rather incredulously, 
but not replied to publicly. In private one 



brother remarked: "I am glad that God did not give 
these Truths to Brother Russell for himself, but for 
the Church of God in every land and of every tongue." 

Brother Russell arrived in time for a Question 
meeting which lasted from 10 to 11 a.m. As he came 
upon the platform the audience gave him the "Chatauqua 
salute" (waving their handkerchiefs), which he 
returned. This salutation had its start at the Asbury 
Park Convention, we know not how; but it seems to 
have come to stay, even though one person has discovered 
(?) that it is a positive sign of "idolatry" by the 
friends for Brother Russell, and of Brother Russell for 
the friends, because he responds. It is difficult to 
sympathize with dear friends who take such peculiar 
views of the little courtesies of life. True, the Bible 
does not commend the "Chatauqua salute," nor even a 
hand-shake; but who will doubt that either is as harmless 
as the "holy kiss" commended by the Apostle. If 
any one has by word and act cautioned against all 
forms of "idolatry" of leaders, "worshiping messengers," 
etc., surely that one is Brother Russell. Let us 
all, however, seek "the spirit of a sound mind" and 
"moderation" on this and every subject and not run to 
foolish extremes. 

Following the Question meeting came a splendid 
discourse by Brother McPhail on "Heavenly Wisdom." 
The address was an able one, and heard with great attention 
and we trust with profit. 

The Saturday afternoon topic was "Baptism— Its 
Import and Necessity to the Church," by Brother Russell. 
It was followed by a symbolic baptism service in 
the First Baptist Church, at which sixty-five were symbolically 
buried in water. 

The Saturday evening service opened with thirty 
minutes praise and prayer, after which Brother Sullivan 
gave an address on "The Preparedness of the Church." 
— Eph. 4:12. The attention was excellent, and some remarked 
the great profit they had derived from it. 

R4027 : page 214 

Sunday was the principal day of the Convention- 
some attending just for that day, and very cheap excursions 
prevailing. The opening hour was devoted 
to praise and testimony, and then Brother Barton spoke 
on "Spiritual Sicknesses: their Causes and their Cure." 
The correspondency between the two kinds of sickness 
was graphically shown, and cures for the spiritual ailments 
suggested. It was thoroughly enjoyed. 

In the afternoon the public service of the Convention 
drew the largest attendance— estimated at from 
1500 to 2500. The topic was, "The Overthrow of Satan's 
Empire," and Brother Russell was the speaker. The 
audience gave close attention for nearly two hours. 

Sunday evening closed the Convention for many 
who could not remain longer. It was a "Love Feast." 



Eight different speakers discussed Love from various 
standpoints. (1) The Love of God. (2) The Love of 
Christ. (3) Love for the Father and the Son. (4) Love of 
the Brethren. (5) Love in the Home. (6) Love for our 
Neighbors. (7) Love for our Enemies. (8) Love the 
greatest of all Gifts. Brothers C. A. Owen, W. H. Lewellen, 
C. A. Wise, G. Draper, J. P. Martin, G. B. Raymond, 
L. W. Jones and S. J. Arnold were the speakers. 

Then came one of the most interesting scenes. The 
friends filed up and down between the ranks of the 
visiting Pilgrims, local Elders and Colporteurs, singing, 
greeting and partaking of the broken loaves of 
bread held by Pilgrims Herr, Barton, McPhail, Sullivan 
and Draper. Many wept for joy, while some 
smiled. 

Monday was Colporteur Day, but this did not make 
it a day of less interest to all the dear friends of the 
Truth. About 400 were in attendance, about one-fourth 
of whom were Colporteurs and intending Colporteurs. 
Brother Russell addressed them for an hour on "Our 
Ambassadorship"— showing the value of the time of all 
who have consecrated their all to divine service. He 
showed that the British Ambassador's services are valued 
by his government at $60,000 per year or more than 
$20 for every fifteen minutes of an eight-hour day, and 
that our services are valued by our still greater Government 
at a still higher valuation. He said that he 
did not wish to stimulate the self-esteem of the Lord's 
people, for that would spoil them for any part in the 
Lord's favor and service; but he did wish them to 
awaken to the value of their office as "ambassadors for 
God," so that each might strive daily to "redeem the 
time" from worldly, social, business and family affairs 
to be used in joyful service to the honor of our King. 
He pointed out that this redeeming or buying back of 
our time from the cares of this life does not mean the 
neglect of duty, but the wise ordering of life's interests 
so that no time will be wasted in frivolities and extravagances, 
after the manner of the worldly, who are not 
"ambassadors" and have no such message to deliver by 
word and pen and printed page and living epistle. 

In the afternoon Brother Cole gave some valuable 
instructions respecting the necessity of method in successful 
colporteuring. He graphically illustrated the 
proper methods of work, showing how the bicycle can be 
a valuable aid in delivering, and exhibiting attachments 
by which 60 books can be carried without inconvenience. 
Then followed assignments of territory— many 
new Colporteurs forming partnerships and entering 
the work in pairs. 

The last session in the evening was a Colporteur 
testimony meeting and was replete with precious experiences 

R4027 : page 215 

of the joys of the service and appreciation of 



the privilege of self-denials in the cause we love. The 

testimony of several was to the effect that they had 

seen more fruitage to their labors in the past six 

months than during several years preceding— an evidence 

possibly of what may be generally expected in 

every branch of the service for a little while. The zeal 

of the Colporteurs seems to be increasing, too. 



R4027 : page 215 

REPORT OF THE LONDON CONVENTION 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

As probably you know the month of May is in this 
country the time when most of the religious organizations 
and societies have their yearly London meetings 
and they are known as "May meetings." The London 
Convention just past was a May meeting for us, and 
was a grand time of refreshment from the presence of 
the Lord. There were more visitors and more friends 
of the Truth than at any previous convention in this 
country, and, accordingly, there was more of the holy 
Spirit of love manifested; indeed, the Convention was 
a grand testimony to the increase of the Harvest work, 
and of the growth in grace and knowledge of those who 
are walking in the light now given to the consecrated. 
How we wished that all the Lord's children were sharing 
with us in the things our Master is now spreading 
before us! It was good to be there; the light of heaven 
shone in the faces of the brethren, and the joy of the 
Lord seemed to fill each heart. Yet there seemed, at 
least to the writer, to be more solemnity. Probably 
the clearer realization of the end of the Harvest, and 
the need for cleansing from all defilement of the flesh 
and spirit were effectual to this. From first to last 
there was a "waiting upon the Lord," and our expectations 
were more than filled. 

This time the Convention was held in the heart of 
the city, in a fine hall attached to the Cannon St. Railway 
hotel. The hall usually seats over 800, but would 
at pressure hold 1000. It proved just a convenient 
size for us, but gave us little liberty for advertising. 
Perhaps the largest number present would be 850, when 
Brother Edgar gave an address on "Where are the 
Dead?" The average number of brethren and friends 
and partly interested would be 500-600. I remember 
that when you were here in 1903 and we were looking 
at the room for the first meeting, a room which would 
hold 400 at a crush, I said I was afraid it would be too 
small. You said you would be surprised if that should 
be the case. The room was well filled, though. When 
you come next year, if the Lord will, I think the fine 
hall we have just had may be too small. So much is 
the Lord blessing his work, and for so much we praise 



him! 

The Convention was opened by a welcome from 
Brother Hemery and a word from Brother Williamson 
as your representatives— Brother Williamson in a more 
personal sense as coming directly from you. Brother 
J. Hay then gave an address, "Jehovah's Suffering Servant," 
and later, Brother Hemery gave a talk on the 
"Songs of Degrees." Sunday was spent in praise and 
testimony, and in listening to addresses by Brother 
Edgar and Brother Williamson; their topics were, respectively, 
"Rest and Restitution" and "The Divine 
Plan Revealed in God's Attributes." On Monday 58 
brethren (30 brothers and 28 sisters) symbolized their 
consecration by immersion. We praised the Lord for 
them, and prayed for them and for ourselves, that we 
all may be kept by the grace of God, and that we may 
be accounted worthy to stand in our lot. In the afternoon 
Brother Johnston spoke of the "Feasts of the 
Lord," and in the evening Brother Edgar gave the address 
already referred to. Earlier in the afternoon 
Brother Williamson spoke of the need of laborers in 
the harvest field, and many who wished to take some 
part in the Colporteur work signified their intention to 
shape their affairs to assist them to that end. We hope 
the dear brethren will use such opportunities as the 
Lord shall permit them to have, for there is very much 
yet to be done before the field is gone over. Tuesday 
brought us a very helpful address from Brother Williamson 
on the necessity of embroidering our garment 
with faith, fortitude, love: and an address by Brother 
Hemery on "Christ, a Priest after the Order of Melchisedec." 
The closing of the Convention was one of its 
most impressive features. We asked Brother Williamson 
to give us an illustration of the "good-bye" said in 
the American conventions. In this way, instead of 
merely singing a good-bye, we sang it and spoke it to 
each other. One lady who came to that last meeting was 
so taken with the spirit of it that she, too, came round 
with the brethren to shake hands with the speakers 
and elders of the meetings represented. Afterwards 
she said it was all so unusual she could hardly understand 
it; she said, "Surely the Millennium has begun 
in you people," and we assured her that was just the 
case. 

Before the final parting a message of love was sent 
to you, dear brother, and the meeting arose to signify 
its wish to have the message sent. We all wish your 
spiritual prosperity, and pray that grace and strength 
abundant may be yours. 

"As the mountains are round about Jerusalem, so 
the Lord is round about his people from henceforth even 
forever."— Psa. 135:2. 

I am, dear Brother Russell, yours in his grace, 
J. HEMERY. 



R4028 : page 215 

THE TRUTH IN JAPAN 

DEAR MR. RUSSELL:- 

God gave me, at the opening of the New Year, a 
quiet time in which to renew my consecration to him, 
and to pray for more light. It was, I believe, in answer 
to such prayer that I was led to read your MILLENNIAL 
DAWN, the first volume of which has stood 
unheeded on my book-case for eight years. I read it 
through three times with growing wonder. How the 
truth now, as never before, shines out from God's 
Word! How it transcends anything that I had ever 
thought of! Eternity will not be long enough to praise 
him for just this knowledge of his wondrous grace. 
I want to be found faithful hereafter in manner of living, 
and in helping to make known the precious Truth 
to others. 

To begin with, I should tell you that I have been 

R4028 : page 216 

for nearly twenty-five years a member of the West Japan 
Presbyterian Mission. I have already written to 
the Foreign Mission Board in New York, as well as to 
my local home Church, stating my changed views— or, 
rather, referring them to your books. This will end— 
if not on their part, then on mine— in a separation; 
because duty (and privilege) is much clearer to me now 
on this point than it was even at the time I wrote to 
them. Since separation, then, is only a matter 
of time, I feel justified in writing to you in advance of 
it, in order to confer with you about the work. Your 
answer and a final settlement with my Board will thus 
doubtless come about the same time. 

There are three alternatives which suggest themselves 
to me: 

(1) That I accept from the Board traveling expenses 
and return to America, and there enter (if I 

may) the Colporteur work. But in order to avail myself 
of the Board's ticket, I would have to sail, in all 
probability, not later than August. This will explain 
my haste in communicating with you. 

(2) That I remain in Japan, find some employment 
as a means of support and teach these precious truths 
as far as opportunities offer or can be made. But at 
best it would be a very limited effort that I could make 
in that way. (a) Time would be limited, (b) Travel 
would also be impracticable, except at long intervals. 
But travel would, I believe, be one of the essentials to 
the accomplishment of any considerable work here. 
(c) Want of literature, in Japanese, on these truths, 
would be greatly felt, and would itself be a very serious 
limitation. 



(3) The third alternative is impossible, unless you 
could supply financial aid from America. It is this: 
That I remain here and oversee the translation and 
publication of "The Plan of the Ages," and also of some 
of your tracts. The tracts could be done first. I could 
thus begin colporteuring at once. As to the book, I 
have enquired into the expense, etc., of getting it out. 
Following is the result:— 

Cost of translation $ 50.00 gold 

Cost of printing 1000 copies (500 pages each in 
Japanese) stiff paper covers 225.00 " 

$275.00 " 

The translation could be done by a Christian Japanese 
whom I know, a man of literary taste and experience 
in translating. His price ($50.00) is about half 
what such work would command if done by a professional 
translator. The undertaking would necessarily 
be in the nature of an experiment. Humanly speaking, 
the demand would have to be created. But there are 
in Japan (see statistics for 1906) 44,228 professing 
Christians (Protestant). Some of them are God's humble, 
consecrated, children longing for a better understanding 
of the things of the Kingdom. 

The third alternative is the one that most appeals 
to me. I cannot think that God intends to leave the 
Japanese Christians without a witness of his special 
revelation for these last days. But if he intends me to 
be such a witness here, he will surely open up the way. 
He seems to have shut me up to your answer, and I 
shall expect to abide by that answer, unless in the 
meantime he gives me some other indication. 

I am wholly in the dark as to your methods with 
workers, but I have sent for "Hints to Colporteurs." 
Any good working plan, however, will be satisfactory 
to me. Will you kindly explain the work of the 
"Pilgrims"? 

May I ask you to kindly tell me, when you write, 
whether you know of others in Japan who hold a "like 
precious faith," and if so who they are? 

Most sincerely and with gratitude, 
A. G.,— Japan. 



R4028 : page 216 

THE TABERNACLE OF MEETING 

-EXODUS 40:l-13,34-38.-AUGUST 4.- 

Golden Text:— "Then a cloud covered the tent of the congregation, 
and the glory of the Lord filled the Tabernacle." 



OUR Berean Studies of the Tabernacle have familiarized 
us with the main features of this lesson. In 
the Tabernacle Shadows of Better Sacrifices we 
learned of the form, size, construction, etc., of the Tabernacle 
which God directed the Israelites through Moses their 
mediator to erect for his worship. It was portable, and 
every way suited to the forty-years journey in the wilderness 
which the Lord foreknew would be their portion as a 
people. Whenever they encamped the Tabernacle was 
erected as the center of the camp and the tents of the Israelites 
were grouped about it: first the tribe of Levi, immediately 
surrounding it, divided into its various families; outside 
of the Levites were the tribes of Israel— on the north 
three tribes, on the south three tribes, on the east three 
tribes, on the west three tribes. Joseph's tribe being divided 
into two, Ephraim and Manasseh, made the twelve complete 
without the Levites. 

The pillar of cloud by day and the pillar of fire by 
night continued to be the representation of the Lord with 
his chosen people, and this cloud and fire-pillar seem to 
have been associated with the Tabernacle in the sense that 
a branch or foot came down from the cloud to the Tabernacle. 
When it left it indicated that the time had come for 
them to travel. They followed the leading of the cloud: 
when it stayed they rested, constructed their camp, and a 
connection established itself as before between the cloud 
and the tabernacle. Thus Israel had continually before 
them a manifestation of God and his protecting care over 
them as his people. They had craved an idol to go before 
them and to serve as an outward manifestation of God; they 
had been punished for the idolatry implied in the making 
of the golden calf; they had learned the lesson and repented, 
and God had given them what he had already planned- 
something far superior in the way of an evidence of his 
presence in their midst and his guidance of their affairs. 

GOD FIRST-THE CENTER 

From the arrangement of the Tabernacle and its relationship 
to the camp of Israel we can see that the lesson to 
that people must have been God first— religion the center of 
all ambition and activity. All the tribes were related to the 

R4028 : page 217 

Tabernacle because it represented God, and they were all 
related to each other because they were each and all surrounding 
and directly in contact with this Tabernacle of 
God. There they and all their interests touched and centered. 
And thus it must be for Spiritual Israel, whoever, 
wherever, whenever. Whoever comes into harmony with the 
divine arrangement will find such an ordering of divine 
providence as will bring him into touch with all others who 
are in fellowship with the Father and his glorious plan. 
It is in vain that we seek to have order in the Church 
or harmony with the brethren except as this common center 



is recognized. If all look to the Lord for guidance then 
all are ready for his providential leading, whether it be to 
move or to stay. If all look to the Lord for their laws 
and government and guidance in all of life's affairs, then 
all may be in harmony the one with the other, as recognizing 
the same central standard of divine atonement. But if 
this central authority be ignored, or in proportion as it may 
be ignored, there will be discord and conflict. Undoubtedly 
this is the difficulty with many of the Lord's people who are 
striving for peace and harmony and meaning well in their 
hearts. They fail to recognize the Lord and his Word as 
their standard, and fail to appeal to this standard only in 
cases of dispute. 

THE HUMAN BRAIN SIMILARLY ORDERED 

Without claiming that Phrenology has reached a perfection 
of development— without claiming that any has 
learned to read accurately from the shape of the human 
skull the various traits of character therein represented, 
even while admitting that such a reading of character might 
be defective, and particularly so with those whose characters 
have been transformed by the renewing of their mind through 
the begettal of the holy Spirit— nevertheless we may admit 
that Phrenology so far as understood fully corroborates the 
picture given us in the arrangement of the Tabernacle of 
Israel surrounded by the camp. Thus:— 

If we imagine the human skull as spread out flat, we 
find that the central part would correspond to the Tabernacle 
and its court; for in the very center of the head on 
top lies spirituality, and directly in front of it lies veneration. 

R4029 : page 217 

The latter organ would correspond well to the court, 

the former to the holy. As to enter the holies it was necessary 

to pass through the court, so to enter into a proper heart-appreciation 

of the spiritual things it is necessary that we 

enter in through veneration, reverence for God, which will 

lead us to worship him and to seek to know and to do his 

will. 

Surrounding these two central organs are others which 
correspond well to the different divisions of the tribe of 
Levi— the sacred tribe devoted to the service of God in the 
court and in the Tabernacle. These organs represent faith, 
hope, benevolence, conscientiousness, firmness, etc., and then 
outside of these again come the various organs of the mind, 
which have to do more particularly with earthly things. 
These, useful and valuable in themselves, all need to be 
controlled and guided from the center. Even as in the camp 
of Israel, the center, the Tabernacle, was not controlled by 
the tribes, but the tribes were controlled and guided from 
the Tabernacle. Thus all the talents and qualities of mind 
and body which we possess, and which are all represented 
in our brains, are all to be subject to and guided by our reverence 
for God and our spiritual perception of his will concerning 



us, which will is to be expressed primarily through 

the intermediary organs of benevolence, faith, hope, conscience, 

etc. 

CONVERSION THUS ILLUSTRATED 

Thus may be illustrated the philosophy of what is 
known as conversion. Thank God it has not been necessary 
to understand the philosophy of conversion in order to 
have and to enjoy that blessing, otherwise very few would 
have been thus blessed. But it will be of advantage to some 
to be able to analyze the philosophy of conversion and to see 
how beautiful and how reasonable a matter it is. The natural 
man, "without God and without hope in the world," is 
like the Israelites as a Jewish horde when in Egypt, disordered, 
incongruous, slaves to sin, laboring under taskmasters, 
and knowing not how to escape. The first step toward 
order is the hearing of the Word of the Lord directing our 
course to the promised land, out of bondage. This implies 
the recognition of Moses, the leader whom God has appointed, 
and obedience to him in fleeing away from sin. 

A time must elapse, whether a moment or year, in which 
the enslaved one realizes his liberty accomplished by God 
through the hands of the great antitypical Moses, and thus 
he is brought finally to a hearing of the law, to a realization 
that even though all of his past were forgotten he would 
be unable to keep perfectly the divine law because of the 
weakness of his own flesh. To this point the divine arrangement 
is indicated, namely, that to all those who consecrate 
themselves to the Lord a begetting of the holy Spirit 
will be granted, and they will be inducted into favors and 
blessings of the Lord and assistances from him hitherto unknown. 
This is conversion— the acceptance of the Lord 
and his will as instead of self-will— in all of life's affairs: 
the full consecration of heart and life, time and talents, to 
the Lord, and the recognition of Christ as our Head or High 
Priest, our Advocate or assistant in all these matters. 

The transformation which then takes place corresponds 
to the setting in order of the tribes in relationship to the 
Tabernacle. The Tabernacle was recognized as the center 
of the camp and each tribe had its own place in relationship 
to it, sometimes here and sometimes there. There was no 
longer any confusion as to one tribe choosing this or that 
location, sometimes in a preferred position and sometimes in 
a less preferred position; henceforth each tribe had its own 
position, its own responsibility and its own relationship to 
the Tabernacle. 

ORDER IS HEAVEN'S FIRST LAW 

So with the converted heart and head. Previously 
sometimes selfishness would be in the center and in control, 
sometimes conscience, sometimes acquisitiveness, sometimes 
hope and sometimes fear would occupy the center, around 
which the various organs would group themselves. But now, 
as soon as the heart is given to the Lord, his organization 



and his arrangement is recognized, and the various powers 

of mind and body represented in our brains are fixed in 

their relationship to the central ones, which henceforth become 

R4029 : page 218 

the dominating ones and always occupy the prominent 
place of authority. To the truly converted, consecrated 
Christian, the center from which will proceed all the arrangements 
of life must be spirituality, which corresponds to the 
holies in the center of Israel's camp. 

This implies veneration for God. Henceforth the various 
organs must all look to this common center for direction. 
Acquisitiveness might say how wealth might be acquired, 
but has no authority to move until first the message shall be 
received from spirituality and veneration. And this authority 
must be passed on through the first circle, represented 
by the Levites: benevolence will have a word to say, so will 
conscience, so will faith and hope, as to whether or not acquisitiveness 
may take possession as it proposes. And benevolence, 
faith, hope and conscience will all surely inquire of 
the Lord through veneration, spirituality, as to what is the 
will or mind of the Lord on the subject before giving permission 
to acquisitiveness to act as proposed. 

Combativeness is another of these organs which used to 
be at times a central one commanding the others, but now 
it is relegated to its proper place on the outside, at a distance 
from the center; it cannot act until authority is granted, 
and the authority can only come through benevolence, 
faith, hope, conscience, etc., and these again must inquire of 
veneration and spirituality as to whether or not it would be 
the proper thing for combativeness to gird on its sword and 
take the field, and what and how much it may do in any 
event. If the cause be good permission will be granted, if 
the cause be evil permission will be refused, and the organ 
of firmness will see to it that the decisions of the central 
court are carried out by all the outlying members. 

For instance, if combativeness is aroused and wishes to 
cooperate with selfishness or acquisitiveness in any form, the 
decision from the central court will be, No! Combativeness 
may never be exercised selfishly; but if combativeness 
be aroused in cooperation with conscientiousness for a defence 
of the faith once delivered to the saints, the decision 
from the central court will be, Yes! contend earnestly for 
the faith once delivered to the saints. Nevertheless benevolence, 
love, cooperating with caution, will be detailed to see 
to it that combativeness shall not, even in defence of the 
faith delivered to the saints, take a harsh and aggressive 
form of action, but shall be supervised by benevolence, love. 

No wonder that worldly people have been astonished to 
find so radical a change of character and life on the part of 
some who have come into harmony with the Lord through a 
full consecration of their hearts to him— some whose minds 
have been reordered, transformed by the renewing of their 
wills— by the placing of all the qualities of their hearts and 
minds in control of and in harmony with the Lord. 



We sometimes speak of conversion as though it worked a 
miracle, because its operations worked so wonderful a 
change in our hearts and lives and sentiments by bringing 
them under the new management, under the control of the 
Spirit of the Lord, the spirit of love, the spirit of wisdom, 
the spirit of a sound mind. 

THE GLORY OF THE LORD FILLED THE TABERNACLE 

In the lesson before us, when the Tabernacle had been 
constructed and the tents of the Israelites had been ordered 
in harmony therewith, the first important event was God's 
recognition of it. This is referred to in the thirty-fourth 
verse of our lesson in these words, "Then the cloud covered 
the tent of meeting, and the glory of the Lord filled the 
Tabernacle." It was called the Tabernacle of the congregation, 
or more properly the tent of meeting, not because the 
Israelites met there as a congregation, not because it was 
their meeting house, but because they were a holy, separate 
house or people of God, and in this tent in the center of 
their camp God made his dwelling-place, and it was here 
that he met the children of Israel by receiving and communicating 
with their representatives of the tribe of Levi, 
through whom, by the Urim and Thummim, the divine will 
was communicated. Applying this now to us individually, 
as Spiritual Israelites: When our conversion took place it 
meant not only the ordering of our minds in accord with the 
Lord, placing spirituality and veneration first— in the center 
of our affections— but it meant more than this. 

This much we were to do and did do under direction 
of the Lord's Word. But God then did something more, 
something very necessary for us, viz., by his holy Spirit we 
were begotten again to a newness of mind. In other words, 
the heart which thus ordered itself according to the divine 
instruction of the Word God recognized. He took up his 
abode with us, and our meeting-place with him, represented 
in the organ of spirituality, was blessed by the Lord and 
lightened. The glory of the Lord filled us. We realized to 
some extent that we were accepted of the Lord, and the enlightenment 
of the holy Spirit has since then been with us, 
an ever-present help and guide: a pillar of cloud, it has 
blessed us by day in shielding us from the things that would 
be too trying for us; a pillar of fire by night, it has granted 
us enlightenment in darkness, and the keeping, protecting 
power of him who has promised that all things shall work 
together for our good because we are his and love him and 
have placed him first in our hearts, and are thus amongst 

R4030 : page 218 

the called ones according to his purpose. Thus the new will 
ordained of God and instructed from his Word may, as the 
priest in each of us, have intercourse with the Father in the 
merit of the great atonement sacrifice. 

And this new will, consecrated, anointed, set apart, may 
bring out the wise decisions of God in respect to all the 



other organs of our bodies, and show what each may and 
may not do, and how each may or may not cooperate with 
the others, and which should be restrained and when, and 
which should be cultivated and how, that the whole body 
may be full of light, full of order, full of divine blessing, 
and that as the people of God we might go onward from 
grace to grace, from knowledge to knowledge, from strength 
to strength, and be prepared for the everlasting conditions 
beyond Jordan in the promised land to which we are journeying 
—the heavenly city. 

A TYPE OF THE FUTURE ALSO 

This arrangement of the Tabernacle was not a permanent 
one. It pictured rather the conditions of this Gospel 
Age, so far at least as the Church is concerned— the Royal 
Priesthood, who are now permitted to enter the holies as 
members of the great High Priest, Jesus, and who during the 
Millennial Age will with him guide all the people of God 

R4030 : page 219 

who are willing to be led into the grand eternal rest 

which remains for them. During the Millennium all 

who desire to become true Israelites, to come into full harmony 

with the Lord, will find a place in the divine plan: 

the Royal Priesthood first, nearest the Lord, yea, even at the 

very gates of his favor, even as the priests encamped immediately 

in front of the gateway into the Tabernacle courts; 

and next to these will come the Great Company, as represented 

by the Levites in general; and in due course all the families 

of the earth will come into harmonious order, all looking 

to God, all seeking to walk in the light of God's favor, 

and ultimately there shall be no more sighing, no more crying, 

no more dying, because all lovers of sin will have been 

cut off in the Second Death, and because all others will 

have come to a full harmony with God through the ministrations 

of the priesthood. 



"I THAT SPEAK AM HE" 
JOHN 4:26; 9:37 

She came, the thirsty one, to fill her pitcher, 

And found a stranger sitting on the brink; 
And while she poured for him the well's refreshment, 

He gave the precious cup of life to drink. 
And when she wondered at her life's revealing, 

And if Messiah deeper depths could see, 
He graciously her rising faith encouraged,— 

"I that speak to thee am he." 

And so when we, blest Master, come all empty 
To fountains we but drink, and drink, in vain, 



Be thou with satisfying waters waiting, 

That we may drink and never thirst again. 

Our wayward hearts' true inwardness disclosing, 
Constrain our timid faith to hope in thee, 

And let us hear again the gracious message— 
"I that speak to thee am he." 

They turned him from the synagogue accursed, 

Whose gift of sight the Savior had bestowed; 
And, burning under grief and indignation, 

He sought again the well-remembered road. 
And while he mused upon his kindly patron, 

And if he could indeed Messiah be, 
Lo, One with beaming countenance addressed him, 

"I that speak to thee am he." 

And so, dear Lord, when our dim eyes are opened, 

And one-time friends thy healing power despise, 
Be thou anear with words of cheer and comfort, 

To grant our saddest hour a glad surprise. 
And when life's subtle mysteries perplex us, 

Unlock to us with faith's unfailing key, 
That we may hear from out the open portals, 

"I that speak to thee am he." 

The proud and haughty still a sign requiring, 

In vain the zenith and horizon scan, 
While walks among them One with vesture girded, 

To wield the purging and discerning fan. 
But he who humbly treads the path of duty, 

With eyes unsealed shall his Deliv'rer see; 
His trial hour shall brighten with this token— 

"I that speak to thee am he." — R. B. Henninges 



R4030 : page 219 

OFFERERS OF STRANGE FIRE 

-LEVITICUS 10: 1-11. -AUGUST 11.- 

Golden Text:— "Wine is a mocker, strong drink is raging, 
and whosoever is deceived thereby is not wise."— Prov. 20: 1 

ABOUT a year had passed since the Israelites had left 

Egypt— a year of training under the direction of 

the Lord through his servant Moses— a year 

of special evidence of divine mercy and favor toward 

Israel. Their first-born, miraculously delivered from the 

tenth plague, had been accepted by the Lord as his priestly 

tribe, to serve the cause of the Lord and to minister to the people 

as his representatives. Mount Sinai's experiences with 

the giving of the Law were in the past. The setting up of 

the Tabernacle, with its symbolical posts and curtains and 

furnishments, had been accomplished; the glory of the Lord 



had rested upon it, as indicating that he was with his people 
to guide in all their affairs and to bring them eventually 
to the promised land. The priests had been installed 
in office and the service of the Tabernacle started. 

At this time, while the Israelites were rejoicing in their 
divinely appointed religious arrangements and the priests in 
their special relationship to the divine program, an incident occurred 
which caused an awe and reverence for the holy things: 
a disobedience to the minute instructions of the priests brought 
upon the two eldest sons of Aaron condign punishment- 
instant death. Awe-stricken and fearful, Aaron and his 
other sons would have gladly relinquished all further service 
of the Tabernacle lest they themselves should similarly 
suffer death through some transgression of the divine 
commands. 

But Moses, the mediator and direct representative of 
God, commanded that they must not do this— they must not 
desert their service. He pointed out to them that the holy 
anointing oil was upon them, and that their entire danger 
lay in deserting, and that they were entirely safe so long 
as they heeded carefully the divine regulations. He forbade 
that they should even make lamentation over the deceased, 
since their death was a divine judgment, and to have bewailed 
them would have implied a rebellion against their 
great King, who had undoubtedly dealt justly with them. 
Thus at the beginning of their religious services the people 
of Israel were taught that they must approach the Lord with 
reverence and that obedience is better than sacrifice. 

WHERE JUSTICE AND MERCY MEET 

A similar lesson, we recall, was taught at the beginning 
of this Gospel Age, when Ananias and Sapphira were 
stricken dead because of false pretense in misrepresenting 
their gifts to the Lord and his cause. Both of these judgments 
seem to be severe. There is a seeming lack of 
mercy in both instances. We are inclined to ask, Why did 
not God have compassion upon these first transgressors, and 
merely reprove them and give them a second opportunity? 
We answer that the lessons taught in these two judgments 
were much more impressive than they could otherwise have 
been; and as for a second chance, it is our opinion that 

R4030 : page 220 

both parties will be thus favored. For instance, in the case 

of Ananias and Sapphira, we doubt if they ever had the 

full consecration of heart, or ever really came to the full 

knowledge of the truth which would make them responsible 

for their conduct and liable to the Second Death. Our surmise 

is that they were well-intentioned, but not begotten of 

the holy Spirit, and that the Lord made an illustration of 

them without special injury to themselves, but for the advantage 

of his consecrated people at that time and ever 

since, illustrating the facts that the Lord knoweth them that 

are his, that nothing is hidden from his sight, and that it is 



in vain that any would attempt to deceive him. 

Similarly we have no thought that the two sons of 
Aaron passed into the Second Death. Theirs was only a 
typical anointing to the typical priesthood, and their death 
we similarly understand to be typical, an illustration of 
some of the antitypical priests who will perish from the 
priesthood because of disobedience to the divine direction. 
As for Nadab and Abihu, our supposition is that in the resurrection 
morning they will be amongst the great world of 
mankind who will come forth unto a resurrection by judgments 
—by disciplines. By disobedience they merited the 
loss of the present life, and God made use of the circumstances 
to give a lesson to the people of that time that would 
hinder them from being careless in the handling of holy 
things, to the intent that the types and shadows of their dispensation 
might be handed down to us in their purity, and 
as a type or illustration to us of the Royal Priesthood 
respecting two classes amongst us represented by these two 
priests. 

TWO CLASSES REPRESENTED BY NADAB AND ABIHU 

Since the priests, the Tabernacle and all the services 
connected were particular types, foreshadowings of higher 
and better things, it follows that the death of these two sons 
of Aaron must have a typical signification. They must typify 
persons who lose their standing in the antitypical priesthood, 
some who fail to make their calling and election sure, 
some who were originally accepted and anointed as members 
of the Body of the great High Priest, but who lose that glorious 
position because of failure to follow the divine directions. 
The Scriptures tell us of three ultimate divisions of 
those originally accepted of the Lord as members of the 
Body of Christ and anointed with the holy Spirit. 

(1) The faithful, who will come off more than conquerors 
and constitute the Very Elect, the Royal Priesthood 

of the Millennial Age. 

(2) A "great company, whose number is known to no 
man"— who, failing to be of the little flock, rejected from 
the priestly office, but nevertheless refusing to deny the 
Lord, will ultimately constitute the servants of Christ in 
glory, the antitypical Levites. 

(3) Another class of the consecrated who will fail to 
appreciate and properly use the Lord's favors, and under the 
tests prove entirely unworthy of eternal life, and fall into 

the hands of the living God for utter destruction in the Second 
Death. 

If an attempt were made to indicate these three classes 
amongst the sons of Aaron by proportionate numbers it 
would apparently have necessitated one of the five representing 
the little flock, three of the five representing the 
"great company," and the other one to represent those who 
would go into the Second Death. But such an illustration 

R4031 : page 220 



was not made and would not have been consistent with the 
divine plan, for it evidently was not intended to indicate in 
any manner what proportion would go into the Second 
Death nor what proportion would fail of the priesthood and 
go into the "great company." On the other hand, to suppose 
that both the priests who died typified those who 
would go into the Second Death would imply that two-fifths 
of all the consecrated would perish. Besides, it would leave 
the type incomplete in that it would make no showing of 
the "great company," who consecrated and were accepted 
as priests, but who failed to prove faithful to the end, failed 
to become members of the Royal Priesthood of the 
Kingdom. 

It is for these reasons that we understand the two 
priests set before us in this lesson to represent the two 
classes who will fail to make their calling and election sure 
as members of the Body of the great High Priest of glory. 
Nadab we understand to represent those who will fall from 
the priestly office to the Levitical, as members of the "great 
company." In allowing one priest to represent each of 
these classes nothing is indicated respecting the proportionate 
numbers of either, but simply the fact that there will be 
two classes who will fail of the grace of God after they have 
been anointed with the holy anointing oil for membership 
in the Royal Priesthood. 

It seems to us consistent to thus represent by one person 
each two classes, whose numbers are not definitely fixed 
by the divine decree, but merely composed of those who fail 
to give heed and to rightly use their blessings and opportunities. 
The names of these two sons who died may be construed 
in harmony with these suggestions. Nadab signifies 
spontaneous, self-acting, and suggests to us the class who 
will go into the Second Death because of their self-will— 
their failure to hold the Head. As for the one who we believe 
represented the "great company," his name, Abihu, signifies 
son of God. This, too, seems appropriate. The "great 
company," like the little flock, are begotten of the holy 
Spirit and will be born of the Spirit— sons of God on a 
spirit plane, though not on the divine plane. They are 
thus, as well as the little flock, differentiated from the remainder 
of mankind, who will be recognized as the sons of 
Christ— receiving their lives by restitution from him who 
bought them with his precious blood. 

OFFERING STRANGE FIRE-NOT COMMANDED 

The crime for which the two sons of Aaron died is described 
in the same terms yet not with particularity. We 
do not know whether their transgression consisted in taking 
an improper kind of incense or in failing to take fire from 
the altar or burning the incense in the wrong place— perhaps 
in the court instead of the holy— or whether it may 
have been the proper incense with the proper fire and in 
the proper place at the wrong time; nor can we know that 
both of the offending priests did exactly the same thing. 

Some have surmised that the error was in respect to 



attempting to enter the Most Holy on the Day of Atonement, 
when the High Priest alone was permitted to enter with the 

R4031 : page 221 

blood of the sin-offering. The lesson to the remaining 

priests in the type was the necessity for greater carefulness, 

greater reverence for the Lord and the particular directions 

by which they might be his servants and come into his presence 

and be his ministers to the people. The lesson to us, 

the antitypical priesthood, would be a similar one— that 

obedience is better than sacrifice, and that the sacrifices we 

offer in order to be acceptable must be presented in harmony 

with the divine will, and that any other procedure on 

our part will cause the loss of our membership in the Royal 

Priesthood. 

There is a similarity as well as a difference between 
the errors of those who will constitute the "Great Company" 
and the errors of those of the consecrated who will be condemned 
to the Second Death. Their errors are the same in 
that they fail to sufficiently respect the stipulations of the 
divine arrangement. Both fail to offer the kind of incense 
that the Lord directed— self-sacrifice and praise to him, with 
which sacrifice God is well pleased. (Heb. 13:15,16.) The 
difference, however, between those who will constitute the 
"Great Company" and those of this age who will die the 
Second Death is that the latter ignore Christ and the merit 
of his sacrifice on their behalf, counting his blood a common 
thing, and doing despite to the favor brought to them thereby. 
The other class escape the Second Death and become 
the "Great Company," not because they have offered proper 
incense unto the Lord, but because they do not deny, do not 
reject, but maintain their hold upon the foundations of their 
faith, the merit of Christ's sacrifice on their behalf. 

"SHE MADE ALL NATIONS DRUNK" 

The fact that immediately after this narrative of the 
death of Nadab and Abihu the command was given to Aaron 
and his sons that they should drink no wine nor strong 
drink, etc., gives some ground for the supposition that the 
two sons who perished had been somewhat intoxicated, or 
at least stupefied through strong drink, and that thus their 
senses were more or less beclouded in respect to the commands 
of the Lord concerning the offering of incense. This 
putting away of intoxicants is described as putting a difference 
between the holy and the common, between the 
clean and the unclean. 

There is no doubt whatever that literal intoxicants were 
referred to by our Lord in this command, but applying it antitypically 
we find that a different kind of intoxicants is 
likely to affect the antitypical priests. We agree, of course, 
that the words of the Apostle are applicable to all of the 
Royal Priesthood, "Be not drunk with wine wherein is excess, 
but be ye filled with the Spirit." We cannot, however, 
apply the matter literally to the Royal Priesthood and say 



that no one who is connected with the antitypical Tabernacle 
and its services could taste of wine without a violation 
of the divine law; because our great High Priest himself 
partook of wine. In seeking, therefore, for the antitypical 
significations of the command that they should use neither 
wine nor strong drink, we find it intimated in the declaration 
of Revelation that Great Babylon made all nations 
drunk with the wine of her false doctrine and confusion of 
spiritual and political interests. 

Undoubtedly the confusion of doctrine which prevails 
is to some extent responsible for the failure of the "great 
company" class to offer acceptable incense. As we get rid 
of the confusion of mind introduced by the false doctrines 
of the "dark ages"— the "doctrines of devils" as the Apostle 
describes them— we find that our clearer thoughts are indeed 
a great advantage to us in respect to a proper understanding 
of what would be pleasing and acceptable to the Lord our 
God as our sacrifices or incense before him. Intoxicated 
with the errors of the past, many of us doubtless offer to the 
Lord "strange fire," strange incense, such as he has not commanded. 
To continue so to do would seem to imply that 
we would ultimately be amongst those who would fail to 
reach the glorious priesthood. Most heartily, therefore, do 
we thank the Lord that we are getting sobered up— that to 
us is returning through the nutriment of his Word the spirit 
of a sound mind, that more and more we are coming to 
comprehend with all saints the lengths and breadths and 
heights and depths of his love, and thus are the better qualified 
day by day to know the good, the acceptable, the perfect 
will of God, and to make our offerings in harmony 
therewith. 

WHOSOEVER IS DECEIVED BY WINE IS NOT WISE 

While the "Royal Priests" are in more danger from the 
symbolic wine than from the natural, and hence need to be 
more on guard against it, nevertheless an occasional reminder 
of the dangers that lurk in the literal wine is safe. It is 
especially well that all see clearly the value of example, 
particularly upon the young. And the better the Christian 
and the greater his knowledge of God's Word, the greater 
his influence either for good or evil. Hence the force of the 
Apostle's words, "What manner of persons ought we to be?" 
On this phase of the subject we content ourself with quotations 
from the pens of others, as follows:— 

Prof. Marcus Dods says of College athletics:— "Trainers 
for athletics act according to St. Paul's rule, Every man 
that striveth for the mastery is temperate in all things.' Not 
only during the contest, but during the long preparation for 
it. The one in training must not touch cigarettes or liquor. 
The little indulgences which some men allow themselves he 
must forego. Not once will he break the trainer's rules, for he 
knows that some competitors will refrain from even that once, 
and gain strength while he is losing it. He is proud of his little 
hardships and fatigues and privations, and counts it a point 



of honor scrupulously to abstain from anything which might 
in the slightest degree diminish his chances of success." 

Coleman in the Independent says:— "A number of 
gentlemen in the State of New York came together to value 
certain parcels of land which were to be offered at public 
sale. They agreed unanimously upon the sum they were 
worth; but upon the day of the sale the owner cunningly 
treated them to alcoholic drinks, and one of them bid and 
actually paid four times as much for the property as he or 
any other man in his right senses thought it worth. A 
temperance man, having some standing timber to be disposed 
of at public sale, decided that he would not furnish 
alcoholic liquors to the bidders, as was the custom in that 
day. The auctioneer replied: 'I am sorry, for you will 
lose a great deal of money. I know how it works, for after 
the men have been drinking the trees look much larger to 
them than they did before.' A vendue master in Connecticut 
said: 'I have often in this way got more than ten times 

R4032 : page 222 

the value of the drinks I have furnished.' Horse jockeys, 
gamblers, thieves, wholesale merchants and commercial 
travelers often furnish alcoholic drinks for the same 
purpose." 

"Doctor Arnot, the famous Scotch preacher, once used 
this striking illustration on the total abstinence question: 
There are plenty of men, and women, too, who proudly say, 
I am not obliged to sign away my liberty in order to keep 
on the safe side.' To such people Dr. Arnot says: 'True, 
you are not obliged; but here is a river we have to cross. 
It is broad, and deep, and rapid; whoever falls into it is 
sure to be drowned. Here is a narrow footbridge, a single 
timber extending across. He who is lithe of limb and 
steady of brain and nerve, may skip over it in safety. Yonder 
is a broad, strong bridge. Its foundations are solid 
rock, and its passages are wide. All may cross it in perfect 
safety— the aged and feeble, the young and gay, the tottering 
wee ones— there is no danger there. "Now," you say, "I 
am not obliged to go yonder. Let them go there who cannot 
walk this timber." True, true, you are not obliged; but 
we know that if we cross that timber, though we may go 
safely, many others who will attempt to follow us will surely 
perish, and we feel better to go by the bridge! Walking a 
narrow footbridge over a raging torrent is risky business, 
but it is safety itself compared with tampering with strong 
drink.'" 



R4032 : page 222 

ENCOURAGING WORDS FROM FAITHFUL WORKERS 
DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 



You will undoubtedly rejoice to know that your 
visit to our city has given new and increased impetus 
to the Colporteur work here. We come in contact daily 
with some who heard the afternoon address on "To 
Hell and Back" or have heard reports of same, and it 
has awakened a desire to investigate these new doctrines, 
and it gives us the delightful privilege of assisting 
such inquirers in these matters. 

A number who have gotten the books lately are 
taking an active interest in these precious truths, and 
their expressions and testimonies give evidence of their 
growth in grace and knowledge. We have begun a 
meeting at our stopping place on Tuesday evenings, 
especially for beginners. These meetings are increasing 
from week to week in attendance and interest. We 
ask for your prayers that we may receive grace and 
wisdom from on high to fitly represent the Apostle and 
High Priest of our profession, that we may act and 
speak as the ambassadors and oracles of God. 

We are meeting with triumphant success in the 
Colporteur work. I have just returned home from a 
delivery of 143 books. It is hard work, but the joy 
connected with it more than compensates us for the 
physical strain, and when we think of the joy and bliss 
that await us if we continue faithful unto death, all 
the toils of the road will seem as nothing. 

May the Lord prosper the work of harvest in your 
hands, and give all the dear co-laborers a share in his 
suffering and service here, to the intent that we may 
also become vitally united to him and to one another 
in the glories of his Kingdom, is our ardent prayer. 

Yours in the bonds of love and fellowship, 
H. BOEHMER,-Colporteur. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

My two sisters (Mamie and Frieda) and I have just 
arrived home after spending nearly eight weeks in the 
Colporteur work, and thought you would be interested 
to learn of our success. The last two weeks were very 
rainy, so we lost quite a little time. We went from 
here direct to Ft. Dodge, a place of 10,000 population, 
and worked there a little less than three weeks. Before 
we started we planned the whole route, how many 
books for each place, etc. We ordered 1300 volumes 
to Ft. D., and expected to sell at least 1000. But when 
we started to work we found the city had been worked 
very thoroughly by Brother and Sister McFarland and 
consequently there was considerable opposition, which 
made it harder to secure orders. However, when we 
came to add up the amount of books sold, we found it 
to be 960 volumes, or very nearly the number we had 
anticipated. 

From here we took different routes, Mamie and 
Frieda going together, taking the larger places, and I 



the smaller ones. The larger places had also been 
previously canvassed and there was a great deal of 
prejudice, etc. At Webster City their work was made 
exceedingly difficult when the Baptist minister, a very 
influential man, announced in Church that the books 
were unorthodox, and if anyone wanted information to 
call on him, etc. However, with special effort they 
were still able to secure an average of nearly fifteen 
volumes per day in that place. The places I visited 
were towns of 600 to 700, one of 1000 and one of 2000 
population, most of them not having been previously 
canvassed, so I sold nearly as many volumes in the 
same time as my sisters. In 41 days of work I sold 
1012 volumes and they in nearly the same time 1399, 
or the three of us a total of 241 1 volumes. It was hard 
work, but in all we enjoyed the trip very much. 

We feel very thankful to our heavenly Father for 
this opportunity of service and also for the method 
which he has supplied through the "Hints to Colporteurs," 
by which the less gifted colporteurs are enabled 
to do so well. Surely the Lord has been with us and 
has blessed us both spiritually and materially. We 
trust that the dear Lord will grant us still further 
privileges of service. 

I wish also to tell you that we continually remember 
you in prayer, that you may be granted strength 
for your trials and labors as in the past. 

As ever your brother in him, 

A. E. SCHLATTER.-Colporteur. 



page 222 

MY DEAR BROTHER IN CHRIST:- 

While waiting here for train, en route for Kokoma, 
will write you a few lines in re the Indianapolis Convention, 
recently adjourned. 

While it is possible that some previous conventions 
were just as good, and as edifying to others, the writer 
was more edified and built up spiritually at the Indianapolis 
Convention than at any of the others. Probably 
that can be accounted for in this way: I made 
more diligent effort to get ready for it than ever before 
—by prayer and the best effort possible to get my heart 
into such an attitude before the Lord, the Truth and 
the "brethren" as would make it susceptible to the 
spirit of the Truth. 

In my humble judgment it is for similar reasons the 

page 223 

friends who attend the conventions almost invariably 
pronounce the last of the series the best. The Spirit of 
the Master— the spirit of love— which was in evidence 
at the last Convention was beautiful to behold. I 



praise God that it was my blessed privilege to be there! 
The General Conventions and One-Day Conventions 
are evidently being used of the Lord as channels of much 
blessing to his people. The study of the Word and 
the fellowship participated in on such occasions are 
building up the brethren in the "most holy faith" to 
a degree that is very gratifying to us— and we believe 
that it is to the dear Lord also. 

Dear Brother, it was a source of much pleasure 
and profit to the writer to meet you again and hear so 
many precious truths fall from your lips. I trust that 
the Convention gave all who were in attendance a fresh 
incentive to "run with patience the race set before 
them," and to engage in the "harvest" work with renewed 
zeal and energy. I praise God that it had that 
effect on myself. It was a pleasure also to meet so 
many dear Colporteurs and several Pilgrim brethren. 
What a source of spiritual strength it is to have fellowship 
with such a noble band of laborers in the Master's 
vineyard! For my part, I desire to become more and 
more acquainted with them— even on this side the 
"vail." 

With much Christian love and very best wishes, 
your brother and servant, 

FRANK DRAPER-Pilgrim. 



R4032 : page 223 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

I would like to tell you of how much blessing the 
Colporteur work has been to me this past year. Of 
course it was entered, from a human standpoint, as 
one setting sail on strange waters, but the Lord has 
been as many waters round about to bless, strengthen 
and cheer. 

It seems that I have received blessings multiplied, 
of which I feel very unworthy and hope that they have 
not been bestowed in vain, but that all may redound to 
his glory. 

Many have seemed interested and like the books. 
One dear sister that I would like to mention, who got 

the books from Sister R , is greatly rejoicing in Present 

Truth. She says that she has learned more in 

reading the six volumes of STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES 

than she did during her thirty years as a member of 

the Lutheran Church. 

Praying that you may be kept faithful, and thanking 
you for the encouragement to the colporteurs from 
time to time, I am, as ever, your sister in Christ, 
PEARL ELLIS,-Colporteur. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 



My wife and I have come into the Truth since last 
December, Brother L. W. Jones being the instrument 
used by God to bring the Truth to us. We were Baptists. 
About three weeks ago the minister called, but 
would not answer my wife's questions, saying, "It's no 
use," and he got angry. My wife said to the minister, 
"If I were a sinner you would plead with me three or 
four days to get me to accept Christ; now you believe 
that I am going the wrong way and you will not show 
me where I am wrong." He replied, "It's no use!" 
On Monday, April 30, she was handed a page from the 
monthly Church Record, which contained the following: 
"The MILLENNIAL DAWN, with its soul sleeping, denying 
sin, Christ's deity and atonement, the fact of hell 
and much more, has carried away Mr. and Mrs. J. and 
Mr. and Mrs. F. into its deceitful current." 

We believe we should send letters to the members 
of this Church and ask you for a suggested letter which 
can be sent to them. I am told that you have a regular 
letter, but do not know whether it will apply to our 
particular case. I should have said that when the minister 
called on my wife he told her that we should ask 
to have our names dropped. Truly, Brother, they have 
cast us out of the synagogue, whereof we are glad, and 
pray that we may live with all lowliness and meekness, 
with long-suffering, forbearing one another in love. 
We thank God that you have been used to shed the 
light of his Truth abroad, which has come even unto 
my family. Already four of our friends are interested. 
We pray that the Lord will keep adding to the light he 
has given you, and that you may be sustained and 
guided in all things. We await your advice regarding 
a letter. 

Your brother, 

ABNER D. FLANNER.-I11. 



We rejoice to note the opening of other blinded 
eyes of understanding. God's blessing will surely attend 
those who when they see are prompt to confess 

R4033 : page 223 

and obey the voice of the Light. We counsel that the 
Baptist minister be not too harshly thought of— that 
his "blindness" be remembered. What the Apostle 
Peter said of those who delivered up our Lord will apply 
to many now: "I wot that in ignorance ye did it, as 
did also your rulers."— Acts 3:17. 

The "Withdrawal Letters" referred to are well 
adapted for use by those withdrawing from any human 
organization called a Church. There is but one true 
Church of the living God, "whose names are written in 
heaven." (Luke 10:20.) We supply these "Withdrawal 
Letters," with envelopes and tracts free, in any quantity. 



We advise that they be sent to every member of 

the Church withdrawn from. This is not only an excellent 

way in which to bear witness to the Truth, but 

a safe way to guard against misunderstanding and 

misrepresentation. For— we say it with sorrow— some 

ministers and Church officials do not notify the congregation 

of the withdrawal, but allow the impression 

that the withdrawing one has defaulted on and thereby 

denied his vows of membership. Still worse, in some 

cases ministers have deliberately misrepresented the 

facts— to prevent others of their congregations from 

examining or hearing further along the lines of the 

Truth. In one case the withdrawing one was reported 

violently insane on religious subjects; and all were advised 

to avoid him lest they should make him worse. 

Our advice therefore is, By all means use these letters 

—and use them freely. It will be one of your best opportunities 

for sowing Present Truth. 

-EDITOR. 



page 225 

SEMI-MONTHLY 
VOL. XXVIII AUGUST 1 No. 15 
A.D. 1907--A.M. 6035 



CONTENTS 

"Fighting Against God" 227 

Hospitality at Conventions 228 

Berean Bible Study in Tabernacle Shadows 228 

In the Presence of the King (Poem) 229 

"Better Sacrifices Than These" 229 

The "Mystery"-the Church 230 

The Merit was in the Bullock 231 

All the Righteous Blood Required 232 

Guided in a Long Journey 233 

Set Forth for an Example 234 

"Much Advantage Everyway" 234 

Spiritual Israel Still More Blessed 235 

The Far-West Convention Tour 236 

An Interesting Question Answered 239 

page 226 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-24 EVERSHOLT ST., LONDON, N.W. 
GERMAN BRANCH-MIRKER STR., 45, ELBERFELD. 
AUSTRALASIAN BRANCH-EQUITABLE BLDG., COLLINS ST., MELBOURNE 

PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 

TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR AS FOLLOWS:- 

All Bible Students who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity or 
adversity, are unable to pay for this Journal, will be supplied FREE if 
they send a Postal Card each June stating their case and requesting its 
continuance. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on 
our list continually and in touch with the Studies, etc. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



THIS JOURNAL IS PUBLISHED IN THE 

FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, DANISH AND ITALIAN LANGUAGES. 

SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



A STRIKE at the bindery which does our work has delayed 
shipment of MANNA to Great Britain and also the orders 
of some colporteurs. It is over now, and all orders will soon 
be filled. 

1907--VOLUNTEER TRACTS--1907 



This year's Volunteer tracts are going out very rapidly. 
We are doing our best to keep up with the increased demand 
and rejoice that an increasing number of the Lord's people 
are appreciating this privilege and will gain a spiritual blessing 
therefrom. We request that all who send in orders specify 
particularly the quantities they can and will use judiciously 
and promptly. We will be glad to double the shipments. 

THE TABERNACLE AND THE PRIESTS 



These two beautiful chromos, considerably delayed, are 
now in good supply and should be in all of our homes— to remind 
us of their glorious antitypes, of which we have been 
studying for some time past in our "Berean Lessons." 

By getting them out in large quantities we can supply 
them at 30c per pair, or 4 pairs for $1.00, post or express prepaid 
by us. They are very handsome and easily worth several 
times the price. We merely aim to meet the cost. The 
foreign shipments will go forward at once. We regret the 
delay. 



R4033 : page 227 

"FIGHTING AGAINST GOD" 

GAMALIEL gave evidence of his wisdom in the 
advice he proffered to his Jewish friends 
of the Sanhedrin when they were about to 
deal harshly with the early disciples. His wise 
words were, "Ye men of Israel, take heed to yourselves 
what ye intend to do as touching these men. ...Refrain 
from these men, let them alone; for if this counsel 
or this work be of men it will come to naught: but if 
it be of God ye cannot overthrow it; lest ye be found 
to be fighting against God." (Acts 5:35-39.) Alas 
that so many who have named the name of Christ, and 
to some extent become partakers of the holy Spirit, 
and to some extent been taught in the school of Christ, 
and to some extent possess the wisdom that cometh 
from above— alas that so many of these seem to have 



less wisdom than is expressed in Gamaliel's words 
just quoted. 

Some people by nature have so little combativeness 
that they lack strength of character, are too pliable, 
"wishy-washy": they lack the qualities of an overcomer, 
and need continually to seek grace and help from on 
high to take a stand for the truth and for righteousness. 
Otherwise they surely cannot be expected to come off 
more than conquerors. The Lord is seeking for his little 
flock those who have character, firmness, strength, 
as well as gentleness, meekness, patience, love. The 
happy combination which the Lord seeks is not found 
anywhere, however. All who come to him need to be 
refashioned in some respects to make them acceptable. 
Consequently on the other side of the question we find 
that some who have strong characters naturally have 
such strong combativeness that it is continually bringing 
them into trouble and needs to be curbed, brought 
under restraint. 

It is difficult to say which of the two classes referred 
to has the advantage over the other. The one class 
must cultivate what the other class must restrain, and 
probably, all things considered, their chances are about 
equal in the matter of winning the race. However, 
those who have large combativeness, who are aggressive, 
forceful, usually attract more attention in the 
Church by reason of these qualities, and usually awaken 
more opposition even though they do not make 
enemies amongst those who love one another. The too 
pliable and docile are apt to think of themselves too 
favorably, and are very likely to be too favorably 
thought of by others as respects their qualifications for 
the Kingdom. Those who are strong and forceful are 
apt to be too roundly censured by others and to be too 
blind to the fact themselves. Oh, that we all could have 
sound minds! but since this is impossible, Oh, that we 
all could have a large measure of the spirit of a sound 
mind, and the ability to weigh ourselves according to 
the divine standard! 

These words are specially intended to assist the 
dear brethren and sisters troubled with too large a degree 
of combativeness, disposed to be too aggressive. 
The Lord certainly showed markedly, particularly, his 
love for the strong characters when from amongst the 
twelve he selected Peter, James and John, the three 
most radical and aggressive of the apostles, as in 
some respects his favorites. So, then, those who 
have the aggressive quality by nature must not feel that 
it is a bar to their attainment of the Lord's "Well 
done," but rather that it is a good quality of itself if 
only it can be restrained and brought within proper 
bounds. They should see, as Gamaliel did, the danger 
of using their combativeness and aggressiveness against 
the Lord, against the Truth, against the brethren. 

Our Lord says, "His servants ye are to whom ye 
render service." (Rom. 6:16.) The question is not, To 



whom do we profess to render service? nor, To whom 
do we think we are rendering service? but, Whose 
cause do we actually serve? From this standpoint, 
looking out over Christendom today, we ask ourselves, 
How many are serving God? and How many imagine they 
are serving him while they are really serving the Adversary? 
—really "fighting against God"? Serving Christendom 

R4033 : page 228 

we find hundreds of thousands of professed 
ministers of the Gospel, and millions of professed 
Christians fighting under various banners, Methodist, 
Baptist, Catholic, etc.,— but whom are they fighting? 
Satan? Error? Like Saul of Tarsus many of them 
will shortly have their eyes opened to the fact that, so 
far from being soldiers of the cross, they are fighting 
against God, against the real soldiers of the cross, the 
followers of the Lamb. What a bitter disappointment 
will be theirs! how we wish that we could awaken them 
now to an examination of the commands of the great 
Chief Captain, that they might see that they are working 
and fighting under orders and directions not from 
him, but from human leaders and captains, some of 
these from the "dark ages," dead and buried. 

We are glad to hope that if the Truth could be 
flashed from heaven many of these strong characters 
that are now fighting for sectarianism, and some of 
them for Antichrist, would fall astonished, humiliated, 
at the Master's feet, crying, "What wilt thou have me 
to do?" 

Let us remember the Lord's words through the 
Apostle: "The Lord resisteth the proud but showeth 
favor to the humble. Humble yourselves, therefore, 
under the mighty hand of God, that he may exalt you in 
due time." These verses, we believe, are a key to much 
of the error along the lines we have indicated. A strong 
character affected by a measure of pride is apt to take 
a wrong course from which it is almost impossible for 
him to recede. But if humility be there the strength, 
the combativeness, will be under proportionate control, 
and that much easier will it be for the individual to receive 
the proper instructions from the Lord, and to follow 
them, and to be fitted, polished and prepared for a 
place in the Kingdom. This same principle applies 
amongst those who have already received as a blessing 
from the Lord the light of Present Truth. We still 
need the humility that will enable us, if too lacking in 
character, strength, to acknowledge the same and seek 
it from the Lord. And we still need the humility which 
will keep close watch upon every word and act and 
thought, even with a view to having all in complete 
subjection to the will of the Lord that we be found not 
fighting against the Lord or against the Truth or against 
the brethren. How careful we should be to watch for 
the leadings of the Lord's providences, not only in our 



own experiences, but also in the words and experiences 
of others, and particularly to measure everything by 
the divine standards and not by our own opinions and 
preferences! 



R4034 : page 228 

HOSPITALITY AT CONVENTIONS 

THE Scriptures everywhere commend hospitality, 
and the Apostle points us to the fact that Abraham 
entertained three men who were strangers, 
and knew not until afterward that they were angels. 
We are glad to note the growth of a hospitable spirit 
amongst all the dear friends of the Truth everywhere. 
We would not say a word in restraint of this, believing 
that it signifies an enlargement of heart that is pleasing 
to the Lord and profitable to the individuals themselves. 
We do wish, however, to suggest that there are times 
when hospitality in the way of entertaining the friends 
at our homes might really be injurious to the interests 
we desire to serve. For instance, at Convention times 
those who endeavor to be hospitable will usually find 
their strength so taxed, their time so taken up, that 
they fail to get the spiritual blessings which 
they had anticipated. This is not right— not wise. 
Your first obligation is to yourself and your own family. 
We urge, therefore, that at Convention times you 
seek to have everything as simple and plain as possible, 
that your mind may be given to the spiritual food and 
to the arrangement of the Bridal dress, remembering 
that it is written of the Bride class, "The Bride hath 
made herself ready," and that this means special care 
of our wedding-garment. 

It would be well for visiting friends to come expecting 
to take their meals at a restaurant, and if they 
lodge with others, to do their share or a little more 
in the way of lightening the home burdens, that 
all may rejoice together and have a spiritual feast. 
At an economical restaurant dinners need cost little 
more than they cost at home, and that little is more than 
offset by the increased rest and peace which this method 
affords. "Whether we eat or drink, or whatsoever 
we do, let us do all to the glory of God."— 
I Corinthians 10:31. 



page 228 

BEREAN BIBLE STUDY IN TABERNACLE SHADOWS 
SACRIFICES SUBSEQUENT TO THE DAY OF ATONEMENT 



SEPT. 1 

1 . To what time do the sacrifices of the children of Israel, 
offered after the Day of Atonement, apply? 

T.93, par. 1 (first five lines). 

2. Is there any sense in which they apply to any other 
time? Luke 16:1-8; Matt. 10:42. T.93, par. 1 (commence 
5th line). 

3. Why do the Day of Atonement sacrifices precede all 
others? T.94, par. 1 (down to sixth line). 

4. After the sacrifices of the Gospel Age have brought 
the world into a justified condition (justified to 
life-rights) will there still be need for further reconciliation? 
and why? T.94, par. 1 (6th line down). 

5. Explain the difference between the Atonement Day 
sacrifices, offered during the Gospel Age, and the 
"trespass-offerings," or "sin-offerings," of the 

world during the Millennial Age. T.94, par. 2. 

SEPT. 8 

6. Will "consecration" be in order during the next 
age? and if so how will it differ from consecration 
now? T.94, par. 3. 

page 229 

7. How will the fact be shown in the next age that the 
people recognize the sacrifices of this age as the 
basis for the forgiveness of their sins? and how 

was this indicated in the type? Lev. 17:1-9; see 
also Lev. 1-5. T.94, par. 4. 

8. Will all the blinding influences of the present be 
done away with during the next age? I Tim. 2:4; 
Isa. 29:18; 25:6-8; 1 1:9; 42:6,7,16; T.95, par. 1 

(1st three lines). 

9. What is included in the term "Adamic death"? T.95, 
par. 1 (4th line to 9th). 

10. Will each one of the world be required to cooperate 
in his own salvation? T.95, par. 1 (9th line on). 

11. When will the people be able to offer "bullocks" to 
the Lord? Psa. 51:19; Lev. 1:3; T.96, par. 1. 

SEPT. 15 

THE PEOPLE'S BURNT -OFFERINGS 

12. Were the "burnt-offerings" of the people, in the type, 
offered only occasionally? Lev. 6:9,12,13. T.97, 

par. 1. 

13. What did this represent to the mind of each offerer? 
Lev. 1; T.97, par. 2. 

THE PEOPLE'S PEACE-OFFERINGS 

14. What was the "peace-offering"? and what did it typify? 



Lev. 3; 7:11-18,30-34; 7:19-21; Rev. 20:9,13-15; 
T.98, par. 1 and 2. 

15. What other offering accompanied the "peace-offering"? 
and what did this signify in the antitype? 

Lev. 7:11-13; T.98, par. 3. 

THE PEOPLE'S MEAT-OFFERINGS 

16. What were the "meat-offerings" of the people? and 
what did they represent? Lev. 2:1-11; 7:9,10; 

Eph. 3:21; T.98, par. 4. 

SEPT. 22 
THE PEOPLE'S TRESPASS OR SIN-OFFERINGS 

17. What were the "sin-offerings" or "trespass-offerings" 
of the people? and what did these typify? 

Lev. 5:15-19; 6:1-7; T.99, par. 1 and 2. 

18. Show the difference in the treatment of these "sin-offerings" 
and the "sin-offerings" of the Day of 

Atonement, and apply it to the antitype. T.99, 
par. 3, and 100, par. 1. 

19. State in what manner this "ministry of reconciliation" 
can be applied during the present age. T.100, 

par. 2. 

20. In what further particular did the treatment of the 
Atonement Day sacrifices differ from that of the 
people's "sin-offerings"? Lev. 6:24-26,29,30; 

Heb. 13:11; T.100, par. 3. 

SEPT. 29 
MALE AND FEMALE DISTINCTIONS TO CEASE 

21. Are the distinctions of "male" and "female" always 
to exist? T.100, par. 4. 

22. If not, why and when will such distinctions cease? 
T. 101, par. 1. 

23. Is the Church the Bride of the man Christ Jesus? 
Rom. 7:4; T. 102, par. 1. 

24. Will these distinctions of sex cease both with the 
human race and with the glorified Church? Jer. 33:16; 
23:6; Isa. 9:6; E.44, 45; T.102, par. 2. 

25. How is this thought shown in the type: that when 
the Church is glorified all sex distinctions will 
cease? T.102, par. 3 (1st four lines). 

OCTOBER 6 

26. Do the teachings and example of Christ and the 
Apostle show that woman in the Church in the 

flesh is not to be a public teacher or leader? Eph. 4:11,12, 
Diag.; I Tim. 2:11-13; I Cor. 14:34,35; 
T.102, par. 3 (from fourth line down). 

27. Are the sisters, equally with the brethren, prospective 



members of the Body of Christ? 2 Cor. 5:17; 
Gal. 3:28,29. See F.491, 492. T.103, par. 1. 

28. How has the Adversary entrapped and deceived the 
world along this line? T.103, par. 2. 

29. Has this unscriptural course been a real advantage 
to women? T.103, par. 3. 

R4034 : page 229 

IN THE PRESENCE OF THE KING 

If we could always feel each little thing 

We do, each hour we spend 
Within the presence of the King, 

What dignity 'twould lend! 

If we could realize our every thought 

Is known to him, our King, 
With how great carefulness would it be fraught, 

And what a blessing bring! 

If, when some sharp word leaves a cruel sting 

Our faith could know and feel 
'Twas heard within the presence of the King, 

How soon the wound would heal! 

Oh, when the song of life seems hard to sing, 

And darker grows the way, 
Draw nearer to the presence of the King, 

And night shall turn to day! — G. W. S. 



R4034 : page 229 

"BETTER SACRIFICES THAN THESE" 

--LEVITICUS 16:5-22.-AUGUST 18.- 

Golden Text:— "Wherefore he is able to save them to the 
uttermost that come unto God by him."— Heb. 7:25. 

ONLY those who through the teachings of the New 
Testament discern that the divine arrangements for 
fleshly Israel were typical of higher things pertaining 
to Spiritual Israel— only these are prepared to get 
proper lessons from the Old Testament Scriptures, and particularly 
from the institution established by the Lord with 
Israel through Moses, the mediator of their Law Covenant. 
The Apostle refers to this on various occasions, assuring us 
that Israel's arrangements were shadows of better things to 
follow, and that the substance belongs to Christ, Head and 
Body, the Church. As those to whom the substance belongs, 
it is proper that we should understand the types that we 
may better appreciate the substance, the reality. 
To fleshly Israel God appointed five great festivals, all 



R4034 : page 230 

typical. (1) The Feast of Trumpets— welcoming the new 
civil year on the first of Tizri (September, October), one 
day only. The feast was of special significance every fiftieth 
year, when the blowing of the silver trumpets announced 
the jubilee— typical of the "times of restitution of all 
things which God hath spoken by the mouth of all the holy 
prophets since the world began."— Acts 3:21. 

(2) The Passover on the 15th of Nisan or Abib (April) 
—the first month of the sacred year. It lasted seven days. 

(3) The Feast of Pentecost (in Sivan, end of May)— 
the first-fruits of the harvest. 

(4) The Feast of Tabernacles, in Tizri (beginning the 
15th),— the Feast of In-gathering or thanksgiving. 

(5) The great Day of Atonement (the 10th of Tizri) 

lasted one day only. While it is named as one of the enjoined 
festivals it was not a joyous one, but was observed 
with fasting, mourning (for sin) and prayer, and was 
esteemed a time for reformation and good resolutions, and a 
desire for divine favor for the year in advance. It is the 
work of this day which constitutes our present lesson. Its 
sacrifices and offerings were not in respect to the sins of 
the preceding year, as some have suggested. Each Atonement 
Day made reconciliation for the sins of the people for 
the ensuing year, and under its arrangement they were God's 
people and treated as though they were free from original 
sin, the sacrifices of the Day of Atonement being reckoned 
as covering the Adamic condemnation. At the close of each 
year, therefore, the people were reckonedly back again under 
Adamic condemnation, and fresh offerings, sacrifices, were 
made to bring them again into God's favor for another year. 
The Apostle points out that these remembrances of sin every 
year— "year by year continually"— (Heb. 10:1), evidenced 
the fact that the Adamic guilt was not actually cancelled, 
but merely temporarily covered. But he also points out that 
the better sacrifices, the real sin-offering which God has 
ordained and which will be effected through the Christ, will 
need no repetition, because its cancellation of sins will be 
forever,— "For by one offering he hath perfected forever them 
that are sanctified"— set apart as members of his Body.— 
Heb. 10:14. 

The sin-offerings of this Day of Atonement were two— 
a bullock and a goat— the "Lord's goat" as in contrast with 
the "scape-goat." Our lesson should properly have begun 
with the opening of the chapter, had those who arranged it 
studied the "key of knowledge" respecting the anti-typical 
meaning; for the bullock of the sin-offering was by far the 
more important of the two. Not only did it take precedence, 
but it was a larger and better sacrifice. The bullock, as we 
have shown,* typified our Lord Jesus in his person, the 
great sacrifice for sins. The application of the atonement 
made by the sacrifice of the bullock— the sprinkling of 
its blood upon the Mercy Seat— was specially stated to be for 
the Priest and his house. 



THE "MYSTERY"-THE CHURCH 

The Apostle frequently refers to the "mystery" hidden 
from past ages and dispensations, but now made known unto 
the saints, namely, "Christ in you, the hope of glory." 
(Col. 1:27.) Only those who discern this "hidden mystery" 
(see "The Divine Plan of the Ages," Chap. V.) can appreciate 
the meaning of the statement that the atonement made 
by the blood of the bullock was for the Priest and his 
house. The majority of readers would get the thought that 
it was made for the High Priest's own sinfulness, and constituted 
his cleansing and the Lord's blessing upon his home. 
But those who understand the "hidden mystery" perceive 
that the High Priest himself represented Jesus, the Head, 
and the Church, his Body— in another figure Jesus the High 
Priest and the Church the under-priesthood— the "little 
flock." And these understand that his "house" refers not 
to his abode, but to his family or household, which in 
Aaron's case was the tribe of Levi, and antitypically represents 
the household of faith, related to Christ, the Head of 
the Church, his Body. From this standpoint of appreciation 
of the "hidden mystery" we perceive that the killing 
of the bullock represented the sacrifice of our Lord as the 
man Christ Jesus, and that the benefit, the result of that 
sacrifice, applied to the entire household of faith, especially 
the Church, which is the Body of Christ— the Head not 
needing the atonement, as indicated by the fact that the 
head of the High Priest was uncovered. 

Had God so pleased he might have had only the one 
sacrifice on the Day of Atonement— the sacrifice of the bullock, 



*See "Tabernacle Shadows of the Better Sacrifices," 10c 
per copy; also Tabernacle and Priests, illustrations, with 
metal mountings, 30c for both, 4 sets $1. 

R4035 : page 230 

representing the death of our Lord Jesus. But it 
pleased God to arrange otherwise in the ceremonies of this 
Atonement Day. God purposed, as the Apostle declares, not 
only to accept the consecrated believers as members of the 
Body of Christ, but to give them a share with the Lord in 
his suffering as his members, and ultimately to give them 
also a share as his members in the glory that should follow 
—the glory, honor and immortality of the Kingdom. The 
New Testament abounds with exhortations to the Lord's disciples 
to make a full consecration of themselves, even unto 
death, to be baptized with Christ's baptism unto death, to 
suffer with him that they might also reign with him, to be 
dead with him that they might also live with him. The 
Apostle also declares that we fill up that which is behind of 
the afflictions of Christ— suffering for the sake of being 
members of his Body, the Church. 



It should not surprise us to find that this sacrificing on 
the part of the Body of Christ, which has been in progress 
for more than eighteen centuries, and which is so prominently 
marked throughout all the exhortations of the New Testament, 
is also marked with prominence in the type. Many 
have treated lightly and as hypocritical language the words of 
the Apostle, "I beseech you therefore, brethren, by the mercies 
of God that ye present your bodies living sacrifices unto 
God, holy, acceptable, your reasonable service. (Rom. 12:1.) 
But as we look into the typical picture of this Gospel Age— 
the Day of Atonement— we find the sufferings of the Body 
of Christ clearly set forth, represented in the sacrifice of the 
Lord's goat. The leanness of the goat as compared with the 
young bullock fitly represents the inferiority of the Church 
and anything she has to offer unto the Lord in sacrifice, as 
compared with the riches of grace which reside in her Lord, 
who gave the important sacrifice, the basis of our offerings, 

R4035 : page 23 1 

without which nothing that we could offer would have any 
value or be at all acceptable before the Father. The fat of 
the sacrifices was offered to the Lord upon the altar, and 
represented the love and zeal of the sacrificer. In the case 
of the bullock there was much fat, in the case of the goat 
little, representing that the followers of Jesus have by nature 
comparatively little that they can offer to the Lord at all. 

THE MERIT WAS IN THE BULLOCK 

The type also shows that until the bullock was offered 
the goat's sacrifice would count as nothing, because it is 
distinctly stated that everything was to be done to the goat that 
had previously been done to the bullock, just as we are told 
by the Lord that we must walk in his steps, must suffer with 
him, must take up our cross and follow him, must go to him 
without the camp bearing his reproach, so the hoofs, hides, 
etc., of the goat were burned without the camp, in the place 
and after the manner that the hoofs, hide, etc., of the bullock 
had previously been burned. (See "Tabernacle Shadows.") 

Both sacrifices— that of the bullock and that of 
the Lord's goat— were requisite to complete the atonement 
for the sins of the people. The Body of Christ and the 
household of faith have imputed to them the merit of Jesus' 
sacrifice for sins, and they are thus counted as justified 
freely from all things through faith in his blood. And before 
our sacrifices could have any value in God's sight it was 
necessary that first we should be adopted or accepted as 
figurative members of the High Priest. Thus the Apostle 
declares, "Ye are not your own, ye are bought with a price," 
and recognizing this we have given over our wills, ourselves 
to the Lord, agreeing to be dead to self and alive only as 
his members, and as his members we suffer under his direction 
as our Head. From this standpoint the sufferings of the 
members of the Body of Christ are the Lord's own sufferings. 
From this standpoint the prophets speak of the sufferings 



of Christ— Jesus, the Head, and the Church, his members 
—and the glory that should follow. The revelation of 
divine glory and the blessing of the world do not follow the 
sufferings of Jesus alone, but will follow the completion of the 
sufferings of Christ when all of his members shall have been 
offered— presented as living sacrifices. 

Looking at the type we see the clear distinction between 
the result of the sprinkling of the blood of the bullock on 
the Mercy Seat and the result of the sprinkling of the blood 
of the Lord's goat upon the Mercy Seat. When the former 
was accomplished it meant the forgiveness and reconciliation 
of the members of the Priest's body and all of his household, 
the household of faith. When the latter was accomplished 
it meant the forgiveness of the sins of all the people 
—the taking away of the sin of the world. It was the Lamb 
of God which was to take away the sin of the world, and 
our Lord Jesus was that Lamb of God; and it is through his 
merit that Adam's sin, the sin of the world, shall be forgiven, 
blotted out, set aside. He was in a particular sense the 
Passover Lamb, not one bone of which should be broken; 
but the little flock, his members, are in a larger sense his 
flesh and his bones, and are never to be separated from him, 
but to be forever with the Lord in heavenly Kingdom and 
glory. From this standpoint it will be seen that the antitype 
of the Day of Atonement is the entire Gospel Age— in 
which from first to last Jesus and all the members of his 
consecrated "little flock" will suffer, and by the end of 
which all sin atonement will be completed and the blessing 
of the divine forgiveness be extended to all the families of 
the earth, in harmony with the Abrahamic Covenant— "In 
thy Seed (the Christ, Head and Body) all the families of 
the earth shall be blessed." 

CASTING LOTS ON THE TWO GOATS 

The two goats standing at the door of the Tabernacle 
represent all of the Lord's consecrated Church at this present 
time, but show us that it consists of two classes. Both classes 
were consecrated alike, but both do not go through the same 
experiences. The one class follows precisely the experiences 
of the Lord, as the goat's experiences corresponded to those 
of the bullock; but the other class, typified by the scape-goat, 
is the Great Company, who, while making a full consecration 
of self-sacrifice in the same manner as do the little flock, 
hold back, neglect to lay down their lives sacrificially and 
experience therefor the destruction of the flesh, that 
the spirit may be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus. 
(1 Cor. 5:5.) These two classes, we remember, are distinctly 
shown in Revelation 7. The little flock— 144,000, the Spiritual 
Israelites— represent the faithful members of the Body 
of Christ glorified; the other, a great multitude whose number 
was not fixed or predestinated by the Lord, which will 
come through tribulation and receive palm-branches as servants 
before the throne, rather than crowns as overcomers in 
the throne. 

The casting of lots as between the two goats seems to 



have been intended to signify that the Lord does not arbitrarily 

determine which of the consecrated shall go into either 

of these classes, but rather that he leaves the matter to us, accepting 

whomsoever manifests the proper zeal in sacrifice and 

thus attests his loyalty, showing that he is a copy of God's dear 

Son. This shows that it is not sufficient to make consecration 

to the Lord, but that we must proceed to fulfil the 

terms of our covenant if we would belong to the Lord's goat 

class— we must suffer, we must sacrifice, and thus 

make our calling and election sure as members of the Body 

of the Priest. 

"FOR JEHOVAH" OR "FOR AZAZEL" 

We shall not go into all the details of this Day of 
Atonement, surmising that all of our readers possess the little 
pamphlet, "Tabernacle Shadows of Better Sacrifices," in 
which the matter is treated in considerable detail. In harmony 
with the arrangement of the lesson we are giving 
special prominence to the two goats. 

In the Hebrew, when the lot had been cast upon the 
goats, one was declared to be for Jehovah and the other for 
Azazel. The significance of the word Azazel is not very 
clear, but according to the majority of modern scholars it 
stood for the prince of darkness; and in Milton's "Paradise 
Lost" Azazel is represented as the standard-bearer of 
the infernal hosts— the prince of devils. We agree with this 
interpretation because it corresponds well with the expression 
of the Apostle, who— when referring to one class of the 
consecrated members of the Body of Christ who had not 
been living up to their privileges— declares, "Absent in body 
but present with you in mind, I have delivered over such an 
one to Satan for the destruction of the flesh, that the spirit 
may be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus." (1 Cor. 5:3-5.) 

R4035 : page 232 

Similarly we understand that the Great Company, those 

who have consecrated but failed to sacrifice voluntarily, will 

be delivered over to Satan for his buffetings, and pass 

through a great tribulation, with a view to effecting in them 

by this means a proper penitence for sin and a proper appreciation 

of the divine standard of truth and righteousness. 

The majority of this neglected class the Scriptures seem to 

intimate will be found in the end of this age— though doubtless 

there have been some of the same class throughout the 

age. 

The scape-goat does not represent a sin-loving class 
nor a class which has denied the Lord, but a class of consecrated 
believers overcharged with the cares of this life and 
the deceitfulness of riches, and not sufficiently loyal to the 
Lord and their covenant to forsake all and walk in the footsteps 

R4036 : page 232 

of the Master in self-sacrifice. This class, particularly 



large in the present day, will be delivered over to the Adversary 
—to suffer in a time of trouble such as was not 
since there was a nation— the great time of trouble with 
which this age will end. Such of them as fail to respond to 
those tribulations and to seek the Lord will die the Second 
Death, but such as respond faithfully and loyally will be 
counted as overcomers, and be granted the palms of victory 
shown in Revelation 7, and be privileged to a share at the 
Marriage Supper of the Lamb and the glories and honors of 
that occasion. It is only their failure to appreciate their present 
privileges in voluntary sacrificing that will deter them from 
gaining membership in the Bride class, and their highest position 
of honor will be as the "virgins, her companions, who 
follow her [the Bride.] "-Psalm 45:14. 

TWO CLASSES OF SINS 

This scape-goat is not sacrificed, does not come upon 
the Lord's altar, but is sent away into the wilderness for 
the "destruction of the flesh." The wide difference between 
sacrifice and destruction must be observed and appreciated. 
The Apostle reminds us that the bodies of those beasts 
(whose blood was brought within the vail to make atonement 
on the Mercy Seat) were burned outside the camp, and then 
he urges the faithful, "Let us go to him without the camp, 
bearing the reproach with him." (Heb. 13:13.) Thus the 
Apostle shows that our Lord Jesus was represented in one of 
those animals and that we were represented in the other— if we 
are willing to go with him outside the camp into disrepute, bearing 
his reproaches and sharing them as members of his Body. 

Let us notice the two classes of sins referred to in our 
lesson, the one propitiated by the blood of the bullock and the 
goat in the Most Holy, and the other confessed upon the head 
of the scape-goat, which bore them away. The propitiated 
sin is the Adamic sin, on account of which the sentence 
of death passed upon all and weaknesses and imperfections 
have thus come upon all. This is what is termed original 
sin, whose curse or blight rests upon the race as 
a whole. But there are other sins than the original one and 
its weaknesses and imperfections which we inherit, and 
which the Lord has cancelled so far as the household of 
faith is concerned, and which he has arranged to cancel 
so far as the world is concerned. The other sins are 
stipulated as iniquities, transgressions— in fact, embrace all 
sins not included in those atoned for by the blood of the 
bullock and of the goat. 

We have not far to look if we would see these iniquities 
or inequities of the world, especially of "Christendom." 
There is today considerable light shining upon the whole 
world, especially on the civilized portion. The principles of 
righteousness set forth in the Jewish Law and subsequently amplified 
by the Lord and the apostles, have enlightened the 
minds of the public in general in respect to justice and injustice, 
right and wrong, good and evil, so that there never 
was so responsible a generation as the one now living. Notwithstanding 
this increase of knowledge, and notwithstanding 



that there are gross iniquities prevailing throughout the 
world, we find comparatively few willing to do anything 
toward a readjustment and equalization of the world's 
affairs, financial, social and religious. Rather it seems 
that the majority of those possessing advantages are quite 
willing to hold to them even though recognizing that they 
are inequitable, iniquitous. 

Meantime, the light of the morning is also awakening the 
masses, who are more and more crying out for their rights and 
against the inequities. The Lord is not only permitting this 
condition of things but is favoring it and helping it along, 
and informs us that the result will be a time of trouble 
such as was not since there was a nation. He tells us that 
in that great final struggle the kings of the world— financial, 
social, religious and political— will with practical 
unanimity be found on one side of the question, and that on 
the other side will be the Lord's "great army," the people 
for whose equities and for whose rights he will plead, 
will contend. True, the common people will not realize 
that the Lord is on their side, and many of them will even 
ignore him and trust simply to their own contrivances and 
devices, socialistic and otherwise. Similarly those who are 
on the side of the kings and princes of earth and their 
armies will not recognize the kind of battle they are engaged 
in, that it is one in which the Lord is taking a hand, 
with the view to the overthrow of present institutions and 
the preparation of the earth for the rule of righteousness— 
the Kingdom of God's dear Son— the Millennial Kingdom. 

Look now at the scape-goat class: Not faithful to their 
covenant of sacrifice they are not counted worthy to escape 
those things coming on the world, and hence will have their 
portion with the hypocrites and with the world in that 
trouble, notwithstanding the fact that they are God's sincere 
children, but overcharged with the cares of this life and not 
properly zealous for the fulfilment of their covenant and a 
share in the Kingdom. It is in mercy for this class that the 
Lord consigns them to that trouble, that in its bitter experiences 
they may learn the necessary lessons and attest finally, 
under stress, their loyalty to him and to righteousness. They 
are represented as having confessed upon them the iniquities 
of the people— this is from the standpoint of divine justice. 
Their own sins were forgiven through Christ, as they 
were reckoned in as members of the household of faith. 
Hence their sufferings must be for the sins of others; and as 
they did not suffer as willing sacrificers they are then made to 
suffer unto death— that the spirit may be saved in the day 
of the Lord Jesus. 

ALL THE RIGHTEOUS BLOOD REQUIRED 

Let us not forget our Lord's words respecting a somewhat 
similar class which suffered in the time of trouble at 

R4036 : page 233 

the end of the Jewish Age. He said that all the righteous 



blood shed from Abel's time down to the death of Zacharias 
should be required at the hand of that generation. In one 
sense of the word this has the appearance of injustice. We 
are inclined to ask— Why should that generation be penalized 
for the transgressions committed centuries before their 
day? The Lord does not particularize— does not explain 
the operation of divine justice in the matter, but we may 
reasonably infer that the answer to the query lies in the 
fact that the generation of our Lord's day had so many more 
advantages than all the generations preceding that it deserved 
severer penalties. As our Lord points out, they had 
the experiences of the past and disapproved the doings of 
their fathers who slew the prophets; nevertheless with 
greater light they did worse, they slew the Son of God and 
persecuted the members of his Body— his Church. 

Similarly the Scriptures indicate that in the end of this 
age the Lord will require of the living generation a penalty 
for much of the unrighteousness of the past— and especially 
for the blood of all the saints shed throughout this Gospel 
Age in civilized lands. We perceive that much of the evil 
done against the Lord's holy ones of the past has thus far 
failed of punishment. Great systems which, in the name of 
the Lord and in the name of religion, persecuted the true 
Church have practised and prospered and not yet received 
their just recompense of reward. Some of these martyrs of 
the past are pictured to us under the fifth seal as inquiring, 
"How long, O Lord, holy and true, dost thou not judge and 
avenge our blood on them that dwell on the earth." This 
is a symbolical picture of justice long deferred crying for 
vengeance, representing those who are actually dead and 
know not anything, and cannot know anything until the resurrection. 
The answer to this query before the seat of Justice 
is given. We are told that it would be but a little while 
until others are similarly maltreated, and the intimation is 
given that then the judgment will come which will compensate 
for the whole. This is the awful trouble of the near 
future, when great Babylon will go down as a great millstone 
into the sea, when every man's hand will be against 
his neighbor's in anarchy, when there will be no peace to 
him that goeth out or to him that cometh in— a time of 
trouble such as was not since there was a nation nor ever 
shall be afterward. 

It is that trouble which the little flock, the Lord's goat 
class of faithful sacrificers, will escape directly or indirectly, 
and that the Great Company class will not escape 
—but on the contrary share. They will come up out of this 
great tribulation with washed robes, made white in the blood 
of the Lamb. Not that their sufferings will wash their 
robes, but that in their sufferings they will learn to appreciate 
as never before their relationship to the Lamb of God 
and to his atoning merit, and by faith will be permitted to 
apply the same to their own cleansing. 

ONCE IN GRACE ALWAYS IN GRACE 

These words represent the Calvinistic sentiment that 



whoever the Lord accepts into his family and begets of the 
holy Spirit will somehow or other, sometime, in some way, 
gain the heavenly estate. There is more of truth in this 
sentiment than some of the opposers of Calvinism realize. It 
is true that whoever draws back from the Lord, either in 
repudiation of the atonement sacrifice of our Lord Jesus or 
by a repudiation of the narrow way and a turning like the 
sow to wallowing in the mire, goes into the Second Death, 
"the blackness of darkness"— utter extinction; yet these, we 

R4037 : page 233 

have every reason to hope, will be few in comparison to the 
whole number begotten of the holy Spirit during this Gospel 
Age. 

Of the whole number of Spirit-begotten ones only a 
"little flock" gain the prize, and the others, failing of compliance 
with the terms of their covenant, might be utterly 
repudiated of the Lord, but he will not do this so long as 
they do not entirely repudiate him. Their failure to sacrifice 
willingly will not debar them from his care so long as 
they are at heart loyal to him. Since the seat in the throne 
provided for the "little flock" of sacrificers (represented by 
the Lord's goat) cannot be theirs, it is in mercy that the 
Lord permits them to become the scape-goat class, and to be 
driven into the wilderness and severely tried in the great 
time of trouble— that all faithful at heart may be delivered 
from the bondage of fear and share a heavenly estate on a 
lower plane than the Bride. Let us, nevertheless, so far from 
taking advantage of the Lord's grace and goodness in this 
manner, feel all the more love for him, so that we will the 
more valiantly and the more faithfully seek to lay down our 
lives in divine service and in behalf of the household of 
faith. 



R4037 : page 233 

GUIDED IN A LONG JOURNEY 

-NUMBERS 10:ll-13,29-36.-AUGUST 25.- 

Golden Text:— "And the Lord went before them by day in 
a pillar of cloud, to lead them the way, and by night in 
a pillar of fire to give them light."— Exodus 13:21. 

THE Israelites spent nearly a year at Mount Sinai before 
they were ready to begin the march for the land 
of promise. During that period quite a constructive 
work was accomplished amongst them, which transformed 
them from a horde of comparatively unorganized emigrants 
into a powerful nation, with covenant relationship to God. 
At Mount Sinai the Law Covenant was instituted, by which 
the nation was accepted of the Lord as his special people, 
distinguished from the other nations of the earth, they 



pledging themselves to full loyalty to the Lord and all the 
principles of his righteousness, and he pledging himself to 
them as their God, their guide, their protector. All of this 
arrangement, however, was centered in Moses, the mediator 
of that Law Covenant; he was the people's representative 
before the Lord and the Lord's representative before the 
people. 

Their organization now was a combination of political 
and military arrangement under judges and officers over 
thousands, hundreds, fifties and tens. (Ex. 18:25; Deut. 1:15.) 
Besides this they had a general council of seventy 
—supposedly the original Sanhedrim— Exodus 24:1; 
Num. 11:16. 

R4037 : page 234 

During this stay at Sinai the priesthood was organized, 
also the Tabernacle constructed and its religious services 
instituted, with the outlines of the feasts and fasts 
appointed of the Lord for perpetual observance throughout 
their generations. That certainly was a year of great 
advancement with them as a people— a year of great accomplishments 
in making them ready for the land. 

The wilderness of Sinai possessed rich though small 
valleys, and while there the people and their flocks and 
herds evidently prospered. The census according to Numbers 1:2 
showed their enumeration to be 603,550 men of twenty 
years old and upward, besides 22,273 Levites. This would 
imply a total number of about 2,000,000. 

When the time came to journey the Lord intimated it 
by causing the cloud to rise from the Tabernacle. It preceded 
the people, indicating the way in which they should 
go and guiding them into the desert of Paran, referred to in 
Deut. 1:19 as "a great and terrible wilderness." It must 
have seemed great to the people after traversing it hither 
and thither in the wanderings of their forty years. Amongst 
its terrors were the fiery serpents and the insufficient supply 
of water for so great a host. Remembering that the Israelites 
were only natural men, we cannot wonder at their murmurings 
against Moses and thus against the Lord in respect 
to many of their experiences. From our knowledge of humanity 
today we would be inclined to say that the murmuring 
disposition must be much greater now than it was then, 
for it is our opinion that no such host could be led for such 
a time under such conditions without the interposition of divine 
power. To have avoided murmuring and to have taken 
patiently all the wilderness difficulties would imply on 
the part of that people a faith greater than the natural 
man manifests anywhere today. 

The fact that they were led by the Lord Jehovah— 
that the pillar of glory guided their journeyings by day and 
the pillar of fire marked and enlightened their camp by 
night— would indeed be a continual reminder to them of 
the Lord their God, of his covenant with them and of their 
covenant with him. The daily portions of manna would 
remind them also of his watchful care of their interests. 



The smitten rock and the waters therefrom, refreshing them 
in the journey, would indeed speak of the power of God enlisted 
on their behalf, and afresh mark Moses as the divine 
representative and appointed leader in the right way. All 
this, however, would hardly account to them for the fact that 
the route chosen was far from the most direct one, and that 
the judgments visited upon them for their murmurings, etc., 
were severer by far than were those experienced by other 
nations round about them who worshiped idols and practised 
all manner of sin and contumacy. 

"SET FORTH FOR AN EXAMPLE" 

The only explanation of the whole matter and one 
which the Israelites could not themselves understand, because 
the time for its manifestation had not yet come, is the 
one given in the New Testament;— that the Israelites were 
used of the Lord as a typical people, whose testings for 
good and for evil were made to picture forth in advance the 
corresponding experiences of Spiritual Israel. As the Apostle 
points out, their rock and its water typified Christ and 
the water of life flowing from him. Their manna, our Lord 
indicated, typified the Bread which came down from heaven, 
of which if a man eat he shall live forever. The fiery serpents 
which harassed them and guided the eyes of the suffering to 
the brazen serpent raised upon a pole, symbolized sin and its 
injurious effects, which cause the sin-bitten to look unto 
him who was made a curse for us in that he hanged upon a 
tree. The murmuring of Aaron and Miriam against Moses 
was made the occasion of divine displeasure, typifying God's 
indignation against those who fail to recognize him as the 
leader of Spiritual Israel, and who fail to honor those 
whom he uses as his mouthpieces and servants. 

"The gainsaying of Korah" and his associates, claiming 
that they were just as well qualified as were Moses and 
Aaron to represent the Lord and his people in all religious 
functions, was punished severely, because of representing in 
the antitype those who would fail to recognize divine institutions 
in Spiritual Israel. The perishing of some for 
despising Moses' Law was intended to be a type or picture 
of the everlasting destruction of those who would despise 
the antitypical Moses and the redemptive work accomplished 
through him, and who consequently shall be destroyed in 
the Second Death. Their Mount Sinai represented as a 
type the Kingdom of God. The giving of the Law therefrom 
represented the promulgation of the divine Law at the institution 
of the New Covenant at the hands of the antitypical 
Mediator, the Christ of glory, in the end of this age. The 
quaking earth and lightning flash and trumpet voice connected 
with that inauguration of the Law Covenant typified, 
says the Apostle, the great time of trouble and complete 
shaking of everything with which the new dispensation, the 
Millennium, will be ushered in shortly. 

"MUCH ADVANTAGE EVERYWAY" 



The Apostle, after pointing out that the Law Covenant 
to Israel made nothing perfect for them, brought in no glorious 
kingdom and rewarded with no eternal life, but rather 
condemned them all, shut them up to the hope that should 
afterward come to them through the Gospel, tells us nevertheless 
that the Jews had "much advantage everyway— chiefly 
because to them were committed the oracles of God." 
(Rom. 3:2.) What does he mean? What advantage did 
they have? We reply that all of their difficulties in the 
wilderness and subsequently were profitable to them as a 
nation, and individually profitable also to those who were 
rightly exercised by the tests and thereby drawn near the 
Lord. 

Those experiences brought Israel at the time of our 
Lord's first advent into the first rank amongst the nations 
as respects holiness, godliness, righteousness; and Jews 
scattered all over the world at that time had a large influence 
in shaping whatever was good and noble amongst 
the most civilized, preparing the world in general for the 
Gospel message in its due season. We have the evidence of 
this in the fact that the earlier converts to Christianity were 
nearly all from the Jews and from those Gentiles who had 
previously had contact with the Jewish religion and more or 
less faith in the true God. Not only so, but the trying experiences 
to which those people were subjected developed 
in some of them grand qualities of heart and of mind, as is 
witnessed in King David and all the prophets, as well as in 
many of the less notable ones, the faith of some of whom is 
attested by the Apostle.— Hebrews 11. 

Some may be inclined to say, How could those blessings, 

R4038 : page 235 

coming to a few of the Israelites and to some of these 
centuries after, compensate them for their experiences, as, 
for instance, those who perished by the bite of the fiery serpents, 
and Korah and his band, whom the earth swallowed 
up, and others who died summarily for their violation of 
Moses' Law? Were not these irretrievable injuries, whatever 
the blessings of their trials to others of their people 
at the time, or to us the antitypical Israelites now? We 
answer, No! they were not irretrievable injuries. Like all 
the remainder of Adam's race they were under sentence of 
death because of original sin, and it mattered little whether 
they died in war or from pestilence or from serpent bites or 
by the earth opening beneath them, swallowing them up. 
They still have a share in the great blessing which God has 
provided through Jesus and through Spiritual Israel, whose 
difficulties and trials and testings they were illustrating as 
types. "Jesus Christ by the grace of God tasted death for 
every man," and this redemption included those we have 
enumerated. The time is coming when all the families of 
the earth shall be blessed through the Redeemer, and this 
will include those whose cases we are considering. The 
Master declares that the hour is coming in the which all that 
are in their graves shall hear his voice and come forth, 



either with the Ancient Worthies of the Jewish epoch or with 
the overcomers of this Gospel Age to the resurrection of the 
blessed and holy, or otherwise to the general resurrection of 
all those who have thus far failed to please God and to be 
accounted worthy of eternal life. 

The latter class will include the great majority of humanity, 
and their awakening will be with a view to giving 
them a most favorable opportunity to learn of God's grace 
in Christ, to accept of the same, and to gain eternal life in 
the Paradise of God. We see then that no injustice was 
done to the Jews, though the Lord treated them in some respects 
more severely than the heathen nations. Though 
they suffered under divine judgments, no loss or injury 
was done to any of them, as all will yet have 
a full opportunity of coming to a knowledge of the truth 
and to eternal life through the Redeemer and his Spiritual 
Israel. We see also that in an educational way 
the experiences given to that people lifted them out of 
the degradation in which they had been almost slaves 
to a foremost rank in the world. We can agree with 
the Apostle that Israel had much advantage every way, being 
accepted of the Lord and used of him as types and shadows 
in connection with the preparation for his Spiritual Israel, 
the true Seed of Abraham, through which all the families of 
the earth are to be blessed. 

SPIRITUAL ISRAEL STILL MORE BLESSED 

If it was blessed to be associated with the Lord as members 
of the house of servants under Moses, how much more 
blessed is it to be now associated with the Lord as members 
of the still higher house of sons under Christ! If the performance 
of the types and shadows was honorable and 
brought blessings, how much greater must be the favors and 
blessings and honors attaching to those who serve the antitypical 
altar, the antitypical temple, as members of the Royal 
Priesthood, the Body of Christ! It is when we begin to see 
something of the lengths and breadths and heights and 
depths of the divine plan, and the glory that will surely attach 
to the ministers of divine grace when the reign of sin 
and death shall be ended, when the time of sacrificing shall 
be over and when the time of glory and blessing shall be 
ushered in— that we appreciate the situation, and be, 
Oh, so thankful, for the privileges we have as Spiritual 
Israelites, as members of the Royal Priesthood, in attesting 
our loyalty to the Lord and his Word and his people, 
that we might be accounted worthy of a share with him and 
with our Redeemer in the glory, honor and immortality of 
the Kingdom. 

HOBAB, THE SON OF RAGUEL 

We have previously seen that Moses spent forty years 
near the Sinai wilderness in the family of his father-in-law, 
Jethro Raguel (Jethro is supposed to have been the title and 
Raguel the proper name). This lesson introduces Hobab, 



supposedly Moses' brother-in-law, who belonged to what is 
known as the Kenites, an Arab tribe of Midian, east of Sinai. 
Hobab had been with the people of Israel, but now upon 
their start on the journey for Canaan he contemplated returning 
to his own people, and our lesson sets forth two 
arguments on the part of Moses to influence him to remain. 
He said:— 

(1) "We are journeying into the place of which the 
Lord said, I will give it you. Come thou with us, and we 
will do thee good, for the Lord hath spoken good concerning 
Israel." 

What words of faith, and how humble a statement from 
the leader of 2,000,000 of people. We note the utter absence 
of reference to himself and what he would do, or of his 
authority and power. Only the Lord's power and the Lord's 
blessing were either invoked or mentioned. Very properly 
we may regard this as a suggestion for ourselves in connection 
with our journeying toward the heavenly Canaan. Those 
who are with us, friends or neighbors or kindred, should be 
invited along these lines— lines of faith: "Come thou with 
us and we will do thee good, for the Lord hath spoken good 
concerning Israel." Whoever comes with us receives a 
blessing, and in urging any to come with us we receive a 
blessing because our own faith is encouraged, stimulated, 
and our own obedience also to the Lord; for shall we say 
to others, The Lord will do thee good, and not experience 
good ourselves and not realize the blessings we are receiving 
day by day from the Lord's hand? And if they do come 
with us how the fact that we have suggested the matter and 
promised them a blessing would help to keep us from murmuring 
and complaining, and from manifesting anything else 
than the good we are continually receiving from the Lord. 
We do well, then, as Spiritual Israelites, to follow Moses' example 
in our appeals to those who are under our influence 
—we do well to quote to them the promises of the Lord, 
and to show our faith in the same. 

But these arguments failed to influence Hobab, just as 
similar arguments on our part have failed to influence our 
friends. But, like Moses, we should not be ready to give up 
our endeavors to do good to others. We should bring forth 
other arguments, as he did. He urged Hobab further:— 

(2) "Leave us not, I pray thee; forasmuch as thou 
knowest how we are to encamp in the wilderness and thou 
mayest be to us instead of eyes. And it shall be if thou 
goest with us, yea, it shall be that what good soever the Lord 
shall do unto us, the same will we do unto thee." 

R4038 : page 236 

Applying this argument to our friends it would seem to 
imply that we should help to make a place for them in connection 
with the Lord's service, again assuring them of a 
share in the reward. This argument did appeal to Hobab, 
and he went with the Israelites, and we have records 
of the Kenites amongst the Israelites for centuries, down to 
the time of Saul. (Judges 1:16; 4:11; 1 Sam. 15:6.) The 



intimation that he could be of service to the Israelites attracted 
him from his own country and people. Similarly 
some may be attracted to the Lord's people by opportunity 
for rendering service. It should be remembered, however, 
that there are varieties of service, and that the Kenites 
were never invited to minister as priests at the altar. And 
so the Lord's people should not feel it to be appropriate 
that they should elect to places of prominence in the Church 
those who have not fully and completely made a consecration 
to the Lord; neither should they repel them, but 
rather be willing to use each and all to the extent of their 
willingness to serve and cooperate in the Lord's work. 
Hobab, more familiar with this trackless wilderness 
than Moses and the Israelites, could give them many suggestions 
that would be helpful respecting water courses, pasturage, 
wells, etc. And here we see the appropriateness of 
all the Lord's people following a similar course to that of 
Moses. Notwithstanding his appreciation of the Lord as a 
leader of the hosts of Israel and the pillar of fire by night 
and the cloud by day, notwithstanding that he gave all 
honor for blessings past and those expected in the future 
to the Giver of every good, nevertheless he was ready to 
make use of every human instrumentality that would aid 
in the carrying out of the divine program. He did not 
expect of the Lord miracles in respect to matters that 
would properly come under human judgment and foresight. 
And so it is with us in all of the affairs of our 
earthly and spiritual interests: in all our ways we should 
acknowledge the Lord as the author and finisher of our 
course; but we should also, while seeking the wisdom from 
above for ourselves and for the work, do everything within 
our power, use every human agency and means in cooperation 
with the Lord and his mighty power. His proposition 
is that we may do all things through his strength— that he 

R4039 : page 236 

will use and bless our humble efforts for the carrying out 
of his great purposes. Some of the Lord's people seem to 
lack a proper judgment along these lines— some of them are 
even disposed to criticise as lacking in faith those who, like 
Moses, seek to use human instrumentalities in cooperation 
with the divine service and guidance. 

Our lesson informs us that every morning in their services, 
when in obedience to the movement of the cloud they 
started forward in their journey, there was a simple religious 
service, Moses proclaiming in the ears of the leaders and 
through them in the ears of the people,— 

"Rise up, O Lord, and let thine enemies be scattered, 
And let them that hate thee flee before thee." 
In the evening, when the camp settled from the journey 
of the day, again Moses' voice rang out in the words,— 
"Return, O Lord, unto the many thousands of Israel."— 
"Abide with us." 
What was thus done every day by the Lord's direction 
in Natural Israel surely takes place with equal regularity in 



Spiritual Israel. All who will be found faithful, all Israelites 
indeed, as they go forth every morning to the journey of 
life, to the battle of life, to the trials and testings by the 
way, must surely learn to look unto the Lord as the Captain 
of their salvation, as the one through whom alone Satan and 
his hosts can be defeated, through whom alone we can 
have the victory. "Rise up, O Lord, and let thine enemies 
be scattered; let them that hate thee flee before thee," and 
let us who love thee and abide in thy love and under thy 
protecting care, be safe-guarded from every experience that 
would do us real harm, and be "kept by the power of God 
through faith." 

Which Spiritual Israelite can afford to retire at the 
close of the day without retrospectively calling to mind the 
goodness of the Lord and desiring his continued favor and 
protection in the shades of night? Which true Israelite 
will long be an Israelite indeed if he fail to acknowledge the 
Lord in all his ways, in his downlyings and his uprisings? 
As the Apostle says, whether we eat or whether we drink or 
whatsoever we do all should be done to his glory, and if in 
all our ways we will acknowledge him let us at the close of 
each day employ language somewhat similar to that of Moses 
and say to the Lord, Abide, O Lord, with all the thousands 
of thy true Israel everywhere. Keep us, guard us, according 
to thy wisdom and thy love in Christ Jesus ! 

The spirit of faith and reverence which runs all 
through the divine Word attests most grandly to the characters 
of those whom the Lord has used prominently in his 
service in the past, and gives even to the babes in Christ a 
confidence and assurance lacking in words from other 
sources not inspired nor infused by the Spirit of the Lord. 
As a grand example of these Biblical benedictions note that 
of the high priest, wherewith he was accustomed to bless 
the people, saying,— 

"The Lord bless thee and keep thee, 

The Lord make his face to shine upon thee, 

And be gracious unto thee! 

The Lord lift up his countenance upon thee 

And give thee peace." 



R4039 : page 236 

THE FAR-WEST CONVENTION TOUR 

THE Editor left Allegheny on June 29th, the friends 
of the neighborhood singing, as the train pulled 
out, "God be with you till we meet again." Our 
last mutual salute was with handkerchiefs, as we stood 
on the rear platform of the train. Truly no other tie 
so binds our hearts in Christian love as does the spirit 
of the Truth. 

Sunday, June 30th: Dear friends awaited our arrival 
at the Chicago depot, and we were soon at Handel 
Hall. A praise and testimony meeting came first. It 



was truly a season of refreshing. At its close the Editor 
gave a brief address. 

None of the sessions was for the public, nor advertised, 
except in the WATCH TOWER. There was a fine 
attendance nevertheless, not only of Chicago friends 
but from nearby places as well. The attendance at the 

R4039 : page 237 

afternoon session was the largest— about 550. Closest 
attention was given to a discourse on "Gather my 
saints together unto me, those that have made a covenant 
with me by sacrifice." (Psa. 50:5.) This discourse 
has already been reported in the Dispatch and News. 

The evening meeting was not quite so well attended, 
because some had home duties and our stay for a 
late train was not anticipated. About 300 stayed during 
a hot evening for a Question Meeting, which lasted 
two and a half hours. Then, accompanied by some of 
the dear brethren to the depot, we started for Denver, 
weary from the work but full of joy in our privileges 
of serving so grand a cause. 

Denver, July 1st: Friends from Texas, Arkansas, 
Missouri, Oklahoma, Nebraska and Colorado, to the 
number of about 200, had been in session two days before 
our arrival and seemingly had enjoyed themselves 
greatly. 

As our stay was limited to the one day, a Question 
Meeting was considered one of the most desirable; and 
the questions themselves showed that the dear friends 
had been thinking quite a good deal along very important 
features of the divine plan. We have concluded to 
reproduce many of them for the general interest of all 
in the WATCH TOWER columns. Here also we spoke 
on the text, "Gather my saints together unto me, those 
that have made a covenant with me by sacrifice." 

Again we were obliged to say, Good-bye! with the 
thought that we should never all meet again this side 
the vail, but hoping to meet many of the dear ones in 
the Kingdom, for the attainment of which hope we 
urged faithfulness even unto death. 

At Ogden, Utah, some of the dear friends, having 
learned of our time of arrival, met us at the station. 
We had a pleasant interchange of greetings and good 
wishes and promises of prayers for one another, and 
soon were again speeding on our way to Los Angeles, 
via Salt Lake City. A wait of two hours at the latter 
place gave us a chance to see this thriving city, whose 
population now is about one-half Mormon. 

Our train reached Los Angeles too late for the 
evening meeting of July 4th, but we had a most enjoyable 
season of refreshing on the 5th. We greeted the 
dear brethren from various cities and villages for miles 
about. These personal greetings seem to us and to 
many to be one of the chief blessings of these Conventions. 
In speaking we can add but little to what we 



have already published in the DAWNS and TOWERS and 
printed discourses, but as iron sharpeneth iron so doth 
the countenance and word of Christian fellowship and 
the hand-grasp cheer each other on the narrow way 
toward the heavenly Canaan. 

The morning service for two hours was devoted to 
the answering of questions— this being esteemed the 
best way to serve the largest number, considering the 
brevity of our stay. In the afternoon for an hour and a 
half we discoursed to the dear friends along the lines 
of our mutual hopes and prospects and the imminence of 
the gathering of the last members to the Lord— beyond 
the vail. Incidentally we showed that our gathering 
must not be to human sects and parties, nor to human 
leaders, great or small— but to Christ, our Lord and 
Head; that the "harvest" work is his; that he is doing 
the gathering into his "garner," and that human helpers 
at very most are to be esteemed as his servants and 
channels and not otherwise heeded or honored. We 
left the dear friends still in session and took the 5.30 
train for Oakland, Cal., where we arrived safely and on 
time the next morning. 

Oakland, Cal., July 6: We were warmly received 
by Bros. W. and E. Bundy, Sexton and Andrews, and 
after cleaning up went to the Hamilton Auditorium, 
where services were already in progress— Bro. E. Bundy 
having just delivered an address as per the program. 
Bro. Russell spoke to the Colporteurs and Volunteers, 
setting forth how the Lord seems to be specially using 
these two branches of the service in the present "harvest" 
time for gathering his saints. He announced that 
Vol. I of DAWN-STUDIES had already reached the 
2,000,000 mark and was advancing despite the efforts 
of preachers and others to misrepresent its teachings 
and hinder its circulation. Although they have influence 
to hinder its sale in book-stores and to hinder its 
advertisement in religious journals this opposition is 
evidently overruled by the Lord for the good of his 
people, for it opens the way to colporteurs, who are themselves 
being blessed both by the service and the consecration 
it inculcates, regardless of the number who 
are thus led to accept the Truth. The great blessing 
afforded by the Volunteers' distribution of the tracts 
was also pointed out. 

The fact that these volunteer tract distributors include 
people of refinement and education and business 
standing gives weight to this literature which is going 
out this year more freely than ever. The subject matter 
this year is considered excellent, and more of the 
friends of the Truth are realizing that they consecrated 
to service and until death, and that the time is short in 

R4040 : page 237 

which they may labor in the vineyard. The fact that 
these tracts are supplied free and freight paid was also 



noted, and how this leaves no excuse for idleness on 

the part of those who are stewards of time and opportunity. 

To this service of the Lord and the Truth and 

the "Brethren" still in Babylon the speaker attributed 

much of the growth in grace and knowledge so noticeable 

in the gatherings of the past few years. 

Brother Russell spoke again in the afternoon from 
3 to 4.30 on, "Gather my saints together unto me, 
those who have made a covenant with me by sacrifice." 
And in the evening he conducted for two hours a Question 
Meeting. 

The Sunday morning session opened with a praise 
and testimony service, following which Bro. R. preached 
from the text, "If ye abide in me and my words abide 
in you, ye shall ask what ye will and it shall be done 
unto you." This discourse many of you have already 
seen in the Dispatch and News. 

The service for the public was held in the First 
M.E. Church— the topic being, "The Overthrow of Satan's 

R4040 : page 238 

Empire." An audience estimated at 1 100 gave 

profound attention, and our hope is that some were 

blessed. Accompanied to the depot by a committee of 

the Church and with happy recollections and prayers 

we started northward for Portland. Delayed, we were 

two days and two nights in reaching Portland; but in 

the Lord's providence and by the forethought of the 

brethren in providing a cab we reached the First Christian 

Church edifice just in time for the appointed services, 

which had been widely advertised. The Church 

was crowded with intelligent hearers (about 600— probably 

one-third of whom were interested friends from 

the city, and some came 400 miles). The service lasted 

two hours, and following it we had an hour of very enjoyable 

greeting and fellowship with the friends. 

At 1 1.45 p.m. we started for Seattle, Wash., where 
we arrived safely Wednesday morning, July 10— two of 
the dear friends of the Portland Church accompanying 
us. The fact that the Christian Endeavor Society 
opened its session the same day in the same city did 
not hinder "the brethren" from having a blessed season 
of refreshing. First, last and all the time we exchanged 
greetings, and wished each other divine guidance to 
the end of the journey and our hoped-for reunion in 
"the General Assembly of the Church of the First-Born, 
whose names are written in heaven." 

Our opening service was a praise and testimony 
meeting led by Brother Acheson. It was good to be 
there. The testimonies as usual were from hearts full 
of praise to God for deliverance from darkness into his 
marvelous light. All of our hearts were surely encouraged. 
Those in attendance were chiefly from the surrounding 
country within a radius of 400 miles, also 
from points in British Columbia, and even Alaska 



had a representative. 

The Seattle Church had provided a splendid dinner 
for the entire company— about 175. We feared at first 
that this meant that some of the dear sisters were deprived 
of the privileges of the meetings and fellowship; 
but were assured that the advice given in the TOWER 
that the spiritual privileges be considered paramount 
had been concurred in, and that six helpers not interested 
in the Truth had been secured for the day. An 
equally substantial supper was provided, and was enjoyed 
by all the dear friends, who thanked the Lord, 
the Giver of all good, and rejoiced in the fellowship of 
kindred minds, so like to that above. 

At the afternoon session there was a discourse for 
the interested, and it was listened to by about 200, and 
following it for an hour we answered a number of interesting 
questions propounded by the audience. After 
the splendid supper already mentioned came the discourse 
to the public on "The Overthrow of Satan's Empire." 
Brother C. A. Wise, our companion in travel, 
opened the meeting and introduced Brother Russell, 
the speaker. This discourse had been well advertised 
and the attendance was estimated at more than nine 
hundred. Close attention was given to the end, a 
little after 9, when an automobile took us quickly to the 
9.30 train of the N.P.R.R. En route ten dear friends 
met us at the Spokane depot and told us of others of 
their number who were not present owing to some misunderstanding 
respecting our train time. The loving 
greetings refreshed us, and we trust that the Spokane 
friends were also refreshed. We did not fail to send 
greetings to the disappointed ones. 

A journey of three days and nights under divine 
Providence brought us safely to St. Paul on Saturday 
at 2.30 p.m. There Brother John Hoskins and others 
awaited our arrival and took us at once to the 3 p.m. 
meeting, for which the friends had already gathered. 
Our discourse was to the interested and dealt with our 
privileges and responsibilities as the Lord's stewards. 
We answered a number of very intelligent questions 
with profit, we trust, to some. After this service we 
had a delightful season of fellowship with the dear 
friends of St. Paul and Minneapolis as well as with 
about 60 from more or less distant points. We had 
supper with a party of forty as the guests of Brother 
J. Hoskins. 

The evening session was for the public— and notwithstanding 
it was the busiest night of the week (Saturday) 
we had a fine audience numbering between 700 
and 800 very intelligent people, who heard with closest 
attention what we had to tell regarding "The Overthrow 
of Satan's Empire." 

We left St. Paul about 1 1 p.m. for our next appointment, 
and notwithstanding the rain a dozen or 
more of the friends sang us adieu in the words of the 
sweet hymn, 



"Blest be the tie that binds 

Our hearts in Christian love; 
The fellowship of kindred minds 
Is like to that above." 

The night was stormy and our train lost time until 
we missed connections, obliging us to change our 
route and causing us to miss our appointment for a 
Sunday morning service in the First M.E. Church of 
Appleton. However, under divine providence we finally 
reached the Chatauqua grounds just fifteen minutes 
before the time appointed for our discourse on "To Hell 
and Back." A grand audience awaited us, large in 
numbers and very intelligent, estimated at between 
2000 and 3000. For two hours we had profound attention, 
and hope that some blind eyes were anointed with 
the eyesalve of divine Truth, so that henceforth they 
will see more distinctly the Justice and the Love of our 
God, as revealed in his Word— rightly understood. 

After the discourse we were cordially greeted by 
quite a large number, many of them TOWER readers 
from various adjacent localities. In the evening we 
had a most enjoyable season, and addressed the friends 
on "The True Vine and the False Vine." The next 
morning (Monday) about sixteen of the friends gathered 
at the depot and bade us goodbye; and then when 
we went aboard the train they sang, "God be with you 
till we meet again." 

On arrival at Chicago Brother Jones, M.D., met 
us at the depot to urge that between trains we visit two 
dear brethren at the Home for Incurables. We did so 
and were well repaid for our trouble. The dear brethren, 

R4040 : page 239 

unable to walk, had shining faces and told of their 
joy in the Lord and in his glorious Truth. They even 
declared that notwithstanding pains which they endeavored 
to forget in their joy in the Lord, they esteemed 
that their afflictions were blessings in disguise, because 
they thereby got time for study and prayer which 
they never had before. Our visit ended with a prayer 
and we returned to the depot, where others joined our 
company for goodby greetings— there were seven in all. 
Here we parted also with dear Brother Wise, whose 
company for the two weeks had been so helpful. We 
parted with mutual expressions of love and prayers and 
hopes for meeting at the Niagara Convention— and 
above all at "The General Assembly of the Church of 
the First-Borns." 

Without further incidents of note we arrived safely 
at Allegheny on July 16 and had a joyous meeting once 
more with the Bible House family. 

Looking back over our hasty journey of approximately 
7,500 miles, and remembering the hundreds of 
dear friends greeted— many of them for the first time 
—we render fresh thanks to God for the wonderful possibilities 



of our day. How evidently the wider "harvesting" 
of this Gospel Age has made necessary the 
peculiar preparations of this time as compared with 
the "harvesting" of the Jewish Age— seeing that the 
same length of time is allotted to each. 

The lasting impression of this trip as a whole, you 
may be glad to know, is this: that love amongst the 
brethren is broadening and deepening. Contrasting 
recent experiences with those of years ago, we note less 
of a spirit of boastfulness and belligerency as respects 
a knowledge of the Truth, and a greater humility and 
spirit of thankfulness to God for deliverance "out of 
darkness into His marvelous light," and a greater desire 
to render the service of love. Thus the various 
degrees of love are more clearly manifested and we 
trust will continue so to be until the end of the pilgrim 
journey to the heavenly city— meekness, gentleness, 
patience, brotherly kindness, Love. As these graces 
more and more abound and display themselves, they 
give evidence that larger and yet larger numbers are 
being polished and "made meet for the inheritance of 
the saints"; for an abundant entrance shall be ministered 
unto such into the everlasting Kingdom of our 
Lord and Savior. 



R4041 : page 239 

AN INTERESTING QUESTION ANSWERED 

Question.— Please explain Romans 6:7: "For he that 
is dead is freed from sin." 

Answer.— The Apostle is not here speaking of original 
sin— the transgression which brought the death 
penalty upon the race: he is addressing those who had 
passed from death unto life through Christ, and who 
now, at the time of his writing, were New Creatures in 
Christ Jesus. He is representing sin as the great taskmaster 
which previously held them in slavery to wickedness, 
and he exhorts them now to consider themselves 
as though they had gotten free from that slavery 
to the taskmaster in as full and complete a sense as a 
slave would be free from his master if he died. You 
will notice this thought running through the discourse 
of this chapter, as for instance in verses 12,14,16,17,18, 
and this is explained to be figurative language in 
verse 19. 

It will be noticed that this is not a question of sin 
having dominion over the New Creature, but a question 
of sin still having dominion over the flesh, the 
earthen vessel. Carrying on the same argument, the 
Apostle says (8:10), "If Christ be in you the body is 
dead because of sin, but the spirit is alive because of 
righteousness." Then he exhorts that it be not satisfactory 
to us merely to count our bodies dead to sin, 



so that we will not permit them to serve sin, but that 
the new mind in us shall take control and actuate these 
mortal bodies, and make of them servants of the new 
mind, servants of righteousness, servants of Christ. 
He assures us that the Spirit of God which was powerful 
enough to raise our Lord Jesus actually from the 
dead is powerful enough, if we lay hold of it properly, 
to permit such a quickening of our mortal bodies to 
newness of life. 

Man can pay his penalty in death; but when the 
penalty has been inflicted to the full there is nothing of 
man left: hence it means his utter and everlasting destruction. 
To suppose anything left after the penalty 
had been inflicted, would be to suppose some part of 
him that had not been condemned; but we know that the 
language of Genesis is, "Thou shalt surely die," 
and that the law was stated to be, "The soul that sinneth 
it shall die." We see, then, that nothing of the 
man, nothing of the being, is exempted from the penalty, 
and so long as the man lay under the penalty he 
could have no right to life to all eternity. 

There is no provision for a second life except 
through a redemption accomplished by our Lord Jesus 
—the work being finished at Calvary, and subsequently 
accepted of the Father, and his acceptance manifested 
by the outpouring of the holy Spirit at Pentecost. But 
God did not deal with the man to acquit him. God 
merely passes the man as a purchased possession over 
to the care of his Redeemer, Jesus,— Justice giving to 
Jesus a full title to the man, and all the rights, etc., 
which he ever enjoyed. 

You will perceive that this gives the man no rights 
of his own, but commits all things to the Son. We 
must therefore inquire of the Son how he proposes to 
deal with the purchased possession. Briefly we understand 
the testimony of the Word to be that the Son, 
during the Millennial Age, will judge the world by, 
through and in conjunction with his elect Church, and 
that all shall have the opportunity of coming up to human 
perfection under the chastisements and disciplines 
of the Millennial Age, and that failing to improve these 
blessed opportunities they will be cut off in the Second 
Death. Some of the Scriptures bearing upon the subject 
would seem to imply punishment for misdeeds of 
the present life— but we believe only for such misdeeds 
as were committed against some degree of light, or 
against some of the children of light. Those who had 
no knowledge whatever of the divine arrangement in 
Christ could have no responsibility in the sense of 
meriting special punishment, because they were under 
the original condemnation, and their personal responsibility 
under the New Covenant could only begin when 
they came to some degree of knowledge respecting it. 
However, we can readily see that to whatever extent 
any violate the laws of nature, they degrade themselves; 
and that every step downward in the present life, will 



require effort to retrace it during the Millennial Age. 



page 241 

SEMI-MONTHLY 
VOL. XXVIII AUGUST 15 No. 16 
A.D. 1907--A.M. 6035 



CONTENTS 

Views from the Watch Tower 243 

The Missionary Without the Halo 243 

Niagara Falls Convention 244 

Watch Tower Foreign Missions 244 

"Having Done All, Stand" 245 

"The Lord Hath Done Great Things for Us, 
Whereof We are Glad" 246 

"The Ox Knoweth His Owner and the Ass 
His Master's Crib" 247 

"Of Your Own Selves Men Shall Arise, Speaking 
Perverse Things" 248 

"Let Me Take Out the Mote" 249 

Reporting from Two Viewpoints 250 

The Brazen Serpent and Its Antitype 252 

The Sin of Moses 253 

page 242 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-24 EVERSHOLT ST., LONDON, N.W. 
GERMAN BRANCH-MIRKER STR., 45, ELBERFELD. 
AUSTRALASIAN BRANCH-EQUITABLE BLDG., COLLINS ST., MELBOURNE 

PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 

TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR AS FOLLOWS:- 

All Bible Students who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity or 
adversity, are unable to pay for this Journal, will be supplied FREE if 
they send a Postal Card each June stating their case and requesting its 
continuance. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on\ 
our list continually and in touch with the Studies, etc. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



THIS JOURNAL IS PUBLISHED IN THE 

FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, DANISH AND ITALIAN LANGUAGES. 

SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



A STRIKE at the bindery which does our work has delayed 
shipment of MANNA to Great Britain and also the orders 
of some colporteurs. It is over now, and all orders will soon 
be filled. 

1907--VOLUNTEER TRACTS--1907 



This year's Volunteer tracts are going out very rapidly. 
We are doing our best to keep up with the increased demand 
and rejoice that an increasing number of the Lord's people 
are appreciating this privilege and will gain a spiritual blessing 
therefrom. We request that all who send in orders specify 
particularly the quantities they can and will use judiciously 
and promptly. We will be glad to double the shipments. 

THE TABERNACLE AND THE PRIESTS 



These two beautiful chromos, considerably delayed, are 
now in good supply and should be in all of our homes— to remind 
us of their glorious antitypes, of which we have been 
studying for some time past in our "Berean Lessons." 

By getting them out in large quantities we can supply 
them at 30c per pair, or 4 pairs for $1.00, post or express prepaid 
by us. They are very handsome and easily worth several 
times the price. We merely aim to meet the cost. The 
foreign shipments will go forward at once. We regret the 
delay. 



R4041 : page 243 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER 
THE MISSIONARY WITHOUT THE HALO 



THE American conception of a missionary is "a man 
with a book, going out among the natives, preaching, 
preaching, always and everywhere preaching, 
'as a dying man to dying men.'" So says Mr. William 
T. Ellis, who is at present engaged in looking at the 
transplanted preacher with unemotional eyes. His 



present field of observation is China, which, he says, 
"furnishes the greatest variety of missionaries." This 
prevalent idea is a misconception, we are told, for 
"there is probably as little of accosting wayfarers in 
China on the subject of religion as there is in America." 
The missionary is a man not different from those who 
preach at home except as, in the minds of his supporters, 
a kind of religious romanticism has invested him 
with a halo. "The man or woman who engages in foreign 
missionary work," says Mr. Ellis (in the New York 
Tribune, May 26), "is commonly regarded as a person 
of peculiar sanctity, chivalry, devotion, sacrifice, and 
courage." The "real" missionary is described in these 
words: 

"Occasionally I have met a missionary, usually 
young and second-rate, who takes himself quite as seriously 
as his friends at home take him, and who, well 
aware that he is one of the noble army of martyr spirits, 
goes about wearing his halo with all the self-consciousness 
of a girl with a new Easter hat. 

"Most missionaries, on the other hand, feel foolish 
because of the false attitude in which they are placed 
by their idealizing admirers at home. Some of them 
have used quite unmissionary forcibleness of speech on 
this point. They say that they are neither extraordinary 
saints nor heroes, and that they are not living 
lives of physical hardship and sacrifice; those who 
really have hardships say nothing about them. That, 
in reality, they do not correspond to the image of themselves 
ever being held up in sermons, speeches, and 
articles no one knows quite so well as themselves. If 
permitted to speak frankly, they would say, as many 
have said to me, that they have fewer material discomforts 
than the average home missionary or country 
pastor." 

The missionary himself may have shared the romantic 
views of the home people before he entered 
upon the work of the foreign field; but Mr. Ellis shows 
how his change of view comes about through perfectly 
natural causes. Thus: 

"The recruit reaches the field in a state of spiritual 
exaltation. He has renounced home, friends, country, 
and worldly prospects, in order to preach the Gospel to 
the heathen. Fully expectant of hardships and self-denial 
and possible martyrdom, he has nerved himself 
to the worst. His first shock comes when he finds a 
welcome awaiting him in a comfortable American home, 
possibly better than the one he has left. He looks 
about in vain for the crosses that he has strengthened 
his shoulders to bear. Then, instead of life on the qui 
vive for the conversion of the heathen, he finds existence 
quite a hum-drum matter. He discovers that he 
is not to preach to crowds or to converse by the wayside 
upon salvation, or to teach the ignorant or to heal 
the sick; two solid years must be devoted to the deadening 
duty of learning the language. Not romance, 



but routine, such as schoolboys know, is his lot. 
There is no glamour about mastering Chinese characters 
and Chinese pronunciation; it is all grind, grind, 
grind, until the poor student wonders whether, after 
all, missionary work is worth while. 

"During these first years, which plane off the corners 
of the soul's enterprise and initiative, the new missionary 
becomes adapted to his environment; the heathen are no 
longer a novelty; they are everywhere— in his kitchen, in 
his study, in every highway and byway. He meets them 
whichever way he turns. Soon the missionary discovers 
that the heathen half a world away are far more interesting 
than the heathen swarming about him on 
every hand. In this latter fact is a depressing power 
difficult to define or describe, but tremendously real in 
experience. The atmosphere of a heathen land seems 
to steal a man's enthusiasm. It reins the war-horse, 
chafing at the bit, down to the dog-trot of the livery 
hack. So the ordinary missionary finds himself plodding 

R4042 : page 244 

along established lines and living not at all the 

life he expected to live when he sailed from his native 

shores. 

"My own judgment has affirmed the criticism made 
to me in numerous specific cases that the dwellings of 
the missionaries are entirely too sumptuous for persons 
of their vocation. Rightly or wrongly, the Church and 
the world associate the idea of sacrifice with the missionary's 
calling; the natives, too, quickly come to see 
the apparent discrepancy between the preaching of 
self-denial and the practise of material luxury; some 
of the most serious strictures upon the missionary's 
style of living have come to me from native preachers. 
Often, I am convinced, the fault lies directly with the 
boards at home; some missionaries have lamented, in 
my hearing, the elaborateness and impressiveness of 
their residences. They deplore the contrast between 
their houses and those of the wealthiest natives. The 
missionary, they reason, should be the last person conspicuous 
for evidences of worldly position. The theory 
that it is necessary to 'impress' the heathen is utterly 
fallacious; the disciple cannot improve upon the spirit 
of his Master, the lowly Nazarene." 

page 244 

NIAGARA FALLS CONVENTION 



EXCURSION RATES, ROOM ENGAGEMENTS, ETC. 

This Convention is timed to take advantage of the 
"TORONTO FAIR" excursion rates. Besides, there are 



special excursions to the Falls every year from many 
large cities and intermediate places. Inquire of your 
railway agent for particulars and judge what will suit 
you best. 

WATCH TOWER B. & T. SOCIETY'S EXCURSION 

A rate of one-way fare, plus one-third, is granted by 
the railroads to our Society for the round trip. Remember 
this and use it IF YOU CANNOT DO BETTER. This is 
known as the Certificate Plan. You pay one full fare 
and get a Certificate which entitles you to purchase 
your return ticket for one-third the regular fare. 

CHICAGO CLASS EXCURSION 

There will be a special excursion train of Truth 
people from Chicago. They have a round trip rate of 
$14.05 to Toronto, Canada (via Niagara Falls), and return. 
They will be glad to have the company of any of 
the friends to whom their arrangement would be a convenience 
or a saving. Address, Dr. L. W. Jones, 2024 
Washington Boulevard, Chicago. 

TOLEDO CLASS EXCURSION 

The Toledo, Ohio, friends have secured a very favorable 
rate via the Lake Erie night steamers to Niagara 
and return, $4.00 (stateroom berths, 75c extra). They, 
too, will welcome any to whom their arrangements may 
prove convenient or economical. Address, C. H. S. 
Kuehn, 620 Chestnut St., Toledo. 

CLEVELAND CLASS EXCURSION 

Cleveland, Ohio, on Lake Erie, also has fine night 
steamers for Buffalo and Niagara Falls. An excursion 
rate of $3.00 has been secured (single berths, 75c extra). 
Friends from other places will be welcome to join on 
same terms. Address, John G. Kuehn, 922 Prospect 
Ave., Cleveland. 

ALLEGHENY -PITTSBURG CLASS EXCURSION 

The WATCH TOWER CONVENTION EXCURSION Certificate 
tickets will be the cheapest for the friends in this 
vicinity— round trip, $8.87. Consequently arrangements 
will be made for two first-class cars specially reserved 
for their use, starting from here at 9 a.m. Central time 
(10 o'clock Pittsburg time), Thursday, August 29. 
Friends from neighboring places may be provided for 
by advising W. D. Witt, 612 Arch St., Allegheny. Such 
should see that their tickets read via the Pittsburg & 
Lake Erie R.R., and do not forget the Certificate. 

Those desiring to go in advance will find a $7.45 
rate on Tuesday, Aug. 27. 



SECURE YOUR LODGINGS 

Those who desire hotel accommodations can readily 
be accommodated on arrival, for Niagara's fine 
hotels are numerous. But not many of our readers can 
afford $3 to $5 per day for this item. 

Those desiring $1.50 to $2 per day hotels, or lodging 
only at 50c. to $1 per night (taking meals at restaurants), 
will do well to let us secure accommodations 
for them in advance through brethren of that vicinity. 

Write of this to the WATCH TOWER, Allegheny, 
on separate letter sheet, indicating sex (and if colored), 
stating the number of your party, and which two would 
occupy same double bed. The 50c. lodging is usually 
for several in a room and two in each bed. Separate 
bed and room $1 and up each night. Add on envelope 
the words Convention Department. 

COLPORTEURS AT THE CONVENTION 

A dear friend of the Truth is desirous of helping 
any of the Colporteurs who may need his aid to attend 
the Niagara Convention. Accordingly he has placed 
in the Society's treasury a sum of money to be thus 
used to the extent of one-half the expenses of any Colporteur 
now on our lists as such, and from whom we have 
had book orders and sales reports during July and 
August. 

It rejoices us to believe that this worthy generosity 
will enable quite a number of our dear Colporteurs to 
attend the Convention and profit by the Colporteur fellowship 
and instructions who otherwise might not be 
able to do so. We urge such to accept the offer. 



R4042 : page 244 

WATCH TOWER FOREIGN MISSIONS 

DEAR friends everywhere were greatly interested 
in the Japanese missionary's letter published 
in our July 15 issue. We have pleasure in telling 
you that we authorized the Japanese translation 
before the letter was published, and made a remittance 
for that purpose. We will see later as to the advisability 
of publishing, and how many copies. You will 
know in due time all particulars. Meantime we must 
be secretive because of our numerous enemies. 

The Jamaica Mission prospers finely; but the 
African work has not amounted to much yet. We are 
not without hope for it in the future, however. Brother 
Booth surely has considerable zeal. 

Meantime we have some news from China. We 



R4042 : page 245 

learn that the Truth reached a lieutenant in the British 
forces there, who, full of zeal, interested others 
of his fellow-soldiers, of whom four symbolized their 
consecration by water baptism. His activity, we learn, 
made him obnoxious to the missionaries, and it is supposed 
that the latter secured his removal from China. 

This surely means the carrying of the good tidings 
to still another foreign field, and seemingly under the 
Lord's direct providence: for we cannot doubt that the 
noble brother, the lieutenant, will let his light shine 
out in his new environment. We hope for a report from 
him ere long. 

And now what! The Lord, we believe, is preparing 
a chosen and already prepared vessel for China— to 
bear the water of life to probably a very few there also. 
He is well qualified for the work— better than we could 
have expected. 

This opening of foreign doors to the harvest sickle 
seems to imply that the harvest work nears its close- 
possibly four years may see the open doors closing, 
because "the harvest is past and the summer ended." 
It has been a surprise to us all around. We had little 
thought of foreign fields, so busy have we been in the 
harvest fields of "Christendom." 

By the way, Russia may well be styled a foreign 
mission field also. The DAWN is prohibited there, or 
was until lately. A few copies, however, were sent 
in fragments by letter-post by some of those who had 
feasted and desired to bless their brethren. As a result 
fifteen members of a German Baptist Church were excommunicated 
and suffered considerable ostracism, 
until now the majority of them have reached the United 
States and more liberty,— and the message continues 
to spread. Wonderful to relate, the very minister who 
opposed them and led them out of the meeting has 
since been convinced of the Truth and is rejoicing 
in it. How many who were most ardent opposers of 
"this way" are now colaboring with us! Let us think 
kindly of those who for conscience sake (misguided) 
oppose us and the harvest message. 

Another thought: As we see so much fresh interest 
springing up and new believers making rapid progress 
in grace, knowledge and zeal, we note with pain that 
some once zealous colaborers are less so, and given 
rather to criticising those who are filled with the Spirit. 
We fear for these lest they lose their "crowns" to 
others. Nor dare we say much to them, for critics are 
very sensitive and easily offended. Evidently the 
thrashing and winnowing of harvest time are upon us. 
"Who shall be able to stand?" Let us fear and watch 
and pray, lest we enter into temptation. 



R4042 : page 245 

"HAVING DONE ALL, STAND" 

"Wherefore take unto you the whole armor of God, that ye 
may be able to withstand in the evil day, and having 
done all, to stand."— Eph. 6:13. 

THIS Scripture means much more to WATCH TOWER 

readers than to others, because we recognize 

that we are already in the "evil day." Nevertheless 

we fear that many fail to make a personal application 

of the Apostle's words to themselves. It is 

right enough to apply them to all in Christendom who 

make a sincere profession of faith in God and devotion 

to his cause. It is right enough to rejoice that we 

have by the Lord's grace come to a considerable 

knowledge of his great Plan of the Ages, and have 

learned to some extent rightly to divide the Word of 

Truth and to appreciate the portions which belong to 

past ages and to the future, and to distinguish 

these from the Scriptures which appertain to the present 

time, and to see the harmonious relationship of the 

whole. It is right enough that we should feel that this 

implies that we have to some extent heeded the 

Apostle's words, that we have to some extent taken 

to us the armor which God has provided in preparation 

for the present and approaching tests 

in this harvest time. But there is a danger: we 

fear that some in whom the good work of grace 

has begun are too well satisfied with their attainments. 

The fact that we know much more about the 

Word and plan than do many of our fellow-Christians 

is indeed a blessed assurance that we are in the school 

of the Lord and being taught of him; but it is no assurance 

that we are ready to graduate. We should all 

realize the force of the Apostle's words, "Now we know 

in part— then we shall know even as we are known."— 

I Cor. 13:12. 

But even if we knew a great deal, if we knew twice 
as much as we now know, we should understand our 
acquisition of knowledge merely to correspond to the 
finding of the armor mentioned by the Apostle in our 
text. We should notice that he does not merely say 
that we should find the armor, but, much more to the 
point— he declares that we should put it on. The Lord's 
object in providing us with the knowledge was that 
thereby we might grow in grace. Knowledge, then, is 
merely a means to an end desired. Well does the 
Apostle say, "Knowledge puffeth up, but love buildeth 
up . " (I Cor. 8:1.) If we could get love alone without 
getting knowledge it would be very much to be preferred 
above getting knowledge alone without getting 
love, but God has otherwise arranged, namely, that we 
must have knowledge as the basis for love, and that 
we must have love as the outgrowth of the knowledge 



if we would be acceptable to him as members of the 
Elect Church. Hence, we are to grow in grace, and to 
this end incidentally we must grow in knowledge, because 
how could we love God if we knew him not, and 
how could we develop his character-likeness except as 
we would be sanctified through the truth? 

"THE GREATEST OF THESE IS LOVE" 

The Apostle, in enumerating the blessings that are 
ours through Christ and the attainments possible in 
faith, knowledge, hope and love, declares that the 

R4042 : page 246 

greatest of these is love. He points out that present 
faith and knowledge will be dwarfed and entirely lost 
sight of in the perfection of knowledge into which we 
shall be ushered in our glorious change in the First 
Resurrection, and that our present hopes will then expire 
because the realization will have come, and will 
so far transcend our expectations. But he argues the 
superiority of love in that it will endure throughout 
eternity: "Love never faileth," "God is love," "Love is 
the fulfilling of the law"; the new commandment is 
that we love one another with a pure heart fervently. 
Oh, how much room there still is for progress in this 
direction, in the putting on of the whole armor of God! 

Were we to analyze the armor we would find it not 
merely an armor of knowledge but very largely indeed 
an armor of faith, an armor containing love as one of 
its chief elements, and surely in every part riveted together 
with love. What would our breastplate be 
worth without this love element? Ah, we see that our 
dear Redeemer's death constitutes our breastplate, 
that his love provided the redemption which covers us 
and protects us, and that it is our appropriation of his 
love and our reciprocating love for him and for the 
Father and for the divine law that led us to a full consecration 
of ourselves to his service. It is behind this 
breastplate of righteousness— of which the love of God 

R4043 : page 246 

and our love for God and for the Lord Jesus are the 
chief elements— that we are secure, justified through 
faith in the precious blood, counted righteous through 
the love and mercy of God. 

And our helmet, does it signify an intellectual 
knowledge of the Lord? Yes! and yet it is a knowledge 
based not upon the things that are seen but upon 
the things that are unseen. Our helmet is a faith-knowledge, 
and the basis of this faith is an appreciation 
of the love of God which passeth all understanding, 
which has begun the good work, not only in our 
redemption, but in the sanctification of our hearts. 



The love of God for us and our love for him are most intimately 

related to this helmet, and whoever would put 

it on, whoever would be protected by it, must surely 

recognize the divine law and be responsive in love 

himself. 

And what of our shield of faith? Is not the love of 
God, the mercy of God and of our Lord Jesus, the basis 
of our faith? We are not trusting either to our works 
or our knowledge for salvation, for both of these prove 
to us that we are unworthy of divine favor. We are 
trusting in God's love and in the loving sacrifice of our 
Redeemer, and this shield can be appreciated and 
will be thoroughly used only by those who have received 
of the love of God as well as of a measure of 
knowledge. 

The sword of the Spirit, which is the Word of God, 
is a part of this armament. But do we not see that 
many who have the Word of God are holding it by the 
blade and not by the hilt? Do we not see that a failure 
to appreciate the love of God has been their difficulty, 
so that the study of the Word and the knowledge 
gained respecting the Word have been comparatively 
valueless to them, misleading— injurious— because 
they received not the Truth in the love of it. Most 
evidently some have received the Truth in large measure 
and some in lesser measure, in proportion as 
they had the right or the wrong kind of love. Pride 
and self-love have hindered many from taking the 
sword of the Spirit in the proper manner; pride and 
denominational love have hindered others; and we are 
safe to say that all who handle the sword of the Spirit, 
the Word of God, are in great danger of doing injury 
to themselves thereby, except as they speak the Truth 
in love— "in the love of it"— in appreciation of it as 
God's great revelation of himself and of his purposes. 
If selfishness to any extent combines with this love, to 
that extent the sword is dangerous to the one who wields 
it. Love out of a pure heart is the only proper, 
the only safe condition. 

The sandals of preparation for contact with the 
world and the ruggedness of the way are very necessary. 
Pride and ambition may enable us to pass over 
a considerable stretch of rough roadway without discouragement, 
but we may be sure that the Lord has so 
arranged the narrow way that selfish ambitions will 
never carry us to the end. On the contrary, the divine 
order is that only love for the Lord and for his flock 
and for his Truth will so protect us that we can go 
onward and upward in the narrow way clear to the 
end of the journey without discouragement that would 
turn us aside. 



"The Lord hath done great things for us, 
whereof we are glad." 



We are assured that the above words represent the 
sentiments of a considerable proportion of the readers 
of this journal. We are claiming nothing for the Editor, 
but freely admit that all the blessings are from the 
great Fountain of blessing, from the Lord himself. 
We are glad to be recipients of these bounties in common 
with you all, and glad to have been used of the 
Lord as a broken and emptied vessel to bear to his 
dear ones some of the refreshments he is now so bounteously 
providing. And we have a deep concern that 
the Lord's grace be received not in vain by any of us 
—that we should all be profited, strengthened by the 
meat in due season which our present Lord is dispensing 
to the household of faith as never before. 
How else could we understand the light that is now 
shining upon the divine Word? And is not this understanding 
of the matter in full accord with our Lord's 
precious promise that at his second coming, when he 
would make up his jewels, gather his very Elect, his 
Bride, he would first knock? and then to those servants 
who would open immediately and show their 
faithfulness, he would come in and sup with them? 
More than this, he would become their servant and gird 
himself and bring forth from the storehouse things new 
and old. (Matt. 13:52.) How wonderfully, how accurately, 

R4043 : page 247 

this matter is being fulfilled before us today! It 
is the Lord's doing and it is marvelous in our sight. 
The eyes of our understanding discern clearly and we 
rejoice therein. 

These blessings of divine truth and grace consist 
not only of new features but also of old features. Do 
they not? How many years have many of us studied 
God's Word, heard preaching, read commentaries, etc., 
to very little account? Indeed our confusion seemed 
to increase rather than diminish, so that the most studious 
were often most confused. But now, the due 
time having come, our present Lord having come 
in to sup with us, having girded himself as our servant, 
having brought to our attention the things both 
new and old, we are feasting. All the precious food 
has a richer and a better flavor. It is cleaner, sweeter. 
For instance, setting aside those special features of 
the Truth which belong to the harvest time, respecting 
the reaping, the presence of the Lord, the fulfilment of 
the prophecies, etc., etc., look again at the old things 
that God's people have recognized as true for centuries, 
and note how appetizing they are to us now, how 
strengthening to faith, how refreshing ! 

Take, for instance, the "precious blood." From infancy 
we heard of the death of Christ, of its necessity, 



of its value. We read the Scriptures, yet we saw not 
the beauty and the grandeur, until now in the harvest 
time the Lord himself has disclosed the real significance 
of the word ransom— a purchase price— and shown 
us just how our Lord Jesus left the glory and became 
holy, harmless, undefiled, separate from sinners, the 
man Christ Jesus, and how then he "gave himself a 
ransom for all, to be testified in due time." Ah! what 
a store of gracious knowledge, mingled with precious 
love, is opened to us by this appreciation of how Jesus 
Christ by the grace of God tasted death for every man. 
Now we can see, as we could not previously, the meaning 
of the word propitiation, satisfaction. Now we can 
see that he was the propitiation for our sins— the sins 
of believers of this present time. 

We can see, too, how the satisfaction which he has 
already rendered to Justice is the ground or basis of 
our acceptance with the Father, and that now we are 
justified through faith in his blood, and correspondingly 
our peace with God has a firmer foundation and 
is every way more satisfactory. But still more, we can 
see the further value of the precious blood when we 
understand the Apostle's declaration— "He is a propitiation 
for our sins [the Church's sins, now], and also 
[through the Church, his Body] for the sins of the 
whole world." Now we can see how and why the gracious 
New Covenant will be introduced at the close of 
this Gospel Age— a New Covenant with Fleshly Israel, 
which ultimately will include all the families of the 
earth, signifying to them a complete release from 
Adamic condemnation, and a taking away of the stony 
heart out of their flesh and the renewing of a heart of 
flesh— during the Millennial Age— bringing them up 
from the degradation of sin and death back to all that 
was lost in Eden, during the times of restitution of 
all things. Oh, what the Atonement signifies to us now 
and how little it signified before! how incomprehensive 
it was before! Praise the Lord for the old things 
as well as for the new. 

Take another illustration out of many: we knew 
something of what the Scriptures taught respecting 
justification, we knew something of how faith was 
related to this justification, but we comprehended it 
not, and but imperfectly realized that this justification 
by faith, this imputation of righteousness to believers, 
was merely the divine method of putting them on a 
plane where they could be acceptable sacrificers, and 
present their bodies, already acceptable to God, as living 
sacrifices, their reasonable service; nor did we see 
clearly either that this consecration to sacrifice, this 
setting apart or sanctification of life and heart and all 
to the Lord, is the condition upon which we may hope 
to share with our dear Redeemer in his glorious Kingdom. 
How real these matters become as the Lord 
brings to us the meat in due season, things new and 
old. 



To illustrate further: A dear brother recently 
said to the Editor, "Oh, Brother Russell, I was an 
Evangelical Christian for years, but it seems as though 
I had been asleep all that time so far as Christian 
knowledge and experience go. How I wish I had 
known some of the things that are presented in the 
sixth volume of MILLENNIAL DAWN when I was rearing 
my family! How I wish that I had realized my personal 
responsibility as a father, and had brought my family 
up in the nurture and admonition of the Lord— had 
realized my home duties, my proper relationship and 
obligation to my wife, children and neighbors! Everything 
in the divine arrangement seems so simple and 
so beautiful now that I wonder how I was blind to 
these things for so long; and evidently others were 
similarly blinded, for our teachers might, at least, have 
told us how to live the godly life, the Scriptural life; 

R4044 : page 247 

they might have drawn our attention to these things 
which so greatly make for our peace, and which are so 
eminently our proper course of conduct in life; but we 
were held in a maze, we were all as it were asleep. 
And it seems peculiar that we are able to awaken so 
few even now; that so many prefer to slumber on, and 
have no ear to hear, and manifest only opposition to 
these glorious things in which they should delight." 
Very true, we agreed. 

"THE OX KNOWETH HIS OWNER, AND THE ASS HIS MASTER'S 
CRIB. "-ISA. 1:3 

This is our Lord's complaint through the Prophet 
against many whom he has favored both in Natural 
Israel and in Spiritual Israel— that they do not exhibit 
the wisdom of even the brute beast. One would think 
after the experiences above narrated, after our blind 
gropings in the past, after our failure— our failure to 
find anything in the Bible that would satisfy our reason 
and our heart— that we all would know assuredly 
that the present satisfaction and blessing and enlightenment 

R4044 : page 248 

and refreshment are from the Lord himself. 

As the ox would be able to know his owner, we surely 

ought to be able to know our God and to recognize his 

supervision in our affairs. But not so with all. Some, 

we are sorry to say, seem to overlook the divine supervision 

of the Church and the divine arrangement respecting 

this harvest time and the present development 

of the Truth. The miraculous supply of manna 

to Natural Israel in the wilderness was not in our estimation 

more wonderful nor a better foundation for 

faith in the divine providences than is the present supply 



of spiritual manna to the Spiritual Israelites. 
Nevertheless some know not the Lord as their owner, 
but still "belong to" various sects and parties and 
denominations. 

The Lord attaches no blame whatever to the wheat 
on account of the tares being mingled, but explains 
that in the time of harvest they are to separate. 
Neither does he express disapproval that his people 
were in "Babylon" for centuries— confused, bewildered 
by "traditions of men" and "doctrines of devils." But 
he does tell us that he does expect that, when the true 
light shines upon the path of the just in the harvest 
time of this age, all who are awake and loyal will see 
the Day Star and the dawning Millennium, and that 
they will hear as the voice of God the message of 
Present Truth, and that they will be strengthened 
and energized by his Word as meat in due season; 
and that, if then thus energized and awake, they 
are loyal to him and to the principles of his government 
and to the honor of his name and to 
their privileges of service, they will promptly recognize 
the Truth as the voice of God, saying to them, 
"Come out of her, my people, that ye be not partakers 
of her sins and receive not of her plagues.— Rev. 18:4. 

"OF YOUR OWN SELVES SHALL MEN ARISE, SPEAKING PERVERSE 
THINGS, TO DRAW AWAY DISCIPLES AFTER 
THEM. "-ACTS 20:30. 

The ass knoweth her Master's crib: She knows to 
look for her food as of her Master's providing, and 
goes again to the same crib, where she receives his 
bountiful supply, that she may be again and again refreshed 
and nourished. But our Lord intimates that 
the stupid ass could give pointers to some of his people. 
And how true this is! Here and there we find 
some who, after feeding at the Master's crib, practically 
say to themselves and to others, "Yes, there was 
good, clean provender in that crib; it tasted good, I 
feel refreshed; but it was not specially of the Master's 
providing; it was a happen-so; let us browse and wander 
about— we may come across another crib containing 
still better provender; let us nose about the various 
creeds, let us try Christian Science, let us try faith 
cure, let us try to make a crib of our own, and to fill it 
ourselves and eat therefrom. The Lord intimates that 
the ass is not as foolish as this; but if we could find 
one thus disposed we would say, Poor, foolish donkey, 
you do not know a good thing when you have it— you 
do not realize your Master's care. 

Turning from the Lord's parable of the ox and the 
ass, we find the Apostle's direct statement respecting 
the trials and difficulties sure to beset the Lord's people 
along this line of forgetting who is their owner, 
who began the good work in them, and who it is 
that proposes, if we are faithful, to complete his 



work in us in the day of Jesus Christ— early in the 

morning of the Millennium. As the Apostle intimates, 

we find that some of the elders in the Church of Christ, 

instead of feeding the flock of the Lord and pointing 

them to their owner, to the food which he has provided, 

the meat in due season, are on the contrary seeking to 

turn the flock away— to draw disciples after themselves. 

Taking for granted that some of the Lord's people are 

more stupid than the ass, they do their best to turn 

them from the Master's crib— his provision for the 

necessities of his people in this evil day. Take an 

illustration of this: We heard recently from a little congregation 

of the Lord's people, who for years have 

been feasting upon the things new and old from the 

storehouse of truth and grace provided now by our 

present Lord, that their Elder had admonished them 

that he would preach to them, or, if they wished a 

Bible study, he would make one for them, but that he 

did not wish that they should have "Dawn-Scripture 

Studies," and hoped that none of them would refer to 

nor quote from those six volumes of "Scripture Studies" 

or other of the WATCH TOWER publications. He 

evidently desired to make them a new crib, into which 

he would put some new fodder, perhaps attractively topping 

it off with some of the kind from which they had 

gotten spiritual refreshment. The old crib he wished 

them now to entirely forget and go to no more for food. 

We have not yet learned to what extent those dear people 

have the common sense of the donkey; but we presume, 

in harmony with the Lord's suggestion, that some of 

them will show themselves lacking even donkey sense. 

"HE THAT GATHERETH NOT WITH ME SCATTERETH ABROAD" 

But what motive could any professed servant of 
the Lord have in such a course? The Apostle explains 
the motive in the text above, saying it is to draw away 
disciples after themselves. The desire for leadership, 
for prominence, to be chiefest, has seemingly been the 
besetment and difficulty of the Church from the days 
of Jesus until now. On no other score did our Lord so 
often warn his disciples as upon this one of a desire to 
be chief. Whoever manifests such a spirit should be 
firmly, kindly dealt with, to the intent that the flock 
might be preserved from such a pernicious spirit, and 
that the leader himself might be recovered from this 
snare of the Adversary. Selfishness is the opposite of 
love, and self-seeking is an evidence of selfishness. 
Hence, even if the foundation of doctrine, the ransom, 
be adhered to for a time, let us make no mistake that 
selfishness would sooner or later lead into outer darkness 
and thereby many be defiled— injured. The 
love which the Scriptures set before us as being 
the proper growth and development of the knowledge 
received from the Lord— seeketh not her own, is 
not puffed up— is solicitous chiefly for the glory of the 



Lord and the good of his flock. 

Failure to recognize— or, if recognized, failure to 
remember— that the Lord is the Chief Reaper in the 

R4044 : page 249 

harvest work and has full supervision of it, is a 
fruitful cause of error. All who are in full accord with 
him, fully submitted to his will, wholly desirous of 
having his will done in their affairs and in the affairs 
of the Church, should look well to it that his will shall 
be fulfilled in every particular: in their thoughts, their 
words, their deeds, as these relate to their private affairs 
and to the interests of the Church. His servants we 
are to whom we render service: and this implies that 
we are either serving the Lord in connection with the 
reaping of this harvest time or serving the Adversary, 
who seeks to oppose this reaping work. Where are 
we? What are we doing? Are we gathering with the 
Lord or are we with the Adversary scattering abroad? 
There can be no doubt as to what the result will be. 
The harvest work will be accomplished and every true 
grain of wheat will be garnered; the important question 
to each of us is respecting our particular share in 
the matter. What is our attitude in this work? To 
what extent are we co-laborers and under-reapers? 
What may we hope for at the close of the harvest, when 
to the faithful laborers the Master shall say, "Well 
done, good and faithful servants?" Can he class us 
with those faithful ones who have sought not their own 
name or fame or glory or honor amongst men, but by 
the sacrifice of these have sought to do the will of the 
Father in heaven? This is a personal matter— each 
must answer to his own heart as best he may be able 
to see it. 

"LET ME TAKE OUT THE MOTE" 

There is a depth of meaning in our Lord's parable 
in which he represents one as desiring to take a 
mote, a small speck, out of another brother's eye, 
whereas he had a beam, a larger matter, in his own 
eye. The import of the parable is that each of the 
Lord's followers should look critically to himself and 
sympathetically at others of the household. This is 
the spirit of love; whoever lacks this spirit is in danger: 
hence we all should seek to cultivate this quality. 
Where an opposite spirit is entertained, encouraged, 
the beginnings may be small but the tendency is toward 
outer darkness. This spirit, we regret to say, 
manifests itself occasionally in various little companies 
of the Lord's people— a factional spirit— a fault-finding 
spirit. The proper spirit, on the contrary, 

R4045 : page 249 



should be loving consideration for one another, a gladness 
to see each other developing, and a willingness to 
assist in as kind and gentle a manner as possible. Any 
other spirit is sure to bring injury, and we urge all of 
the Lord's faithful to stand fast by the principle which 
the Lord enunciates on this subject and to cultivate in 
the heart the loving generosity which thinketh no 
evil, but, on the contrary, seeks to rightly understand 
and excuse an apparent error, especially if it be not 
along an important line of doctrine. 

THE RESURRECTION OF OUR LORD'S SOUL 

Such criticisms sometimes extend to the Editor of 
this journal, who, by the way, has never claimed infallibility, 
and who does not expect to reach that which is 
perfect until his change in the First Resurrection. As 
an illustration of this wrong principle we note the fact 
that a typographical error crept into a recent issue of 
the TOWER and made us appear to teach that it was 
the body of Jesus which was resurrected on the third 
day, whereas all of our readers know that our teaching 
in the DAWN-STUDIES has been that not the body but the 
soul of our Lord was quickened in his resurrection, in 
harmony with the statement of the Prophet and the 
Apostle, "Thou wilt not leave my soul in hades"— in 
the grave. We are glad that the dear friends generally 
read so critically that the mistake was noticed; but 
were sorry to learn that one, "who for the time ought 
to be a teacher" and helper of the flock, improved the 
opportunity to speak slightingly of this journal, and 
risked the interests of the flock through a shaking of confidence 
by remarking that here is the best of evidence 
that ZION'S WATCH TOWER is not reliable in its instructions 
on Scriptural themes. What object he had in 
making the remark only he and the Lord know; we 
judge him not. We suggest, however, that a different 
course would undoubtedly have been more to the 
Lord's glory, more to the good of the little company to 
whom the brother ministered, and more to his own 
credit and influence with that little company as a leader. 
He might have said: "This is a peculiar statement 
and I think must be a typographical error. This 
must be so, for it was the Editor himself who first 
drew the attention of all of us to the fact that our 
Lord was not raised from the dead a human being but 
a spirit being— that it was not his body that was resurrected 
but his soul, as a New Creature. When we 
come to understand this matter we shall surely find 
that a typographical error has crept in." 

As a matter of fact the Editor dictates his matter 
to a stenographer, who takes it down in shorthand and 
then writes it out on a typewriter; the copy thus furnished 
then goes to a proof-reader and subsequently to 
the compositor, and the printer's proof is read by two 
different proof-readers. How in this case the word 



"body" instead of "soul" could have slipped by the attention 
of all the dear friends who are thoroughly 
versed on the subject, none of us understands. Perhaps 
the Lord allows such blunders for the very purpose of 
keeping us all very humble, and also to the intent that 
we all may be on the alert to note carefully what we 
read, and to square it all with the divine plan which 
we all now have so clearly in mind. 

While at it, we will refer to another criticism— not, 
however, that the matter is of any special value, but by 
way of correction. In referring to the wafers which 
constitute a part of the offerings to the Lord on the 
Day of Atonement, we explained that they contained a 
mixture of honey, basing this explanation upon 
the fact that in Exodus 16:3 1 we are told that 
wafers were made of fine flour mingled with honey. 
Another Scripture, however, forbade that honey should 
be burned in any sacrifice to the Lord. There then 
arises a seeming conflict. If the wafers offered on the 

R4045 : page 250 

Day of Atonement contained honey, then that sacrifice 
was peculiar and different from the other sacrifices 
subsequent to the Day of Atonement. If on the other 
hand the prohibition of the burning of the honey be 
understood to apply to the Day of Atonement sacrifices 
as well as to others, then the specified "wafers" could 
not have contained honey, but if they did not contain 
honey, in what respect were they different from the 
other cakes mentioned in the same connection is not 
very apparent. So far as we can see the question is 
not a momentous one, but to avoid confusion or dispute, 
in our future editions of the Tabernacle Shadows 
we will omit the reference to the honey as a component 
part of these wafers. 

"LOVE AS BRETHREN" 

The true spirit of brotherhood amongst the Lord's 
disciples is most necessary for them individually and 
collectively. Our Lord declared, "Hereby shall all men 
know that ye are my disciples, if ye have love one for 
another." By these words he evidently meant us to understand 
that the rules and customs to prevail amongst 
his dear people should not be after the standards of 
the world but of a much higher, much nobler, much 
more generous standard. To the extent that we are 
able to keep this in memory and to live according to 
this rule will be our joy in the Lord in the present 
time and our prospect of being joint-heirs with him in 
his glorious Kingdom. Let us remember his words to 
the disciples on the subject of self-seeking— Except ye 
become as little children ye shall in no wise enter the 
Kingdom of heaven.— Matt. 18:3. 



R4045 : page 250 

REPORTING FROM TWO VIEW-POINTS 

--NUMBERS 13: 17-20,23-33. -SEPTEMBER 1.- 

Golden Text:— "The Lord is with 
us; fear them not."— Num. 14:9. 

THE journey of about 160 miles "through the terrible 
wilderness" toward Canaan consumed about 
three months, due probably to the largeness 
of the camp, for modern travelers have covered the distance 
in eleven days. Finally they reached Kadesh-Barnea, 
on the border of the promised land, with the 
hills of the latter in full view. It was here that Moses 
smote the rock, contrary to the divine command, and 
today the place has abundant springs of water and is a 
regular oasis. In harmony with the divine arrangement 
it was proposed that they go up immediately to 
possess the land, but caution and fear suggested that 
first spies be sent out, that they might have a better 
knowledge of the real value of the land God had given 
them and also a better knowledge of the difficulties to 
be encountered in taking possession of it. With them, 
as with Christians today, the opportunity was afforded of 
doubting the beneficence of the divine arrangement, 
doubting the wisdom and love of God, and conjecturing 
the impossibility of taking possession of the land 
and the probability that even then they should find it 
far less attractive than the Lord at the mouth of Moses 
had reported. 

The request of the people that the land be spied 
and reported on before its conquest was begun was acceded 
to by Moses. Twelve spies were selected, representing 
the twelve tribes— prominent men in whose 
judgment the people might have confidence. Apparently 
these went forth in two companies: one under 
Joshua made a tour of the entire country from the 
southern part to Jericho at the north, some 300 miles. 
The other band under Caleb made a shorter journey, 
going only so far as the valley of Eshcol near Hebron. 
Caleb was accordingly the first to report (Numbers 13:30; 
14:24), while Joshua's report came in later 
(Numbers 14:6,7). The spies were commissioned to 
gather information respecting the fruitfulness of the 
land and the desirability of the country and the character 
of its inhabitants, and whether they dwelt permanently 
in walled cities, or in movable camps like the 
Arabs. Two reports were returned, and in most particulars 
they were very much alike, telling that the land 
was good and fruitful and desirable, but that it would 
be difficult to conquer; that the inhabitants dwelt in 
high-walled cities, which were well nigh impregnable, 



and that some of the people were of great stature. 
Although there were but few of these giants, their fame 
was evidently far reaching, and the spies declared with 
exaggeration that in their presence they felt like grasshoppers. 
The majority advised against any attempt to 
take possession of the land, and discouraged the people, 
leading them to believe that it would be an utterly 
hopeless task for them to undertake to drive out the 
Canaanites, the Amalekites, the Amorites, the Hittites 
and the Jebusites, who had thorough possession. The 
minority report by Caleb and Joshua differed little from 
the other, except that they expressed full confidence 
that Israel under divine guidance and by divine aid 
would be fully able to conquer all the difficulties of the 
situation. 

We cannot wonder that the people were greatly disheartened 
from the very beginning: they were not a 
warlike, but a pastoral people. Indeed with the exception 
of the battle which Abraham waged for the recovery 
of Lot and his family, and the battle a year before 
in the wilderness with the Amalekites, the Israelites 
had no experience in war and quite evidently were unprepared 
for such a contest as lay before them if they 
entered Canaan and attempted to take possession. We 
must admit, therefore, that the report of the ten spies 
that the Israelites were not capable of taking possession 
was in many respects a wise and just one, and the 
people apparently were justified in accepting it. The 
thing lacking was faith. They should have believed 
God, and have followed explicitly his leading; they 
should have said, Greater is he who is on our part than 

R4046 : page 25 1 

all they that be against us, and while we are under his 
direction we are able to do all things through his 
strengthening power. However, it should not surprise 
us that this people under all the circumstances were unable 
to exercise such a faith in God. Rather we might 
say that antitypical Israel alone might be expected to 
have such a triumphant faith— nor do we find that very 
many Spiritual Israelites today possess faith to such a 
degree. Indeed we should not forget that the failure 
of Natural Israel and the divine dealings with them in 
consequence were more in the sense of typical illustrations 
for Spiritual Israel than as real condemnations 
of Natural Israel. We cannot think that God expected 
much more of those people than was manifested in their 
course. Of Spiritual Israel, however, much may reasonably 
be expected. 

THE MAJORITY IN THE WRONG 

How did the people receive the two reports? Almost 
unanimously they decided that they had been misled, 
that their best course was to return to Egypt and proffer 



their services again to the Egyptian taskmasters. 
They decided that their coming out of Egypt was a mistake, 
that the journey through the wilderness was wasted 
time, and that they now stood in a hopeless position, 
a people without a country. They proposed to select a 
leader to lead them back to Egypt, and threatened 
Caleb and Joshua with stoning for trying to perpetuate 
the misleading of Moses, which they seemed to have 
been willing to forgive as an error of judgment. At 
this juncture, however, the Lord intervened, and from 
the bright display of his presence over the Tabernacle 
there went forth a judgment against some of the leaders, 
especially the ten spies who gave the faithless report 
and stirred up the people to resent the divine leading 
which they had previously followed. The lesson 
was a severe one, a plague amongst the people evidencing 
divine disfavor, and they were turned back again to 
wander in the wilderness for the remainder of forty 
years, a year for each day consumed in the spying of 
the land. The divine decree was that all the men of 
Israel over twenty years of age were to perish in the 
wilderness during those forty years of national disfavor 
—that not one of them was ever to enter the promised 
land except the two who gave the good report, 
Caleb and Joshua. 

The commotion amongst the people incident to this 
report must have been great. Moses himself endorsed 
the report of Caleb and Joshua, and urged the people 
to obedience to God, as we read:— 

"Then I said unto you, Dread not, neither be afraid 
of them. Jehovah, your God, who goeth before you, he 
will fight for you, according to all that he did for you 
in Egypt before your eyes, and in the wilderness, where 
thou hast seen how that Jehovah thy God bare thee, as 
a man doth bear his son, in all the way that ye went, 
until ye came into this place. Yet in this thing ye did 
not believe Jehovah thy God, who went before thee in 
the way, to seek you out a place to pitch your tents, in 
fire by night to show you in what way you should go, 
and in the cloud by day."— Deut. 1:29-33. 

But the people in bitterness of disappointment 
cried out, "Would to God that we had died in the land 
of Egypt, or would to God that we had died in the wilderness. 
Wherefore hath the Lord brought us into this 
land to fall by the sword, that our wives and our children 
should be a prey. Were it not better for us to return 
to Egypt?" 

Then Joshua and Caleb exhorted the congregation, 
saying, "The land which we passed through to spy it out 
is an exceedingly good land. If the Lord delight in us, 
then will he bring us into this land and give it unto us; 
a land which floweth with milk and honey, only rebel 
not against the Lord nor fear ye the people of the land." 

SPIRITUAL ISRAEL'S SIMILAR TESTS 



Applying the lesson to Spiritual Israelites we find 
many correspondencies: First, we have leaders of the 
people, corresponding to the spies, on whose report 
much will surely depend as to the courage of the people 
in going forward with the divine arrangement. Some 
of these ministers so magnify the difficulties of the way 
that the people are discouraged and go not on, while 
others giving a truthful report encourage their brethren 
with assurances that the Lord's grace is sufficient 
for all who are his. Perhaps indeed it would not be 
amiss to suppose that the twelve spies represent the 
whole number of the Lord's people who in the present 
life enter into covenant relationship to the Lord and 
experience a measure of his rest. All agree that the 
rest of faith is a glorious one, that its fruitage is grand, 
and samples are presented to the people. A small minority, 
however, give a proper report of the possibility 
of Christian living— the possibility of being overcomers 
of the world, of fighting a good fight in the name 
and strength of the Lord, the possibility of entering 
into all the glorious things which God hath provided 
for them that love him. The majority, the Great Company, 
hold back, fail to appropriate the promises, fail 
to trust the Lord, and their influence is proportionately 
an evil one upon others with whom they have influence. 
Thus at the present time few by faith enter into the 
blessings and privileges that belong to the Spiritual 
Israelite, and these few are the only ones who will enter 
into the heavenly Canaan to take actual possession by 
and by; the others fail of the blessing and joy of faith 
in the present time, and will fail of the highest blessing 
in the future, whatever portion they may obtain 
under the Lord's grace. 

Mr. Spurgeon told a story of a man who was invited 
to come into his orchard to eat some of his fruit. 
He declined because he said he had picked up some 
apples from the roadside that fell from those trees, and 
they were poor and bitter. The owner replied that those 
trees were there on purpose, so that the boys would not 
be attracted into the orchard to steal, but assured him 
that in the orchard proper to which he invited him were 
delicious apples. As those apple trees on the outside 
gave not a proper sample or representation of the orchard, 
so many Christians give to the world a very unsatisfactory 
sample of the blessings of the Lord and 

R4046 : page 252 

the fruits of the Spirit, and in some respects bear false 
witness and hinder the outflow of the blessings of the 
Lord toward mankind in general during this age. 
Thank God that the time is coming when under the 
leadership of the Joshua and Caleb class the whole 
people— all who will accept the Lord and have confidence 
in him— may be brought into the antitypical 
Canaan and assisted to take possession of all the rich 



favors which God has promised to them that love and 
obey him. 

"Unbelief never gets beyond the difficulties, the 
cities, the walls, the giants. It is always preferring 
them, dwelling on them, pitting them against its own 
resources. Faith, on the other hand, though it never 
minimizes the difficulties, looks them steadily in the 
face, turns from them and looks into the face of God, 
and counts on him. This is what the people failed to 
do, and for this they lost Canaan."— F. B. Meyer. 

"Oh, how many a glorious record 

Had the guardian angel kept! 
Had I done instead of doubted, 

Had I warred instead of wept!" 

"I CAN DO ALL THINGS THROUGH CHRIST WHO STRENGTHENETH 
ME" 

There are two important lessons for Spiritual Israelites 
to learn: (1) Their own inefficiency— their own 
inability to meet the trials, the difficulties, the hindrances 
in their way. As the Apostle says, We cannot 
do the things that we would. But our extremity is 
God's opportunity, and his encouraging words are, 
"My grace is sufficient for thee; my strength is made 
perfect in your weakness." The Lord could have armed 
and equipped the hosts of Israel in some miraculous 
manner, making them invulnerable to the attacks of 
their enemies, and giving them courage for their ordeal; 
but this was not his plan. He wished to develop in 
them the necessary faith, trust, obedience, for, "without 
faith it is impossible to please God." Thus in Natural 
Israel was illustrated the divine proceeding in Spiritual 
Israel. God could miraculously give us powers of 
mind and of body which would make us superior to 
every outward circumstance; but instead of so doing 
he merely justifies us by faith, and tells us to reckon 
ourselves as complete, perfect, because of the imputation 
of our Redeemer's merit. From this standpoint 
of faith all the battles of Spiritual Israel are won or 
lost. "According to thy faith be it unto you." Those, 
therefore, who can and will exercise full faith, full confidence 
in all of the divine promises may go from victory 
to victory, from blessing to blessing, from joy to 
joy, from one attainment to another, and have a glorious 
victory in the end over the world, the flesh and the 
Adversary, through the imputed merit and continued 
assistance of him who loved us and bought us with his 
precious blood. 

To this class the giants of opposition and despair 
lose their power, even as did Goliath before the sling-stone 
of David. The pebble from the brook— the message 
from the divine Word— vanquishes the enemy's 
power to those who have the sling of faith. To these 
the fortresses of sin are not so strong as to be invulnerable, 



unassailable; entrenched depravity is recognized 

as being subject to divine power, and when attacked 

in the name and strength of the Lord and encompassed 

repeatedly with prayer, finally its strong 

walls fall down as did those of Jericho. So may depraved 

R4047 : page 252 

appetites and sinful desires be thoroughly conquered 
so far as our hearts are concerned, though the 
traces thereof may continue to some extent in our 
mortal flesh— reminders not only of the weaknesses of 
the fallen nature, but also of the triumphs of the New 
Mind under the leadership of Jesus. 

As these victories of faith progress the fruits of 
the victory become ours. The grapes of Eshcol, the 
figs, and all the plenty of the land flowing with milk 
and honey but feebly picture the riches of grace and 
fruitage of the Spirit which accrue to those who in the 
name of the Lord gain the victories of faith over the 
world, the flesh and the Adversary. Of these fruits and 
graces the Apostle speaks, naming meekness, gentleness, 
patience, longsuffering, brotherly kindness, love. 
And the assurance of the Word is that if we do these 
things, if we maintain this good fight of faith as New 
Creatures, we not only shall enjoy the spiritual refreshment, 
but eventually "an entrance shall be administered 
unto us abundantly into the everlasting Kingdom of 
our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ."— 2 Peter 1:11. 



R4047 : page 252 

THE BRAZEN SERPENT AND ITS ANTITYPE 

-NUMBERS 21:l-9.-SEPTEMBER 8.- 

Golden Text:— "As Moses lifted up the serpent in the wilderness, 
even so must the Son of man be lifted up; that 
whosoever believeth on him should not perish, 
but have everlasting life."— John 3:14,15. 

ABOUT thirty-eight years intervened between the 

narrative of our last lesson and the present 

one. During that time the Israelites wandered 

hither and thither in the desert, probably keeping 

Kadesh-Barnea as a kind of center of their camp, 

which, consisting of so many people, must have spread 

out over a large area of country. During that time the 

rebellion of Korah and his band occurred. (Numbers 16.) 

It was another demonstration of the same lack 

of faith which hindered the Israelites from entering 

Canaan at the first. Had Korah and his followers recognized 

the Lord as Governor of the nation and general 

superintendent of its affairs they would have accepted 



Moses as his representative, and would no more 

have thought of rebelling against Moses and the institutional 

government which he had established than 

against God himself. Lacking faith, however, in the 

special divine guidance of the movement, they imagined 

merely a general supervision on God's part, and 

that Moses and Aaron and those associated with them 

R4047 : page 253 

were usurping authority. They took the broad grounds 
that God was dealing with the whole nation, and that 
therefore any Israelite had as much standing before 
him as had Moses and Aaron. The Lord's dealing in 
the matter showed most distinctly their error. And the 
Apostle calls our attention to the same, warning us of 
the danger of a similar failure to note the divine leadings 
and to accept and follow them implicitly. 

We see such a spirit today amongst some who are 
disposed to ignore our Lord Jesus, and to talk about 
the general brotherhood of man and the fatherhood of 
God, declaring that all men have access to God as his 
children— that sin and atonement are unnecessary— 
that without special call or divine appointment anybody 
and everybody is privileged to become a priest 
and to enter into any and every part of the divine service. 
This thought is in direct contravention of our 
dear Redeemer's words,— "No man cometh to the Father 
but by me," and the Apostle's words, "Neither is there 
salvation in any other." The Apostle also points out 
the exclusiveness of the priesthood, saying, "No man 
taketh this honor to himself but he who is called of 
God, even as Aaron." Thus we see Christ was the one 
called of God to be the great High Priest, and that he 
in turn is calling, not all mankind, but a special class 
of believers under special limitations and conditions 
to be his members, or the under-priesthood. We do 
well to keep this in memory and to profit by the lesson 
of Korah's wrong course. 

Another connected thought is that the recognition 
of Moses and Aaron implied a recognition of the entire 
arrangement of which they were the heads. This arrangement 
in the Church the Apostle points out, saying 
that the Lord hath set in the Church the various 
members as it hath pleased him. (I Cor. 12:18.) We 
are not to forget that he does the setting; we are not 
to ignore it, we are not to set ourselves. The Apostle 
illustrates this matter of the setting of the various 
members of the Body of Christ, that some are hand-members, 
others eye-members, others feet-members, 
etc. He points out that there is plenty of service for 
each member of the Body, but not all the same service. 
We do not hear with our feet, and although the hands 
assist in talking by illustrative motions, and although 
they assist in discernment by feeling that which the 
eyes see, nevertheless it would be a mistake to suppose 



that God set the hands in the Body to see and to 
talk and the feet to hear. For the members of the 
Body of Christ to leave their positions in the Body to 
which they are adapted and for which they are set, to 
use some other place in the Body, is sure to bring serious 
confusion to themselves and to other Spiritual 
Israelites. 

THE SIN OF MOSES 

It was during this interim of waiting that Moses 
committed the sin which hindered him from entering 
the promised land. (Num. 20:2-13.) Peculiarly enough 
his sin was along the line of his principal excellence 
of character. When he was chosen to be captain of 
the Lord's hosts, one of his special qualifications was 
declared to be, "Now Moses was the meekest man in 
all the earth." (Num. 12:3.) Yet it was because of a 
lack of meekness that eventually he failed to reach the 
promised land. We may surely sympathize with Moses; 
we may well realize that had he not been the very 
meekest of men he would have been unfit from the very 
first for the great service entrusted to him. And 
is it any wonder that with the great responsibility resting 
upon him and all of the people looking to him for 
nearly forty years, he gradually grew less humble, 
until finally at Meribah, instead of speaking to the 
rock as the Lord directed, he exclaimed, "Ye rebels, 
must I bring you water out of this rock?" We have no 
thought that Moses on account of this transgression 
has lost his standing as one of the honorable members 
of the company of Ancient Worthies, but we observe in 
his experiences a typical lesson for all the members of 
the Body of Christ. 

We do see that the Lord has indicated that humility 
is one of the chiefest graces amongst his people, 
and that without it we would be unfit for the Kingdom. 
We do see that even though the Truth appeals chiefly 
to the humble-minded, even though the Lord favors 
these alone in connection with his work, nevertheless 
they are in great danger of stumbling along this very 
line. At no time has there been greater danger than 
at present. The feet-class will need to be specially 
upheld by the Lord that they stumble not through 
pride or boastfulness or self-conceit. So many and so 
great are our privileges in connection with the knowledge 
of the Lord and his glorious plan, that if we for 
one moment think of these as being in any sense of the 
word our own, we begin to lose our humility and to be 
in danger of the sin of pride and self-assertion. Our 
only safety is in continually watching and praying lest 
we enter into temptation— lest we should think of the 
truths we are honoring as being in any sense our 
own. Surely we have nothing that we have not 
received of the Lord— nothing, therefore, of which 
we ourselves could boast. Appropriately, then, let 



our boast be of the Lord and his greatness and his 
goodness to us and to all. Humbling ourselves thus 
under the mighty hand of God we shall be kept from 
the self-assertion which was Moses' sin, and which 
typified a difficulty and cause of rejection in some of 
the Lord's prominent ones of Spiritual Israel. "Humble 
yourselves, therefore, under the mighty hand of 
God, that he might exalt you in due time," that you 
may be permitted to enter with the Lord's hosts into 
the glorious Kingdom in due time.— I Pet. 5:6. 

THE FORWARD MOVEMENT CHECKED 

When finally the time arrived in the last of the 
forty years of the wilderness experience for the people 
to move forward and to enter into Canaan they essayed 
to go by the nearest route, through Edom. But the 
Edomites— descendants of Esau— forbade this and 
threatened them with war. Next they thought of the 
route pursued by the spies through Southern Palestine; 
but the Canaanites were prepared and fought them off 
and captured some of the stragglers. This seemingly 

R4048 : page 254 

greatly discouraged the Israelites, who supposed that 
because the Lord's time had come they would have no 
difficulty in entering in and taking possession. They 
lacked faith thirty-eight years before when they should 
have exercised it, and now instead they had come to 
have a kind of credulity that was unwarranted. 

So it is with Spiritual Israelites; sometimes credulity 
is accepted and cherished as instead of faith. 
Many Christians, for instance, seem to expect that 
they will be carried to Canaan on flowery beds of ease, 
without any fighting, without proving their courage, 
without demonstrating their faith by overcoming various 
hindrances and obstacles. Let us not make such 
a mistake; let us understand from the first that God 
is seeking a class of overcomers, and that there could 
be no such class unless there were difficulties to overcome, 
and that it is the patient perseverance in well 
doing that demonstrates true character. 

Israel's credulity shattered, they began their journey 
to the eastward of Edom through a dense wilderness, 
"and the soul of the people was much discouraged 
because of the way"— their hardships, especially 
their disappointed hopes of an easier route. Here a 
rebellious spirit again broke out and they murmured, 
as did their fathers thirty-eight years before, against 
Moses and against God, declaring that their condition 
of bondage in Egypt, severe as it was, was preferable 
to the experiences they were having. Had they possessed 
a proper faith in God, in his wisdom, love and 
power, and a proper resignation to the same, their difficulties 
would have been lightened, their bitterness all 



have been sweetened. And so it is with those of Spiritual 

Israel who do not exercise the proper faith in the 

promises of God. To them the trials by the way and 

the disappointments are most discouraging, and "hope 

deferred maketh the heart sick." (Prov. 13:12.) 

Here again we see necessity for faith and proper devotion. 

With these we can endure all things; yea, and 

take adversities joyfully, as the Apostle explains, "Rejoicing 

in tribulation." (2 Cor. 7:4.) Hope and courage, 

inspired by the divine promises and strengthened 

by the experiences of the way, alone will keep us joyful 

while we are still in the enemy's country. 

LACK OF FAITH 

The Israelites murmured against the whole divine 
arrangement, especially complaining that there was no 
water, and that the manna that they gathered daily was 
too light— not strong enough for them; they craved the 
flesh-pots of Egypt. Similarly some of Spiritual Israel, 
not properly grasping the hopes and promises, not sufficiently 
living by faith on every word that proceedeth 
out of the mouth of God, find themselves in a half-starved 
condition because unable to appropriate a sufficiency 
of the spiritual food from lack of spiritual 
faith and hope. They crave the worldly things, and 
long to satisfy the carnal appetite, and feel themselves 
in a measure of bondage under the antitypical Moses. 
As a punishment for this rebellious condition the Lord 
permitted to come upon them a host of fiery serpents, 
the particular kind of which is not certain. They are 
supposed to have been called the fiery serpents because 
of red streaks upon the head, and because of a glistening 
of the skin in the sunlight. Such serpents are 
found in those desert parts and are very ferocious, 
very poisonous. Their bite so inflames the body and 
nervous system as to cause the feeling of fire throughout 
the entire body, often resulting in death in a very 
few hours. Such serpents are said to be numerous in 
those parts, but the "plague" of these seems to imply 
that they were present on this occasion in vast numbers 
as a scourge to the rebellious Israelites. Their 
agonies were increased by the bites of these serpents 
and by the dying of the members of their families. They 
began to realize that the chastisement of the Lord was 
upon them, and they cried to Moses for help, saying, 
"We have sinned because we have spoken against the 
Lord and against thee; pray unto the Lord that he take 
away the serpents from us." And Moses prayed for 
them. 

How often it is thus with Spiritual Israelites. It 
seems in many instances to require several adversities 
to awaken them, to cause them to appreciate the great 
antitypical Moses, the Christ, and to come unto the 
Father through him for relief. In this connection we 
remember the words of the Prophet, and see that they 



well apply to the experiences of many of the Lord's 
spiritual family, "Before I was afflicted I went astray." 
-Psa. 119:67. 

THE BRAZEN SERPENT 

By divine direction Moses erected on a pole a serpent 
made of brass, apparently of immense size and 
capable of being seen by the Israelites from quite a 
distance. By this means God would teach Natural 
Israel a lesson of faith. They had sinned, the punishment 
of their sins was upon them, but his mercy was 
extended to those who would recognize it by faith. We 
can well imagine the credulity of the people at first, 
and how they would say, What benefit could come from 
looking at a brass or copper serpent on a pole? How 
could that affect the wounds? How could that heal 
the dying ones? Is not this a fraud upon us? What 
does Moses, our great captain, think of us? Why does 
he thus trifle with us, and why does he not prepare 
some special balm? However, as the news would 
circulate that those who looked upon the serpent were 
healed, we can imagine the spread of the message 
among the people and their efforts and zeal to help one 
another to look and live. We can imagine parents 
pointing their dying children to the serpent, others 
helping themselves and being helped to the doors of 
their tents or other points from which the serpent 
might be seen. We can imagine better than describe 
the commotion experienced throughout so large a camp 
by this arrangement, and we can see that it was not 
only a penalty for their transgression, but incidentally 
it became a valuable assistance to their faith. 
Henceforth they might more clearly than ever realize 
that God was their leader, that through him they could 
do all things, and that murmuring against him would 
bring divine displeasure and some unfavorable 
punishment. 

R4048 : page 255 

"HE WAS MADE SIN FOR US" 

We might not have discovered without divine aid 
the antitypical signification of this incident. But our 
Lord himself directs our attention to the fact that the 
Israelites bitten by those serpents represented or typified 
sinners bitten by sin and suffering from the consequences 
thereof— the fall. He calls our attention to 
the fact that he himself was the great antitype of that 
brazen serpent lifted in the wilderness— that by his 
crucifixion he who knew no sin was made a curse for 
us who were transgressors. From our Lord's explanation 
we perceive the great truth taught by this type, 
namely, that in no other way has God provided for 
eternal life for the people than by the acceptance of 



Christ— yea, more than this, the acceptance of Christ 
crucified. 

How plainly does this show us that it is not sufficient 
for us to believe in Jesus as the great teacher, 
classing him with Plato, Zoroaster, Confucius or 
others, nor even by himself as a teacher above all other 
teachers. The lesson was that there was a redemption 
accomplished by our Lord in his crucifixion, which was 
necessary for us and without which we could not have 
eternal life. 

And further, the lesson outlined in the type is that 
not only was it necessary that Christ should die for our 
sins, but that none could be saved through his death 
except by looking unto him, exercising faith in the 
merit of his great atonement-sacrifice. It is in harmony 
with this that we, seeing, look and live. It is in 
harmony with this that we are looking unto Jesus, the 
author of our faith, until he becomes its finisher. It is 
in harmony with this that we are exhorted to look away 
from our own imperfections and dying conditions to 
the perfection of life in the Son of God, who gave 
himself our ransom price, and that we realize that 
through faith in his blood we have forgiveness of sins, 
reconciliation to the Father, and thus eternal life 
through him. 

ALL THE BLIND EYES SHALL BE OPENED 

But alas, says one, if it be true that there is no 
salvation except through faith in Christ— faith in his 
blood, faith in his sacrifice, faith in the redemption 
accomplished thereby— then how few will be saved! 
Some tell us that they cannot accept so narrow and 
limited a Gospel, that they believe that the heathen 
are saved without looking with the eye of faith to the 
crucified one, that they are as much saved as we who 
do look. We answer that we must not be wiser than 
the great Teacher himself, that we must not claim to 
have a greater benevolence than he who gave his life 
as our ransom price, and who declares that no man 
can come unto the Father but by him, and who points 
out that faith in him is necessary to such an approach 
to the Father and the getting of life eternal. 

But while looking to him from the standpoint of 
faith and accepting his Word, we hear from him a blessed 
message, which comforts our hearts and bids us 
rejoice. He assures us through the prophets that the 
hour is coming when all the blind eyes shall be opened 
and all the deaf ears shall be unstopped. He assures 
us that every eye shall see him, including those who 
pierced him. 

Those "eyes of understanding" now blinded, as the 
Apostle declares, by the god of this world and the 
cares of this life, will all be opened wide, in God's due 
time, to see the lengths and breadths and heights and 
depths of divine love and provision of grace in Christ. 



Our Lord informs us that the power of his cross is not 

limited to the present life. He declares, "I am the Resurrection 

and the Life." He declares that the hour is 

coming in the which all that are in their graves shall 

hear his voice and shall come forth. Those who have 

already seen and already been cured come forth to the 

resurrection of life, resurrection of glory and blessing 

and cooperation in the great work of blessing the remainder. 

R4049 : page 255 

Others will come forth to judgments, disciplines, 
corrections in righteousness, either that they 
may learn to look and live, or that, persistently refusing 
divine favor, they shall ultimately be destroyed 
from amongst the people.— Acts 3:23. 

THE DRAWING POWER 

As soon as the Israelites began to realize the divine 
power behind the brazen serpent they began to respond. 
Similarly our Lord informs us that as a result 
of his being lifted up at Calvary he shall ultimately 
exercise a drawing power upon all mankind. Not that 
he is exercising this drawing power now, however, for 
he declares respecting those who now come unto him 
that they are drawn of the Father. He says, "No man 
cometh unto me except the Father which sent me draw 
him." (John 6:44.) Thus the little flock, the Royal 
Priesthood, the members of the Body of Christ, are 
now being drawn. But the great mass of mankind are 
not drawn of the Father, but will be drawn by the Son, 
as we read, "And I, if I be lifted up, will draw all men 
unto me." (John 12:32.) Thus we see that the drawing 
of all men is a future work, and to be accomplished by 
the Christ, while the drawing of the little flock in this 
present time is the Father's work through various 
agencies. Let us rejoice in the divine plan, which is 
so complete, so harmonious, so satisfactory. Let us 
not mar in our minds the beauties of that plan by any 
false theories of our own or of other men, but let us receive 
with meekness the heavenly message that we may 
be wise, for our own benefit in making our calling and 
election sure now, and be prepared for a share in the 
heavenly Kingdom and its work of blessing all the 
families of the earth under the promise made to Abraham's 
Seed, the heirs according to the promise.— 
Galatians.— 3:29. 

"SEPARATE FROM SINNERS" 

Our Lord, we are told, was actually holy, harmless, 
undefiled and separate from sinners. (Heb. 7:26.) 
Thus, as God's holy one, he took the sinner's place. 
As the representative of Adam (and the race in his loins) 
Jesus tasted death for every man,— paying the sinner's 



penalty. He was made sin for us, he who knew no sin. 
He was treated as a sinner in order that we might be 
received by the Father and treated as righteous through 
the merit of his sacrifice. The chastisement of our 
peace was upon him, and with his stripes we are healed. 
Let us learn well the lesson, let us dread the bite 
of the sin-serpent and its death penalty, let us flee 
from this and let us receive the healing full and free; 
let us abide in his love. More than this, let us who at 
the present time have heard of the grace of God— which 
invites us not only to be justified through the precious 
sacrifice of Christ, but also to be adopted by him figuratively 
as members of his Body— accept the glorious 
proposition that we may thus become dead with 
Christ, that we may thus share with him in his sufferings 
as his members, that we may thus be members in him 
in the uplifted condition of the future, the glorious 
condition, and that from him and from us as members 
of his Body in glory may proceed the blessings of the 
Life-Giver to all the families of the earth, who will then 
be invited to look and to live. 



page 257 

SEMI-MONTHLY 
VOL. XXVIII SEPTEMBER 1 No. 17 
A.D. 1907--A.M. 6035 



CONTENTS 

Views from the Watch Tower 259 

Young Men and the Christian Ministry 259 

Looking the Facts in the Face 260 

The Race, the Prize, the Course 260 

Berean Bible Study in Tabernacle Shadows 261 

The Dying Message of a Great Man 261 

Earthly Prosperity and Reward 262 

The Chief or Primary Commandment 263 

"The Servant of the Lord Died" 266 

The Hidden Sepulchre 267 

The Meekest and the Greatest 268 

Quarterly Review 269 

The Chatauqua Salute 270 

Encouraging Words from Faithful Workers 270 

page 258 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-24 EVERSHOLT ST., LONDON, N.W. 
GERMAN BRANCH-MIRKER STR., 45, ELBERFELD. 
AUSTRALASIAN BRANCH-EQUITABLE BLDG., COLLINS ST., MELBOURNE 

PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 

TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR AS FOLLOWS:- 

All Bible Students who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity or 
adversity, are unable to pay for this Journal, will be supplied FREE if 
they send a Postal Card each June stating their case and requesting its 
continuance. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on 
our list continually and in touch with the Studies, etc. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



THIS JOURNAL IS PUBLISHED IN THE 

FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, DANISH AND ITALIAN LANGUAGES. 

SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



KARATOLS NO MORE 



Our supply of STUDIES, VOL. I., bound in Karatol is exhausted. 
Expect no more. 

VOLUNTEERING METHODS, ETC. 



An experienced Volunteer writes, suggesting that, instead 
of trying to slide the tracts under the doors, he puts them between 
the door-knob and the door-jamb so that they form a 
spring like the letter U. Then they will flutter to the floor 
just in front of whoever opens the door. He does not ring 
the bell, for this would be an annoyance and only prejudice 
the recipient against the tracts. 

ABOUT ONE-DAY CONVENTIONS. 



Whenever you see on last page that your invitation for a 
One-Day Convention has been accepted, and a date for it assigned, 
please proceed at once to make all necessary arrangements, 
—for hall, etc. As soon as you have these completed 
write to us, giving all particulars, so the full notice may be 
published in ample time. Hymn slips will be sent you, also a 
fair supply of tracts. These should be on hand for general use. 



Colporteurs will please use our Order blanks and direct 
letters to "Colporteur Department." 



R4049 : page 259 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER 
YOUNG MEN AND THE CHRISTIAN MINISTRY 



THE fact that fewer young men than formerly are preparing 

for the ministry is arousing comment in 

nearly all denominations. We extract below from 

Rev. D. J. Burrell's comments on this question and concede 

that as an educator his opinion should have weight. 

Nevertheless we can agree with it only in part. From 

our point of view the loss of positive faith, induced 



by so-called "Higher Criticism" and the "Evolution 
Theory," make void the Word of God. The very 
few young men who come out of college with a remnant 
of positive faith in the Bible are perplexed and inclined 
to doubt their convictions, and see that anyway they are 
out of tune with the majority of those with whom they 
had hoped to colabor and to serve, and that the message 
they intended to give would no longer be palatable to 
the people they would address nor satisfactory to 
themselves. 

They feel drawn more to some service like that of 
the Salvation Army, and yet they feel that somehow it 
is not right either, and certainly far from their original 
ideal when entering college. Several of these, as well 
as some ministers who have resigned their pulpits in 
Churchianity, are now having blessed times "harvesting" 
— colporteuring. 

Those described, however, are seemingly but the 
few. The vast majority seem intent merely on choosing 
a profession; and law, dentistry, medicine, osteopathy 
call loudly to them, and business holds out still more 
inducements. Hence the smaller proportion offering 
themselves for the ministry. 

Dr. Burrell's views from "The Christian Intelligencer" 
are as follows:— 

"Put yourself in his place. With life before you, 
presenting its various avenues of usefulness, you 
would be likely to reason thus: 'I am urged to go 
into the ministry. What for? "To seek and to save 
the lost?" But they say there are no "lost." To 
preach the truth? What truth? A personal God? 
They say there is no God but law, energy, a "something 
not ourselves, that maketh for righteousness." The 
supernatural? They say the miraculous is played out, 
and all things are to be accounted for by natural law. 
A divine Christ? His virgin birth is denied, and he is 
affirmed to have been a mere excellent man. The 
atonement? The idea that sin requires expiation is 
pronounced unphilosophical and therefore untrue. 
Justification by faith? Justification from what and by 
faith in what? In the New Theology faith has no object 
and justification no ground. Well, then, since all the 
doctrines once regarded as fundamental are explained 
away, suppose I devote my life to the preaching of ethics? 
But where shall I find my ethics? In the Bible? 
Pooh, pooh! The Bible is merely one of the many volumes 
of the world's literature and by no means the 
truest of them. In the Decalogue? The Decalogue is 
declared to have no more authority back of it than any 
other portion of the discredited book. Is there, then, 
no ultimate authority for truth and morals? Only in 
the inner consciousness of the individual. The question 
of entering the ministry, then, resolves itself into 
this: Shall I invest the assets of my life in a profession 
which has no end but to persuade a man to believe 
what pleases him, to be what he would like to be and 



to do what, in his opinion, without any reference to 
"authority," he ought to do? And, that being so, is 
the game worth the candle?' 

"If he is a really 'smart' young man he will be sure 
to answer, No. He knows that he has only one life to 
live in this world, and it behooves him to make the 
most of it. He would be a fool to put all his eggs in 
such a basket as the ministry of 'The New Theology.' 
It isn't worth while. The man who chops wood to 
keep people warm and bake their bread is a contributor 
to the general good, but the man who preaches when 
he has nothing to say is a non-producer. His profession 
ought to fail for want of candidates, because there 
is nothing in it. 

"It is a mistake, however, to assume that 'bright 
young men' are not consecrating themselves, here and 
there and everywhere, to the work of preaching the 
straight gospel. The doubter drops out; why not? 

R4049 : page 260 

But the youth who believes in Christ and the Bible covets 
the privilege of treading in the beaten path of service; 
and he knows that the higher form of service is 
proclaiming a positive gospel, on the authority of a 
'Thus saith the Lord,' with the supreme purpose of 
saving men." 

LOOKING THE FACTS IN THE FACE 



There are over 250,000 insane and imbeciles in the 
United States today. Statistics show that insanity is 
increasing three hundred times faster than the population. 
At the present ratio of increase, even if it gets 
no worse (in reality it is getting worse each year), it 
will require but 290 years to produce the utter destruction 
of the mental endurance of the race. 

One death in every seven is from tuberculosis. 
Recent statistics issued by the German government 
show that one-fourth of all people dying of diseases 
other than tuberculosis, have had consumption at some 
time in their life. It would thus appear that very nearly 
one-half of the grown-up people have had or now have 
tuberculosis in some form or other. 

The deadly cancer is terribly on the increase, and 
a prominent surgeon, appointed by the State of New 
York to investigate this disease some time ago, said 
that if it continues to increase the next ten years as 
fast as it has in the last ten years, it will claim as 

R4050 : page 260 

many victims as tuberculosis. 
On every side there is abundant evidence of the 



rapid increase in the numbers of deformed, defective 
and degenerate human beings. 

Nervous diseases and stomach troubles number 
their victims by millions, and very nearly three-fourths 
of the population are afflicted with one or other of 
these disorders. 

It is an acknowledged fact that vice and crime are 
tremendously on the increase. The rapidly increasing 
army of dentists testifies to the fact that, as a race, we 
are tending toward toothlessness.— Exchange. 



R4050 : page 260 

THE RACE, THE PRIZE, THE COURSE 

UNDOUBTEDLY the Apostle does in two of his epistles 
more or less clearly represent the Christian as 
running a race to win a prize. But as is usual 
with all figures and parables there seems to be room for 
slightly divergent views of his meaning, or rather of how to 
apply his figure of speech to the recognized facts. Let us 
be glad that the facts are generally very clearly seen. This 
is the important matter anyway. 

Shortly before St. Paul was executed he wrote, "I have 
fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept 
the faith: henceforth there is laid up for me a crown of 
righteousness." (2 Tim. 4:7,8.) If this was written six months 
before he died or even one month or only six days should 
we understand it to mean that the day before he wrote or 
the year before it would not have been true? We think not. 
We must believe also, that when, some time before, the same 
Apostle wrote, "I am in a strait betwixt two" as to choice 
between living and dying, he must have felt equally sure 
that he was at the mark which would win for him the great 
prize. 

But we cannot assume that the Apostle was always at 
that mark which would win for him the prize. Surely he, 
like all of us, was first begotten of the Spirit and subsequently 
quickened of the Spirit. Surely during the period 
between the begetting and the quickening neither he nor we 
could be at the "mark" for the prize. 

There must, therefore, be recognized a mark or standard 
of character necessary to the overcomers, which is not 
possessed at the beginning of the course nor usually for a 
considerable time thereafter— and a mark or character development 
which may be possessed a considerable time before 
death. Since "love is the fulfilling of the law of God" is it 
not proper that we consider it to be the mark or standard? 
We have, therefore, assumed that PERFECT LOVE is the standard 
of our acceptance with God to life eternal: and that to 
die before attaining it would insure our losing the prize, 
as death at any time after reaching this mark would insure 
us the crown of life. 

Perfect love includes love for God, for the brethren, for 



our own, for our neighbors and for our enemies; and much 
of the teaching of the Scriptures is devoted to the outlining 
of this perfect love and to encouraging God's people to 
strive for it; for it represents the fruits of the Spirit which 
must be grown or developed as the fruits of the vine. The 
pruning of the branches is to bring this fruitage to perfection, 
for without it the branch will be cut off from the Vine. 

True, some things are imputed to us from the time we 
become members of Christ; purity is imputed, but not the 
fruit of the Vine— Love. That must be developed. Hence 
it behooves every Christian to run, to strive, to attain this 
acceptable standard or mark. All of this is surely true 
whether the Apostle had in his mind a race illustration or not. 

When the Apostle exhorts, "Having done all, stand!" 
it implies that the race has been run, the acceptable mark 
of character attained before death. And is it not thus with 
all the "overcomers?" Did we not begin our Christian experience 
with a mere duty-love toward God and the brethren? 
Did we not "go on unto perfection"— progressing toward 
perfect love? True, the Apostle says, "Not as though 
I were already perfect"— and we with him may well disclaim 
actual perfection. But from the time he in heart 
reached the mark of perfect love, the righteousness or perfection 
of the Law was reckoned or accounted to him. Hence 
he adds, "Let as many [of you] as be perfect be thus 
minded." 

But what, if anything, is expected of those who reach 
this mark of perfect love? Ah! very much! Only after 
they reach it do they begin to tread in the footsteps of 
Jesus around and around that mark on its every side. Being 
actually perfect our Lord needed not to run to get to the 
mark, for he was actually there, even as the perfect man. It 
was for him to "stand" firmly and uncompromisingly at this 
"mark" as it is exhorted of us that after "having done all" 
we should stand complete in him. This standing at the 
mark is the real trial, the real test. To stand is to be an 
"overcomer" of the world, the flesh and the devil. The 

R4050 : page 261 

attainment of the mark is often tedious and slow, but it 
should not be. Since it is merely a state of the mind it 
surely might be attained speedily, whereas from lack of 
zeal many are long years about it and some never gain it,— 
are never quickened, and will never, therefore, be born of 
the Spirit. 

It is after we have reached the mark of perfect love 
that we, like our Lord, must endure hardness and fight the 
good fight. The encouragement held out is the "far more 
exceeding and eternal weight of glory" promised to those who 
display special valor in the King's service. 

When the Apostle says, "A man is not crowned except 
he strive lawfully," he in other words is saying that a man 
must be at the mark of perfect love (the fulfilling of the 
law) ere his strivings would be meritorious or acceptable in 
God's sight. 



Another possible view of the race is to suppose a line 
marked out and that line to represent perfect love, each 
runner being expected to keep as close to that line as possible 
to the end of life. But this view does not allow for or 
explain St. Paul's having finished his course weeks or 
months before he died, nor his "strait betwixt two," years 
before that. 

So then whatever view illustrates the facts best to our 
minds let us enjoy it, and meantime rejoice that the facts are 
so clear and plain as to be beyond dispute. 



page 26 1 

BEREAN BIBLE STUDY IN TABERNACLE SHADOWS 
"THE ASHES OF A HEIFER SPRINKLING THE UNCLEAN" 
SUNDAY, OCTOBER 13, 1907 

1. Was the sacrifice of the red heifer a "sin-offering" 
in any sense? How do we know this? Num. 19:1-5; 
T.105. 

2. What was done with the ashes of the heifer? T.105. 

3. Was this sacrifice in any way related to the sacrifices 
of the Day of Atonement? T.106, par. 1 (1st 

5 lines). 

4. Was it different from the sacrifices offered by the 
people of Israel after the Day of Atonement? T. 106, 
par. 1 (6th line down). 

SUNDAY, OCTOBER 20 

5. What, then, did this sacrifice of the red heifer signify? 
And what class was represented by it? 

And how would their sufferings have to do with 
the cleansing of the people of God, both of this 
age and the age to come? Heb. 9:13; 11:32-38. 
T.106, par. 3. 

6. Is this class, represented in the red heifer, a part of 
the Body of Christ, the Royal Priesthood? Heb. 1 1:39,40; 
T.107, par. 1. 

7. How can we be sure of this? Matt. 11:11; Heb. 6:19,20; 
2:3; T. 108, par. 1. 

8. What was typified by the "ashes" of the heifer? T.108, 
par. 2 (first half). 

9. What will be the station or position of the "Ancient 
Worthies"? Psa. 45:16; T.108, par. 2 (last half). 

10. Who witnessed the burning of the heifer? and what 
did he do? 

SUNDAY, OCTOBER 27 

11. What was typified by the "cedar wood," the "sprig 
of hyssop" and the "scarlet string"? 



12. Why were they cast into the midst of the burning 
heifer? T. 109. 

13. Who would seem to be typified by the under-priest 
who approved this burning and took of the blood 

and sprinkled it toward the Tabernacle door? 
T.109, par. 1. 

14. What was typified in the choosing of a red heifer 
which "never wore a yoke"? T.110, par. 1. 

15. Why was a heifer chosen and not a bullock? And 
why must it be red? T.l 10, par. 1. 

16. For what particular cleansings were the ashes of 
this heifer prescribed? Ex. 12:22; Lev. 14:4,49; 

Psa. 51:7; Heb. 9:19; T.lll, par. 1. 



R4050 : page 261 

THE DYING MESSAGE OF A GREAT MAN 

--DEUT. 6: 1-15. --SEPTEMBER 15.- 

Golden Text:— "Beware lest thou forget the Lord." 

DEUTERONOMY is the title of one of the most 

important books of the Bible. From it evidently 

David and the other prophets of the 

Old Testament drew considerable of their inspiration, 

and from it our Lord and the apostles freely quoted. 

It may be said to be a grand summary of the whole 

Law of God. It presents to us a number of the orations 

of that great man of God and leader of Israel— the 

mediator of the Law Covenant. Its preparation may 

have been a gradual work on the part of Moses, but 

its delivery to the people of Israel was apparently reserved 

until shortly before his death, and about the 

time the Israelites were ready to pass over Jordan under 

the leadership of Joshua to take possession of the 

promised land. The grandeur of its language and figures 

of speech is freely conceded by all, and some have 

ranked its orations quite as highly as those of Demosthenes 

of ancient times and of Burke, the more modern. 

The evident object of the book was to impress upon 

the Israelites the glorious lessons of their past, and to 

inspire them with reverence for Jehovah their God, 

and thus to be to that people the voice of Moses and 

the voice of the Lord through Moses, encouraging and 

admonishing them and, through them, future 

generations. 

Note carefully the loyalty of Moses to the Lord. 
He boasted not of Israel as "his people," as we frequently 
hear modern preachers do respecting their 
congregations— although Moses indeed might have 
been excusable had he used such language, because he 

R4051 : page 262 



was personally the mediator, the representative of the 
whole nation according to their covenant with the 
Lord at Sinai. Note well that his great work as a 
leader passes comparatively unnoticed, and that his 
exhortations to Israel are all along the highest conceivable 
lines of duty towards God and responsibility 
to him for all the comforts and blessings of the past, 
as well as for all the hopes they cherished for the future. 
The preparation and delivery of this oration to 
Israel reminds us of the words of the Apostle Peter in 
connection with his epistle when he says, "Wherefore I 
will not be negligent to put you always in remembrance 
of these things, though you know them, and be established 
in the present truth." (2 Pet. 1:12.) Not only 
did these orations of Deuteronomy have a valuable 
influence upon the Israelites at the important juncture 
of their passing from the guidance of an old leader to 
that of a younger one and into a new land, but Scriptural 
history tells us that six hundred years afterwards, 
when the nation had fallen into idolatry, when 
the Temple of Solomon was practically abandoned, 
and the religious worship of the people was at a very 
low ebb, the finding of this book, Deuteronomy, in the 
rubbish of the Temple, and the reading of it first in 
the ears of King Josiah and afterward at his command 
in the hearing of all the people, awakened one of the 
greatest revivals in the history of that nation, and led 
to the destruction of idols throughout the land and the 
reestablishment of divine worship.— 2 Kings 22:8-20. 

PROPER FEAR OF THE LORD 

Our lesson of today is generally recognized as belonging 
to the second oration (Deut. 5:11). Some 
surmise that at the close of this oration the "Book of 
the Covenant"— the Law contained in Deut. 12:26— was 
recited or read. Later the book was placed beside 
the Ark of the Testimony in the Holy of Holies, as described 
in Deuteronomy 31:24-29. 

This lesson opens with the statement that the book 
is a summary of the divine commandments, the statutes 
and judgments which the Lord commanded to be 
taught and to be performed in the land of promise. 
The word "judgments" here, as in many other places 
in the Scriptures, signifies decisions as to right and 
wrong. The object of these is stated (v. 2): "That 
thou mightest fear Jehovah thy God, to keep all his 
statutes." This was not only to apply to those who 
entered the land, but to extend to all their children, 
and their favor in the land and their continuance in it 
were made dependent thereon. The Apostle counsels 
us that perfect love casteth out fear, but the Scriptures 
also show us that the "fear [reverence] of the Lord is 
the beginning of wisdom." Nor are the two statements 
in disagreement, for a proper reverence carries 



with it a fear to displease or offend one who is loved and 
reverenced. Moreover, it is only the perfect love that fully 
casts out all fear, and the perfecting of love is a gradual 
matter. A beginning of love is not incompatible 
but quite harmonious with the spirit of deep reverence, 
and, as related to the Almighty, a feeling of reverential 
awe as respects his greatness and perfection and 
in contrast with our own littleness and imperfection. 
It is as the Christian grows in grace and knowledge 
that he is enabled to "perfect holiness in the reverence 
of the Lord" and at the same time to perfect his love— 
the latter eventually entirely swallowing up every feeling 
of fear, although reverence will remain an integral 
part of the love, for who could fully love God without 
reverencing him? 

EARTHLY PROSPERITY AND REWARD 

There is no doubt about it that in this lesson (v. 3), 
and in many other parts of the Old Testament Scriptures, 
the Lord distinctly sets before that people earthly prosperity 
as reward for their obedience and loyalty to 
him and his laws. This to some has been a stumbling-block; 
and not recognizing the fact of the dispensational 
change from the Jewish Age to the Gospel Age, 
they have applied this promise equally to Spiritual 
Israel, and their error has resulted in confusion of 
mind, for it is plain to be seen by any one that earthly 
prosperity in the present age does not attend the Spiritual 
Israelite, but rather, as the Apostle expressed it, 
"Yea, all who will live godly in Christ Jesus shall suffer 
persecution." (2 Tim. 3:12.) Ah! how important it is, 
as the Apostle suggests to Timothy, that we learn to 
"rightly divide the Word of truth"— that we notice 
which Scriptures belong to the Jewish Age, which to 
the Gospel Age and which others still to the Millennial 
Age. Observing this rule, everything is plain. 
Fleshly Israel had earthly promises and not heavenly 
ones, while Spiritual Israel has heavenly promises, 
and merely the assurance of bread and water as respects 
their earthly interests, and no assurance beyond 
these as respects their temporal prosperity. 

So far, therefore, as this teaching of earthly rewards 
is concerned, instead of reflecting against the 
book of Deuteronomy and its inspiration, it supports 
them. The promise to Natural Israel, that they would 
be blessed in basket and in store, in flocks and in 
herds, in long life and many children, finds its counterpart 
in Spiritual Israel on a higher plane. The 
heavenly Father was pleased to give Natural Israel earthly 
blessings because they were of the earthly seed, and 
because the dealings of their dispensation foreshadowed 
the divine dealings with the world during the 
Millennial Age in rewarding every good deed and punishing 
every misdemeanor. To God's people, begotten 
of the holy Spirit at Pentecost and since, belong the 



"exceeding great and precious promises," the heavenly 
glory, honor and immortality as members of the New 
Creation, spiritual. Your Father is more willing to 
give the holy Spirit to them that ask him than are 
earthly parents to give earthly good things to their 
children. Spiritual Israel, therefore, is to seek to 
grasp, to appreciate, to enjoy spiritual things by faith 
now, and, if faithful to the end, will enjoy these actually 
throughout eternity by participation in the First Resurrection 
as New Creatures. 
As the opening statement of the most important of 

R4051 : page 263 

all truths, the great Prophet, Moses, cried to the people, 
"Hearken, O Israel!" 

"JEHOVAH OUR GOD IS ONE-JEHOVAH" 

If this statement was true at the time of its utterance, 
it is still true; if its importance put it at the 
very top of the list of injunctions, it should still be 
regarded as the most important amongst the doctrines 
or teachings of the Lord's Word. Yet what do we see? 
We see as respects Fleshly Israel that they soon forgot 
the words of Moses, and time and again they were punished 
on the score of idolatry— for recognizing other 
gods, for forgetting the declaration that there is but 
the one, and his name Jehovah. Quite similarly we 
find amongst Christian people a tendency to forget 
this great integral truth that there is but one God and 
his name Jehovah. Our Roman Catholic friends make 
many gods: the Father, the Son, the holy Spirit, Saint 
Mary, all the apostles and saints, are gods of higher 
or lower dignity, with various degrees of reverence, 
and objects of adoration and prayer. And even Protestants, 
while rejecting many of the lesser gods of 
Romanism, yet, contrary to this Scripture and every 
other Scripture and without any reason, persistently 
declare that we have three Gods in one; nevertheless 
they reject this statement also and reverse it, saying, 
that there is one God in three persons ! If we attempt 
to question them and to ask a reason for their 
hopes and beliefs on this subject they are silent, except 
to say that it is a great mystery, which neither they nor 
any one else can understand— how there could be three 
Gods in one person or one God in three persons. No reasonable 
mind could grasp this; it would be a mystery 
indeed. But why should we make a mystery out of the 
plain, simple statement of God's Word? Why not accept 
the inspired statement of Moses that there is but one 
God, and that he has not three names but one name, 
Jehovah. 

Nothing in this need hinder us from recognizing 
our Lord Jesus as a god also, a "mighty God." Thus 
the Scriptures describe him, and clearly tell us of his 



greatness, his wisdom, his love, his power, his full 

harmony with the heavenly Father, Jehovah, and his 

full submission to his heavenly Father's will in all particulars. 

As he himself said, "Of mine own self I can 

do nothing," "My Father hath sent me," "I came not to 

do mine own will but the will of my Father"; and again, 

"The Father is greater than I." (John 5:30,36; 14:28.) 

Is it not the part of true wisdom and faith to take the 

inspired Word on this subject as on every subject, and 

not to trust to wild theorizings of our own or those of 

other men, which admittedly make confusion and mystery 

and darken the counsels of the Lord's Word? 

How beautiful the thought presented in the Scriptures 

in the language of the Apostle, "All things are of the 

Father— all things are by the Son." (I Cor. 8:6.) How 

beautiful the thought that the Son was the very "beginning 

of the creation of God," and that "by him all 

things were made," that he was the active agent and 

representative in all the great work, not only as respected 

man but angels also. The Bible teaching of 

the relationship between the Father and the Son honors 

both, does violence to neither Scripture nor reason, 

but leaves the teachable in a happy frame of mind, 

the more ready to be taught of the Lord on all subjects. 

How beautiful the thought that Jehovah God presented 
to his first-begotten Son— our Lord Jesus, in 
his prehuman condition— the proposition that he should 
be the Redeemer of the world, and that this should be 
accomplished by the humbling of himself to man's 
nature, and then the further humbling of himself even 
to death, even the death of the cross; and that as a 
result of this humiliation and this evidence of loyalty 
to the Father, he should be raised from the dead to a 
plane of nature above and beyond his original glorious 
estate, made partaker of the divine nature, and share 
in all the glories of that nature. How grand the 
thought that the dear Redeemer did thus manifest his 
love and loyalty, and that he is now exalted and is set 
down at the right hand of the majesty on high, awaiting 
the time when in the Father's name he shall take 
possession of the dominion of the world to rule, to 

R4052 : page 263 

bless with light and knowledge, and to uplift the 
willing and obedient from the mire of sin and death to 
all that was lost in Adam and redeemed at Calvary. 
Truly all who really hearken to the Word of the Lord 
are made both wiser and happier thereby. "The secret 
of Jehovah is with them that reverence him, and he 
will 

"SHOW THEM HIS COVENANT" 

That wonderful Covenant, shown to all who are 
seeking the Word in honesty and sincerity, assures us 



that as our dear Redeemer humbled himself for our 
and the world's redemption and has been highly exalted, 
so, if similarly faithful, we may suffer with him 
now and by and by share his glory and be co-laborers 
with him in the Kingdom which is to bless all the families 
of the earth. O, what riches of grace! what loving 
kindness! what tender mercy! what evidences of 
divine wisdom, skill, justice, love and power! How 
this view of the Only Begotten of the Father shows him 
to us as our Redeemer and also as our Lord and 
Head, who by and by, according to his promise, will 
present us as his Bride, blameless and irreprovable 
before the Father in love. Viewed from this standpoint 
the recognition of Jesus, our dear Redeemer, the 
Sent of God, the Savior of the world, is not in derogation 
of the command of our text, "Jehovah, our God, is 
one"; for the Apostle assures us that, according to divine 
authority, all should reverence the Son even as 
they reverence the Father— not reverence him as the 
Father, but reverence him as the Son whom the Father 
has appointed heir of all things, and who, as the Father's 
associate, is to bless all the families of the earth, 
and who a thousand years later will deliver up the 
Kingdom to God, even the Father, that he may be all 
in all. 

THE CHIEF OR PRIMARY COMMANDMENT 

After calling attention to the one true God, Jehovah, 
we are exhorted, "Thou shalt love Jehovah thy God 
with all thy heart, with all thy soul and with all thy 

R4052 : page 264 

might." This is the summary of the first great commandment, 

as approved by our Lord himself. (Matt. 22:37.) 

It is not in conflict with this that we love our 

Lord Jesus also, for the Apostle declares, "Every one 

that loveth him that begat loveth him also that is begotten 

of him." (I John 5:1.) He who loveth the 

Father must love the Son also, who is the Father's 

express image and who has manifested to us in his 

own flesh the glorious character of the Father. As 

the Son loved the Father, prayed to the Father, and 

felt that he must be about the Father's business, and 

finally died in the accomplishment of the Father's will 

—the work unto which the Father had sent him— so 

with us, imbued with the Spirit of our dear Redeemer, 

our Head. We as his members must have such a reverence 

for the Father and for his will as is here specified. 

The nation of Israel could not love the Lord with 

all its heart, with its soul, with its might; this exhortation 

must be understood to be of an individual kind. 

Similarly the Church, Spiritual Israel, is not called 

upon to love the Lord with heart, soul, being, strength, 

but the individuals who are the Lord's and who are 



seeking to please him, to serve him, to lay down their 
lives in obedience to his will and in the forwarding of 
the divine purposes, are called upon so to do. 

"And these words which I command thee this day 
shall be in thine heart." It is not sufficient, as the 
Lord subsequently pointed out, that we should make a 
profession to be his people, for the "Lord looketh upon 
the heart." The complaint of the Lord through the 
Prophet against Spiritual Israel of today is the same 
as against Israel of old— "This people draw night unto 
me with their lips, while their hearts are far from me" 
—not all, but apparently the great majority. (Isa. 29:13; 
Matt. 15:8.) The lesson to us as Spiritual Israelites 
is contained in the Apostle's words that this 
command of chief love shall be in our hearts. If so, 
this love for God will permeate everything; we will 
love him and his service better than we would love sin 
and its pleasures, better than we would love friends, kindred, 
houses or lands or any other thing; and whoever 
has this first great commandment in his heart and is 
living in harmony with it, will be sure also to have the 
second commandment, "Thou shalt love thy neighbor 
as thyself." 

THE FRUITS OF SUCH A LOVE 

That the Lord and Moses, his mouthpiece, did not 
seek to inculcate the mere nominal professions of love 
for God is clearly attested by the next verse, which declares 
respecting these divine commands, "Thou shalt 
teach them diligently unto thy children and shalt talk 
of them when thou sittest in thine house, and when 
thou walkest by the way, and when thou liest down, 
and when thou risest up." One whose mind and heart 
would be so filled with love for God and the glorious 
attributes of his character would indeed be a saint. 
What time would he have for sin or frivolity? What a 
model home his would be! how well instructed his children 
would be in the dealings of divine providence and 
all the gracious promises of the divine Word! What 
moderation of word and of act would result from this 
intimate fellowship with God, and yet how the light 
would shine out from such a life! 

The highest attainments under this exhortation were 
not reached under the Jewish dispensation, as the 
Apostle most clearly sets forth. The Jew did recognize 
a grandeur in the Mosaic Law, but it was so far 
above him and all his abilities that he gradually drifted 
into mere outward and formalistic observance of 
its propositions. But the Apostle explains that the 
highest attainments under this Law may be made by 
Spiritual Israelites during this Gospel Age. He declares, 
"The righteousness of the Law is fulfilled in us, 
who walk not after the flesh but after the Spirit."— 
Rom. 8:4. 

In other words, although we are not more able to 



accurately keep that grand law than were the Jews, 
we who are in Christ, having his righteousness imputed 
as a covering for our blemishes and being made 
partakers of his holy Spirit, are able to approximate in 
spirit this grand position. And, although there are 
not many such "saints" in the world, we believe that 
WATCH TOWER readers represent a considerable number 
of those of whom the description in the verse before 
us is a fitting one. (v. 7.) And a still larger number are 
awakening to a realization of the true standard which 
the Lord has set for those who are following in the 
footsteps of Jesus. These are more and more watching 
and praying for the fulfilment in themselves of the 
Lord's will as here expressed. They are seeking to 
teach the divine statutes, laws of righteousness, etc., 
to their children by word and by example. They talk 
of them continually in their leisure moments, in the 
house, on the train, on the street— and thoughts of the 
Lord and his wonderful plan of salvation come first 
into their minds on awaking in the morning and are 
last in their thoughts as they retire to rest at night. 

We are glad to testify that our increasing knowledge 
of the readers of this journal leads us to believe 
that they are in their hearts and in their lives seeking 
to approximate the condition of mind and heart here 
set forth as the ideal one, most pleasing to the Lord. 
At conventions this is particularly noticeable, and 
many have remarked that, with from five hundred to a 
thousand gathered from various parts, very rarely is 
there a word heard respecting business or pleasure or 
any other matter except as associated and connected 
with the Lord, his character, his plan and the service 
of his Truth. Strangers have commented upon this 
and marveled at it. Nevertheless, what else might 
we expect amongst those who are growing in grace 
and knowledge and love— amongst those who are coming 
nearer and nearer to an appreciation of the divine 
standards and whose hearts are full of the desire to 
know and to do the divine will. 

Nor would we discourage those who have not yet 
attained to anything like this, the proper standard for 
the Lord's people. Rather would we bid them be of 

R4052 : page 265 

good courage and continue the fight against the world, 

the flesh and the Adversary, and to continue to watch 

and to pray, and to strive to attain the conditions here 

set before us as those pleasing and acceptable to our 

Father in heaven. To have the desire of heart is the 

first condition, and to heroically carry this forward in 

all the affairs of life is the second step. The two constitute 

overcoming the world. Thus God works in us 

first of all to will aright, and subsequently as we become 

stronger in faith and knowledge and grace the 

spirit of the truth works in us to do his good pleasure, 



so that in all our ways we acknowledge him and request 

that he may direct our paths. The family worship, 

the Heavenly Manna at the table— if we give it 

as important a place as the earthly food— and the study 

of the divine plan are channels through which the divine 

blessing is more and more entering the hearts and 

lives of many of our readers, and we trust that the 

good work will continue to go on and progress. Proportionately 

each one is a burning and a shining light 

in his home or amongst his acquaintances, whether 

they acknowledge this or make little of it. His testimony 

is pleasing to God and hopeful to himself, and 

ere long the Lord's favor will be abundantly 

manifested. 

THE JEWISH PHYLACTERIES 

Our Lord Jesus referred to a custom amongst the 
Jews of his day which still prevails— of binding the 
phylactery upon their foreheads and their arms, while 
making void the law of God through their traditions. 
The eighth verse is the foundation for this custom. 
It says, "Thou shalt bind them for a sign upon thine 

R4053 : page 265 

hand and they shall be as frontlets between thine eyes." 

A phylactery is a little square leather box attached 
to a leather strap about a yard long. In the cubical 
leather box are placed parchments containing four 
passages of Scripture in four columns. (Exodus 13:1-16; 
Deut. 6:4,11,13-21.) These the Jews at times 
fastened upon the head, the box coming above and 
between the eyes; or again they fastened the box 
at the inside of the elbow, and wrapped the strap 
about the arm, holding the end in the hand. Poor 
Jews! they grasped with fervency an outward form, 
but, as the Lord pointed out, they missed the real kernel 
of the Law, namely, love out of a pure heart for God 
and for their neighbor. The wealthy and infidel Jews 
have of course abandoned this custom, but it is still in 
vogue amongst the most earnest or orthodox, who 
usually spend one hour in prayer every day and in putting 
on and off the phylactery. 

There is a lesson for us in this failure of Natural 
Israel to catch the spirit of the divine command. Our 
Lord said that while they thus made an outward show 
their hearts had vicious thoughts, unloving, unkind 
thoughts, and hence they were merely drawing nigh to 
God with their lips in a formal manner and were not 
acceptable. We Spiritual Israelites do well to remember 
that, while we do not use the same outward forms, 
we might bow the knee and pray long and much and 
yet be far from acceptable to the Lord unless we allow 
his spirit of grace and truth to enter into our hearts 
and there produce that transformation which he tells 



us is alone pleasing and acceptable to him— a transformation 

which will make us less selfish, more generous, 

less proud, more humble, less children of this 

world, more the children of the Kingdom, seekers less 

of the things of this present time and more of the Kingdom 

of God and of the righteousness which it represents 

and will in due time enforce. 

OUR OUTGOINGS AND INCOMINGS 

"And thou shalt write them upon the door-posts 
of thy house and upon thy gates." It is doubtful if the 
Lord meant this to be understood and practised literally. 
It is probable that, instead of introducing to the 
people phylacteries, the meaning of the Lord's word 
was that they should consider the divine laws as overshadowing 
everything that they saw and as affecting 
everything that they did with their arm (strength) and 
as affecting every affair of life, in the home and outside 
of it. However, if the spirit of the matter could have 
been retained by the Jews, their phylacteries, we presume, 
would have proved no interference to the divine 
blessing nor their method of complying with the last 
requirement (v. 9). They complied with the letter by 
fastening in a prominent place in the doorway what 
they termed "mezuzah." This is a square piece of paper 
or parchment inscribed with Deuteronomy 6:4-9; 
11:13-21. It is rolled and placed in a small cylinder usually 
of wood or tin. It is the custom of the pious Jew 
to touch this with his finger on each occasion of his 
passing it, and say in Hebrew (Psa. 121:8), "The Lord 
preserve thy going out and thy coming in," etc. 

The real thought which we attach to this injunction 
is that everything pertaining to us who are the 
Lord's, especially everything pertaining to the Church, 
which is the house, the family of God, is sacred to him 
and under his blessing, and we must confess him in 
every matter— "In all thy ways acknowledge him, and 
he shall direct thy paths." 

Next (vs. 10-12) Moses exhorts on the blessing and 
prosperity soon to come to them in the Lord's providence 
should they not turn their hearts away from the 
source of their blessing. And we as Spiritual Israelites 
—especially we who at this time are enjoying so 
much refreshment at the Lord's hand in spiritual 
things— should never forget while enjoying these that 
they have all come to us through the Father. True, 
the Father, now as ever, uses means, agencies, Pilgrims, 
Colporteurs, books, tracts, etc., for bringing 
his grace and truth to his family, and everything that 
God is pleased to use for our blessing should be appreciated 
by us if we are in the proper attitude of heart 
and truly thankful to him. But neither the good things 
themselves nor those who bring them to us are to distract 
our attention from the great fact that all these 
blessings are of God, who giveth to us liberally, richly, 



and upbraideth us not for our seeking of them, but 

R4053 : page 266 

rather rewards us richly. As Israel was exhorted continually 

to remember how God had brought them out 

of the house of bondage, so we should continually remember 

how the Lord brought us out of the house of 

bondage— bondage to sin and error, and that this was 

accomplished through the great antitypical Moses, our 

Redeemer. 

The closing verses of the lesson are exhortations 
again for reverence for the Lord and his name, and the 
repudiation of all other gods or rulers, and the assurance 
that instead of divine favor would come reprobation 
if we, after having been recipients of his favors 
and blessings and the spirit of adoption, should 
forget our obligations or turn from him unto sin. 
These lessons, so appropriate to Natural Israel, we 
recognize as still more appropriate, still more important, 
to us as New Creatures. Let us then take a valuable 
lesson, gird up the loins of our minds and 
strive patiently to the end of the way, when we shall be 
crowned if we faint not. 



R4053 : page 266 

"THE SERVANT OF THE LORD DIED" 

--DEUT. 34:1-12.-SEPTEMBER 22.- 

Golden Text:— "Precious in the sight of the 
Lord is the death of his saints."— Psalm 116:15. 

MOSES had faithfully fulfilled the work of the 
Lord committed to his care down to and 
including his orations, mentioned in our last 
lesson, in which he urged upon Israel faithfulness to 
God similar to that which he had illustrated in himself. 
The Lord's time had come for a change in Israel's 
leadership, and Moses was instructed to go up into the 
mountain called Nebo, whose culminating peak is Pisgah 
—about nine miles east of the northern end of the 
Dead Sea. There God gave him a vision, a view of the 
glorious land where the people he had loved— and in 
whose interests he had sacrificed the honors and dignities 
and luxuries of the Egyptian Court— were to have 
their home as the people of the Lord, under the terms 
of the Covenant which he had mediated at Mount Sinai. 
In the clear atmosphere of that country any eye may 
see much of the land of promise, but under divine 
blessing and assistance, as in Moses' case, we can 
readily realize that the vision, the view, could be a very 
comprehensive one. It was a part of this great leader's 



reward, which doubtless greatly comforted his heart, 
enabling him to see that his labor for the Lord had not 
been in vain, but was destined finally to bring forth 
great fruitage. 

The mental vision of Moses probably took in more 
than was visible to his natural sight. He understood 
that the Lord's blessing upon the nation, including 
that upon himself, was all a part of the great Abrahamic 
promise. He understood that the coming of 
Israel into this land which God had given to them was 
merely one step in the development of the divine plan. 
He understood that Israel was to become very great in 
the world, and ultimately be used as the Lord's instrumentality 
in guiding and instructing all the other 

nations. He understood that ere this would be accomplished 
a greater teacher than himself would come, a 
greater lawyer, a greater leader, a commander of the people 
—the Messiah. He could see in the promise made 
to Abraham— "In thy Seed shall all the families of the 
earth be blessed"— the ultimate results, but he could 
not see, we may be sure, the intermediate steps of 
divine providence as they are now open and plain before 
the eyes of those who are guided by the Lord's 
Word and Spirit to an understanding of the "deep 
things of God," which other eyes have not seen nor 
ears heard. 

"THE HIDDEN MYSTERY" 

The Apostle tells us that the riches of God's grace 
revealed during this Gospel Age were mysteries hidden 
from past ages and dispensations. (Col. 1:26.) Due 
time for their revealment had not come. Nor were they 
ever intended to be understood except by the Elect— To 
you it is given to know the mysteries of the Kingdom, 
but to outsiders these things are spoken in parables 
and dark sayings.— Mark 4:11. 

The mystery of the divine plan, which Moses saw 
not, but which we now see through the apostolic explanation 
provided by the holy Spirit, is that the natural 
seed of Abraham, though it will have a part in the 
blessing of all the families of the earth, will not have 
the chief part except as it is represented by Jesus and 
the apostles and members of the early Church, who according 
to the flesh were of the natural seed of Abraham, 
but according to the spirit were the spiritual Seed— 
the true heirs. Neither did Moses nor others of his time 
see that to this spiritual Seed, which originally was of 
the Jews, would be added members gathered out of 
every nation, people, kindred and tongue during this 
Gospel Age. Nor was it necessary that Moses should 
see or understand or appreciate more than he did. 
Greater knowledge would have been confusing to him 
instead of favorable. Thus, "God moves in a mysterious 
way, his wonders to perform." And again, as the poet 
declares: 



R4054 : page 266 

"Deep in unfathomable mines 

Of never-failing skill, 
He treasures up his bright designs, 

And works his sovereign will." 

As we in mental picture see the great Moses looking 
over the land of Canaan and feasting upon the gracious 
promises of God to Israel— as we note his faithfulness 
in his long and arduous service and his peaceful 
resignation of his life into the hands of the Lord at 
its close, in full confidence of the fulfilment of the Oath-Bound 
Covenant, it points a lesson for us. We similarly 
are standing at the close of a great epoch. The 
antitypical Moses, Christ the Head and the Church his 
Body, has arisen amongst men, and for eighteen centuries 
has been leading onward in the direction of the 

R4054 : page 267 

Millennial Kingdom. The journey is almost concluded. 

By the Lord's direction the living representatives 
of the Body of Christ, the antitypical Moses, are 
already on Mount Pisgah, and, looking beyond, are 
getting the antitypical vision of the glories of the age 
to come— of all the blessings that shall come to the 
world of mankind during the Millennial reign of Christ. 
With the eye of faith we perceive the blessing of all the 
families of the earth through the faithful ones of 
Spiritual Israel and the Ancient Worthies. We see gathering 
to their leadership and instruction, not only 
Israel, but all the families of the earth. We perceive 
the blessing of the light of the glory of the Lord as it 
shall fill the whole earth and make it no longer necessary 
for each to tell his neighbor and his brother, Know 
thou the Lord, because all shall know him. We perceive 
the fall of Babylon, the antitypical Jericho, and the rescue 
at the time of the Great Company of the Lord's 
true people who there were represented by Rahab. With 
the eye of faith we perceive the victory after victory 
which the people will gain over their various foes under 
the Spiritual Joshua, the Christ of glory. We perceive 
that ultimately, with still continued victories, even the 
last enemy shall be destroyed, and the whole groaning 
creation brought to the glorious place where there 
shall be no more sighing, no more dying, no more crying, 
because all the former things of sin and condemnation 
shall have passed away. This is our present 
vision from Mount Pisgah, and surely it is glorious and 
heart-inspiring. Soon in our changed condition beyond 
the vail we shall be members of the great Joshua, leading 
all the families of the earth to the victories and 
blessings promised through faith and obedience. 

The prophecy of Baalim might properly be considered 



as the sentiment of Moses, as, looking down into 

the future he endeavored to discern the shadowy outlines 

of the coming blessings of God's Covenant, 

namely: 

"I see him, but not now; 

I behold him, but not nigh: 

There shall come forth a Star out of Jacob, 

And a sceptre shall rise out of Israel." 

"So Moses, the servant of the Lord, died... according 
to the word of the Lord: This is the land which 
he sware unto Abraham, unto Isaac, unto Jacob, saying, 
I will give it unto thy seed. I have caused thee to 
see it with thine eyes, but thou shalt not go over 
thither." As we look into the beauties of the Millennial 
epoch, the Lord tells us that we shall not go over to 
possess it, but that it shall be for mankind. But he 
tells us more, namely, that he has "provided some better 
thing for us." (Heb. 1 1:40.) He tells us that we must 
die, that "flesh and blood cannot inherit the Kingdom 
of God." (I Cor. 15:50.) The glorious vision shown us 
is merely for our comfort and strengthening in connection 
with the closing scenes of this age. 

In the Hebrew language the expression, "according 
to the word of the Lord," would literally be, "by the 
mouth of the Lord," and Jewish rabbis have given this 
a poetic turn and say, "by the kiss of the Lord." It is 
a beautiful thought, for while Moses was about to pass 
to the extreme limit of the curse— death— he was recognized 
of the Lord and dealt with as a faithful servant; 
and in view of the fact that the divine plan had arranged 
for his redemption from sheol, the grave (Hosea 13:14), 
his death is appropriately described as a sleep. And 
thus we have the picture of a father kissing his child 
to sleep, and the other picture of the glorious morning 
of the resurrection in which the antitypical Moses, as 
the Father's representative, will awaken him to the 
blessings and eternal rewards which are his in the 
divine plan because of his faithfulness. 

"THE DEATH OF HIS SAINTS" 

This is the signification of the Golden Text, 
"Precious in the sight of Jehovah is the death of his 
holy ones." In a prominent sense our Lord was the 
Holy One of God, and his death was in the sight of 
the Father very precious, and his soul was not left in 
sheol, in hades, in the state of death. He was "raised 
again from the dead on the third day." And through 
him not only the faith and obedience of the Church are 
counted for righteousness, but likewise the faith and 
obedience of Moses and the Ancient Worthies. It is on 
this account that these may be called saints, holy ones, 
because in the divine plan the merit of the Redeemer 
is imputed to them, and through him all these 



are now in divine favor. Consequently, precious in Jehovah's 
sight was the death of all such; and of all now 
walking by faith and seeking to do his will. 

From this standpoint we may understand that the 
death of our dear Redeemer, like that of all of God's 
consecrated ones who have died, and much more so, 
was precious in the Father's sight, and that even though 
he died as the sinner, crying, "My God, my God, why 
hast thou forsaken me," nevertheless he died with the 
Father's kiss. So may it be with all those consecrated 
to walk in the footsteps of their Redeemer. Covered 
with his robe of righteousness they are all precious to 
the Father, and their death under whatever circumstances 
will really not be accidental, but a kiss of 
divine approval and seal of the coming blessing in the 
First Resurrection. 

THE HIDDEN SEPULCHRE 

The Lord himself buried Moses, hiding the place of 
his sepulchre. The primary reason for this probably 
was to hinder the Israelites from carrying his corpse 
as a mummy, which in after time might have become a 
temptation to idolatry. The passage in Jude 9, which 
mentions Michael contending with Satan concerning 
the body of Moses, is a hint along this line, that Satan 
desired to have the corpse to use it for the further misleading 
of the people, but that the Lord through 
Michael the archangel hindered, prevented this, and 
kept the burial-place a secret from the Israelites. 

But there is another view of this matter which is 
interesting because it relates to Spiritual Israel. Jesus 
and the Church unitedly constitute the antitypical, or 
greater Moses— the Spiritual. Their inheritance is not 

R4054 : page 268 

to be earthly but heavenly, and a grave is a symbol of 
hope as respects an earthly resurrection. Hence it was 
appropriate that the type should not show an earthly 
grave since the antitype has no hope in that connection. 
Our hopes are not fleshly, not restitutional hopes, but 
hopes as New Creatures of glory, honor and immortality 
in joint-heirship with our glorious Head. 

THE MEEKEST AND THE GREATEST 

The Scriptures write down Moses as the meekest 
man, and history has written him down as one of the 
greatest of men. Our Lord and the apostles and others 
of the Church are not introduced in this comparison 
because their greatness is not as men but as New Creatures. 
They sacrificed earthly occupations, etc., that 
they might preach the Gospel of the Kingdom and 
suffer therefor. 

When one hundred and twenty years old Moses' eye 



was not dim, his vigor had not fled! This is a remarkable 

statement in whatever light we view it. Forty 

years was he schooled in all the learning of the Egyptians, 

a member of the Court and a general. Forty 

years more he was hidden from view in the desert region 

as a herder of sheep, learning, we may be sure, 

lessons of patience, endurance, self-control and humility. 

And now, finally, the last forty years of his life he 

was used mightily of God, and yet maintained humility 

and exemplified the wonderful qualities of a judge and 

lawgiver, and later a general, a prophet, a priest, a 

teacher. The poet has said of him:— 

"This was the truest warrior 

That ever buckled sword; 
This the most gifted poet 

That ever breathed a word. 
And never earth's philosopher 

Traced with his golden pen 
On the deathless page, truths half so sage 

As he wrote down for men. 

"And had he not high honor? 

The hillside for his pall, 
To lie in state, while angels wait 

With stars for tapers tall; 
And the dark rock pines, like tossing plumes, 

Over his bier to wave, 
And God's own hand, in that lonely land, 

To lay him in the grave." 

Our lesson says of him that there has risen no 
prophet since in Israel like unto Moses, because not 
only was his birth and development specially under 
divine blessing and guidance, but he fully submitted 
himself to the Lord in meekness, in humility, and was 
therefore specially used of him as a type or picture of 

R4055 : page 268 

the still greater Prophet— the Christ of glory. (Acts 3:22,23.) 
Let us use the words of others in describing 
this great servant of God:— 

Moses, the Statesman: "Inspiration apart, Moses 
possessed all those endowments and qualities which 
form the consummate statesman and chief magistrate; 
an intellect of the highest order; perfect mastery of all 
the civil wisdom of the age; a penetrating, comprehensive 
and sagacious judgment; great promptness and 
energy in action; patriotism which neither ingratitude, 
ill treatment nor rebellion could quench or even cool; 
a commanding and persuasive eloquence; a hearty love 
of truth; an incorruptible virtue; an entire freedom 
from selfish ambition; an invincible hatred of tyranny 
and injustice; a patient endurance of toil; a courageous 
contempt of danger, and a greatness of soul in which 



he has never been surpassed by the most admired 
heroes of ancient or modern times. Comprehensiveness, 
grasp, force, sagacity, were the predominant 
characteristics of his mind; magnanimity, disinterestedness, 
an enthusiastic devotion to liberty and an 
ardent but rational piety, were the leading qualities of 
his heart." 

As a General: "Moses delivered his people from the 
most powerful nation on earth; maintained them 
amid the perils of the desert for forty years, and led 
them in confidence against a country settled by fierce 
tribes, which they conquered." 

As a Lawgiver: "However much may have been 
added by the development of the people, like the 
amendments to the Constitution and laws of the United 
States, yet through Moses was instituted the great 
system of civil and religious law." 

As a Poet: "The two songs in Deut. 32 and 33 and 
Psalm 90." 

As an Orator: "The great orations in Deuteronomy 
stand among the few greatest masterpieces of eloquence 
in the world's history, if not at their head." 

"WHOM THE LORD KNEW FACE TO FACE" 

To others of the prophets the Lord usually manifested 
himself through visions or dreams or by angels 
in human form, but seemingly Moses was granted a 
still closer approach to the divine presence. When 
thinking of the expression, "face to face," we should 
understand it to signify that Moses enjoyed a closeness 
of fellowship and favor with the Lord rather than 
that he really looked into the face of Jehovah, concerning 
which it is written, "No man can see my face and 
live" (Ex. 33:20); and again, "Whom no man hath seen 
or can see." (I Tim. 6:16.) It may be that our Lord 
Jesus as Michael especially represented the Father 
with Moses, as it was he who prevented the Adversary 
from having Moses' body after death. But in any event, 
applying the matter antitypically to the Christ, we see 
that in a special sense the antitypical Moses in the 
flesh throughout this Gospel Age has had a favor in 
connection with the divine presence not enjoyed by any 
others of previous times. 

We see the Lord's face with the eye of faith, for we 
have seen our Lord Jesus, who represents the Father, 
and who declares that whosoever hath seen him hath 
seen the Father— has enjoyed the best possible revelation 
of the Father whom no man hath seen. Again he 
declares respecting the Church, his Body, "Their 
angels [messengers] do always have access to the face 
of my Father," as though he would tell us that all of 
our interests and affairs are brought directly to the 
Father's attention, so that there is no danger of any 
delay and any peradventure that all things will work 
together for good to them who love him. Again we see 



the Father's face in the sense that we see his love, 
which is displayed to us through a knowledge of the 
Truth by the holy Spirit granted to us. Not merely divine 

R4055 : page 269 

power do we see, not merely divine wisdom do we 
see, not merely divine justice do we see— but God himself 
is love, and he has shown us his love. We who with 
the eyes of our understanding have seen our Redeemer 
and come to a knowledge of him have seen the Father 
and become acquainted with him proportionately, for 
all things are of the Father and all things are by the 
Son. "Let me die the death of the righteous— let my 
last end be like his."— Numbers 23:10. 

Our Lord Jesus was the Righteous One, and when 
we think of death we are to think of him and his death, 
and to remember that as he laid down his life we also 
ought to lay down our lives on behalf of the brethren. 
As he sacrificed earthly interests and advantages and 
privileges and pleasures that he might die the sacrificial 
death in accord with the divine plan, so let us remember 
that we have covenanted similarly to be "dead 
with him." For if we be dead with him we shall also 
live with him; if we suffer with him we shall also reign 
with him. Our hope of participation with him in his 
resurrection to glory, honor and immortality, is based 
upon our faithfulness in participating with him in his 
death, which means also a share with him in the sufferings 
of this present time. But standing as we do with 
the Pisgah prospect before us, strengthened by might 
in the inner-man, why should either death or its attendant 
sufferings deter us? Nay, in all these things 
we will rejoice and triumph through our Lord and Redeemer, 
our Head! 

"MEN OF LIKE PASSIONS WITH YOURSELVES" 

These were the words of the Apostle Paul, and his 
humble statement respecting himself and his companions 
is true also of Moses and all the Ancient Worthies, 
and is in full harmony with the Scriptural declaration, 
"There is none righteous [perfect], no not one." 
We here quote the words of another respecting the 
blemishes of Moses' career:— 

"Two or three items to his fault are attributed to 
Moses, as every saint has failed in some point at some 
time. There is no garden but has some weeds. But 
the most unjust thing we can do is to measure its value 
by its weeds and not by its fruits. 'By their fruits ye 
shall know them.' Moses' few faults are such as 
will never be noticed at all by a worldly man. They 
are like a broken limb on a tree loaded with magnificent 
fruit. All God's works through men are done by imperfect 
instruments." 



"There's a fleck of rust on a faultless blade— 
On the armor of price there is one. 

There's a mole on the cheek of the lovely maid; 
There are spots upon the sun." 



R4055 : page 269 

QUARTERLY REVIEW 

-SEPTEMBER 29.- 

Golden Text:— "The Lord is merciful and gracious, 
slow to anger and plenteous in mercy."— Psalm 103:8. 

BEFORE starting the studies of a new quarter 

we are urged to take a glance back over what 

we have seen during the present one. It discloses 

an interesting panorama and a profitable one. 

Israel's history therein depicted is in sharp contrast 

with that of any other nation of earth. How consistent 

with the facts is the Scriptural declaration concerning 

Israel, "You only have I known of all the families 

of the earth." (Amos 3:2.) God, of course, knew of the 

other nations, and in a general way caused his sun to 

shine upon the just and the unjust, the evil and the 

good. He has supervised the affairs of the nations to 

the extent of hindering conditions which would be inimical 

to his gracious plans for the ultimate blessing 

of all the families of the earth; but, as declared, he revealed 

himself to and was in active cooperation with 

the nation of Israel alone, the seed of Abraham, up to 

the time that they were cast off, when they rejected 

Messiah. Since then, as we have seen, the divine care, 

blessing, promises, revelations, etc., have been turned 

to Spiritual Israel— the Spiritual Seed of Abraham, 

Christ and the Church, the new nation, the Royal 

Priesthood, the Holy People. 

We get the most good from the experiences of 
fleshly Israel by seeing through them as types, figures, 
illustrations, the Lord's providences toward Spiritual 
Israel. Thus Israel's deliverance from Egyptian bondage 
corresponds to our deliverance from the bondage 
of sin, condemnation and death. Their deliverer, 
Moses, corresponds to our deliverer, Jesus. Their trial 
and testing at the Red Sea correspond to the test of 
our full consecration to the Lord at the beginning of 
our journey— the entrance upon the narrow way. The 
springs and oases of their desert journey to Sinai correspond 
well with the times of refreshing of a spiritual 
kind granted to us in the midst of our trying experiences, 
resulting from our following our Leader and 
finding as a consequence the world against us. Their 
coming to Sinai corresponds in some measure with our 
growth in knowledge and our greater responsibility 



therefor, and our fuller realization of the greatness of 
our God and the responsibilities of the relationship to 
him into which we have entered. Their daily portion 
of manna, God's supply, but painstakingly received, 
corresponds well to our spiritual sustenance received 
of the Lord from his storehouse, the Bible. Although 
the supply is sufficient, time and patient perseverance 
are requisite for securing it, for gathering it. The fact 
that their manna came every day, and in the proportion 
necessary, well illustrates the fact that our spiritual 
food must be partaken of daily, must be gathered daily 
—"meat in due season." 

The short journey to Kadesh-Barnea, from whence 
spies went forth, indicates the short time which should 
elapse with us before we should enter into the riches of 
God's favor by faith. The viewing of the land enjoyed 
by Caleb and Joshua represents well the joyful experiences 
of those who fully trust in the Lord and fully 

R4056 : page 270 

consecrate to him and are already able even on this side 
the vail to enter into the joys of the Lord by faith. The 
evil report of the other spies, and the unwillingness of 
the Israelites to go forward in faith to possess the land, 
represent well the condition of the majority of the 
Lord's people— they cannot enjoy because they cannot 
believe, because they have not sufficient faith in the 
power of God and in the certainty of his promises. 

MERCIFUL AND GRACIOUS, SLOW TO ANGER 

Our Golden Text reminds us that the Lord is merciful 
and gracious, slow to anger and plenteous in 
mercy, and we see this well illustrated in the case of 
fleshly Israel in the wilderness experiences, in the history 
of the Lord's people of this Gospel Age, nominal 
spiritual Israel, and also in the cases of the faithful 
ones. Can we not all realize how patient and merciful 
the Lord has been to us in our various experiences in 
life? Can we not see how he would have been fully 
justified in canceling our Covenant long ago, and that 
only of his mercy and love have we been permitted to 
come thus far on the way toward the heavenly Kingdom? 
Surely a realization of these things should make 
us both humble and trustful. Moreover the Lord informs 
us that he has a still further requirement, namely, 
that if we would appreciate his greatness and mercy 
through Christ in our own cases we shall exercise similarly 
mercy and forbearance toward others who may 
transgress against us. Indeed, so earnest is the Lord 
in impressing this matter upon us that he positively 
declares that none of us can maintain relationship with 
him except as he shall develop this spirit, this character, 
in relationship to his brethren and fellow-servants. 
How generous, how considerate, how moderate, how 



forgiving, all this should lead us to be in our dealings 
with the brethren, especially with those who have in 
any measure wounded or injured us or our interests. 

Finally, let us remember Moses on Mount Nebo 
looking across Jordan into the promised land— and 
preparing for his burial. Let us more and more realize 
that this should be our attitude; that as the Body 
of Christ in the flesh we are soon to die, and that beyond 
the vail we will be New Creatures. Let us remember 
that the mountain-top of Christian experience 
should now be our portion, and that from thence the 
clear eye of faith should be able distinctly to discern 
the outlines of the glorious inheritance which the Lord 
hath in reservation for them that love him, the possession 
of which we are hoping so soon to share. 



R4056 : page 270 

THE CHATAUQUA SALUTE 

Question.— To our surprise a "Brother" found fault 
with our giving the Chatauqua salute when Brother 
Russell appeared at the Denver Convention. I ask 
for information whether or not any evil significance 
attaches to such a form of salute? 

Answer.— There is no evil significance to the "Chatauqua 
salute." It is one of the most decorous and civilized 
salutes known. It was started as an offset to hand-clapping, 
foot-stamping and cheering; and surely it 
is much more polite. An audience must have some 
method of expressing its greeting, and a less objectionable 
form surely could not be imagined by anybody. 
True, the Scriptures do not command or even mention 
the "Chatauqua salute"; but then neither do they commend 
handshaking, which is merely a private salutation 
as the other is a general one. However, let us 
recognize each other's right to shake the hand or the 
head or the handkerchief or not, as each may choose. 

Let us remember, too, that "Your Adversary the 
devil goeth about as a ferocious lion, seeking whom he 
may devour— whom resist," says the Apostle. We may 
be sure that he attends all the Conventions; and that 
his influence is continually exerted to sow discord, 
strife and every other work of the flesh and of the devil. 
He works upon our imperfect heads and hearts. "We 
are not ignorant of his devices," writes the Apostle, 
and we well know that wrong-heartedness is far more 
dangerous than wrong-headedness. The latter the Lord 
has promised to protect us from, but not from the former: 
we must be "pure in heart," else we will not long 
be reckoned amongst the branches of the True Vine, 
but be cut off; for Love is the fruit of the Spirit— the 
fruit of the Vine. And "herein is your Father glorified, 
that ye bear much fruit." Oh! then, how we should 



watch and pray against the spirit of envy, malice, 
wrath, strife, contention; and cultivate meekness, 
gentleness, patience, brotherly kindness, Love. Thus, 
as directed, let us keep our hearts in the love that is of 
God; keep them with all diligence, for out of them are 
the issues of life— the decision as to our everlasting future 
of Life or Death eternal. Let us all be on guard. 
And let those who have on the whole armor and who 
know how to use the sword of the Spirit assist the 
weaker to overcome the Tempter's snares and wiles. 



page 270 
ENCOURAGING WORDS FROM FAITHFUL WORKERS 

MY DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

I am thinking of you all this morning as being at 
breakfast while I write— discussing the Heavenly Manna 
text for the day: "Thou wilt keep him in perfect peace 
whose mind is stayed on thee," and I am sure the discussion 
going on is reminding all of the greatness of 
the privilege of that perfect peace. I am trying to the 
more thoroughly bring my own heart into that state of 
staying (fixing) upon the Lord that I might enjoy still 
more completely the perfect peace. 

I am having a great blessing in association with 
the dear ones here. The community is a country one, 
and great opposition is manifest by the people, but 
there is a gathering here which would shame many 
large cities— about fifty persons. The population is 
only about 8,000 persons. Bro. S , the leader, used to 

page 27 1 

be a chemist and druggist, but has recently given up 
his business entirely, so that both himself and wife 
might engage in the Colporteur work, which they are 
determined to make the best of, although some conditions 
here make the work far more difficult than in 
America. They are aided very much in reaching small 
towns by an automobile, capable of holding two, the 
expense of maintaining which is less than the railway 
fares of one person would be, and they are thus able to 
carry their books with them while canvassing, and to 
deliver at once. 

I am trying to get as accurate an idea of the Colporteur 
situation as I can while here, that I may give 
you an intelligible report of it when I get home, and 
have been out myself to do some canvassing, that I 
might know from actual experience the attitude of the 
people. I find that one of the greatest hindrances 
here is the absolute indifference of the great majority 
to any kind of religious matter, and the engagement to 
a remarkable degree in the pursuit of pleasure. I shall 



make some canvassing experiments in other parts 
where time will permit. 

The friends everywhere are longing to see you. 
Many of them have come into the Truth only recently, 
and they are very anxious to express personally their 
gratitude to God in bringing the knowledge of his plan 
to them through you. They love you most sincerely 
and when I have mentioned your hope to be able to 
come next year a wave of joy seemed to pass over them 
all. One dear sister here tells me she wanted to tell 
you her feelings of gratitude for what the Lord had 
given her through you, and she wrote seven letters, one 
after the other, in an attempt to put her thoughts into 
words, but she never sent you any of them, because 
she thought they weren't good enough. Doubtless in 
the Kingdom she will be able to express all she feels. 

The zeal and love of the friends is a constant lesson 
and reminder, and I feel that I am learning very 
much by my association with them all. I pray that I 
may have heavenly wisdom to apply the lessons 
learned. 

With much love to you, dear Brother Russell, and 
to every one of the dear ones at the Bible House, and 
asking that you will kindly remember me specially in 
prayer that I may use and not abuse my precious privileges 
in the Lord's glorious service, and assuring you 
that every day I remember yourself and the dear ones 
with you, 

Your brother and servant in our Lord, 

A. E. WILLIAMSON,-England. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

It is with pleasure I pen you these few lines, just 
to inform you of the blessings received in the service 
granted me in the harvest field, "not of merit but of 
grace," and never did I feel so weak in myself as of 
late, but the Apostle so clearly brings the matter to our 
view, saying, "When I am weak, then am I strong," etc. 

Knowing of your love toward all the Lord's people, 
I am glad to be able to express, on behalf of those 
whom it has been my privilege to meet, their love toward 
you, dear brother, which has been manifested in 
so many ways. 

I firmly believe that those who are having the greatest 
joys "in the Lord" at the present time are those 
who have first made a careful and prayerful study of 
the DAWNS, with Bible in hand, thereby putting on the 
armor, and having done so are active in service to the 
extent of their ability, in whatever position the Lord 
has placed them. These seem to be the clearest in 
Present Truth, and find the yoke easy, rejoicing that 
they have the privilege of suffering with him. 

I enclose a part of a letter received yesterday from 
a very dear Colporteur brother who has a family to 



support. It reads as follows:— 

"I often think what an opportunity there is for 
those of our single brothers of good ability and with 
no encumbrance. I would not think of using my time 
in secular employment, while the opportunity was afforded 
of doing "harvest" work, if I were single. I am 
glad that the dear Lord has given me the privilege of 
using a little time this way, and trust I will be able to 
put in a few more months. In the last seven days I 
have sold 250 books. 

'"Lord, if I may, 

I'll serve another day.'" 

A dear sister has also written me, saying: "Since 
you were here the Lord has opened the way, and now 
I am in the 'harvest field.' And oh, the blessings that 
come from day to day! How unworthy I am of such 
favors ! " 

And now, dear brother, may the Lord continue to 
bless you, as you endeavor to serve the household of 
faith. As ever, 

Your brother in our Redeemer, 

W. M. HERSEE, -Pilgrim. 



DEAR BRETHREN:- 

I ask the prayers of the office household that I may 
be emptied of self and filled with the holy Spirit and 
wisdom of our Father for this work. 

I would like to tell you of the condition of the 

Church in A : I can say as a class they are growing 

in grace and knowledge, and from what I have seen 
and heard from other places I think that there is more 
of grace and peace than in many classes, and I 
attribute it to our being willing to partake of what 
is "meat in due season," as it is given to us from the 
"storehouse" by the appointed servant. 

There is none in our company who is pushing 
ahead for meat not yet due, so that all the little disturbances 
that come from differences of opinion on 
such points are avoided— that is, we might say, spiritual 
dyspepsia, cramps and pains from undigested food. 

Nearly all the class a short time ago started to reread 
the set of DAWNS, twelve pages a day, and are 
being blessed in it. We have three and sometimes four 
elders, so avoid strife on that line, and develop new 
material. 

Your brother and servant in the service of our Lord 
and Redeemer, J. H. HENIKA,— Georgia. 



page 273 



SEMI-MONTHLY 
VOL. XXVIII SEPTEMBER 15 No. 11 
A.D. 1907--A.M. 6035 



CONTENTS 

Views from the Watch Tower 275 

Zionists at the Hague 275 

Back to Palestine 275 

The Niagara Falls Convention 276 

The Voices of the Three Signs 276 

What Shall We Say to These Things? 280 

Not Now, My Child (Poem) 281 

"Be Strong and of Good Courage" 281 

"I Will Be With Thee" 282 

Very Courageous to Observe the Law 284 

Entering the Land of Promise 285 

The Lord Went Before Them 286 

"Led Forth by the Right Way" 287 

An Interesting Question Answered 287 

page 274 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-24 EVERSHOLT ST., LONDON, N.W. 
GERMAN BRANCH-MIRKER STR., 45, ELBERFELD. 
AUSTRALASIAN BRANCH-EQUITABLE BLDG., COLLINS ST., MELBOURNE 

PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 

TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR AS FOLLOWS:- 

All Bible Students who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity or 
adversity, are unable to pay for this Journal, will be supplied FREE if 
they send a Postal Card each June stating their case and requesting its 
continuance. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on 
our list continually and in touch with the Studies, etc. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



THIS JOURNAL IS PUBLISHED IN THE 

FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, DANISH AND ITALIAN LANGUAGES. 

SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



R4057 : page 274 

TRUTH LITERATURE-VARIOUS LANGUAGES 



DAWN, VOLS. I. and II., IN GREEK; also "Parousia" 
booklet, 5c; and free tracts Nos. 38, 40, 53, 59, 66. 

DAWN, VOL. VI., IN GERMAN in TOWER form is ready: 
cloth bound, postpaid, $1.50. We have plenty of German 
tracts and TOWERS for free distribution— the former need to 
be separated. 

ITALIAN, FRENCH, HOLLANDISH, NORWEGIAN and POLISH 
tracts for free circulation amongst your friends, we can 
now supply. 

TABERNACLE SHADOWS IN ENGLISH, GERMAN and SWEDISH 
we now have in good supply. 10c each; $1.00 per doz. 

SPIRITISM-DEMONISM IN ENGLISH, NORWEGIAN, AND 
FRENCH are now in stock, 10c each; $1.00 per dozen. 

VOLUNTEERING METHODS, ETC. 



An experienced Volunteer writes, suggesting that, instead 
of trying to slide the tracts under the doors, he puts them between 
the door-knob and the door-jamb so that they form a 
spring like the letter U. Then they will flutter to the floor 
just in front of whoever opens the door. He does not ring 
the bell, for this would be an annoyance and only prejudice 
the recipient against the tracts. 



R4056 : page 275 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER 
ZIONISTS AT THE HAGUE 



THE hundreds of delegates who are attending the 
Zionist Congress now in session at The Hague 
have come from every country in the civilized 
world and from some lands which are still far from the 
van of human progress. The potential strength of will 
and of spirit represented by such a gathering makes a 
strong appeal to the judgment as well as to the imagination. 
These delegates and the people they represent 
have long since passed the argumentative stage in 
dealing with the movement in which they are proud to 
be enlisted. It is "a condition and not a theory" that 
confronts them. To many, indeed to the great majority 
of them, Zionism is a part of their innermost selves. 



They imbibed its influence from the moment when they 
were able to comprehend the prayers which they reverently 
repeat. Their ancestors for eighteen centuries 
have prayed for the restoration of the glorious state, 
and the hope has become imperishable in the hearts of 
an imperishable people. To others the propaganda is 
only in a minor degree representative of this sentiment. 
It is rather their response to the ostracism, the bigotry 
and the proscription, which are not confined to the benighted 
lands of the East, but have given the lie to the 
professions of our civilization in nearly every other 
part of the earth. It is a reassertion, in men whose 
religious principles are often lax, of the unconquerable 
spirit that has refused to bow before the might of a 
host of bigots, of despots and of inquisitors. 

The large section led by Ussischkin, one of the 
leaders of the Russian delegation, is determined to ask 
the delegates to declare in favor of immediate practical 
work in Palestine. Nordau and his followers are 
equally determined to adhere to the original plan of 
concentrating all efforts towards securing the Palestinian 
charter so as to secure a legally assured home 
in that country for the Jews before undertaking extensive 
operations there. The impatience of the Russian 
contingent is easily understood when the terrible pressure 
at home is considered. The danger of embarking 
on extensive plans without a proper guarantee from the 
Sultan and his government is so great, however, that 
impetuosity without foresight is not to be encouraged. 
Those who are already in Palestine might be aided 
without danger by the institution of legitimate enterprises. 
The evils of the Halukah might be done away 
with, and the entry of the shiftless and the poverty-stricken 
discouraged. Further than this, practical 

work is not safe at the present time. Whether the organization 
can continue its numerical strength in the 
absence of definite and striking results is a question 
that has given ardent Zionists much concern. At the 
present writing there is no reason to anticipate a cessation 
of interest in the cause.— Jewish Exponent. 

BACK TO PALESTINE 



"A very large gathering of Hebrew citizens assembled 
in the St. Urbain St. Synagogue, Montreal, on 
Sunday to hear the official report of the International 
Zionist Conference recently held in Cologne, and of the 
program adopted by that conference for immediately 
proceeding with the work of re-settling the Jewish people 
in Palestine, in consequence of the Holy Land now 
being opened by the Sultan to Jewish settlement. 

"Mr. Clarence I. de Sola, in his capacity as a member 
of the Actions Committee, or Chief Executive Council 
of the Zionist movement, submitted the program of 



the work in Palestine that had been decided upon at 

the Cologne conference. He stated that the news that 

the Turkish government was no longer enforcing those 

laws which had hitherto militated against Jews settling 

in Palestine, was the most momentous news which 

had greeted Jewish ears in a century. In consequence 

of the lowering of the barriers, a stream of Jewish immigrants 

from Russia into the Holy Land had now set 

in, which was assuming large proportions. 

"At the very moment when persecution in Russia 
was driving hundreds of thousands of Jews from the 

R4057 : page 276 

dominions of the Czar, Mr. de Sola remarked, the gates 
of Palestine were being opened to them. They could 
see the hand of divine providence in all this, and it was 
the paramount duty of every Jew to seize the opportunity 
which now presented itself of settling, not only 
tens of thousands, nor hundreds of thousands, but millions 
of Hebrew colonists in the Holy Land, with the 
result that they would soon again be in possession of 
the land that had been promised to their forefathers. 
It was in order to give practical shape to this idea that 
the Zionist leaders of the Cologne conference had decided 
on the program of work in Palestine. 

He said that the program arranged was one which 
must produce such a revolution of conditions in Palestine 
as to make it rival any country in the West in 
enterprise and in prosperity. This is what the Zionists 
are now undertaking, but to carry out the program the 
Jews of the world must contribute liberally to the funds 
of the movement. He therefore strongly appealed to 
them to subscribe to the funds of the Jewish Colonial 
Trust and the Zionist National Fund, and also to the 
fund of the Palestine Commission, the committee specially 
charged with the work, and to the Bezalel Technical 
Institute of Jerusalem, which was training the 
new generation in Palestine in arts and handicrafts. 
These were the financial instruments of the movement, 
and it was only by supporting them that they could accomplish 
their work. 

"Rabbi Herman Abramowitz was the next speaker. 
He pictured in glowing periods the happy conditions to 
which the Jews would be restored if they but took advantage 
of the opportunities now presented to them for 
re-settling their people in Palestine. 

"Rabbi Meldola de Sola then addressed the audience, 
and made a most powerful appeal to them to assist 
in the work now being undertaken in Palestine. 
He said that the first words that the Prophet Jeremiah 
uttered in mourning their captivity were words of grief 
for the destruction of Zion, and that for two thousand 
years they had never ceased to cherish love for Zion, 
and to pray for a restoration thereto. The opening up 
of Palestine by the Turkish Government to the Jews 



was an event of such tremendous significance that it 
should be ranked in importance with the edict of Cyrus, 
King of Persia, when he allowed the Jews to return to 
the Holy Land after the Babylonian captivity, and with 
all their hearts should they thank God for having preserved 
them alive and sustained them to enjoy this 
season. By many Biblical quotations he showed that 
it was their duty to assist this work of restoration."— 
Montreal Journal. 

NIAGARA FALLS CONVENTION 



We could not make arrangements for rooms, etc., 
at Niagara until near Convention time— lest details 
should miscarry. Besides, many did not advise us early 
of their intention to go. 

We have engaged apartments for all who have notified 
us, and will have a Bureau of Information at the 
New York Central R.R. depot, where each can obtain 
the address of the quarters secured, as per instructions 
sent us. This will be open the evening of Aug. 29th 
and all day of the 30th. When closed a similar office 
will be established at the "Auditorium" of the Natural 
Food Co., Buffalo Ave., where all the Convention sessions 
will be held. 



R4057 : page 276 

THE VOICES OF THE THREE SIGNS 

WHEN preparing the Sunday School lessons relating 
to Moses and his two presentations of 
himself to the Israelites, as their deliverer 
from Egyptian bondage, we noted the fact that "these 
things were written aforetime for our admonition upon 
whom the ends of the ages are come." (I Cor. 10:11.) 
And, considering the matter from this standpoint, we 
perceived, as we had never done before, that the three 
signs by which the Israelites were convinced that God's 
deliverance of them was at hand, at Moses' second presentation, 
must have been intended to typify some corresponding 
three signs or testimonies at the second 
advent of Christ; testimonies which will be convincing 
to the true Spiritual Israelites. In the type these three 
signs or testimonies preceded the plagues upon the 
Egyptians; and this in the antitype must mean that the 
three signs or testimonies to Spiritual Israel respecting 
the second advent of our Lord and respecting the great 
deliverance which he is to accomplish, must precede 
the plagues, the great time of trouble, coming upon the 
world in general shortly. 
At first we were perplexed, and said to ourself: 



"The Scriptures clearly show us that we are now 'in the 

days of the Son of Man;' our journal has borne as its 

sub-title, HERALD OF CHRIST'S PRESENCE, since its institution, 

1879; yet where are these three signs? Already 

thirty-four years of the forty-year harvest are in the 

past, and but seven remain, in the last of which we 

confidently expect the plagues upon the world— antitypical 

Egypt. Where are these signs or testimonies, 

which the type teaches us we should expect at this time, 

to convince all the true Israelites?" 

For a time we were inclined to look for miraculous 
tokens, but subsequently realized that this would be 
out of the Lord's order, as the antitype is always on a 
higher and grander scale than the type: as for instance 
the typical Passover lamb but feebly foreshadowed the 
Lamb of God, and the great things accomplished 
through his sacrifice. Feeling confident of the times in 
which we are living, "in the parousia of the Son of 
Man," we concluded that in all probability these signs 
had already been given, or were in process of giving at 
the present time. Still we could not recognize them, 
and, feeling that the matter must now be to the Lord's 
household "meat in due season," we besought the Lord 
earnestly and repeatedly for light upon the subject, 

R4058 : page 277 

while continuing our studies. No light coming, we 

mentioned the matter to the Bible House family at the 

dinner table, requesting the prayers of all upon the 

subject, and that if any had suggestions to offer they 

should feel free to present them. Seemingly it was in 

line with the divine purpose that we should thus come 

to the point of making confession of inability to solve 

the riddle, and that our reliance for wisdom was wholly 

upon the Lord: for within two hours after this acknowledgment 

the entire matter became clear and lucid 

to our mind, as we shall endeavor now to lay it before 

you all. 

(1) Our Lord declares Moses to have been, in some 
particulars, in some of his transactions, a type of himself, 
saying, "Moses wrote of me." Moses himself declared, 
"A prophet [teacher] shall the Lord your God 
raise up unto you of your brethren like unto me." Peter 
quotes this last expression in his sermon, and emphasizes 
it. (John 5:46; Deut. 18:15; Acts 3:22.) Moses did 
not typify Christ in all of his doings, however, nor was 
his life as a whole a type of the life of Christ. For instance, 
in his smiting of the rock, contrary to the divine 
command, he became a type of those of Christ's 
followers who put him to an open shame, and who, in 
consequence, will die the Second Death; and as a type 
of these Moses was not permitted to enter into the land 
of promise. (Num. 20:1 1; Deut. 32:51,52; Heb. 10:29.) 
He typified Jehovah at times also; but in the present 
instance we are specially interested in considering his 



conduct with the Israelites in connection with their deliverance 

from the bondage of Egypt. In this type we 

see him distinctly as a representative of Christ Jesus. 

Moses was rich, a prince in high honor, learned in all 

the learning of his times, but for Israel's sake he renounced 

these, left them all, and they being bondmen, 

he took his place amongst them, to be their leader and 

deliverer. How like this is to the description given us 

in the Scriptures of our Lord's course! He left the glory 

of the heavenly condition and spiritual plane of being; 

he took a bondman's form and was found in fashion as 

a man. He came to deliver his brethren from bondage. 

-Phil. 2:6-8, Diaglott. 

When Moses came to his own people they rejected 
him, and he fled for his life to the land of Midian, from 
whence he came to them a second time. So Christ came 
to his own, and his own received him not (John 1:12); 
and he went into a far country, even heaven itself, from 
whence he has now, a second time, come, and will deliver 
all who are true Israelites indeed from the bondage 
of sin and death. Moses was forty years in coming 
to the point where he offered himself to Israel the first 
time; then he was absent from them an equal period of 
time, forty years, and came again and delivered them. 
There is a type or parallel in this time feature also; it 
illustrates the length of the Jewish and the Gospel 
ages, as being equal. From the time of the beginning 
of typical Israel as a nation, waiting for the coming of 
Messiah, down to the time when Jesus actually presented 
himself, was a period of 1 845 years, and from that 
time, when he died and left them, until the period 
which the Scriptures show us marked his second coming 
(October, 1874) was a like period of 1845 years,— 
corresponding exactly to the two periods at which 
Moses offered himself in the type.* 

THE VOICE OF THE FIRST SIGN 

(2) At Moses' second presentation to Israel he did 
not address them personally and directly, as at the 
first, God having said to him, "Aaron shall be thy 
prophet or mouthpiece, and thou shalt be a god unto 
Aaron." This item of the type would seem to imply 
just what we see to be the fact of the case now, viz., 
that the Lord Jesus does not address himself to the 
true Israelites in person now, as at the first advent, 
but through his agent, through a mouth-piece. Aaron, 
the mouth-piece or agent of the Lord, we would understand 
to represent the Royal Priesthood— those of the 
Lord's consecrated people still in the flesh, still sacrificing, 
—who have not yet passed beyond the vail into 
glory. The type, then, seems to say that the signs or 
testimonies which will convince all true Israelites now 
living respecting the presence of the Lord and his 
mighty power to deliver, his ultimate victory over 
Satan, sin and death will be of or from our present 



Lord, but by or through the living members of his 
Body, his brethren, represented in Aaron. 

(3) The first sign or testimony to Israel was the 
casting of the rod upon the ground, and its becoming a 
serpent, and the taking of the serpent by the tail, and 
its becoming a rod again in the hands of Aaron. It 
was Moses' rod, and Aaron was merely his representative 
in every act. The Natural Israelite merely saw this 
as a miracle, and discerned in it no teaching; but the 
Spiritual Israelite is not to expect a larger rod and a 
larger serpent as the antitype, but should expect to 
comprehend the meaning of the rod and of the serpent 
as an antitypical instruction or testimony today. 

A rod symbolizes authority. Moses' rod was frequently 
used in connection with the plagues, as well as 
in connection with the signs, as signifying divine authority. 
A serpent is a symbol of evil— of sin and all 
its consequences, evil in general. The lesson for the 
Spiritual Israelite today is that he is now to understand 
that all the evil there is in the world is the result, 
directly or indirectly, of God's having let go of his rod 
or authority; and they are to understand further that 
it is God's intention or purpose, as it is also his promise, 
to take hold upon the present evil conditions, 
which have lasted now more than six thousand years, 
and to bring order out of confusion— to re-establish his 
authority in his own hand. 

These acts or signs are said to have "voices" or to 
be testimonies. (Exod. 4:8,9.) Hence our query must 
be, Is this sign or testimony now being given to God's 
people throughout the world? We answer, Yes. Has it 
been always recognized and presented thus? We answer, 
No. Was it ever thus presented before this harvest 



*MILLENNIAL DAWN, Vol. II., Chap. VII. 

R4058 : page 278 

time? We answer, No. Heretofore it has been a 
matter of speculation amongst peoples and theologians 
of all classes and shades of Christian belief, but a 
question without an answer— Why did God permit evil 
in the world? Some have blasphemously held that God 
has caused the evil, that good might follow; but this 
God himself most emphatically denies, and everything 
pertaining to his character refutes it. He declares that 
every good and every perfect gift is of him, with whom 
is no changeableness or variableness. "His work is 
perfect." Others have claimed that a conflict is in operation 
between God and Satan, between good and evil, 
and that each side is doing its utmost to conquer the 
other— with evil and Satan predominant in the world, 
on account of which it is spoken of as "the present evil 
world," in which there is "none righteous, no, not one." 



But whatever the standpoint of view, it has been confusion 

only until the harvest-time, when the true light 

upon the subject began to shine forth, showing that 

when sin entered the world God gave mankind over, let 

them take their course, let the rod of divine authority 

drop, "rested from his own work," permitting sin and 

evil to flourish— not, however, intending that it should 

flourish forever as a serpent, but fully intending, predestinating, 

and even foretelling, that in due time he 

would set up his Kingdom in the person of the Messiah, 

who should lay hold upon that old serpent, the devil 

and Satan, and restrain his power. Showing, too, that 

he will ultimately bring all evil conditions back to subjection 

and harmony with the divine authority and law 

—destroying the evil connected therewith. This teaching, 

then, is the sign whose "voice" or testimony was 

typified by Aaron casting the rod upon the ground, its 

becoming a serpent, and his taking it back into his 

hand again. How much grander the antitypical teaching 

than the typical sign! How much more forceful! 

Who of the true Israelites who has heard this testimony 

is any longer in doubt respecting the speedy deliverance 

of all of God's people from the power of Satan, 

sin and death? 

We would avoid personality as far as possible, but 
believe it to be in the interest of the Truth and of the 
true Israelites that we point out that this sign has 
already been given. ZION'S WATCH TOWER AND HERALD 
OF CHRIST'S PRESENCE was founded in 1879, and 
the "voice" therefrom, to the true Israel of God, announced 
that the second advent of our Lord, as the deliverer 
of the world, had already taken place— that he 
was present but invisible, a spirit being not possible to 
be seen by any, even his Church, until they should be 
"changed" and made like him in the First Resurrection. 
The message further declared that he was present for 
the purpose of establishing his Kingdom and delivering 
his saints and the whole groaning creation from the 
bondage of corruption— as many as will obey him. And 
it is very remarkable that very shortly a special number 
of this journal was issued, bearing the significant 
title, "Food for Thinking Christians— Why Evil Was 
Permitted."* This voice or testimony was spread 
abroad amongst the Spiritual Israelites in an extraordinary 
manner— over a million and a half copies being 



*Since this publication two other tracts have been issued, 
bearing portions of the same title: No. 62, "The Divine Plan 
of the Ages: Why Evil was Permitted"; No. 52, "Food for 
Thinking Christians: Our Lord's Return," etc. 

R4059 : page 278 

circulated through the mails and at Church doors in 



the United States, Canada and Great Britain. And the 
voice or testimony of this first sign, token, teaching, is 
still being repeated from one to another of the Lord's 
people throughout the world, and now in various 
languages. In that pamphlet for the first time, so far 
as we know, was shown that the evil in the world, the 
bondage to sin and death and the reign of iniquity and 
the various oppressions to which the whole groaning 
creation is subject, are the results of God's having let 
go his authority (rod), and not the result of his inability 
to hold the authority, nor in any sense the outworking 
of the authority in his hand. It showed also how complete 
will be the restraint of evil and its complete annihilation 
when again the Lord shall take unto himself 
his great power and reign. Could there possibly be a 
greater or a grander antitype for the sign which Moses 
and Aaron presented to Israel through the rod and the 
serpent? Is not the truth on this subject much more 
convincing to the Spiritual Israelite today than any 
natural signs or wonders or miracles could possibly be? 
Does not the knowledge now granted the Lord's people 
respecting the divine plan of the ages, and its purpose, 
and the result, satisfy our longings as nothing else 
could do, and assure our hearts that deliverance is 
nigh? 

THE VOICE OF THE SECOND SIGN 

(4) The second sign to be given to the Israelites 
was that of the leprous hand. Hidden in the bosom, 
when revealed it was leprous; but when hidden again, 
and revealed a second time, it was whole. Again, we 
say that the Natural Israelite discerned nothing but 
the natural sign, but it was intended of God that the 
Spiritual Israelite should discern a much grander lesson, 
and that a testimony through this grander lesson 
would be still more convincing to him than was the 
typical sign to the typical Israelite. A hand is a symbol 
of power. In this case the hand represented divine 
power. Leprosy is a symbol of sin. The teaching, 
therefore, would seem to be that divine power was first 
manifested without sin or imperfection or blemish; 
secondly, that the same divine power, hidden for a 
time, was afterward manifest in sin and imperfection; 
and thirdly, that the same divine power, hidden again 
for a time, will subsequently be manifest without sin. 

What teaching or testimony is this? We answer 
that it is in harmony with the previous teaching respecting 
the permission of evil, but does not apply to 
evil in general, but rather to sin in particular; does 
not apply to the world in general, but specially applies 
to the people of God— to those whom God uses as his 
agents or representatives, his hand, his power in the 

R4059 : page 279 



world. God's power originally was manifested unblemished. 

But during this Gospel Age he has been 

represented by his consecrated people, the members of 

the Body of Christ, who are his ambassadors and representatives; 

but they are leprous, actually imperfect, 

though reckonedly perfect in Christ. As the world sees 

them they are blemished, but from the divine standpoint 

their blemishes are all hidden, covered with the 

merit of Christ's righteousness. Nevertheless, these 

have been the hand or power of God in the world for 

more than eighteen centuries; but by and by they are 

to be received into his bosom, and "changed" in 

the First Resurrection, so that when manifest again in 

the future they will be without sin, "without spot or 

wrinkle or any such thing," and will again be used of 

the Lord as his agent in stretching forth his rod and 

bringing the plagues upon Egypt, and delivering the 

residue of God's people from the bondage of sin and 

death. 

And is this also a sign or a testimony peculiar to 
this time in which we live, and was this subject never 
clearly seen before? We answer, it is peculiar to our 
day, and was never clearly seen before. In the past 
many have seen something of justification, something 
of sanctification, something of a coming deliverer; but 
never before have these subjects been seen in the clear 
light in which they are now seen as related to each 
other. Never before was the relationship distinctly 
seen between justification and sanctification and deliverance; 
that justification is of divine grace, accepted 
through faith; that sanctification implies works and 
sacrifice, based upon justification; and that to these 
justified and consecrated ones who faithfully overcome, 
by the grace of God in Christ, shall be granted a share 
in the "glory, honor and immortality" of the divine 
nature in the First Resurrection. 

But has the voice or sign of this testimony gone 
forth in any particular channel, as did the preceding 
voice or testimony? We answer, Yes: in the MILLENNIAL 
DAWN series of volumes, the first of which was published 
in 1886. The united testimony of these relates to the 
Church, showing original sin, the first step out of it 
into justification through faith in Christ, the second 
step of sanctification and sacrifice, and the ultimate 
change in the First Resurrection to the divine nature 
and glory and joint-heirship. These volumes deal 
specially with this subject from its various standpoints, 
the ransom-sacrifice of our Lord, on account of which 
the cleansing will come to us in due time, being everywhere 
prominently set forth; and also the fact that no 
absolute purity is to be expected until the Lord shall 
take us to himself in our "change." 

Supplemental to the teaching of the DAWNS on this 
subject, and to assist in emphasizing their "voice" and 
making clear their testimony, the Pilgrim service has 
been instituted under which various brethren travel 



from place to place explaining and demonstrating the 
lesson taught by the leprous hand and its healing, and 
all of our readers, having heard the testimony, are 
daily giving it forth to others. 

THE VOICE OF THE THIRD SIGN 

(5) Another sign was to be given, the Lord clearly 
intimating that it would be necessary, and that all of 
his true people would not hear or heed the "voice" of 
the first two testimonies. To Natural Israel the third 
sign was the taking of the water from the river and 
pouring it upon the earth, where it became blood. 
They saw merely the sign, the miracle; they read not 
its meaning, as the Spiritual Israelite must seek to do. 
In explanation of the symbolical teaching of this type 
we suggest that water is here, as elsewhere, a symbol 
of the Truth; and that the earth is here, as elsewhere, 
a symbol of society.* The pouring of the water upon 
the earth would ordinarily mean the refreshment of the 
earth, a blessing; and the pouring of the Truth upon 
society would ordinarily be expected to mean a blessing 
to society; but in the symbol the water turned to 
blood, repulsive, abhorrent, symbolizing death; and 
this, in the antitype, would signify that in the present 
time the pouring out of the Truth upon society will 
produce an effect contrary to what might ordinarily 
have been expected. Society, civilization, has been 
claiming, especially within the past century, to be 
searching high and low for the Truth. But this type 
says that the time has come when these professed 
truth-seekers (the word science signifies truth) will reject 
the truth, disdain it, and to them it will seem obnoxious, 
loathsome, intolerable. Our readers will here 
possibly call to mind our Lord's words respecting this 
present time, "The sun shall be darkened and the moon 
shall be turned into blood." We have elsewhere shown 
the significance of this:+ that the moon is the symbol 
of the Jewish Law, as the sun is the symbol of the Gospel 
message; and that the Gospel message will become 
darkness to the eyes of society in general through the 
sophistries of Higher Criticism, Evolution theories, 
etc., of this boastful day; while the Law, represented 
by the moon, will be viewed as bloody— that its sacrifices 
will not be esteemed as types nor appreciated as 
such, but be regarded as the work of misguided Jews, 
who slaughtered their animals by the thousands because 
of their ignorance and superstition, and that the 
commands which they obeyed were not of God, but of 
their own conjecture and of priestly connivance. The 
same thought attaches to this sign or testimony of the 
water of Truth being poured upon the social earth. It 
will be resented as bloody instead of being absorbed as 
Truth. 

Is there anything corresponding to this sign now 
in progress in the world that could be esteemed a sign 



or testimony to the True Israelites, such as never was 
before given? We answer, Yes, there is. A very remarkable 
movement has been in progress amongst us 
during the past sixteen years, during which the Watch 
Tower Bible and Tract Society has supplied tracts free 
in any quantity to those who would promise to use 
them judiciously. You have the annual reports showing 
the millions of pages which have thus been circulated 



*MILLENNIAL DAWN, Vol. I., pp. 66-71. 
+MILLENNIAL DAWN, Vol. IV., pp. 590-594. 

R4060 : page 280 

—the Truth being thus poured upon the symbolical 
earth, society, liberally in many lands and in many 
languages. But especially has this pouring out of the 
water, Truth, progressed wonderfully during the past 
nine years under what we have designated the "Volunteer" 
work, in which hundreds of the Lord's consecrated 
people have systematically, season after season, 
distributed to Christian people tracts and booklets 
which our Society has supplied freely— the donations 
covering the expense coming in without urging or even 
request. 

But what is the effect of this pouring out of the 
water upon the most enlightened peoples of the world, 
professed truth-seekers? Is it gladly received, joyfully 
absorbed? Only by the few— the vast majority seem to 
be angered, as the Scribes and Pharisees and doctors 
of divinity at the first advent were angered when they 
perceived that the Lord and the apostles were teaching 
the people, and that without money and without price. 
(Acts 4:2.) Nothing can be more evident than that the 
professed teachers of Christendom do not want to be 
taught themselves and do not want their people to be 
taught the Truth. They bitterly oppose it and persecute 
and speak evil of those who in this way are seeking 
to do good. More and more they are getting so 
changed from the simplicity of the Gospel of Christ to 
the theory of Evolution and Higher Criticism and sectarian 
pride and worldliness that the Truth seems repulsive 
to them, undesirable, bloody. They not only 
view the typical sacrifices as bloody, but they resent 
the thought that the antitypical sacrifice for sins 
was the death of Christ— they resent the thought 
that divine justice required this sacrifice, and that 
"without the shedding of blood there is no remission 
of sins," as the Apostle declared. (Heb. 9:22.) 
It does not fit with their theories. According 
to their theories man was created next to the 
monkey, and has been evolving as a race grandly up to 
the present time, and will continue to evolve and develop 
until he becomes a god, and hence needs only to 



be let alone, needs no Savior, no deliverer from the 

present condition of things, which is not seen to be 

evil. They put evil for good and good for evil, darkness 

for light and light for darkness. To these the 

truth of God's Word respecting the fall, respecting the 

ransom, respecting the coming deliverance and restitution 

blessings which God has provided in Christ, 

through the Millennial Kingdom, for all the families of 

the earth— these are all objectionable, contradictory to 

their theories, hateful, bloody. 

As the "voice" of the third sign or testimony was 
to bring conviction to all of the true typical Israelites, 
so in the antitype this last testimony or evidence will 
ultimately bring conviction to all of the Lord's true 
people today in the world. They will discern that the 
systems and theologians in whom they have trusted are 
going further and further, day by day, away from the 
appreciation of the true Gospel— the truth as it is in 
Christ Jesus— into the outer darkness of the world. All 
who are loyal to the Lord, as they perceive this condition 
of things, as they recognize the cleavage between 
belief and unbelief from the Scriptural standpoint will 
thus be helped, convinced, and enabled to take their 
stand for the Truth accordingly. 

It will be remembered that when Moses and Aaron 
presented themselves before Pharaoh they performed 
the first of these signs in his presence— the rod turned 
into a serpent and being reclaimed was a rod. Pharaoh 
called for his magicians (types of theologians of today, 
whose minds, not morals, have become corrupted, and 
who are reprobates, not morally, but as respects the 
faith— 2 Tim. 3:8), and explained to them that Moses and 
Aaron claimed that this sign was an evidence of divine 
power and favor, and asked them if they could not 
show the same evidences. They replied, Yes, and cast 
their rods upon the ground and their rods also became 
serpents; but Aaron's rod-serpent swallowed up all of 
these. What would this signify? It might mean that 
so far as the world is concerned the first sign or testimony 
which convinced the Hebrews will be claimed to 
be nothing new; it will be claimed that theologians all 
along have declared and thought that God blesses evil 
things so that they result in good. But we answer that 
the view of this subject which God has now displayed 
to his people is so much more complete that it quite 
swallows up all these suggestions and theories of the 
past. What the Lord is now showing proves to his 
people conclusively not only that some accidents are 
overruled of the Lord for good, but that all evil of every 
kind is the result of absence of the divine control, and 
that when the Lord shortly shall put forth his hand 
and again take control of earth's affairs, its evil conditions 
will give place to conditions in accord with the 
divine character and authority. 

It will be remembered also that the first plague 
which came upon the Egyptians was the turning of all 



the water of Egypt into blood— the river, ponds, etc.— 

so that the Egyptians could not drink of the water, but 

digged for themselves wells near the river. As the 

water represents truth, the thought here conveyed 

would be that from the worldly standpoint very soon all 

truth will become repulsive— every feature of truth connected 

with the divine plan as represented in the Word 

of God will become abhorrent; and the digging of wells 

would seem to imply that, rejecting the Word of God, 

the world (Christendom— Churchianity) will seek for 

truth in various ways of their own. 

WHAT SHALL WE SAY TO THESE THINGS? 

It should be a great encouragement to us all to find 
so clearly expressed in the type what we had vaguely 
and indistinctly hoped for, viz., that the Lord's people 
of the Royal Priesthood on this side the vail are being 
used of him in various ways in the accomplishment of 
his purpose of separating the people of God from 
others— the wheat from the tares. It is remarkable in 
this connection that none but the consecrated have ever 
been successful in connection with the circulation of 
any of these testimonies. Of the more than two millions 

R4060 : page 281 

of copies of MILLENNIAL DAWN, Vol. I, now in circulation, 

remarkably few have been circulated by any 

but those who are believers in their testimony and 

who have circulated them through a desire to be instruments 

and mouthpieces of the Lord in giving forth 

his Word— even as was Aaron to Moses. 

Let us, then, dear brothers and sisters, feel encouraged 
as, looking into the type, we see so clear a 
fulfilment in our day of the things written aforetime 
for our admonition. Let us with fresh courage show 
forth to all those whom we have any reason to believe 
are Israelites indeed the secret of the divine plan— Why 
Evil Was Permitted. Let us prosecute also the work 
of showing them respecting the hand, the instrumentalities 
which God has used during this Gospel Age in 
this service; respecting the justification which covers, 
in God's sight, though it does not transform us in the 
sight of men, pointing out also the final victory of the 
consecrated. Let us persuade the first-born of Israel 
to faithfulness until our "change" comes, when we 
shall be made like the Lord and fit to be his servants 
and representatives. Let us continue also to pour out 
the water of Truth; whether others hear or whether 
they forbear. The Lord's assurance is that this sign, 
this testimony and its contrary results ultimately shall 
influence all Israelites indeed. Let us remember that 
the opposition of the worldly even will prove to be cooperative 
influence in deciding the Israelites indeed 
that the deliverer and the deliverance are at hand. And 



finally let us apply to ourselves the Lord's assurance 
to Moses respecting himself and Aaron, "Certainly I 
will be with thee." 

R4057 : page 281 

NOT NOW, MY CHILD 

"Father, I long to spread thy Truth o'er land and sea!" 
I listen, and there comes to me 

His answer, tender, loving, mild, 

"Not now, my child." 

"Father, my heart is sad; I fain would leave this wilderness, 
Go forth earth's groaning ones to bless!" 

I hear again his answer mild, 

"Not now, my child." 

"Father, I yearn to break these fleshly fetters and be free,— 
As pants the hart, I pant for thee." 

His voice, how sweet, how tender, mild, 

"Not now, my child." 

"Father, thy will be done; I humbly leave it all with thee, 
Thou knowest what is best for me!" 

I hear his voice, so low, so mild, 

"Come now, my child." — G. W. Seibert. 



R4060 : page 281 

"BE STRONG AND OF GOOD COURAGE" 

-JOSHUA l:l-ll.-OCTOBER 6.- 

Golden Text:— "I will not fail thee 
nor forsake thee."— Joshua 1:5. 

JOSHUA, the divinely appointed leader after Moses' 
death, is calculated to have been eighty-three 
years old at the time. His name originally 
was Hoshea, the same as that of the prophet. The 
name signifies "Salvation" or "Help." Subsequently 
this was changed to Jehoshea (Numbers 13:16) which 
signifies "Jehovah is salvation." This was afterwards 
shortened to Joshua and later modified to 
Jeshua. (Neh. 8:17.) The latter name in its Greek 
form in the Septuagint is Jesous, Jesus, the significant 
name given to our Lord at his birth. It is reasonable 
to infer that in some respects Joshua typified him. 
Joshua was evidently a great man, although that 
greatness does not so much appear until after the death 
of Moses and his appointment as his successor. Previously, 
in harmony with the divine will and arrangement, 
his greatness was overshadowed by that of Moses, 



whom he served as general assistant, private 
secretary, etc. This training was evidently most valuable 
to him as a preparation for his future work. It 
made him familiar with the divine plans and methods 
as understood and practised by Moses, whose confidence 
he seems to have had in a remarkable degree. 
It will be remembered that to him was entrusted the 
command of the people in their first battle, in which 
they, unused to war, worsted the Amalekites by the 
Lord's providential assistance. It was Joshua who 
went with Moses into Mount Sinai, it was he who led 
one of the companies of spies through the land of 
promise and who brought back a good report, and who 
courageously stood with Moses in advising that the 
people have faith in God and proceed to conquer and 

R4061 : page 281 

possess the promised land. He must have been either 
the oldest man in all the nation or next to the oldest, 
for only himself and Caleb of all the nation that were 
above twenty years of age at the exodus remained alive. 
In every way, therefore, Joshua was peculiarly fitted 
to be the Lord's servant in leading the Israelites into 
Canaan, and in every way he must have had the confidence 
of the people for such a position and service more 
than any other man in the world. 

JOSHUA DIVINELY COMMISSIONED 

It was not sufficient that Moses had given Joshua 
a course of training preparing him for this service. It 
was necessary that the Lord, who proclaimed himself 
the real leader of Israel, should specially authorize 
Joshua to take command and to lead the people into 
Canaan. The intimation is that Joshua, like Moses, 
was a meek man, humble minded, and that instead of 
attempting to grasp authority he needed rather that 
the Lord should encourage him to undertake the responsibility 
of the position of leader. Happy would it 
be for all of the Lord's people if they were similarly 
meek and backward. All should criticise their own 
hearts and motives along these lines, and such as find 
in themselves an ambitious spirit should remember its 

R4061 : page 282 

dangers to themselves and to the Lord's people with 
whom they have to do, because the Lord resists the 
proud, the self-conscious, the boastful and ambitious, 
and shows his favor to the humble. The self-conscious 
need to be restrained, and cannot be permitted of the 
Lord to come so close to him nor to enter so fully into 
the secrets of the Lord as can those of more humble 
mind, who indeed need his encouraging words and gracious 
promises of assistance ere they could have 



strength and courage to proceed with his work. Realizing 
their own littleness and insufficiency and the 
greatness of the Lord and the importance of his work, 
these 

"fear to touch 
Things that involve so much." 

The nation of Israel needed to be encouraged, because, 
although they had been forty years in preparation 
for this very event, still they realized that great 
difficulties stood before them. The river Jordan was 
to be crossed, and at this particular time it was swollen 
and large; the enemy, ready to repulse their advances, 
was keen and on the alert and better used to warfare 
than they. If they should succeed in crossing the river 
in the face of their enemies it would appear to mean a 
great expenditure of energy and a great loss of life. 
They had no bridges nor pontoons from which to construct 
temporary bridges; and on the other side, if they 
ever reached it, they knew that the cities were strong 
walled, with a view to withstanding attacks and sieges, 
and they were comparatively unprepared as respects 
military equipment, battering rams, etc. What wonder 
if the people of Israel needed encouragement to undertake 
such a conflict— to take possession of the land 
which God had given them. The Lord began this work 
of encouragement by strengthening the heart of Joshua 
as the leader, by reminding him that he had promised 
the land, and assuring him that "every place that the 
sole of your foot shall tread, to you have I given it, as 
I spake unto Moses." Nevertheless this promise implied 
that nothing was theirs except as the soles of 
their feet claimed possession. It was theirs by faith 
in that promise— a faith that would lead to works. 
And is not this a general illustration of all of God's 
dealings with us of Spiritual Israel? He gives to us 
better promises, exceeding great and precious promises, 
but they are ours only in proportion as we take 
them and appropriate them and act upon them, and 
through such exercise of faith and obedience gain the 
desired strength and blessing. 

Next the Lord outlined the promised land (v. 4), 
and practically gave the very boundaries which subsequently 
marked the possessions of Israel at the close of 
David's reign and throughout that of Solomon— from 
the Arabian wilderness on the south and Mount Lebanon 
to the river Euphrates on the north and the Mediterranean 
Sea on the west. This definiteness in statement 
of the boundaries would prove strengthening to 
faith, and would indicate to them clearly when they 
had attained possession of all that the Lord had given 
them. We may reasonably suppose that had their faith 
and courage been equal to the task they would have 
been capable of taking possession of that land promptly, 
but as it was they took possession of only a portion, 
and Amalekites and Canaanites still dwelt with them 
in the land and subsequently gave them trouble. 



Some have used this as an illustration of how the 
Christian's full consecration means the surrender of 
everything to the Lord, that his Spirit and his will may 
have full control in our bodies and spirits, which are 
his. In proportion as we have faith and avail ourselves 
of the Lord's assistance we may equally take 
possession of our mortal bodies, and transfer our talents 
to the service of the Lord and his cause; but if 
through fear or sympathy with sin we permit the will 
of the flesh to dominate us here and there in this, that 
or the other affair of life, we will always have trouble 
in proportion. The sins and weaknesses which we 
fail to fight against will be sure eventually to fight 
against us and to injure us as New Creatures. Hence 
our consecration and our faith should be so full and 
so strong that we would fight a good fight against sin 
and meanness in every avenue of our natures and in 
our sentiments, at last bringing every power of our 
natures into captivity to God. In proportion as this 
new mind fails to take possession of the mortal body 
and to rule it, in that proportion will we be weak when 
we should be strong, troubled when we should have 
peace, overcharged and ensnared when we should have 
the full smile of God's favor. Not that we are advocating 
the thought of it being possible to reach actual 
perfection in the flesh, but that we do advocate as 
Scriptural the thought that we should have perfection 
of heart, of will, of intention, and that quite early in 
our Christian experience, and that only such as attain 
this are overcomers and may expect joint-heirship with 
the Lord in the coming Kingdom. 

"I WILL BE WITH THEE" 

God's encouragement of Joshua was not along the 
lines common amongst men. He did not say to him, 
"Remember your age and long experience and previous 
successes as a general," etc., but he did give to him the 
better counsel, the assurance that as he had stood by 
Moses as his servant so he would be with him and 
would not forsake him and would not fail him in any 
hour of test and trouble. As a consequence of the 
Lord's assistance he was assured that no one would be 
able to withstand him all the days of his life, nor would 
any Israelite be permitted to occupy his place as the 
captain of the hosts during his lifetime. 

Was it not thus with our Lord Jesus, too? And is 
not the Lord's message a similar one to all the members 
of the Body of Christ— "I will be with thee. I will 
not fail thee nor forsake thee"? In this let us rejoice 
while realizing that of ourselves we can do nothing. 
Remember the Master's words to the disciples returning 
joyful when they had been used in his service. 
When they recounted how in his name they had been 
able to heal the sick and even cast out devils the Lord 



R4061 : page 283 

said to them, Let not your rejoicing be on this account, 
but rather that your names are written in heaven— rejoice 
rather that your Father himself loveth you, that 
you have been accepted of him, and that he is on your 
part as you are enlisted in his service. 

"BE STRONG AND OF GOOD COURAGE" 

Attention has been called to the fact that the Hebrew 
word here rendered strong is one which rather implies 
strength of the arms and of the shoulders, and thus 
gives the thought of aggressive warfare, while the word 
rendered courage has an association with the lower 
limbs and thus implies defensive or resistive power, 
steadfastness. So then the Lord exhorted Joshua to 
be strong, to have confidence, to lay hold upon the 
blessings he and the Israelites were commissioned to 
take and to possess; and he urged him to be of good 
courage, to be firm in the resistance of opposition and 
very steadfast in the face of difficulties. And how 
much all the people of God today need to apply to 
themselves this same encouragement and to remember 
that Joshua and the Israelites and the promised land 
were merely foreshadowings of the greater and more 
wonderful antitypes. To us the Lord has given still 
greater blessings and promises. If the typical Joshua 
needed to be strong and firm, bold and courageous, 
what shall we say of the Spiritual Israelites, who must 
not only wrestle against the world and the flesh, but 
also, as the Apostle says, must contend with wicked 
spirits in influential positions? 

How much strength and courage we must have if 
we would come off more than conquerors through him 
who loved us and bought us! And here is the point 
necessary to be remembered, viz., that this is not our 
battle but the Lord's, that we are not fighting at our 
own charges but with his commission and with his 
promised assistance and support. "I will be with 
thee, I will not fail thee nor forsake thee." No wonder 
that the Apostle, gaining a clear view of this situation, 
exclaimed, "I can do all things through Christ who 
strengtheneth me." (Phil. 4:13.) And so it is with all 
the true followers of the Lord: we do not know how 
much we can accomplish, we do not know if there 
would be any limitations to our powers within the limits 
of the Lord's commands and while upheld by his 
promise. We must remember, however, the limitations, 
"Without me ye can do nothing," and again, that 
what we are to do is clearly indicated in the divine 
Word, and that we are not to look for nor expect divine 
aid beyond those limitations: just as in the case of 

R4062 : page 283 



Joshua and Natural Israel. Had they gone outside the 
boundaries of Canaan specified in the Lord's Word 
they could not have expected the divine assistance. 
Here again we remember the Master's words, "If ye 
abide in me and my words abide in you"— under these 
limitations we can do and be and pray anything and 
everything, but outside these limitations we must expect 
nothing. 

Courage is always admirable, but there is a moral 
courage which should rank higher far than physical. 
This moral courage is greatly needed amongst the 
Lord's people; without it they can do nothing, and 
many of their difficulties in the Christian way are because 
they fail to appreciate this matter and fail to develop 
this courage. It requires real courage of the 
highest order to stand for the Lord's Truth and his 
people when these are misunderstood, misrepresented, 
antagonized. It takes real courage to stand for the 
light when the great Adversary with a world-wide influence 
brands it as darkness and leads an assault 
against it. It requires real courage to denounce the 
darkness, meekly, persistently, when it has on its side 
wealth, culture, influence and Churchianity. 

The story was recently told of a general in the 
United States army, returned from the Philippine war, 
who received the Truth into a good and honest heart. 
Anxious to serve the good tidings to others, anxious to 
honor the great Captain of our salvation, the general 
inquired respecting opportunities for serving the Truth 
and was promptly informed respecting the various 
methods by which its propaganda is going forth in this 
harvest time. He was not so situated that he could 
take hold of the Colporteur work, and hence he concluded 
that he must be a sharpshooter and a volunteer 
tract distributor under the banner of his King. The 
Bible class of which he is a member elected him the 
captain of the Volunteer work for this year, and thus 
the duty of districting the city and assigning the various 
quarters for tract distribution fell into his hands. 
What portion did he assign to himself, a brigadier-general 
in the army, and widely known throughout the city? 
Instead of choosing some out-of-the-way place, where 
few would recognize him, he assigned as his district 
the very one in which he lived and in which he would 
be most widely known and recognized, his argument 
being, "I am not ashamed of the Lord, and if I have 
any influence amongst my fellow men, I want that influence 
to tell for the Lord and for his Truth." Surely 
this dear brother was strong and of good courage, and 
just as surely his faithfulness to the Lord and to the 
Truth must have brought him rich spiritual blessing 
and help to crystallize his character as a New 
Creature in Christ. Doubtless it requires courage in 
the field of battle, facing enemies and dangers of every 
kind; but surely it requires still greater, still more honorable 
courage to thus take one's stand for the Lord 



and for an unpopular Truth and to be seen and known 
as a tract distributor of the same. 

Other cases somewhat similar might be mentioned, 
illustrating the same principle. We believe that the 
Lord has so ordered his work that it will always cost 
something to be soldiers of the cross and always serve 
to test the loyalty, the strength, the moral courage, of 
every member of the Body of Christ. This Volunteer 
tract distribution is certainly serving a valuable purpose 
in connection with the Lord's people, however 
much or little it may be accomplishing for those who 
receive the tracts. 

R4062 : page 284 

VERY COURAGEOUS TO OBSERVE THE LAW 

There is a peculiar force in the language of the 
seventh verse of our lesson— "Only be strong and very 
courageous to observe and to do according to all the 
law which Moses my servant commanded thee." Whatever 
of strength and courage may be implied in the 
sixth verse as necessary to the conquering of the land 
of promise, this seventh verse evidently refers to moral 
courage— strong and very courageous in obedience to 
the divine commands. The injunction implied that 
Joshua would find obstacles and difficulties before him, 
and discouragements in respect to the observance of 
holy things. It is so with the Spiritual Israelites, the 
Body of Christ today: while some are lacking in courage 
as respects the outward things, a still larger number 
lack these qualities in their own hearts, in their 
own lives. They see and to some extent appreciate 
the divine will as being righteous altogether, but the 
self-denial necessary to a full obedience they are 
not willing to render. Perhaps the greatest battles 
any of us have to fight are those of which 
none may know except ourselves— our mental battles. 
As a Methodist brother once put the matter, 
"My greatest battle is to gain the consent of my 
own will." However, no Christian should be in 
this attitude. This should be our first battle— to gain 
the consent and full cooperation of our wills with the 
divine Word. Then let us go on to victory after victory, 
battling against the world, the flesh and the 
Adversary. Once our hearts are fully surrendered to 
his law it should never again be necessary to have a 
battle there; the victory should be so thorough, so 
complete, so far-reaching. 

MEDITATING DAY AND NIGHT ON GOD'S LAW 

The Lord explained to Joshua what would lie at 
the foundation of his success, and that neglect would 
mean his failure— "This book of the law shall not depart 
out of thy mouth; but thou shalt meditate therein 



day and night, that thou mayest observe to do all that 
is written therein: for then thou shalt make thy way 
prosperous and thou shalt make good success"— v. 8. 

No clearer expression of the divine will could be 
made to the antitypical Joshua and the members of his 
Body than is given in this Scripture. Its teaching is 
that there is no safety, no real success for those addressed, 
except in obedience to the divine will, as 
recorded in the divine Word. Thus also the Lord 
Jesus is represented as saying, "I delight to do thy 
will, O my God; thy law is written in my heart"; 
and again prophetically— "O, how I love thy Law! 
It is my meditation all the day." (Psa. 40:8; 119:97.) 
Meditation on the divine law day and night is not, of 
course, to be understood literally— that we should 
do nothing else day or night than think upon the Scriptures. 
We are to understand the Lord to mean that 
we should ever have in mind, in connection with all of 
our life's affairs, the thought that we are his, and that 
he is our guide and director in all things, and that the 
slightest matter that would pertain to our lives and our 
interests, day or night, should be undertaken with due 
consideration of the Lord's will respecting the same. 

In other words, as elsewhere expressed, whether 
we eat or drink or whatsoever we do, we should do all 
to the Lord's glory; and this implies not merely a haphazard 
wish to do the Lord's will, but a studying of 
the divine Word that we may know what that will is— 
not merely a studying of the creeds and traditions of 
the past, however we may honor those who made them 
and believe in their sincerity. It is for us rather to 
prove all things that we accept, and then to hold fast 
that which we have proven to be the good, the acceptable, 
the perfect will of God. As Joshua was told that 
his good success would be in proportion to his attention 
to the divine Law, so Spiritual Israelites similarly 
are informed that their success in making their calling 
and election sure will be proportionate to their loving, 
zealous obedience to the divine message. Meditating 
on the Lord's Law day and night implies a study of the 
Scriptures, a course which some of us at present are 
endeavoring to follow, using such helps as the Lord's 
providence has supplied to us— not relying upon any 
helps to the abandonment of the Word, but rather 
using these helps and proving everything received by 
the divine standard. 

"HAVE I NOT COMMANDED THEE?" 

This question is asked by way of stimulating Joshua's 
thought— that he might realize that he had not 
commissioned himself nor been commissioned of man 
to undertake this great work. Similarly the Apostle 
points out that our Lord Jesus took not the honor upon 
himself to be the High Priest of our profession, but 
that he was called of God to this position. Similarly, 



also, we who are seeking to walk in the footsteps of 
Jesus are to consider that we have not chosen him but 
he has chosen us, commissioned us and authorized us, 
so that we can go forth in his name as ambassadors 
for him and the Kingdom which he represents. What 
strength and courage this gives to the true soldiers of 
the cross— to realize that his labor is not in vain in the 
Lord. How it nerves him to be and to do in harmony 
with the Word and Spirit of his Master. 

No wonder that these are in the Scriptures termed 
"more than conquerors." And no wonder, either, that 
the Lord has made the conditions of their present experiences 
such as to necessitate a good fight and a victory. 
He seeketh such, strong, courageous— not in 
themselves, but in the power of his might and through 
faith. As soon as Joshua got this message from the 
Lord he proceeded to put the people in order for an 
aggressive campaign, and instructed the proper officers 
to prepare the people and to prepare victuals and to 
be ready within three days to obey the divine command 
to enter in and possess the land which the Lord had 
given them. The promptness and zeal here displayed 
are worthy of emulation. We may be sure that, as we 
read, "The Lord loveth a cheerful giver," so he loveth 
those who are prompt and energetic in everything they 
undertake to be and to do for him and his cause. Let 
us who are members of the greater Joshua, the antitype, 
be very courageous also, very prompt, very zealous, 
that we may be used and useful more and more in 
the Master's service. 



R4063 : page 285 

ENTERING THE LAND OF PROMISE 

-JOSHUA 3:5-17. -OCTOBER 13.- 

Golden Text:— "He led them out by the right way, 
that they might go to a city of habitation."— Psa. 107:7. 

FINALLY, after appointed officers had directed in 
the matter of the packing of goods and preparation 
of victuals for the change of camp, the 
people of Israel were all ready to enter the land of 
promise in hope of which they had left Egypt forty 
years before. The time selected for the entrance was 
the tenth day of the first month, Nisan (April), originally 
Abib. It was on this date the Israelites under 
Moses set out from Egypt for Palestine forty years 
before. 

Viewed from the human standpoint it was a most 
unfavorable time of the year, because, although it was 
the harvest time and favorable as respected the crop of 
the land into which they were entering, nevertheless it 



was flood time in the Jordan, when the melting of the 
snows in the Lebanon mountains caused the river Jordan, 
ordinarily about one hundred feet wide at this 
place, to overflow its banks for sometimes several hundred 
feet. And of course its current was swift and 
dangerous. However, the Israelites had evidently 
learned something in the forty years of God's dealings 
with them, and they were therefore prepared for Joshua's 
announcement that a great miracle was to be 
wrought, which would demonstrate to them that God 
was for them and would drive away all fear from their 
hearts and impress the fear of them upon their 
enemies. 

JOSHUA SAID, SANCTIFY YOURSELVES 

We are reminded of a similar instruction given to 
the Israelites when they approached Mount Sinai at 
the time of the giving of the Law Covenant. The word 
"sanctify" is well known to mean "set apart," and the 
specific directions given at Mount Sinai show that this 
meant that they should purify themselves from sin, 
and in general from all earthly things, and abstain 
from all except necessary food, with a view to being in 
the heart condition which would enable them to best 
appreciate their dealings with the Lord and his personal 
interest in them. Thus they were prepared to 
realize that the mercies and favors coming to them 
were not of accident but of divine providence, and to 
be strengthened in heart and in faith accordingly. 

Profitable lessons may be drawn by Spiritual Israelites 
from this narrative. For instance, we might 
think of the entrance into Canaan under the leadership 
of Joshua as corresponding to the entrance of all who 
love the Lord into the blessings and privileges of the 
Millennial Age. In this illustration we might think of 
Joshua as representing the Lord, and the priests bearing 
the Ark as representing the little flock, and the passing 
over of the Israelites as representing the passing of 
mankind into the new dispensation, where indeed there 
will be enemies still to be conquered, weaknesses of 
the flesh still to be overcome, and full possession is to 
be granted only at the close of the Millennial Kingdom. 
In this view the Jordan might represent Adamic death, 
and its being dried up picture the cessation of Adamic 
death to all those desiring to be the Lord's people and 
to enter into his favor, while the return of the waters 
of the Jordan behind the Israelites, shutting them 
within the land of promise, might represent the Second 
Death, which would be the portion of any who would 
renounce the goodly heritage which the Lord has provided 
for the redeemed world. 

But there is another application we may make, also 
Scriptural, which will be still more forceful in some respects 
to ourselves of this Gospel Age. We may suppose 
the people of Israel who accepted Joshua to represent 



justified believers in Jesus, who have accepted 

him as their Pattern and Leader, and who propose to 

follow where he leads, obeying his commands. We may 

consider the swollen river Jordan as representing consecration 

unto death, which is required of those who 

will become New Creatures in Christ Jesus and heirs of 

the exceeding great and precious promises. To us 

consecration means so much and seems so formidable, 

but under the Lord's guidance and leading all the faithful 

may quickly cross over and begin by faith a new 

experience as New Creatures in Christ. From one 

point of view the consecrated, the sanctified, after having 

passed from death unto life, from earthly ambitions 

and joys to heavenly ambitions and pleasures, 

still find enemies that must be conquered— indeed that 

their fightings have just begun. Now it is that they 

must war a good warfare to exterminate the enemies 

of the New Creation— the weaknesses, the imperfections, 

the evil attitudes and desires of the old nature, 

which are yet in conflict with the divine will and law, 

and which, as the Apostle declares, war against the 

soul, against the New Creature. Whichever view we 

take we are to remember that the first command for 

preparation is, "Sanctify yourselves," and note the fact 

that God is with you and for you and ready to aid you. 

But the sanctifying or setting apart to the Lord and his 

service is not only a condition to the call of the present 

time, but it will also be a condition necessary to the 

blessings of the Millennial Age by those then favored 

of the Lord, for whoever will not separate himself to 

be the Lord's can have no part nor lot in any of the 

blessings which God has provided for them that love 

him. 

"PASS OVER BEFORE THE PEOPLE" 

We should have in mind that the Israelites were 
encamped along the eastern side of the river Jordan 
for several miles, a mighty host. Joshua's directions 
were that the people should look out for the Ark of the 
Lord, that it— representing the Lord— would precede 
them. According to these directions about three-quarters 
of a mile intervened between the Ark and the people, 
it going to the north of them and they following it 
within that distance. At the proper place it stood, and 
its bearers, the priests, walked down to the river until 
their feet touched the water. The Israelites were intently 
watching what would be the program, and to the 

R4063 : page 286 

astonishment of all, when the priests' feet touched the 
water the river began to shrink. Step by step they went 
onward into the channel, while the river grew smaller 
and smaller, until it was entirely dried up, and then the 
Ark rested in the middle of the river-bed, while— according 



to the directions of Joshua— the people on the 
bank crossed over quickly into the land of promise. 
Thus so large a body of people crossed the river quickly, 
to the surprise and terror of their enemies, who supposed 
themselves surely safe from an attack behind 
such a barrier as the swollen Jordan. 

But, Do you believe it? some one asks. We could 
readily see that if the waters above could be made to 
stand up in a heap a very swift river like the Jordan 
would speedily empty itself and leave a very dry channel; 
but what kind of a miracle would this be that 
would cause the waters of a whole river to stand up in 
a heap? Many will read the account with unbelief. 

Let us who have gotten so many precious things 
from the Bible learn to not discard any of its presentations 
lightly, but rather to anticipate that they must 
be true and seek a reasonable explanation of them. In 
this case we have not very far to seek, for the account 
says (v. 16) that the waters which came down from 
above stood and rose up in this heap, a great way off 
at Adam, the city that is beside Zaretan. Thus we see 
that the waters did not pile up within a few feet or a 
few inches of the priests and the Ark, but that they 
piled up a great way off. Following this cue, Professor 
Wright examined the bed of the Jordan some miles 
above the place of this miracle, and found that near 
the town of Adam the river passes through a deep 
gorge, and that a land slide at this point had probably 
stopped the river and caused it to form into a lake or a 
great heap of waters north of the obstruction. Such a 
cutting off of the waters from above speedily drained 
the river bed, and the filling of the lake to the level of 
the obstruction or the giving way of the latter allowed 
the river to rise again after the Israelites had passed. 
But some one may say, You are doing away with the 
miracle altogether. We answer, No! God's miracles 
are merely the operations of his power in material ways 
not understood at the time. The matter is none the 
less to be understood as a miracle, because what overruling 
power caused the landslide to take place at the 
particular time when it would begin to affect the current 
of the river at the moment that the feet of the 
priests touched the water? The lesson to us is that 
our God is equal to any emergency, and can use any 
and all of the forces of nature for the accomplishment 
of his will. Similarly the fact that we can now account 
for the flood in Noah's time, as shown in "Scripture 
Studies," Vol. VI.— that it was the breaking of the last 
of a series of earth's rings similar to those of Saturn- 
does not invalidate the thought that the flood was a 
miracle directed in harmony with the affairs of the 
world and the divine plan to the very moment. So far 
from weakening our faith, such interpretations of the 
miracles of the Bible refresh and strengthen us, and 
teach us to look for the fulfilment of the promises which 
relate to the future in marvellous ways known to our 



God and fully under his power and control. In Encyclopaedia 

Biblica, under the caption of "Jericho," we 

find an account of a similar damming up of the Jordan 

in A.D. 1266:- 

"A lofty mound which overlooked the river on the 
west fell into it and dammed it up at a time when the 
Jordan was in full flood as in Joshua's day. The waters 

R4064 : page 286 

above spread out into a great lake while the river 
below ran dry. The dam below held from midnight 
until the fourth hour of the day." 

THE LORD WENT BEFORE THEM 

A general lesson is taught by the fact that the Ark 
preceded and remained in the river-bed until all of the 
people had passed over. This to them was the Lord's 
guarantee of the safety of their passage, and the evidence 
that their privilege and opportunity of thus 
quickly entering into possession was of the Lord. 

A lesson to all Spiritual Israelites should be, "In 
all thy ways acknowledge him and he shall direct thy 
paths" (Prov. 3:6); and again, "Without me ye can do 
nothing" (John 15:5); and again, "My help cometh 
from the Lord" (Psa. 121:2); and again, "I can do all 
things through Christ which strengtheneth me" (Phil. 4:13); 
and again, "All things are yours, for ye are 
Christ's and Christ is God's." (I Cor. 3:22,23.) Let us 
in the strength of these divine promises enter into the 
blessings of the Lord more and more day by day, and 
allow his leadings past and present to give us courage 
and fortitude for the future. 

"Who led us last will lead us still, 
Be calm and sink into his will." 

There was a limited time in which those who had 
faith and a desire to cross over could do so, after which 
the passage would be impossible. So with us there is 
an acceptable time, a day of favor, in which, if we will, 
we may present our bodies living sacrifices, holy, acceptable 
to God, our reasonable service. We know not 
how long the Lord will allow this favorable opportunity 
in any measure to stand open— we know not how 
soon the number of Elect will be complete. But as many 
as are of courageous heart should proceed at once to a 
full consecration and to an entrance by faith upon the 
new life— as New Creatures. Let us not be deterred by 
fear of the giants with whom we will be obliged to contend, 
in fighting against the weaknesses and sin-habits 
of the old nature. Let us not be discouraged with 
the thought of the high walls and fortifications of entrenched 
sin. Let us remember that if God be for us 
he is greater than all that could be against us. As the 



Lord promised the Israelites that he would be with 
them to drive out before them the Canaanites, the Hittites, 
the Perizzites, the Gergashites, the Amorites and 
the Jebusites, the proper course for the Israelites 
would have been to have waged at once a warfare of 
extermination against these peoples of the land, for 
this was the divine command. Those people typified 
the sins with which we must contend earnestly and 
over which we must have a victory of extermination. 
For various reasons the Israelites compromised with 

R4064 : page 287 

their enemies and as a result suffered from them in 
future years, sometimes being dominated by them. 

Similarly Spiritual Israelites who compromise with 
sins in their own flesh are sure to have difficulty therefrom 
and to find the battle between the flesh and the 
spirit sometimes won by the flesh. We are to remember 
in this connection that the destruction of Israel's 
enemies did not signify the sending of them to eternal 
torment. The Lord thus allowed them to be consigned 
to the prison-house of death to await the Millennial 
morning and an awakening by the Redeemer from the 
sleep of death under much more favorable conditions 
than they had ever previously enjoyed. Their death 
would mean no disadvantage to them— indeed in some 
respects it would be much more merciful than a death 
by wasting disease. We are to remember that these 
people, like the remainder of the race, were all under 
death sentence anyway, and that our Lord's declaration 
is that their wickedness had come to a full, and 
that he chose not to allow them to live longer, but to 
take from them the land and to give it to Israel, his typical 
people. 

"LED FORTH BY THE RIGHT WAY" 

In applying these matters to ourselves, let us have 
in our minds the precious words of our Golden Text, 
"And he led them forth by the right way." With Spiritual 
Israel it is particularly true that the Lord leads 
in the right way, in the best way; and that therefore 
all truly his people should be careful to note his leadings 
and quick in following them. In the end we will 
surely see that he has led us in the right way, however 
different that way may be from the one we would have 
chosen for ourselves. The difficulty with many is that 
the way that they take is not the one which the Lord 
led and hence not the best way, even though the Lord 
may overrule their waywardness so that it shall not 
work to them a great injury which otherwise might have 
been theirs. The more of the true knowledge of the 
Lord we possess— the more of the knowledge which 
perfects our love for the Lord— the greater will be our 
faith, the more precious will be the results in this 



present life as well as in the life to come, in which— as 
star differeth from star in glory— the more faithful of 
the Lord's people, and more zealous and more Christlike 
will have the more shining, the more blessed part 
and experience. Let us then, with full faith in him who 
has led us hitherto, go forth through the coming days 
conquering and to conquer, fighting against the world, 
the flesh and the Adversary, strong not in ourselves 
but in him who has called us and led us hitherto. 



R4064 : page 287 

AN INTERESTING QUESTION ANSWERED 

QUESTION.— I have recently sustained a severe bereavement 
in the death of a loved one, and am much exercised 
regarding the future,— where our loved ones will be and 
whether we may hope to know them beyond the grave. In 
this connection please consider John 14:1-3. 

ANSWER.— The Scriptural citation referred to reads: 
"In my Father's house are many mansions. If it were not 
so I would have told you. I go to prepare a place for you, 
and if I go and prepare a place for you I will come again 
and receive you unto myself." All creation is the heavenly 
Father's house, and upon different planes of being he has 
in it creatures made in his own likeness, called sons; and 
for each of these a provision has been made suited to their 
conditions, nature, etc. (1) The angelic sons of God have 
heavenly conditions provided for them. (2) When Adam 
was created an earthly son of God provision was made for 
him and his family of human sons. The fact that these 
human sons of God fell into sin and under sentence of death 
will not hinder the ultimate outworking of the divine plan, 
to have a household of human sons, for God has provided a 
ransom for all, and ultimately will grant eternal life to "all 
those who obey him," when "they hear his voice." The 
provision for these is the human nature in an earthly 
paradise. 

Our Lord was not speaking to nor of the natural man 
when he used the words of this text; he was speaking to 
the New Creatures, begotten through the Word of Truth to 
heavenly promises. Thus far no provision existed for a 
family of sons on the divine plane; our Lord Jesus was the 
first born to this condition, and it is only through his merit 
and by his assisting grace that his Church can become meet 
for the inheritance of the saints in light. Our Lord's departure 
was to this end— that he might not only present the 
ransom sacrifice on our behalf, but also that he might, as 
our Head, succor and help us to the eternal city, and might 
correct and discipline us, and thus prepare us for the new 
conditions, as well as by his sacrifice make possible our 
attainment to those new conditions. 

QUESTION. -Shall we know each other there? 

ANSWER.— Yes; the restored world will know each 



other, for the blessing is to come to them through restitution, 
and each will begin his new life on practically the 
same plane of thought, experience, etc., that he quitted at 
death. As for the elect Church, the Apostle informs us that 
"It doth not yet appear what we shall be, but we know that 
when he shall appear we shall be like him." To be like 
him will mean to be partakers of his spirit-nature, as described 
by the Apostle in 1 Cor. 15:43,44, in glory, in power, 
a spiritual body. Earthly beings will not see these spiritual 
beings with their natural eyes, for the same reason that we 
cannot see angels now. They will know of them, however, 
in the same way that we know of our Lord and of the 
heavenly Father, and this knowledge will be as satisfactory 
to them as our knowledge of the Lord now is satisfactory to 
us. "We see Jesus" and are "looking unto Jesus," etc., the 
eyes of our understanding being opened. But these glorious 
spirit beings will see and recognize each other, as it is 
written, "We shall know even as we are known," and they 
will be able to see their earthly friends, though we do not 
see them. The glorified class will be able to care for and 
bless their earthly friends more particularly than they could 
do if they were with them in the flesh. The Scriptures exhort 
us to lay aside every weight and to run with patience 
to obtain this great spiritual blessing, and while we see 
many of its advantages we may rest assured of others which 
we cannot now so fully realize, because "Now we know in 
part" and "see through a glass obscurely." 



page 289 

SEMI-MONTHLY 
VOL. XXVIII OCTOBER 1 No. 19 
A.D. 1907--A.M. 6036 



CONTENTS 

Views from the Watch Tower 291 

A Denunciation of University of Chicago 291 

R. J. Campbell's Admirers 292 

Roman Catholicism in Italy 292 

A Great Convention of Truth People 293 

Knowledge and Faith Regarding Chronology 294 

The Judgment of the Great Day 296 

Christ's Sermon to the Fallen Angels 297 

"My Soul, Be on Thy Guard" 298 

Berean Bible Study in "Tabernacle Shadows" 300 

The Fall of Jericho 300 

"I Surrender All" (Poem) 301 

Caleb's Reward 301 

Our New Watch Tower Bibles 303 

page 290 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-24 EVERSHOLT ST., LONDON, N.W. 
GERMAN BRANCH-MIRKER STR., 45, ELBERFELD. 
AUSTRALASIAN BRANCH-EQUITABLE BLDG., COLLINS ST., MELBOURNE 

PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 

TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR AS FOLLOWS:- 

All Bible Students who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity or 
adversity, are unable to pay for this Journal, will be supplied FREE if 
they send a Postal Card each June stating their case and requesting its 
continuance. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on 
our list continually and in touch with the Studies, etc. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



THIS JOURNAL IS PUBLISHED IN THE 

FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, DANISH AND ITALIAN LANGUAGES. 

SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



A WORD TO BRITISH FRIENDS 



The Editor is always pleased to have your personal letters, 
but as for business communications (including TOWER 
subscriptions) we are sure that your interests will be served 
best and most quickly if you will address our British Branch, 
London, as above. 

All new publications announced in these columns can be 
expected at the London office about a month later, as that is 
the length of time usually required for ocean freight service. 

The above message to the friends in Britain will apply to 
the friends in Australasia by substituting Melbourne for London 
and remembering that ocean freights from here to your 
coast require about three months. 

MORE ABOUT NORFOLK CONVENTION 



Brother W. E. Van Amburgh will be the Convention 
Chairman until Wednesday. Brother A. E. Williamson will 
be Chairman from Thursday until the close. Brother C. T. 
Russell expects to be present the forepart of the Convention, 
but cannot remain to its close. Baptism services will be on 
Wednesday. Tuesday will be "Colporteur Day." The friend 
who assisted some needing Colporteurs to get to the Niagara 
Convention now proffers through us the same aid, of one-half 
their expenses, to all colporteurs who have been to no convention 
this year and who have ordered books and sent in reports 
during the past two months and who would be unable 
to attend without the aid. 



R4065 : page 291 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER 

A DENUNCIATION OF CHICAGO UNIVERSITY BY REV. J. 
B. CRANFILL OF TEXAS 



"NOBODY in Chicago now claims that the University 
of Chicago is a Baptist institution, 
either in a general or a special sense, and 
it may be gravely doubted whether or not it is even a 
Christian institution," writes Rev. J. B. Cranfill to the 
Texas Baptist Standard, giving his estimate of the 
Baptist life of Chicago. In many Baptist quarters the 
university on the Midway stands in great disfavor, but 



probably never before has such bold expression been 
given that disfavor. 

Dr. Cranfill says that "the University of Chicago 
is the greatest organized enemy of evangelical Christianity 
on the earth today." He doubts if Standard oil 
has ever worked or can ever work such harm as has the 
university which Mr. Rockefeller founded and fosters. 

"During my short stay here," he writes in his letter, 
"I have spent most of my time in South Chicago, 
near the university. In 1895, when it was my pleasure 
to interview President W. R. Harper for the columns 
of the Baptist Standard, it was believed that the 
University of Chicago was a Baptist institution. Indeed, 
that was one of the points elicited in the interview. 
That pleasing delusion has long since vanished, 
and nobody in Chicago now claims that the University 
of Chicago is a Baptist institution, either in a general 
or in a special sense. It may be gravely doubted 
whether or not it is even a Christian institution, but 
there is a semblance of Christianity of a kind in some 
phases of the university work. 

WORSHIP PECULIAR 

"The worship of the university is carried on at 
Mandel hall. This hall was built largely by a Jew, 
Leon Mandel, one of the most enterprising citizens of 
Chicago. The hall is a long building, nicely seated, 
with an elaborate gallery, and will accommodate perhaps 
three thousand people. I have attended several 
of the Sunday services in this building. During the 
time of my stay here I have heard sermons by Dr. O. 
C. S. Wallace, chancellor of McMaster University; Dr. 
W. J. McGlothlin, of the Louisville Theological Seminary, 
and Dr. H. L. Stetson, who is one of the teachers 
in the Chicago university divinity school. Some of the 
other sermons I did not hear. One was delivered by 
an Episcopal rector, and another by a Roman Catholic 
priest. I understand that this 'pulpit' has also been 
filled by Unitarians and Jews. The 'worship' is 
rather peculiar to a Southern Baptist. It is a hybrid 
service, but it is chiefly Episcopalian. It begins by the 
incoming of a male choir, who enter the building singing 
some kind of hymn or chant. They are all capped 
and gowned after the university style, and are followed 
as they come in by the preacher of the day, who also 
has the regulation university uniform. The preliminary 
service is responsive, after the style of Episcopalians. 
A Psalm is read in responsive reading, and after 
the conclusion of the morning prayer the choir chants 
the Lord's prayer. At the conclusion of the morning 
service the choir marches out again, singing, followed 
by the preacher. After they go away somewhere on the 
outside they finish their song in the distance, and the 
audience feels relieved and rises for departure. The 
sermon usually is twenty to twenty -five minutes long; 



the entire service takes up about an hour and a half. 
There is no evening service. 

ENEMY OF CHRISTIANITY 

"Without in anywise meaning to be unkind or unjust, 
I believe that the University of Chicago is the 
greatest organized enemy of evangelical Christianity 
on the earth today. The whole Chicago religious atmosphere 
is surcharged with infidelity and skepticism, 
which is masquerading in Christian garb. At a place 
where I boarded for awhile, one of the instructors in 
the University of Chicago, a very bright and intelligent 
woman, informed me that she never attended 
Church, and that she had no use for either religion or 
preachers. I think this feeling among the teachers is 

R4065 : page 292 

the rule. In many ways I highly esteem Mr. John D. 
Rockefeller, and have never joined in the crusade that 
has in certain quarters been made against him, but I 
believe profoundly that the money he has devoted to 
the establishment of this misnamed Baptist and Christian 
institution is doing, and will do, the world far 
greater harm than all he ever put into the Standard Oil 
Company or any other trust. The situation here is such 
that every preacher within the radius of the university 
has to kow-tow to it, or he will find himself out of a 
job. The powers that be, humanly speaking, are ordained 
of the University of Chicago, and the man who 
has the hardihood to stand out for orthodox Christianity 
takes his life, denominationally speaking, into his 
hands, and is marked for early elimination. 

DIFFERENT TYPE 

"In this connection I hope I will be pardoned for 
saying that the sort of Baptists I have come in contact 
with here are not the same type as our southern Baptist 
people. I recently attended the services at the 
Hyde Park Baptist Church, where Rev. J. L. Jackson is 
pastor. He devoted his entire morning sermon to a 
discussion of the recent Shanghai missionary conference, 
which he made the basis of an appeal for the obliteration 
of all denominational lines and the union of 
the entire Christian world under some kind of a non-descript, 
ecclesiastical organization. He referred to 
the Baptist view as 'narrow and selfish,' and placed 
the emphasis of his discussion entirely upon the importance 
of the obliteration of the lines that have in 
the past divided the various Protestant denominations. 
It was rather a crude piece of irony that, following his 
discourse, he received for baptism a young man who 
had formerly been a Lutheran, but who said that 
through his study of the Scriptures he had come to believe 



in immersion. The logic of Dr. Jackson's sermon 
would eliminate immersion and establish in place 
of our Baptist churches a kind of spineless, jellyfish 
ecclesiasticism that would be like the original universe 
—without form and void." 

Dr. Cranfill summed up his impression by saying 
that he had "become convinced that the really sound, 
aggressive and effective Baptists of the country are 
found in the Southern States."— Houston Post. 

R. J. CAMPBELL'S ADMIRERS 



If Mr. Campbell by his "New Theology," which 
seems a fresh way of spelling "Old Infidelity," has lost 
some of his friends and admirers, he has gained others. 
The most energetic and uncompromising antagonist of 
Christianity in England, and probably in the world, 
is Mr. Blatchford, of Clarion fame, who, in commending 
the recently published book, says: "Mr. Campbell is a 
Christian minister, and I am an infidel editor; and the 
difference between his religion and mine is too small 
to argue about." For once Mr. Blatchford expresses 
the views of many Christians when he says that the 
difference between the "New Theology" and infidelity 
"is too small to argue about." Theosophists also press 
forward to express their appreciation of Mr. Campbell's 
teaching. The Indian Daily Telegraph claims that the 
"New Theology" is simply Theosophy. "This Indian 
newspaper," says the A. C. World, "shows how Mr. 
Campbell, by denying the virgin birth, joins hands 
with Theosophic inquirers, and with them sees in this 
'myth' the materialization of a great spiritual event— 
the virgin birth of the universe.'" Mr. Campbell may 
well say, "Save me from my friends." He must feel 
embarrassed, though he has no right to be surprised, 
at the anti-Christian hosts so enthusiastically rallying 
around, but he should soon feel at home among them. 
—Australian Christian. 

ROMAN CATHOLICISM IN ITALY 



The Italian liberal press teems with detailed descriptions 
of the alleged immorality and corruption of 
religious and educational institutions, and a fresh 
campaign favoring the suppression of all convents and 
monasteries throughout the country has been initiated. 

Recently a so-called clerical scandal was discovered 
by the Milan police. One old woman, who called 
herself a nun, had a home for destitute young girls in 
Milan, which turned out to be a den of filth and iniquity. 
It was found that the children's earnings were increased 
by means too horrible to relate. The home was 



closed and the soi-disant nun and her accomplices, 
two priests were arrested. 

The liberal papers blamed the ecclesiastical authorities, 
but these proved that they had repeatedly 
warned the police against the woman and her work, 
and that they had denied the sacraments to the woman, 
protested against her and exposed her home to no 
avail. 

Though the calumnies recently printed against 
the monks and nuns are so loathsome and horrible that 
they are not fit to be read, not a single proof has been 
adduced to show that they are based on a particle of 
truth. It is no exaggeration to say that open acts of 
violence against religious communities are momentarily 
expected and these may lead to wholesale suppression 
by the government. It is difficult to predict 
what may happen. 

The French people were indifferent and rather 
sympathized with the nuns and monks, but here the 
situation is different, as popular feeling is hostile to 
religion and the anti-clerical parties are so well organized 
that if a movement against the Church once begins 
they will not stop before they have overthrown 
religion and perhaps attained a Church war in Italy, 
which might mean a revolution.— Chicago Tribune. 

BRITAIN BECOMING MORE SOBER 



"Last year the 43,000,000 inhabitants of these islands 
spent L. 164,167,941 on drink, or some L.3 16s. each. But 
a steady decrease is going on, Dr. Dawson Burns 
points out in his annual exposition of drink bill statistics 
in The Times. Great as last year's total was, it 

R4066 : page 293 

was L. 21, 759, 286 less than the amount spent in 1899. 
Every year since that one has shown a decrease. Had 
there been an increase proportionate to the increase of 
population, our drink bill for 1905 would have reached 
L.198,012,495. London spent over L.18,000,000 in liquor 
last year."— English Journal. 



R4066 : page 293 

A GREAT CONVENTION OF TRUTH PEOPLE 

THE Convention held at Niagara Falls, August 
29th to September 5th, stands at the head of the 
list as respects numbers and enthusiasm. As for 
spiritual profit and manifestation of the Master's love 
we cannot imagine how it could have been improved 



upon— but this was true also of the Indianapolis Convention 

and others. It seems true of our conventions— 

as many of the friends write us of the Pilgrim visits— 

that "The last always seems the best." From start to 

finish the Convention surely was a season of delightful 

spiritual fellowship, most favorable to Christian 

development. 

The printed program was carried out, but had to 
be supplemented because the crowd was too large for 
the auditorium so kindly provided free by the Natural 
Food Co. However, we secured the Opera House for 
Sunday forenoon and afternoon. Its capacity (over 
1700) with that of the auditorium (capacity 1000) and 
a reception room holding several hundred, made us 
quite comfortable. In consequence two sets of speakers 
were kept busy serving two audiences. The following 
speakers gave longer or shorter addresses, and 
some of them several: Brothers W. M. Hersee, I. Hoskins, 
R. E. Streeter, J. Harrison, W. E. VanAmburgh, 
J. F. Rutherford, P. S. L. Johnson, F. W. Williamson, 
O. L. Sullivan, G. Draper, J. H. Cole, L. W. Jones, 
T. E. Barker, S. Walker, J. Hutchinson, W. J. Mills, W. 
E. Page, C. A. Dann, J. G. Kuehn, A. C. Wise, and the 
Editor of this journal. 

The total number in attendance was over two 
thousand— some of whom were present only for Sunday 
and Monday. However, at least 1542 were present on 
Saturday, for that number of heads appear in a photograph 
taken on that day. Notwithstanding the larger 
crowd than we had expected there was no excitement, 
no confusion. This was doubtless due in part to 
a very careful preparation for the friends by those who 
looked out for their comfort, secured lodgings in advance, 
etc. However, the principal source of the calm 
and peace and joy so manifest undoubtedly was the 
"new mind," which the Apostle calls "the spirit of a 
sound mind." Indeed we rejoice that this spirit of love 
and confidence in divine supervision is growing among 
the Truth people everywhere. Nothing encourages us 
more as we witness it at the One-Day as well as the 
General Conventions. There is of course plenty of room 
for further growth, but let us appreciate what we already 
discern and encourage it and be encouraged by it. 

"THERE IS A RIVER" 

It would be difficult to decide which feature of the 
Convention was the most interesting and impressive. 
It was all good; the speakers and subjects were quite 
distinctly different. It was surely inspiring to the 
writer to look into the earnest faces of about 600 who 
were present at a special meeting of Colporteurs and 
intending Colporteurs. The sunrise prayer meeting at 
5.30 a.m., attended by approximately one thousand, was 
also inspiring. But we believe that the baptism services 
were the most impressive of all, to many. 



No Church edifice in that city had accommodation 
for our numbers, and so it was decided to use a lagoon 
or bye-water off the Niagara River for the water immersion, 
and hold the service on the bank where the 
hillside formed a natural amphitheatre. An audience 
of about 1500 gathered at the appointed hour, and after 
an address explanatory of the true baptism and its 
water symbol 241 were immersed. 

The service was very impressive from every point 
of view. The preaching reminded one of the Scripture 
narratives of our Lord's discourses and those of the 
apostles, and the baptism in the lagoon reminded one 
of the account of our Lord going down into the Jordan 
and coming up out of it. The lagoon or side stream is 
formed by a small island connected with the mainland 
by a stone bridge at its upper end. Those desirous of 
immersion crossed over the bridge, receiving the right 
hand of fellowship and a word of cheer. On the island 
were two robing tents, one for the brethren and one for 
the sisters. 

Nature has arranged the spot so that it taught several 
symbolic lessons in connection with our use of it, 
as several remarked. Above the island for about 200 
feet the side channel, there about 100 feet wide, was 
separated from the river proper by a row of stones 
which rise up out of the water; but when the island is 
reached the channel narrows to about 30 feet in width, 
and just there, above the bridge, all of the water being 
unable to enter the narrow channel, some of it turns 
back through a cut into the river proper. 

THE SYMBOLIC PICTURE 

If the Niagara river be considered as symbolic of 
the course of the world, the picture is impressive, for 
is not the whole world rushing swiftly in mad competition 
and boisterous glee toward the great time of trouble 
with which this Gospel Age will be consummated, 
even as those waters hastened more and more swiftly 
and madly toward the famous cataract? And did not 
the narrow and placidly-gliding little lagoon correspond 
well with the statement of the Prophet— "There 
is a river the streams whereof make glad the city of our 
God"? (Psa. 46:4.) The wider intake of water seemed 
to picture the path of the many "justified" who are 
"called"; the narrowing of the channel represented the 
"narrow way" of consecration; the turning aside there 
of much of the water represented the testing, the sifting 

R4066 : page 294 

of the Gospel invitation to sacrifice and enter the 

narrow way. The bridge and those who passed over it 

represented well the point of decision for God and not 

for Mammon, and the right-hand of fellowship the encouragements 

and assistances proffered to all who become 



disciples in the narrow way of baptism into Christ's 
death. 

Those who witnessed from the shore declared the 
scene most impressive. Before them in the clear, quiet 
water one after another was buried into Christ's death 
in symbol, while just beyond them could be seen and 
heard the wild, rushing, laughing, moaning waters, 
representing the whole creation groaning and travailing 
in pain together. 

"BEEN WITH JESUS AND LEARNED OF HIM" 

Major Butler, one of the officials of the Natural 
Food Co., said this to a representative of our Society: 

"I want to tell you, on behalf of the company, that 
it has afforded us the greatest pleasure to have your 
convention here. The influence of so many happy people, 
with smiling faces, evident sincerity, earnestness 
and zeal for what they believe to be right has been 
greater than I can express. To see so many people who 
really believe what they say and practice what they 
preach has been a revelation to us. I never saw anything 
like it before. While we have tried to do all that 
we could for your convenience and comfort and to make 
your stay here a pleasant and profitable one, you 
have done more for us than we possibly could have 
done for you." 

The policemen who had charge of the streets 
in the vicinity of the opera house and the officers 
of the State reservation where the immersion service 
was held, were very much impressed by the order 
maintained, and said they had never seen so large a 
crowd without the necessity of handling. 

Those who entertained our friends spoke in 
highest terms of them and were anxious that they come 
again. The janitors of the Auditorium also remarked 
the quiet orderliness of all, and that no cigar stumps 
nor tobacco quids nor even banana peels needed to be 
gathered up. We were glad of this evidence of the love 
of God, which does good to all and injury to none. 
"What manner of persons ought we to be in all holy 
living and godliness?" 

The testimony of all, we believe, would be, It was 
good to be there! Our prayers unite with others, that 
under the Lord's blessing the privileges and inspirations 
and encouragements and resolves of the week at 
Niagara may mean blessings to other thousands than 
those that were present, and that thus the work of 
grace may abound more and more to the praise of our 
Lord and the comfort of his people. 

The end is not yet, we trust and believe. The influence 
from all these conventions (one-day and general) 
is carried home to those who cannot attend them 
and both the relating and the hearing of these seasons 
of refreshing from the presence of the Lord bring fresh 
love and joy and zeal. 



R4067 : page 294 

KNOWLEDGE AND FAITH REGARDING CHRONOLOGY 

A DEAR Brother inquires, Can we feel absolutely 
sure that the Chronology set forth in the 
DAWN-STUDIES is correct?-that the harvest 
began in A.D. 1874 and will end in A.D. 1914 in a 
world-wide trouble which will overthrow all present 
institutions and be followed by the reign of righteousness 
of the King of Glory and his Bride, the Church? 

We answer, as we have frequently done before in 
the DAWNS and TOWERS and orally and by letter, that 
we have never claimed our calculations to be infallibly 
correct; we have never claimed that they were knowledge, 
nor based upon indisputable evidence, facts, 
knowledge; our claim has always been that they are 
based on faith. We have set forth the evidences as 
plainly as possible and stated the conclusions of faith 
we draw from them, and have invited others to accept 
as much or as little of them as their hearts and heads 
could endorse. Many have examined these evidences 
and have accepted them; others equally bright do not 
endorse them. Those who have been able to accept 
them by faith seem to have received special blessings, 
not merely along the line of prophetic harmonies, but 
along all other lines of grace and truth. We have not 
condemned those who could not see, but have rejoiced 
with those whose exercise of faith has brought them 
special blessings— "Blessed are your eyes for they see, 
and your ears for they hear." 

Possibly some who have read the DAWNS have presented 
our conclusions more strongly than we; but if 
so that is their own responsibility. We have urged and 
still urge that the dear children of God read studiously 
what we have presented;— the Scriptures, the applications 
and interpretations— and then form their own 
judgments. We neither urge nor insist upon our views 
as infallible, nor do we smite or abuse those who disagree; 
but regard as "Brethren" all sanctified believers 
in the precious blood. On the contrary, it is those 
who differ who smite us and speak evil of us, because 
we do not welcome them as, with hammer and tongs, 
they seek to remove a mote which they think they see 
in our eye of understanding. They are our critics who 
always claim the infallibility. We go humbly onward, 
following the Apostle's example and words, "We believe 
and therefore speak";— whether others hear or 
forbear to hear. Is not this in accord with the Spirit 
of Christ? Is it not in accord with our Lord's instructions 
also,— "Forbid him not" (Mark 9:39); and again, 
"What is that to thee? Follow thou me." (John 21:22.) 
But some of those who come to a trifling point 



on which they disagree seem to imagine that the entire 
harvest work must be overthrown or at least stopped 
until they get their little jot or tittle satisfactorily adjusted. 
Such evidently make mountains out of mole 
hills, and forget that, if the present movement among 

R4067 : page 295 

the Lord's people is the harvest work or under the 
Lord's supervision at all, the Lord is responsible, and 
not they, and can be trusted to accomplish his own 
ends in his own best way without the violation of either 
the letter or spirit of his commands. 

Recurring again to the query on Chronology we 
quote from DAWN-STUDIES, Vol. II., page 38, last paragraph, 
as follows:— 

"In starting with the question, How long is it since 
man's creation? we should and do feel confident that 
he who gave the prophecies, and said that in the time 
of the end they should be understood, has provided in 
his Word the data necessary to enable us accurately to 
locate those prophecies. However, any who expect to 
find these matters so plainly stated as to be convincing 
to the mere surface reader, or the insincere skeptic, 
will be disappointed. God's times and seasons are 
given in such a way as to be convincing only to those 
who, by acquaintance with God, are able to recognize 
his characteristic methods. The evidence is given 
"that the man of God may be thoroughly furnished." 
(2 Tim. 3:17.) These well know that in all the paths by 
which the Father leads they must walk by faith and 
not by sight. To all who are prepared to walk thus, 
we expect to be able to point out at every step solid 
statements of God's Word— a sure foundation for reasonable 
faith." 

In the same chapter we proceed to point out that 
many of the links of chronology in sacred and profane 
history are "broken, lapped and tangled so much that we 
could arrive at no definite conclusion from them, and 
should be obliged to conclude, as others have done, 
that nothing positive could be known on the subject, 
were it not that the New Testament supplies the deficiency." 
(Page 49, first paragraph.) Thus we sought 
to prove that chronology cannot be built on facts, but 
can be received only on faith. But again we urge a 
fresh reading of Vol. II. entire. If with these suggestions 
some shall lose their faith in our chronology, 
others and many more we believe will have their faith 
in it strengthened greatly. 

We remind you again that the weak points of 
chronology are supplemented by the various prophecies 
which interlace with it in so remarkable a manner that 
faith in the chronology almost becomes knowledge that 
it is correct. The changing of a single year would 
throw the beautiful parallels out of accord; because 
some of the prophecies measure from B.C., some from 



A.D., and some depend upon both. We believe that 

God meant those prophecies to be understood "in due 

time"; we believe that we do understand them now— 

and they speak to us through this chronology. Do 

they not thereby seal the chronology? They do to 

faith, but not otherwise. Our Lord declared, "The 

wise shall understand"; and he told us to "Watch" that 

we might know; and it is this chronology which convinces 

us (who can and do receive it by faith) that the 

Parable of the Ten Virgins is now in process of fulfilment 

—that its first cry was heard in 1 844 and its second 

cry, "Behold the Bridegroom"— present— was in 1874. 

It is this chronology and none other which awakened 

us to trim our lamps, in harmony with the Lord's 

promise through the Apostle, "Ye brethren are not in 

darkness, that that day should overtake you as a thief." 

If our chronology is not reliable we have no idea where 

we are nor when the morning will come. Bishop Ussher's 

chronology, as we have pointed out (DAWN II., p. 

51) puts the end of six thousand years nearly a century 

future and would destroy every prophetic application 

as we have seen and profited by it. And when we 

say "our" chronology we merely mean the one we use, 

the Bible chronology, which belongs to all of God's 

people who approve it. As a matter of fact it was used 

in practically the form we present it long before our 

day, just as various prophecies we use were used to a 

different purpose by Adventists, and just as various 

doctrines we hold and which seem so new and fresh and 

different were held in some form long ago: for instance 

—Election, Free Grace, Restitution, Justification, Sanctification, 

Glorification, Resurrection. 

The work in which the Lord has been pleased to 
use our humble talents has been less a work of origination 
than of reconstruction, adjustment, harmonization. 
God's Word, the great harp from which now 
comes such wondrous music, was unstrung. One denomination 
had one string, another denomination had 
a different one— Election, Free Grace, Baptism, Second 
Coming of Christ, Time Prophecies, etc. They had 
twanged away, each on his own string, until all were 
disgusted at the discord and about ready to quit for 
relief— as they since have done, practically. Then 
came the Lord's time for putting the old harp in order 
again, for the use of his most faithful followers. To 
whatever extent the great Master has used any of us 
either in restringing and tuning the harp, or in calling 
to the attention of his "brethren" the harmony and 
the beauty of the melodious paeans therefrom in honor 
of the Almighty, let us praise him for the great privilege 
enjoyed, and use it. 

The fact that we have reached this harmony just at 
the right time according to our chronology— just at the 
time promised by our Lord when he declared that, to 
those who would be ready and open to his knock 
promptly, he would "come in and sup with them," that 



he would "gird himself [become their servant] and 
come forth and serve them" (Luke 12:37)— is an evidence 
to us that the time features of the prophecies as 
we understand them are correct. To this great Chief 
Servant of his Church then we render thanks for the 
harmonious light of Present Truth— and are we not to 
consider that the chronology which has had so much to 
do with this light is also of him? 

But let us suppose a case far from our expectations: 
suppose that A.D. 1915 should pass with the 
world's affairs all serene and with evidence that the 
"very elect" had not all been "changed" and without 
the restoration of natural Israel to favor under the New 
Covenant. (Rom. 11:12,15.) What then? Would not 
that prove our chronology wrong? Yes, surely! And 

R4067 : page 296 

would not that prove a keen disappointment? Indeed 
it would! It would work irreparable wreck to the Parallel 
Dispensations and Israel's Double, and to the 
Jubilee calculations, and to the prophecy of the 2300 
days of Daniel, and to the epoch called "Gentile Times," 
and to the 1260, 1290, and 1335 days, the latter of which 
marking the beginning of the "harvest" so well fulfilled 
its prediction, "Oh, the blessedness of him that waiteth 
and cometh unto the 1335 days!" None of these would 
be available longer. What a blow that would be! One 
of the strings of our "harp" would be quite broken! 
However, dear friends, our harp would still have 
all the other strings in tune and that is what no other 
aggregation of God's people on earth could boast. We 
could still worship a God so great and grand that none 
other could compare with him. We should still see the 
grandeur of his salvation in Christ Jesus— "a ransom 
for all." We should still see the wonders of "the hidden 
mystery," our fellowship with our Redeemer in "his 

R4068 : page 296 

death" and also "in his resurrection" to "glory, honor 
and immortality"— "the divine nature." 

If, therefore, dearly beloved, it should turn out 
that our chronology is all wrong, we may conclude 
that with it we have had much advantage everyway. 
If the attainment of our glorious hopes and present joys 
in the Lord should cost us such disappointment as our 
friends fear, we should rejoice and count it cheap! If the 
Lord sees it necessary for the arousing of the "Virgins" 
to permit a false note upon the time bugle, let us 
take it joyfully as one of the "all things" working together 
for good to those who love him,— to the called 
ones according to his purpose. But let us not forget 
that the parable shows that the second awakening of 
the Virgins was no mistake! The Bridegroom came! 
The "wise virgins" had the necessary faith to follow; 



the others, too worldly-wise, lacked the faith and missed 
the high honors accorded to the Bride class, though 
privileged later to be her companions at the "marriage 
supper of the Lamb." 

The best medicine, the best antidote for a poisoned 
faith in Present Truth, is a careful review of the presentations 
of the DAWN-STUDIES. If that fails we know 
nothing to recommend. But let us not forget that there 
were conditions precedent to our admission into this 
light, and that those conditions must be maintained if 
we would stay in the light. If, therefore, all or any 
portion of the light becomes darkened, our first query 
should be, "Am I living up to my covenant conditions 
—self-denial, self-sacrifice?" If we discover a coolness 
there we may know that we have found the real secret 
of our trouble and should at once "take it to the Lord 
in prayer." 



R4068 : page 296 

THE JUDGMENT OF THE GREAT DAY 

"The angels which kept not their first estate, but left their 
proper habitation, he hath kept in everlasting chains under 
darkness until the judgment of the great day."— Jude 6. 

WE HAVE already discussed at considerable 

length the test or trial which came to the 

angels of God through the fall of man.* Such 

a testing of the loyalty of the angels of God was appropriate, 

yet would have been, we may say, impossible 

had it not been for man's creation under conditions 

practically what they were. This testing of these perfect 

beings existing under perfect conditions should 

have found them all loyal to the Lord and to his various 

arrangements, realizing that they were every way 

beneficial, the wisest and the best. We have seen how 

sin as a disease is figuratively represented in the 

Scriptures by leprosy; and that the temptation came 

along the lines by which humanity was different from 

other intelligent beings of God's universe in that humanity 

possessed the power of propagating its own 

species after the manner of the lower animals. This 

power was seductive, and the Scriptures show us that 

many of the angels preferred to leave their own estate 

or habitation that they might associate with humanity 

and participate indirectly in this human power of propagation. 

They should, of course, have settled it in their 

own minds that the divine programme for them was far 

better than they could have devised for themselves. 

They should have relied upon God's assurance that 

their plane of being was still higher than that of humanity: 

they should have been contented, happy in the 

exercise of the powers and qualities and blessings 



given them by the Father richly to enjoy. And this 
was true of many of them, but as the Scriptures show 
it was not true of all. The fall of these angels is referred 
to by the Apostle Peter (2 Pet. 2:4) and again in our 
text, and still more particularly in Genesis 6:1-5. 

Having already discussed this phase of the subject 
we will not further elaborate it, nor will we go into detail 
in respect to the sentence upon them— that they 
were restrained in Tartarus, the atmosphere of our 
earth— and thus separated from the holy angels. Nor 
will we take time specially to discuss the chains of 
darkness which have since the flood hindered them 
from materializing in human form, and obliged them, 
if they would have anything to do with humanity, to do 
so secretly or through agents, mediums, witches, etc. 
Nor will we here repeat the evidence elsewhere given 
that these fallen angels, "wicked spirits," as the 
Apostle calls them, otherwise called in the Scriptures 
"demons," "lying spirits," have been operating from 
the time of the flood to the present time under these restraints 
of darkness and inability to materialize. They 
seek and very largely accomplish the ensnarement 
of the human family by the propagation of false doctrine 
—amongst others that the dead are not dead, but 
alive as spirit beings— by pretended communications 
with these, in which the evil spirits personate the dead 
and communicate matters unknown to other humans. 
Thus they seem to corroborate their claim, that the dead 



*DAWN STUDIES, Vol. V., pp. 115 and 428; Spiritism, pp. 
106,111,113. 

R4068 : page 297 

are alive, and thereby to corroborate Satan's original 
lie, "Ye shall not surely die," the very reverse of God's 
plain declaration, "Ye shall surely die."— Gen. 3:3,4. 

We shall not here repeat the evidence that these 
wicked spirits— not content with operating through 
humanity as mediums— seek to "possess" or "obsess" 
them so as to use their bodies as if they were their 
own, succeeding in this largely in proportion as the 
subjects will yield their minds to the influence 
brought to bear upon them. We shall not here give the 
proofs that the human organization is such, by divine 
arrangement, that these evil spirits can be resisted, 
and only intrude into human privacy of thought as 
mankind may disregard the divine warning and give 
ear or heed or attention to the various tricks and devices 
for arousing curiosity of which they make use. 
We shall not repeat the proofs that in some instances, 
the will becoming broken down, a number of these fallen 
spirits get possession of an individual who, by 
their simultaneous communications and suggestions 



to his mind, becomes what we call deranged, insane. 
It is claimed that one-half of the inmates of the insane 
asylums are there by reason of such obsession, corresponding 
to the instances mentioned in the New Testament, 
in one of which the Lord inquired the name of 
the unclean spirit and got the answer "legion," for 
there were many possessing the afflicted one— the 
legion which, afterward permitted to go into the swine, 
crazed them so that the entire herd ran into the sea of 
Galilee and were drowned. 

Our present inquiry is more particularly respecting 
the judgment of these fallen spirits, concerning which 
we read, "Know ye not that the saints shall judge 
angels?" (I Cor. 6:3.) Our text also refers to their 
judgment, saying, that their restraint in chains of darkness 
would be unto or until the "judgment of the great 
day." 

CHRIST'S SERMON TO THE FALLEN ANGELS 

We have already discussed the hope of these angels, 
and have seen the manner in which Christ preached 
to them by his death and resurrection— preached to 
the spirits in prison which were disobedient in the days 
of Noah— the angels which kept not their first estate. 
We have seen that our Lord did not orally preach during 
the time he was dead, and that he was dead the 
three days he was in the tomb, and that he rose from 
the dead on the third day. We have seen that his 
preaching to these fallen spirits was after the manner 
that the proverb suggests when it says, "Actions speak 
louder than words." We may be sure that Satan and 
all these fallen angels knew the Lord and observed 
closely everything pertaining to his early life, death 
and resurrection. Did they not declare, "We know thee 
who thou art, the holy One of God"— the Messiah? 
(Mark 1:24.) While the holy angels watched every procedure, 
these fallen angels had a special interest in 
this manifestation of God's love for humanity, which 
brought the Redeemer from the heavenly plane to the 
earthly one, and then cost his death to redeem Adam 
and his race, because the penalty was death. They had 
known God's character for justice; their own experience 
was an illustration of it, and the experience of 
mankind likewise testified to it. But here was taught 
a manifestation of divine love and compassion, bringing 
aid to the degraded race of Adam. They perceived, 
too, in our Lord's resurrection that his obedience had 
brought him a great reward and high exaltation, so 
that he arose from the tomb a mighty God, a partaker 
of the divine nature, while they wondered in amazement. 
Can we doubt that these circumstances, as the Apostle 
suggests, were a great sermon, a great lesson to them? 
Bright, intelligent, wise, they doubtless reasoned that 
if God had done so much for Adam and his race in 
their degradation, he might not be unwilling also to 



show them some favor at some time. Indeed if we will 
but allow our minds to reason along this line we may 
suppose that forthwith some of those fallen angels, inspired 
by hope of a reconciliation to God at some time 
in the future, began to mend their ways and to seek to 
live more in accord with righteousness. We may assume 
that these no longer exercised deception and wiles 
against humanity, but that, though still restrained, they 
are hoping and waiting for some leniency of the Lord 
in the judgment of the great day. 

R4069 : page 297 

WHAT WILL THEIR JUDGMENT BE? 

With the facts of the case before our minds— that 
there is to be a judgment, and that this implies a trial 
—we inquire what kind of a trial or judgment will it 
be? The word translated judgment in our text is in 
the Greek krisis, its primary signification being decision, 
determination, hence trial in order to reach such 
a decision. This implies that the decision in the case 
of these fallen angels is not yet rendered, and that 
some test or trial must come to them which will determine 
results. The word of the Lord gives us to understand 
clearly that, whatever God's dealings may be in 
the interim, the finality of his judgment is that none 
shall have eternal life except those who are fully in accord 
with himself and the principles of righteousness, 
and that all others shall be destroyed utterly and without 
hope of recovery. There can be no doubt then as 
to the result of the trial. Both the Apostolic statement 
that the fallen angels are reserved unto judgment, 
krisis, testing, and the further statement that the saints 
shall judge angels, show that the matter is not yet settled 
as respects all of these— shows that there is hope 
for such of these fallen ones as may heartily recognize 
their wrong course and return to obedience to the 
Lord. 

When will this judgment take place?— at the beginning 
of the great day or at its further end, or throughout 
the day of Christ? We answer that the judgment 
of mankind requires and has appointed to it the entire 
period of a thousand years, because man— ignorant and 
deluded and impaired under the reign of sin and death 
and by the machinations of these evil spirits— will need 
to have the counsel and instruction and assistance of 
the various agencies which God has provided for his 

R4069 : page 298 

social, mental, moral and physical uplifting during the 
Millennium, and his trial or testing will be all the way 
along— as to his willingness to accept of and use and 
profit by the various blessed agencies which will then 
be in operation for his aid. So then the entire Millennial 



day is Scripturally called man's day of judgment,— 
as the Apostle declares, "God has appointed a day in 
which he will judge the world in righteousness." But 
as for the fallen angels, it is not said that the Millennial 
epoch as a whole is set apart as their judgment 
day, and indeed we can surmise that this would be 
neither necessary nor proper, because, never having 
come under the sentence of death, we are to understand 
that those spirit beings are as much alive and perfect 
in their organization as they ever were— that all the 
change possible to them has been in their mentality, 
their wills. Their knowledge is great, and not, like 
man's, confined to a knowledge of sin and evil things, 
for they had previously a knowledge of goodness, holiness 
and purity, and throughout all the various epochs 
of human history they have seen the divine dealings, 
first with Israel under the typical mediator Moses and 
the typical covenant, the Law; second they have seen 
Christ, the antitypical Moses, and have been witnesses 
of the proclamation of the Gospel throughout this age 
and of its influence upon those who are rightly exercised 
thereby, leading them to sacrifice and to walk in the 
footsteps of Jesus. It would appear then that these 
fallen spirits have little to learn of either good or evil, 
and that any judgment or trial coming upon them would 
not need to be long drawn out, as in the case of 
humanity. 

KRISIS-TESTING-JUDGMENT-DECISION 

Their judgment would signify the bringing of them 
to a decision, a crucial testing of their hearts, their 
wills, as respects righteousness and sin— harmony with 
God or with Satan. In order to have such a testing, 
such a krisis, a peculiar condition of things would be 
necessary— a condition in which they would have an 
opportunity to do the evil or to resist the temptation 
and to do good. As we have suggested, no doubt some 
of them have acted upon the sermon of Christ's death 
and resurrection, and its manifestation of God's loving 
character and the hope that it inspires respecting their 
future. Such might be said to be in a condition of 
trial all through this Gospel Age— whether or not they 
would stand firm in their opposition to sin and to those 
around them, or succumb and yield and participate in 
the sins. But evidently, according to the Scriptures, 
we would expect that some crucial point of testing 
would be reached which would decide matters for all 
these fallen spirits— the "krisis of the great day." 

In view of all these conditions and considerations 
we hold that we are now living in this krisis time— that 
the restraint of darkness placed upon these fallen 
angels was to last only until the crisis or judgment of 
"the great day." Our understanding is that this great 
day of the Lord began chronologically in October, 1874, 
and from what we can learn it is since that date that 



"materializations" have become more and more common. 

Admitting that there are many frauds along this 

line, we consider that the evidence is too strong to be 

disputed that there have been numerous genuine manifestations 

—materializations— in which the spirit personating 

the dead has assumed a material body, possessing 

weight and various qualities similar to a 

human. Not only have such cases been reported in the 

public press, but some friends of the Truth who at one 

time were identified with Spiritism have corroborated 

these. A sister in the Truth who was at one time a 

spirit medium assures us that not long since in the 

parlor of her own home, the door being shut, a spirit 

materialized before her in the form of a man who spoke 

to her. His request being refused he threateningly 

caught her by the arm with a firm grasp, but at that 

instant her brother opened the parlor door and the materialization 

instantly dissolved. 

Another sister in the Truth, who had been less directly 
connected with Spiritism, informed us that recently 
one of the demons personating her deceased sister, 
opening the spring lock, walked into her room 
while she was wide awake and tried to choke her, afterwards 
leaving, as she had come, through the door. 

Another case was that of a brother who at one time 
had made some slight investigations of Spiritism, but 
ceased when he obtained light as to its demon origin. 
An apparition representing his wife appeared to 
him in his room as he was walking toward his bed, and 
reached out a hand while walking by his side. He, recognizing 
the source of such manifestations, and remaining 
firm to his resolution to have nothing further to do 
with the spirits in any sense or degree, refused to take 
the hand, and instead turned his heart to the Lord in 
prayer for deliverance from the Adversary's power; 
then the apparition vanished. It would appear that, for 
some reason we cannot explain, these evil spirits have 
special power and liberty with those who have at any 
time yielded to curiosity in connection with spirit manifestations. 
Here we have a fresh reason for our repeated 
advice that the Lord's people totally refuse to 
have anything to do with spirit mediums, seances, hypnotism 
and clairaudience— this latter a development of 
the powers of the ear whereby the spirits may be heard 
without the ordinary sounds of speech. Attempts of 
the demons to intrude upon us are usually associated 
with something or other to excite our curiosity, and our 
advice is that the Lord's people restrain their curiosity 
and resent such intrusions as dangerous beginnings, 
the end of which we cannot surmise. 

"MY SOUL BE ON THY GUARD" 

The proper course to pursue, when these evil spirits 
attempt to intrude upon us, is to look to the Lord 
with faith and confidence, and in the name of the Lord 



Jesus to command the evil one to depart. We need have 
no fear of their power against us so long as we are the 
Lord's and are walking in our daily life not after the 
will of the flesh but after the Spirit. Remember our 
Lord's words to Pilate, "Thou couldst have no power 
at all against me except it were given thee from above" 
(John 19:11); and again the Apostle's assurance, "We 

R4069 : page 299 

know that all things work together for good to them 

that love God— to the called ones according to his purpose." 

(Rom. 8:28.) Greater is he who is on our part 

than all they that be against us. If the Adversary had 

power to injure us he would have done so long ago— 

"The angel of the Lord encampeth about them that 

reverence him, and delivereth them."— Psa. 34:7. 

Our surmise is that this loosing and liberating 
from the chains of darkness will increase, perhaps very 
rapidly; that these fallen spirits are permitted to gradually 
invent a method by which they can accomplish 
such materializations, and that the knowledge of this 
and their proficiency in it will be permitted to develop 
during the remaining seven years of this harvest time, 
and constitute not only a trial for them, but have much 
to do also with the perilous times for the Church and 
the world which the Scriptures indicate should now be 
expected. 

These fallen angels (demons), still in opposition to 
God, will doubtless ignore the Lord's restraints and 
use their discovery of the new power or new method of 
materialization. Those having respect to the Lord and 
his will would of course refuse to use such powers as 
he had condemned and forbidden and restrained, and 
thus their loyalty to the Lord would be demonstrated. 
Indeed we may be sure that whichever of these fallen 
angels have repented of their wrong course have abstained 
from all attempts to communicate with humanity 
in harmony with the Lord's prohibitions. We may 
be sure, then, that when spirit mediums tell us 
they communicate with both good and bad spirits 
this is not the case, that none of the good seek to communicate 

R4070 : page 299 

with mankind, and that those who do represent 
themselves as good spirits are, as the Scriptures 
declare, "lying spirits," who sometimes use the "cloak" 
of good admonitions for the purpose of trapping mankind 
and deceiving them. In a word, then, all of the 
demons who communicate with mankind are wicked 
spirits, and as these become conscious of their power 
to materialize and become proficient in the use of the 
same we may expect that their vicious natures will lead 
them to beset mankind with the grossest immoralities and 
every evil work. Neither should we forget the Apostle's 



declaration that one of the delights of these demons is 
to personate the pure, the good, as an "angel of light" 
(2 Cor. 11:14), that they might thereby the more effectually 
accomplish injury: for it seems to be one of the 
delights of the evilly disposed to entrap others into sin 
and wrong doing. When we remember Christendom 
in respect to these matters we almost tremble for the 
results that may follow the permission of such 
materializations: 

MANY UNPREPARED FOR "STRONG DELUSIONS" 

(1) They do not understand about these demons; 
they make light of the casting out of devils by the Lord 
and the apostles, and think that they erred and called 
diseases demons. 

(2) On the other hand they do not believe that the 
dead are dead, but that they are bodiless spirits. 

For a long time Christian people have been deterred 
from any intercourse with the demons personating their 
dead by an undefinable fear, but now Christian Science 
has taught many of them to fear nothing, but to say, 
"Everything is good, there is no evil, there is no devil, 
there are no demons," and additionally some of the 
lights of science have lately been investigating psychic 
phenomena, as it is called, and able professional theologians 
have declared that there is truth connected with 
it somewhere and that it is worthy of investigation. 
Looked at from this standpoint, is not Christendom in 
general standing on the brink, as it were, of terrible 
delusions and ensnarements? To this picture we must 
not forget to add the Apostle's testimony respecting 
this very time. He declares that because Christendom 
has not received the truth in the love of it, but has preferred 
a lie— preferred to believe that the dead are alive 
when the Scriptures declare that they are dead and 
without hope except in a resurrection from the dead— 
therefore God will send them strong delusion that they 
may believe a lie because they had no pleasure in the 
truth— that they all may be condemned— shown to be 
unworthy a place amongst the Elect of the Kingdom. 
Respecting this time the Lord also through the Prophet 
declares that "because this people draw near unto me 
with their mouth, and with their lips do honor me, but 
have removed their heart far from me, and their fear of me 
is a commandment of men which has been taught them, 
therefore, behold, I will proceed to do a marvelous 
work amongst this people, even a marvelous work and 
a wonder; for the wisdom of their wise men shall perish, 
and the understanding of their prudent men shall 
be hid."-Isa. 29:13,14. 

Our conclusion then respecting the judgment time 
for the fallen angels is this— that during the Millennial 
Age, when righteousness shall be laid to the line and 
justice to the plummet, and when nothing shall be permitted 
to hurt or to injure in all God's holy Kingdom, 



it would be impossible for those fallen angels to have 

any special trial in connection with mankind— indeed 

their trials would then seem to be over— surely they 

will then have less opportunity and therefore less temptation 

than at present. We reason therefore that their 

judgment in this great day is in the immediate present 

and within the next few years— that the permission for 

them to find and use means of materialization and communication 

with mankind will furnish the special trial 

and testing of these angels which is called their judgment, 

their krisis, their testing time, and that it will 

prove which of them are sorry for sin and at heart now 

loyal to God, and which are otherwise. And at the same 

time this matter has been so gauged as to bring it within 

the period of man's day of trouble— "the day of 

wrath." 

The declaration that the saints shall judge angels 
must not be forgotten. We are to remember that the 
majority of the saints have already passed beyond the 
vail into the condition of heavenly glory and wisdom, 
and that with their Lord they would represent the entire 

R4070 : page 300 

Church, including those of us who are on this side 
the vail. What they will have to do with the judging, 
with the bringing of this krisis time upon the fallen 
angels, we know not, but we believe them to be entirely 
capable for any work that the Lord may assign to them. 
Furthermore it is possible that the saints on this side 
the vail may have something to do with the judging of 
these fallen angels. In this very article we are endeavoring 
to set forth their responsibility and how the repentant 
ones will be distinguishable from the unrepentant, 
the evil. The coming of this very matter to 
their attention will serve the more particularly to test 
them— to show them the krisis or decision time into 
which they have come. Furthermore it is possible that 
in the period of their expected activities the saints on 
this side the vail who know the truth respecting the 
nature of man and the deceptions of these demons may 
have more to do than we at present know of in the 
way of reproving them, exposing them, condemning 
them, judging them. 



page 300 
BEREAN BIBLE STUDY IN TABERNACLE SHADOWS 
OTHER SIGNIFICANT TYPES 
NOVEMBER 3 
1. What was represented by the "posts" which stood 



in the "Court" and upheld the white curtains? 
T.113,par. 2 (1st 3 lines). 

2. Why were they constructed of "wood," instead of 
"copper"? T.113, par. 2 (4th to 9th lines). 

3. What does their being set in sockets of copper 
typify? T.113, par. 2 (9th line on). 

4. What was illustrated by the "white curtain"? And 
should we hold up before the world the "pure 
linen"— Christ's righteousness? T.114, par. 1. 

NOVEMBER 10 

5. What was symbolized by the "silver hooks"? T.114, 
par. 2, Ex. 27:11-17. 

6. What was represented in the "door-posts" at the 
entrance of the Tabernacle— under the "vail"? 
T.114, par. 3 (1st 12 lines). 

7. Why were these posts, also, set in sockets of "copper"? 
T.l 14, par. 3 (13th line on); 2 Cor. 4:7; 

Ex. 26:37. 

8. What was represented by the "door-posts" within 
the second "vail"? T.l 15, par. 1; Ex. 26:32. 

NOVEMBER 17 



9. What did the "golden table" symbolize? T.l 15, par. 2; 
Phil. 2:16; Rev. 19:7. 

10. Explain the meaning of the "golden candlestick." 
T.115,par. 3; Rev. 1:20; 1:11. 

1 1 . Describe its workmanship and explain the beautiful 
symbolism of its various features. T.l 16, par. 1. 

12. What supplied the light for this "golden lampstand 
And of what was this a symbol? T.l 16, 

par. 2 (1st 4 lines). 



•> 



NOVEMBER 24 

13. For whom alone did this light shine? T.l 16, par. 2 
(4th line on); I Cor. 2:14; Heb. 9:6. 

14. How often were these lights trimmed and replenished 
with oil? And what important lesson is 

taught us in this symbol? T.l 16, par. 3; Ex. 27:20,21; 
30:8. 

ANTI-TYPICAL PRIESTS AND LEVITES 

15. Why cannot some Christians see spiritual things? 
T.117, par. l;ICor. 2:9. 

16. What three classes have always been represented 
in the Church nominal? T.117, par. 2; Gal. 5:24. 



R4070 : page 300 

THE FALL OF JERICHO 



--JOSHUA 6:8-20.-OCTOBER 20.- 

Golden Text:— "By faith the walls of Jericho fell down 
after they were compassed about seven days."— Heb. 1 1:30. 

LONG before the Canaanites had been accursed! 
Long before their land had been promised to 
the children of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob! 
The Lord's time had now come to give possession; and 
the place of entrance was close to Jericho. Jericho 
was accursed or condemned: its time of judgment had 
come as that of Sodom four centuries before in the 
same rich, fertile valley. But God would vary the 
method for a purpose. As he had made of the Sodomites 
an illustration of those who would suffer everlasting 
destruction or Second Death (Jude 7), so he 
would now illustrate another thing in the Jerichoites: 
he would show in their slaughter how the "old man" of 
our fallen nature is to be utterly destroyed by us as 
New Creatures under the lead and instruction of the 
real Joshua— Jesus. 

Nothing could be done— none could fight against 
Jericho— until they had been circumcised; which typified 
the circumcision of the heart, the putting away, 
the cutting off, of the love of sin from the hearts of 
the true Israelites. The next lesson to be typified was 
that our power over our natural desires (represented 
by the Jerichoites) must come from God. The natural 
desires and appetites are protected by strong walls, 
the will of the flesh, which first must be broken down 
before we as New Creatures can conquer our natural 
selves, our depraved appetites or desires. 

This power of God in the type was shown in the 
fall of Jericho's wall; but before it fell the faith of the 
circumcised ones was made active as shown in the seven 
days marching around the city and seven times on the 
seventh day, representing completeness. The slaughter 
of the Jerichoites, then, represented the victory of true 
Israelites over self-will, self-love, self-indulgence, and 
over every enemy of the new nature— for the two are 
contrary one to the other and one or the other must die. 
—Compare Gal. 5:16,17. 

Everything in Jericho was accursed, condemned or 
devoted; and so everything in and of our carnal nature 
is condemned or devoted— every living creature must be 

R4070 : page 301 

put to death. This represents that every active influence 
and principle of the fallen nature must be destroyed, 
"Mortify [kill], therefore, your members which 
are upon the earth; fornication, uncleanness, inordinate 
affection, evil concupiscence [desire], and covetousness 
[greed], which is idolatry."— See Col. 3:5-10. 
Yet the deliverance of Rahab (who afterward married 



into the tribe of Judah and became an Israelite, 

and has the honor of being one of the ancestors of our 

Lord Jesus) shows in type that some of our members, 

once enemies of the new nature, may be so transformed 

that instead of becoming the servants of sin they may 

become servants of righteousness, through full consecration. 

For instance, talents for speaking, writing, 

teaching, etc., once used in the service of Satan and sin, 

may be reckoned dead and quickened to newness of life 

and activity in God's service. But as such a transfer 

could only be through a reckoned death and quickening 

through faith in the great sacrifice for sin, this too 

must be illustrated in the type. And it was illustrated 

in the act of faith which displayed the scarlet cord. 

The inanimate valuables, the gold, silver, brass and 
iron vessels, etc., were all consecrated, too, but not to 
destruction; they were to be devoted to the Lord's service. 
So with the truly circumcised Israelites indeed: 
not only are all their carnal powers to be destroyed as 
servants of sin, but all that they possess is to be consecrated 

R4071 : page 301 

to the Lord's service, their treasures of gold and 

silver and their ordinary possessions represented in the 

vessels of brass and iron. All must now be considered 

as belonging to the Lord: and any appropriation of 

these to their own selfish uses brings a curse, as was 

illustrated by the sin of Achan, who appropriated of the 

spoils of Jericho some gold and silver and a fine Babylonish 

garment. The result of his covetousness was 

his own destruction, and for a time he troubled all 

Israel. 

So, amongst Spiritual Israelites, covetousness of 
gold, silver and the fine Babylonish garments is a most 
fruitful source of spiritual weakness and in many leads 
to destruction. "For the love of money is a root of all 
evil: which while some coveted after, they have erred 
from the faith and pierced themselves through with 
many arrows. They that will [to] be rich fall into 
temptation and a snare, and into many foolish and 
hurtful lusts, which drown men in destruction and perdition. 
But thou, O man of God, flee these things; 
and follow after righteousness, godliness, faith, love, 
patience, meekness."— I Tim. 6:9-11. 

The blowing of the trumpets by the priests may 
well be understood to typify the proclamation of God's 
Word against sin and his assurance to his people that 
he is able and willing to give the circumcised New Creatures 
victory over their carnal propensities. Not until 
we understand the assurance of the Word of the Lord 
and have faith therein are we able to blend the shout of 
victory with the shout of trumpets and see the obstacles 
to self-mortification fall before us. 



"I SURRENDER ALL" 

One thing alone, dear Lord, I have, 

I may to thee resign; 
All else is thine that thou hast formed; 

Their use alone is mine. 
Tho' I should offer lands or gold, 

What profit to me there? 
For thou hast always owned them all, 

I but thy bounty share. 

But thou hast placed in mortal frame 

A will to do or not, 
As I may list and, uncoerced, 

I may pursue my lot. 
This will may lead me down to death, 

Or to a rich reward. 
I tremble, Father, at the thought 

Of that I have to guard. 

But, blessed Savior, thou hast said, 

The weak thou wilt sustain; 
Surrendering my will to thee, 

I can no more refrain. 
Resigning this, my fears now flee. 

All I can give is thine; 
To chasten, polish, guide, that in 

Thy glory I may shine. —A. J. Morris. 



For years, no wisdom, no renown, 

Only my life can I lay down; 

Only my heart, Lord, to thy throne I bring; and pray 

A child of thine I may go forth 

And spread glad tidings through the earth, 

And teach sad hearts to know thy worth! 

Lord, here am I. — C. Whitmarsh. 



R4071 : page 301 

CALEB'S REWARD 

--JOSHUA 14:5-14.-OCTOBER 27- 

Golden Text:— "He wholly followed the 
Lord God of Israel."— Joshua 14:14. 

IN all the promises to the faithful prior to the Gospel 

Age there were no intimations of spiritual 

things,— of the high calling to joint-heirship with 

Christ, of the privilege of being transformed New Creatures, 

partakers of the divine nature, etc. Thus, for 



instance, Caleb wholly followed the Lord God of Israel 
and received as his reward a choice portion of the land 
of Canaan. 

We observe also many similar promises made to 
Israel as a nation conditioned on their obedience to 
God and their faith and loyalty:— They should eat the 
good of the land; their days should be long upon the 
land which the Lord gave them; their enemies should 
not triumph over them; they should be blessed in basket 
and in store, etc., etc. These were the immediate 
temporal rewards of earthly things promised to the 
obedient. But the promises to be realized to them even 
beyond the grave were also of an earthly kind. To 

R4071 : page 302 

Abraham God said, "Lift up now thine eyes and look 

from the place where thou art, northward and southward 

and eastward and westward; for all the land 

which thou seest, to thee will I give it and to thy seed 

forever." And Stephen and Paul, referring to this 

earthly promise to Abraham and to his seed according 

to the flesh, remind us that this promise was never fulfilled 

to Abraham in his past life (nor has it yet been 

fulfilled to his posterity— "for an everlasting possession"); 

but that he died in faith believing that when he 

should be awakened from death in due time the promise 

would be verified.-Acts 7:5; Heb. 11:8-10. 

These observations suggest several important questions. 
(1) May the Christian expect the temporal rewards 
of earthly prosperity as a present reward of 
faithfulness to God? (2) Shall the Spiritual Seed of 
Abraham share the earthly inheritance with the Fleshly 
Seed? or (3), vice versa, If the higher promises were 
made to the Spiritual Seed, the Gospel Church, can 
they apply also to the Fleshly Seed? 

Considering the second question first, we answer, 
No; for the saints of the Gospel Age are to be changed 
from the human to the spiritual, divine nature. They 
are to be made like unto Christ's glorious body, who is 
now "the express image of the Father"— "the King immortal, 
invisible and dwelling in light which no man 
can approach unto, whom no man hath seen nor can 
see"; and with Christ they are to inherit all things. 
(I Cor. 15:51-53; Phil. 3:21; 2 Pet. 1:4; Phil. 1:5; 
I Tim. 1:17; 6:16; Rev. 21:7; Rom. 8:17.) While the 
Fleshly Seed of Abraham will rejoice to sit, each man, 
under his own vine and fig tree with none to molest or 
make them afraid (Micah 4:4), the Spiritual Seed will 
be reigning with Christ in glory, and from their exalted 
position will be able to bless all the families of the 
earth; and not only so, but even to judge angels.— 
Gen. 28:14; Gal. 3:16,29; I Cor. 6:3. 

Nor can the Fleshly Seed of Abraham, even the 
most worthy and faithful prophets and martyrs, inherit 
the "exceeding great and precious promises," which belong 



to a subsequent dispensation of divine favor; for 
it is written that "flesh and blood cannot inherit the 
Kingdom of God,"— the spiritual plane of that Kingdom 
being here referred to,— though they will inherit its 
earthly phase, as it is written: "Ye [unfaithful Jews] 
shall see Abraham and Isaac and Jacob and all the 
prophets in the Kingdom of God [the earthly phase], 
and ye yourselves thrust out." (Luke 13:28.) These 
two phases of the Kingdom will be in communication 
and cooperation during the Millennium— the one, the 
higher, spiritual and invisible, and the other, perfect, 
human and visible among men. Thus it is written, 
"Out of Zion [the spiritual phase] shall go forth the 
law, and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem [the 
human, visible phase]." (Isa. 2:3.) And while the 
promise to Abraham, "In thee and in thy Seed ['which 
Seed,' says Paul, 'is Christ'— Head and Body] shall 
all the families of the earth be blessed," shall be fulfilled 
in the Spiritual Seed primarily, yet the exalted 
earthly phase of the Kingdom is to be the blessed channel 
or agency through which the blessing shall flow to 
all the kindreds of the earth. And thus, as the Apostle 
declares, the promise of God— "In thee and in thy Seed 
shall all the families of the earth be blessed"— shall be 
sure to all the seed; not to that only which is of the 
law (the Fleshly Seed), but to that also which is of the 
faith of Abraham. And if ye be Christ's then are ye 
Abraham's Seed and heirs according to the promise.— 
Rom. 4:16; Gal. 3:16,29. 

This calls to mind the two phases of the Kingdom 
of God as presented in MILLENNIAL DAWN, Vol. I., 
Chap. XIV., and the separate and distinct inheritance 
and office of each. We are also reminded of the Lord's 
teaching that not all the natural descendants of Abraham 
are to be heirs with him of the promise, but only 

R4072 : page 302 

such as Abraham would be honored in owning as sons 
—such as partake of his spirit or disposition.— See 
John 8:39,44. 

While to the Natural Seed of Abraham is promised 
all the land which Abraham saw, and the privilege of 
dwelling in it in safety, and while the inheritors of the 
earthly phase of the Kingdom are to be princes in all 
the earth (Psa. 45:16), to the Spiritual Seed of Abraham, 
which Seed is Christ— Head and Body— are given 
the "exceeding great and precious promises."— 2 Pet. 1:4. 

This brings us to the consideration of our first inquiry, 
May the Christian expect the rewards of earthly 
prosperity for his faithfulness to God, either in the 
present life, or in that which is to come? 

We have already shown that Christians, members 
of the Body of Christ, have beyond this life "an inheritance 
incorruptible, undefiled, and that fadeth not 
away, reserved in heaven" for them (I Pet. 1:4); consequently 



the earthly inheritance of human perfection 

and a peaceful home, each under his own vine and fig 

tree, could not confine to earth the immortal spirit beings, 

partakers of the divine nature, the scope of 

whose powers must necessarily extend to the utmost 

bounds of creation. 

Nor can the rewards of present temporal prosperity 
in worldly things be expected by those who are running 
for the prize of this high calling to glory, honor 
and immortality as kings and priests unto God; for 
the way to the crown is the way of the cross, the 
way of sacrifice, as well to every member of the 
Body of Christ as it was to our Head and Lord, 
Christ Jesus. He was "a man of sorrows and acquainted 
with grief"; the reproaches of them that 
reproached God fell upon him; though he was rich, 
for our sakes he became poor; so poor that he said, 
"The foxes have holes, and the birds of the air have 
nests, but the Son of man hath not where to lay his 
head." There was no reward of earthly prosperity for 
the Lord's faithfulness, but the reverse— privation and 
persecution were realized, even unto death. And the 
servant is not above his Lord: if they have persecuted 
him they will persecute us also; and the reproaches of 
them that reproached him will also fall upon us. The 
only present reward for which the followers of Christ 
may look is the heartfelt manifestation of the Lord's 

R4072 : page 303 

love and approval. "In the world," said he, "ye shall 
have tribulation, but in me ye shall have peace." 

It should be observed also that while rewards of 
temporal prosperity were promised and given to Fleshly 
Israel as a nation and as individuals, yet the very 
cream of that nation, the faithful patriarchs and prophets 
received no such temporal rewards, but like the 
Gospel Church, they endured hardness as good soldiers 
and nobly fought the good fight of faith; and their 
abundant reward will be in the glory of the earthly 
phase of the Kingdom of God. Note the account of 
their faithful endurance as recorded by Paul in Heb. 11. 

The temporal rewards and punishments and general 
discipline of Fleshly Israel were typical of the 
Lord's similar discipline of the world in the age to 
come; while his selection out from among that people 
of a worthy class of overcomers for the earthly phase 
of the Kingdom was typical of his selection during the 
Gospel Age of a class of overcomers for the spiritual 
phase of the Kingdom. In any case, it pays to wholly 
follow the Lord God of Israel, who is a rewarder of all 
them that diligently seek him to walk in his ways.— 
Heb. 11:6; Prov. 8:32-36. 



R4072 : page 303 

OUR NEW WATCH TOWER BIBLES 

SOME months ago we gave notice of the preparation 
of a new Bible which possesses various features of 
special interest to WATCH TOWER readers. The 
edition is ready for delivery and orders may now be sent to 
our office. Some features have been added since we first 
announced, so we will describe the book afresh. 

(1) This is the Common Version Bible, but printed on 
India paper; it is very light in weight. (2) It is small- 
less than 1 in. thick, 4-3/4 in. wide, 7 in. long, convenient for 
an overcoat pocket. (3) The type is quite large for so 
small a book— the same used in books three times its bulk 
and four times its weight, namely Minion type. (See illustration 
of types in our issue of Dec. 1, 1906.) 

The above features commend the book to every Bible 
user, but now we come to our special features. (4) It contains 
220 pages of brief DAWN-STUDIES COMMENTS from Genesis 
to Revelation, with references to the DAWN volumes 
treating the subjects more fully. This was the work of our 
dear Brother C. J. Woodworth, and cost him six months' time, 
seven hours per day. He declares it to have been the most 
enjoyable and most profitable work he ever did. He began 
the matter for his own use and subsequently called it to our 
attention as an arrangement of incalculable value to all the 
dear Brethren— enabling all to accomplish two or three 
times the amount of studying in their study hours and with 
better success. We are sure that all the dear Brethren will 
thank the Lord for this labor of love and in their hearts 
thank Brother Woodworth also. 

"INSTRUCTORS' GUIDE" 

AN EPITOME OF THE FAITH ONCE DELIVERED UNTO THE SAINTS 

(5) The above is the title of the second section of 
these Helps. It was prepared for our use by our dear Sister 
G. W. Seibert, and will surely be much appreciated by us 
all. Again we render thanks to our Lord and to the Sister 
who has thus been used as his servant. This will be found 
very helpful to all who attempt to explain the divine plan to 
others. It cites not only the Scriptures, quoting them in part, 
but it refers to DAWNS and TOWERS, etc., in which these subjects 
are treated. Many quite familiar with the Truth are 
unable to locate the desired passages and this will aid them. 
By its aid every WATCH TOWER reader will become, we trust, 
an "able minister" of the Truth, capable of vanquishing 
any opponent. We trust, however, that all will remember 
our Captain's command that we "speak the truth in love," 
and again, "that nothing be done through strife or 
vainglory." 

BEREAN TOPICAL INDEX 



(6) This feature of these Helps, also prepared by Sister 
Seibert, is a revision merely of a similar index which 
appeared in our previous "Watch Tower Bible" (too bulky 
for carrying). This Index will be found very helpful as it 

gives both TOWER and DAWN references on subjects of special 
interest to us all. 

DIFFICULT TEXTS AND SPURIOUS PASSAGES 

(7) This section of our Helps will commend itself to 

all Bible students immediately. Coming across an obscure 

or difficult passage this will direct you at once to the exposition 

of same in DAWNS or TOWERS. The spurious passages 

found in our common version Bible, but not found in the 

original Greek MSS., are all shown. These valuable arrangements 

are also the work of Brother Woodworth, as 

well as 

(8) AN INDEX TO SCRIPTURES TREATED AT CONSIDERABLE 
LENGTH IN ZION'S WATCH TOWER. 

A SPIRITUAL ARSENAL 

(9) The having of these helps all together and under 

one cover with the Bible and of convenient size for carrying 
to meetings, will be apparent to all at a glance. We will 
all soon feel, no doubt, that we shall want this spiritual arsenal 
always at hand wherever we go. Let us never forget, 
however, that the Truth without its spirit of love would be 
vain. 

ABOUT BINDINGS AND PRICES 

The Bibles and Helps will be all exactly alike except 
the bindings, which are of three grades. The best is the 
cheapest really, but knowing that many of our readers are 
far from rich we have done our best to serve them all. All 
such Bibles are stamped so as to look much alike whether 
made of split sheepskin, split cowhide, goatskin, or genuine 
sealskin. The latter is the best book-leather in the world. 
We selected it for our best edition. The cowhide is the best 
of the cheap leathers and is styled "French Seal"; we chose 
it for our cheaper editions. The below prices are actual 
cost. No discount to anybody nor on any quantity: 
No. W. 138— French Seal (cowhide), divinity circuit, 

red under gold edges $1.38 

No. W. 150— French Seal (cowhide), linen lined, divinity 

circuit, red under gold edges 1.50 

No. W. 300— Genuine Sealskin, calf lined, divinity circuit, 
red under gold edges 3.00 

Any of the above with patent index on edge, 25c extra, 
but this is not recommended. Postage, 10c. each. Order 
by number. 



page 305 



SEMI-MONTHLY 
VOL. XXVIII OCTOBER 15 No. 20 
A.D. 1907--A.M. 6036 



CONTENTS 

Views from the Watch Tower 307 

Romanism Beset in Strongholds 307 

Secular Editors Criticize Theologians 307 

Jewish Emigration to Palestine 308 

Progress or Revolution 309 

The Pope Not a Higher Critic 309 

Edison's Glimpse of the Millennium 310 

His Presence (Poem) 310 

The Approaching Battle 310 

Provoking One Another 312 

That Ye Receive a Full Reward 315 

The Cities of Refuge 317 

Israel Renewing the Covenant 317 

Encouraging Words from Faithful Workers 318 

page 306 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-24 EVERSHOLT ST., LONDON, N.W. 
GERMAN BRANCH-MIRKER STR., 45, ELBERFELD. 
AUSTRALASIAN BRANCH-EQUITABLE BLDG., COLLINS ST., MELBOURNE 

PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 

TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR AS FOLLOWS:- 

All Bible Students who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity or 
adversity, are unable to pay for this Journal, will be supplied FREE if 
they send a Postal Card each June stating their case and requesting its 
continuance. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on 
our list continually and in touch with the Studies, etc. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



THIS JOURNAL IS PUBLISHED IN THE 

FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, DANISH AND ITALIAN LANGUAGES. 

SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



SPECIAL TO OUR READERS IN WEST AND SOUTH 



We have the following special offer to make to TOWER 
readers residing in Missouri, Illinois, Kentucky, West Virginia 
and Virginia, and all States south of these and west 
and northwest of them: 

The Woman's National Daily, a very clean and every-way 
respectable daily paper, proposes that it will publish Brother 
Russell's discourses every week, beginning October 12, and 
we have made clubbing arrangements with it by which 
that daily newspaper and this journal, ZION'S WATCH TOWER, 
will both be supplied for $1.60 a year. Subscriptions under 
these conditions should be sent to us immediately. 

To the very large number of our readers throughout the 
South and West the above will be very welcome information. 
Many of them have desired to have Brother Russell's discourses, 
but two difficulties stood in the way; first, the 
Dispatch costs $6 a year, and even at clubbing rate, $3; and, 
second, the papers when they reached them were out of date 
and of little value, so that all they got for the money was the 
discourse. But the arrangement above referred to gives a 
daily newspaper with all the news and none of the trash common 
to dailies, and gives the weekly discourse as well, and 
all for the insignificant sum of $ 1 .60 a year when taken by this 
clubbing arrangement. We believe that the dear friends residing 
in the territory named will appreciate very highly the 
arrangement effected in their interest. 



R4073 : page 307 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER 
ROMANISM BESET IN STRONGHOLDS 



ONE after another so-called "Catholic countries" 

are shaking themselves free from the Roman 

Church-fetters which have held them for centuries. 

All are familiar with the situation in France, 

where the authority of Rome is now disowned and disallowed 

—Catholics, Protestants and Jews, etc., all 

standing on a common footing before the law— much 

as in this country. 

Spain followed the same course with, it is reported, 
the following outline of policy:— 

First. No religious order shall be established 
without the authorization of parliament. 

Second. The State shall accord support to any 
member of a religious order desiring to renounce the 



vows taken. 

Third. The Minister of Justice is empowered to 
withdraw the authorization of any religious order found 
to be inimical to morality or public tranquility. 

Fourth. The Cabinet shall forthwith examine the 
authorizations previously granted to religious orders 
and cancel those which are illegal. 

Fifth. Religious orders whose members are foreigners 
or whose director resides abroad shall be dissolved. 
The authorities are empowered to enter monasteries 
without ecclesiastical sanction. 

Sixth. Religious orders shall not be allowed to 
hold property in excess of the objects for which they 
were instituted. 

Seventh. The sums of money given by members 
of religious orders to such institutions on their admission 
and the sums derived by orders from charitable 
subscriptions shall be strictly limited. 

Eighth. All legacies to religious orders or donations 
to orders by living persons or by testaments 
or through intermediaries are formally prohibited. 

Ninth. Religious orders engaging in trade or industry 
shall pay the regular taxes. 

Tenth. Regulations for the dissolution of religious 
orders shall be established. 

Eleventh. The law of 1887 concerning the registering 
of religious orders remains in force. 

Now the people of Italy are in a ferment. Charges 
of immorality against the clergy (many of them probably 
false) are being widely published, with demands 
for the opening of all "homes," "reformatories," "nunneries,' 
etc., to civil inspection, as are all others not 
Roman Catholic. In a word, the special privileges and 
immunities of the Church of Rome are likely to be 
abolished— as of course they should be. Austria-Hungary 
is the only great nation still acknowledging pronouncedly 
the Roman Catholic system as entitled to 
special and exclusive rights and privileges. 

The reason for the apparent greater prosperity of 
Romanism in Protestant countries— Germany, Great 
Britain, Canada and the United States— is that in these 
their clergy wisely refrain from expecting much special 
privilege, though they quietly obtain some because 
of their solidarity and the respect of politicians for the 
influence of their votes. 

The stripping of Romanism's power and special 
privileges will doubtless prepare her the better for the 
new role marked out for her in Revelation— her cooperation 
with Federated Protestantism in the exercise of 
power during the closing days of this Gospel Age— just 
before the downfall of everything in horrible anarchy. 

SECULAR EDITORS CRITICISE THEOLOGIANS 



Under the heading, "Preaching without Religious 
Faith," a secular editorial says:— 

The confusion of religious thought at this time of 
declining religious faith was never made more apparent 
than in the sermons preached hereabouts on 
Sunday. 

The Rev. Dr. Van Dyke, preaching on the Atonement, 
declared his belief "that the Son of God would 
have come into the world whether man had sinned or 
not," a confession which conflicts radically with the 
whole orthodox theory of the sacrifice of Christ. He 
said also that "there are a thousand true doctrines of 
the Atonement," which is substantially the same thing 
as saying that no doctrine specifically is true, for instance, 
the doctrine of the Westminster Confession, to 

R4073 : page 308 

which Dr. Van Dyke pledged loyalty when he was ordained 
a Presbyterian minister. 

The first sermon of the Rev. Dr. Hillis, as pastor 
of Plymouth Church in Brooklyn, was devoted to extolling 
Christ without any reference to the Atonement 
or any doctrine which raises him to a divine or a supernatural 
elevation. He spoke of "the supremacy of 
Christ among men of genius," said "Jesus is the supreme 
literary artist," and celebrated the wonderful 
power of his "imagination." Nowhere in his sermon 
was there any evidence of the positive faith which gave 
the impulse to Christianity; only generality, sentimentality, 
the vague imaginings of a mind without any 
definite belief were made manifest in the pretty sentences 
of Dr. Hillis. 



Secular editors deprived of theological instruction 
in word and conscience-twisting seem much more logical 
and more honorable than theologians. This editor 
evidently sees clearly that those who have abandoned 
the faith of their ordination vows should seek a new 
ordination in accord with their present agnosticism, 
and not practise a fraud. 

We publish the item to call attention to the departure 
from the central feature of the Gospel— our Lord's 
atonement for sin. We have challenged the evidence 
that there is a single college or theological seminary in 
the United States where Evolution or Higher Criticism 
infidelity is not taught publicly or privately. No one 
thus far has produced proof in refutation of this 
charge. 

Similar conditions prevail in Canada. A minister 
recently charged publicly that there is but one college 
in Canada loyal to the doctrine of original sin and our 
redemption from it by the death of Christ. We challenge 
that one case. We are morally sure that investigation 



will prove that if Higher Criticism, Evolution 
and No Atonement for Sin are barred from the textbooks 
and curriculum some of the professors surely 
hold these wrong views and privately confess them and 
laugh at the backwardness of their college. Well did 
the Apostle declare, "The time will come when they 
will not endure sound doctrine, but having itching ears 
[desiring something new and different] will gather to 
themselves teachers after their own liking: and they 
will turn away their ears from the Truth and unto 
fables"— respecting monkey progenitors millions of 
years ago.— 2 Tim. 4:3,4. 

JEWISH EMIGRATION TO PALESTINE 



Dr. M. Scheinkin, Director of the Information Bureau, 
Jaffa, Palestine, says in a recently published report 
in The Jewish Exponent:— 

"Soon after the October riots of 1905, Jewish immigration 
into Palestine considerably increased. Every 
vessel from Russia brought sixty and even one hundred 
passengers. About 1500 persons arrived in Palestine 
during the winter of 1905-06. Among these three to 
five per cent, were wealthy people, between ten and fifteen 
per cent, workmen, ten per cent, artisans and 
twenty per cent, had no particular occupation, and the 
remainder consisted of old people who became proteges 
of the Halukah. Almost all of the young workingmen 
found work in the colonies. Most of the artisans, 
with the exception of the tailors and shoemakers, who 
arrived in very large numbers, obtained employment in 
the cities of Jaffa and Jerusalem. Twenty families of 
the wealthier class remained in the land, eight of whom 
acquired land in the colonies, one rented a large farm 
from an Arab, and the rest engaged in business, chiefly 
in Jaffa. Eighteen thousand dunams of land passed 
into Jewish hands during the past two years. 

"Different societies undertook the rebuilding of 
various streets in Jerusalem. A London philanthropic 
society built up one quarter of 150 houses. There are 
also two private building associations which are financially 
assisted by the Anglo-Palestine Bank. A large 
society of artisans recently began to build up a new 
quarter in Jerusalem. Ten families formed a company 
to build up a Jewish quarter in Kaifa, at the foot of 
Mt. Carmel. 

"The large commercial enterprises are still in the 
hands of Mohammedans and Christians, although 
during the last decade many Jews also attained a high 
position in the commercial world. In consequence of 
the recent immigration, twenty new Jewish stores were 
opened in Jaffa, a similar number in Jerusalem and 
several in Kaifa and in Beyrut. During the last month 
a Russian Jewish immigrant opened a large grocery 



store in Damascus. The lumber business is passing 
entirely into Jewish hands, due to the large credit 
allowed them by the Anglo-Palestine Bank. 

"The spiritual condition of the Palestine Jews greatly 
improved during the past two years. The hundreds 
of young laborers, the teachers and other intelligent 
persons brought with them a new life and new spiritual 
aspirations. 

"Aside from lower-grade schools the grown-up 
youth is desirous of obtaining more knowledge, and 
for that purpose there was organized in Jaffa, first, 
evening classes for languages, natural history, history, 
etc.; and secondly, popular lectures on hygiene, political 
economy, etc. It is interesting to watch the groups 
of young people returning in the evenings from the 
various places of study and instruction. In Jerusalem 
there is an evening school in connection with the Bezalel. 
The educational and cultural work of the Alliance 
and the Hilfsverein are being strongly influenced 
by the new tendencies." 

R4074 : page 309 

PROGRESS OR REVOLUTION 



"The distinguished author, Prof. Goldwin Smith, 
approaches this vexed question with a judicial spirit, 
and in the brief space which he has occupied tells some 
plain truths which both sides in the controversy might 
study with profit. His sympathy with labor goes back 
to the days when he defended the unions after the 
Sheffield outrages, and stood on the platform of Joseph 
Arch. 'All round the industrial horizon there are signs 
of continuing storm,' he says, in opening. 'The outlook 
is threatening, not to industry and commerce only, 
but to the general relations between classes, and even 
to the unity of the commonwealth.' 

"He accepts the estrangement between labor and 
capital as a fact. Capital has been erected into an industrial 
tyrant, the mortal enemy of labor, and yet, 
what would labor do without capital? 'Without capital 
we should be living in caves, and grubbing up 
roots with our nails. Such, in fact, was the state of 
primitive man. The man who first stored up some 
roots was the first capitalist, and the man who first 
loaned some of his roots on condition of future repayment, 
with addition, was the first investor.' 

"On the other hand, the author admits that a strike 
is a legitimate engine for enforcing the concession of 
a certain wage, though not for any exaction beyond. 
Further exaction must break the trade. As a matter of 
policy the author believes that employes should share 
in the prosperity of their employers, and the want of 
inducement to improving effort on the part of workmen 



is a weakness in the factory system. While capital can 
be rapacious and unjust, it is also true that organizations 
formed for an aggressive purpose are naturally 
apt to fall into the hands of the most aggressive and 
least responsible section. 'There would be fewer 
strikes if the votes were always taken by ballot, and 
every married man had two.... Power newly won and 
flushed with victory seldom stops exactly at the line of 
right. From enabling the wage-earner to treat on fair 
terms with the employer, unions seem now to be going 
on to create for themselves a monopoly of labor. To this 
the community never has submitted, and never can 
submit. Freedom of labor is the rightful inheritance 
of every man, and the vital interest of all.' 

'"Refusal to work with non-union men is undeniably 
lawful, though far from kind,' is another of the 
author's many obiter dicta. 'The best of tempers,' he 
adds, 'can hardly fail to be tried by the intrusion of a 
walking delegate. Why aggravate by discourtesy the 
perils of the industrial situation? Capital and labor 
must settle down in harmony at last, or both must be 
ruined.' His examination of Socialism leads to a rejection 
of that remedy for the industrial ills. In spite of 
the harsh aspects of competition, he believes it will remain 
the indispensable spur. The danger attending 
public ownership is interfering with the rights of those 
who have been allowed to invest their capital under the 
protection of the law, and disregard of whose rights 
would be public rapine. 

"The conclusion reached by the author, after his 
all-too-brief discussion of the problem, is found in his 
closing paragraph:— 

'"It would seem, then, that there is something to 
be said for acquiescing, provisionally at least, in our 
industrial system, based as it is on the general relation 
between capital and labor, and trying to continue the 
improvement of that relation in a peaceful way, without 
class war and havoc. Progress, in a word, seems 
more hopeful than revolution. When the Socialist ideal, 
perfect brotherhood, is realized, there will be social 
happiness compared with which the highest pleasure 
attainable in this world of inequality, strife and self-interest 
would be mean; but all the attempts to rush 
into that state have proved failures, some of them 
much worse. It is conceivable, let us hope not unlikely, 
that all who contribute to progress may be destined 
in some way to share its ultimate fruits; but there 
is no leaping into the Millennium.'"— Toronto Globe. 

THE POPE NOT A HIGHER CRITIC 



Whatever may be said of Pope Pius X. he cannot 
be charged with being a Higher Critic or sympathizing 
with the agnostic spirit of our day which has gained 



such absolute control of all Protestant seminaries and 
secular colleges. It would appear that this same spirit 
has been gaining rapidly amongst Roman Catholic 
professors, etc., also. This fact has led the Pope to 
condemn and prohibit recently a large number of books 
tinctured with "Modernism" or "New Theology," and 
on Sept. 16 led him to issue an encyclical or general 
epistle to all Roman Catholics, condemning the same. 
In it he declares:— 

A SYNOPSIS OF THE ENCYCLICAL 

"Modernism is a peril for the Church. Its reforms 
in faith, philosophy, theology and history are all errors 
and drive those who believe in them to atheism. Boundless 
curiosity, pride of individualism and disregard of 
true Catholic knowledge and discipline actually have 
spread modernism among the clergy." 

The encyclical decrees that philosophy and theology 
hereafter must be taught in the Catholic schools 
and universities in the complete spirit of the Catholic 
Church and in accordance with the rules of the Church. 

It is decreed that all teachers imbued with the 
spirit of modernism be dismissed and all bishops must 
compel the clergy and the faithful to abstain from 
reading papers inspired by the spirit of modernism or 
advocating the new theories. 

A board of censors is to be established in every 
bishopric to revise and edit all Catholic publications. 

The ecclesiastics are forbidden to send papers 
through the mails or otherwise directing them without 
the consent of the bishop. The ecclesiastics also must 
keep a close watch upon their assistants to prevent 
violation of this ruling. 

Clerical congresses are forbidden, except in cases 
when dangers of modernism arise; or when the laity 
show signs of restlessness and rebellion against clerical 
domination. 

A board of supervision is to be formed in every 
diocese to prevent the spread of "new errors." 

All bishops are instructed that they must forward 

R4074: page 310 

to the pope individual reports regarding the matters 
covered in the encyclical. 

The encyclical has caused a great stir throughout 
Europe and is regarded as by far the most important 
issued during the present pontificate. It is regarded in 
some circles as liable to arouse as much controversy 
and discussion as the famous promulgation of the 
dogma of the immaculate conception by Pope Pius IX. 

EDISON'S GLIMPSE OF THE MILLENNIUM 



Mr. Edison does not profess a general knowledge 
of the Millennium, but he does see some things in the 
line of his own experience and work. He sees them to be 
near, too. Of his views The Electrical Trade says:— 

'"A great electrical discovery which I expect to see 
before I die,' remarked Thomas A. Edison, the man 
whose own inventions have done so much to revolutionize 
modern life, 'is the direct generation of electricity 
from coal. Imagine what will be the consequences! 
Then locomotives will be thrown into the scrap heap. 
All trains will be run by electricity. No longer will 
coal be laboriously transported to the cities, but there 
will be great power plants established at the mouths 
of the mines, from which the electricity will be sent 
out over the country by wire. There will be no horses 
in the streets, no stables, no flies. Wagons will be 
propelled by electricity, for it will be so cheap it can 
be used by the humblest tenement dwellers. Ships 
will no longer be driven by steam. Electricity will be 
their motive power. And then it will be possible to 
cross the Atlantic in three days. At the present time 
nine-tenths of the power obtained from coal is lost by 
the use of boilers, wheels and dynamos. With the direct 
generation of the electrical current, therefore, the 
world will have ten times more energy than now. We 
are still ignorant of the true character of electricity. 
Indeed, to me, after all the years I have spent in studying 
electricity, it is more a mystery now than ever.'" 



R4076 : page 310 

HIS PRESENCE 

Whenever I am lonely 

Or anxious or distressed; 
Whenever earth seems only 
A battlefield at best, 

I hear a voice I know— 
The words are sweet and low: 
"My presence shall go with thee, 
And I will give thee rest." 

When heavy cares encumber, 
Temptations come to test; 
When questions without number 
Assail my troubled breast, 

The voice rebukes my fears— 
And oh, the message cheers! 
"My presence shall go with thee, 
And I will give thee rest." 

Whenever I am weary 
And life hath little zest; 



Whenever skies are dreary 
And I am sore oppressed, 
Again the voice is heard— 
What comfort in each word: 
"My presence shall go with thee, 
And I will give thee rest." 

The clouds hang huge and leaden 

Above the mountain's crest; 
The troops of Armageddon 
Must soon be manifest. 
I tremble at their tread, 
But I am comforted— 
"My presence shall go with thee, 
And I will give thee rest." 

—Grace P. Bronaugh. 



R4074: page 310 

THE APPROACHING BATTLE 

THE Bible forewarns us respecting the character of 

the great trouble-time everyone sees is approaching 

rapidly. It tells us it will be different from 

any trouble of the past. It points out that selfishness 

will be its basis and that the whole world will be involved 

—"every man's hand against his neighbor." 

(Zech. 8:10.) The spirit of the Evil One will possess 

the world and cause them to be and to act the reverse 

of those who possess the Spirit of Christ, whose delight 

it must be to "do good unto all men, especially to 

the household of faith." 

R4075 : page 310 

EMMA GOLDMAN'S SPEECH 

The bitter, vitriolic spirit of the unregenerate 
heart, when soured and stung to resentment, is well 
illustrated in the speech of Emma Goldman, the anarchist. 
She declared in a speech to workingmen, as reported 
in the public press:— 

"Why should workingmen warn their employers 
when they are about to strike?" she demanded, stamping 
her foot. "Why should workingmen govern their 
actions in such cases by moral or ethical considerations? 
Why should you give notice, time to prepare 
your own destruction. Oh, I think it is time for workingmen 
to become unmoral. Your employers will tell 
you piously that they have been placed by God in the 
position that they occupy. That is right. You will 
always find God on the side of the thief and the robber. 

"Win your demands quickly by direct action. The 
striking tailors of Glasgow went back to work with apparent 



docility, but when they were inside the shops 
they used their shears to destroy a large quantity of 
goods until their employers saw the wisdom of yielding. 

"Oil workers, striking in a Russian city, when they 
saw that they were about to be overcome by scabs and 
militia, burned huge quantities of kerosene, thus striking 
their employers in their one vulnerable spot, their 
pockets. 

"Paris-striking bakers doped the bread with kerosene 
and castor oil and made the city sick. That is 
the way to enforce your demands. You can't do it by 
process of law." 

FORCE WILL MEET FORCE 

Happily only a few people as yet have so bitter a 
spirit toward their fellow-men; but it is our expectation 
that conditions during the next few years will 

R4075 : page 311 

eventually sour the hearts of thousands to just such a 
frenzy. Now, comparatively few are so wicked and so 
desperate; but under favorable conditions such a ferment 
might develop quickly. 

Nor are we to suppose that the wealthy and educated 
are all saints. The natural mind is in its last 
analysis under desperate conditions, all that the Scriptures 
claim— "deceitful and desperately wicked." Education 
and training assist in the development of moderation 
and self-control, but it will be seen that brutish 
ferocity will characterize their conduct also, though it 
may take a different form. 

CAPITAL MAY GO ON STRIKE 

A hint at the possibilities along the line of capitalistic 
combination was recently thrown out by The Wall 
Street Journal, a staid financial sheet which daily visits 
all the prominent financiers, bankers and brokers, in 
a semi-humorous article written after the style of 
"Looking Backward." It is in the form of telegraphic 
news, dated next year, and begins thus:— 

"WHOLE COUNTRY 'TIED UP.'" 

"Washington, D.C., June 10, 1908. -Capital has 
gone on strike. On Friday, June 12, at 8 o'clock in 
the morning, practically every wheel in the country 
will cease to turn. Manufacturing establishments will 
be closed. Railroad trains will be brought to a standstill, 
mining will be suspended, banking houses will 
close their doors and the stock exchange will take an 
indefinite recess, as in the panic of 1873. Fully 15,000,000 
persons, the bread-winners of 15,000,000 families, 
will be thrown out of employment. It is believed that 



many of the rich men of the country have gathered 
their available funds together and have prepared to 
leave the country." 

Then follows the names of the leading bankers, 
railroad presidents and industrial managers, with an 
account of a visit by them to President Roosevelt. The 
reporters are represented as waiting long for a report 
of the interview, until Mr. Carnegie comes out, saying, 
"I see my way clear, now, to die poor and undisgraced"; 
then followed President Baer of the P. & R. RR., referring 
to Isaiah 66:15. 

Then follows the story of the stormy, desperate interview, 
E. H. Gary representing the iron and steel 
trades and "all of the 216,000 manufacturing establishments 
of the United States, representing invested capital 
of $12,000,000,000." Next President Baer of the 
railroad interests and Jacob H. Schiff of the banking 
interests are represented as telling the President that 
all these interests have decided to stop work. 

Then the President makes an impassioned speech. 
He tells them it is a monstrous, inhuman thing they 
plan, and says he will call out the army and navy to 
prevent them from carrying out their threats. Then 
Harriman asks the President, with "snapping sarcasm," 
"What can you expect from undesirable citizens?" 
The President then roasts Harriman and demands of 
all those who confront him if the conditions of which 
they complain— hostile legislation, exorbitant demands 
by the labor unions and socialistic agitation for government 
ownership by confiscation— are not the outcome 
of capital's outrageous treatment of the people. 
Then he tells them that if they will not operate the factories, 
the railroads and "the various tools of commerce, 
the people will take your properties and operate 
them on their own account." 

The capitalists at this point paralyze the President 
by telling him they have formed a union which includes, 
in addition to all employing capitalists, "the great mass 
of high-class labor, such as executive heads of departments, 
experts, scientists, etc., who preferred to throw 
their lot and portion with the employing capitalists." 
Henry H. Rogers, after stating this, demands to know 
whether the people could run the properties if they 
took them. 

Then the meeting is represented as breaking up, 
the President not even saying adieu to his callers, and 
the article ends with this paragraph: 

"Long past midnight the lights were burning in 
the cabinet room, where the President and his advisers 
(the cabinet) were laboring on a plan to avert the 
catastrophe." 

An improbable picture this, yet who acquainted 
with human nature, who that knows the indomitable 
force and energy of these "captains of industry" will 
doubt that if not this method some other would be used 
to "bring the masses to their senses"?— in other words 



to convince the public of the value of brains in all the 
affairs of the world. 

Selfishness will spur on both sides: each will 
proudly feel its strength and imagine erroneously that 
its next stronger show of power will discourage its 
opponent, until matters will get beyond the control of 
all human wisdom, counsel and power. 

THE OTHER SIDE WARNED 

Mrs. Hettie Green, reputed the wealthiest woman, 
sees the writing on the wall, and is reported to have 
said:— 

"There is going to be a revolution in this country. 
The people are going to revolt against the oppressions 
of the Trusts. There will be a deluge and the streets 
will run with blood when the people are aroused. The 
people are finding out gradually about the Trusts, and 
when they realize a little more fully how they are ruining 
the chances of the average person there is going to 
be a revolution. It will be a deluge, I tell you." 

On the other side of the question we have Chancellor 
Day of Syracuse University, N.Y., who discerns 
that brains are necessary to the world's progress, but 
nevertheless joins in predictions of coming disaster so 
clearly set forth in the Scriptures. He says:— 

"For some time we have been in the grip of this 
mighty spasm over corporate wealth and swollen fortunes. 
These current phrases are from high sources. 
All of our national ills are being stated in this formula. 
Down with the rich! Puncture the swollen fortunes! 
Make the rich poor and all the poor will be rich! Destroy 
the corporations, hamper them, obstruct them, 
sue them in the courts! Assail them in the press! Tie 
the strings of the Lilliputians to them in Congress and 
bind them, and then the individual can have a chance! 

MAKE GREAT MEN UNNECESSARY 

"Make the returns of great businesses sufficiently 
small and uncertain by petty legislative restrictions 
and control and we shall not be troubled by the genius 
of a Rockefeller, a Hill, a Morgan, a Carnegie, an 

R4075 : page 312 

Armour or a Swift. The little men will be big enough 
for the little things remaining to be done. It is a crime 
for several men to exercise the power of giving employment 
to 50,000 or 150,000 men. 

"I predict," he says in conclusion, "that we are 
passing through an epoch that will stand in future 
times to our everlasting disgrace and shame. We are 
phenomenally blessed by providence. We are steadied 
by the calm confidence and signal ability of the greatest 
men ever known in the commercial world. But if 



this mania continues, it is not far on to a crash that 
will carry down all confidence, confuse all property 
rights, block the wheels of all progress and wreck not 
only the millionaire's fortune, but the laborer's cottage. 
The demand of the hour is control of the controller. 
Swollen fortunes are a thousand fold less 
dangerous to our land and people than swollen 
demagogy." 

IF THE RICH WERE SAINTS 

If all the rich were "saints" according to the Scriptural 
usage we might blame them for not sacrificing 
their talents and opportunities and incomes for the 
welfare of others. But amongst the "saints" are not 
many rich or great or noble. The rich children of this 
world, like the poor of the same class, know no consecration 
to self-sacrifice. Each is doing his best to serve 
his own best interests as he conceives these. The difference 
lies in the birth, environment and opportunities. 
Both wisdom and grace bid the followers of Jesus 
to think generously of the entire "groaning creation" 
and rejoice that to all— rich and poor— the Millennial 
Kingdom of God's dear Son will bring soon after the 
day of trouble a day of grandest blessings and 
opportunities. 



R4076 : page 312 

PROVOKING ONE ANOTHER 

"Let us consider one another, to provoke unto love and to 
good works: not forsaking the assembling of ourselves 
together, as the manner of some is, but exhorting 
one another; and so much the more as ye 
see the day drawing on."— Heb. 10:24,25. 

THE word "provoke" signifies to arouse or incite, or 

stimulate to activity. It is generally used in an evil 

sense, but is applicable, as in our text, to describe 

an incitement to good works, good thoughts, etc. The tendency 

of fallen human nature is toward things that are 

mean, selfish, groveling, and the natural bent is to incite 

or provoke or encourage similarly mean and unworthy 

thoughts, actions and words in others, and it has become a 

proverb that "Evil communications corrupt good manners." 

Everyone of experience knows this general tendency of evil 

to beget evil, and to corrupt and to pollute what is nobler 

and purer than itself; hence we have the Scriptural pronouncement, 

"Blessed is the man that walketh not in the 

counsel of the ungodly, nor standeth in the way of sinners, 

nor sitteth in the seat of the scornful." Those who neglect 

this counsel need not be surprised if they are continually 

falling into temptation, and if the influence upon their own 



lives results in a measure at least of ungodliness and sin, 
and disfellowship from those things which are noble and 
true and pure. 

But the "New Creature in Christ Jesus" is one in whom 
the transforming influences of the Lord's Spirit have already 
begun— one who has a new heart, a new will, a new disposition. 
With such, "old things have passed away, and all 
things have become new"; they have been begotten again— 
i.e., re-begotten— to new hopes, new wishes, new ideas of 
propriety. Instead of the earthly wisdom and way, with its 
"bitter envying and strife," which "descendeth not from 
above, but is earthly, sensual, devilish," they have now the 
wisdom that is from above, and a heart (a disposition) to 
appreciate and pursue its counsels, which are, first purity, 
then peaceableness, gentleness, meekness, mercy, good fruits, 
without partiality, and without hypocrisy. And the disposition 
of this class, in proportion to their attainment of this 
heavenly wisdom and new nature, will be to "provoke" or 
incite or encourage one another, and all with whom they 
come in contact, to similar goodness of thought and word 
and act, in harmony with the heavenly wisdom which is 
guiding their own course. 

This is laid down in the Scriptures as an unvarying 
rule: "A bitter fountain cannot send forth sweet water, and 
a good fountain cannot send forth brackish water." A thistle 
cannot bear grapes, and a grape-vine cannot bear thistles. 
It is the Master himself who says, "By their fruits ye 
shall know them." If, therefore, we desire to prove ourselves, 
and to judge respecting our progress in mortifying 
(putting to death) the old nature, and our growth in the 
new nature, we will judge ourselves by this standard; answering 
to ourselves the question,— Is my own spirit (disposition) 
one which delights in sin in its various forms (not 
necessarily in its grosser forms of murder, theft, etc., but in 
its more refined forms, falsity, envy, strife, vainglory, slander, 
evil-speaking, evil surmises, etc.), or is my delight increasingly 
in righteousness, truth, goodness, gentleness, 
meekness, patience, love? If the former, we are yet, either 
wholly or partially, in the gall of bitterness and in the bondage 
of iniquity, and have need to go at once to the Great 
Physician, and to submit ourselves to his radical treatment 
—the cutting off of sin, the mortifying of such fleshly desires, 
etc. If the latter be our condition of heart we have 
cause for rejoicing, yet no cause for pride or boastfulness; 
for we can say no more than that we only have done our 
duty, having merely learned, and that imperfectly, the lessons 
set before us by our great Teacher. 

The Apostle is addressing the Church, the consecrated 
New Creatures in Christ Jesus. This is shown in the text, 
for he classes himself with these, using the word "us"; it is 
also shown by the context. He calls the attention of the 
consecrated to the influence which goes out from each to 
each, and the consequent importance that the influence shall 
always be stimulating, or provocative of that which is good. 
No doubt the Apostle found in his day, as we find now, that 
many who are consecrated at heart fail to see clearly how 



this consecration should associate itself with and mark itself 

R4076 : page 313 

upon our every act and word. Perhaps he saw then, as we 
see now, that the holy influence of truth, gathered at a meeting 
of the Lord's people, through their communion of heart 
with each other and with the Lord, is not infrequently 
spoiled, dissipated entirely, by inconsiderate or unkind 
remarks of some of the company, upon dismissal. 

Who, of experience, does not know how great a matter 
a little fire may kindle; how much evil may be started by 
the fire of the tongue? how many unkind thoughts, evil 
suspicions, surmises, how much envy, malice, hatred and 
strife may be started by a mere insinuation? Since the 
Lord declares, "Out of the abundance of the heart the 
mouth speaketh," it follows that the hearts and lips, from 
which emanate these evil influences, are not controlled by 
the wisdom that cometh from above, though they be in some 
measure consecrated to the Lord. 

It is a great mistake, also, to suppose that because the 
evil thing is said in a kind and gentle manner, therefore it 
is a good thing, and evidence of a pure heart, that is full of 
love; quite to the contrary, we know that the great Adversary 
is continually presenting himself in garments of light, 
that he may exercise the greater influence for evil upon 
those who have made a covenant with the Lord. So, likewise, 
those who implant evil thoughts, surmises, etc., in a 
smooth and polished manner, and perhaps with a tear, are 
the most dangerous foes of peace and fellowship, and often 
accomplish the greater harm; because they succeed in planting 
roots of bitterness and thoughts of evil in hearts which 
would utterly resent the same evil thoughts and evil surmisings 
if presented in a coarse, offensive and obtrusive 
manner. 

We are not to be reckless of each other's interests. In 
our contact with each other, whether a personal contact or 
a contact by mail or a contact through the columns of this 
journal, we are to "consider one another." We are to consider 
what would be helps, and what would be hindrances, 
what would be encouragements and what would be stumbling-blocks; 
and we are to do all in our power to assist 
one another to run with patience the race for the heavenly 
prize. If we are truly consecrated to the Lord, we can do 
nothing "against the truth, but [every effort must be] for 
the truth." (2 Cor. 13:8.) What a burning and shining 
light every Christian would be if his every act were considered 
and shaped for the benefit of those with whom he 
comes in contact! What a blessing it would be in the 
home! What a blessing it would be in the Church! This 
brotherly consideration is what the Apostle is urging upon 
us: "Consider one another to provoke [incite, encourage] 
to love and to good works." Avoid every word and every 
act, so far as possible, that might incite to hatred, envy, 
strife, bitterness (and bad works, corresponding to these 
feelings), all of which are "of the flesh and of the devil." 



The Apostle links this advice with the exhortation to 
forget not the assembling of ourselves together, as the Lord's 

R4077 : page 313 

people. None of us is so strong in the new nature that 
he can disregard the fellowship of kindred minds. But 
even if we did feel sufficiently strong for ourselves, the 
spirit of love in us should so control that we would delight 
to meet with "the brethren" for their sakes, if we ourselves 
received no benefit therefrom. But we are more or less like 
coals of fire, which, if separated, will tend to cool rapidly, 
but which, if brought together, will tend to increase in fervency 
the entire mass. Our Lord has encouraged his people 
to seek each other's fellowship for companionship in 
the study of his Word, and in prayer, pronouncing special 
blessings upon the meeting of his people together, even if so 
few as only two or three. 

It is true that sometimes isolated ones, who have no 
fellowship in the Present Truth (except through the WATCH 
TOWER) are often amongst the most staunch and devoted 
and self-sacrificing of the Lord's people: but we should not 
from this infer that the blessing comes from their isolation, 
but rather, since their separation is unavoidable on their 
part, we may reasonably suppose that our Lord makes up 
to them, in his own presence and blessing, that which they 
lack of fellowship with other members of the Body. But if 
one had opportunity for assembling with others for worship 
of the Lord and the study of his Word, and neglected to 
avail himself of his privilege, we need not expect that for 
his benefit the Lord would work special miracles of grace. 
The Lord's miracles may be expected only in times of emergency, 
to make up for natural deficiency. 

Besides, we are to remember that through the WATCH 
TOWER and the mail the Lord has established a channel of 
communication amongst his people so that no one needs be 
without such fellowship and spiritual intercourse. And we 
call attention to the fact that the terms of our journal are 
so liberal that the very poorest of the Lord's people may 
avail themselves of this privilege of communion. If they refuse 
or neglect to use this grace which the Lord has put 
within their reach, at a cost of one postal card per year, it 
is their own fault; they are disregarding the Lord's instruction, 
through the Apostle, and are neglecting the means open 
before them for having fellowship with others of like precious 
faith. If such find themselves growing cold, as a result 
of neglect of the Lord's arrangements and providences, 
they have themselves to blame. We do not know how to 
make the WATCH TOWER terms more reasonable than they 
are. We exhort all the poor to accept it, not as a personal gift, 
but as a part of the Lord's provision for his people, to which 
they are as welcome as to all the features of his grace. Freely 
we have received, freely we will give the message of his love 
and mercy. 

The Apostle intimates that, as "the Day" draws near 
there will be the more need for the observance of this instruction 



respecting the fellowship and communion of the 

Lord's people with each other. And experience proves this: 

the great Millennial Day which has already begun, chronologically, 

has brought with it new activities in mind and 

body, a greater pressure of business and rush to keep abreast 

of the times, and a correspondingly greater danger to the 

Lord's people of being choked with the cares of this life, or 

with the deceitfulness of riches, or the seeking of riches. We 

need a counteracting influence to off-set this increasing influence 

of the world and its affairs upon us; and this counteracting 

influence is to be sought and to be found by the 

Lord's people among themselves,— communing one with the 

other and with the Lord, and exhorting and encouraging one 

R4077 : page 314 

another to steadfastness along the lines of instruction laid 
down in his Word. 

And not only so, but we find that the beginning of this 
great Millennial Day is a "day of trouble." We find that 
the latter part of this day of trouble is to be upon the 
world, and that the Lord promised his Church that, if faithful, 
they shall be "accounted worthy to escape all those 
things coming upon the world." But we have found also 
that the forepart of this day of trouble, which is the time of 
preparation for the world's trouble, will be a special time 
of peculiar trouble and trial, testing and sifting upon the 
Church; for— The judgments of this day "must begin with 
the house of God." We see this sifting and shaking in 
progress all about us in the nominal Church, and still more 
intensely among those who occupy a still higher position 
and enlightenment through the knowledge of the Present 
Truth. "The great day of his wrath [judgment, testing, sifting, 
first of the Church and afterward the nations] is come, 
and who shall be able to stand?" We hear the Apostle's 
exhortation, as he looked down prophetically to our day, 
saying, "Wherefore, take unto you the whole armor of God, 
that ye may be able to withstand in the evil day, and having 
done all, to stand. For we wrestle not against flesh and 
blood, but against principalities, against powers, against the 
rulers of the darkness of this world, against spiritual wickedness 
in exalted positions."— Eph. 6:13,14. 

It is "as we see the day drawing on" that we are to 
be the more diligent in assembling ourselves with those of 
like precious faith; the more earnest in exhorting and provoking 
to love and to good works, and thus to assist one 
another in putting on "the whole armor of God"— the 
graces of character, meekness, patience, gentleness, brotherly 
kindness, faith, truth, hope— that with these as the divine 
panoply or armor, protecting us from the assaults of the 
Adversary in this day, we may be able to stand. The clear 
intimation is that, unless we have on this armor, we will be 
unable to stand. And this armor includes more than mere 
head-knowledge, represented by the helmet; it includes, be 
it noted, the entire breastplate of righteousness, purity of 
heart, and it includes the shield of faith, and the sword of 



the Spirit, and the sandals of consecration. 

In the succeeding verse the Apostle mentions the possibility 
of wilful sin among the Lord's people, and what it 
would imply— the Second Death (the sorer punishment than 
the first death, in that it would be without hope)— "everlasting 
destruction from the presence of the Lord and the 
glory of his power." 

While wilful sin has always been the same, it would 
not be unreasonable to infer from the Apostle's words that 
the temptations and dangers of "this evil day" in which we 
live will specially tend to trial along this line. Let it be 
clearly noticed that the Apostle is not speaking of sins of 
ignorance nor of accidental missteps by being overtaken 
in a fault, whose sin is not unto death, and from which the 
transgressors may be restored in a spirit of meekness. He 
is referring directly to full, complete sin— the sin upon 
which the full penalty is justly and properly to be 
recompensed. 

At first thought, many may be inclined to say, "Well, I 
am in no danger of that sin, for I am sure that I would not 
commit sin wilfully, intentionally, designedly." But let us 
notice, dear friends, that there is a way in which sin may 
come upon us without being at the time a wilful sin, but 
which later might become wilful sin: for instance, any 
transgression committed, either in total ignorance or with 
only a partial acquiescence of our wills, might become a full, 
wilful, deliberate sin afterward, if we afterward came to a 
clear knowledge of the truth respecting the subject, and 
failed to repent of it to the Lord, and to undo so far as was 
in our power the wrong toward our fellow-creatures. To 
consent to a sin clearly and fully understood, simply because 
at the time of its committal we were in ignorance, and to 
refuse to make amends for it, and thus to endorse the sin 
intelligently, would appear to make it a will-full sin. 

With this view of the matter, the children of God cannot 
afford to sanction in their minds even the slightest injustice 
or untruth towards each other, or towards anyone. The 
essence of this thought is found in our Lord's command: "If 
thou comest to the altar [if we have anything to offer to the 
Lord, either of service or of worship or of thanks], and there 
rememberest that thy brother hath aught against thee [that 
someone has been wronged by you, either in word or thought 
or act] leave there thy gift before the altar [do not think 
that it will be acceptable to God while in your heart or outwardly 
you are practising injustice toward others]; first go 
and be reconciled to thy brother [make amends to him, 
apologies, explanations in full, of whatever wrong you have 
done him] and then come and offer thy gift [assured that 
in such an attitude of heart the Lord Almighty will be 
pleased to accept your gift]." 

In describing those who sin wilfully, the Apostle uses 
very strong, figurative language, declaring that, inasmuch as 
they are in heart-sympathy with sin, and not in opposition 
to it, they are the opponents of the Son of God, who was so 
out of sympathy with sin in its every form that he laid down 
his life to redeem us from its power and curse. The Apostle 



declares that such wilful sinners may be esteemed as the 
enemies of Christ, who really trample him and his goodness 
and love under their feet, figuratively, disdaining his mercy 
and favor as well as his instruction in righteousness. He 
says that, inasmuch as they were once sanctified, as a result 
of their faith in the precious blood and its cleansing from 
sin, their turning now into harmony with sin would imply 
that they now disesteem the precious blood of Christ which 
redeemed us to God, counting it a non-sacred thing- 
common— and do despite to the spirit of divine favor which 
had held out to them freedom from the yoke of sin, and 
ultimately release from its penalty, death; and the attainment, 
as the Lord's people, of the crown of life eternal. 

While holding up before the Church the dangers of sin, 
and the danger of falling away from steadfastness for Christ 
and to the principles of his righteousness, the Apostle encourages 
us to continue our fight against sin and its influence 
in ourselves and in others, "perfecting holiness in the 
reverence of the Lord." Accordingly he calls our minds back 
to our first love and first zeal— "the former days, in which, 
after ye were illuminated, ye endured a great fight of affliction; 
partly whilst ye were made a gazingstock both by reproaches 

R4078 : page 315 

and afflictions, and partly whilst ye became companions 

of them that were so used." He would thus encourage 

the Lord's people to continue the good fight— to 

continue to wage warfare against the world, the flesh and 

the devil, and the spirit of these, especially each within 

himself, in the battlefield of his own soul. And he urges 

that faith in the Lord and the rewards which he shall grant 

by and by, when he shall be glorified in his saints, is very 

necessary to our endurance of hardness as good soldiers in 

the fight against evil, both within and without, saying, "Cast 

not away, therefore, your confidence, which hath great recompense 

of reward"— "forsake not the assembling of yourselves 

together, as the manner of some is, but exhort one 

another; and so much the more as ye see the day 

approaching." 

And this reminds us of the words of the Lord, through 
the prophet Malachi (3:15-17): In the time when the proud 
are happy, and they that work wickedness are established 
in power and influence, and they that tempt God seem to be 
blessed— "then they that feared the Lord spake often one to 
another [sympathizing with and encouraging one another, 
so much the more]: and the Lord hearkened and heard it; 
and a book of remembrance was written before him of them 
that feared the Lord, and that thought upon his name; and 
they shall be mine, saith the Lord of hosts, in that day when 
I make up my jewels; and I will spare them, as a man spareth 
his own son that serveth him." But while all should 
seek to provoke to love and to good works and to happy 
looks, we well know that the majority do the reverse. Hence, 
we suggest that the Lord's peculiar people may be so controlled 
by the Word and its spirit that they will be incited 



to good works, good deeds and good looks even by the most 
unfavorable conditions. Consider Stephen, confronted by those 
who afterward took his life: not only had he courage to 
preach to them, but his heart was so provoked to love and 
good works that his face shone with an angelic beauty. 
(Acts 6:15.) And the same grace abounding enabled him to 
pray for his murderers. (Acts 7:60.) Nothing could provoke 
such a spirit-filled saint to evil. Let us follow the example 
of such close followers of our Lord's footsteps. 



R4078 : page 315 

"THAT YE RECEIVE A FULL REWARD" 

"Look to yourselves, that ye lose not the things which 
we have wrought, but that ye receive a full reward." 
2 John 8, R.V. 

SOME of our readers appear not to grasp fully 
the fact that two classes are being saved during 
this Gospel Age— a "little flock," to be the 
"Bride," the "Lamb's Wife," "Joint-heirs" in the Kingdom; 
and a "Great Company," who will constitute the 
"virgins, her companions, that follow her." (Psa. 45:14.) 
We might say from one standpoint that this is 
not a fundamental doctrine, and that hence differences 
of opinion respecting it need cause little concern. 
However, every truth has its place and bearing upon 
the divine plan as a whole, and upon our doctrinal 
establishment, and hence upon our ability to "stand in 
this evil day." Those who see not the two companies 
in the process of development during this age will of 
necessity be somewhat confused in respect to certain 
features of the divine plan. Take, for instance, the 
statement that the final overcomers of the Bride class 
will be those who were not only called but also chosen, 
and also found faithful. (Rev. 17:14.) All can readily 
recognize that, while sinners are called to repentance, 
only justified believers are called of God to this High 
Calling, this heavenly calling of joint-heirship with 
their Lord in the Kingdom. If we assume that throughout 
the age all the justified ones were granted that 
privilege in order that they might be ready, we must 
admit the force of the declaration that "many are called 
but few are chosen." This Scripture shows us a wide 
distinction between merely a position of justification 
by faith and a position of acceptance with God. Only 
such called ones as accept the call by making a full 
consecration of themselves belong to this "chosen" 
class. 

The chosen ones, begotten of the holy Spirit and 
adopted as Spirit-begotten sons of God, are forthwith 
in the school of Christ, with a view to their development 
in grace, knowledge, love, and with a view to 



their testing as respects the thoroughness of their consecration 
even unto death. We well know that not all 
who reach this chosen place will prove faithful and win 
the crown. The great majority of the exhortations in 
the New Testament are addressed to this chosen class, 
accepted of God as probationary members of the Bride 
company, the little flock, the Body of Christ. To these 
come the exhortations to "fight the good fight," to "bear 
much fruit," to "let their light shine," to "so run that 
they may obtain," to "lay aside every weight," to "strive 
to enter in," to be "faithful unto death, that ye may 
receive the crown of life," to be "filled with the Spirit." 
They are exhorted that if the various fruits and graces 
of the Spirit be in them and abound, an entrance shall 
be ministered to them abundantly into the everlasting 
Kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.— 
2 Pet. 1:11. 

THE UNFAITHFUL, THE FOOLISH VIRGINS 

If in the foregoing it is intimated beyond question 
that only the "more than conquerors" will gain the 
prize— or, as our text expresses it, "gain the full reward" 
—what shall we say will become of those who 
will not gain the full reward, not gain the prize, who, 
being begotten of the Spirit, will fail to have part in 
the First Resurrection of the blessed and holy, amongst 
the Body of Christ? These evidently are referred to 
in the various parables. In one parable the Lord styles 
this class a wicked and slothful servant. He does not 
deny him the honor of being a servant, he does not 
charge him with becoming an enemy, and the entire 
parable shows no such attitude toward the reproved. 

R4078 : page 316 

He is counted wicked and slothful because, having undertaken 

certain responsibilities as a servant, having 

certain talents committed to his care as a steward, he 

has failed to manifest the proper spirit of earnest devotion 

which he had professed at the time of his acceptance, 

when the talents were entrusted to him. Similarly 

the foolish virgins are still virgins in the parable. 

They are not shown as having become corrupt or become 

lovers of sin. They were drowsy, overcharged 

with the cares of this life, and did not show proper 

spirit and alertness in connection with the interests of 

their Master, the Bridegroom. Hence they did not at 

the time have the proper oil in their vessels nor in 

their lamps, and hence were not ready nor of the class 

finally accepted as the "Very Elect," though for a time 

they had been a part of the nominally elect. The parable 

shows the door into the high calling to the exclusion 

of these. 

Moreover, aside from the parables, our own experience 
teaches that amongst those who have made a real 



consecration to the Lord and who have for a time manifested 
a thorough devotion to him, some fall away to 
the extent of carelessness, lukewarmness, a condition 
which the Lord describes as "overcharged with the 
cares of this life and the deceitfulness of riches"— true 
wheat, but choked so that they do not bring forth the 
proper fruitage. We cannot suppose for a moment 
that such would be accepted of the Lord under the 
strict terms and conditions of the high calling on the 
narrow way and the faithfulness unto death— the terms 
and conditions everywhere implied in connection with 
the little flock. What then shall we say would be the 
portion of these lukewarm, overcharged ones? 

The Scriptures inform us that as that which is begotten 
of the flesh is flesh, so that which is begotten 
of the Spirit is spirit. That is to say, that whoever has 
been begotten of the holy Spirit has experienced a 
change of nature so radical that it would be impossible 
for him to share a resurrection with the world on the 
human plane. He must either be born of the Spirit 
and become a spirit being, or else experience the only 
alternative we find, namely, the Second Death. We remember, 
however, the declaration of the Lord that he 
willeth not the death of him that dieth, but would that 
all should turn unto him and live. We must suppose, 
therefore, that God would feel a deep sympathy with 
the large class of Christian people who have made a 
consecration unto death but who have not rightly valued 
or improved the opportunity for carrying out that 
covenant in self-sacrifice. Some of this class the 
Scriptures clearly indicate are destined for the Second 
Death. One of the apostles describes them as those 
who have been washed, but like the sow have returned 
to wallowing in the mire. Another Apostle describes 
this class saying, "If we sin wilfully after that we have 
received a knowledge of the truth, there remaineth no 
longer a sacrifice for sins, but a certain fearful looking 

R4079 : page 316 

for of judgment and fiery indignation which shall devour 

us as adversaries." (Heb. 10:27.) And again he 

tells us that it is impossible to renew again unto repentance 

those who have counted the blood of the covenant 

a common thing, and done despite to the spirit 

of favor. (Heb. 6:4; 10:29.) And again we read, "There 

is a sin unto death: I do not say that he shall pray for 

it." -I John 5:16. 

But are there not many Christians who have not 
taken these extreme backward steps to sin and to rejection 
of divine favor, who nevertheless are not so 
running as to obtain the prize? Is there not a large 
number that would come under the classification made 
by the Apostle as those who build with wood, hay, 
stubble, instead of with gold, silver and precious 
stones?— a large number, therefore, whose works will 



be burned in this trial time just before us. And does 
not the Apostle say of these, "themselves shall be saved 
so as by fire?" (I Cor. 3:15.) This is a large class; no 
wonder it is styled a Great Company, no wonder it is 
symbolically represented in the Levites, while the more 
than conquerors, the faithful, are but a little flock, 
heirs of the Kingdom, joint-heirs with their Redeemer. 
It is in great mercy that the Lord will deal with these 
and bring them into judgment, testing, so that all of 
them, who at heart love righteousness and hate iniquity, 
may be manifested, may be blessed, may be saved, 
even though they do not come up to the glorious standard 
which God has predestinated as the only acceptable 
one for the Redeemer and all those who shall be joint-heirs 
with him, for he has predestinated that these 
shall be conformed to the image of his Son— more than 
conquerors through him who loved them and bought 
them with his own precious blood. 

The Apostle James seems to speak of this Great 
Company class when he says, "The double-minded man 
is unstable in all his ways." (Jas. 1:8.) These surely 
cannot be the more than conquerors, yet who will say 
that some of the dear people who manifest considerable 
vacillation and double-mindedness are enemies of God 
and righteousness, whose portion will be the Second 
Death? Such is not our opinion. Rather we understand 
the Scriptures to teach that this Great Company 
class, double-minded, intent on serving the Lord and 
hoping to gain a crown, and at the same time loving 
the world and seeking to have its approval and emoluments, 
will miss the prize of our High Calling and not 
be counted worthy a share in the Kingdom, but put to 
the crucial test so many of them as under stress will 
fix their characters for righteousness and become its 
loyal servants— these will be saved with the lesser salvation 
—on the spirit plane indeed, but not as partakers 
of the divine nature nor joint-heirs with our Redeemer 
in his Kingdom. 

A BIBLE STUDY OF THE GREAT COMPANY 

Brother C. J. Woodworth has sent us a Bible study 
upon this subject which we append and recommend to 
you all. He says that the subject was recently brought 
to his attention and that he looked it up in the memoranda 
he has prepared for our new Bibles, and that he 
found all of these citations within an hour and a half, 

R4079 : page 317 

whereas without the references he might have been 
obliged to hunt for days or for weeks to find these various 
allusions to the Great Company. The study shows where 
and how the class is referred to in the Scriptures— not directly, 
because no one was called to be of the Great 
Company, all being called to the high calling, the little 



flock. But they are referred to indirectly, yet specifically, 
as a part of the divine work of grace of this Gospel 
Age. We recommend a study of the subject to all 
of the dear friends, reminding you again in the words 
of our text, that even though loyal at heart to the Lord 
we should look to ourselves lest we lose the things 
which we have wrought— that we receive a full reward, 
the high calling, the joint-heirship, the Kingdom, the 
divine nature. The letter references denote DAWN-STUDY 
volumes, TOWERS, etc. 

TWO COMPANIES, BOTH JUSTIFIED, BEGOTTEN OF THE SPIRIT, 
AND CANDIDATES FOR JOINT-HEIRSHIP WITH CHRIST 

Lev. 16:7-10. .Selection of goats by lot T.60 

Lev. 23:17. ...Two leavened wave loaves, 16th Nisam.Z. '98-68 

Zech. 13:8. ...Two parts cut off Z/06-151 

Gen. 15:5 Included in the heavenly Seed Z. '96-277 

DISTINGUISHED SEPARATELY WHILE STILL IN THE FLESH 

Dan. 5:2 Silver vessels at Belshazzar's feast.. Z. '99-175 

Mai. 3:3 Silver in the Refiner's fire Z/05-379 

FIRST CAUSE OF FAILURE-IDLE 

Matt. 25:2. ...Five were foolish C.94, F.75 

1 Cor. 3:12...Builded with wood, hay and stubble T.69 

SECOND CAUSE OF FAILURE-DISOBEDIENT 

Col. 3:6 Included in Children of Disobedience.. Z. '99-141 

Gen. 19:26. ...Remember Lot's wife C.194 

Psa. 1:1 Sinners against their covenant Z. '00-281 

THIRD CAUSE OF FAILURE-FEARFUL 

Heb. 2:15 Lifetime subject to bondage T. 70,71 

Num. 13:31. ...The ten spies with Caleb and Joshua.. .Z. '07-251 

1 Kin. 18:3,..Obadiah Z/04-221 

Jas. 1:8 Double-minded, unstable 

FOURTH CAUSE OF FAILURE-PRESUMPTUOUS 

Num. 10:1 Abihu and his strange fire Z/07-220 

Jer. 8:20 Harvest is past; we did not do the Lord's will. 

[D.578 

Matt. 25:24.. Unprofitable servant Z/01-61, Z/06-318 

Matt. 18:28. ..Cruel servant, not possessing Master's Spirit. 
[Z/00-219, Z/06-199 

SUBJECTS OF SPECIAL CHASTISEMENTS 

Rev. 7:9-14. ..Out of great tribulation C.364, F.127 

Isa. 66:8 Delivered after Zion's travail Z. '94-135 

Matt. 24:20. ..Pray that your flight be not in winter.. ..D.578 



Isa. 34: 16.. ..Slaughter of the lambs D.17 

1 Cor. 3:15. ..Saved so as by fire A.321, T.69 

1 Cor. 5:5. ...Turned over to Satan for destruction of flesh. 
[T.69,71 

FINALLY DELIVERED FROM BABYLON, WITH REJOICING 

Rev. 19:6-9.. .Called to the Marriage Supper.. .A.87,240, F.128 
Psa. 45: 15. ...With gladness and rejoicing F.121 

SAVED WITH A HEAVENLY SALVATION: MADE SERVANTS OF 
THE TRUE CHURCH ON A HEAVENLY PLANE OF EXISTENCE 

Num. 3:15 Northward D.653, F.129 

Rev. 7:15-17. .Before the throne, servants F.127 

Gen. 24:61. ...Damsels who went with Rebecca F.171 

Ezek. 44: 1-14. Door was shut: servants Z. '05-269 



R4079 : page 317 

THE CITIES OF REFUGE 

-JOSHUA 20:l-9.-NOVEMBER 3.- 

Golden Text:— "Who have fled for refuge to lay 
hold upon the hope set before us."— Heb. 6:18. 

THE cities of refuge were appointed in Israel for 

the protection against summary punishment of 

any who might accidentally take human life, but 

not for any wilful murderer. There were six of these 

cities in central localities, to any one of which the manslayer 

might fly and there find protection until his case 

could be legally tried. These cities did not shelter the 

wilful murderer; but the authorities, after a fair trial, 

delivered such up to the just penalty of their crime, 

which was death. -Deut. 19:11-13; Num. 35:30-34. 

If the killing proved to be accidental the man-slayer 
must still remain in the city of refuge until the death 
of the high priest then in office. This restraint upon 
his liberty was the penalty for his carelessness, and 
thus an additional protection to human life. 

This feature of the typical Mosaic Law strongly 
foreshadowed the refuge which the sinner may find in 
Christ. He is our shield and hiding-place from the 
penalty of all sin, save that which is wilful. He is no 
shelter for obstinate, unrepentant sinners; but for 
every one born in sin and shapen in iniquity— and thus 
sinners by the accident of birth or heritage, yet earnestly 
desirous of escaping from sin and its just consequences, 
and seeking refuge in him by faith— there is 
protection. We are all under sentence of death; Justice 
is the avenger; and only those in Christ are 
shielded. 



R4080 : page 317 

But, mark you, the sinner must continue to abide 
in this city of refuge as long as the high priest liveth 
—i.e., as long as Christ continues in the priestly office, 
which will be until he is able to present all the redeemed 
who abide in him under the New Covenant 
conditions faultless before the throne of God, at the 
end of his Millennial reign as King and Priest. Then, 
being made actually perfect by the great Redeemer-Physician, 
they will be able to stand, not in the imputed 
or reckoned righteousness of another, but in their 
own glorious perfection, yet never forgetful of the 
great atoning sacrifice, and the patient work of restitution 
which made possible such a glorious 
consummation. 

Like the cities of refuge, Christ is easy of access to 
all who diligently seek him, and who have no will in 
opposition to righteousness, nor to any of his measures 
of just and righteous discipline. 



R4080 : page 317 

ISRAEL RENEWING THE COVENANT 

-JOSHUA 24: 14-25. -NOVEMBER 10.- 

Golden Text:— "The Lord our God will we serve, 
and his voice will we obey."— Joshua 24:24. 

ISRAEL became God's people by solemn covenant 
(See Exod. 19:5-8), and on several occasions that 
covenant was renewed that succeeding generations 
might not forget the obligations thereby resting 
upon them. The instance before us was one of these 
occasions, and a very appropriate one— after their settlement 
in the land of promise and when Joshua their 
leader, being very old, must of necessity soon be taken 

R4080 : page 318 

from them by death. Joshua, therefore, remembering 
the command of Moses to thus remind the people of 
their covenant obligations (Deut. 27), made this the 
occasion for solemn exhortation, warning and counsel, 
as well as for leading the people to a renewal of their 
vows and a purging of themselves from every semblance 
of idolatry, which his address shows still lingered 
in some degree among them. 

The counsel of Joshua was reverently received, the 
covenant was renewed, and the nation purged itself 
from idolatry, and in consequence was prospered and 
blessed. But why, we may reasonably inquire, should 



we be interested now in seemingly trivial matters of 
history of a date so remote? Why so minutely consider 
the experience and doings of that nation more than 
others of the ancient peoples? Or why are they so 
minutely given by the sacred writers? 

Their importance to us lies in the fact that in the 
experiences of that consecrated people were foreshadowed 
those of God's consecrated people of this Gospel 
Age; and in God's dealings with them we can read his 
judgment of us under similar circumstances, we, the 
Gospel Church, being the antitypes of fleshly Israel, 
the Spiritual Israel of God— nominally, as in the type, 
including all the professed members of the Church, but 
actually only those who are truly the Lord's— "Israelites 
indeed," Christians indeed. 

In the nation of Israel (nominal Israel) we observe 
a constant tendency to idolatry, while a faithful few 
("Israelites indeed") always resisted this tendency, 
and, with fixed purpose of heart, worshiped the Lord 
in the beauty of holiness and endeavored to influence 
others to similar faithfulness. But their forefathers 
prior to Abraham were idolaters; the nations all about 
them were idolaters; and idolatrous worship, unlike 
the worship of the true God, imposed no restraints 
upon the downward tendencies of the fallen nature, but, 
on the contrary, cultivated and pandered to its depravity. 
Nor did it require faith in the unseen, but presented 
to the senses tangible objects of worship with rites 
and ceremonies suited to the carnal nature. Hence the 
continual gravitation of the nation toward idolatry, 
notwithstanding the wonderful power and goodness of 
God manifested on their behalf. Joshua, after calling 
attention to the marvels of divine providence which 
their wonderful history furnished, urged upon the 
people a prompt and firm decision, saying, "Choose ye 
this day whom ye will serve," etc. 

Joshua also gave them distinctly to understand 
that in choosing to serve the Lord it must be whole-hearted 
and sincere service, a full and complete turning 
to the Lord, and the putting away of all rivals. This 
exhortation was coupled with warnings of the Lord's 
indignation and wrath if they should wickedly ignore 
or violate their covenant and turn to idolatry. "And 
the people said unto Joshua, The Lord our God will we 
serve, and his voice will we obey." 

Happy indeed was it for Israel that such was their 
decision; and happy would it be for all God's consecrated 
people, if, with fixedness of purpose they would 
pay their vows unto the Most High. In his dealings 
with typical Israel we see that our God is a jealous God 
and that he desires whole-hearted devotion to himself. 
If we permit any rival to occupy the mind and heart 
that were solemnly consecrated to him alone, then 
we are unfaithful to him and wickedly despising our 
covenant. Let the language of every heart be, "The 
Lord our God will we serve, and his voice will we obey." 



"If ye forsake the Lord, and serve strange gods, 
then he will turn and do you hurt and consume you, 
after that he hath done you good." The fact that the 
Lord has richly blessed us in the past while we were in 
the way with him is no guarantee that he will continue 
his favor with us after we have forsaken him. On the 
contrary his positive declaration is that he will withdraw 
his favor from all such. In addition to the above 
the Prophet Ezekiel says, "When a righteous man doth 
turn from his righteousness and commit iniquity, and 
I lay a stumbling block before him, he shall die." And 
Paul adds, ["because they received not the love of the 
truth, that they might be saved"], "God shall send 
them strong delusions, that they should believe a lie: 
that they all might be condemned who believed not the 
truth, but had pleasure in unrighteousness."— Ezek. 3:20; 
2Thess. 2:11,12. See also Heb. 6:4-8; 10:26-31. 

We should observe specially in Heb. 10:29 the reference 
to a sorer punishment to be visited upon the 
covenant-despisers of this age than that visited upon 
the same class in the Jewish Age, because of the higher 
privileges and advantages received here and despised. 
The death penalty there was a hasty visitation of the 
original Adamic penalty, but the death penalty here 
upon the wilful covenant-despisers is the Second Death, 
from which there is no escape. 



page 318 
ENCOURAGING WORDS FROM FAITHFUL WORKERS 

DEAR BROTHERS IN CHRIST:- 

I thank God for the glorious privilege of thus addressing 
you and all the brethren. I have just finished 
making out my report of four days' work as a colporteur 
—from the standpoint of results as to the number of 
volumes sold, which was 82 cloth-bound and 12 leather-bound, 
making an average of a little better than 23 
volumes per day. And this report completed I feel that 
I ought to report something for which I find no blank 
but which to me has been the most important, namely, 
my spiritual blessing. I have been blessed as never 
before, and it is impossible for me to try to tell the 
brethren to what extent the blessing has been; it has 
only been limited by my ability to receive it. I am naturally 
demonstrative, and when I first saw the Truth I 
had to tell every one about it that would listen, and that 
interfered with my business, but now my business is to 
talk of the Truth and the more I talk of it (with discretion) 
the more business I do— in fact, I am being supplied 
with daily bread for the flesh and the spirit at one 
and the same time, where heretofore one or the other 
suffered. I find selling the DAWNS just like anything 



page 319 

else as far as the selling goes. One has to use tact and 
adapt himself to the customer, and use the arguments 
or rather suggestions best adapted to the prospective 
buyer as shown to one by what he can observe of the 
person he approaches. I desire to express my thankfulness 
to God for such an opening as that as "Colporteur" 
for one who has been disqualified for his position 
in the world through the Truth, for it is truly 
a work where a double blessing goes with every sale. 
May this branch of the work as well as all God's work 
be prospered, and may those ministering to the household 
of faith be enabled to go forward in the strength 

of the Lord. The class at M , led by Brother 

Raymond, is prospering in the only true and real prosperity. 
We have three meetings a week now, and can 
hardly contain ourselves between times. We have 
about eighteen members, whereas a year ago, or before 
Brother Raymond located here, there were possibly 
two. Truly God is good to us. May the Lord prosper 
this harvest work and may all the brethren everywhere 
be united in Christ our Redeemer, Pattern and Head. 
As ever, your brother and servant in him, 
W. J. TOOKE,-Indiana. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL: 

I wish for the benefit of the readers of the TOWER 
to tell a bit of my experience right here. Mother was 
a Calvinistic Baptist, believing in eternal torment, or 
as they call it, "hell." I was converted in youth, and 
firmly believed the same. But God opened my eyes on 
that question some twenty years ago, under the preaching 
of The Crisis (Adventist), which I believed was the 
"faith once delivered to the saints." In December, 

1901, mother came from Canada to B to visit me, 

and she mourned and cried over the death of her youngest 

son, who was drowned unconverted, at the age of 

seventeen years. Her doctrine taught her that he 

was in eternal torment. I told her he was in his grave 

and would remain there till Jesus came— but even then 

there was the Second Death, or "hell," as she termed 

it. Bro. Haynes, Colporteur, God bless him, came to 

my home with the DAWNS. I told him, No; and meant 

it. Mother interfered and told him she wanted the 

books, and he left the first five volumes. Mother commenced 

to read the first volume and before she got 

through with it she was walking the house rejoicing 

and cried, "Praise God, Sammie is not in hell," meaning 

eternal torment. I commenced to read and investigate. 

I found the Truth— "the whole truth and nothing 

but the truth," and with mother I rejoiced and 

praised my heavenly Father that he had showed us his 

plan and his great love for the world. And likewise 



I thanked him for his great love in sending us such a beloved 
brother as you, our beloved Brother Russell, who 
gives us meat in due season. May God spare you 
a few years yet in the harvest work. 

I am rejoicing in the Truth, firm and established 
in the harvest work. 

Yours sincerely in Jesus Christ, 

MRS. JAMES FORSYTH,-California. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

We have been delayed from our work on account 
of sickness, until yesterday, and then, although both 
of us were under the doctor's care, we went to work. 
Wife put in about seven hours and I about two. Result: 
twenty-six volumes for her and fifteen for myself. 
Praise God! We were so thankful, so happy, when we 
came home that we could scarcely go to sleep. We are 
starting out again this morning. We thank you for 
your kind words of encouragement. We expect to finish 
this place this week. My orders were all from colored 
people. I am to preach for them second Sunday 
in May. Will make full report later both to you and 
Colporteur department. 

J. B. MCGEE,-Colporteur. 



DEAR BRETHREN: 

The work goes on gloriously. But the trials and 
testings are severe, and increasingly so. The cry is 
coming from every quarter. There never was such an 
important moment as this. Surely the Lord is thus 
hastening the work of finishing our faith so that we 
may at once come to the mark, and our faith may be 
able to stand the final great conflict and we be brought 
off "more than conquerors." May the Lord grant that 
none of us may be found wanting in willingness to encourage 
and strengthen these little ones who are now 
struggling for existence. In much love to all, 

Your servant, O. L. SULLIVAN,-Pilgrim. 



WATCH TOWER INDIA PAPER BIBLES 



This is the most desirable 
Bible published, in respect to 
size and weight, for the overcoat 
pocket. It combines with these 
qualities a fair-sized type— "Minion. 
Size, 4-3/4 x 7 x 7/8 in. 

But most interesting to our 



readers will be our special helps 
to Bible study and aids in teaching 
the Divine Plan. See the 
description of these special features 
in our October 1st issue. 

The Bibles and helps will be 
all exactly alike except the bindings, 
which are of three grades. 
The best is the cheapest really, 
but knowing that many of our 
readers are far from rich we have 
done our best to serve them all. 

The below prices are actual 
cost. No discount to anybody nor 
on any quantity: 

No. W.138-French Seal (cowhide), 
divinity circuit, red under gold 

edges $1.38 

No. W.150-French Seal (cowhide), 
linen lined, divinity circuit, red 

under gold edges $1.50 

No. W. 300— Genuine Sealskin, calf 
lined, divinity circuit, red under 
gold edges $3.00 

Any of the above with patent 
index on edge, 25c extra, but 
this is not recommended. Order 
by number. POSTAGE, 10c EACH. 



page 321 

SEMI-MONTHLY 
VOL. XXVIII NOVEMBER 1 No. 21 
A.D. 1907--A.M. 6036 



CONTENTS 

Views from the Watch Tower 323 

Thorns, Thistles and the Curse 323 

The Norfolk Convention 324 

Berean Study in Tabernacle Shadows 326 

The Triumph of Gideon 327 

Catalogue of Bibles, Testaments, Students' Helps, 

Etc 328 

Each Shall Give Account to God 331 

"Before the Judgment-Seat of Christ" 332 

"The Kingdom of God is not Meat and Drink". ...333 

"All Things Indeed are Pure" 334 

"He That Doubteth is Damned" 334 

Unto the Third and Fourth Generation 335 

An Interesting Question Answered 335 

page 322 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-24 EVERSHOLT ST., LONDON, N.W. 
GERMAN BRANCH-MIRKER STR., 45, ELBERFELD. 
AUSTRALASIAN BRANCH-EQUITABLE BLDG., COLLINS ST., MELBOURNE 

PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 

TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR AS FOLLOWS:- 

All Bible Students who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity or 
adversity, are unable to pay for this Journal, will be supplied FREE if 
they send a Postal Card each June stating their case and requesting its 
continuance. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on 
our list continually and in touch with the Studies, etc. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



THIS JOURNAL IS PUBLISHED IN THE 

FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, DANISH AND ITALIAN LANGUAGES. 

SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



HEAVENLY MANNA in handsome durable leather binding, 
gold edges and stamping, are ready. Price, $1.75 each. Wholesale 
rates to all readers, $1.00 each, any quantity. 

A WORD TO BRITISH FRIENDS 



The Editor is always pleased to have your personal letters, 
but as for business communications (including TOWER 
subscriptions) we are sure that your interests will be served 
best and most quickly if you will address our British Branch, 
London, as above. 

All new publications announced in these columns can be 
expected at the London office about a month later, as that is 
the length of time usually required for ocean freight service. 

The above message to the friends in Britain will apply to 
the friends in Australasia by substituting Melbourne for London 
and remembering that ocean freights from here to your 
coast require about three months. 

HYMNS OF DAWN WITH MUSIC 



Our readers have for years inquired for this book. We 
now have it for you in handsome cloth binding and at cost 
price. It is the best and the cheapest hymn book in the world, 
at 35 cents per copy, postpaid, and contains 333 of the choicest 
hymns of all ages. By express, collect, 25c each, in any quantity. 



R4080 : page 323 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER 
THORNS, THISTLES AND THE CURSE 



AS a benevolent feature of the curse or sentence of 

God upon our race because of Original Sin, 

we are told that God said to Adam when 

driving him forth from Eden, "Thorns and thistles 

shall the earth bring forth unto thee... and thou 

shalt eat bread in the sweat of thy face." Without the 

thorns and thistles and battling with them man would 

have found life too easy, and would in indolence have 

sunken into depravity more rapidly than he has done. 

But the curse is to roll away— times of restitution 
are at hand when the great King, Messiah, will exercise 
his power among men for their uplift; and when the 



great demoralizer, Satan, and his associated demons 
will be restrained. Then the thorns and thistles would 
be a real menace to man's rapid rise, for they with the 
insect pests would serve to absorb his vitality and hinder 
him from intellectual progress. 

We should expect, therefore, that now or very soon 
some means would be found for coping with and subduing 
these pests. Already science has done much to 
combat the insect foes by washes, sprays, etc. But 
now from governmental institutions we have the glad 
message that thorns and thistles may be easily vanquished 
—by a cheap chemical spray which kills the 
weeds, while non-injurious to grain, etc. It is even 
claimed to be beneficial to some varieties of the latter. 

The Technical World says:— 

"It is estimated that weeds cut down the yield of 
grain in this country at least twenty per cent. Under 
these conditions agriculturists have for several years 
occupied themselves in the attempt to discover a chemical 
that can be used for spraying grain-fields. To 
make it a success it is necessary that the chemical 
should destroy the weeds, but leave the cereals uninjured. 
...Numerous methods of extermination have 
been tried and abandoned because they were ineffective, 
injured the grain crop, poisoned stock, or were too 
expensive. 

"From this it is evident that any means that can be 
found to destroy these pests will mean one of the greatest 
discoveries for agriculture that has ever been 
made. No mechanical invention in farm machinery 
will compare with it in importance. 

"It can now be said with certainty that such a discovery 
has been made. The first successful experiments 
were attempted in June, 1906, by the Agricultural 
College of the University of Wisconsin. The work has 
been carried on under the direction of Prof. R. A. Moore. 

"The experiments carried on consist in spraying 
the field with a ten-per-cent. solution of iron sulphate. 
The idea of controlling wild mustard by this method 
was conceived last year at the university experiment 
station. The work was based on information derived 
from Germany, where experiments had been tried on 
mustard. Plans were laid to make tests on the university 
farm as soon as the wild mustard appeared. 
No machine for the purpose is made in this country. 
A sprayer costing $135 was imported from Germany. 
The tests on the university farm were entirely successful. 
Professor Moore then experimented on other Wisconsin 
farms, in Dane, Kenosha and Waukesha counties 
and at Lynn, Lyons county, Minn. As far as known 
these are the only experiments that have yet been made 
in this country and in every case there is evidence that 
the weeds have been annihilated, while there has been 
no perceptible injury to the grain. The grains that have 
been tested are oats, barley, wheat and spelt. No tests 
have been made on rye in the United States, but Prof. 



Staglich has had success in spraying rye in Europe. 
Experiments are also being made on Indian corn, and 
the results so far have been successful. The only effect 
that is seen on the grain is the blackening of the lower 
and older leaves that are doomed to wither eventually, 
while the young leaves, that bring the cereal to maturity, 
are unharmed. There are no complaints from any 
center of deterioration either in the quality or quantity 
of the grain crop sprayed. There has been no difference 
observed in the time of ripening. No tests have been 
made in this country on clover or grasses, but experiments 
made in Scotland show that in no case was damage 
done to the young clover or grass, while the mustard 
was entirely destroyed. 

"So far the sulphate-of-iron solution is found to 
act definitely on mustard, yellow-dock, cockle-bur, 

R4080 : page 324 

smart-weed, rag-weed, and Spanish needles, while 
there is every reason to believe that it will destroy 
Canada thistle.... 

"It is at once apparent that every section of the 
country will share in the benefit of this discovery. The 
various weeds that iron sulphate will destroy are found 
to prevail in different localities. The white daisy is 
familiar to Eastern farmers, the rosin-weed to Western, 
wild mustard is widely scattered, and Canada thistle 
grows in most of the Northern States." 

Nor is this all that is making ready for "times of 
restitution," when the Scriptures declare "the earth 
shall yield her increase." A means has been found for 

ENRICHING THE SOIL 

It has long been known that soil is impoverished 
by the exhaustion of its supply of nitrogen. It has been 
known also that there are vast quantities of nitrogen 
in the air; but no one has known how to get it to reunite 
with the soil. Beds of nitrogenous fertilizers in 
far-off lands have been transported at great cost to rejuvenate 
depleted soils— but the cost is too great for 
general use. Recently two successful methods have 
been discovered for separating nitrogen from the 
air by electricity at a comparatively small cost, and it 
is confidently predicted that its manufacture on a large 
scale will soon supply a cheap restorative for earth's 
rejuvenation. 

Meantime another means has been found— "some 
good microbes have been employed to aid the work 
of reclamation." These useful bacteria operate only in 
connection with leguminous plants— such as the various 
clovers, vetches, peas and beans. The nitrogen-fixing 
bacteria form nodules on the roots, and these absorb 
nitrogen from the air and fix it in the soil. This 
not only causes the legumes to flourish but enriches 



the soil for different succeeding crops. 

A circular before us from the U.S. Dept. of Agriculture, 
Washington, D.C., relates the foregoing in 
other terms, and offers to the public on application the 
salts in proper quantity free of charge. 

Doubtless the same Divine Wisdom which is now 
supplying man with skill to construct machinery and 
manufacture electric lights, etc., is operating also in 
this "Day of His Preparation" in the ways above indicated 
to remove the thorns and thistles and to cause 
the wilderness to blossom as the rose. Thank God for 
the eyes of faith to recognize him as our Deliverer by 
whomsoever he may send the assistances. 



R4081 : page 324 

THE NORFOLK CONVENTION 

IT seems too stereotyped to say so repeatedly, "Our 
last convention was best of all." Yet how else 
can we properly report? At Indianapolis we said, 
"This is surely one of the best conventions ever held, if 
not the best of all." Nevertheless some who attended 
it went later on to the Niagara gathering, and said, 
"This is still better." And now, some who attended all 
three persistently claim that the Norfolk Convention 
was best of all. In the Editor's opinion these three 
seasons of refreshing were all so good as to be beyond 
comparison. Each, however, had its special features. 
The last continued longer than the others, and, besides, 
afforded to many specially favorable opportunities for 
fellowship en route, going and returning; and this we 
must reckon as one of the special Convention blessings. 
And these comparatively few who went from one Convention 
to another prolonged and increased their spiritual 
exhilaration as per the Apostle's advice: "Be not 
drunk with wine... but be ye filled with the Spirit." 

CONVENTION OF BELIEVERS IN THE ATONEMENT SACRIFICE 
OF CHRIST-"A RANSOM FOR ALL" 

Saturday, Sept. 28th, the friends began to arrive 
in goodly numbers and full of joyous anticipation of 
spiritual refreshment. The local friends, joined by 
several who went early to assist them (the Lord reward 
them all!), had made excellent arrangements for 
the comfortable entertainment of all, whose number 
was about 750— some going and others coming throughout 
the eight days of the session. So far we have 
learned of none who went away without a blessing from 
the Lord. 

The opening service at 10 a.m. Sunday, Sept. 29, 
started with a hymn of praise to God, after which 
Brother Russell led in prayer, invoking the divine 



blessing upon the Convention, and upon its influence 

in Norfolk, and on the dear friends far and near whose 

hearts were with us, and upon the influence of the Convention 

upon the little groups and classes represented 

—that a holy and blessed experience might result to the 

comfort and encouragement of many of the saints. 

Brother W. W. Murray, as the representative of the 
local Church, then delivered an Address of Welcome and 
introduced Brother VanAmburgh as Chairman for the 
first four days of the Convention. Brother VanAmburgh 
at 1 1 a.m. delivered the first discourse, on "Redeemed" 
—Titus 2:13,14. The audience, nearly all 
"brethren," seemed very appreciative of what they 
heard. 

The general attendance was 600 to 800, except for 
the publicly advertised discourse of Sunday afternoon 
on "To Hell and Back," delivered by Brother Russell. 
On that occasion a close estimate was 2200, though 
some guessed double that number. Excellent attention 
was given for nearly two hours. Some of the foremost 
people of the city were in attendance. The Mayor, introducing 
the speaker, without endorsing anything, 
asked a courteous and attentive hearing. The city was 
considerably stirred and two ministers attempted a public 
refutation— the Baptist preaching on "To Hell and 
to Stay" and the Methodist on "To Hell and be Damned." 
But "their guns were spiked," we feel sure, so 
far as those were concerned who received and read the 
freely distributed WATCH TOWER on "What Say the 
Scriptures About Hell?" And, by the way, all of our 
readers are welcome to these TOWERS free, for use 
amongst their friends. They discuss and explain every 

R4081 : page 325 

Bible text containing the word "hell," and various "parables 

and dark sayings," which are generally 

misunderstood. 

At 7.30 p.m. Brother Russell spoke again, on "The 
Hopeless and the Hopeful." (Eph. 2:12,13.) Many of 
you already have this through the newspapers which 
publish a sermon each week. 

MONDAY, SEPT. 30 

The opening session was devoted to praise and 
testimony, after which Brother Russell answered Bible 
questions propounded by the audience. 

At 2.30 p.m. Brother Alex. Graham delivered a very 
interesting discourse on the text, "Having Harps of 
God." At 3.30 a Testimony Meeting was held for an 
hour and a half. 

Brother C. E. Fowler spoke in the evening, taking 
as his topic, "Overcoming— What? How?" The necessity 
for overcoming the world, the flesh and the 
Adversary was shown, and that faith and prayer and 



determination are necessary to success. 

TUESDAY, OCT. 1 --COLPORTEUR DAY 

After a Praise and Prayer Service, Brother Russell 
preached from the text, "He that reapeth receiveth 
wages and gathereth fruit unto eternal life." The 
usual congregation was present and the various features 
of Harvest work were referred to— "Colporteuring," 
"Volunteering," "Pilgrim Work," and the other 
numerous ways, great and small, by which all who 
will— all who love the Lord and the brethren and the 
Truth— may thrust in the harvest sickle. The wages 
were shown to be partly present but mainly future. 

In the afternoon Brother J. H. Cole addressed the 
Colporteurs on successful methods, and gave very helpful 
and interesting illustrations along the lines of our 
circular, "Hints to Colporteurs." 

The Colporteur Praise and Testimony Meeting in 
the evening was an excellent one and evidenced the 
fact that the dear Colporteurs are receiving a great 
blessing and are carrying blessings to others. Some 
thought this service alone worth all the Convention 
had cost them of time and expense. Many not Colporteurs 
were deeply moved and blessed by it. 

WEDNESDAY, OCT. 2 

Our Sunrise Prayer and Praise Service at 5.30 a.m. 
was attended by about 450 to 500 of the friends. Brother 
Russell, who led the meeting, pointed out the fact that 
we are now in the Millennial Dawning and that God's 
promise is that "He shall help her (the Church) early 
in the morning." (Psa. 46:5.) The unusual hour, the 
fellowship, the hymns and prayers referring to our 
hopes of the dawning of Zion's glad morning, all conspired 
to a holy solemnity and blessed joy. 

We had two hours of splendid Testimony and 
Praise Service, beginning at 10 a.m. One dear brother 
from the wilds of the North Carolina mountains, with 
tears of joy on his cheeks, declared that he must go 
home, for he was so full he could hold no more. But 
he remained, doubtless realizing with others that holy 
joy enlarges our hearts and increases our capacity. 

At 3 p.m., in the largest Baptist Church in Norfolk, 
about 700 assembled for the discourse on "The 
True Baptism," by Brother Russell. 

In all 53 were immersed. Two colored brethren 
purposed being baptised the next day in the river, because 
Southern usage forbade the use of the Church 
fount, but they were not permitted to do so. 

In the evening Brother Bohnet delivered a very interesting 
and profitable discourse on "The Righteous 
shall Flourish like the Palm Tree." 

THURSDAY, OCTOBER 3 



Brother A. E. Williamson arrived and became 
Chairman of the Convention for its latter half. The day 
was left open for rest and individual fellowshiping, the 
only general service being in the evening, when Brother 
F. Draper delivered a very interesting and helpful discourse 
on the text, "The Spirit, the Water and the 
Blood, these three agree in one." Brother Russell departed 
for Allegheny by the afternoon train. About 
thirty-five who learned of the time and place were present 
and gave him a hearty goodby. As he stood on the 
rear platform while the train pulled out all joined in 
singing, "God be with you till we meet again." 

FRIDAY, OCTOBER 4 

After another splendid Praise and Testimony Meeting 
lasting an hour and a half, Brother M. L. Staples 
preached on "The New Creation." (I Tim. 3:15.) Many, 
we trust, were refreshed and strengthened in purpose. 

In the afternoon the harmony of the Great Pyramid's 
Testimony with that of the Bible was forcibly 
presented by Brother H. C. Rockwell. 

In the evening, following a Praise service, 
Brother W. J. Thorn addressed the Convention ably on 
the topic, "Full Assurance of Faith." 

SATURDAY, OCTOBER 5 

Another good Testimony Meeting of an hour and a 
half showed clearly that as the Convention progressed 
many of the dear friends became more and more filled 
with the Lord's Spirit which overflowed from their 
beaming eyes as well as in their fervent words. Then 
Brother S. D. Senor delivered an interesting discourse 
on "Gathering and Scattering." 

The afternoon service was a discourse by Brother 
E. H. Thompson, whose topic was, "The Three Fires of 
the Atonement Day, and their Antitypes." His address 
was both interesting and instructive. 

After a Praise service Brother A. E. Burgess gave 
the evening address on, "Study to Show Thyself Approved 
unto God: a workman that needeth not to be 
ashamed, rightly dividing the Word of Truth." He was 
heard with interest and profit surely. 

SUNDAY, OCTOBER 6 

The last day of this great feast opened with another 
stirring testimony meeting. Then Brother H. Samson 
spoke pointedly and feelingly on "The Witness of the 
Spirit." 

The afternoon discourse was by Brother A. E. Williamson, 
whose topic was "The Bridal Garment." A 

R4082 : page 326 



large audience gave closest attention to this portrayal 
of how the robe of Christ's imputed righteousness becomes 
through consecration and obedience our Bridal 
Garment. 

In the evening a symposium on Love was participated 
in by Brothers A. E. Williamson, S. Kuesthardt, 
D. H. Thornton, J. F. Rutherford and F. L. Hall. Then 
followed a splendid Love Feast, in which all participated 
with hand and heart and voice, bidding each other 
goodby and expressing the hope of meeting soon in 
the Great Convention beyond the vail— "the General 
Assembly of the Church of the First-Borns, whose 
names are written in heaven." 

TWO PASSED ON BEFORE 

On the Saturday preceding the Convention, Brothers 
H. Holmes and U. G. Munsell and their wives (all active 
Colporteurs) having arrived a little in advance were 
active in preparing for and welcoming others. Toward 
nightfall they went to a boat-landing to meet a party 
from Boston. There, learning that the boat that night 
would land at a different pier, the two brethren hastened 
to it, leaving the sisters to come on more leisurely. But, 
five minutes later, the two dear sisters were killed under 
the wheels of a shifting engine which suddenly 
came upon them from a freight-yard switch. 

The finding of them a few moments later was a 
harrowing experience for their dear husbands, one of 
whom remarked, "If it had not been for the Truth and 
its blessed, quieting and hallowing influence I would 
at once have run to the river and suicided." The Lord's 
grace and TRUTH greatly sustained both of these 
brethren and those who sympathized with them in their 
grief. The remains were taken to their homes in Connecticut 
and buried there, steps being taken to secure 
an able presentation of their faith to their gathered 
friends. The husbands returned then and spent the 
closing days of the Convention— not in mourning, but 
in praising God for our blessed hope, which forbids 
our sorrowing as others who have no hope. We have 
the best of hope for both of the sisters, for their faithfulness 
and self-sacrificing spirit attested their devotion 
to God. No doubt their death shed a solemnizing 
influence over the Convention as a whole. 



page 326 
BEREAN BIBLE STUDY IN TABERNACLE SHADOWS 
OTHER SIGNIFICANT TYPES 
DECEMBER 1 



1. Does St. Paul differentiate between merely justified 
believers and those who go on to sanctification, in 
Romans 12:1? 

2. How does his discrimination there correspond to 
the difference between the typical priests and their 
brethren, the Levites, from whom they were separated 
to the work of sacrifice and higher service? 

T.117, last par. 

3. Have all justified believers of this Gospel Age been 
eligible to membership in the Royal Priesthood 

until the "harvest" time? 

4. Will the opportunity for entering the ranks of the 
antitypical priests ever cease? T.118, line 11. 
C.216-220. 

DECEMBER 8 

5. What is the usual interpretation of the text, "Now 
is the acceptable time"? 

6. What is the correct interpretation of it? T.l 18, 
line 12. 

7. Do those who now consecrate themselves to God as 
priests sacrifice as New Creatures, or as sinners, 

or as justified humans? Rom. 12:1. 

8. Do they offer spiritual or fleshly sacrifices? John 6:51; 
Col. 1:22,24; I Pet. 4:1; Heb. 10:10. 

9. If this be true, why do we read that the Church is 
a "holy priesthood to offer up spiritual sacrifices, 
acceptable to God"? I Pet. 2:5. 

DECEMBER 15 

10. Are we justified in accepting the reading of the 
Sinaitic MS., the oldest Greek MS. of the New 
Testament, which omits the word spiritual in 

I Pet. 2:5? See Tischendorf Testament; also list 
of interpolations shown in new WATCH TOWER 
BIBLES. 

1 1 . Is it conceivable that the Lord should wish us to 
sacrifice spiritual interests? Are we not always 

to sacrifice the earthly so as to gain the spiritual? 

12. Is it probable that many in the Church at any time 
have been sacrificing priests? T. 1 18, par. 1. 

13. What was the proportion of numbers as between 
the priests and the Levites? T.118, par. 2. 

14. Considering this typical teaching on the subject, 
should we be surprised that those professing consecration 
to death in God's service and living accordingly 

are few— a little flock as compared with 

the millions of Christendom? Compare C.163. 

DECEMBER 22 

15. How many nominal Christians make up the population 
of your city or town? And what number 



do you know who profess faith in Jesus as their 
Redeemer and have renounced sin and are living 
saintly lives? 

16. Even amongst the great, rich, wise and noble, according 
to the estimation of the world, do you find 

many possessing the fruits of the holy Spirit? 

17. If the type shows 8580 Levites to 5 priests, is it not 
a faithful picture in prophecy? T. 1 18, par. 2. 

18. What was signified by the laver of water in the 
Tabernacle Court? T.119, par. 1. 

19. If that washing meant the putting away of the filth 
of the flesh, does its antitype apply only to the 
antitypical priests— the "little flock"? T.l 19, par. 1. 

20. Are natural men "totally depraved," as some teach, 
or do some of the divine characteristics in a modified 
degree still persist despite the fall? 

DECEMBER 29 

21. May a justified believer be wrongly consecrated to 
a work instead of to the Lord? T.l 19, par. 2. 

22. Do Church work, Rescue work, Temperance 
work, etc., sometimes deceive well-meaning people 
and take the place of the proper work of complete 

page 327 

sacrifice to God— to do the will of the Father 

in heaven and to finish his work of gathering out 

the "Elect"? T.l 19, par. 2. 

23. Should we then be surprised that so few see "the 
deep things of God"— hidden behind the Tabernacle 
Vail, which represents full consecration- 
death of the will? T.119, par. 3. 

24. Does the Golden Altar of the holy, like the candlestick, 
represent not only Jesus but also all those 

whom he accepts as "his brethren," his "Body"? 
T.120, par. 1. 

25. Do the "royal priests" offer their own incense 
(prayers) to God, or are they offered by their Advocate 
and Head? John 15:7; Rev. 8:3; T.120, par. 1. 



R4082 : page 327 

THE TRIUMPH OF GIDEON 

-JUDGES 7:13-23.-NOVEMBER 17.- 

Golden Text:— "Though a host should encamp 
against me, my heart shall not fear."— Psa. 27:3. 

GIDEON was one of the judges of Israel raised up 
by the Lord. He delivered his people from the 
Midianites who had invaded Palestine and 



taken possession of its most fertile part, pillaging the 

country of its produce. Under God's special covenant 

with Israel we know that he would have protected them 

from these invaders had they remained faithful to him. 

We are not surprised, therefore, that the narrative 

shows that the Israelites at this time had succumbed 

to the idolatrous influences of the Canaanites who still 

dwelt in the land. Gideon's father was one of the chief 

men of his tribe and district, and upon his plantation 

he had erected a statue to Baal in the midst of a consecrated 

grove, on a hilltop. Notwithstanding this established 

idolatry in the home, Gideon appears to have had 

considerable knowledge of the true God and of the deliverances 

effected by him for his people in the past, 

and when conversing with his angel visitor he shows 

not only his knowledge of the Lord's dealings in the 

past, but his surprise that the Lord had ceased to care for 

his people. It did not even seem to occur to him that 

the Lord's disfavor, as manifested in the successes of 

the Midianites against Israel, was on account of Israel's 

disloyalty to the Lord in idolatry, etc. It is probable 

that this same sentiment pervaded the nation in general 

and that, in some sense of the word, they respected Jehovah 

at the same time they worshiped Baal also. 

God's favors to Spiritual Israel and his protection 
are along spiritual lines against spiritual enemies and 
spiritual difficulties; and yet how few Spiritual Israelites 
when they get into spiritual difficulties realize that 
it must, in some sense of the word, be traceable to the 
Lord's providences! How few of them properly look 
to see to what extent their spiritual adversities, weaknesses, 
coldness, alienation from the Lord, etc., are 
due to the permission of some kind of idolatry in their 
hearts! Not an idolatry, probably, that entirely ignores 
the Lord; but one which, while thinking favorably 
of his spiritual blessings and victories of the past, 
simply wonders at his disfavor of the present, and fails 
to recognize that it is impossible to serve at the same 
time both God and Mammon; that God's favor and 
close communion and protection can not be expected 
while we permit in our hearts a rival reverence for 
wealth or fame or human institutions and creeds, or 
self or family to any degree or extent. 

Evidently the Lord saw that the Israelites were 
at this time ripe for a change— that under the adversities 
inflicted through their enemies they were 
humbled to such an extent that they would be ready to 
see where was their fault, and to turn from idolatry 
again to the Lord. But the Lord wished an agent for 
his service, and instead of using a supernatural one— 
an angel— he chose, as usual, to use a man. And he 
chose, as usual, to use a suitable man, fit for the purpose. 
Gideon seems to have been a man of middle 
age, for he had a son at this time of probably fifteen 
years of age; he was well born, as is implied by the 
record that he was fine of form and feature. 



True, the adage is, "Handsome is that handsome 
does"; it is true, too, that some who are handsome fail 
to measure up to their appearance in the conduct of 
life; nevertheless, it is beyond question that to those 
who can read character, the face and form, unless 
marred by accident, indicate the character and the 
training. The noble, the brave, the generous, the 
wise, by nature, by birth, show these qualities in feature 
and form; nevertheless God is not always able to 
use as his servants the naturally noblest and finest of 
the human family. Too frequently with such nobility 
goes a spirit of pride and self-conceit, which renders 
the individual unsuited to the Lord's purposes of the 
present time, when humility and obedience to the Lord 
are the prime essentials. The Apostle noted this, saying 
that not many wise, not many noble, not many 
learned hath God chosen, but the weak things and the 
ignoble things— rich in faith, heirs of the Kingdom. 
(I Cor. 1:26.) How gracious is this arrangement which 
opens the way to the highest divine favor for the humblest 
who hears the voice of the Lord and responds 
with humility and zeal! Let the ignoble, then, who 
have tasted of the Lord's grace, be encouraged to trust 
that, even though ignoble by nature, the grace of the 
Lord is able to work in them such a transformation of 
character that they may in heart, at least, become 
copies of God's dear Son, and thus be prepared for the 
finishing touches of our promised "change" in the First 
Resurrection. 

As Gideon's band may be considered a figure or 
illustration of the overcomers of this Gospel Age— the 
Church, the little flock— so Gideon himself would fitly 
represent the Captain of our salvation, whose example 
we are to follow, and whose character is to impress all 
his followers. Of Gideon it is declared that he looked 
like the king's son— that in appearance, form, etc., he 
had a nobility which marked him as above the ordinary 

R4082 : page 330 

rank and file. So our Lord Jesus is the King's Son, 
and so all whom he accepts to be of the little band, his 
little flock, are to be conformed to his image by the 
power of God working in them "to will and do of his 
good pleasure"; working in them through a knowledge 
of the truth;— the knowledge of the exceeding great 
and precious promises of God's Word. Whatever they 
are by nature, it is God's design that eventually they 
shall be like their Lord and Captain, see him as he is 
and share his glory, honor and immortality. 

After receiving the Lord's invitation to be the deliverer 
of his people, Gideon also received a test; he 
was to hew down the trees constituting the grove of 
Baal and was to overthrow the statue and was to offer 
to the Lord sacrifices upon a rock, using the wood from 
Baal's grove and image as the fuel. Sure that he was 



following the Lord's command, he did not wait to gain 
even the consent of his father, much less that of his 
people in that vicinity, who he knew would be greatly 
incensed by such a procedure. Assuring himself that 
his commands were of the Lord, he hesitated not one 
moment, but accomplished the destruction and made 
the offering, doing the work by night, knowing it would 
be interrupted by the people if done in the day time. 
The citizens of his clan demanded his life, appealing 
the matter to his father, who evidently was a chief 
amongst them; but the wise decision of the father was 
that if Baal could not defend himself against his son, 
there was certainly no need of any one taking up the 
cause of Baal. 

Thus the Lord protected the one whom he had chosen 
for his servant, and brought him more markedly 
than ever before the attention of the people, so that 
when he sent out invitations for volunteers from various 
quarters, an army of thirty-odd thousand assembled 
to his standard. But the Lord said to Gideon that 
there were too many, and that all were not of the kind 
desired. From the human standpoint the thirty-two 
thousand of Israel had no show of conquering the hundred 
and thirty-five thousand of their enemies (Judges 8:10); 
but from the standpoint of faith in God, who 

R4083 : page 330 

called them to this service, victory was certain, though 
none could foresee in what way it should be brought 
about. 

The Lord had in mind a glorious victory, but it was 
to be achieved by his might and power alone. The 
honor due to the human instruments who were privileged 
to share in it was not to be in their skill and 
strength in battle, but in their faith in God and in their 
zeal in obeying his orders, as an evidence of the 
strength of their confidence in God. 

Then the Lord commanded Gideon to prove them. 
Gideon's army had a chance to see the hosts of the 
enemy; they had a chance to consider that their 
enemies were used to warfare while they as a people 
had for now a long time been accustomed to the peaceable 
pursuits of agriculture. Accordingly, the first test 
of faith applied was permission for all the fearful to 
return home. This reduced the army to ten thousand; 
yet many if not all of these who first volunteered, but 
were now rejected, probably had an opportunity a little 
later on of joining in the battle after the Midianites had 
been discomfited and were in full retreat. But the ten 
thousand courageous men, fearless in the presence of 
an enemy many times their own strength, must have 
been men of faith in the Lord, men who, in some respects 
at least, resembled Gideon in their hearts, in 
their courage, in their trust in Jehovah; nevertheless 
there were still too many for the Lord's purpose. The 



next test was a test of zeal. When led down to the 
brook to drink, all but three hundred halted very leisurely 
and knelt down to drink, which required the 
loosening of their armor and unfastening of their 
swords. But three hundred did not stop to do this, 
but hastily scooped up a little water and lapped it from 
their hands. This zeal, inspired by a living faith in 
God, was just the element of character for which the 
Lord was looking; and these three hundred "peculiar 
people," full of faith and active zeal, were the only ones 
acceptable to God and privileged to share the honors 
of delivering Israel from a mighty host of oppressors. 

Just so the Lord Jehovah contemplates the conquest 
of the world for Christ (Zech. 14:3); and Christ, 
like Gideon, is called of God to lead a "little flock" of 
"called and faithful and chosen" ones (Rev. 17:14) forth 
to the conquest of the hosts of sin. The selection of 
Gideon's army was an illustration of the Lord's method 
in the selection of a "peculiar people" who will share 
with him the honors of victory in the conquest of sin 
and all its defiling host. 

Of these there is first a call to faith in the Lord, 
resulting in justification and acceptance; secondly, 
there is a call to consecration, in full view of the requirements, 
in full view of the enemy, and our Captain 
requests all of the justified ones who come to him to 
sit down first and count the cost, whether or not they 
are willing to sacrifice their all under his leadership. 
The large majority, when they come to see the cost, to 
realize the battle that must be waged between the followers 
of the Lord and the forces of the world, the flesh 
and the devil, are rather inclined to say, We prefer not 
to engage in battle, we are timid, we are fearful, we 
have not sufficient confidence either in Gideon or in 
Gideon's God. It is in accord with the Lord's will that 
such should be considered separate from God's army, 
though they may have subsequently an opportunity for 
joining in the battle against evil. 

It is not sufficient that we should have faith in the 
Lord and in the Captain of our salvation and should 
make our consecration to the Lord's will; but further 
tests are made with a view to making a final selection 
of a very special class to constitute the little flock. It 
will be a test of water— symbolizing the truth. It becomes 
a very important question to every consecrated 
one as he is brought to a knowledge of the truth how 
he will receive it— appropriate it. In the picture or 
type those accepted of God to be Gideon's little flock 
used their hands to lift the water to their mouths, a 

R4083 : page 331 

sup at a time, as a dog uses his tongue to lift the 
water; while the others drank like as a horse who 
puts his mouth into the water and sucks it. The 
hand is a symbol of energy, and we might understand 



this to signify that the persons most approved of the 
Lord will use energy and discretion in partaking of the 
truth— these will not bow down in the mire of human 
servility, but will maintain their own erectness of manhood 
and will partake of the water of truth, lifting their 
heads upward and acknowledging its heavenly origin 
by whatever stream or channel it may come to them. 

The selection complete, the remainder of the brave 
men were not sent home but to Gideon's tent or headquarters, 
there to be ready for their share in the battle 
later. Those whom God would specially use were supplied 
with peculiar implements: (1) a ram's horn; (2) 
a pitcher; (3) a lamp, or torch, placed inside the 
pitcher and thus obscured from the view of their enemies. 
The three hundred were divided into three companies 
and the individuals of each company were scattered. 
They approached close to the enemy and 
practically surrounded their camp. When Gideon blew, 
all who heard the blasts made similar blasts upon their 
trumpets; when Gideon broke his pitcher and let the 
light of his torch or firebrand gleam forth, the others 
did the same, blowing meantime with their trumpets 
and alternately shouting, "The sword of the Lord and 
of Gideon." It was the Lord's battle and the Lord's arrangement, 
and it was carried out as intended; the Midianites 
awakened from their slumbers panic-stricken, 
believed themselves surrounded by immense hosts, and 
fled precipitately, killing one another in their fright 
and confusion. Perceiving the routes they would take, 
Gideon hastened with his ten thousand followers to 
intercept them and to complete the defeat. Meanwhile 
others of the people, learning of the condition of things, 
joined in the battle to the ultimate and utter discomfiture 
of the Midianites, and the destruction of the vast 
majority of their hosts, including their leaders. 

Our Captain, the Lord, has given special instructions 
to those whom he will specially use in the conflict 
of evil now in progress. Each one shall follow the 
example of the Captain of our salvation. First, he shall 
blow upon the trumpet, representing the proclamation 
of the truth, and proclaim that the sword of the spirit 
of truth is of Jehovah and of his anointed Son; and 
secondly, they shall break their pitchers and let their 
light shine out. The pitchers represent our earthen 
vessels, and the breaking of them in order to let the 
light shine out signifies that to which we are exhorted 
by the Apostle, saying, "I beseech you, therefore, 
brethren, by the mercies of God, that ye present your 
bodies a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto God, 
your reasonable service." We see how our Chief-Captain 
broke his earthen vessel; we see what a light 
streamed forth. Our highest ambition must be to follow 
his example, to walk in his steps, to lay down our 
lives for the brethren as he laid down his life for us. 
Meantime the blowing of the trumpet is to progress 
as well as the shouting in the name of Jehovah, our 



Captain, and the sword of the spirit of truth is to be 
wielded. The result will be victory; the enemies of the 
Lord will be overwhelmed. 

But many others than the little flock will be associated 
in the work of overthrow, though theirs will be a 
special work as specially chosen instruments of the 
Lord. Now is the time for response to the call of our 
Captain; now is the time for standing the tests and 
being full of faith and confidence in the Lord that he 
is able to give us the victory. Now is the time for 
understanding the will of the Captain, following his 
example, and imitating him and laying down our lives 
for the brethren, and as sacrifices, holy and acceptable 
to God and our reasonable service. Now is the time 
for the proclamation and for publicly declaring our 
confidence in him who called us, who gave us the light, 
and who has privileged us to be his little flock; and 
very shortly will come the time for the fleeing of the 
enemy. Let us be faithful to our tests and opportunities, 
and thus be accounted worthy of a share in the 
service and the glory that shall follow. 



page 328 
Bibles, Testaments, Students' Helps, Etc. 

SUPPLIED AT WHOLESALE COST PRICES 



THIS LIST SUPERSEDES ALL PREVIOUS LISTS 

Bible publishers announce that, owing to increased cost of material 
and labor, they have found it necessary to advance the price of 
many of the cheaper grades. 

IN presenting our list of Bibles this year, we have dropped a number 
which we previously carried and have selected others which we 
think more desirable. We give below a list which, although not 
very large, we think will cover a range sufficiently broad to suit the 
wants of nearly all. However, should any of the friends desire a 
more complete list to select from, we shall be pleased to mail publishers' 
catalogues upon postal card application. 

First in importance among Bibles we rank the 

WATCH TOWER BIBLE 

described on next page. 



TEACHERS' BIBLES 



No. (Add Postage on these, 20c. each.) Pub. Our 

04403 Minion, French Morocco, div. cir., round corners, Price Price 

red under gold, references, linen lined, 

7-1/4 x 5 $1.35 $ .94 

8301 Minion, French Morocco, div. cir., red under 

gold, illustrated, full teachers' helps, references, 

linen, 7-3/4 x 5-1/4 1.45 1.00 

(Add Postage on these, 26c. each.) 

8701 Long Primer, French Morocco, div. cir., red 
under gold, helps, references, concordance, 
illustrated, linen, 8-1/2 x 6 1.95 1.33 

8702 Same as 8701, leather lined 2.35 1.58 

COMBINATION TEACHERS' BIBLES 

These Bibles show the variations of the Revised Version at the 
foot of each page. Otherwise they are ordinary "Teachers' Bibles," 
with maps, concordance, etc., illustrated. 
(Add Postage on these, 28c each.) 
610 Bourgeois, French Seal, div. cir., red under 

gold, 8 x 6 x 1-3/4 5.00 1.35 

614 Same as 610, leather lined 6.00 1.63 

LINEAR TEACHERS' BIBLES 

Hitherto these Bibles have been sold by Subscription Agents 
only. Their special feature, differentiating from other Teachers' 
Bibles, is that they show the readings of the Common and Revised 
Versions side by side in the same line, self -pronouncing. 
(Add Postage on these, 30c each.) 
350 Small Pica, French Seal, red under gold, full 

teachers' helps, 8-3/4 x 6 x 1-1/2 6.00 2.10 

360 Small Pica, Levant Morocco, kid lined, otherwise 
same as 350 10.00 4.25 

POCKET BIBLES 

(Add Postage on these, 15c each.) 
01 153 Ruby, French Morocco, round cor., red under 

gold, div. cir., text only, 5-1/2 x 3-7/8 x 1-1/8... .95 .63 
01327 Minion, French Morocco, div. cir., red under 

gold, text and maps, 6x3-3/8 x 1-1/4 1.20 .78 

01329 Same as 01327, leather lined to edge 1.60 1.05 

194 Minion, French Morocco, div. cir., red under 

gold, text, 5-7/8 x 4 x 1-1/4 1.10 .75 

INDIA PAPER POCKET BIBLES 

"Mite" Bible (the smallest Bible.) 
093x Venetian Morocco, div. cir., gilt edges with 

magnifying glass, 1-3/4 x 1-1/4 x 5/8 1.00 .75 

(Add Postage on these, 8c each.) 
01 103 Diamond, French Morocco, div. cir., red under 

gold, text only, 4-1/2 x 2-1/2 x 1/2 1.40 .98 

01112 Persian Morocco, leather lined to edge, otherwise 
as 01103 2.00 1.35 



01157x Ruby, French Morocco, div. cir., leather lined, 

red under gold, text only, 5-5/8 x 3-7/8 x 9-16 2.00 1.35 

03029x Pearl, Alaska Seal, div. cir., leather lined, silk 

sewed, red under gold, references, 5-1/8x3-7/8x5/8.. 3.25 2.15 

031 14x Ruby, Persian Levant, div. cir., leather lined, 

silk sewed, red under gold, references, 5-5/8x4x3/4. 3.25 2.15 
(Add Postage for these, 4c each.) 

0612 Diamond, Persian Morocco, div. cir., leather 

lined, red under gold, text only, 3-3/4x2-1/2x7/8... 2.25 1.55 

02002x Brilliant, Persian Morocco, div. cir., leather 
lined, red under gold, maps (smallest reference 
Bible made), 3-5/8 x 2-1/2 x 5/8 2.50 1.70 

INDIA PAPER BIBLES 

(Add Postage for these, 15c each.) 

8635 Minion, French Morocco, div. cir., red under 

gold, references, maps, 7 x 4-3/4 x 5/8 1.75 1.13 

8636 French Seal, leather lined, otherwise as 8635 3.00 2.14 

9635 Brevier, large face, French Morocco, div. cir., 

red under gold, references, 7-1/8 x 5 x 1 2.75 1.90 

9636 French Seal, silk sewn, leather lined, otherwise 
as 9635 4.00 2.85 

03265x Minion, Levant Morocco, div. cir., calf lined 
silk sewed, red under gold (thinnest minion 
reference Bible), 6-7/8 x 4-3/4 x 5/8 4.25 2.85 

THUMB INDEX ON A BIBLE, 25c EXTRA 

INDIA PAPER BIBLES-(Continued) 

03274x Minion, Alaska Seal, div. cir., leather lined, silk 

sewed, red under gold, references, index, concordance 
and maps, 6-7/8 x 4-7/8 x 7/8 4.50 3.00 

03554x Brevier, black face, Alaska Seal, div. cir., leather 
lined, red under gold, references, index, self- 
pronouncing, concordance and maps, 8-1/8 x 
5-1/2 x 7/8 5.50 3.60 

0358 lx Long Primer, black face, same as 03554x, 7-3/4 x 
5-1/4 x 15-16 6.00 4.00 

08651/2xLong Primer, Levant, div. cir., calf lined, silk 
sewed, red under gold, teachers' helps, arranged 
as cyclopedic concordance, 7-3/4 x 5-1/4 x 
1-1/8 8.35 5.25 

OXFORD REVISED BIBLES (Amer. Com.) 

(Add Postage on these, 25c each.) 
3750 Brevier, Cloth, round cor., red edges, maps, 

8x5-5/8 1.00 .70 

3752 Brevier, French Morocco, div. cir., red under 

gold, 8 x 5-5/8 2.00 1.30 

AMERICAN STANDARD REVISED BIBLE 

(Add Postage on these, 20c each.) 



160 Bourgeois, Cloth, references 1.00 .80 

172 Bourgeois, Egyptian Seal, references, red under 

gold, div. cir 2.00 1.60 

(Add Postage on these, 30c each.) 

260 Long Primer, Cloth, references, 8-3/4 x 6-3/4 1.50 1.15 

272 Long Primer, Egyptian Seal, references, red 

under gold, div. cir., 8-3/4 x 6-3/4 3.00 2.25 

(Add Postage, 15 cents each.) 
Minion, black faced, reference edition, self-pronouncing, a 
fine edition— 4-3/4 x 7. 

152 Egyptian Seal, div. cir., red under gold 1.75 1.38 

154 Persian Levant, leather lined to edge, otherwise 

same as 152 3.25 2.35 

(Add Postage, 12 cents each.) 

152x India paper edition of 152 2.75 1.97 

154x India paper edition of 154 4.00 2.81 

LAP BIBLES FOR THE AGED-References, Light 
Weight, Large Print 

(Add Postage on these, 25c each.) 

2002 Pica, Cloth, red edges, 9-1/4 x 6-1/2 x 1-1/4 2.00 .90 

2014 Pica, French Seal, limp, size same as 2002 2.75 1.43 

2022 Pica, French Seal, div. cir., size same as 2002 3.50 1.75 

2232 Arabian Morocco, grained leather lining to 

edge, silk lined band and marker 6.00 2.80 

CHILDREN'S ILLUSTRATED BIBLES 

(Add Postage on these, 1 lc each.) 
216 Minion, French Morocco, limp, red under gold, 

5-3/4x3-5/8 1.15 .82 

215B Minion, French Morocco, references, div. cir., 

red under gold, 7-1/4x5-1/4x7/8 1.50 .85 

TESTAMENTS 

(Add Postage on these, 3c each.) 
21 13 Nonpareil, French Morocco, limp, gold title, side 

and back, gold edges (vest-pocket edition), 

4-3/8x2-7/8x1/2 40 .22 

21 13P Same as above, with Psalms 50 .27 

2115 Same as 2113, with div. cir., and red under gold 56 .30 

21 15P Same as 2115, with Psalms 66 .35 

013RL Same as 2113, with words of our Lord in red 

letters 60 .33 

015RLSameas013RL, with div. cir., red under gold 80 .42 

2142x Nonpareil, French Seal, limp, grained leather 

lining, red under gold, gold roll (thin), 4-3/8 x 

2-3/4x3/8 85 .43 

2142PX Same as 2142x, with Psalms 1.00 .50 

010 Diamond, Venetian Morocco, limp, gold edges, 

3-3/4x2-1/4x1/4 50 .35 

014 Diamond, Arabian Morocco, div. cir., leather 

lined, red under gold, India paper, 3-3/4x2-1/4x1/4. .90 .65 
(Add Postage on these, 5c each.) 



287 Brevier, Roan leather, flexible, gold edges, with 
Psalms, 6-1/4x4-1/2 42 .42 

NEW TESTAMENTS FOR THE AGED 

(Add Postage on these, 10c each.) 

212 Small Pica, Roan, square cor., 5-3/4x8-1/4 45 .45 

283 Same as above, with Psalms, 8-1/4x5-1/2x3/4 50 .50 

REVISED TESTAMENTS 

0100 Brevier, Cloth, red edges, 16 mo., including 
postage .23 

TEXT BIBLES 

(Postage, 7c.) 
178 Agate type, cloth, red edges, 4 x 5-3/4 17 .17 

(Postage, 12c.) 
131 Nonpareil type, cloth, red edges, 5-1/4 x 7-1/4 25 .25 

page 329 

CONCORDANCES AND OTHER BIBLE STUDY HELPS 

First in this list we mention the several volumes of 

"STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURE" SERIES 

—referring inquirers to the second page of each issue of this journal 
for prices, etc. We commend also, as aids, the following publications 
by other presses, which we supply at specially low prices because of 
the assistance they will lend to the study of God's Word. We mention 
these somewhat in the order in which they seem to us to be desirable 
aids. 

THE WATCH TOWER BIBLE 

We specially recommend this Bible 
for its smallness of size, lightness of weight 
and good-sized print, and above all for the 
helps to Bible students and teachers 
bound with it. Printed on India paper; 
excellent press work. It is a reference 
Bible, 4-1/2 x 6-3/4 and 3/4 inch thick. Its 
special feature distinguishing this Bible 
from all others is 

ITS B ERE AN BIBLE 
TEACHERS' MANUAL 

Parti. 

DAWN STUDIES COMMENTS 

Part II. 

INSTRUCTORS' GUIDE TEXTS 

Part III. 

BEREAN TOPICAL INDEX 



Part IV. 

DIFFICULT TEXTS EXPLAINED 

SPURIOUS PASSAGES NOTED 

PartV. 

INDEX TO SCRIPTURES TREATED 

at considerable length in 

ZION'S WATCH TOWER 

WHOLESALE PRICES 
IN ANY QUANTITY 

POSTAGE, 10 CENTS EACH 

No. W-138-So called French Seal, 
red under gold, round cornered, 

divinity circuit $1.38 

No. W- 150— Same as above, linen 

lined 1.50 

No. W-300-Best Genuine Sealskin, 

calf lined, silk sewed 3.00 

Patent index 25 cents extra, but we do 
not advise this on so small a book. 
The above very special price was secured 
only by our placing a very large order— 
10,000 copies. This is probably the 
largest-sized single order ever placed for 
India paper Bibles. 

DAILY HEAVENLY MANNA 

FOR THE HOUSEHOLD OF FArTH. 

This publication, we believe, will be in 
great demand as soon as known. It is a 
text-book for each day in the year— and 
good year by year continuously. 

But this is more than a text-book; it 
has an appropriate comment under each 
text selected from the columns of back 
issues of ZION'S WATCH TOWER. 

Our new edition of the "Manna" contains the same texts 
and comments as the former one; but it has twice as many 
pages. Every alternate leaf is blank ruled, for use as an 
Autograph and Birthday record. It is printed on fine bond paper 
and bound in handsome dark blue cloth. It would be well worth 
$1.00 or more, in any book store. 

NEW PRICES, WHOLESALE AND RETAIL. 

The new "Manna" will be sold by Manna Colporteurs and others 
at 50 cents each (60 cents when gotten by mail or prepaid express). 
The wholesale rates, open to any TOWER reader, are as follows 
cash with order:— 

1 copy, postpaid $ .35 

10 or more copies, by express, prepaid, each 30 

10 or more copies, by freight or express, charges collect, each. .20 



We, of course, prefer the STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES to be colporteured; 
but a good follow-up work can be done with "Manna" 
by those who cannot do the regular work with the STUDIES. 

We hope this little book will find a place at every breakfast 
table; and that spiritual refreshment may thus be enjoyed with the 
natural food, stimulating thankfulness to the Giver of all Good and 
thus inducing the peace of God and favoring both spiritual and natural 
health and well-being. 

THE EMPHATIC DIAGLOTT 

This very valuable work, published under the author's copyright 
by Fowler & Wells Co., New York City, has been sold by them at 
$4 in cloth and $5 in half leather binding. For several years a friend, 
an earnest Bible student, desirous of assisting the readers of our 
Society's publications, has supplied them through us at a greatly 
reduced price; now he has purchased the copyright and plates from 
the Fowler & Wells Co., and presented the same to our Society as a 
gift, under our assurance that the gift will be used for the furthering 
of the Truth to the extent of our ability, by such a reduction of price 
as will permit the poor of the Lord's flock to have this help in the 
study of the Word. 

REDUCED PRICES.-These will be sold with ZION'S WATCH 
TOWER only. In cloth binding $1.50 (6s. 3d.)— includes postage and 
one year's subscription, new or renewal, to Z.W.T. On thin paper, 
in full morocco leather, divinity circuit, red under gold edges, silk 
sewed, leather lined, $2.50 (10s. 6d.)— includes postage and one year's 
subscription to Z.W.T. 

THE TISCHENDORF NEW TESTAMENT 

This is the ordinary Common Version in cloth binding. As 
footnotes it gives the reading of the three oldest Greek MSS., Sinaiticus, 
Vaticanus and Alexandrine, wherever these differ from the Common 
Version. This is a very valuable little work, published in Europe, 
which we specially import for the benefit of our readers. Price, 50c, 
including postage. 

LEESER'S TRANSLATION OF THE OLD 
TESTAMENT 

This is the standard translation amongst English reading 
Hebrews, by one of their own rabbis. It is not perfect, but is a 
valuable aid in critical study of the Old Testament. Our special 
price, in leather binding, including postage, is $1.10. 

ANALYTICAL CONCORDANCE TO THE 
SCRIPTURES 

In English, Hebrew and Greek, by Prof. Young (Presbyterian). 
A valuable work for all critical students. Price, in cloth binding, $5, 
including postage. We are not permitted by the publishers to cut 
this price; but may and do give postage free and give besides a 
premium of any four volumes of the SCRIPTURE STUDIES series in cloth 
binding with each Concordance, or six volumes if purchaser pays 



the expressage. 

THE EXHAUSTIVE CONCORDANCE TO THE 
SCRIPTURES 

In English, Hebrew and Greek, by Prof. Strong (Methodist). 
This is also an able work and useful in critical study. It has some 
advantages over Young's; after getting used to it we prefer it. 
Special reduced prices,— in cloth binding, $3; half leather, $5. 
Carriage prepaid, 65c. extra. 

CRUDEN'S CONCORDANCE TO THE SCRIPTURES 

A valuable work, but scarcely necessary to those who have either 
one of the above mentioned. English only. Cloth binding, $1, 
postage included. 

SMITH'S BIBLE DICTIONARY 

This is one of the most desirable editions of Prof. Smith's work. 
It is a large volume of 1020 pages. In cloth binding, $1.30, including 
postage. 

"BIBLE TALKS IN SIMPLE LANGUAGE" 

This is the best book of its kind we have ever seen. It presents 
the Bible stories in simple, but not childish language, and seems 
remarkably free from the bad theology so common in this class of 
books. All Christian parents should have a Sunday Bible lesson 
with their children, and this book furnishes interesting topics, to 
which may be added as much concordant "Present Truth" as the age 
of the children will justify. Parents are responsible for their children's 
training in theology as well as morals. This will assist you in 
the discharge of this duty, and thus be a blessing to yourself as well as 
to your children. 

624 pages, 250 illustrations; cloth sides, leather back and 
corners, gilt edges. A subscription book at $3. Our special price 
75 cents, plus 25 cents postage. 

SCRIPTURE STUDIES-INDIA PAPER 

Calls for SCRIPTURE STUDIES divided into small portions, light, 
convenient for the pocket, that could be read on the cars, etc., led 
us to prepare an India-paper edition. The entire volume is on this 
very fine paper reduced to three-eighths of an inch in thickness and 
about four ounces in weight. [The type is exactly the same size as in 
the regular editions.] It is a beauty. Leather covers, gold edges. 
Its cost, with postage, is raised to 75c each for the first three volumes 
and 85c each for the remainder per volume, at which price it is 
supplied to WATCH TOWER subscribers. 

We regret inability to promise these definitely, as we are experiencing 
great trouble in securing the India paper. We hope to 
have the last three volumes by Dec, 1907, and the preceding three 
about Feb., 1908. 



Specimen Lines of Various Sizes of Type Referred to on 
Reverse Page: 

This line is Brilliant type. This line is Diamond type. 

This line is Pearl type. This line is Ruby type. 

This line is Nonpareil type. This line is Emerald Minion. 

This line is Emerald type. 

This line is Minion type. 

This line is Brevier type. 

This line is Bourgeois type. 

This line is Long Primer type. 

This line is Small Pica type. 



R4083 : page 331 

EACH SHALL GIVE ACCOUNT TO GOD 

--ROMANS 14: 12-23. -NOVEMBER 24.- 

Golden Text:— "Judge this rather, that no man put a 
stumbling-block or an occasion to fall in his brother's way." 
—Romans 14:13. 

AGAIN the International Sunday-School Committee 
requests Christian people in general to 
consider the evils of intemperance— the importance 
of temperance in all things on the part of 
those professing godliness. Such lessons seem to be 
all the more important when we perceive that the rush, 
the push, the hurry, the consumption of nervous energy 
on the part of people in general, seems to be causing an 
increase of nervous and mental disorders and an enlargement 
of the lists of the insane. Certainly no one 
claiming benevolence of heart and soundness of judgment 
could in any sense of the word advocate or encourage 
intemperance, realizing that it is a fruitful 
source of crime, depravity, immorality, etc. We note 
with pleasure the spread of local option and total prohibition 
in many of the southern States. Not that such 
restraints are the highest ideals of liberty, but that- 
seeing the necessity for the restraints— those who love 
liberty are willing to share the bondage for the sake of 
their fellow-citizens, to whom full liberty is admittedly 
injurious. Either climatic variations or financial and 
social changes account for the fact that there was less 



tendency to drunkenness in the days of the Lord and 
the apostles than there is now, and probably for this 

R4084 : page 332 

reason the Scriptures have less to say respecting this, 
which is one of the chiefest evils in our day. 

But no amount of interest in the temperance question 
should permit us to read into the divine Word what 
was not intended by the inspired writers— though we 
may properly enough draw inferences and conclusions. 
First of all we must take the lesson provided for us as 
we find it. It is a part of the Apostle's discussion of 
liberty and law, custom and conscience, on questions 
that were prominent at the time of writing. The Jews 
were accustomed to observe their Law with great exactness, 
and very properly so. Consequently it seemed 
a very peculiar lesson for them to be obliged to learn, 
that they were no longer under the Law, hoping for 
eternal life through the observance of it, but were under 
grace, hoping for life eternal by the forgiveness 
of their sins through the merit of the sacrifice of 
Christ. The Jews at Rome, for instance, had experienced 
trials and difficulties for a long time in their endeavor 
to observe the Law— the keeping of the Jewish 
Sabbath Day, the avoidance of meats that had been 
strangled or offered to idols. When these accepted 
Christ they had great difficulty in realizing that the 
Law Covenant under which they had been seeking to 
please God was at an end, and that they must seek new 
principles for their guidance in respect to worship, 
service, self-control. Naturally enough some minds 
grasped the situation more quickly than did others. 
Some accepted Christ and felt all the previous bondage 
to the Jewish ritual; others saw more broadly that 
Christ had become the end of the Law Covenant to 
everyone that believeth, and that the Law which he had 
instituted had indeed the spirit of the ten commandments 
and the Jewish ritual but not the letter of them, 
and that to him that is in Christ Jesus there is no Law 
except that of love: love to God supremely, love to the 
brethren and love to our neighbors— a law seen to be 
very comprehensive indeed when studied, but on its 
surface quite different from the Law of commandments 
given to the house of servants. 

"The New Commandment," or new law of love, left 
much more to the discretion and judgment of the individual 
than did the Law commandments given at Sinai 
and written in stones. With the latter there was no 
discretion, but with the former responsibility for decision 
rests largely with the individual and his own 
conscience. Hence some, reasoning broadly, said to 
themselves, "The Jewish Law Covenant being at an 
end its restrictions are no longer in force where they 
would clash with the law of love and the spirit of 
a sound mind: I may, therefore, eat such food as I find 



will be helpful to me, and am no longer forbidden to 
eat certain kinds." Further, as the mind expanded 
and grew it was realized that the idols were not gods 
at all, and hence that the custom of the people to offer 
the meat to idols before it was sold for consumption 
had really done the meat no harm, and hence it might be 
eaten without any disrespect to God if he were acknowledged 
and thanked therefor. 

CONSIDERING THE WEAKER BRETHREN 

In reasoning on this question the Apostle leaves 
no room for doubt as to his conception of the right or 
wrong of the question at issue. He agreed heartily with 
the enlightened few that an idol was nothing more than 
a piece of human handiwork, and that therefore the 
offering of meat before it as a sacrifice amounted to 
nothing and did not injure the meat any more than it 
did the idol good. The Apostle would, therefore, feel 
free to eat such meat if it came convenient to him, even 
though he might have preferred to have such as 
had not been so offered. But while endorsing the position 
of the more intelligent he sympathized with the 
less intelligent, realizing that with many of them it 
would require considerable time to surmount their 
natural prejudices and give their consciences the 
proper and sure footing on the subject. In other words, 
all Jews would need education along this line, and 
some could take the education more rapidly than others, 
but the former should be sympathetic with the latter 
and to a large extent should defer to them. 

"BEFORE THE JUDGMENT SEAT OF CHRIST" 

Our lesson opens in the midst of this argument 
with the declaration, "So then each one of us should 
give an account of himself to God." By these words the 
Apostle seeks to impress the thought that the weaker 
brethren are not to judge and censure the others, 
neither the stronger brethren to judge and censure the 
weaker. All are to remember that God is the Judge, 
and that each one needs to criticise himself rather than 
to criticise his brother— to make sure that he himself 
has a conscience void of offence toward God and man. 
Each one so doing may feel sure eventually of the divine 
approval. The same thought is given in a preceding 
verse (v. 10), which reads, "For we shall all stand before 
the judgment-seat of Christ." Each one of the 
Church is on trial, and our Lord Jesus as the Father's 
representative criticises and examines the various 
members of his Body, not with a view to cutting them 
off, but, on the contrary, for their aid and encouragement, 
assistance and instruction and preparation for 
the Kingdom. As we are now before the judgment-seat 
of Christ, so during the Millennial Age the whole world 
of mankind will be before his judgment-seat and be 



separated into two classes, sheep and goats. During 
the world's judgment the overcomers of this Gospel 
Age, the brethren, the Bride, will be with the Lord in 
his Millennial throne as he promised, "To him that 
overcometh will I grant to sit with me in my throne"; 
and again, "To him that overcometh will I grant power 
over the nations"; and again, "Know ye not that the 
saints shall judge the world"?— in conjunction with 
their Lord. -Rev. 3:21; Rev. 2:26; I Cor. 6:2. 

But not only are we now standing before the judgment-seat 
of Christ, and day by day rendering up a 
measure of account in respect to our faithfulness, loyalty, 
etc., but eventually at the close of this age the decisions 
will be given by him as he pictures in the parable 
of the young nobleman. On his return from a far 

R4084 : page 333 

country, invested with full power and authority, he will 
give to every one in his Church according as his work 
has been— according to his faithfulness in the use of 
his talents, privileges, opportunities— according to his 
faithfulness and obedience to the "New Commandment" 
given to all, that they should love one another as he 
had loved them. Then every man's work shall be made 
manifest, however misunderstood in the present time. 
Some highly esteemed amongst men will be shown to 
be less esteemed of the Lord, and some little esteemed 
amongst men will be granted high honors in the Kingdom. 
Therefore, we are not to gauge ourselves entirely 
by what our fellow-men might think, but to have special 
respect to the Lord and his judgment of us. Hence 
the Apostle argues, Let us not, therefore, judge [condemn] 
one another any more, but let our judgment 
rather turn to ourselves, to see that nothing in our conduct 
toward our brethren shall be in any sense of the 
word contrary to our Master's new law of love. Watching 
that law carefully, and applying it to ourselves, we 
will be hindered from any course of conduct which 
would tend to stumble a brother; and such a love for 
the brethren as would lead us to the renouncement of 
our own liberties where necessary would certainly be 
pleasing in the sight of the Lord and the heavenly 
Father, and assure us a place and a higher honor than 
would otherwise be ours. 

"FOR WHOM CHRIST DIED" 

The Apostle then assures his hearers of his own 
conviction that there is no such thing as legally unclean 
or forbidden food from the Lord's standpoint for those 
who are New Creatures in Christ. Love for the brethren, 
however, should lead us to renounce to some extent our 
own liberties and preferences lest our exercise of liberty 
might do injury to some for whom Christ died. His 
argument is that if we have the love of Christ we will 



hesitate to do anything that would wound or injure or 

cause a stumbling of conscience to any member of the 

Body. If Christ so loved them that his death was made 

available to their salvation, we should so love them as 

to be willing to cooperate for their assistance and do 

nothing that might stumble or hinder them. He argued 

further that having taken a stand for the Lord and 

for righteousness we should be careful that our outward 

conduct would conform to this in as large a degree 

as possible, and that this would mean that we 

should do nothing that to others would seem to be unrighteous. 

"Let not your good be evil spoken of," 

rather exercise yourself along such lines of goodness 

and in such a manner as will have the approval of all 

who have respect for religious things. An application 

of this principle today would seem to be that we who 

have a clearer knowledge than have some others of the 

meaning of the Sabbath, for instance, should so conduct 

ourselves in the observance of Sunday as would 

bring no disrespect to the Lord nor to his Word. A 

proper time and occasion may occur for explaining our 

R4085 : page 333 

higher thought respecting the significance of the Sabbath, 
but meanwhile let us reverentially keep Sunday, 
not as under the bondage of the Law, but as a great 
privilege and opportunity for fellowship in spiritual 
things, better than any we could ourselves devise. The 
same principle will apply to other matters or outward 
manifestations in which reverence for God and holy 
things may have a bearing upon our influence with 
others. Reverence for all good things is surely appropriate 
to all who love the Lord and love his righteousness. 
Increasing knowledge would make us increasingly 
reverential, not only in heart, but also in outward 
demonstration. 

"THE KINGDOM OF GOD IS NOT MEAT AND DRINK, BUT 
RIGHTEOUSNESS AND PEACE AND JOY IN THE 
HOLY SPIRIT" 

This statement by the Apostle has been grievously 
misunderstood and misconstrued by some, and interpreted 
to teach that the Kingdom of God is not a real 
Kingdom to come, with Jesus as the King, the Church 
as the joint-heirs in the Kingdom, and the world as 
the subjects, to bless, rule and uplift during the 
Millennial Age. It is used to oppose this thought, the 
claim being that when the words Kingdom of God are 
used throughout the Scriptures they signify not a real 
Kingdom but a rule of righteousness, joy, peace, in the 
hearts of believers. This is a serious misinterpretation 
of the Apostle's thought. His argument may be paraphrased 
thus: Abstain, dear brethren, from the use of 
your liberty in Christ wherever you find that it would 



stumble the conscience of another or be to his hindrance 
in any manner. Consider not that the advantages of 
being counted in as members of Christ's prospective 
Kingdom consists in these liberties to eat and drink 
what you choose, but rather consider that the blessings 
we enjoy in the present time as members of that prospective 
Kingdom are the peace of heart, the joy of heart, 
the righteousness of the Lord and his holy Spirit. These 
are the blessings of the present time, and not the mere 
liberties in respect to food. Hence we may readily renounce 
these liberties if they interfere with the advantage 
of others, and we will thereby find ourselves increasing 
in love and joy and peace of the holy Spirit by 
reason of such sacrifices. The Church indeed is the 
Kingdom of God in an embryotic sense— in the sense 
that each member is here being instructed and prepared 
for the duties and privileges of the Kingdom to 
come, especially being developed and tested along the 
lines of his own fitness for a share in that Kingdom. 
But all of this emphasizes the fact expressed in our 
Lord's prayer that God's Kingdom is to come, and, 
coming, will bring about in the world that condition of 
things in which eventually God's will will be done on 
earth as it is now being done in heaven. 

Continuing this thought the Apostle urges (vs. 18,19) 
that such service, such self-denials for Christ's sake, 
are well pleasing to God, and will also have the approval 
of right-thinking men, and that all the Lord's followers 
therefore should thus be making for peace and 
those things and conditions whereby they may edify, 
strengthen and build one another up. What a precious 

R4085 : page 334 

lesson is here! Oh, that all of the Lord's dear people 
could catch the spirit of the Apostle's exhortation and 
see how beautiful it must be in God's sight that his 
people should emulate the example of their Redeemer 
in their willingness to deny themselves for the sake of 
helping others. With this spirit prevailing largely in a 
company of the Lord's followers, assuredly there would 
be a great blessing and great upbuilding of one another, 
a great strengthening of character and great assistance 
one to the other, and great absence of puffed-up 
superiority and disdain for those unable to see and appreciate 
every feature of the divine plan. 

"The things that make for peace." Oh, how blessed 
the congregation of the Lord's people which has a 
goodly number of such followers of Christ, especially 
if they be among the leading ones! How their love and 
peace and unity of spirit would assist them to be kind 
and generous toward others and helpful— not by ignoring 
the principles of truth, not by putting the light under 
a bushel, but by presenting the Truth in so kind 
and gentle a manner that all who are of the Truth 
would appreciate it and be strengthened thereby. How 



potent the Apostle's argument, "Overthrow not for 
meat's sake the work of God"— do not jeopardize the 
interests of either the Church or of an individual in it 
merely for the sake of preserving a non-essential. As 
the Apostle exhorted Timothy, "Condescend to men of 
low estate," condescend to the weakest and humblest 
of the Lord's true followers; come down to them in 
speech and in conduct that you may be the abler assistant 
of those who need the uplifting and enlightening 
influence of the Truth in the spirit. 

"ALL THINGS INDEED ARE PURE" 

We are not to understand these words of the Apostle 
to indicate that nothing is impure or unclean. Quite 
to the contrary. He has elsewhere pointed out many 
impurities of thought and act, and advised the Church 
against these. Here his words are confined to the subject 
in hand— nothing indeed is unclean— no kind of 
meat. He proceeds, however, to point out where wrong 
might be done even in eating of that which is cleanest, 
most desirable, or in the exercise of any other liberty- 
it is evil to the one whose conscience would be injured 
by it. In a word, conscience is one of our most valuable 
assets; according to our obedience to conscience 
will be our standing before the Lord. If, therefore, we 
violate our own consciences in anything we do, we are 
doing ourselves injury; or if by word or example we influence 
others to violate their consciences, however 
harmless a thing in itself it may be, we are doing them 
a serious injury, the outcome of which we cannot fully 
estimate, for it might go on to great and greater ungodliness 
and eventuate in the Second Death. Hence, 
it is good not to eat flesh nor to drink wine nor to do 
anything whereby thy brother might be stumbled or 
offended or made weak. 

FAITH VERSUS CONDEMNATION 

"The faith which thou hast, have thou to thyself 
before God." That is to say, our outward conduct need 
not necessarily show all the depth of our knowledge 
and faith and liberty. God knows the heart, he sees 
the progress we have made, and he will be the better 
pleased with us if for the sake of the brethren we do 
not declare all our liberties at a time and a place when 
they might prove injurious to others of his dear family. 
The Apostle proceeds to point out that if we be 
critical in examining our own conduct and motives we 
may find something therein very similar in kind to that 
which we are disposed to criticize in others, though 
perhaps in relation to a different subject. His words 
are, "Happy is he that condemneth not himself in that 
which he alloweth." For instance, he who judges 
another, allows or concludes that that other's motives are 
inspired by pride or ambition; if he turns his criticism 



upon himself may sometimes find something of this 
kind in his own heart. He who allows that his neighbor 
is a slanderer and condemns him for it should turn 
his criticism upon himself to see that his own words 
are always above reproach— never upon the slanderer. 
Happy and blessed the person who, seeing faults in 
others, after careful examination finds himself to be 
entirely free from these. Such certainly are exceptional 
characters. 

"HE THAT DOUBTETH IS DAMNED" 

With the wrong conception before the mind the 
words of the Apostle sound extremely harsh, "He that 
doubteth is damned if he eat." The idea conveyed by 
these words to many minds laboring under the delusions 
of the "dark ages" is that the person who eats 

R4086 : page 334 

meat clean in itself but thinking the matter to be wrong, 

thus defiling his own conscience by eating, would be 

damned— sent to an eternity of torture. But no such 

thought was in the Apostle's mind nor could it be properly 

understood in his words. He there emphasized the fact 

that any person eating meat, however clean, but thinking 

it to be a sin, a crime, to eat it, would as a consequence 

be under condemnation for having violated his 

conscience, his judgment of the Lord's will, and this 

would serve as a cloud to separate between himself and 

the Lord, who judges the heart and not merely the outward 

conduct. Such an alienation might ultimately 

lead to the loss of the great prize of our high calling, 

and thus into the Great Company, or possibly eventually 

into the Second Death. The Apostle explains why 

this condemnation would hold, saying, "because he eateth 

not of faith"— not in harmony with his conscience— 

and whatsoever is not in harmony with faith and conscience 

is a sin. The principle here applied to the 

question of using or not using spirituous liquors would 

certainly be profitable to all of God's people: the person 

who uses them believing them to be sinful is violating 

his conscience; the person who uses them knowing 

that another will be affected thereby unfavorably is 

violating the law of love, "Love thy neighbor as thyself." 

The matter becomes a very important one in 

our day, more than ever before, because today the 

question of conscience in the matter of using liquors is 

more pronounced than ever before. 

R4086 : page 335 

The following article, clipped from the Literary 
Digest, is translated from the French, and will, we 
trust, be both interesting and instructive to many in 
connection with this lesson: 



"UNTO THE THIRD AND FOURTH GENERATION" 

"One cannot be, with impunity, the son of a drunkard" 
—so says Dr. A. Joffroy, a French physician, who 
writes on "Alcohol and Alcoholism" in the Revue 
Scientifique (Paris, July 13). Dr. Joffroy's article reads 
in places like an old-fashioned temperance tract, but it 
is in reality a pitiless scientific statement of facts. 
Diseases, the author points out, are of two kinds, those 
that attack persons in normal health and those that 
touch only those who are predisposed to them. To 
create such morbid predispositions alcohol is eminently 
suited, and in this way it strikes down not only those 
who abuse it, but their descendants, often ceasing its 
ravages only when it has obliterated a whole family. 
We can quote here only a small part of what Dr. Joffroy 
says. First comes his division of diseases into the two 
categories mentioned above. We read: 

"In the case of some diseases (scarlet fever, smallpox, 
plague, etc.) the pathogenic agent produces the 
specific malady in every one exposed to contagion, 
whatever may have been his previous condition of 
health. But, on the other hand, there is a whole class 
of diseases that attack only such as are predisposed. 
Of 100 infants fed in the same way, one or two will become 
abnormally fat, because, for example, the father 
had gout or the mother diabetes.... 

'"But hereditary predisposition exists also with 
nervous diseases, and alcoholism is one of the most 
effective means of creating such predisposition, as well 
as developing it where it exists. To have cholera or 
rheumatism, for instance, one must have obese, nervous 
alcoholic parents. A man may be seized with shaking 
palsy, following some violent emotion,... but heredity 
must be present to facilitate the action, and alcoholism 
is generally found to be at the bottom of this 
heredity.' 

'"In mental diseases,' Dr. Joffroy goes on to say, 
'the role of heredity is greater still. We may almost say 
that predisposition is absolutely necessary for these.' 
The author rejects the classification made by some 
authors who divide mental diseases into those of the 
normal and abnormal brain. The former, he thinks, 
do not exist, a diseased brain being always abnormal. 
Even poisons that act on the brain select those who are 
predisposed, and this is eminently true of alcohol itself. 
Predispositions (generally alcoholic) determine 
the special form of drunkenness and explain why wine 
makes one man gay, another sad, another quarrelsome. 
Likewise, hereditary predisposition explains why alcoholism 
results, with one man, in an ulcer of the stomach, 
with another in cirrhosis of the liver, with others 
in paralysis of one or another set of nerves. The writer 
continues: 

'"On epilepsy the action of alcohol is quite clearly 



manifest; sometimes a subject plainly epileptic from 

infancy takes to drink at about 20, with the result that 

his attacks increase in violence at each excess; sometimes 

a man of thirty to forty years who has had only 

slight seizures in childhood begins to have the characteristic 

attacks, which disappear or lessen when he becomes 

abstinent.... 

'"In order that I may be clearly understood I will 
repeat the definition that I have given elsewhere of incipient 
degeneracy. "The totality of organic defects, 
of hereditary or acquired origin, which, by lessening 
organic resistance, create new morbid aptitudes and 
make causes pathogenic when of themselves they would 
be powerless to injure a normal organism." 

'"And I repeat again that, in the creation of these 
new morbid aptitudes, this hereditary predisposition, 
which dominates almost all pathology, alcoholism 
stands preeminent, doing more harm and counting 
more victims than tuberculosis. Alcoholism, in fact, 
not only affects the individual, but its effects are continued 
to his descendants. One cannot be, with impunity, 
the son of an alcoholic. Alcoholism begins with 
the father and strikes down his children, and generally 
its action continues, until, in the fourth or fifth generation, 
it has destroyed the family. But before this final 
result is reached, the alcoholics and their descendants 
are, according to circumstances, hurled into disease, 
madness or crime, filling our hospitals, asylums and 
jails, as I have already said. 

'"Blind indeed are those who, ignorant of the dangers 
of alcohol, see in it only a source of revenue!'"— 
—Translation made for the Literary Digest. 



R4085 : page 335 

AN INTERESTING QUESTION ANSWERED 

QUESTION.-In Acts 20:28 the reading is peculiar, and 
seems to imply that the Father, and not the Son, was the 
purchaser of the race; yet this disagrees with other Scriptures. 
How should we understand the matter? 

ANSWER.— The Diaglott translation is very much better 
than that of our common version, and reads, "which he hath 
purchased with the blood of his own"— "Son" being 
understood. 

The question may still arise with some, In what way 
did the Father purchase the race? We answer, In the 
same way that he has been the author of the entire plan of 
salvation. All that our dear Redeemer has done for us has 
been the carrying out of the great plan of Jehovah, purposed 
in himself before the foundation of the world. It is in harmony 
with this that the Father declares himself the Redeemer, 
"Jehovah thy Redeemer, and the Holy One of Israel." 
(Isa. 41:14; 43:14; 54:5.) Again we read, "Jehovah is my 



Shepherd." (Psalm 23:1.) In like manner the Father is 
the Creator, although all things were made by the Son (as 
the Father's agent) "and without him was not anything made 
that was made."— John 1:3. 



page 337 

SEMI-MONTHLY 
VOL. XXVIII NOVEMBER 15 No. 22 
A.D. 1907-A.M. 6036 



CONTENTS 

Views from the Watch Tower 339 

Curiosity a Dangerous Snare 339 

A Sign of Our Times 340 

The Lesson of Samson's Life 340 

Samson Judged Israel Twenty Years 341 

Ruth's Choice 344 

Dwelling with God's People 345 

"Speak, Lord, for thy Servant Heareth" 345 

Unequally Yoked Parents 345 

Consecration of our Children 346 

A Kind and Indulgent Parent 347 

The Voice of the Lord 348 

The Holy Anointing Oil 349 

Some Interesting Letters 350 

page 338 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-24 EVERSHOLT ST., LONDON, N.W. 
GERMAN BRANCH-MIRKER STR., 45, ELBERFELD. 
AUSTRALASIAN BRANCH-EQUITABLE BLDG., COLLINS ST., MELBOURNE 

PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 

TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR AS FOLLOWS:- 

All Bible Students who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity or 
adversity, are unable to pay for this Journal, will be supplied FREE if 
they send a Postal Card each June stating their case and requesting its 
continuance. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on 
our list continually and in touch with the Studies, etc. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



THIS JOURNAL IS PUBLISHED IN THE 

FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, DANISH AND ITALIAN LANGUAGES. 

SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



WATCH TOWER BIBLES 



Send no more orders for Nos. 300 and 150 for the present 
—except with patent thumb index. We still have a good 
quantity of No. 138, and of all styles with the index, which 
costs 25 cents extra. A new edition of Nos. 300 and 150 will 
be gotten out next spring. The orders came so fast that we 
are swamped. The bindery hopes to give us the last of our 
5,000 edition by Nov. 15, but we have orders waiting for 
perhaps all of these. If your order has been delayed have a 
little further patience. If you do not get yours by Nov. 15 
advise us. 

DAWNS, STUDIES AND CHRISTMAS 



We remind Colporteurs that they can greatly increase 
their sales by mentioning that these books make presents 
that combine elegance, usefulness and cheapness. 

SWEDISH, GERMAN AND FRENCH TRACTS 



We have these in good supply for the Volunteer work. 
We also always have plenty of the English. 



SOME OF OUR CORRESPONDENTS fail to sign their names 
to communications, or to give their addresses, and then are 
distressed when they do not hear from us. Put full address 
on every letter or card you write. 



R4086 : page 339 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER 
CURIOSITY A DANGEROUS SNARE 



INCREASINGLY the evidences multiply which 

show the power of the fallen angels in the affairs 

of men. We call attention to the fact that curiosity 

is the "bait" which they generally use to entrap 

their victims. Apparently the human mind is so constituted 

that these "demons" cannot intrude upon it 

except with its consent: hence the resort to curiosity to 

gain the consent of the will to investigate. Then gradually 

the leading is onward into foolishness or perhaps 

to obsession. Mechanical toys which answer all kinds 

of questions are amongst these. They are of various 

designs, but all requiring personal manipulation, and 

all tending to establish reliance in and communication 

with the fallen angels who personate the dead and 

sometimes personate the Lord himself, and give religious 

counsel in the endeavor to bind to themselves the 

confidence of mankind. 

The more absurd the proposition the more likely 
will it be to arouse curiosity. It seems absurd to believe 
that a "Ouija board" can and does answer questions 
correctly. There is reason to doubt that the 
operator may have something to do with the movements, 
and each must try for himself, thus slightly coming 
under the power of these "wicked spirits." (Eph. 6:12, 
margin.) The only safe plan is to have nothing whatever 
to do with "occult powers." They are all "powers 
of darkness"; for the holy angels do not thus communicate 
with man during this Gospel Age, and as "the 
dead know not anything" (Eccl. 9:10) they cannot. 
Hence all such occult powers are of the lying spirits, 
with which men may have communion and fellowship 
only at their peril. 

To our surprise, all that we have written on this 
subject does not keep some of our readers aloof from 
these snares. We have heard recently of some who 
were "not afraid to operate a Ouija board." The Truth 
should and does give courage, but this is not the way 
to exercise it. Our Lord says, "Fear God,"— that is to 
say, "Fear to disobey and to offend God." The Apostle 
says, "Let us fear, lest a promise being left us of entering 
into his rest we should seem to come short of it." 
The Editor of this journal fears not what men or demons 
can do to him, so long as he abides in the loving 
favor of God; but he would fear to disobey the Lord in 
respect to having communication with these demons 
and their various "curious" devices. It is well that we 
not only remember the promises of God; but let us also 
remember to be "obedient children." "All things shall 
work together for good to them that love God— the called 
ones according to his purpose," and the delusions of 
the end of this age will not be such as would deceive 
the very Elect; but we should remember the other 
side also, namely, that such as would have the special 
watch-care and deliverance promised must "abide under 
the shadow of the Almighty." Of such, only, it is written, 



R4087 : page 339 

"A thousand shall fall at thy side— ten thousand 
at thy right hand; but it shall not come nigh thee." 
Indeed we fancy that those of us who have been 
blest with the greater light upon God's plan should be 
the more loyal to him and should be able to stand 
severer tests. 

"WALK BY FAITH, NOT BY SIGHT" 

The Scriptures clearly teach that in the past 
God spake unto the fathers miraculously, and so we 
believe. Yet we would not listen to such "voices" now. 
We should close our minds against all such revelations 
either to ourselves or others. It is now the fallen angels 
that thus seek to commune with us clairaudiently. We 
should, if such were heard, pray at once to God, "Deliver 
us from the evil one." 

"God hath in these last days spoken unto us by his 
Son"— and his chosen apostles. We have their messages, 
and these, we are assured, are "able to make us 
wise unto salvation," and sufficient that the man of 
God should be thoroughly furnished unto every good 
word and work. The Apostle Peter also emphasizes 
this, saying, "We have a more sure word of prophecy 

R4087 : page 340 

unto which we do well to take heed as unto a light 
shining in a dark place until the day dawn and the Day-star 
arise in your hearts." 

We know of one "brother" in the Truth recently 
deceived by the Adversary into foolishness by these 
"voices" which personated God. It is our duty to warn 
all against these "seducing spirits" (I Tim. 4:1) and to 
repeat the caution of God's Word in respect to every 
teaching of men and demons, "If they speak not according 
to this Word, it is because there is no light in 
them"— they are of the darkness while we are children 
of the light. 

We have also warned our readers against those 
claiming gifts of the Spirit, including "unknown 
tongues." Nevertheless we have just heard of a dear 
"brother" who was very nearly captured, ensnared, thus 
by the Adversary. He attended a meeting where "the 
faithful" evidently became obsessed in some degree. 
He went to the altar, submitted his will and had already 
begun to feel a power coming into his arms, which were 
becoming rigid, when another "brother" went to his 
rescue. Surely "holy-rolling" trances, fits and frenzies 
are contrary to the holy Spirit as exhibited by Jesus 
and his apostles, and denominated "the spirit of a 
sound mind." 

There is much more excuse for the world and the 



nominal Church than for the Truth people along these 

lines. We cannot understand how anyone who has read 

carefully and prayerfully the six volumes of DAWN-STUDIES 

could be in doubt as to any of these delusions. 

The explanation of falling into such a trap would 

surely be that the person had to some extent neglected 

the study or the practice of the Truth and had measurably 

lost its spirit. Let us remember that our Lord 

has provided the full armor for all the soldiers of the 

cross in this "evil day," but that it remains for us to 

put it on and use it if we would resist the evil one in 

our Redeemer's name. All these should know the source 

of such pranks and communications— they should not 

be curious. And if they do recognize their source and 

still dally with them instead of being active and zealous 

in showing forth the light of Truth, it implies that 

they are not appreciative of the great privileges they 

enjoy. Just such we must suppose the Lord will wish 

to sift out as not "more than conquerors." 

AS THE SERPENT BEGUILED EVE 

We have mentioned Satan's use of human curiosity 
to entrap the mind. We refer now to mother Eve's seduction 
by him from loyalty to God. It was the sight 
of the serpent eating without harm the fruit forbidden to 
her and Adam that aroused her curiosity. The matter 
seemed to contradict the divine threat that the eating 
of that fruit would to Adam and his race mean, "Dying 
thou shalt die." Too late she found that she had been 
deceived and that not the effect of the fruit, but the reward 
of disobedience, was death. So with us, the danger 
is in leaving God to hearken to and connive with demons 
—the disloyalty— the neglect of our own grand 
opportunities in this "harvest" time. 

By this we do not mean to be understood as condemning 
all curiosity and investigation of proper matters, 
of which there are many. We cannot even condemn 
the world for having curiosity respecting things 
occult, for they have not the Word of God to guide them 
as have we. But surely those who have tasted 
the good Word of God and the powers of the age to 
come, and been made partakers of the spirit of holiness, 
—these are well nigh inexcusable for curiosity along the 
lines occult. We should always keep in memory that 
"Secret things belong to God, but things revealed belong 
to us and to our children always." The revelation 
granted to us in the Word of God is so complete as to 
leave no room for legitimate curiosity respecting any 
of the works of darkness. Any attempt to investigate 
them tells of our lack of faith in the divine Word! 

A SIGN OF OUR TIMES 



COMPARE 2 TIM. 3:1-4 

"The Roman Catholic Bishop of Elphin, in Ireland 
(Dr. Clancy), in a pastoral letter read a few weeks ago 
in his diocese, reveals a sad state of things in modern 
Irish life in that part of Ireland. The Bishop writes: 
"The absence of reverence for God and of respect for 
the awful sacredness of an oath are unhappily prominent 
features of modern Irish life. Cursing, blaspheming, 
profane and ribald language of the most revolting 
character assail the ears of the passers-by in our towns 
and villages, and the utter disregard for truth, even 
under the sanction of an oath and the solemn surroundings 
of our law courts, has become so frequent and so 
flagrant that, as a consequence, our religion is dishonored 
and our faith brought into contempt."— Exchange. 



R4087 : page 340 

THE LESSON OF SAMSON'S LIFE 

-JUDGES 16:21-31.-DECEMBER 1.- 

Golden Text:— "Be strong in the Lord and 
in the power of his might."— Eph. 6:10. 

MANY have wondered that three chapters of the 

Old Testament have been devoted to the 

story of Samson— great, strong, good-natured, 

witty. Still more strange it has seemed to some of 

us that his name should appear in the list of faith-heroes 

enumerated by the Apostle in the book of Hebrews, chapter 1 1 . 

Here his name appears with those 

of Abraham, David, Gideon, "who through faith subdued 

kingdoms, wrought righteousness, obtained 

promises, stopped the mouths of lions." No other similar 

character is mentioned in the Scriptures; he stands 

unique amongst the Bible heroes. Dr. Lang remarks:— 

"His irony, his grim laughter as well as his feats 
of strength are duly recorded. The story is strange, 

R4087 : page 341 

pathetic— one over which we smile and sigh, one of 
boisterous mirth and fearful sorrow— such wit, such 
folly, such force, such feebleness, comedy so grotesque 
and tragedy so awful." 

Those who have not learned to rightly divide the 
Word of Truth— those who have not learned to study 
Scripture dispensationally— will surely be perplexed 
when they think of Samson as one of the saints of God, 
and then attempt to measure such saintship with the 
teachings of Jesus and the apostles. Meekness, gentleness, 
patience, long-suffering, brotherly kindness, love, 



Samson no doubt possessed in some measure, as might 
any natural man; but most evidently he was not begotten 
of the holy Spirit— not, therefore, one of the sons of 
God in the sense that Jesus and his followers are recognized 
in the Scriptures. The same is true in considerable 
measure of all the ancient worthies. No such 
standards were set before them as are set before us of 
this Gospel Age. They were not called to the high calling 
of a change of nature from human to divine. They 
were not begotten again to be New Creatures in Christ 
Jesus. The time for this was not yet. Christ, the 
forerunner on this heavenly narrow way, had not yet 
come. The sacrifice of atonement had not yet been 
offered, and none therefore could come unto the Father 
as sons or receive the begetting of his Spirit. The very 
highest rank possible to the most noble of that time 
was that they might be called servants of God. Moses 
was faithful as a servant over his house, and Samson 
and the others belonged to that house of servants. So, 
then, we must not think to copy Samson nor to set his 
life as a standard for our children or others. We are 
to assign him the place in the divine plan which the 
Scriptures give him, and then his life and his doings 
will be seen in their proper light and not prove a 
stumbling-block to us. 

THE MISSION OF SAMSON 

Samson's parents were consecrated people of God in 
the fullest sense that it was possible for them to be at 
the time. They believed in God, trusted him, and desired 
that in some way their son might be used of him 
in his service. They and their son, had they lived during 
this Gospel Age, under its light and privileges, no 
doubt would have been saints of a high order in the 
Church. Samson's special consecration to the Lord was 
followed by a Nazarite vow, such as is described in 

R4088 : page 341 

Numbers 6:2-6: it included total abstinence from 
grapes, wine and all intoxicants, permission of 
the hair to go uncut, and the avoidance of contamination 
with dead bodies. Many took such a vow temporarily, 
but Samson and John the Baptist apparently 
voluntarily took the vow for life. And here it is well 
to remember that through all the vicissitudes of his 
peculiar career there is no intimation that Samson ever 
violated this vow. In its observance we have a testimony 
to his faith and his loyalty to God— in harmony 
with God. In this respect at least he was an overcomer 
of a high order; and all the faithful, all the overcomers 
of this Gospel Age, who have taken the vows of the 
cross and the narrow way in the footsteps of Jesus, 
should be able to appreciate very highly the loyalty of 
Samson to his vow. If we are similarly faithful to the 



observance of our vows we may be sure of a place in 
the heavenly Kingdom. 

SAMSON JUDGED ISRAEL TWENTY YEARS 

We have seen the child Samson consecrated to the 
Lord's service; we have seen his acceptance of this 
consecration in his taking of the Nazarite vow. Some 
have confused this vow with the statement that our 
Lord was called a Nazarene. This is a mistake. The 
people of the city of Nazareth were called Nazarenes, 
but those who took the special vow were called the 
Nazarites. Our Lord was not a Nazarite. He took no 
vow respecting his hair or the use of grapes and the 
fruit of the vine. He was a Nazarene, because for 
years his home had been in that city. 

The Scriptures indicate also that God accepted 
Samson for his service. Now the question arises, In 
what way could God use him? What service could he 
render? Would God send him to preach the Gospel? 
No, there was no Gospel, no good tidings, no message 
to declare yet. That message could not go forth until 
first of all the Redeemer had come and the satisfaction 
for our sins had been made. Thus the Scriptures declare 
that Christ brought life and immortality to light 
through the Gospel— life eternal, life for the world of 
mankind, for all who eventually would receive the 
goodness of God through Christ, and be restored by 
him to the full of human perfection. For these the 
eternal life is the divine intention. More than this, our 
Lord brought immortality to light as the special gift of 
God to that special class, which— called during this 
Gospel Age, in the dark time when the way is narrow 
and difficult— has been obedient to the heavenly calling, 
and, laying aside every weight, runs with patience 
the race set before it. For these the divine provision 
is glory, honor and immortality. But these things were 
not available either to Jews or Gentiles in Samson's 
day, and hence there were no missions or ministries of 
grace and truth as we have these now. However, God 
had a work to be done at that time, as we shall see, and 
he used Samson as his agent in connection with that 
work. 

After settling in Palestine the Israelites did not 
remain earnest and loyal to God and inspired with the 
promise made to Abraham, that through their nation 
God intended to bless all nations under the leadership 
of Messiah. When more or less of lack of faith with 
idolatry came in, God allowed them to be oppressed by 
the heathen nations on either side of them. At the time 
in question the Philistines had, by divine permission, 
conquered them and reduced them to a kind of slavery, 
by not permitting them to have any except the very 
crudest of tools and by not allowing amongst them 
blacksmiths, whose trade at that time was largely the 
forging of swords and spears and other implements of 



warfare. Thus the Israelites were unarmed, while the 
Philistines, their oppressors, were well armed. And 

R4088 : page 342 

while the Israelites were learning a lesson from their 
captivity they were also losing their courage. The 
Lord, knowing their condition, was preparing for their 
deliverance, and he accepted the consecration of Samson 
and made of him his agent for the raising of a 
patriotic spirit amongst the people, for their invigoration 
by hope, and for the paralyzing to some extent 
of the power of the Philistines, so that the Israelites 
might gradually begin to recover themselves from their 
bondage and to look again to the Lord for the deliverance 
which he was willing to grant them on their return 
to his favor. Samson's great strength, considered 
by the people in its relationship to his Nazarite vow, 
would be a continual lesson to them of the power of 
God. They could see that the Lord was quite able to 
accept of all who were consecrated to him, and to make 
them mighty indeed to the overthrow of their enemies. 
Had the lesson been rightly applied we may readily 
suppose that all the children of the Israelites would 
have been similarly consecrated, and that the people 
would have been looking forward to the Lord's mighty 
deliverance of them; but they were slow to learn. 

Samson judged Israel after the proper meaning of 
that word "judging" in the original, but not according 
to the usual acceptance of the word today. He judged 
Israel in the sense of avenging wrongs that they sustained 
upon the enemies who committed those wrongs. 
Samson was not merely a warrior because of his love 
of fighting; he was a patriot, he was a firm believer in 
the Oath-Bound Covenant, he was hoping for the deliverance 
of Israel from all antagonists, and for the 
nation's exaltation as God's people, to be his mighty 
power in the world for the blessing of all nations. He 
was therefore opposed to everything that opposed the 
Israelites; and the Philistines being their oppressors 
and opponents he directed his energies against them. 
Their wealth was gained largely from the extensive 
wheat-fields lying between the mountains of Judea and 
the Mediterranean Sea, and in order to injure them financially 
Samson on one occasion took peculiar means 
for setting fire to these wheat-fields owned and operated 
by the Philistines for their own profit. It was not a 
joke, although the means used were peculiar, unusual. 
Samson was a general in the field of battle, and in his 
own person and in his own ingenuity he represented 
infantry, cavalry and artillery, using every means at 
his command to break the forces of the oppressors and 
to deliver his people, judging their oppressors or 
penalizing them, injuring them, punishing them, and 
to that extent helping to deliver Israel. 

The abject servility of the Israelites is manifested 



by the fact that, instead of cooperating with Samson 

and with him claiming the divine promises for the possession 

of the land of Palestine and the overthrow of 

all opponents, they so feared the Philistines and had so 

little faith in God that they were even willing to deliver 

Samson to the Philistines, and did deliver him bound. 

He allowed the binding and delivery, knowing his ability 

to break the bonds and to put to flight those who 

thought they had him in their power, and he did so. 

What a lesson again to the faint-hearted, that they 

should have courage to accept the Lord's promises and 

be obedient to his directions. They had already been 

in the land for a long time, but had failed to conquer 

it because of lack of faith, whereas with the proper 

faith one might have chased a thousand and two 

might have put ten thousand to flight. 

SAMSON A BLIND PRISONER 

When we remember Samson's zeal for God and for 
his people, when we remember his faithfulness to his 
vow as a Nazarite, when we remember his great 
strength— which enabled him with no other weapon 
than the jawbone of an ass to fight a large company of 
his enemies and to slay about a thousand of them— his 
undoing by a woman carries with it a great lesson. The 
Philistines directly and indirectly planned the seduction 
of their powerful enemy, using as a decoy the 
beautiful Delilah, and the man who was so strong in 
other respects was found vulnerable from this point of 
attack. 

What a lesson to Spiritual Israelites! How we also 
should realize that the great Adversary will be on the 
alert to use any snare or trap for the undoing of those 
who are faithful soldiers of the cross. If we were to 
draw an analogy as between Samson's temptation and 
the temptation of the Body of Christ it would imply 
that we should be specially on guard against the blandishments 
of the world and the Adversary through the 
nominal Church, which figuratively is called a woman 
—more, she is described in the Scriptures as a harlot. 

It was when Samson rested his head upon the lap 
of Delilah that he was shorn of his hair and of his 
strength— a condition of his vow being broken. Similarly 
those who are strong in the Lord and in the power 
of his might through their faithfulness to the vows of 
consecration as followers of the Lord Jesus are in danger 
of going to sleep in the lap of the modern Delilah, 
Churchianity. A spirit of drowsiness is their spirit, 
of rest from the activities and self-sacrifices of their 
vow, a spirit of slumber; and with that spirit goes their 
strength. Is there not in some respects an analogy between 
the experiences of Samson and the experiences 
of the Church of Christ? Consider the activities of the 
early Church and the victories they gained in the name 
and strength of the Lord. Consider how the Adversary 



entangled and seduced the Church, and how for a considerable 

time the stupor and drowsiness and ease and 

worldliness were upon those who vowed to be faithful 

to the Lord and his service. Consider how the strength 

of the Gospel message was lost while in that drowsy 

condition in the "dark ages." Consider how the eyes 

of our understanding were put out even as Samson lost 

his natural sight. Consider that even since the Reformation 

time the Church has been to a large extent under 

the blinding influence of the Adversary, a slave to 

Churchianity and the world, even as Samson was the 

slave of the Philistines. As their slave Samson was 

used instead of a horse to turn a great wheel for grinding 

R4089 : page 343 

their food; and thus indeed the Church has been 
grinding food of a certain kind for many while still a 
slave to the world and under its blinding influences. 

THE DEATH OF SAMSON 

Here our lesson really begins. The Philistine worshipers 
of Dagon had called for a great religious festival 
in honor of their god, whom they credited with the 
success of their warfare not only upon the Israelites 
but their sea victories against the Sidonians and 
Egyptians. Samson was a prisoner in their prominent 
city, Gaza, where the festival was to begin in a great 
temple. In the midst of their hilarities Samson was 
brought forth as an exhibit of the power of their idol, 
of their god Dagon, over all enemies. They would have 
this one who had slain thousands to sing and play on 
an instrument and dance before them, and after he had 
thus made sport for them he stood between the two 
main pillars upon which the center of the structure 
rested and where he was in full view of the thousands 
who were in the temple proper itself, and also from 
the roof of it could be seen by about three thousand 
congregated thereon, the prominent men and women of 
the nation, the lords of the Philistines. Samson, still 
full of the spirit of his consecration, still full of the desire 
to serve God and his nation, entreated that the 
sacrifice of his life in the Lord's cause might be acceptable 
and might be used at this time in the slaughter 
of all the principal people of the Philistines, and 
thus signify a greater opportunity for the Israelites to 
be released from their slavery than any other means 
that could be thought of or made available at the time. 
The Lord was pleased to accept the sacrifice, and Samson, 
exerting his great natural strength combined with 
whatever the Lord was pleased to additionally grant, 
the two great central pillars of the structure gave way, 
the whole edifice came down with a crash, the three 
thousand people on the roof as well as the materials of 
the building serving as the executioner of the hour; or, 



as in the other figure, as Samson's artillery against his 
enemies, who were also the enemies of the Lord and 
the opponents of the divine program for which Israel 
stood. 

Modern buildings in many respects differ from 
those of ancient times, so that to us it may be difficult 
to imagine the truthfulness of this description. However, 
we have items of history which somewhat correspond. 
Pliny describes two theaters built of wood by 
L. Curio, which he says were large enough to contain 
all the people of Rome, and were supported by a single 
hinge; and if this were to give way, there would have 
been a greater slaughter than at the battle of Cannae. 

We have seen some analogy as between Samson's 
experiences and the history of the Gospel Church: may 
we not carry this analogy farther, and see in the death 
of Samson and its influence an illustration of the closing 
of this Gospel Age, the consummation of the sacrifice 
of the Church and the resulting influence upon the 
world? It is of course hazardous to attempt the reading 
of prophecies or symbols not yet fulfilled. Nevertheless 
we suggest that the Scriptural delineations of 
the future correspond in many respects with the picture 
given us in the life of Samson. Have we not come to 
the time when the Lord's people are recovering a little 
of the strength of the early Church? and have we not 
also come to the time when the worldly wise are feasting 
and rejoicing and giving honor to the god of Evolution, 
and through their Higher Critics denouncing the 
true Israelites and their hopes and the divine testimonies? 
Have we not come very near to the time when 
those who are still faithful to the Lord and the principles 
of his Word are made sport of by the worldly-wise? 
and have we not come to the time when some at least 
of the Lord's true people are ready to put forth all the 
strength in their power through the Volunteer work 
and the Colporteur work, the Pilgrim work, and a 
thousand other energies to move the pillars of error 
which uphold Churchianity? It is appointed for the 
Church to die, to die in sacrifice, to die in the interests 
and service of the Truth— to lay down their lives for 
the brethren, the Israelites indeed, for their deliverance 
from the bondage of the world. The strength of our 
reformation lies in the Abrahamic promise, in our confidence 
in God, and in our vow to do his will. With 
the death of the last member of the Church, the Body 
of Christ, will surely come, as the Scriptures point 
out, the downfall of Churchianity and the present system 
of world power, and all this will but make ready 
for the glorious Kingdom of God's dear Son, though 
the incidentals shall signify a time of trouble upon the 
great ones, the mighty ones, the chief captains of 
earth. 

OUR GOLDEN TEXT 



"Be strong in the Lord and in the power of his 
might." Here we have an exhortation applicable to the 
people of God at all times and under all conditions and 
under all circumstances. It would have applied to 
Samson in his day as a natural man, a servant, and it 
applies to us of today who are New Creatures in Christ 
Jesus, servant-sons of the Most High. If we look back 
to Samson and all the ancient worthies recounted by 
the Apostle, we note that the secret of their strength 
of character, by which they endured and overcame, 
resided in their faith in God and in the promises. And 
so it must be with us. But there is a difference between 
faith and credulity: the latter may give a spirit of energy, 
but will not endure. The former is the power of 
God which enables us to endure all things as good 
soldiers of the Lord Jesus Christ, soldiers of the Truth, 
soldiers of righteousness, fighting against sin and 
error and all ungodliness, including the artful wiles of 
the Adversary, by which he would deceive us and the 
whole world, misrepresenting the divine character by 
the "doctrines of devils" foisted upon the Lord's people 
during the "dark ages," to the blinding of the eyes 
of their understanding. Now in the Lord's providence 
our eyes are becoming more and more opened, 
in harmony with the Apostle's prayer, "I pray God for 
you that you may be able to comprehend with all saints 

R4089 : page 344 

what is the breadth and length and depth and height; 
and to know the love of God which passeth knowledge." 
-Eph. 3:18,19. 

Hence it is important for us, not merely to believe, 
but to believe the truth. Our Redeemer prayed, "Sanctify 
them with thy truth, thy Word is truth," and the 
Scripture tells us of some who, not having sufficient 
love for the truth, are abandoned of the Lord to believe 
a lie, and through that false faith to find ultimately the 
condemnation of their heart attitude and to be counted 
unworthy a place with the "Very Elect." Let us set 
the Word of the Lord above all other messages: yea, 
more than this, let us prize the divine Word and plan 
above any of our own misconceptions and imaginings. 
Thus we shall be willing to buy the truth at any cost 
and to sell it not for any price. Thus we shall be 
found acceptable to our Lord, and shall be kept strong 
in the Lord and in the power of his might, until our 
trials shall be finished and he shall say, It is enough; 
come up higher; enter into the joys of thy Lord. 



R4089 : page 344 

RUTH'S CHOICE 



--RUTH l:14-22.-DECEMBER 8.- 

Golden Text:— "Thy people shall be my 
people, and thy God my God."— Ruth 1:16. 

MANIFESTLY the chief object in the brief narrative 
of Ruth and Naomi was to preserve 
an authentic record of a link in the chain of 
our Lord's human ancestry. Though a Gentile by 
birth, Ruth was a sincere Jewish proselyte, incorporated 
into the commonwealth of Israel, and as such she 
was recognized of God as one of his chosen people. 
And not only so, but she was also honored with a place 
in the line of our Lord's human ancestry, being the 
great-grandmother of David. The same was true of 
Rahab, also a Jewish proselyte, who became the mother 
of Boaz, the great-grandfather of David. 

The story of Ruth and Naomi is an interesting one 
as an item of Jewish history. It has its lights and also 
its shadows; for the characters were but samples of 
our fallen humanity coming gradually under the influence 
of divine grace. All that was noble in them therefore 
calls forth our admiration and esteem, while the 
blemishes are to be deplored. 

Naomi and her husband Elimelech, pressed by 
hard times and a threatening famine, decided to leave 
the land of Israel and the people of God and try their 
fortunes among the Gentiles in the land of Moab. In 
doing so they were leaving the special privileges of association 
with God's people, and failing also to contribute 
their part toward their comfort and encouragement 
and godly counsel in the time of general distress. 
They were also exposing themselves and their children 
to the unhallowed influences of an idolatrous people. 
This was the part they chose merely for temporal advantage, 
rather than to share the hardships at home 
and trust in the Lord to supply their needs. 

The result of this wrong course was only trouble. 
Elimelech died there, and Naomi was left alone with 
her two sons to rear. By and by the two sons married 
heathen wives who knew not the God of Israel. Then 
they also died; and Naomi, bereft of all but her two 

R4090 : page 344 

daughters-in-law, feeling that the hand of the Lord 
was against her in that she was thus sorely chastened, 
decided to retrace her steps to the land of her nativity, 
and again to cast in her lot with the Lord's people. 

When she had thus, by sad experience, learned the 
needed lesson and determined again to submit herself 
to the Lord's leading, the favor of God began to return 
to her. She found a great comfort and blessing in the 
manifested devotion of Ruth, her daughter-in-law, and 
in her conversion to the Jewish faith. "And Ruth said, 
Entreat me not to leave thee, or return from following 



after thee: for whither thou goest I will go; and where 
thou lodgest I will lodge; thy people shall be my people 
and thy God my God. Where thou diest I will die, 
and there will I be buried. The Lord do so to me, and 
more also, if aught but death part thee and me.'" 

That this was not a mere impulse on the part of 
Ruth is also manifest from her subsequent course of 
faithfulness to her mother-in-law; and Naomi's appreciation 
and devotion to her interests were just as manifest. 
Evidently though Naomi and her husband had 
erred in judgment and had been faint-hearted they 
were still loyal to God and let their light shine in the 
land of Moab, and both the daughters-in-law had been 
influenced by it, while Ruth was fully converted to God. 

Their kindly reception by the people of Bethlehem 
and the sympathy and kindness shown them were other 
great blessings. And finally the marriage of Ruth to 
Boaz, a man of character, wealth and influence, furnished 
a happy home to the desolate women and Ruth 
was honored of God in the line of our Lord's ancestry. 

The advice of Naomi to Ruth concerning Boaz was 
not of unalloyed wisdom. Such a course today would 
brand any woman as a loose, if not a disreputable, 
character. And that Boaz feared such reproach is also 
clear from his request of Chap. 3:14. In advising such 
a course Naomi again betrayed the weakness of her 
trust in God. But God in kindness had mercy on her 
weakness; and, their hearts being free from evil, God 
overruled all for good. 

The words of Ruth, contained in the Golden Text 
of the lesson, serve to remind us of one of our duties. 
We who by nature were Gentiles (as Ruth was a Moabitess) 
have by God's grace become Spiritual Israelites; 
and should determine that henceforth former conditions, 
interests, pleasures and relationships are gone 
forever. To us "old things have passed away and behold 
all things have become new." 

How forcefully this lesson is brought to our attention 
by the Psalmist's words, which prophetically represent 
the Church, and urge her to "Forget also thy 

R4090 : page 345 

Father's house and thine own people: so shall the king 
greatly desire thy beauty; for he is thy Lord— worship 
thou him." (Psa. 45:10,11.) It is expected that those 
who have had the high honor of betrothal to the great 
King's Son, the one "altogether lovely," will become 
so enchanted with their future prospects as to be almost 
oblivious to the things of this present time, except 
as to "things needful." 

"Only for Jesus! Lord, keep this forever 

Sealed on my heart and engraved on my life! 
Pulse of all gladness and nerve of endeavor, 
Secret of rest and the strength of our strife." 
Next to the Lord himself are his people, and whoever 



loveth not him that is begotten of God does not 

really love God. And to love God and his people means 

that we will delight to meet with them. Where opportunities 

for fellowship in praise, prayer and the study 

of the divine Word exist and go unimproved it marks a 

coldness or at least a lukewarmness of our love for 

God and holy things, which argues unfavorably as respects 

even our sharing the Bridegroom's throne. 

To counteract the influences of sin and worldliness 
and to grow in grace let us resolve to fully cast in our 
lot with the Lord's faithful, saying, in Ruth's words, 
"Thy people shall be my people and thy God my God; 
where thou dwellest I will dwell and there will I be 
buried." 

DWELLING WITH GOD'S PEOPLE 

All of God's people can dwell together in love, in 
fellowship, under the divine care as a "royal priesthood" 
"seated together in heavenly places"— in the 
antitypical Tabernacle's "Holy." So far as our earthly 
abode is concerned we may today live comparatively 
closely, by virtue of the convenient railway and mail 
services. It behooves us all, therefore, to "speak often 
one to another" that, as the Prophet declares, the Lord 
may hear and note and prosper our blessing of one 
another. (Malachi 3:16.) And we suggest that it is a 
partial fulfilment of the injunction that we "make 
straight paths for our feet, lest that which is lame be 
turned out of the way," if we seek such dwelling places 
as will conduce to our occasional interchanges with 
the household of faith. Let us put God first and Christian 
fellowship and growth in grace second and both 
before wealth in all of our reckonings. Thus we will 
best seek first the Kingdom of God and its righteousness 
and find all other things added in proportion to 
our real needs as New Creatures. 



R4090 : page 345 

"SPEAK, LORD, FOR THY SERVANT HEARETH" 

-I SAMUEL 3:6-14.-DECEMBER 15.- 

SAMUEL, the Prophet, is one of the grand, strong 

characters of Old Testament times. The 

story of his early devotion to the Lord and 

his obedience and perseverance in well doing, constitutes 

a grand lesson, not only for young Christians, 

but also for those more advanced in years, including 

parents. As the story of Ruth gives us glimpses of a 

time of life of the Israelites such as is generally obscured 

by the records of wars and troubles, so also 

does the story of Samuel. He was of the tribe of Levi, 



already consecrated to the Lord, and accepted. An 
insight into the deep piety of his parents is given in 
the first chapter of the Book. A child born under such 
circumstances of prayer and devotion to the Lord, 
could not, under natural laws, fail to be noble minded 
and religiously inclined. Would that we could impress 
this thought upon all Christians who become parents 
—that their children should be devoted to the Lord 
from the moment of conception! and daily prayer and 
effort should be made that pre-natal influences might 
all conduce to the highest mental, moral and physical 
welfare of the offspring. "Who can bring a clean thing 
out of an unclean?" asked the Prophet, and he answers, 
"Not one." Our expectation should not, therefore, be 
that the children even of the saints would be absolutely 
perfect; but we are to remember that the Lord accepts 
the heart, the intention, the will; and that agreeably 
to his arrangement of nature, the mind, the intention, 
the will of the parents may be expressed in 
their child. True, the imperfect mind cannot even 
grasp or picture perfect things, but it can approximate 
them, and in that same proportion it can impress that 
approximation of character upon the offspring. 

UNEQUALLY YOKED PARENTS 

There is an old adage that "blood will tell"— that 
is, that culture and good breeding will be marked in 
the offspring. It is surely a fact that character will 
tell. Christians, thoroughly devoted to the Lord and 
seeking day by day to know and to do the divine will, 
and who are under the instruction of the holy Spirit in 
the School of Christ and somewhat developed in grace 
and in knowledge of the truth, whose minds are transformed 
by the renewing of the holy Spirit, and their 
affections set upon things above, will surely mark and 
impress the spiritual qualities of their own hearts upon 
the natural offspring. Such children, well born and 
devoted to the Lord from conception, will, of course, in 
childhood be trained by the same parents in the ways 
of the Lord, in the ways of righteousness, of justice, of 
truth and of love. Thus begotten and thus trained, it 
seems very improbable that they should afterward depart 
from the way of the Lord, or that they should 
permanently remain transgressors, even though temporarily 
misled through temptation. 

While the Lord has directed his children not to be 
unequally yoked together with unbelievers, nevertheless, 
where the yoking or marriage has occurred prior 
to their covenant with the Lord, he has arranged that 
the fruit of their marriage, their children, shall be accounted 
as the Lord's through the consecrated parent; 
and his blessing will accordingly be with the consecrated 
child regardless of the fact that one of its parents 

R4090 : page 346 



was an unbeliever. The Apostle clearly states this in 
I Cor. 7:14. 

It is a serious error— and one into which some 
Christians have fallen— to suppose parentage to be dishonorable 
or sinful, some even claiming that "original 
sin" was of this sort. The Scriptures teach quite to 
the contrary, declaring that "marriage is honorable in 
all, and the bed undefiled." We are to remember, too, 
that the divine plan for the propagation of the race was 
arranged and the command to multiply and fill the 
earth was given before sin entered the world— before 
the disobedience in Eden. The Apostle severely reprimands 
those "forbidding to marry," and distinctly says, 
in his letter to Timothy, "I will, therefore, that the 
younger women marry, bear children, guide the house, 
give none occasion to the Adversary to speak reproachfully." 
-I Tim. 5:14. 

R4091 : page 346 

Neither is this in conflict with his declaration in 
I Cor. 7, that "he that marrieth doeth well, but he 
that marrieth not doeth better." In his letter to Timothy 
he is speaking of the younger persons of the congregation; 
whereas in his advice in Corinthians he is 
addressing such members of the Church as had made 
a full consecration of themselves to the Lord, and were 
seeking to run in the race course toward the mark for 
the prize. And our advice to others on this subject 
should be strictly along these inspired lines. The advice 
not to marry will usually be found helpful to those 
who have made a full consecration of themselves to 
the Lord, who will find that they can accomplish more 
in the Lord's service free, as far as possible, from 
earthly obligations and division of heart. But for 
others who are not New Creatures, though moral and 
well disposed, marriage is the reasonable and proper 
expectation of life according to divine arrangement; 
it should not be hindered, but should be counseled as 
wisely as possible. 

CONSECRATION OF OUR CHILDREN 

We are to recognize a difference between the consecrated 
parents of Samuel and their prayers for a son, 
and the proper prayers of consecrated people of the 
present time. Only since Pentecost have the Lord's 
people been privileged to be "New Creatures in Christ 
Jesus," begotten of the holy Spirit; and such seek and 
pray for spiritual rather than natural children;— by 
spending their lives as did their Master, seeking to 
transform children of the first Adam into spiritual 
children of God. It is in view of this, and when addressing 
spirit-begotten ones, that the Apostle declares, 
that "he that marrieth not doeth better,"— because he 



will, generally speaking, find the unmarried condition 
most favorable to his new ambitions. 

Born in response to prayer and consecration, Samuel 
was, doubtless, a remarkable boy; and his parents 
showed the sincerity of their prayer in the fact that he 
was early brought to the high priest at Shiloh and formally 
presented to the Lord's service. We read that 
this was when he was "weaned," but are not to suppose 
that it was when as an infant he was weaned from the 
breast; but, rather, interpreting the word on a larger 
scale, we should understand it was when he was weaned 
from his mother, in the sense of being able to get 
along without her care: this was probably when he was 
from ten to twelve years of age. 

We are often surprised that Christian parents, begotten 
of the holy Spirit, do not manifest more of this 
spirit which actuated the parents of Samuel. Many 
seemingly consecrated people hold back their most 
precious possessions, their children, from the Lord, 
and incline to devote them to some worldly calling in 
life— medicine, law, industry. Whether their course is 
prompted by too great humility or too great selfishness, 
it is not our province to determine; but seemingly 
they either have not the faith to believe that the 
Lord would accept their offering, or they cherish, perhaps 
but half unconsciously, a desire to see their children 
prosper after the manner of the world, and fear 
that their consecration to the Lord might in some 
manner blight their earthly prospects. What a great 
mistake! Do not such parents know that it is their 
privilege to present themselves to the Lord and all 
they have, including their children? and do they not 
know, too, that "The blessing of the Lord, it maketh 
rich, and he added no sorrow with it"? (Prov. 10:22.) 
Can they not realize that it is better to be a door-keeper 
in the house of the Lord than to dwell in the tents of 
wickedness? and that greater happiness would accompany 
a devoted life, even though spent in poverty, 
than could come through any other course, even though 
surrounded by every luxury? Have they not learned 
these lessons from their own experiences? and can 
they not apply them likewise to their own children? 

"TRAIN UP A CHILD" 

Samuel ministered to Eli in the temple; that is, he 
served the high priest— who was specially the Lord's 
servant and representative— in his dwelling apartments 
which were close by the tabernacle,— for the 
temple was not yet built. Samuel's parents, in thus 
subjecting him early in life to the duties of a servant, 
were really putting him in a most excellent school. In 
our opinion it is a mistake to suppose that the early 
years of life— from ten to eighteen— should be largely 
spent in play; not only is the wisdom of bringing children 
early into positions of responsibility, and more 



or less of routine and drudgery, exemplified in the case 

of Samuel, but it is also exemplified in the cases of 

many of the prominent people of this land today. Mr. 

Carnegie, whose fame is world-wide, entered early 

upon the drudgery of life as a telegraph messenger. 

Mr. Edison, whose fame as an electrician is also world-wide, 

began life's drudgery as a newsboy. And thus 

it is in perfect accord with the experiences of today in 

worldly things that we perceive that the consecration 

of Samuel as a servant of Eli at an early age had probably 

much to do with the firmness and grandeur of his 

character when, subsequently, he became the Lord's 

Prophet, and the last and the greatest of Israel's 

judges. 

R4091 : page 347 

Our observation is that there is no more common 
mistake made by parents than that of supposing their 
children could not properly understand or appreciate 
religious things at an early age— say twelve years. 
The experience of Samuel and our own experience and 
that of many others assure us that some of the deepest 
religious sentiments may be experienced as early 
as twelve years of age. This should be watched for 
by the parents and should be cultivated with much more 
care than the tenderest flowers in their gardens. The 
flowers of veneration, spirituality, hope, faith, trust, 
in the child-mind need and should have tenderest care 
and watering and weeding and assistance. The parent 
by nature and by divine direction occupying a 
responsible position as gardener to these, must appreciate 
flowers in the hearts of his own family; and if he 
neglect his responsibilities he is culpable and will 
surely suffer, not only disappointment in respect to his 
children in the future, but suffer also in that he will be 
the loser of certain blessings in his own heart; because 
it is a part of the divine arrangement that he that watereth 
others shall himself be watered. 

Public responsibilities and duties, and trying to 
save other people's children, can never excuse any 
Christian parent from his responsibilities toward his 
own children; nor can he shift his responsibilities 
upon Sunday School teachers. His neglect of duty 
will surely work to his own disadvantage as well as to 
the disadvantage of his offspring; and if in the past 
he has been negligent in this matter he cannot too soon 
rectify matters, though he will need to pray for and to 
seek to exercise greater wisdom in order to overcome 
his past neglect. 

Dr. Haslett, in his Pedagogical Bible School, submits 
the following as the sum of his findings from 
various statistics:— 

Out of 8,424 conversions— 
5,054 occurred between the ages of 12-20 years. 



3,183 16-25 " 

187 " at 25 years and over. 

GOD'S MOUTHPIECE TWELVE YEARS OLD 

The story of the Lord's first message to Samuel is 
beautiful in its simplicity. The boy evidently was 
accustomed to obeying the calls of Eli for various services 
at various times, and to this end had his sleeping 
apartments near by, Eli being advanced in life, about 
seventy-eight years. Three times the Lord called Samuel, 
and he answered, "Here am I," and went to Eli. 
It was after the third call that Eli instructed him to 
say, "Speak, Lord; for thy servant heareth." 

The record is that for a long time such a message 
from the Lord had been "precious," that is, scarce: 
Eli, although a good man, and sincere and faithful and 
kind in his dealings with Samuel, had been too lax in 
his dealings with his own sons, who were priests and 
had much to do with the services of the Tabernacle, 
and who, therefore, in every sense of the word should 
have been pious and exemplary men. The Lord had 
already sent Eli a warning message respecting his sons 
who were profligate and open transgressors, not only in 
financial affairs, but also in morals. Eli should have 
realized his responsibilities and should have checked 
their wrong course and, if necessary, should have dismissed 
them from the service of the Tabernacle even 
though they were his own sons; but in proportion as 
he had grown weak in mind and body, they had grown 
strong, self-willed and impious, and the old man seems 
not to have had the necessary strength of character to 
deal with them. The Lord's message delivered to 
Samuel was in respect to Eli's family and the punishment 
that should come upon them for their sins, which 
were much more grievous in view of the fact that they 
were the exemplars and instructors of the people. 

A KIND AND INDULGENT PARENT 

There are two kinds of unfaithful parents: 

(1) The harsh, cruel, wicked, who not only inbreed 
an evil disposition, but inculcate the same by precept 
and example. If both parents be of this stripe the 
child's condition is almost a hopeless one for the present 
life. The restitution conditions of the Millennium 

will be needed to eradicate the taint. Yet where one 
parent belongs to God the result may under divine 
providence be the reverse— the child may not only be 
better born, but discerning the evil of his parent's 
course may thereby be repelled and prepared to take 
the opposite course. 

(2) Some "kind and indulgent parents" are very 
unfaithful to their trust. With our children partakers 
of the general weaknesses of the race, a kindness and 
indulgence which allow noxious weeds to develop in 



their characters is gross unkindness, very reprehensible 
in the sight of God and those in accord with his Word. 

R4092 : page 347 

Indeed, it is possible that this term, "kind and indulgent 
parent," is frequently used very inappropriately. 
In many instances it would be more truthful if less 
polite to say, "A weak and incompetent parent." 

Surely all proper parents from the divine viewpoint 
will be kind to their children, and all such should 
be glad to be indulgent also, to the extent that the best 
interests of the child will permit— and not one inch 
further. But while the correcting rod must not be 
spared when necessary nor used when unnecessary, 
nor too severely— yet the best rule where possible, 
where the disposition of the child will permit, is the 
rule of love. Beginning early the parents' love combined 
with firmness should so mould the child's mind 
that it would have absolute confidence in the parents' 
love and in their loyalty to God's regulations in all of 
life's interests. To such a child the look of sadness 
and regret or the tear of sorrow on the parent's face 
will be more efficacious than many blows and much 
violent language. 

JUDGE ELI UNFAITHFUL TO GOD 

Judge Eli's weakness as a parent led him to unfaithfulness 
to God. His is not a sample of an "overcoming" 
character: he more nearly represented the 
character of the "Great Company." He had many good 
qualities. No vulgar sin is laid at his door. In many 

R4092 : page 348 

respects he placed the honor of God far beyond his 

personal interests. We see no manifestation of selfish 

ambition on his part opposing Samuel's advancement. 

Indeed to his credit be it noted that he fathered Samuel 

well. He disapproved the course of his sons, but, 

aged, he failed of the courage to denounce their course 

with proper vigor, as the Lord's words seem to intimate. 

We are not to forget, either, that among the 

twelve directly under our Lord's instruction one exercising 

his free will became a traitor. We fear that, 

however trained, those who turn out badly are generally 

not well-endowed in their begettal: though here 

also we remember Satan as an example of a perfect begetting 

and perfect training, which were lost before 

the energy of his ambitions. 

Eli's experience with his wayward sons calls for 
our sympathy, even though he brought his difficulties 
upon himself by reason of his neglect of the early 
training of them in the ways of the Lord, in the ways 
of his righteousness. Doubtless he often looked at the 



faithful lad who ministered to him so patiently and industriously, 

and wished that his sons had been of similar 

disposition; but the time so to wish advantageously 

and profitably was long gone by; they should have 

been begotten in the spirit of consecration, and trained 

in conformity therewith, and the Lord's Word for it is 

that when they were old they would not have departed 

from it. There is a lesson for parents here, too; the 

fact that the Lord's service is to be considered of primary 

importance and is to be defended even at the expense 

of their own flesh and blood. 

THE VOICE OF THE LORD 

In the morning Samuel hesitated to tell his kind 
master, Eli, the unfavorable message he had received 
of the Lord in the night; but Eli was anxious to know 
whatever the Lord had to say, and importuned until 
Samuel told him all. There is a good lesson here for 
the Lord's people— a lesson of humility and kindness; 
the lad might have felt puffed up to think that the Lord, 
who so seldom spoke to any, had now spoken to him; 
he might have felt himself honored and above Eli, in 
that the message spoke of the discomfiture of the latter; 
pride might have made him boastful and inconsiderate 
of the feelings of his master so that he would 
have taken delight in telling him of the calamities that 
would come, and how greatly he had been honored of 
the Lord. Samuel, on the contrary, exhibited the spirit 
of meekness, apparently not even considering the honor 
that had come to him; but, rather, sympathizing with 
his master, he would have preferred not to burden his 
heart with the message of calamity. 

The Lord is speaking now to some of his faithful 
ones through his Word, through his "knock" (Rev. 3:20), 
which tells us of his presence, through the signs 
which mark the incoming of the new dispensation: are 
any disposed now to be haughty and proud and boastful 
because the Lord has permitted them to hear his 
voice and to know something of his plan and of the 
calamities coming upon Babylon? Should they not 
rather be filled with humility so that self would be lost 
sight of entirely? Should not all favored of the Lord 
speak of the trouble coming upon Babylon sympathetically, 
with a disposition to assist to an escape, rather 
than a disposition to gloat over and rejoice in coming 
troubles in which present systems will be completely 
overthrown? 

The Lord speaks in our day in a different manner 
from that in which he spoke in olden times: as the 
Scriptures declare, "God, who at sundry times and in 
divers manners spake in time past unto the fathers by 
the prophets, hath in these last days spoken unto us by 
his Son." (Heb. 1:1,2.) The Word of the Lord is still 
precious and scarce in that it is not, at the present time, 
given to all, but only to a certain class; as it is written, 



"He that hath an ear to hear let him hear." The majority 
of mankind hath no ear to hear at the present 
time, no eye to see the glorious beauty of God's plan. 
As the Apostle explains, "The god of this world hath 
blinded their minds"— earthly things, earthly ambitions, 
earthly hopes, earthly calls and voices, distract 
their attention, fill their capacity; but blessed are our 
eyes for they see, and our ears for they hear, and blessed 
shall we be if, like Samuel, when we hear the 
Lord's message we respond promptly, "Speak, Lord, 
for thy servant heareth." Such as thus respond shall 
be taught of God— by the Word of his grace— the words 
of the Lord Jesus, and the words of his inspired apostles 
—instructed and guided in the understanding of 
these through the holy Spirit, through the various 
helps and channels and agents which the Lord is pleased 
to use— perhaps a tract, perhaps a book, perhaps a 
letter, perhaps a conversation, perhaps a sermon. 

He who would continue to be taught of the Lord 
must continue to listen for his voice, continue to be in 
the hearing and obeying attitude of heart. The difficulty 
with some apparently is that their own wills are 
not fully extinct, dead— that their consecration is not 
complete; hence while consecrated enough to wish not 
to disobey the Lord's voice, they have certain ideas of 
their own respecting what his voice should say, and 
they prefer to interpret his message in conformity to 
their own preferences: they will to do more or less their 
own wills, and will to hear the Lord's voice directing 
them in accordance with their own wills. This is a 
most dangerous situation and is generally accompanied 
by self-conceit and self-assertion and will ultimately 
lead far from the Christian's goal. Let each of us resolve 
by the Lord's grace that we will out of honest 
heart continually seek to hear the pure Word of God, 
and that with a desire to obey it as far as we are able. 



R4092 : page 349 

THE HOLY ANOINTING OIL 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

I have several thoughts regarding the typical 
anointing oil which I desire to have your opinion on. 
They have been very faith-inspiring to myself, and so 
I desire to impart them to others, but hesitate to do so 
before laying them before you. 

In Ex. 30:23 we read God's instructions to Moses 
regarding the holy anointing oil, as follows: "Take 
thou also unto thee principal spices, of pure myrrh 500 
shekels, and of sweet cinnamon half so much, even 250 
shekels, and of sweet calamus 250 shekels (v. 24), and 
of cassia 500 shekels after the shekel of the sanctuary, 
and of olive oil an hin." 



Notice here it reads "principal spices," in contrast 
to v. 34, same chapter, where it reads "sweet spices" 
used in the incense or holy perfume. So these principal 
spices would represent principal things which 
would go to make up the anointing which we receive 
to become priests and kings with Christ. 

As far as I know the meanings of these spices are 
in no way significant, but compared with other Bible 
verses we may see their significance. In Ex. 31:2-5 we 
have Bezaleel, referred to as the builder of the tabernacle, 
a type of Christ. His ancestry is typical of the 
existence of Christ on the various planes he has lived. 
Bezaleel was son of Uri, he in turn son of Hur, and he 
in turn a son of Judah. Now Judah means praised; 
so was Christ praised in his prehuman existence, referring 
to the glory he possessed with the Father before 
the world was. Hur, the next offspring, is representative 
of Christ's humiliation; as the word Hur means 
grave, so Christ humbled himself even unto death, yea, 
to the ignominious death of the cross, down into the 
grave. From there he came forth with the right to life 
for every human being, and is the Light of the world, 
as Uri signifies light; and now he is the shadow of the 
Almighty, the robe of righteousness provided by God 
for us, as signified in the word Bezaleel, "shadow of 
the Almighty." 

V. 4 says that this Bezaleel could devise cunning 
works to work in gold (the divine nature) and in silver 
(the spirit nature— Great Company) and in brass (the 
perfect human nature), showing Christ can complete 
work in all the planes of existence. V. 5, And in the 
cutting of stones (polishing the jewels), to set them 

R4093 : page 349 

(as the Father pleases), and in the carving of timber 
(the fallen race) to make all manner of workmanship 
(as restitution will produce for the race). This verse 
shows the present condition of the race and the Church, 
the unfinished material. Verse 2, referring to this 
Bezaleel, says, "And I have filled him with the Spirit 
of God, in wisdom and in understanding, and in knowledge 
and in all manner of workmanship." This is the 
typical anointing of Bezaleel; and the antitypical 
anointing of Christ recorded in Isa. 1 1 :2 contains the 
identical component parts as that of Bezaleel, viz.: 
"The Spirit of the Lord shall rest upon him, the spirit 
of wisdom and understanding, the spirit of counsel 
and might, the spirit of knowledge and fear of the 
Lord." The only difference in the two verses is in respect 
to the terms "counsel and might" and "workmanship," 
but both embody the same idea, i.e., deputyship 
and ability, or how to go about a matter and the ability 
to accomplish the same. These three verses parallel 
as follows: 



EXODUS 30:23 EXODUS 31:3 ISAIAH 11:2 
HOLY ANOINTING OIL BEZALEEL CHRIST 

Filled with the Spirit of Lord rest 
Olive oil, an hin Spirit of God. upon him. 
Myrrh, 500 Wisdom Wisdom 

Cinnamon, 250 Understanding Understanding 
Calamus, 250 Knowledge Knowledge 

Cassia, 500 Workmanship Counsel and might 

In the above parallel we find knowledge parallel 
with calamus and understanding with cinnamon, and 
of each a like quantity is prescribed, even 250 shekels. 
So we would also expect in our anointing from above 
to find our knowledge and understanding equal— that 
is we would have the understanding of all the knowledge 
received of God, so that seeing we might discern 
and hearing we might understand. 

For example, we read in the Scriptures that Christ 
is a corresponding price for our sins. Now, if we fear 
Jehovah we have that knowledge, for the fear of God 
is the beginning of knowledge. (Prov. 1:7.) When we 
see how that Christ became a perfect fleshly man and 
was an exact counterpart of Adam and gave up his life 
for Adam's, we see, or understanding tells us, how he 
is a cover for our sins. So knowledge from God is 
accompanied by its equal of understanding, and this 
is how we have become established in the faith. If 
God gives us knowledge he also gives us a test on that 
knowledge, and fortifies it with the understanding 
thereof. 

Myrrh, which represents and is parallel with wisdom, 
is equal in amount with calamus and cinnamon 
combined, 500 shekels of myrrh and 250 shekels each 
of calamus and cinnamon. So we find God in the 
anointing also gives wisdom equal to our knowledge 
and understanding combined. Wisdom is knowing 
what to do. To illustrate: Knowledge tells us that 
God loves his only begotten Son; understanding tells 
us it was on account of his cheerful obedience even 
unto death that the Father took such delight in him; 
wisdom then draws the inference, that if we would also 
be well pleasing to the Father we must do as Jesus did, 
follow in his steps, get our minds into the same frame 
as Jesus had his, for if this mind is not in us which was 
also in Jesus, we are not pleasing to the Father. 
Again, the knowledge that Jesus died for our sins 
brings responsibility, and the understanding of the 
ransom brings added responsibility, and our responsibility 
is equal to what we see we ought to do, or our 
wisdom. 

Workmanship may also be translated deputyship, 
but never means work or labor. It has the two ideas 
embodied in itself that are expressed in its parallel in 
Isa. 1 1:2, viz., counsel and might. Counsel here means 
advice, or how to do a thing; might here means the 
ability to perform. Now, cassia, which represents 



R4093 : page 350 

workmanship or counsel and might, amounted to 500 
shekels, the same as myrrh, which represented wisdom, 
or knowing what to do. So God, after showing us our 
responsibility or what we should do, accompanies it 
with an equal amount of advice or information how to 
do it, and also enough ability to perform what is expected 
of us. All that is expected of us is to will— a 
full consecration to the Lord and his service— and all 
the rest he will supply in knowledge, understanding: 
knowledge of what we should do and ability and information 
how to do it. With more than this he cannot 
anoint us. 

This mixture of oil and spices was well ground together, 
so that each drop of oil contained the four 
spices in the same proportion as the whole mass; so 
each drop of anointing we receive that comes down from 
above has all its constituents in the proper proportion. 
God gives no knowledge except for a purpose, and 
establishes our faith by giving the understanding 
thereof, then shows us what that knowledge is for, by 
showing us what is expected of us, and also gives us 
the advice and ability needed for the accomplishment 
thereof, and we must make active consecration to complete 
the Lord's will. 

Chap. 30, v. 32, in Rotherham's translation reads, 
"And according to the proportions thereof shall ye not 
make any like it; holy is it." V. 33, "Whosoever compoundeth 
any like [according to the proportions thereof] 
shall be cut off from among his people." This 
would show us that after the same proportions thereof 
no other anointing would be allowed. So we might 
expect many imitation anointing oils, using the same 
ingredients, but not in the same proportions as the 
true anointing oil, having knowledge and understanding 
equal and balanced, and these in turn accompanied 
by their equal of wisdom and counsel and might. 
Some imitations may be so close that only God could 
tell the difference; hence these are false brethren. 

In Eccl. 9:10 we read, "Whatsoever thy hand findeth 
to do, do with thy might; for there is no work nor 
device nor knowledge nor wisdom in the grave whither 
thou goest." The word translated device here is translated 
reason and account in Eccl. 7, verses 25 and 27, 
respectively. All three words are closely related to 
understanding and are the results of understanding. 
Solomon here uses these four— wisdom, knowledge, 
device (or understanding) and works (result of workmanship) 
—to show that the absence of these produces 
physical death, or is the sign of physical death, and 
conversely their presence signifies physical life. So if 
we have been anointed with spiritual wisdom, understanding, 
knowledge and workmanship, or counsel and 
might, and are in a state of activity in our consecration, 



we will have spiritual wisdom, spiritual knowledge, 
and our understanding and counsel will give us 
spiritual device, so we will know how to form character 
and bring forth spiritual fruits, and our spiritual might 
received from God will be the power to bring about our 
spiritual works. If we possess these we will be spiritually 
alive, and if not we will be dead in trespasses 
and sins. Paul, in Col. 1:9,10, prays that the saints 
may be filled with the knowledge of his will, in all 
spiritual wisdom and spiritual understanding— being 
fruitful in every good work and walking worthy of the 
Lord— these very same four again. 

These four produce the fruits of the Spirit, therefore 
they are the principal spices. The odor emanating 
from such a typically anointed one is symbolical of the 
fruits of the Spirit we show forth— the more anointing 
the more fruits; and surely it is desirable to be in the 
presence of one so antitypically anointed. 

The oil being olive illustrates something divine 
and is representative of the divine power and supervision 
used in the anointing of the antitypical priesthood. 
The oil was the means of distributing the spices over the 
body, and each drop carried the four spices in the same 
relative proportion as that of the whole mass. So 
whatever amount of anointing a member in Christ receives 
from the Head, it has its constituents of knowledge, 
etc., in their proper relative proportions. The 
oil may be the Bible, which carries all these four elements 
of the anointing to us, God's power being used 
in connection therewith in anointing us. 

Hoping I have not wearied or bothered you, dear 
brother, but not wanting to have it for myself, I considered 
it my duty to communicate this to you. I have 
hesitated much in writing to you, but have done as I 
considered it my duty. Thanking you for all the blessing 
received from you and asking an interest in your 
prayers that I may remain in Christ to the end, 

Your brother in Christ, M. E. RIEMER-Mo. 



R4093 : page 350 

SOME INTERESTING LETTERS 
DATE OF NEHEMIAH'S COMMISSION 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

With reference to first complete paragraph of Vol. 
II., p. 67, the following facts, culled from "Tregelles on 
Daniel," regarding Ussher's position in the matter of 
the date of Nehemiah's commission, may be of interest 
to WATCH TOWER readers, seeing that he is deservedly 
considered as an authority on chronology. 



"Archbishop Ussher drew up a scheme of chronology 
which is commonly followed rather for convenience 
than for absolute accuracy. About a hundred and fifty 
years ago Bishop Lloyd undertook to affix Ussher's 
dates to our English Bibles, but in this instance (Nehemiah's 
commission) he made a considerable alteration, 
substituting another date of his own, so as to 
adapt the reign of Artaxerxes to his own theory. 

The date which stands in our Bibles for the 20th 
year of Artaxerxes is B.C. 446. This makes the commencement 
of his reign B.C. 465; but the date fixed by 
the best and most nearly contemporary historian will 
put the matter in a different light. Thucydides mentions 
that the accession of Artaxerxes had taken place 
before the flight of Themistocles. This authorizes us 
to adopt Ussher's date and to place the commencement 

R4094: page 351 

of the reign 473 or 474 B.C. This would give 

the date of 454 or 455 B.C. as his twentieth year and 

the date of the commission." 

It appears that Archbishop Ussher was the first to 
establish the date of Nehemiah's commission as 454 
B.C. as a result of lecturing on the 70 weeks of Daniel 
in Trinity College, Dublin, in 1613. Other critics who 
support the date given in DAWN II. are Vitringer, Kruger 
and Hengstenberg, as well as Tregelles, above 
quoted. With much love, I remain, 

Yours in the Lord, J. P. BURNS, --England. 

"SCRIPTURE STUDIES" AS CHRISTMAS GIFTS 



DEAR FRIENDS :- 

It might interest you to know that we are already 
offering the books for "Christmas gifts." We find that 
many secure their Christmas presents several months 
ahead, and that this month is the one in which many 
are very pleased to secure "such a beautiful, appropriate, 
and above all such a reasonable [in price] gift!" 
Often we can get orders for several sets in one home, 
in view of the fact that the books make such splendid 
gifts. Today we got more than one order on this account. 
We mention this because we think it might 
help wonderfully during the next six weeks in securing 
orders from people who would perhaps not buy for 
their own use. We say, "Many are taking them for 
gifts, and it is of course a compliment to a friend's intelligence 
to give him a book, and especially a work of 
this kind, and you get the entire three for only 98c!" 

With much Christian love and appreciating more 
and more the great privilege of laboring in the harvest 
field, we are, Yours in Him, 

J. AND L. HUTCHINSON, -Colporteurs. 



THE WATCH TOWER BIBLES 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

I wish to thank you for the copy of the new Bible 
you have so kindly sent me. It is needless for me to 
tell you that I am delighted with it, not only because 
of its elegant binding and compact form (such that it 
will easily go into the side-pocket of an ordinary coat), 
but especially because of the extraordinary helps for 
Bible study that it provides. In the 220 pages of abbreviated 
DAWN comments there are 1 1,608 references to 
the DAWNS and booklets; or, in other words there are 
that many Scripture explanations utilized. 4793 texts 
are examined— about one-seventh of the total number 
in the Bible. 

Just here let me say that I have been deeply impressed 
in gathering and compiling these explanations 
to note how perfectly they are in accord with each other 
and with the Word itself. This beautiful harmony of 
thought and expression speaks very significantly of the 
fact that the Lord of the Harvest has exercised close 
supervision of his message. Few works have ever been 
subjected to such a critical analysis, and nothing but 
the TRUTH could stand before the word-by-word and 
clause-by-clause method which was used. It now remains 
to be seen whether the Truth people, with their 
sharp eyes, will find that my representation of your 
works has been as faithful and as accurate as your 
representation of the Scriptures has been! If they find 
a whole lot of mistakes I will take refuge in the thought 
that I did the best I could and that it was a hurried job 
—only about 1400 hours of labor altogether. 

Sister Seibert has done a grand work in the "Epitome 
of the Faith." The first thing I did when I got 
the Bible was to read every word of it. I cannot conceive 
how it could be more complete in plan, orderly in 
arrangement or concise in statement. I have already 
made use of it on two occasions with excellent results, 
and am sure it will be greatly appreciated. 

I feel sure this new Bible will have a very rapid 
sale, as I do not see how any one who is really in the 
Truth can afford to go without it. 

Your brother and servant in Christ, 

CLAYTON J. WOODWORTH. 

CHARITY BEGINS AT HOME 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

Being my Pastor in a very special sense to me, and 
knowing of your deep interest in all who understand, 
even to a limited degree, the Harvest Message, I am 



taking the liberty to write you on a subject that has 
been on my mind for a long time. 

I am sorry, very sorry to say it, but many times I 
have found, on close acquaintance with the brethren in 
the Truth, men who professed full consecration, that 
they neglected their families so very badly relative to 
the Truth. Seemingly anxious to spread the Truth 
amongst their friends and neighbors, yet they made no 
provision for their wives, so that they could attend the 
meetings, and would even talk before their families in 
such a way as to leave the impression that maybe the 
Truth was not for their wives and children. 

I confess this is beyond my comprehension— how 
a man with brains enough to comprehend the Truth, 
and after reading the six volumes of MILLENNIAL 
DAWN and the TOWER, could or would do or say such! 

A man can leave all the cares of the home and the 
care of the children to a perhaps not too strong wife, 
and spend all of his spare time while at home reading; 
and Sunday morning, instead of helping his wife and encouraging 
her, just get up and eat, dress and leave, 
and let her know he expects a hot dinner when he returns 
from the class, and it is no wonder she cannot 
go. It certainly doesn't look fair to me. Just nominal 
Church people do better than that. 

From the depths of my heart I pity the man who 
has the Truth and objects to his children attending the 
nominal Church Sunday school and makes no effort to 
teach his children and never has family prayer unless 
some of the Colporteurs or Elders call on him. These 
things are so. I wish I could believe otherwise. 

Several cases have come to my personal knowledge 
where the wife was really hungering for fellowship with 
the class and believed all the Truth she could understand, 
and whose husband, while himself attending the 
class every Sunday, was the real cause that hindered 
her. I feel confident a special, pointed article from 
your pen would do good to many. 

Yours in the service of the King, , — Tenn. 



page 353 

SEMI-MONTHLY 
VOL. XXVIII DECEMBER 1 No. 23 
A.D. 1907--A.M. 6036 



CONTENTS 

Views from the Watch Tower 355 

Getting Ready for Federation 355 

The Time of Trouble Approaching 356 

French Priests as Tent-Makers 356 

The Mission Field 357 

New Watch Tower Bibles 358 

Glasgow Convention Report 358 

Berean Bible Study in "Tabernacle Shadows" 359 

Honoring or Dishonoring the Head 360 

"The Prayer of Faith Shall Save" 361 

Birth of the "Man Christ Jesus" 362 

No Debate in Paragould, Arkansas 365 

"Give Us Today Our Daily Bread" 366 

Encouraging Words from Faithful Workers 367 

page 354 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-24 EVERSHOLT ST., LONDON, N.W. 
GERMAN BRANCH-MIRKER STR., 45, ELBERFELD. 
AUSTRALASIAN BRANCH-EQUITABLE BLDG., COLLINS ST., MELBOURNE 

PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 

TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR AS FOLLOWS:- 

All Bible Students who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity or 
adversity, are unable to pay for this Journal, will be supplied FREE if 
they send a Postal Card each June stating their case and requesting its 
continuance. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on 
our list continually and in touch with the Studies, etc. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



THIS JOURNAL IS PUBLISHED IN THE 

FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, DANISH AND ITALIAN LANGUAGES. 

SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



COLPORTEURS, PLEASE NOTICE 



Please do not order DAWNS or STUDIES or MANNAS outside 
of the territory assigned to YOU. 

If people decline to purchase because of fear of hard times, 
etc., say, "These books show the present financial conditions 
outlined in prophecy and their relationship to the introduction 
of the Millennium. You need mental food and rest fully 
as much as other food for your body." 

WHEN SELECTING CHRISTMAS GIFTS 



Remember the new MANNA Birthday Books, 35c each in 
cloth; $1.00 each in fine Morocco, postpaid. 

Remember the DAWNS and STUDIES in cloth or leather- 
their low cost and great value. 

Remember the Diaglott and other study helps. 

Remember the handsome Motto and Text Cards which we 
supply at cost for home embellishment. We have these in 
assorted $1 packets (postpaid)— from different assortments, 
some new and some choice old designs. One of the new 
1908 mottoes will be included in each $1 packet. 

VOLUNTEER TRACTS FOR I907.-Our temporary shortage 
is over. We have a large quantity again on hand and shall 
be pleased to ship promptly to all desiring to make use of 
these opportunities of proclaiming the harvest message. Order 
such quantities as you can use judiciously in house-to-house 
distribution. These tracts are FREE and sent postpaid. 



R4094 : page 355 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER 
GETTING READY FOR FEDERATION 



UNQUESTIONABLY the splitting of Christendom 

into numerous denominations since the Reformation 

has been productive of a spirit of 

moderation in sharp contrast with the period in which 

many were racked, maimed, burned at the stake, etc., 

as "heretics." When we have pointed out that the proposed 

Federation of Religions would again put great 

power into the hands of a united majority and possibly 

revive the persecutions of the past, we have been 



laughed at. We are told that the world has so changed 
that persecution for religious belief would be 
unthinkable. 

Within a month we have heard of two professed 
"ministers of the Gospel" whose remarks imply that 
nothing is lacking but the favorable opportunity for 
them to light the fires of persecution. Besides the 
most refined modes of persecution, by slander and ostracism, 
there may yet be opportunities for as barbaric 
martyrdoms for the Truth's sake as were practised in 
our Lord's day. 

REV. DR. PATTERSON'S CHRISTIAN LOVE 

"There was an exciting episode at the Monday 
meeting of the Philadelphia ministers, and the Rev. 
Dr. R. M. Patterson, pastor emeritus, was the centre 
of it. His assignment was a discourse on John Calvin. 
He gave the ministers a surprise by advocating capital 
punishment for other felonies than murder— and for 
flagrant heresy. According to one reporter, he said: 
'Those who spread blasphemous and immoral doctrines 
should also be put to death.' According to another reporter, 
he added that burning at the stake was too 
good for them." 

The editor of the Philadelphia Inquirer, in answer 
to a query as to the very words of the reverend gentleman, 
replied (Oct. 18):- 

"We are sorry that you should ask us to print the 
very words used by Rev. Dr. R. M. Patterson in his 
recent outburst. They were reported as follows: "If I 
had my way about it I would have an executioner called 
in to deal with all heretics and blasphemers. Burning 
at the stake would be too good for those who revile 
religion and take the Lord's name in vain. The growth 
of heresy is such today that nothing but measures such 
as this can stop it." 

Not all Presbyterians, however, feel so bitterly 
toward the non-elect heretics; for we read further:— 

"The Rev. Dr. Henry C. McCook, replied to the 
Rev. Dr. Patterson. 'My blood boils,' he said, 'at 
what I have just heard, and it astonishes me to think 
that a Presbyterian minister should utter such 
sentiments.'" 

THE SPIRIT IS WILLING 

Evidently, some of the "doctors of the law" in our 
day are as willing to do violence as were those who 
stoned Stephen. Their spirit is willing but their flesh 
is weak— because public sentiment would not stand for 
it. But we expect to see public sentiment grow in the 
same direction under the stimulus of the Federation of 
the Churches. 

Recently the Editor preached at Morgantown, 
W.Va., to a large audience, which gave close attention 



for more than two hours. Shortly after a man who was 
present met one of the ministers of that city who asked 
him if he had heard the discourse. He replied, "Yes! 
and I enjoyed it very much. Did you attend?" "No," 
replied the minister, "I would sooner have joined in 
stoning him out of town!" 

It is presumable that only lack of courage held 
back this Reverend Doctor of the Law of Love from 
enjoying himself at our expense. Poor blind leaders 
of the blind! We are so glad for them that God has a 
glorious plan in which they may yet share— when "all 
the blind eyes shall be opened and all the deaf ears 
shall be unstopped." Verily it is written, "They that 
hated you, that cast you out [rejected you] said, Let 
the Lord be glorified! [We do it for the good of 
Churchianity!] But he [Christ] shall appear to your 
joy and they shall be ashamed."— Isaiah 66:5. 

R4095 : page 356 

METHODIST RE-UNION IN ENGLAND 



By means of re-union a new church was created 
in Great Britain on September 17. This event, says 
Dr. Robertson Nicoll in The British Weekly (London), 
"was a historic day of the twentieth century and marked 
an epoch in the Christian Church." Three Methodist 
denominations, known as the Methodist New 
Connection, the Bible Christians, and the United 
Methodist Free Church, merged their separate life in 
one organism to be known as the United Methodist 
Church. From the beginning, the above writer also 
states, "this Church takes its place with the best equipped 
and most powerful denominations in the kingdom." 

The historic uniting conference took place in John 
Wesley's chapel, City road, London, and was composed 
of seven hundred delegates. The controversies which 
from time to time caused the formation of these divisions 
have long passed into history, and the only differences 
that have marked them in recent years have been 
those of polity and not doctrine. Legal questions 
were, therefore, the main questions requiring settlement. 
Some account of these old denominations is 
given in The Daily News (London). We read: 

"The Methodist New Connection is the eldest of 
the three contracting parties, and has been in existence 
for one hundred and ten years. It represents the 
first division that took place in Methodism after the death 
of John Wesley. The question at issue, as in almost all 
the subsequent divisions of Methodism, was practically 
the right of the people to a place in the government of 
the Church. The leader of the agitation was Mr. 
Alexander Kilham, who contended for the right of the 
Methodist people to order their own form and fix their 



own time for religious worship, the right of Methodist 
preachers as apart from clergymen of the Established 
Church to administer the sacraments, and the right of 
the people to make and administer the laws of Methodism. 
The first two reforms were granted by the conference 
under what is known in Methodist history as 
'The Plan of Pacification,' passed in 1795, but the third 
reform was refused, and for advocating this reform in 
a pamphlet Mr. Kilham was expelled from the conference 
in 1796, and in the following year, after a deputation 
to the conference had failed to obtain redress, the 
Methodist New Connection was formed. 

"The second of the uniting churches is the Bible 
Christian denomination, which has behind it an unbroken 
and successful history of eighty-nine years of fervent 
evangelism. It originated through the remarkably 
successful lay ministry of Mr. William O'Bryan, who 
refused to confine his labors within the narrow bounds 
of a circuit. Though he was acting in the spirit of 
John Wesley, who said, 'The world is my parish,' 
and though he invariably chose as the sphere of his 
labors those parts of Devonshire and Cornwall where 
Methodism was unrepresented, he was deemed by the 
Wesleyan courts to be acting irregularly. Because he 
would not limit his labors to the circuit-preachers' 
plan, he was expelled in the chapel at Gunwen, in 1810, 
'a chapel,' says the Rev. G. Eayrs, in his excellent little 
handbook, 'the erection of which he had superintended, 
of which he had given half the cost, and for 
which he had given the freehold, with more land for a 
burial ground.' 

"The third Church, the United Methodist Free 
Church, is itself a union of denominations, each of 
which had unsuccessfully striven for certain reforms 
in the Wesleyan Church, and, in consequence of their 
failure, had formed themselves into separate denominations. 
The Protestant Methodists, formed in 1827, 
stood for simplicity of worship and impartial observance 
of Connectional regulations. The Wesleyan 
Association arose in 1835 out of controversies respecting 
ministerial education, and the claim of the local 
churches for self-government. The Wesleyan reform 
movement, in the controversy that ended so disastrously 
for the Wesleyan Church, and which cost that denomination 
100,000 members, was a protest against 
the arbitrary rule of the conference and a demand 
for the cooperation of laymen with the ministers in 
legislation and administration in Wesleyan Methodism. 
The expulsion of Messrs. Everitt, Dunn and 
Griffiths, and the formation of the Reform Church, 
were the outcome of this controversy. Ultimately these 
three denominations united in 1857 under the name of 
the United Methodist Free Churches, and for fifty years 
this denomination has been regarded as the most democratic 
of the Methodist churches."— Literary Digest. 



THE TIME OF TROUBLE APPROACHING 



The present financial flurry is doubtless another of 
the spasms of "travail" referred to in DAWN I., p. 334. 
The primary cause is a shortage of money, due to a demonetization 
of silver. Secondly, Italians, Poles, etc., 
to the number of 5,000,000, have come here lately, and, 
earning good wages, do not trust banks, but carry their 
money or bury it. At but $200 each this would be an 
immense drain on our currency— $1,000,000,000. Thirdly, 
the depreciation in stocks started many to hoarding 
money in safe deposit vaults. However, as the country 
is very prosperous it is to be expected that confidence 
will soon return. It is seven years yet before the 
time for the great financial and social collapse which 
we find so clearly depicted in the prophecies. But 
meantime the spirit of unrest must be expected to prevail 
increasingly. 

FRENCH PRIESTS AS TENT -MAKERS 



The Hamburger Nachrichten in the following report 
does not intimate that these priests still serve the Lord 
and the people:— 

"An unforeseen result of the separation of Church 
and State in France has been to make the Church of 
France more apostolic than it has ever been before. 
Peter was a fisherman; Paul a tentmaker. Thus a 
great number of the French priests are looking round 
for opportunities of earning their daily bread by the 
labor of their hands. Several of them are keeping bees 
and living on the sale of the honey. Others have large 
poultry-yards and live by selling eggs and fowls for the 
table. The breeding of blooded dogs, such as poodles, 
makes a profitable occupation for many of them. The 
cure of Labourgabe has a profitable trade in the fruits 
he preserves and has become quite famous for the 
geese he rears. 

"Many of the clergy show a preference for handicraft. 
The cure of La Pannonie has set up a lathe and 
become a turner. Wheelmaking suits the priest of 
Averdon, who has accordingly become a wheelwright 
and carriage-builder, while as a side-issue he undertakes 
the repair of sewing-machines and bicycles. The 

R4095 : page 357 

cure of Maurages has turned locksmith. But the favorite 
trade of these spiritual men is that of watchmaking, 
in which seven noted cures are known to be engaged. 
Humbler vocations are also selected. The cure of La 
Tadiere has taken to tailoring, the ex -pastor of Negron 



weaves rugs, while about ten of his confreres do knitting, 
producing stockings and underwear. Among the 
most respected and honored of French village clergymen 
is the cure of Hericourt, who now applies himself 
to the stationery business, the printing of visiting 
cards, etc. Others are bookbinders, photographers, 
artists, sculptors." 

Such conditions in France should be very favorable 
to the Truth. We will be glad to further assist 
French brethren in making use of present opportunities 
for "harvest work" there. 

TO REVIVE "PASTORAL OVERSIGHT" 



When a pastor meets a member of his congregation, 
should he talk of politics and the weather, or bring the 
conversation to bear upon the member's spiritual condition? 
This spiritual pastoral oversight, which 
formed an important element in the vocation of a minister 
of a past generation, is practically laid aside by 
many clergymen nowadays without a substitute. The 
spiritual loss occasioned thereby is frequently lamented 
by religious journals; but the remedy is not easy to 
find, since, it is alleged, "the younger lay element in 
the Church" prefer the minister to "be a man among 
men," a "hail fellow, well met." "Real pastoral oversight," 
declares The Lutheran (Philadelphia), "is not 
desired as a rule, and, when offered, it seems almost 
like an intrusion, if not an impertinence." Whatever 
the cause, the fact remains, so The Lutheran asserts, 
that "in this age of ecclesiastical secularization, the 
pastoral office is not exercised as it should be." We 
read further:— 

"That a similar state of affairs exists in communions 
where considerable emphasis of a certain kind is 
placed on conscious spiritual experience is made evident 
from an editorial on 'The Care of Souls' that appeared 
in a recent issue of The Congregationalist (Boston). 
It reports a business man as saying: I can't 
see that ministers as a class in private conversation 
with laymen discuss to any degree the subjects peculiar 
to their profession. When my pastor meets me, 
for example, it's "How are you?" and then some comment 
on the news of the neighborhood or in the morning 
paper. He never ventures an inquiry or remark 
that has any bearing upon my personal religious 
condition.'" 

The man in question is not regarded as a "complainer, 
or demonstrative in his emphasis of a peculiar 
kind of spirituality, but one who, immersed in business 
cares, probably feels the need of spiritual direction." 
The Congregationalist goes on: 

"We wonder if this desire is not more widely spread 
on the part of the laity than many ministers realize! 



They have become of late years men among men. 
They play golf and mingle with their parishioners 
freely in clubs and social circles. That indefinable 
but real sense of separateness from common men which 
attached to the old-time ministry has gone. On the 
whole this is well, but the gains do not outweigh the 
loss if the average minister today is less eager and 
less competent to understand and satisfy the demands 
of the personal religious life. He is still or ought to 
be the spiritual specialist of the community. His 
supreme interest still is not in men in the mass, but in 
this and that and the other individual— how he or she 
can be brought under the compulsions of religion and 
then grow daily in grace and in knowledge." 

The Lutheran recommends for its own communion 
a return to the practice of setting aside a day in the 

R4096 : page 357 

week when pastors would be free to confer with souls 
who feel the need of spiritual counsel. "What but this 
individual-contact method of dealing with souls have 
we to take the place of the Roman confessional?" it 
asks. It even conceives a way of adapting that confessional 
to Protestant uses, speaking in these words: 

"We need not wonder that the Reformers were 
loath to part with this individual method of dealing 
with souls and that they purified it and retained it. 
The inquiry room or sick-bed visitation is a very poor 
substitute for the confessional in its purged Protestant 
sense. What a new significance the celebration of the 
Lord's Supper would have could there be instituted in 
every congregation an individual preparatory service 
such as is in vogue here and there in Germany and 
Scandinavia! Besides, much of the reverence and 
respect once accorded by the laity to the clergy would 
be regained if the pastor might be known among them 
more preeminently than is the case at present as one 
who is in travail for their souls' sake. No ministry is 
likely to strike a powerful spiritual note until it has 
become intertwined with the deepest longings and 
spiritual needs of a congregation."— Literary Digest. 

THE MISSION FIELD 



William T. Ellis has made a journey to Heathendom 
with a view to studying out a better mission 
policy. He has returned wiser as respects true conditions 
there and, while admitting that he was greatly 
disappointed at what he saw, because he had accepted 
too fully the mission reports, he nevertheless is hopeful 
that if new "business" methods were adopted much 
might soon be accomplished. Alas! thus others have 
hoped against hope, only to find that there are twice 



as many heathen today (1,200,000,000) as there were a 
century ago (600,000,000). He says:- 

"Up to the present, foreign mission work has been a 
mere reconnaissance in force, and not a war. One of 
the hurtful delusions of the home churches concerning 
foreign missions (a delusion sometimes fostered by 
ill-balanced reports from the field) is that the whole 
heathen world is on the verge of conversion to Christianity. 
One of the commonest figures of missionary 
oratory represents the nations as crowding into the 
Church. Now, the unwelcome fact is that heathendom, 
as a whole, has scarcely been budged by missions. 
Great as have been the missionary triumphs in spots, 
the whole mass has hardly been touched by the Christian 
teachings. Even enlightened Japan, which many 
persons believe to have become almost Christianized, 
is still rankly heathen, except for a small percentage of 
the population which only the mind of faith can invest 

R4096 : page 358 

with conquering power. The overwhelming and, at first 
sight, immovable and impregnable heathenism of mission 
lands is a challenge to the churches." 

How much more reasonable the Bible hope: that 
when God's due time shall come, the glorified Christ 
(Head and Body) will inaugurate the Millennial Kingdom, 
under whose wise and loving and powerful rule 
Satan will be bound, sin estopped, ignorance and superstition 
banished, and the knowledge of the Lord be 
caused to fill the whole earth— causing every knee to 
bow and every tongue to confess. 

Let all of our readers understand, therefore, that 
our present effort to send the true Gospel into Africa 
and Japan and China is not at all with a view to converting 
those peoples, but to do a harvest work among 
them— to seek for some of the Elect Church amongst 
them,— "not many." 

PROHIBITION SENTIMENT GROWING 



"The movement against the use and abuse of strong 
drink has grown and is still growing. It has already 
assumed the proportions of a veritable crusade. It is, 
too, a crusade of the strongest and most effective kind 
—a crusade of the people. The growth of this sentiment 
is found most vigorous in places where, but a 
short time ago, to have hinted of such a thing would 
have been considered absurd. Throughout almost the 
entire South, where the very term hospitality has so 
long been synonymous with strong drink that it was a 
fixed tradition that all southerners drank, and no southern 
man would think of welcoming another to his home 
without offering him the cup that cheers temporarily, 



this sentiment against general drinking has grown 
wonderfully, and is gaining strength with every day 
that passes. Georgia has passed a strong prohibition 
law that becomes effective at the beginning of the coming 
year. Local option is coming to be the rule in 
another southern State, Kentucky, where tradition says 
every native is trained from his cradle up to 'turn his 
back when he passes the bottle,' that he may not be 
guilty of taking note of the size of the drink taken. In 
Tennessee saloons have been practically driven out of 
the State by the declaration of sentiment against them 
under the local option law. In Missouri fifty-three 
counties have already declared in favor of local option, 
putting the saloon under the ban, and the work appears 
to have only begun. These are only some of the more 
notable instances of the growth of this sentiment. 
Equally good work is being done in many other States. 
—National Daily. 



R4096 : page 358 

NEW WATCH TOWER BIBLES 

THE first edition (5000) of the new WATCH TOWER 
BIBLES is about exhausted. We however, purpose 
another (5,000) edition, which we hope 
will be ready by May, 1908. Meantime Brother C. J. 
Woodworth is at work on the Commentary again, and 
promises that soon he will have it include all TOWER 
comments that are not found in the DAWNS. This 
addition will make unnecessary "Part V., Index to 
Scriptures treated at length in Zion's Watch Tower." 
Nevertheless it will add over 200 pages to the "Helps," 
making them in all about 500 pages. This will add 
the price a little, too— 15 cents each. Do not order 
until we announce that these are ready. 

Of the present edition we still have some of all 
styles with the patent index, which adds 25c each to 
the price. We also have a few of No. W138, price with 
postage $1.48. 

THE HELPS SEPARATE SOON 

To issue all of these "Helps" as a separate volume, 
in India paper, bound in cheap leather, would make the 
books cost as much as the cheapest of these Bibles; hence 
would be undesirable, for surely it is a great item to have 
such helps bound in with the Bible. However, we well 
know that some of our dear readers who get the TOWER 
free, as "the Lord's poor," cannot afford another Bible, 
however desirable and cheap. 

We therefore are preparing all the helps, except 
the Commentary, on India paper, 64 pages, which we 
can supply at 10c each, including postage— and our 



"Lord's poor" will be welcome to one each free. Others 
may find these convenient for use with other Bibles. 
They are thin, so they can be carried under your Bible 
cover. Orders may be sent in any time. We expect to 
be able to make deliveries Dec. 1. 



R4096 : page 358 

GLASGOW CONVENTION REPORT 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

The Glasgow Convention, just passed, was one of 
the many seasons of sweet and blessed refreshment 
with which we are now being favored by our present 
Lord. It was indeed good to be there. As for myself 
I could not but continually thank the loving Giver of 
every good and perfect gift for the love which was so 
clearly discernible in the brethren gathered there. I 
suppose that one's impression of the Convention is 
sure to incline to the writer's mind or feelings, so I 
perhaps speak more for myself when I say that I 
thought the brethren seemed to have a quieter and 
more assured bearing. There was the feeling of work 
to be done, and that the time for its doing is rapidly 
shortening. The joy of the Truth is widening out into 
a realization of the need of witnessing to the many who 
have not yet heard of the "loving kindness of our God," 
and that "the time is at hand" for the establishment of 
the Kingdom. Brother Edgar early reminded us that 
we are now entering into the last week of the "Gentile 
Times," and that the probability is there are very few 
General Conventions for any of us. May we all be 

R4096 : page 359 

ready for the Great Convention where our Lord and all 
his faithful will be. 

The two thoughts which were chief amongst those 
introduced by the brethren who addressed the meetings 
were, as might be expected, "The hope set before 
us" and "Our privilege of being sharers in the 'ministration 
of righteousness.'" After a word of welcome 
from Brother Johnston, representing the Glasgow 
brethren, and from Brother Hemery, representing the 
W.T.B.& T. Society, Brother Guard gave us a helpful 
talk on "The great and precious promises." Later Bro. 
Hemery spoke about "The disciple's race" (Heb. 12:1), 
of the difficulties and testings of the way we run in laying 
hold of the hope. On Sunday Brother Crawford 
talked on "The hope set before us," and many helpful 
hints were given. One of the pleasant features of the 
Convention was an address by Brother Edgar on "A 
tree planted by the rivers of water." It was a very 
interesting comparison of the natural growth of a tree 



and the developments of the Christian in his growth 
from faith to love (2 Pet. 1:5-8), and the lessons driven 

R4097 : page 359 

home made it an effective help to growth. 

On the Monday 62 brothers and sisters symbolized 
their consecration by immersion. We rejoice in their 
faith and hope, and trust that they and all will grow 
unto the likeness of the Lord. There were other addresses 
and other meetings intended to help us all to 
do with our might the work before us. Quite a good 
number promised to help as much as possible in the 
Colporteur service, and I believe both that department 
and the general work have got a stimulus. The farewell 
meeting was a happy time, even though it was 
tinged with the sadness of saying good-bye for a time, 
for there was the possibility of speaking with each one 
and thus of sharing in our pilgrim fellowship. 

Our parting message was a word from Brother 
Hemery, who used the parable of the sower as the basis 
of a short exhortation to have the heart ready for this 
"word of the Kingdom" which is now so abundant, that 
we may be neither of the wayside class, nor of those 
who receive the Truth into stony hearts, nor of those 
who allow thorns to hinder development. We trust we 
all may be of those whose hearts are of good ground, 
and who shall give back to the Lord some thirty-fold, 
some sixty-fold, some an hundred. And we parted, 
thanking the Lord for the privilege of the Convention. 

Your letter came a day too late to enable me to 
make an announcement to the Convention of the proposed 
dates of your visit next year, but the news has 
got around pretty well by this time. Before I left Glasgow 
the brethren there had entered upon a scheme 
which included colporteuring the city again before 
your coming in the spring. The brethren in other 
parts are also preparing themselves— and the people, 
too— so we are looking forward to a good time. The 
Lord give you strength for all your many labors. 

With much love, I am your brother in his grace, 
J. HEMERY. 



page 359 

BEREAN BIBLE STUDY IN TABERNACLE SHADOWS 

OTHER SIGNIFICANT TYPES 

JANUARY 5 

1 . Is it in their own merit as individuals or only as under 
priests in the merit of their Head, the High 
Priest, that the prayers of the consecrated believers 



are acceptable to God at the Golden Altar of 
incense? T. 120, par. 1. 

2. If they "ask amiss" is it because the New Creature 
does not offer the prayer, or has neglected to seek 
and obtain first the mind of the Head on the subject, 
and because the Head will not present the 
petition? T.120, par. 1. 

3. Is it merely the prayers of the priests that were typified 
by the incense offered on the Golden Altar? 

T.56, par. 2 and 120, par. 2. 

4. Would the incense representing the Church's obedience 
to God be acceptable unless supplemented by 

their Lord's imputed merit? With his merit 
would theirs be acceptable to God? Rom. 12:1. 

5. What constituted the only article of furniture beyond 
the Vail— in the Most Holy? and what did it 
represent? T.121, par. 1. A. chap. 5. 

6. What did the Ark of the Covenant contain? Please 
read the Scriptures which explain this. T.121, 

par. 2. 

JANUARY 12 

7. What did the two tables of the Law there signify? 
and why were there two? T.121, par. 2. 

8. Since the Lord's followers, even with the best intentions, 
are still actually more or less imperfect, 

how can it be that they could be represented by 
God as fulfilling his perfect Law? T.121, par. 3. 

9. By what means can God maintain the justice and 
dignity of his own laws and yet overlook our 
blemishes? Romans 3:26; T.121, par. 3. 

10. In what sense is "the righteousness of the Law fulfilled 
in us" now, before we have actually reached 

the end of the way? T.122, par. 1. 

1 1 . Relate the narrative of the budding of Aaron's rod. 
Num. 17. 

12. What did that budded rod, when placed in the 
Ark of the Covenant, signify or typify? T. 122, par. 2. 

JANUARY 19 

13. What was the peculiarity of the almond tree which 
constituted it a suitable type, marking the Royal 
Priesthood? T.122, par. 2. 

14. How could a rod which marked the acceptance of 
Aaron and his sons represent Christ and his followers 
of the Royal Priesthood, since these were 

not Aaron's sons nor of his tribe— Levi? 
Heb. 5:1-5. 

15. If Aaron and his sons under the Law typically represented 
only the sacrificing work of Christ, is 

there any other type which represents his great 
future work as a Priest-King— a Royal Priest? 
Heb. 5:6-10. 

16. Was the Manna, hidden in the Ark of the Covenant 



page 360 

by Moses, referred to seventeen centuries later by 
our Lord? Read Rev. 2:17. 

17. What does Gold represent in the divine symbolisms 
and why? 

18. Did Israel's supply of Manna keep indefinitely or 
was it very perishable? Read the record in 

Exodus 16:18-20,23-25,32-34. 

JANUARY 26 

19. Was there any typical significance in the fact that 
no manna fell on the seventh day? Would it not 
represent that the bread of Truth on which the 

Lord will feed the world during the Millennium 
will be exactly the same as he has now provided 
and that came from heaven, during the sixth day 
of the world's history? 

20. Since Christ is the antitypical Manna must all, to 
have eternal life, "eat the flesh of the Son of 

Man?" Read John 6:48-51,58. 

21. What is meant by eating Christ's flesh? F.696. 

22. If the Manna is for all could it represent eternal life 
to some eaters and immortality to others? 2 Tim. 1:10. 
T.123,par. 1,2. 



R4097 : page 360 

HONORING OR DISHONORING THE HEAD 

"I would have you know that the head of every man is Christ; 

that the head of the woman is the man; that the head 

of Christ is God. Every man praying or prophesying 

with his head covered dishonoreth his head. But every 

woman praying or prophesying with her head 

uncovered dishonoreth her head: for that is one and 

the same thing as though she were shaven. 

For if a woman be not covered let her also be 

shorn: but if it be a shame for a woman 

to be shorn or shaven, let her be covered. 

-I Cor. 11:3-6. 

THERE is something about the above Scripture that 
seems to wound or hurt some of the Lord's dear 
flock. We greatly regret this, but the fact does 
not authorize us to change or modify the Scriptures. 
On the contrary, it implies to us that where there is a 
soreness of the heart against some regulation which 
the Lord has placed in his Word, some false ideas upon 
the subject resulting from wrong views and wrong 
practices of ourselves or others, there has been produced 
a condition of mind which, because of this very 



soreness, is indicated to be diseased. We have even 

known a few to be so sensitive, so tender, upon this 

subject that they felt embittered toward the author of 

DAWN STUDIES, Vol. VI., because he therein called attention 

to this Scripture and its evident meaning. 

If we find any Scripture which touches us to the 
quick our attitude should be, not that of opposition to 
the Scripture nor of opposition to the one who drew it 
to our attention, but on the contrary we should be 
grateful that a weakness and sore spot of ours had 
been brought to our attention, thus enabling us to apply 
the correct remedies, which would salve the sores 
and make the Lord's yoke easy and his burdens light. 
It will not do to say that these were not the words of 
our Lord, but only those of his Apostle Saint Paul; 
for the Lord honored the twelve and their words and 
prayed a blessing upon us all through them— upon "all 
who would believe on him through their word." (John 17:20.) 
He declared furthermore that whatsoever they 
would bind on earth would be bound in heaven, and 
whatsoever they would loose on earth would be loosed 
in heaven— thus giving us to understand that their 
words would be guided with particularity, so that what 
they would enjoin we might understand would be a 
divine injunction, and what they would tell us respecting 
our liberties in Christ we might understand to be a 
divine message also. Furthermore we are to remember 
how greatly the Lord used those channels of blessing 
for the comfort and edification of his Church. We are 
to remember how they were specially given to him of 
the Father as he declares, "Thine they were and thou 
hast given them unto me, and I have lost none save 
the son of perdition"— Judas. We see that the Apostle 
Paul was the divine selection to fill the place vacated 
by Judas' deflection, and we see that in the Lord's 
providence through him God has sent to the Church 
the larger proportion of the New Testament message— 
the explanation of the divine plan as a whole. True, 
the words of our Lord and the words of the other apostles 
have brought blessing to the Church, but in number 
and in explicitness the words of St. Paul outrank 
all others. As we have seen, this is true of our Lord's 
words, because his preaching was before the descent 
of the holy Spirit, and hence was to those who were not 
Spirit-begotten and who were unable consequently to 
appreciate and understand spiritual things. Hence 
many of our Lord's deeper teachings were given in 
parables and dark sayings, and these evidently were 
but partly understood even by the twelve until after 
Pentecost. 

We call attention to this subject afresh, not by reason 
of any desire to make it more prominent than it 
already is— not because we wish to force the Apostle's 
words upon any, not because we wish to condemn any, 
but because we want to have the responsibility for 
these thoughts placed where it belongs, upon the Apostle 



and upon the holy Spirit back of him, and not upon 
the author of SCRIPTURE STUDIES. Whoever quarrels 
with the subject let him know with whom he is quarreling 
and be on his guard proportionately. No one 
ever quarrels with the Lord to his advantage. On the 
contrary, those who with meekness receive the engrafted 
word which is able to make them wise— these have 
the greater blessing. The self-sufficient, and all who 
think themselves wise above what is written, are in a 
dangerous place. They should understand that now is 
the trial time, and that humility is one of the tests 
which the Lord is applying to all of us. They should 

R4097 : page 361 

remember that our tests are not all the same, but that 

it is the Lord who by the various testimonies of his 

Word tries and proves those who have made a consecration 

to him— not with a view to their stumbling, 

but to their testing, and if rightly exercised to their 

greater blessing and advancement in the divine favor. 

Let any who are disposed to dispute this Scripture 
read the entire context down to and including the 16th verse, 
in which the Apostle declares, "But if any man 
seemeth to be contentious we have no such custom, 
neither the churches of God." This is the Apostle's 
final word on the subject— the Lord's final word through 
the Apostle. In substance it means this: "I have set 
before you the truth on this subject, through obedience 
to which you will have a larger measure of the blessing 
of God not only in your families and in the assemblages 
of the Church but also in your own hearts and experiences. 
By following this course you will make better 
progress and be the surer of winning the great reward 
and hearing the Master's 'Well done.' Nevertheless, 
do not consider what I have said as a law; I am not 
giving it in that sense. I am giving it as an admonition, 
as something that will be for your benefit individually 
and collectively. If anyone is disposed to resent 
my presentation and to argue the question and to 
contend about the matter it would better be dropped. 
Let those who appreciate my advice follow it and reap 
the blessings; let those who do not appreciate it follow 
their own course in this matter— to themselves 
will be the disadvantage from which I fain would shield 
them. They will lose the blessing which I fain they 
would receive by following this advice." 

The Apostle's advice respecting the covering and 
the uncovering of the head is a part of his general 
teaching respecting the relationship of the husband 
and the wife in the affairs of the home and of the 
Church. The man who covers his head in his devotions 
dishonors his head by showing that he does not 
appreciate the divine word on this matter. In the 
home in which the husband does not occupy the place 
of the head of the family, he is covering his headship; 



in the home where the woman does not recognize the 
headship of her husband she is dishonoring him and 
dishonoring herself in that she thus confesses that she 
has unwisely married a man whom she cannot esteem 
as she should— as the head of the home. If men and 
women professing godliness recognized this principle 
which the Apostle here enunciates it would, we believe, 
mean the solving of many domestic infelicities and 
difficulties; for the wife looking to her husband would 
thus throw upon him the greater weight of responsibility 
in the affairs of the home, and as soon as she got 
accustomed to this she would find a great relief to her 

R4098 : page 361 

own mind— a lessening of the nervous tension which is 
so wearing, especially upon women. The husband, 
realizing his situation and his responsibility as the 
head, should and we believe would generally be more 
careful than ever to look out for the interests of his 
wife, his children and all that come properly under his 
supervision— to not only provide for their temporal 
necessities, but also to realize an increasing measure 
of responsibility as respects their higher interests, mental, 
moral, spiritual. But let us remember that the 
Apostle has placed the responsibility of this question 
with each man and each woman in the Church of 
Christ, and has not made it a matter in which Brother 
A may criticize Brother B or Sister B, nor vice versa. 
To his own master each one of us stands or falls on 
this and on other similar questions. The more obedient 
we are the greater our blessing, the less obedient 
the slower our progress, seems to be the divine rule, 
and it is increasingly important to us to know this as 
we are approaching the consummation of this age and 
finishing our course. 



R4099 : page 361 

"THE PRAYER OF FAITH SHALL SAVE" 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

A few weeks ago, while reading the Diaglott, I noticed 
that the word translated sick in James 5:14 was 
astheneo, a word derived from a-sthenes, meaning without 
strength (a, without; sthenos, strength). From 
this is derived asthenia, a word much used in medicine. 
From my knowledge of medicine I knew that a person 
might be asthenic without being diseased or sick, so I 
looked up the word rendered sick in the 15th verse, 
and this I found to be kamno, a word which occurs only 
three times, and means, "to labor, suffer from fatigue." 
The two other passages are Heb. 12:3 and Rev. 2:3, 
which Young's translation renders as follows: "For 



consider him who endured such gainsaying from the 
sinners to himself, that ye may not be wearied (kamno) 
in your souls— being faint." (Heb. 12:3.) "And thou 
didst bear and hast endurance and because of my name 
hast toiled and not been weary (kamno)." (Rev. 2:3.) 
These passages would indicate that it was the weary 
and weak in faith who was told to call for the elders, 
and not the one suffering from disease. There are 
other words which mean sick, such as nosos, meaning 
sickness, unsoundness, disease; echo kakos, meaning 
to be ill. 

These two words are never used to denote moral or 
spiritual sickness, while asthenos in its various forms is 
so used, and while it is frequently rendered sick in the 
common version, it is never rendered sick in Young's 
translation, and the revised version has the number of 
times reduced. 

I also looked up the word healed, and found that 
there are three words rendered healed, viz., (1) therapeuo, 
meaning to attend to, to heal, cure; sozo, to make 
sound or whole; iaomai, meaning to heal. This last 
word is the one used by James, and it has also the significance 
of saved, as the following passage will show: 
Matt. 13:15, "For this people's heart is waxed gross, 
and their ears are dull of hearing, and their eyes they 

R4099 : page 362 

have closed, lest at any time they should see with their 
eyes and hear with their ears and should understand 
with their heart and should be converted and I should 
heal [iaomai] them." (See also Acts 28:27,28; Luke 4:18.) 
"The spirit of the Lord is upon me, because he 
hath anointed me to preach the Gospel to the poor; he 
hath sent me to heal [iaomai] the broken-hearted, to 
preach deliverance to the captives, recovering of sight 
to the blind, to set at liberty them that are bruised." 
Jno. 12:40, "He has blinded their eyes and hardened 
their heart, that they should not see with their eyes 
nor understand with their heart, and be converted and 
should heal [iaomai] them." 

Acts 10:38, "How God anointed Jesus of Nazareth 
with the Holy Ghost and with power, who went about 
doing good and healing [iaomai] all that were oppressed 
of the devil." I Pet. 2:24, "Who his own self 
bare our sins in his own body on the tree, that we being 
dead to sins should live unto righteousness: by 
whose stripes ye were healed [iaomai]." 

These passages can be applied only in a moral or 
spiritual sense, while therapeuo is never applied in such 
a sense but always relates to a cure of a physical 
disease. 

As examples of the use of astheneo, I quote the following: 
Matt. 8:17, "That it might be fulfilled which 
was spoken by Esaias the prophet, saying, Himself 
took our infirmities [astheneia] and bare our sicknesses 



[nosos]." Matt. 26:41, "Watch and pray that ye enter 

not into temptation; the spirit indeed is willing but 

the flesh is weak [astheneia]." Rom. 4:19, "And being 

not weak [astheneo] in faith, he considered not his own 

body now dead, when he was about an hundred years 

old, neither yet the deadness of Sarah's womb." Rom. 5:6, 

"For when we were yet without strength [asthenes] 

in due time Christ died for the ungodly." Rom. 6:19, 

"I speak after the manner of men, because of the infirmity 

[astheneia] of your flesh: for as ye have yielded 

your members servants to uncleanness and to iniquity 

unto iniquity; even so now yield your members servants 

to righteousness unto holiness." Rom. 8:3, "For 

what the law could not do in that it was weak [astheneo] 

through the flesh, God sending his own Son in the likeness 

of sinful flesh and for sin condemned sin in the 

flesh." Rom. 8:26, "Likewise the Spirit also helpeth our 

infirmities [astheneia], for we know not what we should 

pray for as we ought; but the Spirit itself maketh intercession 

for us with groanings which cannot be uttered." 

Rom. 14:1,2, "Him that is weak [astheneo] in 

faith receive ye, but not to doubtful disputations. For 

one believeth that he may eat all things; another who 

is weak [astheneo] eateth herbs." I Cor. 8:11,12, "And 

through thy knowledge shall the weak [astheneo] brother 

perish for whom Christ died? But when ye sin so 

against the brethren and wound their weak [asthenes] 

conscience ye sin against Christ." Heb. 4:15, "For we 

have not an high priest which cannot be touched with 

a feeling of our infirmities [astheneia], but was in all 

points tempted like as we are, yet without sin." 

R4100 : page 362 

Nosos is the word most commonly used to denote 
sickness or disease and occurs in the same verse in 
contrast to astheneia, viz., Matt. 8:17, "That it might 
be fulfilled which was spoken by Esaias, the prophet, 
Himself took our infirmities [astheneia] and bare our 
sicknesses [nosos]." 

From the foregoing I would conclude that James 
referred to Christians who had become weak in faith, 
or, to use a common expression, had "backslidden." 
This is indicated in verse 16, the word "faults" being 
translated from paraptoma, meaning a falling away. 

I hope I have made myself clear, and I very much 
desire your comments. The following is a more literal 
translation of Jas. 5:14-16: "Is any weak among you, 
let him call for the elders of the Church; and let them 
pray over him, anointing him with oil in the name of the 
Lord: and the prayer of faith shall save the wearied one. 
And the Lord shall raise him up, and though he have 
committed sins they shall be forgiven him. Confess 
your fallings away one to another, and pray one for 
another, that ye may be healed. The effectual fervent 
prayer of a righteous man availeth much." 



Yours in our dear Redeemer, 

J. E. TAYLOR, M.D. 



Evidently the weakness and faintness are spiritual, 
and the restoration and healing also spiritual. In 
accord with this is the exhortation that we "Consider 
him who endured such contradiction of sinners against 
himself, lest we become weary or faint in our minds," 
as respects the Lord and his promises, and thus become 
unfaithful, covenant-breakers, alienated from 
God. Any in such a condition will find it difficult to 
return to rest in the Lord and should follow St. James' 
prescription. 



R4098 : page 362 

BIRTH OF "THE MAN CHRIST JESUS" 

--MATTHEW 2:1-12.-DECEMBER 22.- 

"And the angel said unto them, Fear not, for, behold, I 
bring you good tidings of great joy which shall be unto 
all people."— Luke 2:10. 

OUR subject does not take us back to the beginning 
of God's creation when Christ as a spirit 
being became "the first born of every creature;" 
the Word that was with God in the beginning of creation, 
and by whom all things were made, and without 
whom not one thing was made. (John 1:1-3,10.) Our 
Master at that time was "the beginning and the ending, 
the first and the last," of Jehovah's direct creation: all 
subsequent creations being by and through him as 
Jehovah's honored agent. (Rev. 1:11; 3:14; Col. 1:15; 
John 1:1-3.) We come to the time when he who was 
rich and for our sakes became poor (2 Cor. 8:9) and 

R4098 : page 363 

left the glory which he had with the Father "before the 
world was." (John 17:5.) Then, without dying, our 
Master underwent a change of nature and "humbled 
himself," "was made flesh" (Phil. 2:8; John 1:14), "took 
upon himself the form of a servant" and was "found in 
fashion as a man;" "a little lower than the angels;" 
and then still further he humbled himself even unto 
death, and yet more even unto the shameful death of the 
cross— as a culprit, as a sinner. (Heb. 2:9,16; Phil. 2:6-9.) 
This lesson, appropriate to the season, calls our 
attention to the birth of "the man Christ Jesus." 

In the divine predictions of a coming Savior attention 
is largely called to the fact that he is to be a King, 



a Deliverer, a Savior. This point is made prominent 

because God appealed to mankind along the line of 

their necessities and hopes. The sacrificial feature of 

the Lord's ministry was made less prominent than his 

power and majesty and glory, because the sacrifice related 

specially to God and was to meet the demands of 

the divine law against the sinner-race. The question 

of how God would settle the matter consistently with 

his own sentence of death, resting upon the race, would 

to the average human mind be much less important 

than the statement of the resultant glories, restitution 

and blessings. Hence, we find the references to the sacrificial 

features of our Lord's ministry largely presented 

under types and symbols intended to be comprehended 

only by those who, as sons of God, would be 

guided into the truth by the Spirit of God. 

It is not surprising that the angels who announced 
our Lord's birth mentioned only the glories to follow 
and not his sufferings which would intervene. It is not 
surprising that they did not weep for the sufferings 
and humiliation, but sang, "Glory to God in the highest, 
on earth peace, good will toward men;" grasping 
merely the culmination of the great divine plan which 
had its beginning in the birth of Jesus. 

(1,2) Whether or not the "wise men" of the East 
were Hebrews we are not informed; but since divine 
favor was for the time confined to Israel, and since 
that favor did not depart until they had rejected the 
Messiah, we consider it highly probable that these wise 
men from the East were part of "the twelve tribes scattered 
abroad," who, "instantly serving God," were 
hoping for and "waiting for the consolation of Israel" 
through the long-promised Messiah. (Acts 26:7; Luke 2:25.) 
We do know that hundreds of thousands if not 
several millions of Israelites were carried captive to 
this very East country— Babylon, Medo-Persia; and we 
know also that less than 55,000 availed themselves of 
the decree of Cyrus permitting their return to Palestine. 
The great bulk of the people of Israel, therefore, 
at that time (as now) resided in foreign lands. And it 
would appear that their foreign captivity was helpful 
to their religious interests, and that the Israelites in 
general had more faith in the Lord and more strong interest 
in prophecies respecting Messiah after the captivity 
in Babylon than for several hundred years previous, 
when they were continually beset with idolatry. 

The promise of God to Abraham of a great "Seed," 
a great king and ruler who should bless the world with 
a righteous reign, it would appear, was carried by the 
Israelites into all the then civilized world. Leading some 
to expect a Jewish Messiah, it led others through a feeling 
of pride to declare that they were as able as the 
Jews to produce the desirable government and ruler 
for the world. Hence, we find that the idea of universal 
dominion began to prevail. It is claimed by some that 
Zoroaster, the great Persian religious teacher, was a 



disciple of the Prophet Jeremiah, and the memoir of 
Mrs. Grant, missionary to Persia, says:— 

"Zoroaster taught the Persians concerning Christ. 
He declared that in the latter days a pure virgin should 
conceive, and that as soon as the child was born a star 
would appear, even at noonday, with undiminished 
luster. 'You, my son,' exclaimed the venerable seer, 
'will perceive its rising before any other nation. As 
soon as you see the star follow it wherever it leads you, 
and adore the mysterious child, offering your gifts to 
him with the profoundest humility. He is the almighty 
Word which created the heavens.'" 

Although this is only a legend, it is interesting to 
know that there was such a legend amongst the people 
of the East. And respecting Zoroaster it may be said 
that his teachings were of a higher character than those 
of other heathen teachers. 

(3-6) Expecting a king, the wise men naturally 
came to the palace of Herod, who, although called the 
King of the Jews, was the representative of their conquerors, 
the Romans. Herod was the founder of the 
House of Herod and naturally had great expectations, 
not only with reference to the duration of his own dominion, 
but also with a view to the establishment of 
his posterity in the power and office which he enjoyed. 
No wonder, then, that he was "troubled." The prospect 
of a rival either in the power or in the esteem of the 
people was not to his liking. "And all Jerusalem [was 
troubled] with him." Political influence takes in a wide 
circle. There were connected with Herod's government 
or benefited by it, directly or indirectly, many whose 
plans, hopes, etc., might be very much disarranged by 
any change of the government. Herod evidently knew 
of the Jewish tradition respecting Messiah, for he at 
once sent for those who were learned in the Scriptures 
to demand of them where the prophets indicated that 
Messiah should be born. The scribes and Pharisees 
were evidently quite familiar with the subject, had 
looked it up, and apparently without hesitation gave 
the name of Messiah's birthplace as Bethlehem, and 
quoted from the prophet in support of it. 

(7-12) The cunning art of Herod, by which he 
hoped to learn who was this divinely designated Prince 
and heir to his throne, is appreciated only when we remember 
the sequel to this narrative: how, when he 
found that the wise men did not return to give him the 
information and permit the destruction of the child 
Jesus, he determined to kill all the children of the city 
of Bethlehem of two years old and under; thus he 

R4098 : page 364 

might be sure, he thought, that he had outwitted the 
divine plan and protected his own power. 

The star which seemingly had led these wise men 
toward Jerusalem, and which then apparently had vanished, 



and left the searchers to arouse the curiosity 

and interest of the people of Jerusalem, again became 

their guide as they left the city, leading them to Bethlehem, 

which is only a short distance, and the star 

appears to have indicated even the very house in which 

they found the new-born King. According to the custom 

of the time they presented costly treasures as well 

as their homage. 

Although the King came, his own received him not; 
and like the "young nobleman" of his own parable he 
went "into a far country," even heaven itself, there to 
be invested with power by the King of kings, and to 
postpone the establishment of his Kingdom until his 
Church, his Bride, his joint-heirs, should be selected 
and prepared to share the Kingdom with him. 

Meantime, the world still needs a King as much as 
ever. All nations are learning more and more their 
need of a wise, a just, a powerful, a loving, a merciful 

R4099 : page 364 

ruler. They need this very one, and are gradually 
learning that none of the fallen race can be trusted 
with much power, honor and glory; that all are weak 
through the fall, and that a superior king and a superior 
government are essential to their highest blessing. 
The masses are beginning to feel this need more keenly; 
and it is remarkable to what extent various advocates 
of Socialism recognize and quote with commendation 
the teachings of this very King— even though it may 
be said that they wish others to be governed by the 
Golden Rule, while they themselves fail to walk by it. 

The world is beginning to realize that the King is 
at the door: the Herods of today and with them all those 
of influence and power, political and financial, are 
"troubled" at a prospect of a change of government, 
which their own "wise men" announce as imminent. 
We need not expect that the princes of this world will 
welcome him; rather they will fear a disruption of 
present institutions; fear that under his government 
they would not have so favorable opportunities for 
prosperity; and that in the general leveling, which the 
prophets declare will accompany his reign, some that 
are high shall be abased, and some that are low shall 
be exalted. As a consequence, Messiah's Kingdom, 
although a Kingdom of peace and righteousness, must 
be introduced by a "time of trouble, such as was not 
since there was a nation." Yet we rejoice in the promise 
that "when the judgments of the Lord are abroad in 
the earth, the inhabitants of the world will learn righteousness, 
and that eventually his Kingdom shall come 
to be the "desire of all nations." 

Thus far the Gospel of the Kingdom has been received 
by only a few; and the special blessings have 
been with the few who have acknowledged the King, 
and who are being prepared to be joint-heirs in his 



Kingdom. But let us not forget the gracious results 
that are to follow the establishment of that Kingdom, 
when, as declared in the Golden Text, the good tidings 
and the great joy "shall be to all people." 



"OUR SUFFICIENCY IS OF CHRIST" 

Where's the day I'll call dreary, 
While his favor shines so bright? 

Where's the time in which I'll weary 
Of his loving words of light? 

Where's the test of faith that's greater 
Than the measure of his grace? 

Where's the loss of goods more precious 
Than what's given in its place? 

Where's the stone on which I'll stumble 
While I trust to him my hand? 

Where's the fear to make me tremble 
When his words the winds command? 

Where's the cross that is too heavy 
When his strength doth lend me aid? 

Where's the crowned head I'd envy 
Since he's having my crown made? 

Where's the home that we could long for 

Like his palace up above? 
Where's a way more fit to get there 

Than his narrow way of love? 

--B. H. Barton. 



R4100 : page 364 

"THOU CROWNEST THE YEAR WITH THY GOODNESS" 

--PSALM 65:11. -DECEMBER 29.-REVIEW.- 

DMTERESTING as it is to review the lessons of the 
year, reaching from the Creation to the boyhood 
of Samuel and the beginning of the epoch of the 
kings of Israel, we leave that to individual effort and 
consider here the beautiful golden text of the International 
lesson. 

When we remember Father Adam's disobedience 
and that he justly came under the sentence of death 
therefor, and that in consequence ourselves and all of 
his posterity share his imperfections and dying conditions 
as we share the blessings of life through him, we 
have cause for gratitude toward God for endurable conditions 
of whatever kind he may be pleased to permit 



us to experience. From this standpoint every blessing 
is an unmerited favor, whether small or great, for we 
deserve nothing, all of our rights having been forfeited. 
Hence, as members of the world we should feel ourselves 
at the close of the year impelled to look up to 
the Creator and to confess that we have received at his 
hands numberless mercies and blessings which we 
could not claim by right or desert. For not only are 
we under condemnation through heredity, but we realize 
that individually we are unworthy of divine 
favor, for, as our Episcopal friends express it, "We 
have all done those things which we ought not to have 
done and have left undone those things which we ought 

R4100 : page 365 

to have done, and there is no health in us." It is appropriate, 

therefore, that the world, which the Apostle 

speaks of as the "groaning creation," should be exceedingly 

thankful to God for the blessings they enjoy, even 

though these have not been unmixed with bitter disappointments 

and sorrows and tears. 

But if the natural man has cause for gratitude to 
God, much more have we, the children of God through 
the adoption which is in Christ Jesus our Lord. Do 
we not enjoy all the blessings which the world enjoys? 
and have we not the same call as they to thankfulness? 
And, in addition, is it not true that God has done for 
us exceeding abundantly more than we could have asked 
or thought according to the riches of his grace? (Eph. 3:20.) 
How profitable it is for us to turn our minds 
backward and note the steps by which divine grace 
has led us to our present station, in which we rejoice 
in the hope of the glory of God. When we were without 
strength and without merit Christ died for the ungodly, 
including us. We are amongst the favored ones 
who heard of the grace of God; we are amongst the 
comparatively few whose ears and eyes of understanding 
were opened to a realization of the Lord's grace 
and truth; we are amongst the still fewer number who, 
having heard, were enabled to rejoice with joy unspeakable 
and who appropriate the blessing to ourselves. 
We are amongst the still fewer number who 
received not the grace of God in vain, but under the 
guidance of the Word and Spirit of the Lord presented 
their bodies living sacrifices, holy and acceptable to 
God, their reasonable service. 

"Oh, happy day, that fixed my choice 

On thee, my Savior and my God! 
Well may this glowing heart rejoice 
And tell its raptures all abroad." 

The Apostle says of himself, "If others have somewhat 
whereof to boast, I more." And so we see in general 
that if the world has something to boast of in respect 
to God's gifts and blessings, and something for 
which they may be thankful, we more— we who are in 



Christ Jesus, who have tasted of the good Word of 
God and the powers of the age to come, and been made 
partakers of the holy Spirit, we may rejoice abundantly. 
We may be glad even in the house of our pilgrimage 
—even though here we have no continuing city, no 
abiding place, no security, but are buffeted by the 
world, the flesh and the Adversary continually. The 
Lord, our great Deliverer, is on our part; his promises, 
exceeding great and precious, are our support and 
consolation. We have laid hold upon one who is mighty 
to save; yea, more, he has laid hold upon us, or, as the 
Apostle expresses it, "we have been apprehended of 
Christ Jesus." (Phil. 3:12.) Neither will he let us go so 
long as our hearts are loyal to him. Only the wilfulness 
which would take our interests out of the divine keeping 
could in any sense of the word separate us from 
the love of God which is in Christ Jesus. 

Let all of this class review the year, especially from 
the spiritual standpoint, to note what progress each of 
us has made in spiritual growth, in grace, in knowledge, 
in love— the fruits and graces of the holy Spirit. 
In proportion as these are large let us rejoice; in 
proportion as they are small let us lament the fact, yet 
not to the degree of discouragement or surrender to 
the enemy. Let us hear the Master's voice saying, 
"Fear not, I have overcome the world," "My grace is 
sufficient for thee; my strength is made perfect in your 
weakness."— John 16:33; 2 Cor. 12:9. 

Reviewing the year in its temporal blessings and 
mercies and privileges and favors, and in its spiritual 
opportunities and strength and knowledge and development 
in character-likeness of our dear Redeemer— while 
rejoicing in all these, let us say to ourselves in the 
words of our text that the crowning of the year with 
blessings is in the divine goodness. The Lord would 
not have us understand that he does everything for us 
so that we have nothing to do for ourselves, but he does 
give us clearly to understand that all of our doings 
would accomplish nothing without his aid— that our 
efforts and strivings are profitable in their results only 
as they have the divine favor and blessing. God's 
goodness is the crowning of the year for us. We are 
glad at its close to remember how good he is, how generous, 
how sympathetic, how compassionate, how loving 
and kind— especially to the household of faith. To 
these alone he has exhibited or sent messages of his 
grace and peace as yet, but we are glad to see in his 
Word that soon the New Covenant will be inaugurated 
and its message of forgiveness will go forth in trumpet 
tones, a Jubilee message to the world of mankind that 
they have been ransomed by the precious blood which 
seals the New Covenant and which makes possible to 
them the "times of restitution of all things which God 
hath spoken by the mouth of all the holy prophets since 
the world began." (Acts 3:21.) We rejoice, then, not 
only in our own favor and blessing, but also in the 



coming blessings, all of which we recognize to be of, by 
and through divine goodness. Our Lord Jesus 
was the great channel of this divine goodness, through 
whom it reaches us who are his followers, the adopted 
members of his Body. We are thus permitted to 
come into relationship with him, so that we also shall 
become channels for the dispensing of the divine goodness 
ultimately to natural Israel and to all the families 
of the earth. 



R4101 : page 365 

NO DEBATE IN PARAGOULD, ARKANSAS 

SOME months ago the Editor received a challenge for 
a debate from the Baptist minister at Paragould. 
We declined personally, but assured the gentleman 
that one of our "Pilgrim" brothers would serve in a Christian 
manner for the edification of the Truth. The following 
is the outcome: 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 
I have no doubt but what the Lord had some good 

R4101 : page 366 

purpose in permitting me to come to Paragould, but it evidently 
was along different lines from what we had anticipated. 
The challenger is a little country preacher, one of apparently 
little ability, and if we had known the man it would have 
been better to ignore his suggestions. However, the Lord 
knows best, and by his grace I shall make the best use of the 
occasion. If the Baptists fail us we will explain matters in 
papers and advertise fact that we will take both sides, showing 
what Baptists believe and why, and why we know that 
they are wrong, and what is right. If they will not show 
their weakness we will have to do it for them. 

LATER.— The challenger had tried to engage a man who possessed 
great eloquence and no spirituality— much fighting ability 

but little Scriptural knowledge of a desirable sort— Rev. , 

one of the last men in the world anyone would want to talk 
Scripture with. He told me himself that it would depend 
on the deacons of the Baptist Church as to whether he would 
debate at this time or not; but I suppose they would not 
agree to pay him enough, for he decided not to take part. 
However, before he left he asked me to sign some propositions 
which accompanied a resolution regarding a debate in 
December, and of course I refused. This was merely a ruse 
to enable them to circulate a report that the debate was not 
held because I would not sign the propositions. 

Not content with that they had us locked out of the 
school house, in which we purposed to hold other meetings. 
The school house has been open for religious services of 
every kind, but we were obliged to secure an unoccupied 
house for our meeting place. The first night our audience had 



to sit on the floor. What a miserable substitute for Christianity 
these people have! 

The experience has confirmed my old idea that it is 
not the representative religious people of each denomination 
that are asking for debates, but rather the little country 
preachers, who owing to lack of better ways of using their 
time are anxious to stir up a fight and have some excitement 
and have their people attend, not to learn, but to applaud 
their preacher. 

There are only six or seven believers here and I trust 
our visit may prove to be a blessing to them and to a few 
others who are willing to hear. The Baptists may write 
about a debate later, but I told them that if you had known 
the real condition of things you would not have noticed 
their request and that future communications would be 
ignored. 

However, there is a blessing for me in this experience 
and I am trying to get all the good I can out of it. Am 
giving discourses on the various propositions, and hope to 
tract the town before leaving. With much Christian love, 
BENJ. H. BARTON,-Pilgrim. 



R4101 : page 366 

"GIVE US TODAY OUR DAILY BREAD" 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

Should you think well to make use of this in the TOWER 
please do not use my name. It is a copy of a letter I sent to 
a brother, a stranger, who twice addressed me requesting 
charity. Yours in the Lord, C . 



MY DEAR BROTHER:- 

Your letter of some weeks ago and also your later one 
came duly to hand, and though I feel I did quite right in 
making no reply to your first letter, yet now that you have 
taken the trouble to address me twice on the same subject I 
will give you my understanding of the Lord's will in regard 
to the matter discussed. 

First let me say that I take no exceptions to the style 
or composition of your letters. On the contrary they disclose 
a very unusual talent for writing, and my only regret 
is that this talent should have found expression in a way 
that is so little calculated to glorify the Lord or his cause, 
or to really benefit you or anybody else. I remind you that 
all our talents belong to him if we are truly his, and 
that these talents ought never to be exercised in any 
manner which would reflect upon his ability to care for his 
own, but on the contrary should be directed into channels 
such as would provide an honest livelihood for ourselves and 
our families and additionally enable us to give something 
toward the spread of the Lord's Truth and the blessing of 



his people. It is not yet too late for you to make a proper 
use of the talent you possess in letter-writing, nor for the 
Lord to aid you in making it a source of honorable income 
if devoted to worthy ends. 

I trust you are not mistaken, dear brother, in your confidence 
that if any man goes to the Kingdom he will be sure 
to meet you there; but I remind you that the Scriptures are 
very explicit on the point that the only ones who will ever 
get there will be the ones who DO the will of our heavenly 
Father as expressed in his Word, and that many, very many, 
who now have unbounded confidence that they will be accepted 
of the Lord are sure to hear the words, "Depart from 
me, ye that work iniquity, I never approved of you." The 
fact that one has been fed on the loaves and fishes broken 
by the Lord's hands is no guarantee whatever that he will 
be accounted worthy to be the Lord's joint-heir in his 
Kingdom. 

These matters are stated thus plainly to you, dear 
brother, because as a diligent student of the Word you must 
be very familiar with the Scriptures, which declare that "I 
have been young, and now I am old, and yet have I never 
seen the righteous forsaken nor his seed begging bread"; 
"No good thing will he withhold from them that walk uprightly"; 
"All things work together for good to them that 
love God"; "His bread and water shall be sure"; "Your 
Father knoweth that ye have need of these things"; "Trust 
in the Lord and do good, and verily thou shalt be fed", and 
a host of others of like import. 

And it ought not to be necessary additionally for me to 
call your attention to the fact that there is not one solitary 
passage in the Lord's Word that would justify you or any 
other brother in Christ in asking alms of anybody except the 
great Dispenser of all blessings upon whose never-failing 
bounty we all subsist. To whom did the Lord Jesus instruct 
us that we should raise the petition, "Give us this day our 
daily bread"? Of whom is it said that if we lack we may 
ask and he "Giveth to all men liberally and upbraideth not"? 

Furthermore, it would be quite as improper for me to 
respond to your appeal for alms as it was for you to make 

R4101 : page 367 

the appeal. Why? Because the statement is clear from the 
Scriptures that we should be on the lookout for wolves, 
swine and dogs, and the predominant characteristic of all 
these creatures is hunger, selfish rapacity, which would 
greedily devour not only the food of the Lord's true sheep 
but the very sheep themselves, if given the opportunity; and 
the Lord has instructed his people not to be led about by 
every suggestion that may come to them (for the devil is 
just as busy in making suggestions as he ever was) but to 
be "Wise as serpents and harmless as doves," testing every 
question— even this question of alms to the needy— by the 
Scriptures and by them alone. 

It is not for me to say why the Lord has permitted poverty 
to come to you, dear brother. I have never seen you, 



and have no knowledge of you whatever beyond what is 
contained in your letters, but it is barely possible that the 
chief reason for your poverty is that instead of "Working 
with your hands the things which are good, that you may 
have to give to him that needeth," you have been of the 
class that are mentioned by the Apostle as content to live 
on the bounty of others, "Working not at all." I hope this 
is not the case, but there is nothing in your letters to indicate 
that such may not be true. 
Your brother in Christ, C . 



page 367 
ENCOURAGING WORDS FROM FAITHFUL WORKERS 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

In addition to my report I wish to tell you how 
much I enjoyed the Niagara Convention. It was my 
first General Convention and it was far beyond my 
highest expectations. I appreciated it all very much, 
especially your kind words of encouragement and advice 
to the colporteurs. 

I am so thankful to our dear heavenly Father that 
the way was opened up for us to go out in the harvest 
work and attend to our parental obligations by having 
our little one with us. I consider this a great privilege, 
and oh, the blessed experiences which we have in the 
work! I will mention some since we have been here. 
One forenoon I had secured 33 orders in the neighborhood 
of the U.B. minister's home. Half an hour after 
meeting him, the minister was around, calling where I 
had taken orders and advising the people not to take 
the books. At one place where they had ordered them, 
before I left some one came with D. M. Panton's tract 
on the "Deadly errors of MILLENNIAL DAWN revealed." 
But, thank the Lord, neither the minister's warnings 
nor the warning of the tract influenced the people so as 
to have them cancel their orders. Those very people 
have more of a determination to read the books than if 
the preacher had remained at home. We know they 
cannot overthrow the Lord's work. "Praise the Lord, 
oh, my soul, for his mercy endureth forever." 

We realize the Father's leading more and more 
each day; and know it is only with his strength and 
grace that we are able to do anything at all. We do 
appreciate all the favors which we receive, the promptness 
in which the orders are filled, the TOWERS, sermons, 
etc.— they are all so good! 

May our heavenly Father richly bless you, dear 
brother, as you dispense the meat in due season to the 
household of faith. With much Christian love to yourself 
and all the Bible House staff, 

Yours in his service, 

(MRS.) B. VANHYNING,-Colporteur. 



DEAR BROTHER:- 

Enclosed find my Pilgrim report for this month 
and money order for balance due the Society. 

I returned to Atlanta Sept. 9 very much reduced in 
physical health and strength. It was with great difficulty 
that I finished my route; but the good Lord gave 
just enough strength to complete it. It does not seem 
as though I could have filled another appointment, 
but am better now. The last week of rest and quiet has 
been a great help, and today for the first I feel quite 
like myself. 

I rejoice as I think that if we only keep the sacrifice 
bound to the altar it will not be long before it will 
all be consumed. Sister Henika and I are thankful 
that we made the sacrifice of not attending the Niagara 
Convention so I could take the Pilgrim trip, for the 
friends in the extreme South, where there is not so 
much Pilgrim service as in some other parts of the 
country, were very glad to get the service of even this 
frail earthen vessel, so we feel that your decision of 
the matter was approved of the Lord, and each has received 
a blessing in making the sacrifice. 

As this is the fourth season that I have spent in 
the southern Pilgrim work you may want to know what 
I find of the spread of the Truth in the extreme South. 
While you will see by my reports that the interest and 
numbers are a little on the increase the opposition to 
the "Present Truth" in the South is very great; but 
there is one thing that is breaking it down, and that is 
that the friends are showing their faith by their works. 
I find that where there has been an increase of interest, 
or even a more favorable disposition to the Truth, it is 
the result of consistent living on the part of those who 
have made the covenant to sacrifice. (I Pet. 2:12.) And 
so their neighbors are beginning to come and see what 
it is that is lifting the daily walk and lives of those in 
"Present Truth" above that of the nominal Church 
people. It is a mystery to them how the Truth people 
live the high standard of life that they do and do not 
believe in eternal torment. How much we have to be 
thankful for that we have the "eyesalve" which enables 
us to see the "mystery hid for ages." 

The Church in Atlanta send Christian love and 
greeting to the TOWER office and to Brother Russell. 

Your brother in Christ, 

J. H. HENIKA. 



page 369 

SEMI-MONTHLY 
VOL. XXVIII DECEMBER 15 No. 24 



A.D. 1907--A.M. 6036 



CONTENTS 

Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society's Annual 
Report 371 

The Volunteer Work 371 

The Colporteur Work 372 

The Newspaper Mission 373 

Zion's Watch Tower 373 

The Pilgrim Service 374 

The Year's Convention Work 374 

Foreign Mission Work 374 

The Financial Showing 376 

The Word was Made Flesh 376 

"In the Beginning was the Word" 379 

John, Our Lord's Forerunner 380 

An Interesting Letter 382 

page 370 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-24 EVERSHOLT ST., LONDON, N.W. 
GERMAN BRANCH-MIRKER STR., 45, ELBERFELD. 
AUSTRALASIAN BRANCH-EQUITABLE BLDG., COLLINS ST., MELBOURNE 

PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 

TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR AS FOLLOWS:- 

All Bible Students who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity or 
adversity, are unable to pay for this Journal, will be supplied FREE if 
they send a Postal Card each June stating their case and requesting its 
continuance. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on 
our list continually and in touch with the Studies, etc. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



THIS JOURNAL IS PUBLISHED IN THE 

FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, DANISH AND ITALIAN LANGUAGES. 

SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



1908-MOTTO CARDS-1908 



The year-text selected for 1908 is a double one: "The 
eternal God is thy refuge" and "Thy will be done on earth as 
it is done in heaven." We have gotten out a very handsome 
motto-card bearing these texts in artistic silver lettering— the 
one above and the other below a beautiful chromo representing 
in Isaiah's symbolism the peace and harmony of the Millennial 
Kingdom. The card is panel-shaped and corded, size 
10 x 15 inches. The chromo is the work of Sister Darlington 
—the same sketch from which the Millennial pins were made. 
Price, 10c, postage 7c extra. Per dozen, $1.00, by express, 
charges collect, or $1.25, charges prepaid. One of these 
cards is included in each $1.00 package of mottoes, unless 
otherwise ordered. 

INSTRUCTOR'S GUIDE AND BEREAN INDEX 



Now ready— 68 pages— India paper— thin, can be carried 
in back of any Bible. Price, 10c, 6 for 50c, 12 for $1.00, includes 
postage. Free to any on our poor list. 

RENEW THROUGH US SUBSCRIPTIONS FOR 

PAPERS PUBLISHING BROTHER RUSSELL'S SERMONS. 

COST TO YOU IS LESS AND INFLUENCE IS GREATER. 



R4103 : page 371 

WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY'S REPORT 

-FOR THE YEAR ENDING NOVEMBER 30, 1907- 

ANOTHER year has coursed swiftly by. We congratulate 

you that one year less lies between 

us and the glorious consummation of our 

hopes— the completion of our "change"— that one year 

less intervenes before the establishment of God's glorious 

Empire, which is to bring blessing to all the families 

of the earth through the setting at liberty of the 

captives of sin and death. From this standpoint we 

rejoice to see the years fly swiftly by, and, as our Lord 

directed, we lift up our heads and rejoice, knowing 

that our deliverance draweth nigh. (Luke 21:28.) But 

while we would not restrain the speeding days and 

years, nor wish for a renewal of their trials and difficulties, 

joys and sorrows, nevertheless we believe that the 

expiring year, like many of its predecessors, has been 

a joyful, a pleasant one to the majority of the Lord's 

faithful followers. To the world it might appear that 

the trials, the testings, the scoffs, the slanders to which 

faithfulness to the Lord is sure to expose, would rob 



life of all its pleasures. But not so: "When he giveth 

quietness, who then can make trouble?" (Job 34:29.) 

All the Lord's people are surely being taught the lesson 

enunciated by the Apostle— that we must learn to 

rejoice in tribulation, and to be patient because of our 

hope, which, as an anchor sure and steadfast, has entered 

within the vail. Quite to the contrary of what 

the world would suppose, our own experiences, and 

the testimony of many of the household of faith, assure 

us that no other people in all the world are so 

happy, so contented, so joyful in the house of their pilgrimage 

as are we. The poet has well said: 

"Think what spirit dwells within thee, 

Think what Father's smiles are thine, 
Think how Jesus died to save thee— 
Child of heaven, canst thou repine?" 

If, momentarily, earth-born clouds and shadows do 
to some degree becloud our pathway, it is but for a 
brief season until we hear the voice of our Father and 
of our Savior assuring us of "Love divine, all love excelling." 
Before our mental vision comes the bright 
picture of the first manifestation of divine love on 
our behalf— in the redemption accomplished by our 
dear Redeemer; then the call of the Little Flock, and 
the fact that the way of attainment thereto has been 
made so clear to us— justification through faith in the 
blood, and begetting to a new nature through the operation 
of the truth and the sanctification of our hearts. 
Then comes the evidence that we have the divine favor, 
in that the eyes of our understanding have been permitted 
to see wonderful things in the divine Word— to 
realize that we are in the harvest time, that the great 
Chief Reaper is present, that the separating work is 
in progress, that the wheat is already being garnered, 
and that when the reaping, threshing and winnowing 
processes shall have been completed, and the last 
worthy member of the Body shall have been changed, 
"Then shall the righteous [the saints] shine forth as 
the sun in the Kingdom of their Father."— Matt. 13:43. 

Our sighs and tears are indeed called for as we 
think of our dear friends and neighbors who are still 
blind to these glorious things. Yet the murmur is 
hushed and the tears dried, as we hearken to the 
voice of him that speaketh from heaven, assuring us 
that his love and sympathy for the groaning creation 
are far greater than ours, and that he has made 
ample provision for every man, and that in his "due 
time" all shall have the necessary knowledge and the 
necessary assistance to a participation in the glorious 
"restitution of all things which God hath spoken by 
the mouth of all the holy prophets since the world began." 
-Acts 3:19-23. 

THE VOLUNTEER WORK 

We begin our report of the year's work with that 



feature in which the largest number of us have 
had the privilege of active participation— some by the 
contribution of money for the publication of these 
tracts and the payment of the freight and express 
charges thereon, others by the free circulation of the 
tracts, giving their time and energy thereto, and some 

R4103 : page 372 

by participating in both of these ways, and still others 
who, unable to actively participate, have sympathetically 
assisted the workers, figuratively holding up their 
hands in prayer and otherwise. 

This year properly enough surpasses any of the previous 
years in the distribution of free literature. Many 
who have recently come into the Truth have found in 
this arrangement an opportunity for service, joining 
hands with those who for years have been active in 
volunteer tract distribution. And more and more, as 
the Truth works down deeply into the hearts of the 
Lord's people, and they come more and more to appreciate 
the Lord's favor to them and their privilege of 
being co-laborers with him, the dear friends are seeking 
opportunities to engage in this work. Many are 
obeying the Apostolic injunction to redeem the time- 
to buy it back from earthly cares, pleasures, ambitions, 
etc., that they may have the greater opportunity of 
"showing forth the praises of him who has called us 
out of darkness into his marvelous light." (Eph. 5:15,16; 
1 Pet. 2:9.) We congratulate you all, dear brethren 
and sisters, in the success of this department of the 
Lord's service, and we trust that the figures shown 
may so stimulate and energize you that the new 
year before us may show no slacking of our zeal, but 
rather an increase, as the signs multiply about us confirmatory 
of our faith and hopes. 

Amongst the laborers in this department of the 
Lord's harvest work are many brethren and sisters of 
good education, good social position, etc., who rightly 
reason that whatever of social standing or honor 
amongst men they may have attained should be 
brought to the support of the Truth— laid as a tribute 
upon the altar of the Lord. We think, for instance, of 
one company of volunteers in whose ranks are to be 
found several business men, several teachers, a high-school 
professor, a General of the U.S. Army and several 
bank clerks. These, instead of being ashamed to 
own their Lord and to witness a good confession of his 
Word of Truth, are properly glad that they have a little 
influence in the world to lay at the Master's feet. 
Not that we consider it a great matter to distribute 
gratuitously leaves of healing for the mental and moral 
comfort and relief of our friends and neighbors- 
it is, indeed, a light service, a precious opportunity for 
showing to our Master on a small scale our love and 
zeal. Glad would we be if we had a thousand tongues 



to sing our great Redeemer's praise, and a thousand 
hands and feet to use in the promulgation of the blessed 
message of "good tidings of great joy which shall 
be unto all people."— Luke 2:10. 

THE COLPORTEUR WORK 

The summing up of this year's work in the Colporteur 
department has exceeded our most sanguine hopes. 
Many of the dear friends, astonished at the results of 
last year's efforts, thought that we must not expect as 
great results this year: others thought it would be unwise 
at least to expect more; but we ventured to express 
the hope that this year we might reach nearly to the 
half-million mark. To our surprise, and yours no 
doubt, the totals show that we have surpassed this— 
notwithstanding the fact that a strike in the bindery 
interfered considerably for a little season. 

The love and zeal with which the dear Colporteurs 
have labored during the year is worthy of our highest 
appreciation, and gradually their numbers have increased, 
until now we have about 600 laborers in the 
field, more than half of whom are giving all of their 
time, and others a portion, to this blessed service, 
which the Lord seems to be using so wonderfully in the 
scattering of his message. Amongst these dear laborers 
are several who were physicians, others who were 
school-teachers, stenographers, farmers and preachers, 
and others still who left manual labor and housework 
to give their time and energy to this method of 
preaching the Gospel. God is blessing these dear co-laborers, 
and we can note in their letters to the office, 
in their reports, and in the good results which follow 
their labors, that they themselves are growing continually 
in grace, in knowledge and in the love which 
the Truth begets, which includes meekness, gentleness, 
patience, long-suffering, brotherly kindness. 

We note with interest also that the public are 
awakening more and more— that they are discovering a 
spiritual deadness in the nominal Church, and that 
those who have been begotten of the Lord's holy Spirit 
are feeling and hungering and thirsting for the Truth, 
which the chaff of sectarianism cannot satisfy. Many 
formerly earnest are therefore absenting themselves 
from former Church associations— sometimes to seek 
for spiritual food elsewhere and sometimes giving 
themselves over to worldliness and carelessness and 
doubt. These, who could not be reached from any pulpit, 
are reached by the Colporteurs, who not only defend 
the Bible as the divine revelation, but proffer them 
helpful suggestions, and seek to put into their hands 
the Bible Keys. The books may be neglected for a time, 
yet the earnestness of the Colporteur will so attach itself 
to the STUDIES that, as the time of trouble nears, the keys 

R4104: page 372 



will more and more come into use for the blessing and 

enlightenment not only of the Little Flock but also of 

the Great Company. As the earnestness and spirituality 

of the Colporteurs increase and abound more and 

more, their work becomes more lasting, more effective, 

as, for instance: a report from one group of Colporteurs 

recently received showed that after their canvass 

of a small city they were able to locate a number of 

deeply interested Christians, some of whom had purchased 

from them, while others already had the DAWNS 

in their possession. These were gathered to a little 

meeting in one of their homes. The Colporteur talked 

over with them the Divine Plan of the Ages for a whole 

Sunday, and on the following Sunday he urged that 

they have regular meetings. This was decided upon 

by a vote of twenty, and one of their number, who manifested 

not only a deep consecration but a clear knowledge 

of the Truth, was chosen as their Elder or leader 

for further cooperation in the studying together of the 

R4104: page 373 

Divine Plan. Thus the harvest work goes grandly on, 
despite the opposition of the world, the flesh and the 
devil. 

THE NEWSPAPER MISSION 

Some eight or nine newspapers are now publishing 
Brother Russell's weekly sermons— the aggregate of 
their circulation amounting to more than 300,000— possibly 
400,000. This in a year means approximately 
18,000,000 copies of sermons, and since newspapers are 
presumed to be read by three to five persons each, it 
swells the total of possibility in this direction to 
an enormous figure. We are not forgetting that comparatively 
few have ears to hear the whole truth, the 
deep things of God, but are remembering also that 
there are many features of Present Truth which at the 
present time appeal strongly to the common sense of 
even the natural man, and it is our belief, based upon 
experience, that a favorable influence for the Truth is 
thus being widely exercised. 

What is the power, the influence, that is pushing 
forward this department of the Harvest work? We 
trust that it is the Lord who is moving in this matter, 
as in all others, and rejoice that he is using the 
brethren in this as well as in the other matters. 
For instance, the latest request that has come 
to us for publication of the weekly sermon explained 
that various of the brethren had made request of the 
editor that he should publish these discourses, and 
that finally some of them addressed the "Circulation 
Manager," assuring him that they could guarantee at 
least 100 new subscriptions to his journal if the sermons 



should appear. Thus was the Lord pleased to 

use the brethren, who had in mind not only their own 

desires in respect to the reading of the sermons weekly, 

and the opportunity of sending copies to their 

friends, but additionally the thought that thousands 

would thus be brought in contact with the Truth who 

otherwise could not be so favorably reached. We commend 

this course to the dear friends in various 

quarters. 

We note specially favorable results through the 
Pittsburgh Dispatch, and believe that other good work is 
gradually being accomplished. We encourage the dear 
friends who have been maintaining this work by their 
subscriptions to the Dispatch to continue so doing to 
the extent of their ability. We also suggest that the 
dear friends everywhere encourage the editors of these 
papers from time to time by mentioning briefly some 
point in the sermons which they have specially appreciated, 
and acknowledging the good work which the 
editors are doing by assisting in the publication of 
these sermons. In nearly every case ministers of the 
various denominations, sometimes singly and sometimes 
in a body, approach the editors and, by misrepresentation 
and threats, endeavor to have the publication 
of the sermons stopped. If the friends of the 
Truth manifest no interest, and give the newspapers 
no encouragement in the matter, and the opposition is 
active, it is easy for the editor to conclude that his 
interests would be better served by discontinuing the 
publication of the sermons. 

The Woman's National Daily has made a clubbing 
arrangement with ZION'S WATCH TOWER, which now 
includes all the United States. Under this arrangement 
we are permitted to receive from within that territory 
$1.60 as a year's subscription to both papers, or 
60 cents for a year's subscription to the National Daily 
from those who are already TOWER subscribers. Many 
of the dear friends have already taken advantage of 
this. Some, going further, have solicited subscriptions 
to the National Daily at $ 1 .00 per year (one-third 
cent per copy) and have thus made for themselves a 
little profit, besides putting into the hands of their 
neighbors 52 sermons for the year. We suggest to all 
residing in the favored territory that such subscriptions, 
costing them but 60 cents each, would be excellent 
Christmas gifts, which might accomplish much 
for the Truth. We hope soon to know of some weekly 
papers in the North and East which would give our 
friends in those districts as good an opportunity at 
as low a price. We will advise you how we can accomplish 
the largest good in this direction— by assisting in 
the circulation of a paper which already has a large 
circulation amongst intelligent people. 

ZION'S WATCH TOWER 



The only disappointment we have to note in this 
year's report is in connection with the subscription list 
of ZION'S WATCH TOWER. It is not what it should be 
—not what we had expected it to be by this time. 
True, its circulation is large. We print 30,000 copies 
of each issue, sometimes more, when extra sample copies 
are needed. But our regular paid list is only 
about one-half of this. It seems a pity that this branch 
of the service cannot be extended more widely. Those 
who receive the TOWER assure us of their high appreciation 
of it and the blessings which they look for 
and receive with every number. For this encouragement 
we thank the Lord and you all. However, it is 
our opinion that if every thoroughly interested brother 
and sister would take this matter to heart, they could 
increase our list at least 10,000 during the present year. 
This is not an appeal for money. Our desire is that 
the good influence which we believe accompanies the 
TOWER shall be extended— that many who now have 
some interest and are reading the DAWNS and STUDIES, 
and are participating in the meetings, should additionally 
have the privilege and blessing that the Lord 
has provided through this journal. We remind you all 
again that those whose circumstances do not permit 
them to pay the price, are welcome to the TOWER free 
upon application, and that those who prefer not to ask for 
it free, yet have not the money conveniently now, may 
have it on credit with the plain understanding that if 
they should never be able to pay for it, and so request, 
we will cancel the indebtedness at any time. We would 
like to have the WATCH TOWER list representative of 
all the truly deeply interested friends everywhere, regardless 
of their financial conditions. Let each one do 
his part and watch and labor and pray for a wider influence 
for good in this direction— for the further ripening 
of the wheat and its ultimate preparation for the 
heavenly garner. 

R4104: page 374 

THE CORRESPONDENCE DEPARTMENT 

The correspondence feature of the work continues 
to increase, as we should expect, and we take this opportunity 
of assuring all that we are glad to have your 
letters and respond to your queries. If sometimes our 
replies are brief we trust you will not take it as an indication 
of lack of interest and appreciation. Sometimes 
on a card we can refer the questioner to the answer 
to his query in the DAWNS or in a back TOWER, 
and thus really respond more fully than the proper 
compass of a letter would permit. The new Bibles will 
bring many of you into closer touch with your DAWN- 
STUDIES and back TOWERS, and we trust will be very 
helpful. Nevertheless, do not forget that we are pleased 
to hear from you. We again request that all orders 



for books, tracts, etc., be on a separate sheet of paper 

from your general letter, that your address be very 

plainly written, and that any questions be separate 

from the letter itself. We also remind you that each 

receives a personal communication from the Editor 

twice every month-ZION'S WATCH TOWER. Please accept 

these communications in lieu of any lengthy 

epistles from him. 

Number of letters and postal cards received at 

Allegheny 60,580 

Number of letters and postal cards mailed from 
Allegheny 50,232 

THE PILGRIM SERVICE 

This branch of the harvest work has had the Lord's 
blessing to a marked degree during the last year. Altogether, 
thirty-five brethren have done more or less 
work in this branch of the service— some of these giving 
all of their time, others giving such portions as they 
could spare from their other engagements in life. The 
names of the latter do not appear in the Pilgrim list, 
but notifications of their visits are sent by mail. The 
following brief summary will give quite a comprehensive 
view of this branch of the service: 

Total number of visits made 1951 

public meetings held 2009 

" " semi-public meetings held (in parlors, 
etc.) 4210 

" " miles traveled 184,878 

THE YEAR'S CONVENTION WORK 

We have reported all the General Conventions and 
need not here repeat that they were simply grand— one 
and all. How we wish that all TOWER readers could 
attend at least one each year! They are such an inspiration 

R4105 : page 374 

as pen cannot do justice to. Once we considered 
them too expensive: now we consider that they pay 
well in increased zeal and love. "They that feared the 
Lord spake often together," writes the prophet, and 
then he adds, "A book of remembrance was written before 
him of them that thought upon his Word. They 
shall be mine, saith the Lord, in that day when I come 
to make up my jewels." 

All cannot attend in person, but we feel sure when we 
meet that many are with us in spirit who cannot come 
in the flesh. And they are remembered by us and by 
the Lord, and share the blessing. 

We cannot announce any program for these General 
Conventions for 1908, but feel impressed to have one in 



Pittsburg if the way seems to open. Let us look to the 
Lord for guidance— wisdom from above on the subject 
of time and place. We desire to take advantage of 
some large Convention's special excursion rates, that 
the larger numbers might be enabled to attend. 

The "One-Day Conventions" of the past year have 
been events of increasing interest. We have not reported 
them all, for two reasons: (1) Our space is limited, 
and (2) although each one is different and has its 
own special blessings to those attending, there would 
of necessity be much sameness in the reporting of 
them. But they are surely awakening the public- 
Christian people in particular— especially such as have 
gotten hungry and tired of the "husks" of false doctrine. 
And they do the "brethren" good, too. They 
enjoy hearing not only on their own account, but also 
on account of others. Their self-denial in raising the 
money necessary for rent of auditorium and advertising 
brings a spiritual blessing as a reward. And their 
zeal to scatter the advertisements and place the show-cards 
finds a reward in the greater strength of character 
thus engendered. More than this, the conventions promote 
brotherly love and fellowship amongst the brethren 
of an entire district. Thus, for instance, at our last One-Day 
Convention— at Brockton, Mass.— more than 50 
brethren came from Providence, R.I., on a special electric 
car; while friends from Lowell, Lynn, etc., joined 
the Boston friends and came together in a special train 
of five cars (321 passengers)— enjoying the journey and 
cheering and encouraging the Brockton class. May 
the Lord continue to bless this branch of the service in 
1908 also. 

"He is the fountain of blessing, 
Yes, worthy is he to be praised." 

FOREIGN MISSION WORK 

In proportion as the Lord's spirit of love pervades 
our hearts, it overrides and obliterates all division of 
country, race, sex, language, etc., and emphasizes the 
Lord's words, "One is your Master, even Christ; and 
all ye are brethren." (Matt. 23:8.) We properly, therefore, 
feel the same interest in finding one of the Lord's 
hungry sheep, whether the color be yellow or black or 
white, or whether the residence be in Africa, in Europe, 
in Asia or America. However, every year seems to 
emphasize what we have suggested along the line of the 
divine providence, viz., that the Lord has gathered to 
this favored land people out of every nation, tribe, 
kindred and tongue, and especially the poor emigrating 
classes of all nations, with a view to their emancipation 
from the thraldom of priestcraft and superstition 
in preparation for this "harvest" message; hence, it 
does not surprise us to find that the great majority of 
those interested in Present Truth are still being found 
in this country. And a great many of those who are 



being interested in foreign lands have received more or 
less of the knowledge of the Truth through their friends 

R4105 : page 375 

residing here. Nevertheless, while using every energy 
here in the opening of the eyes of understanding of 
those who give evidence of having heart loyalty to the 
Lord, we feel it to be both a duty and a privilege, as 
the Lord opens the way, to convey the light of Truth to 
other lands, that the loyal and the true may be found 
and be refreshed, and be prepared for the Kingdom by 
the meat in due season— the "harvest" message— "the 
good tidings of great joy, which shall be to all people." 
-Luke 2:10. 

Since during the past year the Lord has sent to our 
care and stewardship an increased amount of money, 
we have taken it to be his will that we should not only 
increase our activities in the home field, but also avail 
ourselves of the opening doors in foreign fields, and 
continue to enlarge the foreign missions already established. 
Reports from some of these will appear in a 
later issue. We content ourselves in this report with a 
brief general review. 

Principal amongst these missions is the British, 
which during the past year has flourished exceedingly, 
giving evidence that many of the British people are becoming 
awake and responsive to Present Truth. The 
condition of things in Great Britain more closely resembles 
the conditions in the United States and Canada 
than does that of any other section. We feel greatly 
encouraged by the outlook there. 

The Australian mission is making good progress, 
too. The field seems to be a ripe one, but not many 
Colporteur reapers have presented themselves there, 
and consequently the work is not progressing as it otherwise 
might. We are hoping great things from the dear 
friends of that mission, and that they may become more 
and more warmed and imbued with the spirit of the 
Truth. 

Considerable work has been accomplished in Germany, 
but results are rather disappointing for the 
amount of effort put forth and money expended. The 
Colporteur work does not seem to prosper there either, 
because the dear friends do not learn how to do it, or 
else because of the scarcity of money, or perhaps the two 
difficulties in combination. The people of Germany 
certainly live comfortably, and if they were made to 
appreciate the value of the spiritual food that the Lord 
is now spreading before his consecrated ones, they 
would be ready to deny themselves natural food and 
luxury for the sake of the spiritual. We fain would 
encourage the Colporteurs in that field to greater courage 
and greater zeal in thrusting in the sickle of Truth. 
What has been accomplished there has been largely 
through the distribution of tracts, and, alas, but a 



small proportion of these were scattered through volunteering, 

nearly all having been sent in conjunction with 

newspapers through the mail. Thus, the tract distribution 

does not mean so large a share of blessing to 

the dear friends of the cause as might otherwise be 

supposed. Nothing in this, however, should be considered 

a reflection on the loving zeal which has exercised 

many of these German brethren and sisters. We 

presume that the narcotic influence of nominalism, Higher 

Criticism, etc., has affected Germany as much as or 

more than any other land. We here remark that the Germans 

in America are amongst the most active, most 

earnest, most self-sacrificing. 

The work in Scandinavia, especially in Norway and 
Sweden, has been making considerable progress in the 
last year. We are glad of this, and rejoice to note the 
zeal of many of the dear friends there. The work in 
Denmark seems to lag. We are trusting for much better 
things in the year ahead of us. The work in Switzerland, 
France and Italy is extremely small, rather discouraging, 
nevertheless some true wheat has been found 
and we trust some ripened for the garner. We bid the 
dear friends in these countries be of good cheer, and to 
pray the Lord of the harvest to send forth more 
laborers into the vineyard. (Matt. 9:38; Luke 10:2.) 
The work in Jamaica has prospered well during the 
year and is taking good hold, finding a considerable 
number who are very zealous to serve the King of kings 
as Colporteurs. Nearly all of these are colored. 

We cannot give much of a report from Africa. A 
great many books and tracts have been sent there, and 
Brother Booth is there doing what he can to gain a 
hearing amongst the blacks. He reports some success, 
but nothing that he can boast about. It remains to 
be seen whether or not we acted wisely in supposing 
that there might be some true "wheat" among the aborigines, 
and in undertaking to find it and ripen it with 
Present Truth. We expect to send Brother Browne (colored) 
shortly to see if he can do anything to further 
the interests of the cause there. 

The proposition to serve the Truth in Japan miscarried. 
The missionary who had read and rejoiced 
and who desired to spread the Truth amongst the people 
there had not become sufficiently rooted and 
grounded in it. However, we are advised that the Japanese 
can read Chinese literature, and, a favorable 
opening having manifested itself in China, a work is 
under way there of which we have nothing as yet to report. 
We trust, dear readers, that all these various interests 
of the harvest lie so close to your hearts that 
you continually remember them at the throne of grace, 
petitioning for all your representatives and the Lord's 
in these various services of the Truth, that wisdom and 
grace from on high may be granted, that the Lord's 
will may be accomplished thereby, that his people may 
be blessed and his name honored. The Society's expenditure 



in these various missions, noted below, is in 

excess of whatever was collected and used in the missions 

themselves: 

In Great Britain $ 5,973.47 

In Germany 6,385.00 

In Australasia 5,142.54 

In Scandinavia 2,089.91 

In Jamaica 1,446.73 

In Switzerland, France and Italy 303.02 

In Africa 1,740.25 

In China 1,288.19 

Total $24,369.11 

R4106 : page 376 

THE FINANCIAL SHOWING 

The increased donations of this year encouraged 
us to spread the work as never before. The increase 
may be accounted for in part by the general prosperity 
prevailing; but this accounts for it only in part. In 
various ways we have evidence that a deepening work 
of grace is in progress amongst us. This led not only 
to financial activity but also to activities in Colporteuring 
and Volunteering and in attendance at the 
Conventions and arranging for them. The Lord be 
praised! This zeal to know the Lord, to understand 
his Word and to assist others toward the Kingdom is 
just what we should expect of the "called and chosen 
and faithful" ! 

We are not deceiving ourselves into thinking that 
our financial showing is very great. We know well that 
all of our receipts would be very small for some of the 
large institutions, which propagate "a ring-straked and 
speckled" Gospel, and that the amount would not be 
large enough to pay the salaries of the "officers." But we 
thank God that in his providence he has made us stewards 
to the extent indicated. We are striving to use the 
money so wisely that He will be pleased with the results 
and by and by say, "Ye have been faithful in a few 
things, I will make you rulers over many things." 

1907--SUMMARY OF THE OUTPUT--1907 



Total number of DAWNS, "Scripture Studies," 

cloth-bound, sold at cost 554,021 

(This is more than 1,789 volumes per each working 
day of the year.) 
Total output DAWN, Vol. I., magazine form, sold at 

cost 41,625 

Total output DAWN, Vol. I., magazine form, given 
gratis 11,125 



Total 606,771 

Total output of free TOWERS, Tracts and Newspaper 
publications of our weekly sermons— stated in the 

usual form of tract pages 212,696,246 

(This does not include several millions of Tracts and 
TOWERS printed and scattered in Germany, 
Scandinavia, etc., for which see later issue.) 

FINANCIAL STATEMENT 

Receipts 

Balance from last year $ 3,349.75 

"Good Hopes" realized and other Tract Fund 
donations 83,042.07 

Total $86,391.82 

Expenditures 

Expended for Pilgrim service. (This year this item 
is greatly enlarged by reason of including hall 
rents and advertising expenses, nearly all of which 
extra was actually sustained by the friends who 
were served. We have invited their reports of 
the amounts expended, have credited the same as 
a Church donation to the Fund, and charged the 
same in as part of the expenses connected with 
the Pilgrim service. This also includes the reported 
expenses of One-Day and General Conventions.). ...$17, 091.38 

Expended on Foreign Missions 24,369.11 

Cost of Tracts, TOWERS and other free literature 
above, with postage, freight, rents, etc 35,670.91 

Total expended during 1907 $77,131.40 

Balance, overplus for new work $ 9,260.42 



Although this comfortable balance encourages us 
to an aggressive campaign for the Truth in 1908, we cannot 
hope that the receipts will equal the above report. 
But, if next year's receipts should be less, we will strive to 
use them wisely and to remember that our Lord owns all 
the gold and the silver and the cattle upon a thousand 
hills. If he sees best to withhold he will have a reason 
for so doing. Possibly money may be less plentiful 
in general, and hence the output of DAWN-STUDIES 
may be less, and the test of the loyalty and faithfulness 
of the dear Colporteurs the more keen. He 
knows! He knows what is best! 

But on the other hand we are most decidedly of the 
opinion that the Harvest Message is to have a much wider 



circulation than it has yet had, before the closing in of 
the world's dark night of sorrow. It is for us to apply 
to ourselves the message, "Speak to the people that 
they go forward." It is ours to lay down our lives for 
the deliverance of the brethren from the yoke of error 
and the blindness of the Adversary, and to "show forth 
the praises of him who hath called us out of darkness 
into his marvelous light." Let us be faithful and endure 
hardness as good soldiers and wait for our Captain's 
word, "Well done! Faithful over a few things, I 
will make thee ruler over many things." 



R4106 : page 376 

THE WORD WAS MADE FLESH 

--JOHN 1:1-18.~JANUARY5.~ 

Golden Text:— "The Word was made flesh and dwelt among us. 

AS a pendulum swinging from one extreme to another, 
passes the true center of gravity 
midway, so are the conceptions of Christians 
in general respecting our Lord: they go to one 
extreme or the opposite. One extreme view declares our 
Lord Jesus to have been simply a good man, a member 
of Adam's race as are others, the son of Joseph; others 
that he was perfect but not preexistent. Some deny the 
personality of God, and claim that what is called God is 
merely an operation of nature— that man is the greatest 
personal being in existence, and that he was not created 
but evolved himself from lower conditions. All 
of these theories we must set aside as being entirely 
inconsistent with the divine revelation, the Word of 
God, which teaches us respecting the intelligent Creator 
that he, in his sympathy and love, provided a Redeemer 
separate and distinct from our race. The opposite 
view holds to a personal God, the Creator of all 
things, and accounts for the honorable station of our 
Lord Jesus by assuming that he was the Father, 
but called himself the Son of God in a harmless deception 
of mankind for a time. It assumes also that he was 
"incarnate"— that is, that God entered a human body 
and used it in an obsessional sense. 

R4106 : page 379 

It would be in harmony with the carrying out of this 
thought to say that when Jesus prayed to the Father 
he really prayed to himself, but in this mild manner 
deceived because the disciples were not able to comprehend 
the great fact that he himself was the Father. 
Pursuing the same line this theory would imply that 
our Lord on the cross, praying to the Father, "My God, 



my God, why hast thou forsaken me?" merely did this 
for the effect upon the disciples, since he was the 
Father and could not forsake himself. The same theory 
carried out supposes that when the body of Jesus 
died it was merely the moment when God stepped out 
of it, because it would be claimed that God could not 
die, and that the universe could not be left even for 
three days without supervision, and that if God died he 
could not raise himself from the dead. Therefore this 
theory compels the thought that our Lord's experiences 
from first to last were deceptive. We cannot agree with 
this thought; it is founded upon several errors, and as 
a whole is repugnant to reason as well as to Scripture. 

Another thought along the same line is that the declaration 
of the Scriptures that there is but one living and 
true God is to be accepted in an accommodated sense 
—that there are really three Gods, but that they cooperate 
so thoroughly in every plan and purpose and act 
that they might properly be called one God. 

According to this theory one person of the Trinity 
left heaven, was incarnated, and addressed another 
person of the Trinity as Father, and prayed to him and 
not to himself, and declared that the Father was greater 
than he— though this was not really the truth, since 
they were all one, according to the Westminster Confession, 
"equal in power and glory." Nevertheless this 
view also insists that Jesus, being God, was not made 
flesh, but merely appeared in flesh in an obsessional 
sense— in the same sense in which the demons took 
possession of men. According to this claim this God 
obsessed Mary's babe and dwelt in him until he died, 
performing through him wonderful works and giving 
forth wonderful teachings, but being God this one could 
not die, and therefore did not die at Calvary, but merely 
allowed the obsessed body to die. 

The foregoing statement of the views of Unitarians 
and Trinitarians is not in exactly the verbiage used by 
the advocates of these doctrines, but our presentation 
is truthful, merely stripping their statements of the 
matter of some of the gloss they would use to hide the 
difficulties of their theories. 

We now come to a consideration of the Bible view 
of this important subject, which agrees with none of 
the foregoing. We do not admit that either we or others 

R4107 : page 379 

have a right to ignore the plain statements of the 
divine Word, but claim, on the contrary, that the Scripture 
should be allowed to interpret itself, and that what 
it presents should be accepted by all Christian people 
without cavil. Let us look at the subject candidly as 
presented in this lesson. 

"IN THE BEGINNING WAS THE WORD" 



The first verse of our lesson, although not a bad 
translation, fails to give to the English reading the 
force, the significance of the Greek, and gives the implication 
that there are at least two Gods, whereas the 
Scriptures declare that "there is one God, the Father, 
and one Lord Jesus Christ." (I Cor. 8:6.) Nowhere 
in the Scripture are these said to be equal in power and 
glory. On the contrary, whether we take the words of 
the apostles, or the prophets, or of the Lord Jesus himself, 
they all declare in harmony that the "Father is 
greater than I." "I came not to do mine own will, but 
the will of him that sent me." (John 14:28; 6:38.) 
When we read, "In the beginning was the Word and 
the Word was with God," that makes two, the Word 
and the God whom he was with or represented, and then 
the statement that the "Word was God," we are thrown 
into confusion. How could the Word and God be 
God? It is here that the Greek gives the relief and 
makes the matter plain. It reads, "In the beginning 
was the Word and the Word was with the God and the 
Word was a God; the same was in the beginning with 
the God." If we accept this just as the Greek gives it, 
with the emphasis of the Greek article in the one place 
and not in the other, then all is straightened out— is 
clear. Then we can see that originally there was but 
the "one God, the living [self-existent] and true God"; 
that the glorious personage in this verse called the 
Word or Logos was the beginning of the Father's creative 
work. 

This is in full accord with the Scriptural declaration 
that Jesus was the beginning of the creation of 
God— the "Firstborn of every creature." (Col. 1:15.) 
But some one objects,— "You are making Jesus, the Son 
of God, a created being." We answer, No; we are 
making nothing. We are just finding out what the 
Scriptures say; we are twisting nothing. The fault 
lies in the error of the "dark ages" in assuming that 
Jesus was one of three Gods or that he was all of the 
one God. For neither of these positions is there a particle 
of Scripture. Let us not be wiser than God. If 
we accept the Bible as the divine revelation— as the 
voice from heaven said of our Lord Jesus, "This is my 
beloved Son, hear ye him"— does not the very word 
son, applied to our Lord, imply that he was not his own 
father nor coexistent with the Father, but a begotten 
or subsequent creation? Surely there is no escape 
from the simplicity of the Scriptural presentation of 
the subject. "The same was in the beginning with the 
God" clearly implies a certain time recognized as the 
beginning, but so far as the heavenly Father himself is 
concerned, the Scriptures declare, "From everlasting 
to everlasting thou art God." (Psa. 90:2.) In other 
words, while it may be beyond our comprehension, it 
is the Scriptural presentation that the Father alone 
was without beginning, and that the Son was the beginning 
of the Father's creative work— created before 



angels as well as before man. 

"ALL THINGS WERE MADE BY HIM" 

Let us notice carefully this statement: it refers to 
the Logos, and is in full harmony with the statement 
made by the Apostle, "All things are of the Father, all 
things are by the Son." (I Cor. 8:6.) The power was of the 

R4107 : page 380 

Father, but it was exercised through the Son, the beginning 

of his creation, and hence "without him was not 

anything made that was made." What a beautiful testimony! 

How honoring to the Father! how honoring to 

the Son! The Father used the Son as his active agent in 

every creative work— nothing whatever was done without 

him. Is not this a sufficiency of honor for our dear 

Redeemer? Is it not as much or more than he ever 

claimed? In his humility he said nothing about his 

high honor, which he left to be our Redeemer. 

The name he used, "The Word of God," the "Logos," 
was of itself significant, and in full harmony 
with our interpretation, as all scholars must admit. 
In olden times the kings kept themselves more or less 
apart from their subjects; they were rarely seen. It 
is said that it was a custom for them, when addressing 
multitudes of their subjects, to sit behind a screen or 
curtain, while in front of this stood the king's interpreter 
or representative, who spoke the king's words in 
a loud tone to be heard of all who were there. How 
beautifully this represents the honorable position of 
our Lord Jesus. He is the mouthpiece of the Father; 
he is his representative to every creature, to angels 
and to men. He is his active agent; by him were all 
things made, and without him was not anything made. 

"In him was life." Abruptly the writer passes 
from our Lord's great work in the creation of all things 
to his appearance amongst men. He declares, "In him 
was life; and the life was the light of men." Our Lord 
is here contrasted with other men. He was different 
from others because he was not born of the flesh, 
though born in the flesh— that is to say, his life did not 
come from a human father, though it was nourished, 
matured, by a human mother. It was this peculiarity 
which marked him as separate and distinct from all of 
the race. That perfection of life was in marked contrast 
with the imperfection of the remainder of the 
race. The death sentence which passed upon father 
Adam, and which all of his children increasingly inherit, 
had brought them down to low mental and moral 
conditions, while our Lord Jesus, having a perfect life 
transferred from a heavenly condition, was in consequence 
very different from others of his people. This 
life constituted the light amongst men. They perceived 
that he was a remarkable character— "Never man 



spake like this man." "They marveled at the gracious 
words that proceeded out of his mouth." (John 7:46; 
Luke 4:22.) They had never before seen one in whom 
was life: all others whom they had met, like themselves, 
were dying creatures, nine-tenths dead. 

"And the light shineth in darkness, and the darkness 
comprehendeth it not." Not only is it true that 
the sin-darkened ones of our Lord's day comprehended 
him not, nor the light of truth and grace which shined 
from him, but it is still true that the darkened class 
comprehendeth not. "The god of this world hath 
blinded the minds of them that believe not." (2 Cor. 4:4.) 
This is the Apostle's explanation of the matter 
—he still blinds the darkened class, and their eyes will 
not be opened until, at the second coming of Christ, 
Satan shall be bound for a thousand years; and then, 
during that Millennial period, under the reign of our 
dear Redeemer, all the blind eyes shall be opened and 
all the deaf ears shall be unstopped, and every creature 
shall come to a knowledge of the mercy and goodness 
and love of God, operating through Jesus Christ our 
Lord. 

JOHN, OUR LORD'S FORERUNNER 

The people indeed recognized John the Baptist as 
a notable character and servant or messenger of Jehovah, 
and this the Evangelist corroborates, saying that 
he was sent from God to be a witness of that Light. 
But John's witness was received by comparatively few, 
though it was given to all the favored nation to whom 
the Light was sent. The fact that John as a servant 
of God was given that honorable position of identifying 
and declaring Jesus as the Messiah, the Son of 
God, which taketh away the sin of the world, was of 
itself an assurance that the great One thus introduced 
and announced was very great in the estimation of Jehovah 
God, very honorable, the Messenger of the 
Covenant. 

"HE WAS THE TRUE LIGHT" 

"He was the true light, which lighteth every man 
that cometh into the world." This is a prophetic statement, 
for our Lord at his first advent did not even enlighten 
all of his own nation, and made no attempt 
whatever to enlighten the world of mankind. Nevertheless 
it is God's purpose that ultimately all shall 
see, all shall know of his love and wonderful provision. 
And our Lord Jesus is that great Light, the great Enlightener, 
that is yet to enlighten Adam and every 
member of his race. When amongst men the glorious 
Light was not fully revealed, even though what the 
Jews did see caused them to marvel. Our Lord himself, 
according to the Scriptures, "learned obedience 
by the things which he suffered," and was thereby prepared 



for his exaltation, his glorification, which he 
received when he had finished the work which the 
Father gave him to do— when on the third day thereafter 
the Father raised him from the dead by his own 
power, to glory, honor, immortality, the divine nature. 
Now, in his highly exalted condition, he is still the 
true Light which shineth with a brightness above that 
of the sun at noonday. He is to be the great Sun of 
Righteousness which, during the Millennial age, shall 
bless and enlighten every man that cometh into the 
world; and we are given the blessed assurance that the 
Church, the Bride class, the Elect, will be with him in 
that glorious mission of blessing and enlightenment.— 
Matt. 13:43. 

"HE WAS IN THE WORLD" 

"The world was made by him and the world knew 
him not. He came unto his own, and his own received 
him not." These words set forth in plain perspective 
the dignity of the Son of God, who was made flesh and 
dwelt among us. The world knew him not! and, still 
more surprising, his own nation, the Jews, knew him 
not! although they had been instructed from the beginning 

R4108 : page 381 

of their nationality to look for the Messiah, 
and although to them a description had been given— 
not only that he should be very great, but also that he 
should be born of a virgin and made of no reputation. 
How they received him not is clearly set forth in the 
Scriptures: they mocked him, derided him, rejected 
him; they preferred instead of him Barabbas, the robber; 
at the instigation of their priests and doctors of 
the Law they cried, "Away with him! Crucify him!" 
But while this was the course of the majority, a few 
had the eyes to see and ears to hear the message of 
God's love which came through him as the Word of God. 
Of this our lesson tells, saying, "As many as received 
him to them gave he power [privilege or right] to become 
the sons of God, even to them that believe on his 
name." These were the "Israelites indeed," of whom 
were the twelve apostles and the seventy, also the "500 
brethren," and those Jews subsequently reached on the 
Day of Pentecost and afterward during the entire harvest 
of their age. These had formerly belonged to the 
house of Moses, the house of servants— "For Moses, 
verily, was faithful as a servant over all his house." 
But now, the due time having come, these favored ones 
saw the true Light, because they were in the proper 
attitude of heart, and they received from him not only 
forgiveness of their sins through the merit of his sacrifice, 
but also the begetting of the holy Spirit— an 
adoption by the holy Spirit into the family of the sons 
of God— quite a step above their previous position as 



merely members of the house of servants, for of our 
Lord it is written that Christ as a son was faithful 
over his own house, whose house are we, if we hold fast 
the confidence and the rejoicing of the hope firm unto 
the end.— Heb. 3:6. 

The following verse (13) emphasizes all this, saying, 
"Which were begotten, not of blood, nor of the will 
of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God. " We 
render here the term gennao begotten, and not born, as 
in our common version, for although the same Greek 
word is used interchangeably as referring to begettal 
and birth, yet there is that in the construction of the 
Greek sentence which fixes it here as signifying begetting. 
It refers to our begetting of the holy Spirit, 
whereas our birth of the holy Spirit is the Scriptural 
designation for the resurrection. It was not along family 
lines of blood relationship, not along fleshly lines 
of worldly sympathy and judgment, not according to 
man's wealth or wisdom that some were changed from 
being members of the house of servants and made 
members of the house of sons of God, under Christ. 
It was of God that all this came to them, because they 
were Israelites indeed in whom there was no guile— 
the very class for whom God had prepared the exceeding 
great and precious arrangements of his plan. Only 
such are at present able to appreciate the full riches of 
God's grace and loving kindness. As sons of God, as 
members of the Royal Priesthood, they are privileged to 
have a greater fellowship in the great High Priest, 
Jesus, and a greater intimacy with the divine Word 
than is granted to others. As the Lord expressed the 
matter, "Unto you it is given to know the mystery of 
the Kingdom of God; but unto those who are outsiders, 
these things are spoken in parables."— Mark 4:11. 

"THE WORD BECAME FLESH" 

The last verse of our lesson contains much food 
for thought: from it our Golden Text was selected. It 
declares that the Word was made flesh. The revised 
version renders it, "The Word became flesh." Both 
are correct, and both contradict the two extremes of 
view held by Christendom. It was the Word that was 
made flesh, and hence our Lord's was not an ordinary 
birth. On the other hand, note that it does not say 
that the Word was incarnated or got into flesh or obsessed 
it, but says quite correctly, "The Word was made 
flesh— the Word became flesh." Let us make no mistake 
in the reading of this message on this important 
subject; let us take it just as it is written, without 
twisting. The lesson is that the great One, the beginning 
of the creation of God, the only begotten of the 
Father, full of grace and truth, came down from that 
glorious condition as a spirit being and was made flesh 
and dwelt among us, as the Apostle says. "The man 
Christ Jesus" was not an incarnated being, but was 



himself the One who had been with the Father, and 

whose nature as a spirit being had been changed, exchanged 

for human nature as a fleshly being. It was 

when he made his consecration at thirty years of age 

and symbolized it in water baptism that he received his 

begetting of the holy Spirit to a new nature, a spiritual 

nature, as high or higher than he had before. From 

that moment on he was the Anointed One, which in 

the Greek signifies the Christ, and in the Hebrew the 

Messiah. He was anointed with the holy Spirit, with 

the oil of joy above his fellows. And directly after this 

anointing came upon the Master, he began the work of 

selecting those who were to be joint-heirs, otherwise 

styled the members of his Body, the under priesthood, 

the Bride, the Lamb's Wife. In the preceding verse 

we have seen how some of these "fellows" were given 

liberty to become the sons of God— to be begotten of 

the holy Spirit, with a view to their ultimately reaching 

the same glorious nature. 

It is not the Word made flesh that was glorified 
and exalted; rather the Word made flesh offered 
up himself a living sacrifice to the Father 
and carried out that sacrificing covenant, completing 
it at Calvary when he cried, "It is finished." 
The sacrifice was finished, the Word made flesh 
had died, had ceased to be. Neither was that 
Word made flesh ever revived. No, he gave his life a 
ransom for many, for Adam and all his race, and never 
revived as a man, never took back that sacrifice. 
Hence we may go free. As it is written, "Deliver him 
from going down into the pit: for I have found a ransom 
for him. "-Job 33:24. 

But if the Word made flesh died and did not rise 
again, what did arise from the dead? and who is the 
Lord of Glory that now ever liveth? We reply that the 

R4108 : page 382 

Lord of Glory was begotten at the time the Word made 

flesh offered up himself, namely, at the time of our 

Lord's consecration and symbolization of that covenant 

at Jordan. Not the newly begotten Son of God, begotten 

of the holy Spirit, but the Word made flesh sacrificed 

himself, gave himself up as a man, with all of his 

earthly rights and privileges sacrificed on behalf of 

father Adam for the restoration of Adam and all those 

condemned to death through him. This New Creature, 

begotten of God by the holy Spirit, prospered, grew, developed, 

as the Word made flesh yielded and finally died. 

This New Creature, which did the sacrificing of the 

man Christ Jesus, was the One recognized of the Father, 

the One who gave his flesh for the life of the world. 

(John 6:51.) This New Creature's life was not given 

for the life of the world, the New Creature was not sacrificed 

for sins. No! it was the Word made flesh, the 

man Jesus, that was sacrificed, while Jesus the New 



Creature, begotten again, was delivered in the resurrection 
—raised from the dead on the third day by the 
Father. He it was who ascended up on high, there to 
appear in the presence of God on behalf of the Church, 
which is his Body, the under-priesthood, and on behalf 
also of all the household of faith, the antitypical 
Levites. 

Meantime not only the faithful of Natural Israel, 
but also the called-out ones from amongst the Gentiles 
have been privileged to walk in their Master's footsteps. 
True, they had not perfect flesh as he had; true, it 
could not be said of them as of him that in them was 
life. But to them was imputed life, because they believed 
—they were justified through faith, and their sins 
and imperfections reckonedly covered. Hence from 
this, the divine standpoint, they were thenceforth like 
their Lord. They also consecrated their flesh, they 
also were begotten of the holy Spirit, they also were 
reckoned as New Creatures, they also crucified the 
flesh with its affections and desires, they also laid down 
their lives, their flesh, in death, and to them also was the 
promise that eventually, as the Father raised up Jesus 
from the dead, so also will he raise them up in his likeness, 
in his resurrection— the First Resurrection of the 
blessed and holy. They like their Lord will never more 
be of the human nature: when perfected as New Creatures 
they will be like their Lord, see him as he is and 
share his glory, because they will be changed— because 
"flesh and blood cannot inherit the Kingdom of heaven." 
-I Cor. 15:50. 

When the Apostle says, "And we beheld his glory, 
the glory of the only begotten of the Father, full of grace 
and truth," we may not surely know his thought. He 
may have meant that subsequent to our Lord's resurrection 
he and the other apostles had beheld the Lord's 
glory when he had manifested himself to them; or he may 
have meant that during the days of his flesh before his 
sacrifice of it was complete, that they beheld his glory, 
his honor, his dignity, his perfection, as the earthly 
image of God— God manifest in the flesh. In any 
event we may here apply to ourselves, not only a good 
doctrinal lesson, but also a good practical lesson, for 
we are amongst those who are hoping to make our calling 
and election sure, that we may become joint-heirs 
with our dear Redeemer in his glory and Kingdom. 
The lesson shows us clearly that if we would be so honored 
by a share in his resurrection, we must be faithful 
now and make our calling and election sure by walking 
in his steps and finishing the sacrificing of our flesh: 
"I beseech you, brethren, by the mercies of God, that 
ye present your bodies a living sacrifice, holy and acceptable 
to God, your reasonable service."— Rom. 12:1. 



R4102: page 377 



YOUR "GOOD HOPES" 1908 



[The plan here proposed we designate "GOOD HOPES," 
because nothing is actually promised— only your generous 
hopes expressed, based upon your future prospects as they 
now appear to you. The plan proved not only so beneficial 
to the cause of truth, but also so blessed to the hopers, for 
some years past, that we again commend it to all as Scriptural 
and good. Those who desire to make use of this plan 
can fill out both of these memoranda. One should be kept 
for the refreshment of your memory; the other mail to us.] 

To the 
"WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY." 

Dear Friends:— I have read with interest of the openings 
for the Dawn and Tract work in foreign lands and here 
at home. I need not tell you that I am deeply interested 
in the spread of the Glad Tidings of the lengths and 
breadths, the heights and depths of redeeming love expressed 
for us in God's great Plan of the Ages. 

I am anxious to use myself— every power, every talent, 
voice, time, money, influence, all— to give to others this 
knowledge, which has so greatly blessed, cheered and comforted 
my own heart and placed my feet firmly upon the 
Rock of Ages. 

I have been considering carefully, and praying to be instructed, 
how to use my various talents more to my Redeemer's 
glory and for the service of his people— those 
blinded by human tradition who are, nevertheless, hungering 
for "the good Word of God," and those also who are 
naked, not having on the wedding garment of Christ's imputed 
righteousness, the unjustified, who stand at best in 
the filthy rags of their own righteousness. I have decided 
that so far as my "money talent" goes, I will follow the rule 
so clearly laid down for us by the great Apostle Paul (1 Cor. 16:2), 
and will lay aside on the first day of each week, according 
to my thankful appreciation of the Lord's blessings 
during the preceding week. Out of this fund I wish to contribute 
to the several parts of the Lord's work specified on 
the back of this letter. Of course, I cannot in advance 
judge or state particularly what the Lord's bounty may enable 
me to set apart weekly, and hence you will understand 
the sum indicated to be merely my conjecture or hope, based 
upon present prospects. I will endeavor to contribute more 
than I here specify; and should I not succeed in doing as 
well, the Lord will know my heart, and you, also, will know 
of my endeavors. 

My only object in specifying in advance what I hope to 
be able to do in this cause is to enable those in charge of 
the work of publishing and circulating the Tracts, etc., to 
form estimates, lay plans, make contracts, etc., with some 
idea of what I will at least try to do in the exercise of this 



my highly appreciated privilege. 

My present judgment is that during the coming year, by 
self-denial and cross-bearing, I shall be able to lay aside on 
the first day of each week for Home and Foreign Mission 
Work (to assist in circulating Millennial Dawn in foreign 
languages, and in publishing the "Old Theology Tracts" in 
various languages, and in supplying these gratuitously to 
brethren who have the heart and opportunity to circulate 
them widely, and in meeting the expenses of brethren sent 
out as "Pilgrims" to preach the divine plan of salvation, 
and in general to be expended as the officers of the Society 
may deem best), the amount of per week. 

To comply with United States Postal Laws, all or any 
portion of my donation may be applied as subscription price 
for Watch Tower or O.T. Tracts sent to the Lord's poor 
or others, as the Society's officers may deem advisable. 

That the work be not hindered, I will endeavor to send 
you what I shall have laid aside for this cause at the close 
of each quarter. I will secure a Bank Draft, Express Order 
or Postal Money Order as I may find most convenient, and 
will address the letter to 

WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 

"Bible House," Allegheny, Pa. 

or, 24 Eversholt St., London, N.W., England; or, Equitable Building 
Collins St., Melbourne, Australia. 

(Name) 

(Post Office) (State) 

page 378 

WATCH TOWER SUBSCRIPTIONS 

-ON GOOD HOPES ACCOUNT.- 

The friends who contribute to the "Good Hopes" (described 
on the reverse of this sheet) at times desire to send 
the Watch Tower to friends who are not yet interested 
enough to subscribe for themselves; or to deeply interested 
friends who are too poor to subscribe and backward about 
accepting our Lord's Poor offer. They are invited to give 
us such addresses below— the expense to be deducted from 
their donations. Give full addresses, and write very plainly 
please, mentioning the length of the subscriptions. 



CHRISTIAN HOME EMBELLISHMENTS. 



For several years we have been supplying our readers 



with handsome text and motto cards for the walls of their 
homes. Their influence is excellent; for they continually 
and cheerfully catch the eye and remind the heart of our 
great favors present and to come, based upon the exceeding 
great and precious promises of our Father's Word. We 
commend these as helps in the "narrow way,"— helps in 
character-building . 

OLD THEOLOGY TRACTS 



These are published quarterly at 6 cents per year. But 
extra SAMPLE copies, for distribution among friends, from 
house to house, for enclosure in letters, and in general for use 
in such ways as seem judicious, are supplied freely, the expense 
entailed by the great demand for them being borne by the 
Tract Fund of voluntary contributions. Write for the tracts as 
you feel able to use them, even if not so well able to contribute 
toward the expense; some who are not able, and do contribute, 
do not have opportunities personally to use all that their 
contributions pay for, so that the matter is equalized 
and all may have a part in this service of disseminating 
the truth. 

A PRIVILEGE AND A SERVICE 



We are convinced that the Watch Tower lists do not contain 
the names of one-half of those deeply interested in its teachings. 
The total is small enough surely, and we are not content that 
the name of any should be missing. We believe that all such 
will be stimulated and encouraged on the "narrow way" by 
its semi-monthly appearance on their table, reminding them 
afresh of spiritual matters which the world, the flesh and the 
devil continually tend to crowd out of mind and heart. 

Hitherto we have required that all desiring the Watch Tower 
on credit, or free, as "the Lord's Poor," should make personal 
application; but now we request every subscriber to inquire 
among those whom he knows to be interested in present truth, 
and to obtain the consent of all such to send in their subscriptions 
either on credit or free, as their circumstances may necessitate. 
Any getting it on credit may at any future time request 
that the debt be cancelled, and we will cheerfully comply. We 
desire that as nearly as possible the Watch Tower lists shall 
represent all those deeply interested in its message. 

Our object is not the gain of "filthy lucre," but "the perfecting 
of the saints for the work of ministry"— present and to 
come. (Eph. 4:12.) We offer no premiums, desiring the 
co-operation of such only as appreciate the privilege of being 
co-workers with us in this ministry. Our list is now about 
22,000; but it should be at least 30,000, and we confidently 
expect the above program to bring it to that figure. Let as 
many as appreciate it as a privilege, join at once in this service. 



WATCH TOWER SUBSCRIPTION RENEWALS. 



Most of our subscriptions end with the year, so we take this opportunity 
to remark that we will be glad to hear promptly from such as 
desire the visits of the Watch Tower continued. The Lord's Poor 
friends have been requested to send in their applications in June. When 
names are dropped and afterward renewed it makes us unnecessary 
trouble. 

When desiring to know date of expiration, look on your Tower 
wrapper. Date is given in lower left-hand corner. 

HYMNS OF DAWN WITH MUSIC. 



Our readers have for years inquired for this book. We 
now have it for you in handsome cloth binding and at cost 
price. It is the best and the cheapest hymn book in the world, 
at 35 cents per copy, postpaid, and contains 333 of the choicest 
hymns of all ages. By express, collect, 25c each, in any quantity. 

WATCH TOWER BINDERS. 



These are substantially made of stiff cloth boards, and can 
hold two years' issues of the WATCH TOWER. They prevent 
soiling and loss. Price, postpaid, 50c. 



R4118 : page 382 

AN INTERESTING LETTER 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

I have just returned home from a colporteuring tour, 
occupying several months time. During the time I canvassed 
about 117 days and sold 4,406 volumes, averaging a 
little better than 37 books a day. One little town I canvassed 
in one day and took orders for 127 books, and when 
I came back to deliver I delivered every book ordered, besides 
three more, after three o'clock in the afternoon. 

In one town it was "noised about" that the books I 
was taking orders for were the DAWNS. In fact the subject 
was discussed at the M.E. "sewing circle." One of the ladies 
had Vol. I., said she had read it and enjoyed it, and wouldn't 
take a hundred dollars for it, and yet thought it wasn't 
quite safe for young people to read! This same lady called 
on me that evening at my rooming place and told me I 
wouldn't likely secure any more subscriptions from Methodists, 
and that those who had subscribed would likely countermand 
their orders. Of course this made me a little uneasy; 
still, I knew if I lost the orders, the experience 



would be good for me, and so I left the matter with the 
Lord. Well, the result was I still kept on taking orders 
from Methodists, and not a Methodist went back on me. 
One man whose wife didn't give me an order, sent word for 
me to call when I was delivering and he bought all six of 
the books. 

I met a man in a little town who said he had got the first 
three volumes last year, and that he had read all of them 
three times, that he found something new every time he 
read them and that they never grew stale. He said he has 
a library of over a thousand books. He bought the other 
three from me. When I find persons having the first three I 
always try to get them to take the other three and they do 
not often hesitate to do so. 

I have heard from a set I sold last year, that the person 
had read all six books three times in less than a year 
and considered them the finest literature on the Bible that 
he ever read. 

I met a dear old brother who is ninety-one years old. 
He is two years old in the Truth, and got the Truth by reading 
the "Debates." 

With much Christian love, in which the household here 
joins, I am, your sister in the Lord, 

ANNA J. GILLESPIE,-Colporteur. 



