Benefits of Group Witnessing
1 Do you often work alone in field service? Very few of us do. It is more encouraging to have someone either working with us at the door or working in the same territory. As one publisher remarked: “Just knowing that there is someone close by helps.” Starting out in field service with a happy group makes service all the more enjoyable.
2 Group witnessing is not new. Luke chapter 10 relates to us the joy that the disciples experienced when working together. It should be noted that before sending out the 70, Jesus first gave them instructions. From his example we see why it is good, in most cases, to meet together prior to going out in field service.—Luke 10:1-16.
3 Recently in Our Kingdom Service there was a series of articles explaining the importance of helping one another. Are we still putting these fine suggestions into practice? As an “association of brothers,” we all want to help one another. (1 Pet. 2:17) Reports show that in many congregations there is a good response to the special arrangements for field service on the first Sunday of the month. Some elders say that this arrangement has drawn the congregation closer together. Where morning meetings are held, some publishers bring their lunch and then go out in field service before returning home. We are happy to receive these fine reports. They should encourage all of us to continue taking advantage of local arrangements for group witnessing.
4 Meeting together for field service and working with the group give us the opportunity to work with new publishers as well as those who are more experienced. Elders and ministerial servants can get better acquainted with the brothers and sisters while working with them in the field. It affords a fine opportunity for all to share in encouraging one another.
5 Meeting with the group need not take much time. Usually groups can be organized and started out in service within 10 or 15 minutes. The service overseer should be alert to help brothers overcome problems with organizing the groups so that more time can be spent in the field.
6 Group witnessing can also be arranged during the week. Many of the sisters are taking advantage of this. Also, most of the pioneers are out in field service on weekdays. By working with the pioneers you will receive encouragement and, in turn, you can be encouraging to them. Youths, now that school will be closed for the summer, why don’t you plan on spending some of your vacation time sharing in this midweek group witnessing?
7 Some have commented that there is an increasing number of people that are not at home during the week. We encourage you to continue keeping accurate house-to-house records so that either you or those who engage in field service during evening hours or on weekends can try calling on the not-at-homes. With the coming of the summer months, would it not be good to make definite arrangements for evening group witnessing? Some of the elders and the ministerial servants may be able to meet with the group on an evening that would be convenient for the congregation. Since evenings generally seem to be the best time to find people at home, service overseers should explore this possibility.
8 We want to reach as many people as possible with the good news while there is still time available. So, where conditions permit, some publishers may wish to work alone. In other areas, going to the doors alone may not be advisable. Or, a married couple working together may be more effective in talking to people. Also, when young ones are in the group, it may be wise to have an adult publisher work with each child. In every case good judgment coupled with a desire to accomplish the most good should govern the arrangements we make.
9 We wish to commend all of you for the fine work that you have been doing in the preaching activity. We are seeing good increases in the number of new ones sharing in the work and this makes us all happy. May Jehovah continue to “send out workers into his harvest.”—Luke 10:2.

