Keeping a Balanced View of Our Service
1 Spiritual balance is a desirable Christian quality. Being balanced means we are able to weigh or compare the relative weight, force, importance or value of something. With balance, we can avoid the pitfalls, extremes and mistakes that adversely affect our service to Jehovah. It comes as a result of acquiring the wisdom taught by Bible principles. (Prov. 2:10-15; 3:5, 6) Study and application of such principles help us to develop “perceptive powers trained to distinguish both right and wrong.” (Heb. 5:14) A person who has acquired good spiritual balance as a Christian strives to demonstrate moderation, modesty, patience, self-control, discernment, faithfulness, endurance and dependability in all that he does. Such a person usually gets more done, finds greater joy in his service and will endure despite difficulty. All of us do well to cultivate this fine quality.
STRIVING FOR BALANCE
2 We often find individuals involved in secular work to the point where they maintain only a token share in field service. What is the purpose of secular work? (1 Tim. 5:8) What would give evidence that we have become unbalanced? (Luke 12:18-21) What is the proper viewpoint? (Matt. 6:31-33) How can we keep a balance between secular and spiritual responsibilities?—1 Tim. 6:6-8; Heb. 13:5, 15.
3 Today’s society puts much emphasis on entertainment and personal pleasure. If not careful, we too could be affected by this influence and become excessively involved in such pursuits. Is it wrong to enjoy ourselves? (Eccl. 3:12, 13) When have we gone too far? (2 Tim. 3:4) What principles can help us decide what type or amount of entertainment is appropriate?—Phil. 4:8; 1 Tim. 4:8; Eph. 5:15, 16; Luke 8:14.
4 Many problems are being experienced in caring for the spiritual and physical needs of the family. A father may be very active in preaching the good news while his children’s conduct is poor at the Kingdom Hall. Or a wife who is meticulously concerned about the physical appearance of her home shows only a minimal regard for the spiritual needs of her family. What two basic responsibilities are involved? (Eph. 6:4; Rom. 10:10) Why should concern for the spiritual interests of the family rate high on the list of priorities? (1 Tim. 3:4, 5; Prov. 10:1) What good benefits result when parents are well balanced?—Prov. 24:3, 4.
5 From time to time, some find it difficult to maintain the initiative necessary to share regularly and wholeheartedly in field service. When they do participate, to some extent they may feel that they are forcing themselves. Thereafter they may tend to become discouraged and frustrated because of what seems to be a serious lack in themselves. Is it something unusual for a Christian to sometimes lack initiative to do the work assigned? (Gal. 5:17; Rom. 7:19, 20) Is a need to force ourselves necessarily a sign of failure? (1 Cor. 9:16, 26, 27) Our service to Jehovah is acceptable if our motive is right. (Col. 3:23, 24) It is appropriate to ask Jehovah for his spirit to help us develop greater initiative to act in harmony with his will.—1 John 5:14.
6 The key to good balance lies in viewing ourselves honestly, expecting neither too much nor too little. We are balanced when our service is commensurate with our abilities, circumstances and opportunities, rather than judged in comparison with what others do. When we detect a lack in ourselves, a desire to please Jehovah should prompt us to do better. Satisfaction and peace of mind are the result of an inward assurance that we are pleasing Jehovah.

