“Step Over into Macedonia and Help”
1 Most of us are familiar with the above-quoted words and the circumstances that surround them. (Acts 16:6-10) Paul and Barnabas loved people. Their willingness to give of themselves was evident by their actions. We see that same willingness among Jehovah’s servants today. (Ps. 110:3) Many of you have moved into congregations so that you can help in working seldom-covered territories and be a source of encouragement. We are sure that, like Paul and Barnabas, those who have done this have been richly blessed.
2 We should not think that moving to serve where the need is greater is only for elders and pioneers. Oftentimes the Society receives letters from circuit overseers and congregations requesting families to move in to add support, as well as help in working territory.
3 The right motive is most important in deciding to make a move to serve where the need is greater. Our reason for moving should be one of wanting to be of help. A brother, who with his wife and son has spent many years serving in congregations needing help, commented that it is often necessary to lower your living standards. “Don’t try to change the congregation to suit your personal likes,” he said, “but work with it, relying on Jehovah for work, housing, and so forth. Be willing to accept what He provides.” Good suggestions!
4 Also keep in mind that in most areas where help is needed, secular work is often scarce, the cost of housing and other basic necessities may be expensive or weather conditions could be extreme. Much prayerful thought should be given before moving. Count the cost. (Luke 14:28) It is important to turn to Jehovah, as a family, asking for his direction and guidance. And it will be important for each member of the family to support the arrangement. Are you willing to make sacrifices and adjustments in your lives?
5 What should you do if you decide to move to a new congregation? First, review what is stated in the Organization book on pages 134 and 135. Then write a letter and give it to the service committee. They, in turn, will send it to the Society.
6 In addition to what is mentioned in the Organization book, please let the Society know if you have in mind a certain part of the country where you would like to serve. We will send you names and addresses so you may obtain additional information you need by writing directly to the congregation(s). It might be mentioned that Arizona, California, Colorado, Florida, New Mexico, Oregon and Washington have a limited need.
7 There are a number of foreign language congregations that have needs. If you can speak another language and are in a position to move, please correspond with the Society, as indicated in paragraph four, and tell us which languages you speak.
8 With the remaining time of this old system running out, how good it is if we can be of help to our brothers and other honesthearted people who are still thirsting for the truth. Our prayers are with you in this important matter. May Jehovah provide his guidance as we all work in boldly preaching the good news.—Acts 4:29.

