VOL. XXI. OCTOBER 15, 1900. No. 20. 



CONTENTS. 

Views From the Watch Tower 307 

Poem: The Christian's Goal 308 

Seasons of Refreshing 308 

"Thy Saints Shall Glorify Thee" 309 

The Song of Moses and the Lamb 310 

"Thy Saints Shall Bless Thee" 313 

Following the Voice of Conscience 314 

The Unjust Steward 315 

"Ye Cannot Serve God and 

Mammon" 317 

The Rich Man and Lazarus 318 

Encouraging Words From Faithful 

Workers 319 

About Pilgrim Visits, etc 306 

page 306 

SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
--ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, N.Y. DRAFT, MONEY ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity 
or adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, if 
they send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting 
the paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our 
list continually. 



BRITISH BRANCH NO. 131 GIPSY LANE, FOREST GATE, 
LONDON EAST, ENGLAND. 



R2750 : page 306 

ABOUT PILGRIM VISITS. 

We are surprised at the limited number of responses to our 
request of Aug. 1. issue that all desiring visits of "Pilgrims" in 
future shall write us a postal card at once so saying— and answering 
the queries propounded in that issue. 

We cannot think that the limited number of responses received 
indicate the measure of appreciation entertained for this 
Pilgrim service, which is free— no collections even. If this service 



is not appreciated highly we will certainly discontinue 
some of the Pilgrims, and hereafter endeavor to serve chiefly 
those who have expressed a desire for such ministries. We 
feel confident, however, that you have merely overlooked or 
neglected the matter, and shall hope to have at once responses 
from all who have expressed deep appreciation of the Pilgrim 
services in the past. We desire the answers on postal cards and 
by numbers so that they will be compact and uniform and easily 
referred to. If you know of friends at near-by post offices 
please mention names of such post offices on the card. 



page 306 

NAMES OF WATCH TOWER POOR LIST. 

While we are not only willing but anxious to have on our 
lists the names of all interested in present truth, we nevertheless 
require that the request come direct from the person desiring 
the WATCH TOWER; and that the request be repeated each 
December. One exception would be that any who are contributors 
to the Tract Fund may send in such names of interested 
poor brethren, authorizing us to charge up the subscriptions as 
in offset to their donations. Those who desire the TOWER and 
hope to pay for it in the future may order it on credit; with the 
understanding that, if never able to pay, they may at any time 
have the debt canceled on request. 

SEND NO MONEY BY MAIL: IT IS UNSAFE. 



R2710 : page 307 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 



WORLD MOVEMENT TOWARD DENOMINATIONAL UNION. 



A CONTEMPORARY thus sums up the recent 
tendencies toward union on the part of 
Churchianity,— in full harmony with what our pages 
for the past twenty years have shown will be the procedure 
of "Babylon" just prior to her fall "as a great 
millstone into the sea." We quote as follows:— 
"The question of denominational union is fast 
becoming one of the most important questions of the 
day in all Protestant lands. In Germany, as we have 
lately pointed out, a strong movement exists for the 
federation of the state churches, amounting to nearly 
fifty in number; and federation is one step on the 
road to organic union. In Scotland, the Congregationalists 



and the churches of the Evangelical Union 

—sometimes called Morrisanians— amalgamated their 

forces a short time ago; and the Free and the United 

Presbyterian churches are to become organically one 

next October, as already mentioned in these pages. 

In South Australia the three leading Methodist denominations, 

and in Canada all the various Methodist 

bodies have for some years been one. This is an encouraging 

record. 

R2711 : page 307 

"Besides this measure of union already attained, 
there are promising movements under way in England. 
All the great Protestant churches outside the Establishment 
have for some years had a strong federal 
organization, as we have several times pointed out. 
During several years past an attempt has been made 
to unite organically two of the Methodist bodies— the 
Princeton Methodists and the Bible Christians. Both 
are offshoots of the original Wesleyan parent stock, but 
separated from it on questions of church government." 

CHRISTIAN THEORY AND PRACTICE CONTRARY. 



The following is from the Orient, a Japanese journal: 
"Japan enjoys the unique distinction of being the 
only non-Christian power that has been admitted into 
what is called the comity of nations on a footing of 
perfect equality, and, to judge from the utterances of 
the European and American press she is by no means 
the least respected power. Unfortunately the cause 
of this respect is not such as to satisfy all Japanese. 
Japan has made great progress in the arts of peace; 
but that is not really why she is respected. That respect 
was earned in a short nine months by the achievements 
of the Japanese army and navy. Now, that 
sort of thing is pleasing enough to a nation's amour 
propre, but on calmly thinking the matter over some 
Japanese would wish that the respect of Western nations 
had been earned by something else than by mere 
proficiency in the art of slaughter conducted on modern 
scientific principles. Russia, too, is respected and 
feared. Yet she is the only non-constitutional country 
in the comity of nations. The liberty of the individual 
and of the press is under the tyranny of mere 
administrative orders in Russia, and official peculation 
is nearly as rife as in China. And this gives rise to 
strange misgivings. Are the so-called Christian nations 
really followers of the religious cult they so ostentatiously 
and proudly profess?... 

"Without going so far with Count Tolstoi as to 
say that his rendering of the real meaning of Christianity 
is the correct one, we do go so far as to say 



that the precepts of the Sermon on the Mount are the 
most important in the so-called Christian code of morality. 
And these precepts, unquestionably, are against 
war, and all against according honor to any nation or 
any man on the mere grounds of success in the exercise 
of brute force, much less of success in slaughtering 
enemies. And yet it is precisely on these grounds 
that non-Christian Japan has been accorded the respect 
of so-called Christian Europe and America! 

"We can very well understand the old Hebrews 
respecting us for success in war, for the old Hebrew 
God was a God of battles. But we have always understood 
that the Christian Father in heaven was no 
mere tribal war-god, but a God of love. The present 
situation is not a little puzzling to us poor benighted 
heathens of Japan, who have earned the respect of 
those who profess to follow the precepts of Christ on 

R2711 : page 308 

the Mount, by success in slaughtering our enemies, 
and by that alone. Will real Christians kindly explain 
what it all means?" 



In our "View" of last issue we made a typographical 
error, in stating that Terah, Abraham's father, 
died at seventy. It should have read— two hundred 
and five years. 

R2711 : page 308 

THE CHRISTIAN'S GOAL. 



THOUGHTS SUGGESTED BY THE CHICAGO CONVENTION. 



Perfect love— the mark for the prize; 

How shall I reach it, O Lord? 
The way thou hast walked is a narrow way, 

So we read in thy precious Word. 
We eagerly start in the way with joy, 

Thinking our love is pure; 
But the Father, seeking our perfectness, 

Purgeth us more and more. 

Till, by dint of strokes and of tears 
Made to look back o'er bitter years 

Our hearts in anguish deep exclaim 

"Woe is me ! " "Wretched man that I am ! " 

We know that in us dwelleth no good thing, 
But in the Beloved do we stand; 



O glory and honor and praises to him 
Who holdeth us in his hand! 

Perfect love! O Lord can it be 

Thou in infinite mercy canst see 
In one so unworthy, so helpless as I, 

A heart that unto thee would draw nigh? 
Perfect love! Lord, can it really be 

Thou hast so loved and cared for me, 
That when in me did sin so abound 

Thy grace more abundant was found? 

Perfect love— the mark for the prize 

Thou hast placed beyond the skies! 
O yes, our dear Lord, we will patiently run, 

With our eyes on thee alone; 
Not looking back on the way we have come, 

Battles fought, and victories won; 
But forgetting those things which are behind 

Press along our reward to find. 

Perfect love— we do see it in him, 

Who gave his life, our poor lives to redeem; 
That we might as sons to our Father draw near, 

For in Jesus we've nothing to fear, 
As in the light of his glorious face 

We press to the end of the race; 
Standing complete in his Righteousness, 

He alone our perfect dress. 

-MRS. C. A. OWEN. 



R2711 : page 308 

SEASONS OF REFRESHING. 



AS THE time for the Dallas, Texas, Convention 
drew near, it became evident that it would 
serve only a small proportion of the Texas friends 
who would desire to attend, and so arrangements were 
made for two other gatherings in that large State- 
about 300 miles apart;— namely at Houston and at 
San Antonio. And another local convention of nearby 
friends was held at Columbus, Ohio, on the Editor's 
return trip. All were seasons of refreshment in spiritual 
things, profitable, we trust, to all who attended. 

At Dallas the attendance was about 300; from all 
parts of Texas, from Oklahoma, Indian Territory, 
Arkansas, Mississippi, Alabama and California. The 
three days were practically one continuous meeting 
with necessary intermissions for food and rest. Fifteen 
brethren and seven sisters symbolized their real 
baptism into Christ's death, by immersion in water. 



At Houston we had only a one-day meeting, but 
it was a good one; full of love, joy, fellowship of kindred 
minds; its influence will abide, with some at least, 
through life, yea throughout eternity, no doubt. The 
attendance was about one hundred and twenty-five, 
chiefly local. 

At San Antonio we had great refreshment during 
two days' meeting with about one hundred and fifty 
of God's dear people, mostly from local points. Two 
informed us that they had driven over one hundred 
miles in a wagon, there being no good rail road connections, 
and, anyway, the expense being a consideration. 
The Lord's blessing was with us all in bountiful 
measure as we considered together the grandeur 
of our high calling, and the "mark" to which all must 
attain if they would win it. 

At Columbus we had but one day, but it was one 
full of refreshment, as we met about one hundred dear 
brethren and sisters from local points, and communed 
together concerning the exceeding great and precious 
promises and arrangements of God for the elect, and 
through them for all the families of the earth, in 
God's due time. 

The arrangements at every point were most complete, 
and with the cordial reception accorded ourself 
and all visiting brethren, bespoke— amongst all— a 
"Love divine all love excelling." 

We shall cherish fondly to the end of our pilgrimage 
the remembrance of the hearty greetings and 

R2712: page 309 

many kind attentions, great and small, lavished upon 

us by loved ones whom we had never met before, but 

who, for all that, were far from strangers. We accepted 

these attentions as done "unto the Lord" and to us 

a representative of Him and his truth; and not as personal 

tributes. If, as our Master promised, even a 

cup of cold water given in the name of a disciple shall 

be rewarded by him, surely these many kindnesses to 

us as his servant will bring showers of spiritual blessings 

to many; and in this we rejoice. 

Much as we enjoy these conventions and realize 
that they are spiritually profitable to many, we feel 
nevertheless that they must not be indulged so freely 
next year, nor until the concluding two volumes of 
the DAWN series are prepared. The conventions of 
this year have retarded VOL. VI. a full year. We 
have not as yet gotten started on it, and yet our daily 
increasing mail clearly shows its need. We have in 
mind for 1901 a convention at Buffalo, N.Y., to which 
point the Pan-American Exposition will undoubtedly 
secure low excursion rates. 



R2712: page 309 

"THY SAINTS SHALL GLORIFY THEE. 



They shall speak of the glory of thy Kingdom, and talk of thy power; 
to make known to the sons of men his mighty acts, and the glorious 
majesty of his Kingdom."— Psa. 145:5-12. 

VARIOUS ARE the view-points from which mankind 

regards its Creator. The world of mankind 

in general notes merely his mighty acts, without 

appreciating his glorious character. This is suggested 

by the Prophet, saying, "I will speak of [meditate 

on] the glorious honor of thy majesty, and of thy wondrous 

deeds, and men shall speak of thy terrible acts: 

but I will declare thy greatness." (Vss. 5,6.) The 

world speaketh of its own, and according to its intelligence 

respecting the Almighty; but the Lord's people, 

specially instructed by him and taught of the holy 

spirit, know of the Lord and his greatness in a sense 

that the remainder of mankind know them not. 

As the Apostle declares, "The natural man receiveth 
not the things of the spirit of God, neither can he 
know them, because they are spiritually discerned. 
...But God hath revealed them unto us by his 
spirit." (1 Cor. 2:14,10.) As our Lord again declared, 
"To you it is given to know the mysteries of 
the Kingdom." "Blessed are your eyes, for they see; 
and your ears, for they hear." (Mark 4:1 1; Matt. 13:16.) 
We are not, then, to be surprised at the wide 
difference of understanding of God and of his mightiness 
and of his character, as viewed by the saints and 
by the world; rather we are to expect such a difference 
of view. The Apostle explains the reason, telling 
us that the god of this world hath blinded the 
minds of them that believe not, so that the glorious 
light of God's goodness, shining in the face of Jesus 
Christ our Lord, does not shine into their hearts, to 
give the light of the knowledge of the divine character 
and plan. (2 Cor. 4:4.) And he explains again that 
we who were at one time in darkness, are now enlightened 
by the Lord, having been translated out of 
the dominion of the prince of darkness, into the dominion 
of God's dear Son. (Col. 1:13.) And it is 
this enlightened class that the Apostle urges should 
make progress in the knowledge of the Lord, growing 
in grace, growing in knowledge, and thus growing in 
the love of God and in the appreciation of his character. 
He urges this, saying that it is necessary, to 
the intent that we may comprehend with all saints, 
the lengths and breadths, and the heights and depths, 
and to know the love of Christ, which passeth all 
[human] understanding.— Eph. 3:17-19. 

Alas! the great majority of Christian people, 



while they have escaped from much of the blindness 
of the Adversary, are still subject to his confusing errors 
and misrepresentations of the truth, and are thus 
blinded still in great measure to the divine plan; looking 
at things more from the human standpoint than 
from the divine standpoint, and framing their creeds 
and confessions accordingly. Ah, they forget how 
the Lord has declared, "My plans are not your plans, 
neither are your ways my ways, saith the Lord, for 
as the heavens are higher than the earth, so are my 
ways higher than your ways, and my plans than your 
plans." (Isa. 55:8,9.) Because of this measure of 
blindness that rests upon the mass of the nominal 
church— even amongst Protestants— it follows that, 
not seeing the divine character and plan in their true 
light and beauty, the vast majority of Christian people 
cannot take the standpoint of the saints in this prophetic 
testimony before us, but they take rather the 
standpoint of the natural man: when they think of the 
Almighty they think rather of his wonderful and terrible 
acts than of his own greatness, because they know 
comparatively little of the glorious honor of his majesty, 
and do not see how his wonderful deeds declare 
his greatness. 

From the standpoint of the average Christian, 
God is anything but gloriously honorable in his majesty; 
indeed, thinking of the Almighty from the 
standpoint of their creeds, the majority of noble-minded 
Christian people feel ashamed of God and of his plan. 
One class declares that his glorious honor and majesty 

R2712: page 310 

is manifested in his election of the Church to glory 

and eternal life, and in the passing by of the great 

majority of others, condemning them to an eternity 

of torture— and that since "known unto the Lord are 

all his works," God foreknew and foreordained whatsoever 

comes to pass, and thus purposed the eternal 

torment of the vast majority of his hundreds of millions 

of human creatures before creating them. Can 

these dear Christian friends declare the honor and 

majesty, the greatness and goodness, of their Creator? 

No! Hindered by such a false view of God's plan and 

of his mighty works, they cannot discern in such a 

course either justice, or love, or any other great or 

honorable quality, that they should honor or reverence 

it. Hence, like the world, they merely take note of 

the mighty power of Jehovah, and fear him, but are 

unable to take the position of the saints and to glorify 

his name and declare his righteousness. 

Another large body of Christian people repudiate 
the foregoing false view, asserting another equally 
untrue, and almost equally dishonoring— tho their 
thought is to glorify God, and to relieve his character 
of the stain of injustice, inequity and lovelessness with 



which the foregoing view would besmirch it. These, 
therefore, claim that God loves every member of the 
race, and is doing, and has been doing since the fall, 
everything within his power to rescue Adam's fallen 
race from their difficulties. But with such a view how 
could they extol the greatness and the honorable majesty 
of the Almighty? If for six thousand years he 
has been unable to accomplish anything, where is the 
power, where is the honor and majesty to be seen? 

Surely all would confess that any bright, honorable 
man, if granted the one-hundredth part of the 
omnipotent power of the Creator, could accomplish 
more in one hundred years than all that has been accomplished 
in six thousand years, toward the rescue 
of the race from ignorance, superstition and sin! How, 
then, could these dear Christian friends who, with good 
purpose of heart, are nevertheless blinded by a false 
theory— how could they tell forth the glorious honor 
of the divine majesty, and show this and his greatness 
from his wondrous deeds? Surely they would be dumb 
in any such effort. 

THE SONG OF MOSES AND THE LAMB. 



Only those who see the divine plan of the ages, 
and the relationship between the past, the present, and 
the future, are in any degree able to make known the 
greatness of our God, his glorious power, and his 
honorable majesty. This class is referred to by the 
Revelator as singing the song of Moses, the servant 
of God, and the song of the Lamb— they sing in the 
sense of declaring in harmonious and beautiful cadences 
the relationship of the types and figures of the 
Law and the Prophets of the Mosaic dispensation with 
the antitypes of these of the Gospel dispensation; 
showing that all things written in the Law and in the 
Prophets are finding glorious fulfilments in the Lamb 
of God and in the great plan which the heavenly Father 
is working out through him.— Rev. 15:3,4. 

The Revelator tells us the substance of this song; 
namely, "Great and marvelous are thy works, Lord 
God Almighty! Just and true are thy ways, thou King 
of saints!" But what great and marvelous work has 
God performed, and how shall we see that he is both 
just and true in all his ways and dealings? From the 
standpoint of those who can sing this song everything 
must be clear as noonday! 

First amongst the great and marvelous works of 
the Almighty was the sentence of death upon father 
Adam and his posterity because of disobedience— not a 
sentence of eternal torment, which would be as unjust, 
and unreasonable, as it is untrue and contrary to the 
Word of God— not the false presentation respecting this 
divine act that is held forth in all the creeds of Christendom, 



—but the great and marvelous act which God 

R2713 : page 310 

declares he accomplished when he let fall upon our 
race the sentence of death, which has brought in its 
train all the various disasters and difficulties, mental 
and physical, to which our fallen flesh is heir, all of 
which are tending to, and resulting in death, the penalty. 
As we look at this marvelous work, we must 
concede that it was just (in that it was merited), that 
it is true (in the sense of not being an unreasonable 
penalty), true in the sense that it was exactly what 
God forewarned father Adam the penalty of disobedience 
would be. "Just and true are thy ways, thou 
King of saints." 

But Jehovah's first great and marvelous work 
of condemnation was, after four thousand years, followed 
by another great and marvelous work; viz., the 
work of redemption. How stupendous this work of 
the ransoming of all Adam's race of hundreds of millions 
by the sacrifice of one man! How great and 
wonderful indeed this act, and how just and true, and 
how fully in harmony with every feature of divine 
justice and love! Even the philosophy of the ransom 
is explained to the Lord's people,— how that all mankind 
were included in one man's sentence, to the intent 
that in due time the penalty of sin could be paid 
on behalf of all mankind by the one sacrifice for sins, 
"the man Christ Jesus, who gave himself a ransom 
for all." (1 Tim. 2:5,6; Rom. 5:12,18,19.) Was 
not this a great and marvelous work? Who that realizes 
the lengths and breadths, and heights and depths 
of this manifestation of divine justice and divine love, 
can do aught else than sing this song of Moses and 

R2713 : page 311 

the Lamb, declaring to all who have ears to hear it, 
"Great and marvelous, just and true are thy ways, 
Lord God Almighty." But few see it clearly; and 
hence few can sing this wonderful story to others. 
But there is still another feature to this song, and 
it is glorious also, tho it pertains not to the things 
that are past, but to the things yet to come. It declares, 
"Who shall not reverence thee, O Lord, and 
glorify thy name?" It looks forward to the time when 
this great redemption, accomplished by the blood of 
the Lamb, shall be made available to every member 
of the human family. It looks forward to the glorious 
Millennial age, to the time when, under divine providence, 
the knowledge of the Lord, essential to faith, 
and to any acceptance of his favor and mercy through 
Christ, shall be extended to every creature,— who 
indeed will not reverence the Lord and glorify his 
name? Surely, as the Scriptures have declared, at 



that time, "Every knee shall bow and every tongue 
confess," and while this bowing and confessing may 
at first be compulsory, and not with all the volition 
of the heart, yet the Scriptures assure us that ultimately 
all who will not come into heart harmony with 
the Lord and with all his gracious arrangements and 
provisions, shall be cut off from amongst the people, 
—in the Second Death. (Acts 3:23.) So that ultimately, 
instead of the universe being filled with hundreds 
of millions who to all eternity will wail and 
gnash their teeth and blaspheme God's holy name in 
agony— instead of this the time shall come when every 
tongue in heaven and in earth shall be heard praising 
God, and giving honor to him that sitteth on the throne 
and to the Lamb, forever; for by that time all evildoers, 
all lovers of unrighteousness, shall be cut off 
from amongst the people. 

But this song continues, and has yet another 
strain. It declares, "Thou only art holy"— all holiness, 
all perfection, wherever it is found, must proceed 
from God, the great fountain of holiness. How 
strange, then, that any of God's dear people (and we 
ourselves were once amongst this number) should so 
misunderstand the divine character and plan as to 
misrepresent the same as being the very essence of 
unholiness, injustice, unkindness, inequity, lovelessness, 
toward the great mass of God's creatures! It 
will indeed be a glad day when all shall reverence 
God's name, and when all shall recognize that he is 
indeed the fountain of holiness. 

But there is still another strain in this song, and 
it is a grand one also, like all the others,— reaching 
down into the Millennial age. It declares, "All nations 
shall come and worship before thee; for thy 
judgments are made manifest." "All nations" will 
include, not only all the nations then living, but all 
the nations of the dead, just as does the promise which 
God made to Abraham, saying, "In thy seed [the 
Christ, Head and body] shall all the families of the 
earth be blessed"— all nations. 

How few, how extremely few, are able to learn 
this song ! How extremely few learn it so well as to 
be able to sing this song to the glory of God! How 
many who supposedly were trained to sing "the good 
tidings of great joy" for all people, are in the pulpits 
to-day singing totally different songs; some of them 
songs of "Evolution," declaring that there was no 
fall, consequently no redemption from a fall, and consequently 
that there is to be no recovery from a fall; 
but that man is grandly climbing up, up, up, and 
proving to be his own Savior, and hoping to attain 
they know not what,— they know not when. 

Others are singing the song of Calvinism, predestination, 
foreordination and election. Others are 
singing the song of Arminianism, and hoping that 
God will be able to accomplish much in the future 



through their assistance,— which they hold he has 
unsuccessfully been trying to do for six thousand 
years. Others are singing the song, "In union there 
is strength," and seeking to combine for what they 
term a "social uplift," or "the salvation of society." 
Others are singing the song of works and universal 
salvation. But how few are able to sing this song of 
Moses and the Lamb, or to see how God's great and 
marvelous works of the past reflect gloriously upon 
his character, both for justice and love, and give us 
the best of all assurances for the working out in the 
future of the glorious plan which he has already outlined 
and begun! 

And we are told the reason why so few can sing 
this song— that it is only for those to sing who have 
"gotten the victory over the beast and his image and 
his mark and the number of his name." These symbols, 
representing earthly institutions which now hinder 
and bind and enslave the Lord's people to creeds, 
must be overcome by every soul that would hope to 
be able to appreciate this song, and to sing it in his 
daily life to others according to his opportunities. 
Those who try to sing this song while yet in Babylon 
find their mistake. 

PROCLAIM LOUDLY THE MEMORIAL. 



Coming back to the Prophet's testimony respecting 
the message, showing forth the Lord's honor and 
majesty, we find in the 7th verse a wonderful testimony 
to the central feature and greatest manifestation 
of the divine character and plan. The Psalmist 
says (Leeser's translation), "The memorial of thy 
abundant goodness shall they loudly proclaim, and 
they shall sing joyfully of thy righteousness." What 

R2713 : page 312 

memorial has God given us of his abundant goodness? 
Which of all his great and wonderful works could be 
thus termed a memorial of divine favor? We answer 
that this memorial, this great act, was none other than 
the gift of God's dear Son, to be our redemption 
price, as the Apostle declares, "In this was manifested 
the love of God toward us, because that God sent his 
only begotten Son into the world, that we might live 
through him." (1 John 4:9.) But as very few realize 
the great act of justice accomplished in the sentencing 
of father Adam and his race to death, so very 
few can appreciate, as a special manifestation of God's 
abundant goodness, the death of Christ as the full offset 
for Adam's sin, the full ransom, the full payment 
of his penalty and that of his race. 
The reason for this is that they esteem that the 



ransom was paid only for the Church, a little flock. 
From this standpoint it was not a manifestation of the 
abundant grace and goodness of God, but of a very 
limited grace and favor for a very limited number, a 
handful, as it were, out of the great mass of humanity. 
But when we come to see that our Lord Jesus' 
sacrifice was "a propitiation for our sins [the Church's 
sins] and not for ours only, but also for the sins of the 
whole world," and that this "ransom for all" is "to 
be testified in due time" to all, and made available to 
all, that ultimately all may benefit thereby if they 
will, and return to harmony with God and to eternal 
life,— from this standpoint only can we see the greatness 
of that transaction, finished at Calvary, and how 
it is a "memorial" of God's abundant goodness. And 
only such as see this can heartily and loudly proclaim 
it, and sing joyfully of the righteousness of God, 
which not only was manifested in the righteous penalty 
against sin, but which again manifested itself in 
the righteous payment of that penalty on behalf of 
every creature. 

The Psalmist continues, "The Lord is gracious 
and full of compassion; slow to anger and of great 
mercy. The Lord is good to all, and his tender mercies 
are over all his works" (vs. 8). Is not this just 
what we should expect in our Creator, if we recognize 
him to be the full embodiment of Justice and of Love 
and of Wisdom and of Power? And yet how different 
is this description of the divine character from the 
general view, as held by the masses of Christian people, 
blinded by the Adversary and misled by their 
creeds! Instead of thinking of the Lord as gracious, 
do they not think of him as awfully ungracious, and 
have they not pictured him, not only in their creeds 
but also in their hymns of praise, as being awfully 
bitter and malignant against his creatures, ungracious, 
pitiless, full of anger and of no mercy? Have they 

R2714: page 312 

not, on the contrary, represented that Jesus our dear 
Redeemer must plead with the Father, and show his 
wounds and appeal for us, ere any compassion could 
be exhibited, and then only in the most limited degree? 
But not thus false was the Prophet's view of Jehovah, 
given by inspiration. Jehovah is gracious and 
full of compassion; he knows that the motions of sin 
are in our flesh, tending downward, and in his great 
mercy and compassion he has provided in Jesus for 
our every difficulty, our every trial, for the covering 
of our every weakness and imperfection, and with 
those who become his people, and who even haltingly 
seek to walk in the footsteps of Jesus, he is slow to 
anger and of great mercy. False ideas of the divine 
character and the divine dealings with the world of 
mankind have not only perverted the hopes of God's 



people as respects the world, but have also inculcated 

in their hearts misconceptions of God's sentiments 

toward his Church, so that the majority of his people 

do not appreciate the kindness, the mercy, the love, 

the compassion of our Father in heaven, and failing 

to appreciate these they have more or less of the fear 

of which the Apostle speaks, saying, "Fear hath torment," 

and correspondingly they lack "the peace of 

God which passeth all understanding" to rule in their 

hearts. It is only when by the grace of God the eyes 

of our understanding are opened to see how our heavenly 

Father is not against us, but for us, and how 

under his providential arrangement all things are 

working together for good to those who love, and who 

are seeking to attain to the gracious things which he 

has offered them in his Word,— only then are we enabled 

to know him, appreciate him, and to offer him, 

in the best and fullest sense of the word, the tribute 

of our hearts and the praise of our lips. 

Now we come to the climax, as it were, of our 
text, and note that while the Lord's saints see his 
greatness and honorable majesty connected with every 
feature of the divine plan, and while they are telling 
these good tidings to others, and speaking of his mighty 
doings in the past, their message would not be complete 
without a testimony respecting his glorious Kingdom. 
"They shall speak of the glory of thy Kingdom" 
—the Millennial Kingdom. They cannot tell of 
the majesty of the divine plan and not tell about the 
Kingdom. To tell of the fall, and to tell of the 
righteous sentence upon the fallen race, and to tell of 
the redemption accomplished through the precious 
blood of Christ, and that it was paid on behalf of 
every member of the Adamic race, would not finish 
the good tidings of great joy. It is necessary, therefore, 
to speak of the glory of God's Kingdom, and to 
talk of his power as it will be manifested in that Kingdom. 
As the sentence and the execution of the sentence 
manifest the justice of God; and the redemption 

R2714: page 313 

through Jesus manifests the love of God, so the Kingdom 
of the Lord will manifest his power to save to 
the uttermost all those who come unto the Father 
through the Son. 

The glory of the Lord's Kingdom will not consist, 
as some have supposed, of some saints sitting 
with the Savior on a bright cloud and looking over 
the battlements of heaven to see the remainder, the 
numberless millions of mankind, writhing in agony. 
O no ! If this were all that we could say of the Kingdom 
of our God we should rather prefer to say nothing. 
There would be no glory in such a Kingdom; 
it would be an everlasting reproach to the King that 
he had conceived a plan which had resulted so horribly, 



so indescribably bad, that it should mean the 

eternal torment of hundreds of millions of his creatures. 

Nor will the glory of the Kingdom consist, as 

some others of God's dear people suppose, in a manifestation 

of a handful of saints, the glorified Church, 

with the Lord, and with the remainder of the race 

blotted out of existence without ever having had 

knowledge and a full opportunity under favorable conditions 

to avail themselves of the great memorial of 

God's love, the redemption. O no! There would be 

no glory, but a discredit to such a Kingdom and to so 

meagre an outcome to the great "memorial." 

Nor will the Kingdom be, as some others of God's 
dear people have conceived it to be, one in which 
Christ and his Church shall, during the Millennial 
age, bless merely the living nations of the world, and 
bring to them the blessings which God has promised, 
but leave all the remainder of the race who have died 
for six thousand years, from Adam down to the present 
time, in darkness, in ignorance, in death, without 
any opportunity under that Kingdom. O no! A human 
plan might thus favor the millions living at the time 
of the establishment of the Kingdom, but forget or 
ignore or pass by the hundreds and thousands of millions 
who have gone down into the great prison-house 
of death; but God's ways are not as man's ways nor 
his plans as man's plans. The glory of the Kingdom 
of which we are authorized to speak, is a Kingdom 
which is to bless all nations, the dead who have gone 
down into the tomb, as well as those who have not 
yet gone into death. It is a Kingdom in which God's 
power will be most marvelously manifested. 

Let us "talk" together now of his power as the 
Prophet has suggested. It will be a mighty power 
which will overthrow the reign of sin, which will bind 
the power of Satan that he shall deceive the nations 
no more, and which will establish the Lord Jesus and 
his glorious Church in power and great glory, with 
dominion over all the earth, with authority to execute 
judgment,— to punish sin and to reward every effort 
toward righteousness. But the power of God as it 
will be manifested, will be still greater than all this; 
it will be a power which will lift up out of the miry 
pit of sin, out of the weaknesses of the flesh, out of 
his imperfections, mental, moral and physical, every 
member of the human family who desires to make 
progress and to return to the grand perfection of human 
nature represented originally in father Adam, 
and from which he and all in him fell, through disobedience. 
In this sense of the word it is a resurrection 
power, raising up, up, up, from the low conditions 
of sin and death to the high conditions of perfection 
and righteousness. It not only will thus take 
hold of the people who will not at that time have 
fallen asleep in death, but this mighty power of the 
Kingdom will take hold also of those who have gone 



down into the tomb, and who are in the great prison-house 

of death; even as our Lord declared, that he 

will open the prison-doors and say to the prisoners, 

"Show yourselves; come forth." "And all that are 

in their graves shall hear his voice and come forth" 

(John 5:28,29), and the coming forth shall be unto a 

resurrection by judgment— that so many as will, may 

avail themselves of the blessed privileges and opportunities 

of that great judgment day (the Millennial 

age), and profit by the stripes and corrections in righteousness 

which will then be administered, and grow 

in grace, grow in knowledge, grow in love and grow 

in perfection of being, until by the close of the Millennial 

age, if they will, they shall have arrived back 

again into full harmony with God, and received fully 

all the perfections of human nature lost through the 

fall, and redeemed by the great "memorial" of divine 

favor. 

No wonder, then, that the saints, when they glorify 
God, speak of the glory of his Kingdom and talk 
of the mighty power of God which shall then be manifested, 
and how then shall be made known to the 
sons of men God's mighty acts; how they shall then 
see clearly the meaning of the original sentence as 
they do not now see it; how they shall then see clearly 
the meaning of the great redemption, as they do not 
now see it, and how they shall then see clearly the 
provision of divine power in the Kingdom for their 
blessing;— that seeing these mighty acts of God in 
their true light, they also may glorify the Father 
which is in heaven, and they may appreciate the majesty 
of his Kingdom. 

"THY SAINTS SHALL BLESS THEE." 



The Prophet intimates that all the saints shall 
have the privilege of thus declaring the Kingdom, and 
of thus honoring the name of our God; and this seems 
to be literally fulfilled to-day, for the Lord seems to 

R2714: page 314 

be bringing to the attention of all of his saints (his 
consecrated people everywhere) the present truth; to 
the intent that they may have its light upon their 
pathway, making manifest unto them the glorious 
character of our God, through a knowledge of his 
great plan of the ages. Moreover, the Lord seems to 
be putting it within the power of every one of his 
saints to thus glorify his name and to speak forth the 
truth to others. To some he has granted the talent 
of oratory and opportunity to use it and to speak forth 
his praises in this way; to others he has granted a 
talent for private conversation, that they may thus 



tell of his Kingdom and speak of his glorious majesty 

and make known his plans to such as have hearing 

ears. To others still he has given the privilege of 

declaring his message through the circulation of the 

printed page; and to some he seems to have given opportunities 

for using all of these various methods of 

singing the song of Moses and the Lamb. And we 

may rest assured that none can be of the company of 

the Lord's saints in this time, and know of his goodness 

and his wonderful honor and majesty, and not 

have a desire to tell the good tidings of great joy to 

all who have an ear to hear; and those who are most 

earnest, most zealous in proclaiming the message, are 

sure to have the most blessing in their own hearts, 

and in their own experiences, and to grow the most in 

grace, in knowledge and in love. 

R2715 : page 314 

"I will speak of the glorious honor of thy majesty, 
and of thy wondrous deeds. Thy saints shall 
glorify thee; they shall speak of the glory of thy 
Kingdom, and talk of thy power, to make known unto 
the sons of men thy mighty acts, and the glorious 
majesty of thy Kingdom." 



R2715 : page 314 

FOLLOWING THE VOICE OF CONSCIENCE. 



A BROTHER writes us interestingly as follows. 
We omit names for obvious reasons. 

I want to thank you for your last letter. The 
Lord has poured out upon my distracted mind a great 
blessing since I fully and unreservedly gave up all. 
So far as I understand my present attitude toward the 
dear Master, I am now "beheaded," having bowed 
reverently and joyfully to his will. It seems that the 
mere unconditional resolve to separate wholly from 
Babylon brought me a blessing. But I have not yet 
sent in my contemplated letter to the Presbytery. The 
same meets in regular session the 9th of Oct. I shall 
endeavor to have it ready to go before that meeting 
for action. The pastor of the local church (Presbyterian) 
here has promised to help the matter along 
and to defend my case, should a defence be called out. 
This promise he made after I had explained to him, 
one day this week, my reasons for the step. At first 
he tried, by arguments and persuasion, to induce me 
to change my mind. 

"Wait a while," he said, "until you see the outcome 
of the revision movement. The Confession of 



Faith will, and must be changed. I am out of harmony 
with several of its doctrinal statements myself, 
and the brethren of the Presbytery know it too, and 
some of them hate me for it like poison. Let us stand 
by our guns and fight the thing out, brother." 

"No," I said, "I cannot follow your advice, 
brother, tho I know it is well meant. My mind is so 
fully made up that I cannot be induced to take a backward 
step." 

"Well then, if that is the case, where do you wish 
to be dismissed to— what church, or association? We 
cannot dismiss you at large or at random, you know. 
Our book makes no provision for such a case. In fact, 
I have never heard of such a case before." 

"My request is, and must be, for unconditional 
dismissal," I answered. "I wish to be absolutely 
free from ecclesiastical bondage. I recognize no human 
organization as the Church of Christ. All of 
them exist without the authority or recognition of the 
Lord Jesus Christ; hence, none of them are his. His 
Church has no name on earth. But I can conscientiously 
say this of the Presbyterian Church as I know 
it: In practice it is the best of the denominations and 
sects, but in doctrinal teachings it is nearly as bad as 
the Roman Catholic system." 

Not one word of comment in reply! Instead he 
gave me this item of confidential information: 

"Brother, I will tell you something by which you 
can see how most of our brother ministers stand on 
the Westminster Confession: At our last meeting a 
young man from the German Theological Seminary 
in Iowa came to us for examination and ordination. 

Dr. , our Stated Clerk of Presbytery, was chairman 

of the examining committee, and I was also on 

the same. After Dr. got through with him and 

expressed himself as satisfied, I took the book, and 
turning to the statements on election and reprobation 
I read the whole chapter to him, and then asked him 
solemnly, 'Do you believe this?' He looked at me a 
minute, and then said: If you will let me explain it, 
I will show in what sense I believe it.' 'No, no,' I 
said, 'you cannot and you must not try to explain it; 
you must believe it or you are not entitled to ordination 
according to our form of government. Now 

R2715 : page 315 

let me ask you once more, Do you accept this doctrine 
as it stands?' Brother, that young man answered very 

emphatically, 'No!' Dr. said, And neither do 

I!' And I also said, 'Neither do I!' 

"Did the Presbytery ordain him on such a confession 
as that?" I asked. 
"Not one dissenting vote in the committee." 
"Such inconsistency is inexcusable, and wrong 
before God," I said. "It is only another strong argument 



in favor of my decision to get out and be free." 

Then we parted, he cordially offering me his assistance 

if needed, as above stated. 

Your counsel with reference to the spirit of my 
letter of request for dismissal, is appreciated and fully 
approved. I believe the Lord will suggest to my mind 
the words he would have me say. I will send you a 
copy of the letter when I write again. I think of you 
daily, and my love goes out to you as a brother high 
above a brother by birth. 



R2715 : page 315 

THE UNJUST STEWARD. 

LUKE 16: 1-13. --NOV. 4. 

"Ye cannot serve God and Mammon." 

WHILE THE previous parables of this dinner-table 

talk were addressed specially to the 

Pharisees, this parable, and the one following it, concerning 

a rich man and a poor man (Dives and Lazarus), 

were addressed not so exclusively to the Pharisees, 

but, as the first verse of our lesson declares, to the disciples 

also, as well as to the Pharisees at the same table. 

The reason why the first three parables were addressed 

to the Pharisees only, and not to the disciples, is evident 

—the disciples needed no such instruction, having 

no prejudice against the poorer classes, recognizing 

themselves as amongst the "lost" who were glad to be 

found by the Good Shepherd. 

The steward of this parable corresponds to the 
elder son of the preceding parable, and to the rich man 
of the succeeding parable; it applies specially to the 
scribes and Pharisees, who, as our Lord declared, on 
another occasion, "sat in Moses' seat"— represented 
Moses, and the Law Covenant of which Moses was the 
Mediator, and the blessing obtained through that covenant, 
of which Moses was the original steward, and they 
now the steward, as his representatives. In what did 
this stewardship consist? The Apostle Paul asks this 
question, and answers it, saying, "What advantage 
then hath a Jew? Much every way; chiefly because 
to them were committed the oracles of God," the knowledge 
of God, with typical justification and at-one-ment 
with him, and an interest in the promises made to the 
fathers. 

The Jews, as represented in Moses and his successors, 
failed of their stewardship— failed to use in a 
manner satisfactory to God the favors committed to 
their care. Nor, indeed, were they wholly to blame 
for this, as the Apostle Paul points out; they were weak 
through the fall, incompetent to be administrators of 



so great a trust; and God knew this when he gave them 
the stewardship— he knew that they would fail to keep 
the Law perfectly. He had fully intended that in due 
time he would depose them from the stewardship and 
give it to the one whom he had foreknown— to Messiah. 

Now the time had come when this change of administration 
was about to be effected, and God was 
calling upon the representatives of Israel to give an account 
of their stewardship, and informing them that 
a new dispensation was about to be ushered in. Our 
Lord Jesus in this parable wished to point out to them 
what would be the wisest course for them to pursue 
under the circumstances. He shows them what an 
earthly steward would do under such circumstances, 
and tells them there is wisdom in such a course, saying, 
"The children of this world are wiser in their generation 
than the children of light:" you, as God's people, 
more favored than any others with light on the divine 
character and plan, are not acting as wisely as you 
would do if you were earthly stewards. 

Here we are met with the difficulty that the majority 
of people do not clearly comprehend— the scope 
of a steward's privileges in olden times. We have no 
such office to-day amongst civilized people. A steward's 
office was a confidential one; he had the liberty 
and full authority to do anything and everything that 
the owner himself could do with his goods. He could 
make presents or cancel debts, or use in any manner he 
chose the goods under his care, and could not be held 
responsible as a culprit before the Law, because the 
nature of his office as a steward was such that he fully 
represented and acted for his employer. The latter 
could discharge him from the stewardship as a penalty 
for unfaithfulness, but this would be his only punishment, 
because in making him steward he fully authorized 
him to use his judgment. 

In the parable the unjust steward— unjust in his 
previous use of his master's affairs, that is, unrighteous, 
unsatisfactory, imperfect— as soon as he realized the 
situation, made no attempt to defend himself, nor to 
claim that he had done perfectly; but before rendering 
up his accounts he dealt leniently with some of his 
lord's creditors, remitting parts of their indebtedness. 
(This may have been a wise course, as, for instance, 
to-day bankruptcy laws similarly release debtors from 

R2716 : page 316 

obligations which they could not pay; and similarly 
creditors frequently, in their own interest, agree to accept 
sixty per cent., fifty per cent., forty per cent., or 
some other proportion of the original sum as for the 
whole of a debt, seeing that the debtor is unable to pay 
the account in full, and with a view to his encouragement 
to do the best he can. The Jewish Jubilee year 
of full release from all debts was along the same line 



of leniency and wise business policy represented in the 
"Bankruptcy Law" of today.) It is not because of this 
last conduct of the steward that he is called unjust 
(unrighteous) in the parable, but because of his previous 
stewardship, not having come up to the full, perfect 
demands of his master. 

Now, applying the parable to all of the Jewish 
nation, especially to those who sat in Moses' seat and 
had the control of matters, and who decided what was 
and what was not the proper interpretation of the Law, 
our Lord intimated that if they were as wise as earthly 
stewards they would make use of their opportunities 
in a somewhat similar manner. Now how could they 
have done this— supposing that they recognized the 
fact that they had not fulfilled the requirements of God 
under the Law, and supposing also that they realized 
that the time had come for a change of dispensation, 
and that God was demanding an account of them 
and informing them that a new steward would take 
possession of matters— under such circumstances how 
should these in Moses' seat have acted? We answer, 
that in harmony with the lesson of the parable, they 
should have said to themselves: We realize that we 
ourselves have not kept the Law of God perfectly; indeed, 
that it is not within our power to do so. We 
realize that a change of dispensation is impending, and 
that we are called upon to make an accounting, and 
that we can only admit before God that we have made 
a failure as respects the carrying out of the demands of 
his Law and the gaining of eternal life under it,— and 
as respects the use of the many advantages every way 
which God has given us. We have used our advantages 
in some respects well, but we failed on the whole 
to accomplish anything in the world, or to gain eternal 
life, either for ourselves or for any,— and we cannot 
dispute, therefore, that "By the deeds of the Law 
no flesh should be justified in God's sight." 

Since, therefore, it must soon be evidenced to all 
that our stewardship has resulted in failure and that we 
are dispossessed, the wise thing for us to do is to turn 
about at once, and deal kindly and generously with 
these sinners (the prodigal son class) and, instead of 
denouncing them as sinners more than ourselves, we 
should say to them frankly, We cannot keep this perfect 
Law of God, and we know also that you cannot 
do so; but now, instead of being hopelessly discouraged 
and cast down, do the best you can; we will remit part 
of the exaction of the Law, admitting that you are unable 
to keep it perfectly, and will merely require of you 
that you keep it to the best of your ability— fifty per 
cent., or eighty per cent., according to your circumstances 
and conditions— according as you are able, keep 
the Law. 

Had the scribes and Pharisees taken this position 
they would have healed the breach as between themselves 
and the people, and their honesty in admitting 



that they themselves could not keep the Law would 
have been a distinct advantage to them, subsequently, 
in connection with the new dispensation. And this 
very conduct of candid admission and of sympathy for 
others, and assistance in lifting their burdens would 
have brought them into such a condition of heart that 
they would have been ready for the Gospel; and the 
lower classes, from which they had hitherto held aloof 
as sinners, would have had a kindly feeling toward 
them, and as a result they would have retained a measure 
of their sympathy, at least, in the time of trouble which 
came upon them when their polity was overthrown. 

But did the scribes and Pharisees follow any such 
course? By no means. On the other hand they put 
on a brassy front, made broad their phylacteries, made 
still louder claims respecting their own perfection of 
heart and life, deceiving their own selves probably as 
much as or more than they deceived others. They boasted 
that they should ever continue to be stewards of the 
manifold grace of God; and, as our Lord declares, so 
far from lifting the burdens and condemnations of the 
Law from the shoulders of the people, who were honest 
enough to confess inability to keep the perfect law, 
these scribes and Pharisees, on the contrary, bound upon 
the people heavy burdens which they would not assist 
to lift with their little finger. --Matt. 23:1-4. 

Thus doing they became more and more hypocritical 
and case-hardened, until, in his later descriptions 
of them, our Lord declared them to be whited 
sepulchres, outwardly fair and beautiful, inwardly full 
of corruption, dishonesty, hypocrisy; knowing themselves 
to be infractors of the Law they were outwardly 
claiming and boasting perfection. This not being said 
to the Pharisees alone, but to the disciples "also," implies 
that they were to notice how the parable fitted 
and how unwisely this steward class was acting. Even 
at the table the Pharisees, perceiving to some extent at 
least the trend of the parable, "derided"— being covetous. 
But our Lord pressed the lesson home to them 
saying, "Ye are they which justify yourselves before 
men; but God knoweth your hearts." You are the 
unjust steward and soon all will witness your rejection. 
"The Law and the prophets [of which you are the representatives] 
was [recognized of God] until John [the 

R2716 : page 317 

Baptist]; since that time the Kingdom of God is preached 
[the new, the Gospel dispensation], and every one 
[should] press toward it." (Verses 14-16.) You, leaders 
of the people, however, not only will not enter 
yourselves, but those desiring to enter you hinder. 
(Matt. 23:13.) You should see that your institution 
is bound to Moses and the Law as a wife to her husband 
—so long as it liveth. It is needful, therefore, 
that the Law which you represent should die, that Israel 



may be liberated and thus be prepared to be united 
(married) to Messiah by a new covenant.— Verses 17,18; 
Rom. 7:1-4. 

We are not informed that this parable had special 
application in the end of this Gospel age, but since we 
know from other Scriptures that natural Israel and its 
harvest time were a pattern or illustration of spiritual 
Israel and this age and the present harvest time, therefore 
we are justified in looking for some parallel as 
between the condition of the unjust steward in our 
Lord's day and a similar class in this present time. 
And looking about us to-day for a class corresponding 
to those who sat in Moses' seat, we find a class to-day 
sitting in Christ's seat, as respects the Gospel Church. 
This class is composed of elders, Sunday School teachers 
and superintendents, ministers, bishops, archbishops, 
etc. These as a whole are representing a great stewardship 
of divine favor as respects the Lord's people 
today. They perceive that a change of dispensation 
is upon us, that their creeds and traditions from the 
past are being called in question, and that they are 
being required to render up an account. They perceive 
that the account will not be a very flattering one, and 
that if the whole truth were known to the people as it 
is known to God, they would be found derelict, unfaithful 
to their stewardship in many respects. They fear 
the crisis; they put off the day of reckoning as far as 
possible; they hush the murmurs of the people and the 
questions respecting creeds, and as the Lord said of the 
steward of his day, so it will be true of these: "That 
which is highly esteemed amongst men is an abomination 
in the sight of God."— Verse 15. 

These representatives of the nominal church, who 
hold a position of stewardship as respects the masses 
of the Lord's people, are disposed, as were the Pharisees, 
their prototypes, to put a bold face upon matters, 
to brave it out rather than to confess the truth. As 
for instance, in the matter of creeds that are being called 
in question: Many, even of those who were at first disposed 
to demand the revision of the Westminster Confession 
of Faith, have concluded that this would be 
showing the white feather, and admitting that they had 
been in error in the past, and imperfect in their interpretation 
of the divine Word, and hence calculated to 
discredit them with the people; and now the tide is 
rapidly turning and the same ones who were demanding 
a revision are now voting to the contrary, that the 
creed is good, thoroughly satisfactory to them, that 
they would not change it for anything. They are so 
anxious to be highly esteemed of men that they seem 
to forget altogether the one from whom they received 
their stewardship, and who is about to take it from them. 

What would be the proper course for this steward 
class of the Gospel age? We answer, that the proper 
course would be to do what our Lord recommended to 
the Jewish stewards; viz., they should candidly confess 



to the people the errors of the creeds and their own imperfection 

in attempted exposition of the divine Word, 

and their own failures in the past in respect to a proper 

use of the oracles of God and a proper application of 

R2717 : page 317 

the exceeding great and precious promises. And while 
acknowledging their own errors and shortcomings, they 
should modify the demands made of the people and 
bring them into conformity with their ability. For 
instance, they should say to the people, How much 
did we say that you owed to God, and what penalty 
did we say would be imposed upon you? If we said 
you were to receive a penalty of eternal torment, count 
that now as being an error, and write down instead, 
" A j ust recompense of reward. " If we taught you 
that your obligations to God are according to the Jewish 
law, and as represented in the Ten Commandments, 
and that unless these were kept perfectly in letter and 
in spirit you would have no hope of eternal life, alter 
and amend that feature of your faith, and write instead 
that, under the New Covenant, God will accept the 
most imperfect works of those who have consecrated 
themselves to him, providing those imperfect works 
are the best that they are able to offer; and providing they 
are offered in the name and merit of him who loved us 
and who bought us with his own precious blood. 

If the present stewards would follow such a course 
they would undoubtedly be respected through the future, 
but following their present course, the time is 
surely coming when they will be despised as hypocrites 
and blind guides, who mislead their confiding flocks into 
the ditch of skepticism and the great time of trouble. 

This parable may be considered as ending with the 
eighth verse, the instructions which follow being separate 
and distinct, and along a somewhat different line, 
and addressed specially to those who accepted the 
Lord's teaching, his disciples. 

"YE CANNOT SERVE GOD AND MAMMON." 



This after-lesson is on the subject of the impossibility 
of having two masters, God and Mammon. Mammon 
represents earthly riches, not only financial wealth, 
but honor amongst men, etc.— the thing which was 
particularly hindering the Pharisees from taking the 
proper course and acknowledging their error and seeking 
for and obtaining mercy. Mammon still is a great 
hindrance to all who desire to be the Lord's disciples. 
Whoever worships Mammon— and it may be self or 
wealth or fame or position and honor amongst men, 
one or all of these— whoever worships Mammon cannot 
at the same time be a true worshiper of God, 



a true follower of Christ; because God and Mammon 

R2717 : page 318 

are rivals before our hearts. If we attempt to divide 
our love and attention, and to give part of it to God and 
to his service, and part of it to Mammon, the results 
will be unsatisfactory to God, unsatisfactory to Mammon 
and unsatisfactory to ourselves. 

We must, therefore, decide either to live for self 
and earthly things or to renounce and sacrifice these 
in the interest of God and of heavenly things. The 
worshipers of Mammon may have certain advantages 
as respects the present life, in the way of earthly prosperity, 
but Mammon cannot give eternal life. It is 
the gift of God, and those who would have God's gift 
must be God's friends, God's children; and he demands 
of such that they shall manifest their love and devotion 
to him by renouncing Mammon, by joyfully sacrificing 
earthly name and fame and favor and interest, thus 
showing their higher appreciation of his love and favor, 
the riches of his grace, and the exceeding great and 
precious things which he has promised to give them in 
the life to come. 

These are to "make to themselves friends;" in 
other words, to lay up treasures in heaven, by the sacrifice 
of the Mammon of unrighteousness;— that is to 
say, the sacrifice of the various interests of this present 
time of unrighteousness, "this present evil world." 

Some may have very little of Mammon at their 
disposal to sacrifice; but the Lord encourages us all by 
saying that he that is faithful in that which is least, 
thereby gives evidence of how faithful he would be if 
he had much; and the Lord accepts the little sacrifices 
which we are able to make as tho they were greater 
ones. "She hath done what she could" is the best of 
testimony as respects the use of present opportunities 
in the Lord's service, whether it refer to a mite or a 
million, a little influence or a great one. It is not the 
amount that God is seeking, but the character, the disposition 
of heart; and whoever has the right disposition 
of heart and is careful in the small affairs of life, to 
serve the Lord with all that he possesses and to the 
extent of his ability, such an one will have committed 
to him the true riches— the heavenly riches. Not merely 
may he expect to enter into the glories of the heavenly 
Kingdom, but even in the present life he will begin to 
get a first-fruits of those riches in his own heart, in his 
own experiences; for it is unquestionably a fact that 
the heirs of glory, those who are in the right relationship 
with God and running faithfully in the race, not 
only will get the prize at the end of the race, but already 
get blessing which the world can neither give nor 
take away;— the joys of the Lord, the peace of God 
which passeth all understanding ruling in their hearts; 
so that they can sing for joy, even in the house of their 



pilgrimage— even in the present unsatisfactory tabernacle 
condition, in which we groan also, being burdened 
with its weaknesses. 

But if we are not faithful in the little things which 
confessedly are not our own, and merely given to us as 
a stewardship— the things, the opportunities, the talents, 
which are merely put within our grasp as stewards 
of the Lord,— if we are not faithful in using these 
with an eye single to the Lord's glory, how can we expect 
that he will ever give us true riches of grace, to 
be our own forever, either in the future or in the present 
life. 

The sum of this lesson to the disciples, then, is that 
as no man is able to serve two masters and satisfy both, 
and do justice to both, their interests conflicting, no 
more can we serve God and righteousness, and at the 
same time be pleasing and acceptable to the Adversary 
and those who are in harmony with him who now rules 
in this present dispensation, the "prince of this world." 
All of the Lord's consecrated people, those who would 
lay up treasures in heaven and be rich toward God, 
must be willing to become of no reputation amongst 
those who are not consecrated, and who, whatever their 
professions, are really serving Mammon, selfishness, 
the present life, and not sacrificing these interests to 
the attainment of the heavenly Kingdom. 



R2717 : page 318 

THE RICH MAN (DIVES) AND THE POOR MAN (LAZARUS). 

-LUKE 16:19-31.-NOV. 11.- 

THIS PARABLE is a continuation of the series, 
a part of the table-talk at the banquet at the 
Pharisee's house. It is the culmination, so to speak, 
of the entire series of parables. The first represents 
mankind in general, as the lost sheep, and the Lord's 
interest therein, and its final recovery to the fold; the 
second respecting the lost coin, represents the same 
thought, with the additional feature of the diligent 
sweeping and bringing in of the light in order to the 
recovery or restitution of the lost race. The third applies 
this same principle to the Jewish nation, and reproves 
the Pharisee class, the elder brother, for not 
having the Lord's spirit of love and mercy in respect 
to the sinner class, the prodigal. The fourth represents 
the unwisdom of this Pharisee class in hypocritically 
pretending to others that they kept the Law and were 
acceptable stewards, whereas they themselves were well 
aware that they came short of the glory of God, came 
short of fulfilling their stewardship, and must therefore 
be ejected from it; and points out to them a proper 
course, which they did not, however, take. And now, 



finally, this parable of Dives and Lazarus, the fifth of 
the series, brings the instruction to a climax by picturing 
the favored class as the rich man, who enjoyed, 
but did not rightly appreciate the blessings showered 
upon him,— selfishly shutting up his heart against the 
poor sinner at his gate; not acknowledging that he 
himself also was imperfect and came short of the glory 
of God and the perfect keeping of his Law. 

This parable shows what the results would be as 
respects both classes— the final outcome. We will not 
deal with it here, since we have already treated it with 
considerable elaboration in our issue of March 15 and 
April 1, 1900. But inasmuch as some may have loaned 
or given away that copy, and since we have a good 
supply of them on hand, we conclude to send an extra 
copy of that one with this issue to supplement this lesson. 
Those who find themselves possessed of two 
copies will no doubt have good opportunity for using 
the extra one to the Lord's praise and to the blessing 
of some who in more or less darkness are "feeling after 
God [his plan], if haply they may find him." 



page 319 
ENCOURAGING WORDS FROM FAITHFUL WORKERS. 



MY DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-Glory to God! By 
the aid of the Holy Spirit I am now feasting on the 
meat due to the household of faith. The Lord has 
anointed my eyes to behold the prize of the calling from 
on high. The separation has come; I am the Lord's. 
I have not only covenanted with God that I will be 
dead to all human things, but with the aid of His spirit 
I have resolved to perform that covenant throughout 
my earthly career,— keeping my "body under," keeping 
my will out of sight, and to perform only the Lord's 
will. I am no longer simply justified, I am now sanctified. 
Praise the Lord! I have forsaken all and am 
willing to suffer with him that I may also be glorified 
with him. Words cannot express the joy and peace 
dwelling in my heart. 

How is it that I remained in darkness so long? 
The Lord's ways are certainly wonderful and past finding 
out to those who have not his spirit. I now better 
understand the purpose of his dealings with me. It 
was a hard lesson to learn, but thanks be to God for 
the permission to learn it. This world has no longer 
any attraction for me. It is all a fleeting show for 
man's delusion given. Heaven is my home, and O how 
I long to be there! How I long to receive the crown 
which the righteous Judge shall give me at that day! 

The Lord is sustaining me, spiritually as well as 



physically. To earn a living, I am doing some light 
work during the week,— "collecting." I could not 
preach for money again. The Lord only knows how I 
regret having ever preached for a salary. But then I 
was not consecrated: now I know different; nor am I 
preaching for sects: I am only preaching for the Lord 
Jesus whenever and wherever opportunity presents itself. 
And, praise the Lord, I am now preaching "present 
truth." 

In connection with my work during the week I 
have opportunities to sell the DAWN. Perhaps the Lord 
will lead me into the colporteur work. His will be 
done! I don't suppose that you remember me. We 
met at the Council Bluffs Convention. 

Pray for me, for I need much divine strength. 

Yours in Christ, J. A. KIEFERLE,-Colorado. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-As we did not get to 

bid you "good-bye," at Chicago, nor have an opportunity 

to express our sentiments concerning the convention, 

I take this means of letting you know how much 

we enjoyed the meetings and how much good they have 

done us. Not only do I speak as to Sister Owen and 

myself, but the rest of the dear ones who were present 

from here (18 in all) have been greatly refreshed 

and blessed, and this morning at meeting I could see 

the blessed spirit of our Convention shining from their 

countenances, and they still wore the "convention 

smile" which was to me an inspiration in itself. One 

dear sister who has come into the truth since our Convention 

last summer and who was at our late one told 

me this morning that since attending the Convention 

and meeting with so many of the Lord's people and 

hearing various phases of the truth discussed, all her 

doubts had vanished, and that she could not sleep last 

night for thinking of these blessed truths and God's 

wonderful goodness to her in allowing her to see them. 

She said, "The room seemed to be filled with joy and 

all I could do was to lie still and praise the Lord," and 

her bright, happy face this morning was a clear index 

to the deep well of joy springing up in her heart since 

coming out of darkness into his marvelous light. 

This dear sister's experience is doubtless but the 
counterpart of the experiences of many others. And 
if the Convention did us, who have the blessed privilege 
of daily fellowship with those of like precious faith, 
so much good, think what it must be to those dear 
isolated ones who, so far as human fellowship and sympathy 
are concerned, must stand alone through all the 
long days of waiting till their change come. 

The foregoing brings vividly before my mind the 
memories of my first convention. It was in Allegheny 
in 1890. I was then "a cake not turned." I did not 
know whether I believed in "restitution" or not. I 
well remember how timid I was, how fearful lest I 
should be led wrong. I almost felt as if I were going 



to the "enemy's country." But of this one thing I was 
determined; I would not allow any one "to pull the 
wool over my eyes," but I would see and know for 
myself "whether these things be true." 

Sister Owen has preserved the letters I wrote her 
while at Allegheny this first time, and I send some extracts 
from them, thinking they would be of interest 
to you. In my first letter I wrote as follows:— 

"I hardly know how I stand on their doctrines (now, thank 
God, I do know how I stand on our doctrines, I stand squarely 
on them with both feet), but I feel content to trust God to bring 
me into the full light. I find that the people here have a great 
advantage over us, and we are just beginning to learn, just in 
our letters, so to speak." 

Next day I wrote,— 

"We had the best meeting last night that I have been in 
for a long time; it was a love feast indeed. ...O how I wish 
you were here! Think of a houseful of consecrated people and 
the pleasure of worshiping with them. I am coming more fully 
into the light and am thinking of being immersed tomorrow. 
Brother Russell preached a sermon on this subject the first day 
that I was here that was better than anything I had ever heard. 
...I believe him to be the most consecrated preacher that I 
have ever met and have learned to love him. I may stay longer 
than Monday as he has given me a pressing invitation to do so." 

My last letter, written perhaps two days later than 
the one above, is so expressive of my feelings at that 
time that I give it verbatim. 

"MY DEAR WIFE:— I did not write you yesterday, thinking 
to start home last evening, but Brother Russell insisted on my 
staying longer. I may stay until tomorrow evening. I am up 
before the family this morning; I am troubled with sleeplessness 
to some extent. Last night I went to bed very tired, and 
thought that I would go right to sleep, but I could not sleep for 
meditating on the goodness and mercy of God to me. And now 
my heart burns within me as I think of his many blessings. 
Praise his name forever! 

"You know how undecided I was when I left home. Well, 
through the increase of knowledge and the sweet communion of 
God's people, the mists of darkness have cleared away, and 
yesterday I symbolized my burial with him through water baptism. 
I have consecrated all I have and am or hope to be to 
God. Will you join me in this? I know you will. O, how I 
wish you were here with me that you might partake of the 
spiritual food that the Lord has supplied in such abundance. 
But I will bring home (I hope) all that my heart will hold and 
we will enjoy it together. 

"I look forward with joy to the many precious hours that 
we will spend together studying the Word of God and loving 
its great truths more than ever now that we begin to see them 
more clearly. The doctrine of Restitution' is not a cunningly 
devised fable' but is foreshadowed in all the types in a 
way that we never dreamed of, and I believe that the Lord will 
reveal more and more of his great plan to us if we follow on to 
know the truth. Let us humbly and prayerfully do this, looking 
unto Jesus, the author and finisher of our faith.' 



page 320 

"You will have to be content with this fragment until I get 
home. Kiss the dear children for papa. With much love, yes, 
with more love, I remain as ever, CHARLEY." 

I love to live over again these scenes; they are 
most precious to me, my dear brother, and to-night I 
can truthfully say that the love there begotten towards 
yourself has only grown deeper and stronger with the 
lapse of years, and I feel a deep and loving concern in 
all that concerns you. Looking back over these intervening 
years I can see much of weakness, much of 
humiliating defeat. Yet, thank God, many victories. 
He has permitted us to gather some precious grains of 
wheat, amongst them Brother and Sister Ransom and 
a good many others who are yet in the narrow way. 

Just a few words regarding the singing. I think 
it was excellent. Brother McPhail did splendidly, and 
the new books are such a treat. Yours in our dear 
Redeemer, C. A. OWEN,-Indiana. 

CHARLES T. RUSSELL, 

DEAR SIR:— About three weeks ago, on coming 
out of church, a young woman handed me a copy of 
your paper. I should like to thank her. I have read 
and re-read it, and it is a great relief to me to be convinced 
that there is no place of endless torment prepared 
for the wicked. I have not been able to understand 
how a God of love could inflict such terrible punishment 
upon his creatures, many of whom have been 
called to endure great suffering in this life. It is right, 
of course, that those who will not submit to God's 
authority should be destroyed, but I am glad to be able 
to hope that another opportunity for repentance will be 
given them. I intend to lend my paper to friends, 
hoping to make converts, and will be glad to have some 
of the tracts which you send free. If I were able I 
would buy some but cannot do more than subscribe 
for the paper. Respectfully yours, 

Miss S. E. RITTENHOUSE,-D.C. 

MY DEAR BROTHER:-We cannot ever hope to have 
you and the other dear brethren (who assisted so graciously 
and unselfishly in making the gathering at this 
place on Sept. 29, 30, and Oct. 1 such a profitable one 
for our spiritual growth and upbuilding) fully understand 
this side the second vail what a deep spirit of 
gratitude and love fills our hearts for you. In every 
possible respect has the convention passed beyond our 
greatest hopes, and to whom but our very present Lord 
can we ascribe such unmistakeable direction in even 
the minutest detail? To him and the glorious Father 
be all the praise and glory, yet we forget not to thank 
him for the humble, loving instrument he has used of 
late years, so effectually to dispense and serve present 



truth to the balance of the household of faith. May 
the Lord continue to keep and richly bless you as that 
faithful servant. With much love, 

E. W. BRENNEISEN,-Dallas, Texas. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I find that I am a 
little behind with my contribution for the WATCH 
TOWER. I beg to enclose postal order which will pay 
for another year. How thankful I have been since 
my spiritual eyes were opened to see the grand and 
glorious truths that the Lord's people were promised 
through his Word. The Bible to me has had a greater 
charm and is quite a new book. How true it is that 
many of the things were so difficult to understand, 
but we had faith in God, that he was too wise to err 
and too good to be unkind. Hence we used to say, 
"Why, in God's good time all will be cleared and 
made right;" we forgot the fact that they were for a 
good and wise end. 

I was, so to speak, cradled in Methodism, having 
been carried by a dear Father, who passed away some 
sixteen years ago, to Sunday school and more or less 
was always connected with School and Church. I had 
a splendid class of young women, which to leave was 
a sore task for me, but I found that it was impossible 
for me to continue teaching and speaking about things 
which were quite contrary to the Word of God. After 
leaving the School I had the Super- and vice Superintendent 
to visit me. I told them I could no longer 
continue. They thought I was doing wrong. The 
glorious truths which are rich to me were as foolishness 
to them. But oh! how they forget, or do not 
know, that Satan is blinding their eyes to the truth: 
One of the many questions I got is this one, "How is 
it that you have just found it out, and how is it that 
so few believe it? Have you, as the Word of God 
has told us, searched the Scriptures and proved all 
things? Are you not content to take what our ministers 
and teachers give us?" I find it very difficult to 
make much impression in our place, full of prejudice 
and blindness, tho I am happy to say I have an opportunity 
to spread the grand truth, having a wide connection 
in business; I am able to converse with many 
Christian travelers who come here; some listen with 
great interest. I have given many DAWNS and also 
many tracts, and I am hoping and trusting that some 
may be led into the light and liberty of God's dear 
children. Thank God for all his blessings. 

Yours in Christ, HENRY BELL,-England. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-In renewing my subscription 
for ZION'S WATCH TOWER for another year 
I would like to give expression to some of the feelings 
of gratitude which I have in my heart toward you, for 
the great work you are doing in said journal re the 
preparing of the little flock and getting ready the bride 



for the Bridegroom. I have received great and, I 
trust, lasting good from the reading of the TOWER. 
At times I have difficulties, but I find the sure way to 
get them answered is simply to wait, and not to trouble 
you with them, for you are sure to be discussing 
within a few weeks the very questions I am desirous 
of asking. In fact, speaking personally, I could ill 
afford to be without the helpful influence and practical 
lessons which are to be found in every issue of the 
TOWER. Any thing which helps us to walk closer to 
the Master, and enables us to abandon ourselves more 
entirely into the hands of our loving Father, must 
be coming from that same source. And I wish also to 
specially thank you for what some brother called a 
pleasant surprise, in other words, for the visit of a 
Pilgrim and Mrs. Henninges to this far away Scotland. 
It will take a more eloquent pen than mine to 
describe the blessed times we had together, listening 
to the good news as proclaimed by Brother Henninges. 
Please send them back soon, and earn some more of 
the gratitude of one along the narrow way which is 
ever getting narrower. But he giveth more grace. 
Yours in Christ, JOHN THOMPSON,-Scotland. 



page 321 

SEMI-MONTHLY. 


