Keep Active in Preaching During Summer Months
1 Many good things we enjoy are associated with Jehovah’s gift of summertime. (Jas. 1:17) Are we resolved to use this summer to his praise? Of course, our theocratic activities should remain in first place during all seasons of the year. Surely we will have this in mind as we plan our summer activities.
USING EVERY OPPORTUNITY
2 Many of us have had faith-strengthening experiences as a result of keeping active in preaching while on vacation. Tactfully initiating informal conversations with others in restaurants and motels or while traveling brings many blessings to brothers who take this initiative in speaking to others about the good news. While traveling, a brother spoke to a young man who was reading a book on politics and sparked his interest in the Kingdom hope. The young man obtained literature from the Society, and within a few months, he was moved to resign from his church and began teaching others what he had learned.
3 Advance preparation is necessary if you are to get the best results. Be sure to have your Bible and a supply of literature with you. Plan on attending meetings and working in field service with the local congregation where you visit.
4 The upcoming “Divine Peace” District Conventions will provide excellent opportunities to preach while traveling. Wearing our lapel cards often arouses the curiosity of others, affording us the opportunity of starting conversations.
OPPORTUNITIES TO PIONEER
5 During school vacation periods, young dedicated publishers who qualify can auxiliary pioneer. In some cases, the entire family can share in this privilege, resulting in greater joy and unity in the family circle. An increasing number of family members have set a goal of sharing in the auxiliary pioneer work every summer.
6 Then there are those who are planning to begin regular pioneering on September 1, 1986. Thousands who started pioneering last September are now looking forward to attending the Pioneer Service School later this year. If you begin serving as an auxiliary pioneer during the summer months, you will be able to build up your return visits and start Bible studies. This will provide you with a good foundation for beginning the regular pioneer work in September. Even if your present circumstances will not allow you to share in the regular pioneer work, you can still work toward increasing the time you normally spend in field service. You may be able to make arrangements to accompany the pioneers in the ministry, encourage them, and share in their joy.
7 Many distractions can interfere with our summer preaching activity. But the wise ones will keep their priorities straight, putting Kingdom interests first. Staying busy in the preaching work at all times shows that we recognize the urgency of these last days.

