Meetings to Help Us Make Disciples
NOTE: Our Kingdom Ministry will schedule a Service Meeting for each week during the summer. Congregations may make adjustments as needed to allow for attending the district convention and then for a 30-minute review of the program highlights at the Service Meeting the following week. Review may be divided into three 10-minute portions. Following brief introduction, chairman could review Thursday and Friday program highlights. Second brother would review Saturday program, and third brother would focus attention on Sunday highlights. Any experiences used or occasional comments from audience should be brief and to the point. A well-prepared review will help the brothers to remember key points for personal application and use in the field.
WEEK STARTING JUNE 1
Song 148
10 min: Local announcements and Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry. The June 22 Awake! has two helpful articles on tipping. Brothers are encouraged to read these articles before going to convention cities or visiting other places.
20 min: “Be Progressive in Your Ministry.” Question-and-answer discussion of article. Read paragraphs and cited scriptures as time permits. Present one or two well-prepared, pointed demonstrations showing how to offer the Live Forever book in local territory. Note use of Romans 16:20 as second scripture in Topic for Conversation. Adapt material to local needs.
15 min: Family Preparation for Field Service. Family-group discussion. Family head takes lead in discussion with wife and children, including one preteen child and one in late teens. Father calls attention to information on page 11 in Reasoning book under “FAMILY/​CHILDREN.” Suggests that these introductions will blend in very nicely with current Topic for Conversation. Wife can express agreement. Is asked how she plans to use these introductions along with topic and offer of the Live Forever book. She believes this presentation will be effective in local territory where there are many families with young children. She enjoys having one of the children accompany her from house to house and read one of the scriptures to be used. Father asks older son or daughter how this material could be used effectively by young person in house-to-house ministry. After greeting householder, young one may inquire whether there are children in the family and ask householder what he thinks future holds for his children or for other young ones today. Young publisher could then state that although many young people are discouraged because of what the future seems to hold for them, he is optimistic because of what his parents have helped him to learn from the Bible. This would lead into the current topic. Preteen child could then be helped with preparation of brief presentation to be used in offering the Live Forever book or current magazines, or shown how to offer a tract or an invitation when working with parent. Chairman should encourage parents to take time to help family members prepare for meaningful house-to-house service.
Song 126 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING JUNE 8
Song 14
12 min: Local announcements, including accounts report. Commend congregation for material support of Kingdom work. If congregation has received a contribution acknowledgment letter from Society, it can be read. Encourage all who can to participate in magazine work this Saturday. Briefly discuss highlights of current magazines that would have local appeal. Demonstrate an appropriate presentation featuring The Watchtower and one featuring Awake! Presentations should be pointed and of a minute’s duration or less.
20 min: “Presenting the Good News​—By Following Up Interest Promptly.” Question-and-answer consideration. When considering paragraph 4, have a demonstration of publisher on initial call making arrangement for a return visit later the same week. After considering paragraphs 6 and 7, demonstrate a householder declining literature offer and the publisher continuing with brief Bible discussion. As publisher and companion leave the door, they talk about why they should call back.
13 min: “Can You Accept Discipline?” Talk to congregation based on article beginning on page 26 of May 1, 1986, issue of The Watchtower.
Song 138 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING JUNE 15
Song 133
12 min: Local announcements, Theocratic News, and local field service report. Service overseer or other capable brother commends congregation for progress in field ministry, highlighting strong points in the report. May offer appropriate suggestions for continued improvement, stressing congregation’s commission to preach “this good news of the kingdom.” (Matt. 24:14) Call attention to highlights of March service report for country and local congregation’s part in it.
18 min: “Keep Active in Preaching During Summer Months.” A talk with a few pointed questions directed to audience. Outline any special field service activities the local congregation has arranged for the summer months. Encourage family heads to make arrangements for field activity during vacation period or when attending “Divine Peace” District Convention. May include appropriate experience regarding successful arrangements carried out by some last year or a brief interview with family head or group regarding plans for this summer.
15 min: Local needs or “Praying Before Others With a Humble Heart.” Talk based on article beginning on page 21 of May 15, 1986, Watchtower.
Song 31 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING JUNE 22
Song 144
10 min: Local announcements. Give report on progress of current service campaign with Live Forever book. Have publisher(s) relate one or two selected brief experience(s) in placing current offer. Have any Bible studies been started? Encourage full participation in field service this weekend, including magazine work this Saturday.
20 min: “Keep Faith Strong Through Personal Study.” After brief introduction based on paragraph 1, conduct question-and-answer discussion of remaining paragraphs. Read paragraphs and cited scriptures as time permits. When considering paragraph 6, include practical suggestions that have worked for local brothers. May have a publisher relate briefly what has helped him to improve his study habits and strengthen his faith.
15 min: Local needs or time may be used for portion missed while attending convention. Otherwise, have consideration of “Questions From Readers” in May 1, 1986, Watchtower.
Song 202 and concluding prayer.

