Presenting the Good News​—By Following Up Interest Promptly
1 The apostle Paul encouraged Timothy: “Preach the word, be at it urgently . . . do the work of an evangelizer, fully accomplish your ministry.” (2 Tim. 4:2, 5) That counsel well applies today.
2 There is an urgent need to find those remaining ones who are “sighing and groaning” over the corruption prevailing in Christendom. (Ezek. 9:4) Indeed, “the whole world is lying in the power of the wicked one,” so that people everywhere need the Kingdom. (1 John 5:19) We can help them by making effective return visits. Following up interest promptly can save lives.
CALL BACK SOON
3 When you make a return visit soon after the initial call, the householder is more likely to remember the subject you discussed. You will be in a good position to pick up the conversation where you left off and develop the interest further. You may be able to increase the interest before others can introduce negative thoughts into the householder’s mind.
4 While working in field service one Monday, a sister met and witnessed to a young mother who was despondent and without hope. She made a return visit on Thursday and started a Bible study. The woman commented that she had never had her questions answered so clearly from the Bible. Another call was made on Friday to draw attention to the subject of the Watchtower Study for Sunday. The woman attended that first Sunday and continued making spiritual progress. If we wait too long before calling back on interested people, the initial interest may soon fade away and be difficult to rekindle.
5 On the initial call, a specific appointment can be made for a return visit. This may be done effectively by raising a thought-provoking question and offering to return with the answer. Make an appointment for a specific time the following week, later in the same week, or even the next day if appropriate.
FOLLOW UP ALL INTEREST
6 As Christians we are all encouraged to make disciples. (Matt. 28:19) In addition to those who accept Bible literature, others may be interested in the good news. Some who decline to accept literature may be willing to discuss Bible subjects. If you detect interest, whether literature is placed or not, by all means call back and try to cultivate the interest. We are looking for people who are interested in the good news.
7 A special pioneer in Korea sensed latent interest in a woman who always refused to accept the magazines. The pioneer put the magazines aside, and the woman was willing to discuss a few paragraphs in one of the booklets. The sister came back three days later for a second discussion. After a few more calls, the woman was having a Bible study twice a week. In four months she was able to overcome serious family opposition and began preaching to others.
8 If you really want to stimulate interest and start Bible studies, it is very important that you follow up all interest promptly. Doing so will bring you many blessings from Jehovah’s hand.

