A Wise Step Before Calamity
SINCE Mary’s children were now grown, she had time on her hands and decided to get part-time secular work. When she told her husband, Enos, however, he made it clear that there was no need for her to do so. “If I could provide for you and the children, I can certainly keep the two of us now,” he said. Instead of having his wife work secularly, he suggested that she prayerfully consider becoming a pioneer, a full-time Kingdom proclaimer.
Although Mary enjoyed sharing the Kingdom message with her neighbors, she was shy and lacked confidence. Yet, she wanted to follow her husband’s counsel. So, with mixed feelings, she enrolled as an auxiliary pioneer in April 1981.
Mary quickly developed a love for the Kingdom-preaching work that she had never before experienced. Soon, she was conducting four home Bible studies with interested people. Within a year she had become a regular pioneer, conducting ten Bible studies. Christine, a Witness of Jehovah with two children still in school, enthusiastically joined Mary as her pioneer partner. Newly interested people began to attend meetings at the local Kingdom Hall, where a fine pioneer spirit was growing. And Mary’s greatest joy came when her own son, Christopher, chose to follow her example and became a pioneer too.
Then, suddenly, in 1985 tragedy struck. Mary collapsed. An aneurysm in her head led to a severe brain hemorrhage, and within three days 45-year-old Mary was dead.
During those four years of pioneering, however, Mary had built up a fine standing in her community. Her funeral service was attended by over 300 people, including many neighbors. One of those present had been a school friend who had been impressed by Mary’s faith, wanted to learn more about it, and asked for a Bible study. Mary’s ministry was still bearing fruit.
“I am an auxiliary pioneer myself now,” says Enos, “but I only wish I had joined Mary when she was pioneering. She was always talking about her experiences and was so happy. In fact, those few years were the happiest ones of our life together, but it is only now that I appreciate why.”
Nobody can predict when “time and unforeseen occurrence” may exact its toll, as it did so unexpectedly in Mary’s case. However, those who remain faithful as Kingdom proclaimers ensure for themselves favorable recognition by both God and man, even in the face of calamity.​—Ecclesiastes 9:11; 11:1, 2.
[Pictures on page 31]
Sharing in the ministry is time well spent

