VOL. XXX MAY 15 NO. 10 
A.D. 1909-A.M. 6037 



CONTENTS 

Brooklyn Bethel Hymns for June 146 

Views from the Watch Tower 147 



"Blasting at the Rock of Ages" 147 

The Orthodox Student vs. the Orthodox Teacher. 148 

Tabernacle and Bethel Reception 149 

"Walk Honestly as in the Day" 150 

"Put Ye on the Lord Jesus Christ" 151 

The Emmanuel Movement 152 

"For This He Did Once" 153 

"If We Suffer With Him" 154 

"Come Over and Help Us" 155 

"There is a Sin Unto Death" 157 

Western Convention Tour 158 

An Interesting Letter 159 

Berean Studies on the Atonement 159 

page 146 

PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY 
CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
"BROOKLYN TABERNACLE," 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, N.Y., U.S.A. 

Foreign Agencies:— British Branch: 24 Eversholt St., London, 
N. W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, Barmen. Australasian 
Branch: Equitable Building, Collins St., Melbourne. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR 

REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 

Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:— All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are not 
only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually and 
in touch with the Studies, etc. 



SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER. 

APPLICATION MADE FOR ENTRY AT BROOKLYN, N.Y. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, DANISH AND ITALIAN EDITIONS. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



BROOKLYN BETHEL HYMNS FOR JUNE 



After the singing of the hymn the Bethel Family listens 
to the reading of "the Vow" to the Lord, then joins in 
prayer. At the breakfast table the MANNA text for the 
date is read and questions and comments considered. 
Finally, just before leaving the table, the MANNA comment 
is read. Desiring that all share the blessings, we 
commend the plan to others. The hymns for June are 
indicated below to permit all who so desire to join with us: 

(1) 267; (2) 29; (3) 19; (4) 313; (5) 257; (6) 119; 
(7) 4; (8) 208; (9) 17; (10) 152; (11) 301; (12) 230; 
(13) 193; (14) 105; (15) 66; (16) 121; (17) 130; (18) 263; 
(19) 273; (20) 85; (21) Vow; (22) 8; (23) 71; (24) 291; 
(25) 258; (26) 312; (27) 191; (28) 169; (29) 120; (30) 279. 



ITALIAN VOLUNTEER MATTER 

The Volunteer matter for use among Italians is now ready, 
and we trust that those having Italian friends or living near 
Italian sections will recognize the opportunity and order what 
they can judiciously use. 

POCKET HYMNALS DELAYED 

The cloth and paper editions of the Pocket Hymnals have 
been unexpectedly delayed in shipment, but we expect to be 
filling orders by the time this issue reaches you. 



R4393 : page 147 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER 
"BLASTING AT THE ROCK OF AGES" 



FOR the past twenty years we have been sounding 

the Alarm against the infidel tendencies of the 

colleges and seminaries of Christendom. We 

have pointed out that Higher Criticism of the 

Bible and the Evolution Theory are taught in practically 

every institution of learning of higher grade than a 

Grammar School and that even in these the seeds of infidelity 

are being sown in the class books and studies, 

though not openly lectured upon. 

In these twenty years we have counselled parents that 
it is better to give their children less education than to 
risk the complete wreck of their religious instincts and 
faith in God and the Bible. Our views were thought to 
be extreme and rarely heeded. Now parents are writing 
us of their sad mistake— that the faith of their children 
is irreparably lost, because they refuse to read the only 
thing which would enable them to regain the ground of 



faith lost, namely The Divine Plan of the Ages. 

Finally, when the new manhood and womanhood have 
been thoroughly inoculated with the poison of infidelity 
others are awakening to the situation; as, for instance, 
Mr. Harold Bolce, who writes in the "Cosmopolitan," and 
Hon. S. H. Blake, who has started a good warfare in 
Canada. 

We give below John Temple Graves' note of alarm. 
He says:— 

Out of the curricula of American colleges a dynamic 
movement is upheaving ancient foundations and making 
an open way for a revolution in the thought and life of 
this people. Those who are not in close touch with the 
great colleges of the country will be astonished, in most 
cases indignant, to learn the creeds that are being fostered 
by the strong men in the professors' chairs. 

In hundreds of classrooms there is a scholarly repudiation 
of all solemn authority, and it is being taught daily 
that "the Decalogue is no more sacred than a syllabus"; 
that "the home as an institution is doomed"; that "there 
are no absolute evils"; that "immorality is simply an act 
in contravention of society's accepted standards"; that 
"democracy is a failure and the Declaration of Independence 
only spectacular rhetoric"; that "the change 
from one religion to another is like getting 
a new hat"; that "moral precepts are passing 
shibboleths"; that "conceptions of right and 
wrong are as unstable as styles of dress"; that "wide 
stairways are open between social levels, but that to the 
climber children are encumbrances"; that "the sole effect 
of prolificacy is to fill tiny graves," and that "there can 
be and are holier alliances outside the marriage bond 
than within it!" 

Every quoted sentiment is from the spoken or written 
word of some one of the leading and famous professors 
of the great colleges. 

And the colleges carrying such new and revolutionary 
creeds are not the minor schools, but those vaster seminaries 
such as Harvard, Yale, Princeton (shade of Jonathan 
Edwards behold it!), University of Pennsylvania, 
University of Chicago, Columbia, Syracuse, California, 
George Washington, William and Mary, Northwestern, 
the universities of New York, Iowa, Kansas, Michigan, 
Wisconsin, Cornell, Brown, Leland Stanford, Union, 
Nebraska and others. 

In each of these great institutions some professor, 
neither infallible nor inspired, but a free thinker rioting 
in the mere license of opinion, and some, alas, hungering 
for the notoriety of the utterance, are flinging down daily 
doctrines like these, not to strong and mature men capable 
of discrimination and accustomed to disputation, but 
speaking from responsible stations to youthful and undeveloped 
minds which are accustomed to receive what 
comes from the scholar in the chair of authority as the 
unchallenged gospel of the time. 

"Meat for strong men and milk for babes," has no 



restraining influence upon the riot of opinion among these 
so-called professors of to-day. If these men really believe 
the monstrous conceptions which are stirring the 
age to unwholesome revolution against the doctrines of 
the ages, they should at least voice them first in serious 
councils of their peers, and submit them solemnly and 
primarily to an arena in which orthodoxy can fairly defend 

R4394 : page 147 

its Gibraltars and stand by its own. 

But to strip every shred of reverence from the foot of 
thought— to march out before unfledged youth of either 
sex— to dissect God, and Religion and Homage and Home, 
and Government as if they were mere fossils, or vertebrates 
or equations— to leave morals afloat upon inclination, 
and so unsettle standards of virtue that every youth 
might swing unsmitten of conscience from the classroom 
to the scarlet woman in the street— this is carrying 
liberty of thought to the rank license which makes the 
intellectual commune and presages the revolution which 
is the beginning of chaos. 

The presidents of these great institutions, held in check 
by boards and councils, are not usually the voices of this 
amazing propaganda. But college professors, in the enjoyment 
of apparently too much liberty, and of rarely 
questioned responsibility, are sowing the seeds of these 
dangerous doctrines day by day in the minds of a quarter 
of a million of American young men and women who are 
going out to make the morals, the manners and the 
civilization of our country. 

I protest the initial exploitation of these "doubtful 
disputations" upon the great body in whom all of us have 
such vital concern. I deny the right of teacher or professor 

R4394 : page 148 

to take such advantage of youth sent by orthodox 
parents to university halls. 

I am neither preacher nor Puritan. I neither cavil 
nor cant. I am an ordinary man of the world, who, as 
unworthy as he is, keeps yet in reverence the old orthodox 
faith of his fathers, and I do not hesitate to say 
that if I had a son in one of these colleges, and I heard 
that such doctrines were being fed to him out of the 
irreverent lips of uninspired thinkers, I would put my 
hat on my head and walk up to the chancellor's office 
of that university and demand on behalf of my son, and 
of other sons of American citizens, that these intellectual 
banditti of the classroom should practise their license of 
opinion upon the sunrise clubs or the free thought societies 
to which they belong, or ought to belong, and to 
leave unstained to these tender minds those old honored 
and orthodox creeds by which American fathers and 
mothers for over a hundred years have led their children 
up to the honor of the American home and to the responsibility 



of the American citizen. 

THE ORTHODOX STUDENT VS. THE ORTHODOX 
TEACHER 



Under date of Toronto, March 29th, 1909, the Hon. H. 
S. Blake of Canada replies to a college student respecting 
the responsibility of college teachers for the spread 
of Infidelity amongst the people, under the specious name 
of "Higher Criticism," thus:— 

My Dear Brother:— I have received and thought a great 
deal over your letter of the 19th inst... 

I have not time to reply to all the letters that I have 
received containing complaints of the teaching given by 
those who "sit in Moses' seat," but have made the 
Word of God of none effect." 

You will, therefore, excuse me if, while I deal with 
your difficulty, I also take up some other points that 
have been presented. 

You ask my attention to one of the text-books which 
is prescribed for you in your course of study for the 
ministry, namely, "The Life of Christ," by Burton & 
Matthews (Constructive Studies); and you say as to 
this, "I have been impressed by the amount of what I 
consider 'Higher Criticism' that I find there." But this 
should not surprise you, for this book has the endorsement 
of "The University of Chicago," which University 
gives its imprimatur to a work of Professor G. B. Foster 
on "The Finality of the Christian Religion," in which it 
is declared at page 130 that to the scientific understanding 
of the world, and to the intellectual attitude super-induced 
by science, a miracle cannot be admitted; and 
again, at page 132, where the anti-supernaturalistic principle 
is not only admitted, but is paraded, and a man 
is said not to be a "modern" who does not admit it, 
Prof. Foster affirms, "An intelligent man who now affirms 
faith in such stories (miraculous narratives like the 
Bible) as actual facts can hardly know what intellectual 
honesty means." 

So that you perceive from other books which have the 
authority of this University that the miracle of the resurrection 
of Jesus is not to be accepted. You may possibly 
in due course be led to this book, but in the meantime 
you refer to page 269 of the text-book, which you 
are obliged to study, where this comment on 
verse 33, of chapter XV. of the Gospel of St. Mark, is found:— 

"And when the sixth hour was come, there was darkness 
over the whole land until the ninth hour." On 
which the comment is: "Darkness; if taken literally, it 
was probably due to a storm of sand.. ..But probably 
the phrase in its origin is metaphorical." There is 
no more reason to think that this is metaphorical than 
that the fact of the crucifixion itself was a mere metaphor. 
Even as children, we learned that God hung the 



world in mourning when the creature crucified the Creator. 

It was fitting and proper that this should be done. 

Continue to believe it as God's miracle to call 

the attention of the world, at that time assembled in 

Jerusalem, to the depth of the crime committed. Second, 

you call attention to the belittling of the mode in which 

God called the attention of all to the fact that Jesus 

Christ was the new and living way into the Holy of 

Holies. It was intended to strike home to the mind 

of a Jew the great truth beyond any other means that 

could be presented. The Jew might well stand awe-struck 

at the rending of the heavy veil and the throwing 

open to the gaze of all that which for centuries was regarded 

as too sacred a place to be entered but once in 

the year, and that by the High Priest alone, and then 

not without blood. 

To say that, "This rather than a physical fact is perhaps 
all that the words should be taken to mean," is 
without any warrant whatever. These two instances to 
which you refer are simply illustrations of the determination 
of those who are introducing the new Bible to 
drive away everything that savors of the miraculous. 

Pay no attention to the statements of the Higher 
Critics "that certain words are apparently an addition 
to the original narrative, etc." He says it is "apparently" 
so to him. But in all such cases take my advice 
and thankfully accept the text that has stood for all 
these centuries rather than the suggestions of some new 
light.... 

It may be helpful to you to read this quotation from 
Wesley's preface to his explanatory notes of the Bible 
printed for the "Wesleyan Methodist Bookroom": 

"Concerning the Scriptures in general, it may be observed, 
the word of the living God, which directed the 
first patriarchs also, was, in the time of Moses, committed 
to writing. To this were added, in several succeeding 
generations, the inspired writings of the other 
prophets. Afterwards, what the Son of God preached, 
and the Holy Ghost spake by the apostles, the apostles 
and evangelists wrote. This is what we now style the 
Holy Scripture. This is that 'Word of God which remaineth 
forever,' of which, though 'heaven and earth 
pass away, one jot or tittle shall not pass away.' The 
Scripture, therefore, of the Old and New Testaments is a 
most solid and precious system of divine truth. Every 
part thereof is worthy of God; and all together are one 
entire body, wherein is no defect, no excess. It is the 
fountain of heavenly wisdom, which they who are able 
to taste, prefer to all writings of men, however wise, 
or learned, or holy."... 

But, you will say, Did John Wesley know of the wonderful 
teachings of "new light," "modern thought," 
"common sense," "rational views"? Did he know of 
the infirmities of Genesis, the mistakes of Moses, the 
childishness of the story of Jonah? And had he recognized 
that a belief in miracles was a sure mark of superstition 



to be at once rejected by anyone that pretended 
to intellectual power? 

Why, John Wesley lived in the very centre of this atmosphere 
when, as one of the "Bible moths" in his 
Oxford days, he was the perpetual object of attack, ridicule 
and obloquy by the smart, clever infidel set of the 
18th century. He was a contemporary of Thomas Paine, 
with his "Age of Reason" and "Common Sense," and 
of Voltaire and Volney. 

After quoting Dr. Eakin's words in defense— "It is a 
significant fact that neither Charles Bradlaugh, in England, 
nor Colonel Ingersoll, in America, has had any successor" 
—Mr. Blake concludes:— 

How amused these two gentlemen would be if they, 
revisiting the scenes of their labors, attended some of 
the lectures of the higher critics in the Toronto Y.M. 
C.A. and elsewhere, and perused their many volumes! 
How "significant" to them would be the fact that their 
labors were not thrown away, and that so-called ministers 
of God were playing him false, and that schools and 
colleges rendered their presence unnecessary, as the 
work commenced by them was being so constantly, efficiently 
and thoroughly carried on by their ecclesiastical 
successors! 

It is a still more "significant fact" what a wonderful 

R4394 : page 149 

resemblance the above teaching, sanctioned by Dr. 
Eakin, bears to the results that we find amongst our 
students and graduates who have had the disadvantage 
of his teaching ! 

One reason urged for preserving such teaching which 
should trouble every lover of our country is, that the 
students thus instructed are to be throughout the length 
and breadth of our land the teachers in our public 
schools, and are to receive diplomas enabling them to 
continue to spread abroad the infidelity of this destructive 
criticism. 

Truly, "the plague is begun." How is this plague to 
be "stayed?" There is no more live question in our 

R4395 : page 149 

Dominion to-day than is this. 

It is not denied that this is the teaching we have in 
some of our colleges, and that the determination is to 
proceed with such instruction in order to educate those 
that are to be the teachers in our land to believe in and 
to present a mangled edition of the Bible. Remember, 
my dear friend, that these men do not seek to strengthen 
faith in the Bible, to build up their pupils in a reverence 
and love for it and an acceptance of it as God's 
Word. All the doubts, difficulties, uncertainties, objections, 
contradictions, imperfections, mistakes, that can 
be conjured up from minds that have been devoted to 



this one-sided study are presented. The views of people 
that do not know how to weigh evidence are given as 
conclusive. 

If a man has his doubts as to the authenticity of the 
Bible as God's Word, he is to be deeply pitied, and is 
worthy of great sympathy. If with such doubts he 
spreads them abroad, pity should end in reproof; but if 
with such doubts he accepts the position of instructor of 
youth and spreads abroad the poison with which he is 
afflicted, he should be found guilty of treason against the 
State, which he is wounding in its most vital part. 
H. S. BLAKE. 



R4395 : page 149 

TABERNACLE AND BETHEL RECEPTION 

THE month of April proved none too long for the 
transfer of the Headquarters of the Society from 
Pittsburgh to Brooklyn. It may astonish some 
of the friends to know that, between the stock of Tracts 
and Books, office fixtures, home furniture, etc., seven 
large cars were required for the removal. It required 
considerable time to pack and as much or more to unpack 
and to properly locate here. Meantime we did 
our best to handle our large mail and the orders it 
contained. If some of you have been unduly delayed 
and inconvenienced we trust that you will pardon us, 
remembering the cause of it. We trust that in our new 
quarters we shall be able to serve the increasing demands 
upon us more successfully than has been recently 
possible in the old quarters, where matters had 
become considerably congested. 

Naturally the friends of New York and vicinity have 
felt a justifiable curiosity and interest in the arrangements, 
not only in the Tabernacle Auditorium but also 
in its office and shipping departments, and an additional 
curiosity in the home which we style Bethel. However, 
remembering the general interests of the work everywhere, 
we requested the dear friends in this vicinity to 
restrain their loving curiosity, assuring them that when 
we would be in order a general Reception would be 
arranged. The opportune time for that reception came 
the night before we took the steamer for the European 
tour. We want to give you all a little picture of the 
Reception on that evening, so that those who can never 
visit the Tabernacle and Bethel actually may enjoy the 
pleasure of a mental survey of their appointments. 

THE TABERNACLE AND BETHEL FAMILY "AT HOME" 

The family took an early luncheon so as to be prepared 
to give their entire attention to the visiting friends. 
The reception was set for from seven to nine o'clock, but, 



as had been anticipated, some came earlier. On 
they came, a happy company of about three hundred and 
sixty— according to some estimates four hundred and 
fifty. They were received at the entrance, No. 13 
Hicks street, in the Sales Room by a brother and 
three sisters. From there another sister showed them 
the sisters' cloak room and lavatory. Then a brother 
showed them the Mailing Department— how the lists are 
kept; how they are printed upon the wrappers; and how 
the Towers and People's Pulpit are prepared for mailing. 
Next they were shown the Subscription Department and 
the locations occupied by the different helpers and the 
safes in which the addresses are kept by the card system. 
Next they were met by a representative of the Colporteur 
Department, who gave them some explanation respecting 
that part of the work. Then they had explained to them 
the method of keeping track of the Pilgrims and the 
requests for their services by the card system. After 
this they were shown the desks of the various workers 
in the Correspondence Department. 

When through with this inspection they were referred 
to another brother, who showed them the files of old 
Towers and then directed them onward to the Basement. 
Arriving in the basement a brother took them in charge 
and showed them the Packing Department. Another 
showed them the type-setting arrangements. Then they 
were shown the bins in which the general supplies of 
"Dawn-Studies" in the various languages, Booklets, 
Tracts, Charts, Bibles and Mottoes are kept. Then they 
looked at the furnace. These inspections being finished 
they were directed to a front stairway which landed them 
on the street at entrance No. 17 Hicks street. Here they 
were directed how to find their way to "Brooklyn Bethel," 
some blocks distant. In the center window in the front 
of the Tabernacle on plate glass in gold and colors the 
cross and crown pin, which so many of you have, is reproduced 
on a large scale— about three feet in diameter. 
Above it are the words, BROOKLYN TABERNACLE, 
PEOPLE'S PULPIT. Below the cross and crown design 
are the words "IN THE CROSS OF CHRIST WE GLORY." 
Wishing to give to each visitor a memento of trifling 
value, one of these cross and crown pins was thought 
most suitable; accordingly one was presented to each 
before leaving the building. 

THE BETHEL RECEPTION 

The constant stream of people occasioned no end of 
comment in the neighborhood. The Bethel doors stood 
wide open and one of the sisters receiving the friends 
as they entered ushered them into the parlor, a fine large 
room. The parlor is furnished in part with the parlor 
furniture from the Allegheny Bible House but mainly 
with furniture purchased with the "surplus" money presented 
by the Allegheny Congregation to Brother Russell, 
in connection with the rug and the mahogany desk and 



chair and stands for his study. Some of the sisters received 

the friends in the parlor and then passed them 

along through the double doorway to Brother Russell, 

who received them in his study. These two splendid 

rooms with lofty ceilings and heavy stucco work constitute 

the main floor of Bethel. In the center of 

the study is an old style, massive chandelier, to the bottom 

of which is suspended a white dove with pinions spread 

wide, a present to the study by Sister Seibert. Additional 

to the articles already described as presented to 

the Study by the Allegheny Church is a large arm chair 

presented to Brother Russell some years ago by the 

Los Angeles Church, also a stenographer's desk, a large 

photograph cabinet containing pictures of hundreds of 

Watch Tower friends, including Pilgrims and Colporteurs. 

There also is a couch where Brother Russell 

sleeps at night within reach of the telephone and thus 

within reach of you all, the world over. Finally we 

must not forget to mention a large walnut book case 

covering the entire west side of the room— with a capacity 

R4395 : page 150 

of two thousand volumes— the identical one used 
for years by that celebrated preacher, Henry Ward 
Beecher, who may not improperly be said to have made 
Brooklyn famous. 

From the study the visitors were shown upward to the 
second floor, which is devoted exclusively to the use of 
the unmarried sisters. This floor has four rooms. Upward 
still to the third floor they were shown, whose five 
rooms are occupied by the married couples of the family. 
This is as high as some of the friends cared to go. But 
those who desired were shown to the top floor, whose 
six rooms are occupied by the unmarried brethren. 

While inspecting the upper floors the friends were invited 
to look out of the windows at the rear of the house. 
There they saw a most enchanting spectacle. To their 
left was the Harbor and Staten Island and Jersey City, 
while directly in front of them were scores of the most 
massive and lofty buildings in the world— lower New 
York. The electric lights could be seen in the windows 
in many of these twenty and thirty stories high. The 
Singer Building, electrically illuminated from base to 
roof outside and inside (forty-seven stories), was a sight 
which could not be duplicated elsewhere in the world. 

REFRESHMENTS CAME NEXT 

So much walking and sight-seeing served to give the 
friends some appetite and appropriately they were next 
invited to the basement of the building, where a dining-room 
more than fifty feet long was able to accommodate 
sixty at a time. They were supplied some simple refreshments 
at the willing hands of members of the family. 
From the dining-room and its hallway access was 



had to the street and the dear friends were bidden 
"Good night!" We hope the visitors enjoyed themselves 
as much on the occasion as did the household of Brooklyn 
Tabernacle and Bethel. 



R4401 :page 150 

"WALK HONESTLY AS IN THE DAY" 

--ROMANS 13:8-13.-JUNE 27.- 

Golden Text:— "Put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ."— Rom. 13:14. 

THIS is the regular quarterly temperance lesson, and 

an excellent one. It inculcates temperance in respect 

to every thought, word and act of the consecrated 

Christian. It opens with a delineation of the 

Divine Law, showing its comprehensive character— that 

it relates to all of life's affairs. "Owe no man anything, 

but to love one another." We can never discharge 

that obligation. It is upon us every day and 

every hour of life and enters into all of life's interests. 

Other debts or obligations we may meet and be through 

with, but this debt of love, the essence of Divine command, 

is our obligation toward God, toward the Church, 

toward our families, toward all men, even our enemies. 

Why? Because, "He that loveth his neighbor has fulfilled 

the law." No wonder no Jew could keep the Law! 

No wonder no Gentiles would try to keep it! 

No wonder the Scriptures suggest the keeping of the 
Law of love only to Christians— to those begotten 
of the holy Spirit and thus have the assistance of the 
grace of God in daily living, as well as the mercy of 
God in Christ to cover all of their imperfections, all of 
their unintentional shortcomings. But it is expected of 
these consecrated ones that they will keep that Law. 
Whoever comes short of it in spirit, in heart intention, 
is unfit for the Kingdom, and will not be of the "little 
flock." More than this, if he comes short of this standard 
of heart intention he cannot be in the "great company" 
either, for God has not provided eternal life for 
any except such as shall now attain to this condition 
of love in the heart, the will or intention; and during 
the Millennial Age only to those who shall attain perfect 
love actually. 

"LOVE THY NEIGHBOR AS THYSELF" 

The Apostle next enumerates some of the perspicuous 
commandments— the one against adultery, the one 
against murder, the one against theft, the one against 
false witness, the one against covetousness. All of these 
commands presuppose a fallen condition of mind, out 
of harmony with God— a selfish heart. Is it not selfishness 



that leads any to covet the things which belong to 
another? Is it not selfishness, the opposite of love, that 
leads to false witnessing? Is it not selfishness, the opposite 
of love, that leads to theft? Is it not selfishness that lies 
back of murder and adultery— self-love, self-gratification? 
And the essence of all the other commands is Love, the 
same love to our neighbor that we have for ourselves, the 
same desire for his welfare, his prosperity, his happiness, 
his health, etc. Whoever, therefore, attains to this position 
of full consecration to God, a begetting of the holy 
Spirit, has before him this great lesson— to learn to love 
his neighbor as himself. 

Well does the Apostle add, "Love worketh no ill to his 
neighbor," no injury of any sort. Love would prompt 
us to be as careful of the health of our neighbor as of 
our own, as careful of his reputation as of our own, as 
careful of his property as of our own, as careful of his 
feelings as of our own. What a wonderful world it 
will be when the Kingdom of God's dear Son in the 
Millennial Age shall have brought all mankind back, 
mentally, morally and physically, to the original perfection 
of human nature, in the image and likeness of the 
God of Love— having destroyed all refusing to 
co-operate! 

"IT IS HIGH TIME TO AWAKE" 

We must bear in memory that the Apostle was addressing 
Christians in whom the new life had been begun. 
His language implies what we know is very frequently 
the case, namely, that after the early Christian experience 
of turning from sin to righteousness, from ignorance 
and superstition to faith and knowledge, and from 
the feelings of the stranger to a realization of adoption 
and membership in the family of God, there comes later 
to some a measure of carelessness, drowsiness. A spirit 
of the world comes in and threatens to overwhelm the 
New Creature. The beautiful truths lose some of their 
freshness, crispness, beauty and flavor. Something new 
is looked for, and is provided by the Adversary, along 
the lines of more or less self-gratification in earthly 
things. 

The strenuosity of the new experience reacts and 
spiritual lethargy comes on. The experience of realizing 
sins forgiven and ourselves adopted into the family of 
God and the necessity for learning the lessons of the 
School of Christ is considerably forgotten. Some such 
occasionally cry out, "Where is the blessedness I knew 
when first I knew the Lord? Where is the soul-refreshing 
view of Jesus and his Word?" Such a cry implies an 
awakening of the kind which the Apostle wished to 
encourage. In other words, in this lesson he says, 
"Knowing the time that now it is high time to awake 
out of sleep; for now is our salvation nearer than when 
we believed. The night is far spent, the day is at hand; 
let us, therefore, cast off the works of darkness, and let 



us put on the armor of light." The thought here evidently 
is a double one:— 

(1) We who have accepted Christ should be awake. 
Each day and week and month and year should find us 
more awake and more zealous and more appreciative of 
our wonderful privileges. Our salvation, our resurrection 
"change," is surely nearing day by day. 

(2) From whatever standpoint we view the matter it 
must be that the night-time of sin is far spent. It must 
be that the morning of the new dispensation is near. 
The Apostle wrote after four thousand years had passed 
and when the fifth was under way. We live when the 

R4401 :page 151 

entire six thousand-year days are in the past and the 
seventh, the Millennium of promise, is chronologically 
already begun. 

From both standpoints, with both arguments, it is 
proper for us to cast off the works of darkness and everything 
pertaining to sin and error and to put on the armor 
of light to prepare us for the duties of the new day, the 
morning light of which shines now. 

The exhortation of the Apostle is as appropriate today 
as it was when written, and we urge its forcefulness 
upon all. In our estimation the Lord has sent to his 
people in the present time the exhortation of the Vow 
we have suggested to wake them up. One dear brother 
recently said to us, "I have already told you of my ungodly 
life, before the Truth reached me. When I accepted 
the Truth and made my full consecration to the 
Lord I experienced a blessing of great joy and peace. 

R4402:page 151 

Afterwards I lost this joyful feeling in considerable measure. 

At first the loss of it distressed me. I sought it 

carefully, but found it not. I am more pleased to tell 

you that since I took that Vow and brought my original 

Vow of consecration up to date, as it were— since then 

the joy has returned to me and I have ever precious 

fellowship and communion with my Lord. I am striving 

to continue in this relationship and not to 'grieve the 

holy Spirit, whereby I am sealed, unto the day of redemption." 

We believe that this is the experience of a 

great many and the lesson for us is not far to seek. Any 

endeavor to draw near to the Lord by the renunciation 

of hindrances and the making of straight paths for our 

feet must surely bring a blessing. 

"HONESTLY AS IN THE DAY" 

The word here rendered "honestly" might more properly 
be translated becomingly, in harmony with our 
faith, our hope, our appreciation of the Lord, our appreciation 
of the morning light. By way of contrast the 



Apostle stipulates certain things as belonging to the 
night which would be unbecoming to us, not only in 
their grosser sense, but also in the more refined. Live 
not in intoxication. Surely it would be unbecoming for 
any saint to become literally intoxicated at a banquet 
or a revel, but surely, also, there is a more refined sort 
of reveling and intoxication. One can become intoxicated 
with a revel in pleasure of any kind, in automobiling, 
in golfing, cricketing or social whirl. The true 
Christian must recognize all of these as things that do 
not belong to the morning of the new dispensation, 
things that are incompatible with the light of Present 
Truth, which show us where we stand at the opening of 
a new dispensation and what wonderful possibilities arise 
for the sacrificing of the present life and for the attainment 
of the glories of the Kingdom. 

As Christians we should not walk (live) in chambering 
(unlawful intercourse), wantonness (self-gratification). 
These experiences apply to some in a gross sense, 
but to others surely in their refined sense. There is no 
fellowship or communion between light and darkness on 
any plane, because the two are opposites. Any intercourse, 
therefore, with things of darkness, the things of 
sin, the things occult, the things that are not in fullest 
harmony with the Lord are an unwarranted, unlawful 
intercourse or fellowship. Likewise wantonness (selfishness) 
may apply to a refined kind of selfishness (self-gratification), 
pampering of appetites and failure to sacrifice 
earthly pleasures, in harmony with our consecration 
Vow to engage in the service of the Lord, the Truth 
and the brethren; or in doing good to all with whom we 
come in contact and have opportunity. 

The Christian should not live (walk) in strife and 
envying. Here again a coarse and a refined thought 
may be apparent. To the world the strife may be understood 
grossly to mean fisticuffs and physical encounters 
and such bitter jealousies as would lead to evil deeds 
and murder, actual or in the heart; or we could apply 
these injunctions in a more refined way to saints as an 
exhortation that our lives be not strifeful, but that we 
follow peace, seek to promote the interests of peace 
everywhere— in our own home, in our neighborhood, 
amongst the Lord's people far and near. "Follow peace 
with all men, and holiness, without which no man shall 
see the Lord." Envyings, jealousies, alas, in a refined 
sense, are to be found with nearly all mankind. Often, 
unrecognized by the New Creature, jealousy is a fruitful 
source of much injury in the Church, which is the Body 
of Christ. No other evil quality can lead to more harm 
to ourselves and others than envy, jealousy. We are to 
put off all these things. 

"PUT YE ON THE LORD JESUS CHRIST" 

Here we have the thought. Our hearts are already 
consecrated to the Lord. We are already adopted into 



his family by the begetting of his holy Spirit. But our 
flesh is not perfect and it continues to love many of the 
garments of the old nature, which we are to put off. 
Gradually we are to substitute the new clothing, the 
livery of heaven, by which all may know us outwardly 
as well as know us by profession to be children of God, 
brethren of Christ, "heirs of God and joint-heirs with 
Jesus Christ our Lord." 

Putting on the Lord Jesus is not the work of a moment, 
nor of an hour, nor of a month, nor of a year; it 
is the work of a life time. But unless it be begun it will 
never be completed. And indeed we may be sure that 
we can never fully put on Christ's characteristics. However, 
the Lord will see our endeavor, our strenuous fighting 
to put off the old nature, to put off the works of 
the flesh and to be clothed with the garments of righteousness, 
suitable to our relationship to him— the livery, 
the clothing, that will make us separate from the world, 
sanctified to God through Jesus Christ our Lord. 

"MAKE NO PROVISION FOR THE FLESH" 

Ah, here we have an important point to be remembered. 
On it will greatly depend our success or our 
failure as respects the winning of the prize. When as 
New Creatures we made full consecration to the Lord 
and surrendered all the rights of the human nature our 
flesh did not agree to the contract, but protested. Subsequently 
it found it good policy to reason with the New 
Creature quietly, calmly, urging moderation in righteousness 
and self-sacrifice— urging, too, that we should not 
be more extreme than are others; that we should not 
make ourselves foolish in the estimation of others, lest 
this bring contempt upon the cause we desire to serve. 

Ah, how shrewd, how cunning, how deceitful is the 
flesh! If we would give heed to its plausible reasoning 
we would go out of the race altogether, failing to sacrifice, 
and hence failing to become members of the "royal 
priesthood," and to share the Kingdom glory of our Redeemer. 
Occasionally the New Creature wakes up and 
purposes energetic, thorough-going measures of self-sacrifice 
in every direction; but the old nature, the flesh, 
quietly makes its appeal— You must at least reserve thus 
and so; and, You cannot cut off thus and so entirely; 
and, it would be monstrous and unjust to yourself to 
practise self-denial to such an extent. You must make 
provision for the flesh! is its claim. "Make no provision 
for the flesh," urges the Apostle. And the flesh generally 
has its own way; for that reason the overcoming 
self-sacrificers will be but a "little flock," while those 
who will go into the Second Death or into the "Great 
Company" will be more numerous. 

The question, Shall I make provision for the flesh to 
fulfil its desires, or, shall I not? should be weighed by 
every saint. Much depends upon the decision. It is at 
this very juncture that the "Vow to the Lord" which 



we have been recently advocating as seasonable to all of 

the "household" of faith is proving a great blessing to 

many. It is helping them to the point of making absolutely 

no provision for the flesh to further its desires 

along any line. It promises, if possible, more careful inspection 

than ever of each word and thought and act. It 

raises barricades at various weak points and thus 

R4402 : page 152 

strengthens the New Creature and confirms its highest 
resolutions, and it proportionately binds the old nature 
and mortifies (deadens) it. 

The old nature is exceedingly deceitful. It will not 
admit that it is afraid of the Vow. Rather it will boast 
that it has no need of it, because it is already dead. 
The difficulty all the time is that the old nature fears to 
see the New Creature shut and permanently bar every 
door to its liberties. It urges that if the New Creature 
makes no provision for the flesh, it should not at least 
make such strenuous provision against the flesh and its 
liberties. Let us hearken to the voice of the Lord 
through the Apostle and close every avenue whereby the 
flesh might attack us in a moment of weakness or inattention. 
Let us throw out the pickets of prayer and 
watchfulness against every thought and word and act 
not in fullest harmony with the Spirit of our Lord. Let 
us thus by the aid of the Vow put on the Lord Jesus 
Christ and make no provision for the flesh to fulfil its 
desires. 



R4396 : page 152 

THE EMMANUEL MOVEMENT 

NUMEROUS inquiries come to us respecting the 

Emmanuel movement— Is it right? Is it of the 

Lord? etc. We reply that we believe that those 

identified with it are honest, sincere and well-intentioned 

as other Christian people, Theosophists, Christian Scientists, 

etc. In our opinion all of these people are beyond 

their depths— hoodwinked by our great Adversary. We 

see the whole civilized world inclining towards Christian 

Science, Hypnotism, Emmanuel Movement, etc.— seeking 

physical healing. As already pointed out in these 

columns we believe that Satan has considerable power 

under Divine restriction and that it is always a baneful, 

injurious power. We believe that in various ways the 

Adversary and the fallen angels (demons) can and do 

favor diseases and especially those which appertain to 

the mind and the nerves. We believe that the time has 

come in which Satan, endeavoring to hold back mankind 

from giving attention to the Divine Truth now due 

to be appreciated, has become a miracle-worker, a disease-curer, 



in order to attract attention away from the 
Truth. 

Furthermore we understand that it is through such 
mental suggestions, etc., that the evil spirits are now 
attempting to gain, more than ever, control of humanity. 
In Christian Science we perceive the method to be a 
confusing of the human judgment, so as to render those 
under its influence incapable of rational thought along 
religious lines, so confused do the advocates become 
through false definitions. We believe that the mind 
cures, etc., more commonly called hypnotism, and supposed 
to be merely exercise of the mind, are really attempts 
of the fallen angels, the demons, to break down 
the human will, the barrier which God has granted for 
protection against them: that thus these evil spirits may 
ultimately gain a much larger control over our poor 
race than ever since the flood. 

Physicians are paying to be taught how to exercise 
hypnotic influences upon their patients. One large dry 
goods store in New York City employs, at $8000 a year, 
a man who was once a minister of the Gospel of Christ 
and subsequently a lecturer on hypnotism and mental 
control. His business now is to instruct the clerks of 
that large establishment how to exercise hypnotic influences 
upon their customers so as to increase the sales 
of the establishment. 

Finally, in the Emmanuel movement, we believe that 
these evil spirits are coming still closer and becoming 
more dangerous and seductive; because the claim is that 
this hypnotic power in the hands of ministers of the 
gospel is a duplication of the work of Christ and the 
apostles in healing the sick nineteen centuries ago. 
Books have been written explaining to ministers how to 
introduce this "Emmanuel Movement" into their 
Churches. Circulars are sent to all ministers everywhere 
urging the importance of these books and this 
method. We can imagine no more seductive method 
for the introduction of the influences of the evil spirits, 
the fallen angels, in the breaking down of the human 
will. Lest we should be misunderstood, we repeat that 
we have no thought that any of these people practise 
hypnotism with any suspicion that they are in collusion 
with the fallen angels or doing evil to the fallen race. 
Rather they are benevolent and desire to "do good to all 
men." But they do not understand the Word of God. 
"My people perish for lack of knowledge." They are 
being ensnared by the very ones who should be their 
pastors, assistants and protectors, and by reason of their 
confidence in them. 

What the end of the matter will be the Lord only 
knows. But it is surely the fact that every time a 
person is hypnotised his will is the weaker. He can 
the more easily be hypnotised again and thus the brains 
and nerves of the civilized world are being trained for 
an onslaught from the evil spirits. Well indeed the 
Apostle wrote, "We wrestle not with flesh and blood, but 



with wicked spirits in exalted positions." 

As we write a clipping is handed us from the "New 
York Herald" which shows that some others see something 
of the danger in this direction. We quote the 
clipping and follow it with an extract from "The Housekeeper" 
on the same subject, which will be interesting 
reading. 

MINISTER ATTACKS EMMANUEL MOVEMENT 

According to the Rev. Dr. I. M. Haldeman, pastor of 
the First Baptist Church, Broadway and Seventy-ninth 
street, if the Emmanuel movement is allowed to continue 
its work it will ruin the Church. 

Mr. Haldeman in his sermon said the only church that 
would survive would be the Christian Science Church. 
He added that the Emmanuel Movement is more of a 
peril than Christian Science because the Christian Scientists 
had kept apart from the orthodox church, while the 
Emmanuel movement was born in the Episcopal Church 
and invaded the Baptist ranks. 

Through the practice of hypnotic healing clergymen 
would be subjected to scandal, Dr. Haldeman said, because 
of "the tender relationship a minister comes into 
with his flock." 

"I beg you to turn away from the Emmanuel movement," 
said the minister. "It will give you salvation in 
time and damnation in eternity. The time has come 
to rise up and protest against ministers turning themselves 
into hypnotists and their churches into mental 
healing hospitals." 

Dr. Haldeman declared the Emmanuel movement "one 
of the most accursed and damnable inventions of the 
age." 

THE EMMANUEL MOVEMENT 

The following is from the "Housekeeper":— 

We have been asked why we have not printed something 
about the "Emmanuel Movement." Like some 
other questions in this world of ours, the question is 
easier asked than answered. 

It would be a simple matter to print an article showing 
the historical growth of the movement, and one 
strongly advocating its principles. 

It would be a simple matter to print an article strongly 
condemning the movement. 

R4396 : page 153 

There are many people, with ability to write, who have 
made a careful study of the phases of the movement, but 
who hold diametrically opposite views. A religious 
movement is perhaps the most difficult phenomenon of 
human life to study. If we are neither exponents nor 
opponents, we are the friends of neither and the enemies 



of both. As with the earliest Christian faith, "He who 
is not for Me is against Me." 

The movement is comparatively new, and thus it is 
very hard to comprehend its principles, especially as so 
much has been written about it that one is confused by 
the mass. Any new movement or faith acquires a large 
number of disciples who have been waiting for something 
new. Until these followers leave the ranks in 
pursuit of something newer, it is difficult to observe the 
fire for the smoke. 

The movement takes its name from a church in Boston 
whose ministers were the pioneers. Undoubtedly there 
are a large number of converts to the movement who 

R4397 : page 153 

have followed the Christian Science ideas more or less 
closely but have been restrained for certain reasons or 
beliefs from joining the Christian Science church. 

Many of these people have found in the Emmanuel 
Movement what they have sought, good counsel for a 
wearied soul, the suggestion from an outside source that 
there is hope, the balm of spiritual peace, the evidence 
of optimism and power of mind over body— and have 
been given medicines for their sick bodies. 

But if we are really to consider the movement, we 
cannot stop at this point. To a lay mind, the Emmanuel 
movement seems to be a combination of religious faith, 
mental faith curing, and modern medicine. At first 
thought this would seem to be an admirable combination, 
but is it not rather a compromise to salve the 
prejudices of all? 

James M. Buckley, editor of "The Christian Advocate," 
has written of some "Dangers of the Emmanuel Movement." 
He has pointed out that hypnotism and suggestion 
do not always tend to induce a higher, more moral 
tone, although so stated, in spite of our wish that this 
might be so. He asks if the time of a servant of a 
church is not now crowded with the many duties; does he 
not labor seven days of a week and sigh for more time 
to administer to the spiritual wants of his flock? This, 
he suggests, should be considered before ministers enter 
the ranks of healers. 

Consider human nature, American human nature. If 
ministers become medical advisers and use mental healing, 
in such cases will we not have experiments in suggestion, 
hypnosis and untrained diagnosis throughout 
the land which will be as foreign to the first ideals of 
the Emmanuel church in Boston as it is possible to 
imagine. If the mind becomes sick, which is one of the 
suggestions of the Emmanuel Movement— and a very 
good one— would it be any less quackery to try experimental 
cures upon it than upon the body? 

"Psychology" is a word which it is becoming necessary 
to understand. However, we have not really advanced 
so very far in the study of psychology, only far 



enough to establish certain premises— and we should be 
careful not to take wild flights therefrom. Has not the 
Emmanuel Movement taken a little of psychology and 
assumed the rest? The very fact that we, that is, our 
workers, thinkers and experimenters, specialists, have 
been progressing should lead us to be content to wait 
until certain conclusions have been more definitely 
proved. Of course, if we wait, wait, forever wait, and 
never act, we will be waiting at the millennium. But 
we have been eating a great deal of mental food of late, 
and it might be wise to digest a little bit of it. 

"The Housekeeper" believes that fresh air, careful diet, 
good living and good thoughts— the well-rounded life — 
this is the best physician. But like the servant of old, 
the physician of medicine is worthy of his hire and a 
very good hire. 

It is well to consider what certain physicians have 
said of the Emmanuel Movement. In an interview in 
the "Boston Herald," Dr. J. J. Putnam, professor of nervous 
diseases at the medical school at Harvard University, 
said in part:— 

"I consider the whole affair an injury to the progress 
of scientific medicine... .When the Rev. Mr. Worcester 
talked to me he gave me to understand that his 
idea was to take those of his parishioners who needed 
suggestive help, and if there were no real physical disturbance 
in the individuals to lead them along the line 
of self-control by suggestion. I also agreed with him 
that many of these unfortunates needed assistance in the 
way of getting some occupation— something congenial 
that would take their minds away from themselves— to 
stop their introspection, the self- worry.... 

"At the present moment the claims of the Emmanuel 
people are misleading, if not something else. The public 
lectures at a dollar admission in other cities, and other 
well known commercial methods, do not look well in 
either priest or doctor. 

"There are many reasons why this sensational movement 
—a veritable epidemic— should be limited and controlled. 
First, the notoriety given it brings out a crowd 
of morbid individuals who will impulsively jump at any 
fad which offers new sensations. This state only increases 
their unstable condition. The marvelous cures 
reported in the press and from the platform mislead the 
masses and put hope in the really ill, which is cruel, for 
many of these will believe until the second shock of disbelief 
comes, and by this time they have lost faith in the 
trained physician, in all treatment and suffer on unaided. 
Many of these unfortunates resort to quack 
medicines and thus become morphine and alcoholic 
victims. 

"The crowd of untrained and unfitted clergymen who 
at once jump into the role of medical men and preach 
and practice what they call psycho-therapeutics is 
going to do great harm, is an injury to the public 
welfare.... 



"This is the whole trouble with the statements now 
going out to the world from the Emmanuel healers; the 
public are led to believe that there is a decided line 
between functional and organic diseases, and that the 
untrained— the clergymen throughout the country— can 
mark this line, when in truth the experienced neurologist 
is not at all certain." 

Opinions by other physicians of equal standing reiterated 
Dr. Putnam's statements. 

It is always a sore trial to any sincere person to attempt 
to criticise or discourage a movement which is 
noble and generous in its conception, but like mistaken 
charity, the tree must be known by its fruit. 



R4397 : page 153 

"FOR THIS HE DID ONCE" 

"Who needeth not daily, as those high priests, to offer up 
sacrifice, first for his own sins, and then for the people's; 
for this he did once, when he offered up himself."— Heb. 7:27. 

IN studying the Book of Hebrews it is well to keep in 
memory that the Apostle's thought was not to give a 
detailed explanation of the types of the Law, but 
merely to prove to the Jews that they should look beyond 
the high priests and the under-priests of the Aaronic order 
for a greater Higher Priest of our profession (order) and 
a superior under-priesthood, "a royal priesthood." In the 
text above quoted St. Paul is drawing attention to the 
fact that a repetition daily and yearly of the sacrifices 
of the Law on a higher plane is not to be expected, but 
rather that the One Priest (Christ, Head and Body,) in 
the one antitypical Atonement Day accomplishes the entire 
work which will usher in full forgiveness and reconciliation 
to all the people. This in type was done in the one 

R4397 : page 154 

Atonement Day and the antitype of that Atonement Day 
is not yet ended. It will close with the end of this Gospel 
Age. It will close when the last member of the Body 
of Christ shall have suffered with the Lord, "Filling up 
that which is behind of the afflictions of Christ."— 
Col. 1:24. 

The first offering of the Day of Atonement was the 
bullock, which typified the man Jesus. It was because of 
this offering and by the act of consecration that our Lord 
became the Anointed One— "the High Priest of our profession. 
As the spirit-begotten High Priest our Lord for 
three and a half years offered up himself, his manhood, 
in sacrifice. He finished that offering, typified by the bullock, 
at his death. Then, as shown in the type, he took 
the blood of the bullock and proceeded into the Most 



Holy, "there to appear in the presence of God for us"— 
the "household of faith." 

In the type the typical high priest, after offering 
the first sacrifice and after applying its blood on behalf of 
the body (the under-priest) and his house (the tribe of 
Levi), laid his hands on the Lord's goat and slew it and 
did with it as with the bullock, except that its blood when 
taken into the Most Holy was differently applied— on 
behalf of the other eleven tribes, who represented all 
nations, peoples, kindreds and tongues of humanity. 

These two offerings and their distinctly separate 
sprinklings of blood were both parts of the one Atonement 
Day service— "this he did once." Two deaths are 
clearly shown and two blood sprinklings; and on behalf 
of two different classes; but they were parts of the one 
sin atonement. Just so our Lord, during his earthly ministry, 
was dying daily, yet it was one sacrifice; so also 
when we fill up a share of his sufferings, dying daily, it is 
part of his sufferings and sacrifice, which he is still accomplishing 
in us once for all— this he does once and will 
never repeat. All sacrificing of this sort will end with 
this age— he will accept no further members of the Body 
of Christ, no additional members to "the royal 
priesthood." 

As we have repeatedly shown, the first Atonement Day 
sacrifice was our Lord's sacrifice of his own flesh, the 
man Jesus, and the second sacrifice was that of his 
adopted members— those justified by his blood and consecrated 
to his service even unto death. These accepted 
by the Lord are sacrificed by him as parts or members 
of himself; and their blood (death) is counted in as a 
part of the blood of Christ— "dead with him." This is 
the "Mystery" hidden from previous ages and generations. 
The "fellowship of this Mystery" was granted to the Jews 
and Gentiles of the "little flock" of the called and chosen 
and faithful. 

Our Lord as the High Priest laid his hand upon the 
"Lord's goat" at Pentecost. His power (hand) there 
came upon his followers accepting their consecration and 
bringing to them the trying experiences as his members 
which faithfully endured will, according to the Divine 
plan, grant them a share with him in his divine 

R4398 : page 154 

nature and Kingdom. It is not the suffering of the 
Church that counts, but the sufferings of Christ. It is 
because we are counted in as members of Christ, "members 
in particular of the Body of Christ," that we are 
permitted to be his members on the spirit plane and to 
share the glories and honors of our Head. "If we suffer 
with him, we shall reign with him." "If we be dead with 
him we shall live with him." 

Thus the sufferings of Christ, while in the one sense 
of the word ended at Calvary, in another sense of the 
word continue in his members; this is a "Mystery" to 



many. The sufferings of Christ are still in process and 
his faithful ones are still filling them up. St. Peter tells 
us that the prophets of old spake of the sufferings of 
Christ and of the glories that should follow. The sufferings 
of Christ Jesus were followed by his personal glorification, 
demonstration of which was given at Pentecost; 
but the glory mentioned in this text has not yet been 
accomplished. It awaits the completion of the sufferings 
of Christ— the sufferings of the members: "For if one 
member suffer, all the members suffer with it." (1 Cor. 12:26.) 
"When he shall appear in glory, we shall appear 
with him." We shall be glorified together if we 
suffer with him as his members. 

With the Jews there was a Day of Atonement every 
year, with its sacrifices repeated year by year continually. 
But with Christ there is but one antitypical Atonement 
Day and when its "better sacrifices" shall have been accomplished 
—when the great antitypical High Priest shall 
have finished the work of offering up himself, including 
his members, thereafter there will be no more sufferings 
of Christ for anybody to fill up. The glory of the 
Millennial Kingdom will then be ushered in. The sins of 
the whole world will be blotted out so far as God is concerned 
and the High Priest of our profession will be a 
Priest upon his throne (Head and members) after the 
order of Melchisedec. 



R4398 : page 154 

"IF WE SUFFER WITH HIM" 

"The Spirit itself beareth witness with our spirit, that we are 

the children of God: and if children, then heirs; heirs of 

God and joint-heirs with Christ, if so be 

that we suffer with him, that we may 

be also glorified together."— Rom. 8:16,17. 

ST. JUDE speaks of "our common salvation"— a 
salvation from sin, from death, from human imperfection 
to human perfection— to all that God 
intended that our race should be, to all that our race lost 
through Adam's disobedience. The Divine provision is, 
as expressed by our Lord, "to seek and to recover that 
which was lost. "-Matt. 18:11. 

The world is to be sought and to be recovered during 
the Millennium, its period forjudging (disciplining) 
and trial for life eternal. Then the faithful and obedient 
of all peoples will obtain full Restitution and life 
eternal. But now, in advance, this "common salvation" 
comes by faith to a certain class— to those who have the 
hearing of faith and the eye of faith, and obedient hearts. 
These, by virtue of the merit of Christ applied to them 
when Jesus "ascended up on high there to appear in the 
presence of God for us"— these are reckoned as having 



all the advantages of restitution imputed to them on account 
of their faith. They do not get restitution actually, 
but reckonedly. Their faith is counted to them for 
righteousness or perfection. 

Why is there this discrimination in Divine providence 
—that some now hear the voice of the Son of Man and 
live, through Justification of Faith, while others will not 
hear the voice of the Son of Man and come to life and 
perfection until the Millennium and then actually and 
not reckonedly?— "Verily, verily, the hour is coming, 
and now is, when the dead shall hear the voice of the 
Son of God; and they that hear (obey) shall live."— 
John 5:25. 

The answer is that this is a part of the "Mystery" of 
God; that the Lord is now seeking for and electing a 
special class to be joint-heirs with his Son— joint-sufferers 
with him in his sacrifice and joint-sharers in his 
Kingdom glory, "the Bride, the Lamb's Wife." The 
special arrangement permitting these to be justified by 
faith instead of actually justified (or perfected) is with 
a view to their being privileged to offer a proper sacrifice 
—"holy, acceptable to God, their reasonable service." 
(Rom. 12:1.) This Justification by faith is necessary 
because nothing unholy or unclean may come to the 
Lord's altar, as the Law clearly taught and the types 
clearly showed. Every sacrifice for the Lord's altar 
must be "without spot or blemish." Every member of 
our race was spotted and blemished by inherited sin and 
imperfection, and hence the necessity for the Divine 

R4398 : page 155 

provision of Justification by faith— not faith in Covenants, 
but faith in the precious blood of Christ, the Lamb 
of God which taketh away the sin of the world." This 
faith grasps the fact that while the sin of the world 
has not yet been taken away by the Lamb of God, and 
the world still lies under condemnation, nevertheless the 
merit of the blood has been applied on behalf of the 
"household" of faith— and in due time will be made 
efficacious, under the New Covenant, for the bringing of 
forgiveness to every creature, with the opportunity of 
eternal life. 

But under which Covenant does God purpose to receive 
the faith-justified ones as sacrificers? The answer 
is that the Divine proposal to the Redeemer that he 
sacrifice and as a reward of his sacrifice be highly 
exalted to the Divine nature and glory— this blessing 
(which belongs only to Jesus and was applied only to 
his sacrifice) has by the gracious plan of God been extended 
to include all those of this Gospel Age who have 
the character likeness of the Redeemer. They are invited 
to share in his sacrifice, and are promised that if faithful 
they shall share in his glory. 

But what sacrifice is this? Could Justice call for 
more than a life for a life— the death of Jesus as the 



ransom-price for the death penalty of father Adam? 

Surely not. Justice has no voice in the present proceeding 

of Grace. Justice, however, cannot interfere, if 

it is agreeable to the Great Judge and the Redeemer 

to accept a "little flock" of justified believers 

as members under the Redeemer as Head. This very 

matter pleased the Father and pleased the Son, and is, 

therefore, a part of the Divine program. These members 

are "elect according to God's foreknowledge through 

sanctification of the spirit and the belief of the Truth." 

(1 Pet. 1:2.) Their selection is not a change in the 

Divine program, for they were "chosen in him before the 

foundation of the world." (Eph. 1:4.) Their selection 

was unexpected of the angels and of men and hence was 

a "mystery" and still is a "mystery" to mankind. "The 

world knoweth us not, even as it knew him not." (1 John 3:1.) 

But the selection of this class was always 

the Divine purpose. "The God and Father of our Lord 

Jesus foreknew us also by Jesus." 

Whatever, therefore, was the Divine program for the 
Master, the Forerunner, the Chief -priest, is the Divine 
program for his members— they must "walk in his 
steps"; they must "suffer with him"; they must "fill up 
that which is behind of the afflictions of Christ." If any 
decline so to do, he loses his place as a member of the 
Body. We know, nevertheless, that the full number of 
the "elect" will ultimately be found and every one of 
them will be sacrificers, for none others are members of 
his Body. It is the spirit of the Head coming upon these 
that produces the sacrifice of the flesh (the justified 
flesh) "holy, acceptable to God."— Rom. 12:1. 

There is only one object in the sacrifice which God has 
provided for, the sacrifice which Jesus accomplished, and 
is accomplishing in all those who will become his members 
—that is a sacrifice for sin. It is presented to God, 
holy and acceptable. In this respect it differs from other 
sacrifices which men make; as, for instance, a father or 
mother may sacrifice comfort or even sacrifice life, on 
behalf of their offspring, but such sacrifices, however 
appropriate, are not the sacrifice of Christ— are not of 
the "better sacrifices" typified in the sacrifices of the 
bulls and the goats. 

St. Paul calls our attention to the fact that only 
those sacrifices which were burned outside the camp 
were a Sin Offering. Next he shows how our Lord was 
the sin offering. Then he points out how, if faithful 
members of his Body, we also must suffer outside the 
camp— as members of the sin-offering— represented in 
"the Lord's goat." This sacrifice is not yet completed. 
It is in process. Hence the Apostle's expression, "Let 
us go to him outside the camp, bearing his reproach"— 
just as the slain goat was carried outside the camp and 
there consumed as the bullock had been. (Heb. 13:11-13.) 
These matters, dear readers, are amongst the 
"deep things of God which no man knoweth except by 
the spirit of God." (1 Cor. 2:10.) The world knows 



nothing about them. "To you it is given to know the 
mysteries of the Kingdom of God, but to outsiders all 
these things are spoken in parables." (Matt. 13:11.) 
Outsiders are in what the Scriptures term "outer darkness" 
—the darkness which belongs to this present time 
of ignorance and superstition. (Matt. 25:30.) The 
few have been permitted to enter into the banqueting 
halls and to see the glorious beauties of the riches of 
Divine grace. Blessed are your eyes that see and your 
ears that hear. As for those who never saw they properly 
have our sympathy, nor should we expect so much 
of them as of ourselves who have been blessed with this 
knowledge of this important sacrifice and of its glorious 
reward. Furthermore, as we are now in the sifting and 
testing time, it must not surprise us if some who once 
saw eye to eye with us in these matters become blind to 
them and drift into the "outer darkness" as respects 
these matters and others— we know not how far. Truths 
so interweave that one lost or perverted injures presently 

R4399 : page 155 

the beauty of the entire fabric. 

Our expectation must be that the differences will increase 
and that the loss of spiritual sight will ultimately 
extend to other features of the Divine Plan. We have 
nothing but sympathy to express for such. Indeed to us 
their case is most pitiable. It is practically a hopeless 
case, too, whereas some of those who have never seen 
and never tasted we may hope will yet see and taste of 
this grace. But of those who see and who then become 
blind our Lord says, "If the light that is in thee become 
darkness, how great is the darkness." (Matt. 6:23.) It 
would be better not to have known the way of 
Truth than to have departed from the holy command. It 
is not for us to judge one another, but to leave all in 
the Lord's hands, assured that he makes no mistake. 
We may have thought their hearts all right, when the 
Lord may have seen them to be all wrong. But the results 
will show. And what we could not read, and should 
not have attempted to read of unfaithfulness to the 
Truth, will be manifest of themselves in the Lord's time 
and way. Let us not forget that he that sanctifieth and 
they that are sanctified (his members) are all one. He 
is in us all. In our consecration we lose our humanity 
and all of its rights, exchanging these for our spiritual 
membership in the Body of Christ. 



R4399 : page 155 

"COME OVER AND HELP US" 
-ACTS 15:36; 16:15.-JULY 4.- 



Golden Text:— "Come over into Macedonia 
and help us."— Acts 16:9. 

TO-DAY'S lesson is connected with the introduction 

of the Gospel into Europe. After 

the conference at Jerusalem, noted in a previous 

lesson, Paul and Barnabas remained for a time 

at Antioch. But seeing that there were many laborers 

there and that a larger field was little worked, a second 

missionary journey was planned. Barnabas and his 

nephew John Mark went in one direction, while with St. 

Paul went Silas (Sylvanus), with whom he had become 

acquainted at the Jerusalem conference and who is reported 

to have been a Roman citizen, as was St. Paul. 

It is with this latter couple that we have to do in this 

lesson. Their course lay through Syria and Cilicia, 

Derbe and Lystra. In these places they confirmed the 

R4399 : page 156 

faith of such as had already been accepted of the Lord 
through the Apostle's first missionary tour, and the 
working of the Truth during the interim. It was at 
Lystra that Timothy was found, a young man of Jewish 
mother and well trained in the Scriptures by her and 
his grandmother— his father being a Greek. We note 
that amongst the things presented to the Churches was 
the decision of the Jerusalem conference that the Jewish 
Law should not be considered binding to the Gentiles, 
except in certain features noted in a former lesson. 

After good success in the mission up to this point the 
Apostle had in mind a journey through Asia Minor, 
but apparently things went unfavorable until the Apostle 
concluded that the Lord was hindering their efforts and 
in perplexity began to think of other fields of labor. His 
moment of uncertainty was the Lord's opportunity for 
directing him. He dreamed that he saw a man dressed in 
the costume of the Macedonians beckoning to him and 
saying, "Come over and help us." The Apostle accepted 
this as of Divine leading and promptly began the journey 
which took him into Europe. We have here an evidence 
of God's supervision of all the interests of his 
Church. He was not averse to permitting the message 
to go into Asia Minor, for it did go there later, possibly 
at a more opportune time. But this was the time for 
sending the message to Europe. 

Evidently the Lord could have directed his message 
southward through Africa and away from Europe, but 
there is a "due time" connected with every feature of 
the Divine Plan— and now, by Divine arrangement, the 
message of God's grace in Christ was to go to the Greeks, 
who at this time were recognized as the foremost people 
of the world in literature and the arts. 

It is supposed that it was about this time that Luke, 
the physician, became attached to Paul's company. A 
man of education, a scribe, as well as a physician, the 



Lord evidently provided him as St. Paul's amanuensis, 
that thereby the Apostle's letters should reach many of 
the Churches of that time, as well as the Lord's people 
from then until now. Thus it came that Luke wrote not 
only a version of the Gospel, but also the Book of Acts 
and nearly all of St. Paul's epistles. Here we have another 
illustration of the privileges of the various members 
of the Body of Christ. Luke could not be the 
Apostle Paul nor could he do St. Paul's work; but he 
could be used of the Lord honorably and efficiently in a 
greater spread of the Truth. 

So it is with us. We cannot be apostles. We cannot 
do anything very great; but, if filled with the Spirit of 
the Lord, it is our privilege to be used to some extent in 
some service of the Truth. And any service for the Lord 
and for the brethren, even to the washing of feet and any 
menial service, is, as our Lord shows, honorable and a 
privilege. 

LYDIA OF THYATIRA 

Philippi, one of the chief cities of Macedonia, in Greece, 
appears to have been the first place for the preaching of 
the good tidings in Europe. As usual, on the Sabbath 
day the Apostle and companions sought for some who 
worshiped God, who hoped for the Kingdom that God 
had promised, knowing that such would be the better 
prepared to receive the message he had to deliver; that 
Jesus had appeared as the Redeemer and had laid the 
foundation for the Millennial Kingdom in the sacrifice 
of himself; that the blessings of his sacrifice would ultimately 
be made available to every creature, but that 
now, in advance of the dealing with the world in general, 
the Lord is calling out a Spiritual Israel, a "little 
flock," to be his kings and priests with Jesus in the administration 
of the Millennial blessings. 

Apparently there was no synagogue in Philippi, and 
matters may have looked very unfavorable to Paul and 
his companions. However, they heard of a little religious 
meeting held every Sabbath by the river side, 
outside the city gate. It was a prayer meeting principally 
and place of Divine fellowship. Not having the 
facilities of a synagogue they probably had no Scripture 
parchments, and hence no reading of the Law, but merely 
prayer and worship. All this was favorable to the Gospel 
message the Apostle had to present. He spoke to 
those who resorted thither, commending the importance 
of their worshipful condition of heart and the importance 
of praise to the Giver of all good. Then he proceeded 
to declare the good tidings of the sacrifice of 
Jesus, of his death and resurrection, and his Second 
Coming in power and great glory. He showed surely 
that the invitation now being given was for joint-sacrifices 
with Jesus whose reward would be joint-heirship 
with him in the Millennial Kingdom, as members of his 
Body, the Church. 



However many or few were at the meeting there was 
one present whose heart was in the right condition to 
receive the message— a woman named Lydia, a dealer in 
purple. Dyes were much more expensive in olden times 
than now and the secret knowledge of how to make them 
was turned to financial profit. Thus it is supposed that 
Lydia was in quite comfortable circumstances financially. 
Not only did the Truth open her heart, enlightening the 
eyes of her understanding, but she was prompt to obey 
it in full consecration; and prompt to symbolize that consecration 
in water baptism— "She and her household." 

It is not always that religious parents have religiously 
inclined children. Several instances of the kind are mentioned 
in the Scriptures. Personal experience teaches us 
also that the parent who is earnestly consecrated to the 
Lord and guided by his Word has generally a good influence 
upon those nearest to him and directly under 
his care. Such an influence should be hoped for, prayed 
for, sought for by every parent. But it cannot be obtained 
except by carefulness, circumspection of word and 
deed. These in subjection imply that the very thoughts 
of the heart are brought into captivity to the will of God 
in Christ. Nevertheless parents who have failed to discern 
the Truth and recognize its responsibilities until 
their children have outgrown parental instruction must 
not chide themselves unmercifully if their children do 
not respect them and their religious convictions. Rather 
they should remember that the Lord is thoroughly acquainted 
with the situation and will hold them accountable 
only for what they do or do not after they have 
come to know him and to an opportunity for understanding 
the instructions of his Word respecting their own 
lives and the training of their children in the nurture and 
admonition of the Lord. 

"AND SHE CONSTRAINED US" 

The fact that Lydia's household believed implies that 
she was the mother of adult children. And these were 
so thoroughly under her influence that they worshiped 
with her the true God, neglecting the idolatries prevalent 
in Philippi. We may infer that she was a widow, 
since her husband is not mentioned. Hence it was her 
right, without conference with anybody, to invite the 
Apostle and his companions to share the hospitality of 
her home. She seems properly to have realized that, instead 
of honoring them, she was honoring herself and 
her home by having such guests— the ministers of God, 
the brethren of Christ— under her roof. Note her language 
when inviting, "She besought us, saying, If ye have 
judged me to be faithful to the Lord, come into my house, 
and abide there. And she constrained us." The latter 
statement implies that the Apostle was not too ready to 
force himself upon anybody, that he did not urge, saying, 
Surely myself and companions who have preached to 
you should be served by you in temporalities— though 



R4400 : page 156 

that was the Truth. Rather the Apostle made no reference 
to temporalities. Indeed, after the suggestion of 
Lydia had been made it was apparently not too quickly 
accepted, but with the indication that the disciples of 
Jesus had no desire to intrude upon others. This is implied 
in the statement that they were "constrained," 
gradually drawn or led to accept invitation. How beautiful 
it is to see God's children wisely exercised in such 
matters! How much more is their influence upon one 
another for good! 

R4400 : page 157 

This lesson may be considered as specially teaching 
Divine supervision of the true Gospel and its ministers. 
Yet how diversified God's dealings and how necessary 
that his children in ministering the Truth should have 
fullest confidence in his wisdom, love and power! Note 
the sharp contrast that, after specially guiding the 
apostles to this place and then to a very small meeting 
and apparently one family of converts, the Lord next 
allows what seems to be a great catastrophe to befall his 
faithful servants. This trial came through the evil 
spirits. A young woman, possessed (obsessed) by an 
evil spirit (one of the fallen angels), was used for fortune-telling 
etc., the spirit working through her, divining 
or giving intelligence of things that were lost, telling 
fortunes, etc. She was a slave girl and very profitable to 
her owners— a syndicate apparently of influential men. 

For several days, as the Apostle and companions went 
to and from the home of Lydia attending to the Lord's 
work, this obsessed girl followed them, shouting in a 
loud voice, "These be the servants of the Most High God, 
which show unto us the way of salvation." Of course, 
the girl did not know them, but the evil spirits knew 
them. To what extent they forecasted the results we 
may not definitely know, but quite possibly what occurred 
was what they had premeditated, namely, that the 
Apostle would cast out the evil spirit and that this 
would bring upon them and any converts a violent attack 
from the owners of the girl and their friends and 
all whom they could arouse to a frenzy of excitement, of 
wrath and rioting. Or the evil spirit may simply have 
told the truth without considering the possibility of the 
Apostle commanding it to come out of the woman— 
possibly supposing that they would be rather pleased with 
a testimony from any quarter. But we read that St. 
Paul was grieved as day after day this testimony was 
made. He was not grieved that a testimony was borne 
to the Truth, but grieved that it should come from such 
an evil source, for he knew that it would have no respect 
for the Truth; for any of the fallen angels who would 
have respect for God and the principles of righteousness 



would not seek to obsess humanity when it knew that 
it would be to their injury and contrary to the Divine 
will. 

The S.S. teachers' instruction books will probably suggest 
to them that this woman had hysteria or was somewhat 
demented. But this is out of accord with the facts 
of the case, as Scripturally set forth, and quite contrary 
to the words of the Apostle. He said not a word to the 
young woman, assuming that she was not at all accountable. 
He addressed the evil spirit as such, and commanded 
it in the name of Jesus to come out of the woman 
—just as Jesus and the apostles under his instruction 
had frequently cast out these spirits. 

WITH A SPIRIT OF DIVINATION 

Just as the owners of the swine were angry with our 
Lord because of the loss of their swine, when the 
"legion" of demons cast out of the man entered the 
swine and the owner suffered loss, so here; while the 
Apostle and all who had proper hearts would rejoice 
that the woman was free from the evil spirit's power, 
her masters, who profited by her sad condition, were 
made angry. Their pocket-books were touched. They 
could not legally attack the Apostle because he had done 
the woman no harm. But they could have revenge and 
hence raised a riot, claiming that these men with the 
new religion were interfering with the rights of the 
people of Philippi, which was a Roman province in 
Greece. 

And the Lord permitted all this; yea, permitted the 
rioting to reach considerable proportions. Paul and Silas 
were carried before the rulers at the market-place for 
the imposition of sentence. The rulers, who held office 
specially for the preventing of rioting and for preserving 
order, were greatly excited and rent their garments 
as an indication of their distress and dissatisfaction that 
such a disturbance should be brought to their city. The 
thought was that the men against whom the populace 
would thus rise up must be guilty of something and 
deserving of punishment. They knew not that the evil 
spirits had to do with the arousing of the riot. As St. 
Paul elsewhere expressed it, "We contend not with flesh 
and blood merely, but with wicked spirits in influential 
positions." 

To satisfy the mob, to restore peace quickly, the 
missionaries were publicly beaten, presumably with rods, 
and then were committed to the prison. Alas, we say, 
what a reward for missionary effort! What a recompense 
for sacrificing their lives for the Lord and the 
Truth— that these men should be evil-spoken of, evil 
thought of and evilly treated! 

Let us remember that the God who changes not is our 
God, and has supervision of the interests of the Church 
to-day as then. Let us remember that he requires of 
us to-day, as of those missionaries, that we be 



willing to represent him, willing to endure hardness and 
thus to make full proof of our ministry— of our service 
for Christ and his message. Would it require faith 
on the part of the missionaries to accept such experiences 
as providential and not to think of them as evidences 
of the Lord's disfavor or neglect? So must we learn 
similar lessons of faith, in the School of Christ, and be 
glad to follow in the footsteps of Jesus and the apostles, 
and learn to rejoice in tribulations, as well as in 
prosperity. 



R4400 : page 157 

"THERE IS A SIN UNTO DEATH" 

-1 JOHN 5:16.- 

ONCE we were inclined to believe that the final 

results of God's great Plan of Salvation would 

show the vast majority of his creatures saved and 

granted eternal life through faith in Christ and obedience 

of heart. However, as the years roll by and as our view 

of the Divine requirement becomes more clear, our expectations 

are considerably modified. From our present 

viewpoint it will not surprise us if the number going 

into the Second Death will be a considerable one. 

This does not mean that our clearer sight shows the 
love of God to be less than we had at first supposed, nor 
that the provision made will come short and fail to 
grant a full opportunity of eternal life to every creature. 
It does mean that daily we are coming to see in a clearer 
light the high standard which God will require of all who 
will be granted life eternal at any time and on any plane. 

The fact is that God leaves the human will entirely 
free; that he seeks not the worship of those whom he 
will be obliged to coerce and restrain, but merely "seeketh 
such to worship him as worship him in spirit and in 
Truth." God's provision is that with the close of the 
Millennial Age "there shall be no more crying, no more 
sighing, no more dying;" because there shall be no more 
sin; because all the former things of sin shall have passed 
away. Putting these items together we perceive that 
the tests to prove who are worthy and who are unworthy 
of life eternal must be very crucial. None must go beyond 
the Millennial Age whose heart is not perfect; for 
if any others should be admitted there it would mean a 
perpetual danger of recurrence of sin in some form— a 
menace to the perfect bliss of that blessed state. 

The world will have its purgatorial experiences during 
the Millennial Age— its blessings under the reign of 
the glorified Messiah, the Mediator of the New Covenant, 
Head and Body. By lessons, encouragements and 
chastisements it will learn the lesson of obedience to the 
Divine will, that thus it may attain to the full perfection 



of God's likeness and to life eternal. But failing to attain 

R4400 : page 158 

this blessed state during that time appointed, the only 
alternative will be Second Death, for no provision is 
made for sin or sinners beyond the Millennium. 

The Church's trial, as we have seen, is now taking 
place during this Gospel Age. Every justified believer 
who knowingly and intelligently consecrated himself and 
whose consecration the Lord has accepted by begetting 
him of the holy Spirit— every such one is on trial now, 
for either life or death, and he can have no future 
opportunity. In other words, the trial of the spirit-begotten 
ones of this age will eventuate in eternal life 
on the spirit plane or eternal death, just as the trial of 
the world in the time of Restitution will eventuate in 
eternal life on the human plane or in eternal death. 

Consider what this means: It means that all who will 
be saved during the Millennium must attain to a condition 
of actual perfection and absolute heart loyalty to God, 
absolute love of righteousness and hatred of iniquity, if 
they would have eternal life. It means to you and me 
and all other spirit-begotten ones of this age that, if we 
do not reach a perfection of heart-development during 
the period of our trial, we shall die the Second Death. 
Thank God, it does not mean a perfection of the flesh, 
which would be impossible to us; but a perfection of the 
spirit, a perfection of the New Mind, a perfection of the 
will. But, oh, how much a perfect heart signifies! No 
wonder our dear Redeemer said, "Blessed are the pure 
in heart, for they shall see God" ! Any impurity of heart, 
of intention; any degree of evil contention, anger, hatred, 
strife, bitterness of heart, would mean just so much 
shortage of the Divine standard— perfect love. 

We are not competent to judge, however. Some may 
have perfect love in their hearts who, because of imperfections 

R4401 :page 158 

in their flesh, make a poor showing of it. In 
our experience, however, comparatively few even make 
the claim of perfect love, either for God or for the brethren 
or for neighbors, not to mention their enemies. We 
may be sure that of all spirit-begotten ones in such a 
condition at the time of death there will be no place 
found amongst those counted worthy of life eternal. The 
only alternative for them will be Second Death. 

They could not be of the "little flock" because God has 
foreordained that every member of it must be "a copy of 
his dear Son." "For whom he did foreknow, he also 
did predestinate to be conformed to the image of his Son, 
that he might be the firstborn among many brethren." 
(Rom. 8:29.) Can they not, then, be of the "great company"? 
We answer, No. All who would be of the "great 
company" must, through tribulation, attain to heart perfection, 



in order to be accounted worthy of life eternal. 
The difference between the "great company" of overcomers 
and the "little flock" of "more than conquerors" is 
that the former prove faithful under stress, when forced 
to the decision, while the latter class, the "little flock," 
possess more zeal, press forward joyfully to do, to be, to 
suffer, to serve; but both classes, to be overcomers at all, 
and to get eternal life at all, must reach the mark 
of perfect love. 

Ah, yes, God's ways are wise and just and loving. It 
would not be to his glory nor in the interests of his 
faithful ones or others for him to admit to eternal life 
conditions any deficient in love. Does this alarm us and 
cause us to fear for our own acceptance and our own 
attaining of eternal life? The Apostle says, "Let us 
fear, lest a promise being left us of entering into his rest, 
any of you should seem to come short of it." (Heb. 4:1.) 
Let the thought stimulate us to a renewed zeal and energy 
in conquering self and the old nature and in pressing on 
from glory to glory and from one degree to another 
higher degree of likeness to our Lord. 

We feel sure that, in the Lord's providence, the Vow, 
published again in the last issue, is proving a great 
blessing and great help to many. Let no one take it 
except after mature consideration, but let all who see it 
to be thoroughly Scriptural in its every provision take it 
as a partial expression of their original consecration 
Vow of baptism into Christ's death. It is proving a 
blessing to many to daily read it every morning in connection 
with the Manna text and comment and morning 
devotion. It helps to impress upon the mind and 
upon the heart the very things which are most necessary 
to be remembered and yet most likely to be forgotten 
in the necessary hurry and push of the present 
life. Let us with deliberation and determination take 
all the vows that will assist us to a closer walk with 
God and to the binding of our sacrifice to the altar. We 
shall surely need in the trial time which is now upon the 
Church every assistance which the Lord provides, that 
we may be able to stand; that we may develop the 
proper character; that we may make our calling and 
election sure. 



R4395 : page 158 

WESTERN CONVENTION TOUR 

IT is proposed that the Western Convention Tour 

shall start a little earlier so as to include Piedmont, 

Ala. Hence Brother Russell will leave Brooklyn, 

N.Y., midnight July 7th, via P.R.R.; arriving at Washington 

City 7:12 a.m., July 8th; arriving at Atlanta, Ga., 

5:00 a.m.; Piedmont at 9:21 a.m., July 9th; leaving 

Piedmont 7:16 p.m., July 9th, ar. at Memphis, Tenn., 7:30 



R4396 : page 158 

a.m., July 10th. Leaving at 11:00 p.m. (111. Central), 
we are due to reach New Orleans Sunday, July 1 1, at 
10:45 a.m. Leaving at 9 p.m. we hope to reach Houston, 
Texas, at 10:15 a.m., and, leaving at 12:25 a.m., to reach 
San Antonio, Texas, at 7:35 a.m., July 13. Leaving at 
9 a.m., July 14, via El Paso at 8:30 a.m. of the 15th, we 
hope to reach Los Angeles at 1:30 p.m., Friday, July 
16th. We leave at 5 p.m., July 17, arriving at Oakland, 
Cal, 8:45 a.m., July 18. Leaving at 8:57 p.m., July 19, 
we are due at Portland, Ore., 7:15 a.m., July 21, Wednesday. 
Leaving at 1 1:45 p.m. we are due at Seattle 
Thursday at 8: 15 a.m. Leaving at 9:30 p.m. (N.P.Ry.), 
Sunday, July 25, arrive at Spokane at 9:00 a.m., Monday, 
July 26. Leaving at 3:20 p.m. (N.P.Ry.) arrive at Butte, 
Mont., 7:40 a.m., July 27. Leave at 11:40 p.m., ar. at Billings, 
8:50 a.m., July 28. Leave 9:30 a.m., arrive at Denver 
11:30 a.m., July 29 (C.B.Q.Ry). Leave July 30, 1:15 
p.m. (C.B.Q.Ry.), ar. at St. Joseph, Mo., July 3 1, at 9:30 
a.m. Leave August 2 at 1:45 p.m., arrive Huron, S.D., at 
7 a.m., Aug. 3. Leaving at 8:10 a.m., arrive at Aberdeen, 
S.D., at 1 1:55 a.m. Leave (C.N.&St.P.Ry.) 8:35 
p.m., arrive at St. Paul, Minn., at 8:10 a.m., August 4, 
and Chicago at 9:45 p.m. Leaving Chicago at 11:45 p.m. 
(P.R.R.) arrive at Pittsburg at 6:05 p.m., August 5. 
General Meeting at Allegheny Bible House, 7:30 p.m. 
Leave 9:40 p.m., arriving at Brooklyn 9 a.m., August 6. 
Of course, changes of railroad schedules may make 
necessary some slight modifications of the foregoing. 
Four-Day Convention, Piedmont, Ala. July 8-11 



One " 


Memphis, Tenn. 


" 10 


" " " 


New Orleans, La. 


" 11 


" " " 


Houston, Tex. 


12 


" " " 


San Antonio, Tex. 


" 13 


Three " 


Los Angeles, Cal. 


" 16-18 


" " " 


Oakland, Cal. 


17-19 


One " 


Portland, Ore. 


" 21 


Four " 


Seattle, Wash. 


" 22-25 


One " 


Spokane, Wash. 


" 26 


" " " 


Butte, Mont. 


27 


Two " 


Denver, Colo. 


" 29,30 


Five " 


St. Joseph, Mo. July 29-Aug 


Three " 


Aberdeen, S.D. 


Aug. 1-3 



The Convention Committees of the Churches at the 
places named will please confer with us respecting 
further details desired. 



R4402 : page 159 

AN INTERESTING LETTER 



DEAR BROTHER:- 

I do not know if you have any more time now than 
you ever had to read poor letters, for I know you are 
always kept busy in the Master's service. But I must 
tell you about that Vow. 

I had always prayed for you and all those who 
labored with you in the WATCH TOWER office, from the 
time I first took the TOWER, which was in 1882. And 
then, when you sent out the Pilgrims to preach God's 
Grand Plan of the Ages, also the Colporteurs, prayer 
was added daily. But when the Vow was first brought 
to my notice, I did not think much about it; but after 
studying it a while the Lord showed me that it was a 
binding of the sacrifice closer to the altar that I made 
when I consecrated, so I took the Vow and sent you 
word. And oh, what a blessing has been mine since 
then, for though I am weak and frail and old, the Lord 
my God has drawn me closer to himself. And I can 
appreciate more and more the 91st Psalm and John 14:21-23, 
and though I can do so little in his service, he 
has promised never to leave nor forsake me, because I 
trust that he who began the good work in me, is able to 
finish it. My desire is not to be a stumbling block in 
my own way; I desire to follow my Lord even unto death. 

I enjoy the WATCH TOWER and those sermons in 
the Cincinnati Enquirer very much. May the Lord 
keep you faithful even unto death as that servant, is 
my daily prayer. 

Your sister in his service, 

MRS. J. A. MARWOOD,-Neb. 



page 159 

BEREAN STUDIES ON THE ATONEMENT 

THE TEXT-BOOK USED FOR THIS COURSE 
IS SCRIPTURE STUDIES, SERIES V (E)* 

Questions on Scripture Study V. 
—The Spirit of a Sound Mind 

JUNE 6 

(1) In the text, "God hath not given us the spirit of 

fear, but of power and of love and of a sound mind" (2 Tim. 1:7), 
what is the contrast? What is the antithesis 
to the spirit of a sound mind? Page 249, par. 1. 

(2) In this Scripture are we to understand that the 
four spirits mentioned are persons? or are any of them 
persons? or are they merely qualities of mind which 
might appertain to persons— on the human or on the 
spirit plane? P. 249, par. 1. 

(3) If a Christian has a spirit of fear, to what should 
it be attributed? What is lacking in him when his mind 



is under the control of such a spirit or influence? And 
what is the remedy for such an undesirable condition 
of spirit or mind? P. 249, par. 2. 

(4) Does the spirit of Christ take hold upon the strong-minded 
or the strong-bodied merely, or upon the weak-minded 

and weak-bodied merely? What is the result in 
either case? Give Scripture proofs. P. 250, par. 1,2. 

(5) In the text quoted (2 Tim. 1:7) what is meant 
by the "spirit of power"? Does it refer to physical 
strength or spiritual strength or what? P. 250, par. 3. 

(6) Similarly explain "the spirit of love" in the same 
text. Is it natural love, or what kind? How does it 
operate? And does it abide or will it pass away? Cite 
Scripture. P. 250, par. 3. 

JUNE 13 

(7) Are the Lord's people naturally more sound of 
mind— better balanced mentally— than the remainder of 
the world? Or how do they compare on the average? 
P. 251, par. 1. 

(8) What is the effect of the Truth upon the fully 
consecrated believer begotten of the holy Spirit and 
taught of God? How does he compare with the average 
man? P. 251, par. 2. 

(9) Explain how it is that there is such diversity of 
mind and say whether there are many of strictly sound 
mind. Quote Scriptures. P. 251, par. 3. 

(10) What are some of the causes of mental unbalance 
and in what manner does the holy Spirit rectify 
natural weaknesses and mental defects? P. 252, par. 1,2. 

(11) Give an illustration of the manner in which the 
spirit of a sound mind rectifies an imperfect judgment. 
P. 252, par. 2. 

(12) Give some illustrations of evidences of mental 
unsoundness common to the world and often to the 
Church. P. 252, par. 3. 

(13) What is the most general mental ailment as evidenced 
by asylum statistics, and is the same mental 

weakness a besetment to Christians? P. 254. 

(14) Which is the greater need amongst men, restitution 
of bodies or of morals or of sound minds? And 

what would the latter have to do with correcting the two 
former? P. 254, par. 2. 

JUNE 20 

(15) What quality of mind is the source of the greatest 
trouble to the world and the greatest to the Christian? 
What is the antidote or remedy which the Scriptures set 
forth? P. 254, par. 2. 

(16) What is the antidote for that poisoned condition 
of mind styled "the spirit of fear"? Cite the Scriptural 
antidote. P. 255, par. 1,2. 

(17) Does the spirit of the Truth correct over-confidence 
and under-confidence?— How? Cite the Scriptures. 



P. 255, par. 3. 

(18) Why is it that the heavenly hopes and promises 
appeal to some and not to others equally educated and 
intelligent otherwise? Explain the philosophy. P. 256, 
257. 

(19) What is the answer of the "spirit of a sound 
mind" to our Lord's inquiry, "What will a man exchange 
for his soul"— his being, his existence? P. 258, par. 1. 

(20) How were we redeemed from vain conversation 
and how does the spirit of a sound mind give a new 
viewpoint to every affair of life? P. 258, par. 2; P. 259, 
par. 1. 

(21) Which ambitions are restrained by the heavenly 
promises and which are encouraged and developed thereby? 
Cite Scriptures on the subject and show their application. 

P. 259, par. 2,3. 

JUNE 27 

(22) Show the philosophy of how the spirit of a sound 
mind deepens and broadens character. What if anything 
opposes this? Cite the Scriptures. P. 260, par. 1. 

(23) If patience, sympathy, generosity, love, godlikeness 
are elements of a sound mind, show how these qualities 
become more developed and appreciated. P. 260, par. 2. 

(24) What is the effect of the spirit of a sound mind in 
the home? How does it operate? What is the motive 
or mainspring? P. 260, par. 3. 

(25) Will the spirit of a sound mind make its possessor 
the best husband or wife, the best sister or brother, the 
best parent or the best child? Why so or why not? Give 
the philosophy of the matter. P. 261. 

(26) What is sure to be the effect of this spirit of a 
sound mind? P. 262, par. 1. 

(27) Cite one of the evidences of the unsoundness of 
human judgment. Cite the Scriptural admonition 
touching the defect. P. 262, par. 2. 

(28) Who may have this spirit now and is there hope 
that others may have it in the future? Cite the Scriptures. 
P. 262, par. 3. 

(29) Is there anything to suggest or to prove that 
the spirit of a sound mind, the spirit of wisdom, the 
spirit of common sense, is a spirit being which comes 
into us, or is it simply an instruction, a basis of proper, 
sound reason? 



*Five years ago DAWN-STUDIES, VOL. V., was reset, and 
unfortunately the type was not exactly same size as before; and 
hence page for page they differ. The references given in these 
Berean Studies apply to the present edition, a copy of which 
postpaid will cost you but 30c. But keep your old edition, for 
unfortunately the new Bible Helps refer to its pages. 



page 160 

PUBLIC MINISTRIES OF THE TRUTH 

UNDER THE AUSPICES OF PEOPLES PULPIT 
ASSOCIATION OF BROOKLYN, N.Y. 



PIEDMONT, ALA., CONVENTION, JULY 8-11 

The friends of this locality request a General Convention 
for that section, so it is arranged at the beginning of Brother 
Russell's Western Tour. He will be there one day; but able 
speakers are provided for the other sessions. Railroad rates 
are expected. Further announcement later. 

ONE-DAY LOCAL CONVENTIONS ADDRESSED BY THE 
EDITOR OF THIS JOURNAL AS FOLLOWS: 

BROOKLYN, N.Y., JUNE 13 

Morning Rally and Testimony Meeting at 10:30 o'clock. 

Discourse by Brother Russell at 3:00 p.m. Evening meeting 
for the interested at 7:30 o'clock; this will be a Question 
Meeting. Visiting friends cordially invited. 

All meetings will be held in the Brooklyn Tabernacle, Nos. 
13-17 Hicks street. Convenient to all cars and ferries— close 
to the old bridge terminus. 

NEW BRITAIN, CONN., JUNE 20 

GLENS FALLS, N.Y., JUNE 27 



page 162 

STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES 
"MILLENNIAL DAWN" 

THESE STUDIES ARE RECOMMENDED TO STUDENTS AS VERITABLE "BIBLE KEYS. 

PRICES ARE NET AND BARELY COVER COST OF PRODUCTION, 

WHEN DELIVERED BY COLPORTEURS THE COST AND PRICE ARE INCREASED. 

SERIES I., "The Plan of the Ages." gives an outline of the divine plan 
revealed in the Bible, relating to man's redemption and restitution: 
386 pages, in embossed cloth, 25c. (Is. l/2d.) India paper edition, 75c. 
(3s. l-l/2d.). 

This volume has been published as a special issue of our journal— 
at the extremely low price of 5c. a copy, in any quantity, postage included. 
(To foreign countries, 9c.) This enables people of slender 
purse to herald far and wide the good tidings in a most helpful form. 

SERIES II., "The Time is at Hand," treats of the manner and time of 
the Lord's second coming, considering the Bible Testimony on this 
subject: 370 pages, in embossed cloth, 25c. (Is. l/2d.) India paper 
edition, 75c. (3s. l-l/2d.) 

SERIES III., "Thy Kingdom Come," considers prophecies which mark 
events connected with the "Time of the End," the glorification of the 
Church and the establishment of the Millennial Kingdom; it also contains 
a chapter of the Great Pyramid, showing its corroboration of the 
dates and other teachings of the Bible: 384 pages, in embossed cloth, 
25c. (Is. l/2d.) India paper edition, 75c. (3s. l-l/2d.) 

SERIES IV., "The Day of Vengeance," shows that the dissolution of the 
present order of things is in progress, and that all the panaceas offered 
are valueless to avert the predicted end. It marks in these events the 
fulfilment of prophecy, noting specially our Lord's great prophecy of 
Matt. 24 and Zech. 14:1-9: 660 pages, in embossed cloth, 30c. (Is. 3d.). 
India paper edition, 85c. (3s. 6-l/2d.) 

SERIES V., "The At-one-ment Between God and Man," treats an all-important 
subject— the hub, the center around which all the features 
of divine grace revolve. Its topic deserves the most careful and 
prayerful consideration on the part of all true Christians: 507 pages, 
in embossed cloth, 30c. (Is. 3d.) India paper edition, 85c. (3s. 6-l/2d.) 

SERIES VI., "The New Creation," deals with the Creative Week 
(Genesis 1 and 2), and with the Church, God's "New Creation." It examines 
the personnel, organization, rites, ceremonies, obligations and 
hopes appertaining to those called and accepted as members of the 
Body under the Head: 740 pages, in embossed cloth, 30c. (Is. 3d.) 
India paper edition, 85c. (3s. 6-l/2d.) 

The above prices include postage. 

IN FULL LEATHER BINDING, gilt edges, the set (6 vols.) $3.00, 
(12s. 6d.), plus postage, 60c. (Is.). 

Is also published in foreign languages as follows: German, six vols., 
in Swedish Vols. 1, 2, 3, 5 and 6; in Dano-Norwegian, three vols.; 
in Greek, three vols.; in French, two vols.; Hollandish, Spanish, 
and Italian, one vol. each; bound in cloth, uniform with English edition, 
prices the same; in Polish, condensed edition, one vol., 10 cents. 



page 161 



SEMI-MONTHLY 