Announcements
● The offer for January: Watchtower subscription for $2.50 with one of the following books as a free gift: Great Teacher, Holy Spirit, World Government, Man’s Salvation or Word of God. The secretary and those handling literature and accounts should check the October 1979 issue of Our Kingdom Service on how to request credit for free books given with subscriptions. February and March: Any of the 50-cent books in congregation stock except Choosing, Commentary on James, Family Life, Truth, or School Guidebook. During the month of March some publishers and pioneers may wish to offer From Paradise Lost to Paradise Regained on a contribution of 75c. A supply of this book may be ordered from Brooklyn. We suggest you order according to what you feel the congregation will be able to place during March. April: Watchtower subscription for $2.50 with three booklets given free to new subscribers.
● Once every three months the secretary should continue to supply study conductors with written lists of individuals needing attention in the book study groups as suggested at the elders’ meeting in the last series of circuit assemblies. This information should be available to the service overseer when he visits the study groups.
● Prepare for Memorial and special talk: Please order Memorial invitations and special talk handbills now so that your congregation will receive them well in advance of the Memorial celebration on Monday, March 31, 1980, and special talk to be held on Sunday, April 6, 1980. Memorial invitations may be ordered in lots of 250, 500 and 1,000, using the special blue Memorial Invitation Order Form. The special talk handbill should be ordered on the yellow Special Talk Handbill Order. Two copies of each form will be sent to congregations with the December statement. The special talk will be on the subject: “Coping with Life’s Anxieties.” PLEASE DO NOT REMIT WITH YOUR ORDER. The invitations and handbills will be charged to your congregation’s literature account. Payment for these should be included with the amount of money remitted for literature. Please do not list payment for invitations and handbills separately on the remittance form.
● New Publications Available:
Commentary on the Letter of James—German, Italian
Life Does Have a Purpose—Chinese, Thai
Study Questions for the book Is This Life All There Is?—German, Portuguese
Study Questions for the book Is the Bible Really the Word of God?—Portuguese
● At circuit assemblies having the new program, starting on February 3, 1980, district overseers will give the public talk “To Whom Does the Obedience of the People Belong?” Starting in February, circuit overseers will give a public talk with the theme “How Purposeful Is Your Life?”

