Are You the Only Member of Your Family in the Truth?
1 What a blessing it is when we find entire families serving Jehovah together! However, not all are in such a happy condition. Many of our brothers and sisters are the only ones in their family serving Jehovah. Certainly they are to be commended for the fine example of faithfulness and endurance they show.—2 Thess. 1:4.
PARENTS
2 In your congregation do you have sisters who have children but whose husbands are not in the truth, or are even opposed? One mother wrote: “I have to be the breadwinner—I have to shop, clean, cook, sew, and listen to my children’s problems,” in addition to getting the entire family to meetings and into the service. Yes, such fine examples truly deserve our commendation and our help.
3 What can be done to help? Some younger publishers have especially befriended the children in these divided homes in order to provide good companionship. Experienced publishers have assisted by conducting Bible studies with the children and by helping them get out in the service regularly. One family made themselves available to help a sister whose husband was not in the truth. Later, this family kindly included the sister’s husband in some theocratic social activities. Eventually the husband agreed to a Bible study and became a dedicated, baptized publisher.
YOUNGER PUBLISHERS
4 Many of our teen-age or younger publishers are the only ones of their families in the truth. In spite of strict family tradition and intense pressure to pursue higher education, one young Oriental brother stood firm in his determination to pioneer. By his fine example, his younger sister also accepted the truth and both of them are now pioneering.
5 Young publishers whose parents are not in the truth often need help and guidance, both spiritual and physical. Many older ones have kindly helped by taking a personal interest in these younger ones, becoming spiritual fathers and mothers to them, as it were. Concerning one young Bible student, a family wrote: “She was encouraged to pray, to use Bible principles in her life and to be more respectful and patient with her parents.” The family assisted her to attend an international convention and she is now progressing toward baptism.
ELDERLY OR HANDICAPPED
6 Those who are elderly or handicapped are very much appreciated in the congregation even though they may be limited in their preaching activity. If you are one of these, we want to assure you that your determination and loyal service is faith strengthening to us.—Prov. 16:31.
7 Many older or handicapped persons have spent their youth and vigor in Jehovah’s service, and now they may be alone. Certainly we do not want to overlook them now. Just spending a little time with them may be greatly appreciated. Too, it may be that we can help them with shopping and chores, or to get to meetings and out in field service. One family assisted an elderly widow whose only child died. While they provided comfort, they also gave personal help in handling legal matters.
8 If you are the only member of your household in the truth, be assured of our loving concern for your spiritual welfare. Working and associating with you results in mutual encouragement, and we thank Jehovah for the good work you are doing.—1 Thess. 1:2, 3.

