Meetings to Help Us Make Disciples
WEEK STARTING DECEMBER 30
10 min: Song 69 and appropriate items from Announcements. Encourage congregation to read chapters 1-4 in Choosing book to prepare for this week’s public talk.
13 min: Audience discussion of “We Have What They Need!” Highlight other articles in past year’s magazines that were well liked in territory. Can display copies to refresh memory if desired.
20 min: Developing a Presentation for the Subscription Offer. Consider the following points with the audience and ask for suggestions: (1) Review Topic for Conversation, “God’s Promise of Something New,” and possible scriptures: 2 Peter 3:13; Revelation 21:4, 5. (2) Ask audience what subject matter would tie in with above and is of concern to people in territory. (High cost of living, crime, some recent news items or local happenings, and so forth) (3) Review January 1 issue of The Watchtower. What articles or points tie in well with Topic for Conversation?
Chairman sums up key points of presentation and encourages all to prepare at home what they will say and to give full support to special weekend field service.
12 min: Enthusiastic talk on yeartext and its application, based on article “Speaking Jehovah’s Word with Boldness” in December 15 issue of The Watchtower.
 5 min: Song 93 and prayer.
WEEK STARTING JANUARY 6
Theme: Reaching All Who Will Hear.
10 min: Song 82. Welcome and local announcements, including accounts report. Remind congregation to read chapters 5 and 6 of Choosing book for the public talk. Also bring January 8 Awake! for next week’s meeting. Also bring Yearbook to next week’s meeting.
20 min: “Reaching All Who Will Hear.” Question-and-answer coverage of article. Then have three demonstrations of informal witnessing. (1) Waiting in line at a check-out counter, (2) passing someone on the street, (3) a neighbor. As time permits, ask audience for further suggestions.
15 min: Those Who Benefited from Informal Witnessing. Two interviews: (1) One or two who came into contact with truth by means of informal witnessing. Have them relate their personal experience. (2) Individuals in congregation who do particularly well in informal witnessing. Have them relate how they do it and what type of people they approach. Why is it effective? Why do they enjoy this avenue of service?
10 min: Review key points learned in preceding two parts. Ask audience what points would be practical in the local community. Mention to audience that in last meeting of the month some may relate experiences they had in using these suggestions. Encourage all to engage in informal witnessing at all opportunities.
 5 min: Song 79 and prayer.
WEEK STARTING JANUARY 13
10 min: Song 96 and local announcements. Remind congregation to read chapters 7 and 8 of Choosing book for this week’s public talk.
20 min: “New Feature in Awake! Designed to Aid Us in the Field.”
(10 min.) Talk covering article. Look for the various features mentioned in article, using January 8 issue.
(10 min.) Demonstrations: (1) A young publisher. After introductory remarks, say: “I have something here that I think you will be interested in.” Then, take out magazine, open to page 3 and read to householder both the feature heading and the article title. At this point, the magazines can be offered. Chairman comments on simplicity of presentation, and encourages parents to help young ones prepare for it. (2) A more experienced publisher. Begin as above, but after reading the heading and title, pause briefly and say: “Notice what it says here,” and read the first paragraph. Then ask the first question in bold type and invite the householder to comment. Summarize by reading the paragraph under the question and then offer the magazines. Chairman directs attention of audience to other questions in bold type. These can also be discussed if sufficient interest is shown. The quoted scriptures can be brought in, or cited ones can be read from the Bible.
20 min: Highlights of first 32 pages of 1980 Yearbook. Elder draws attention to what appears on page 2. Then briefly develops aspects of hope covered on pages 3-7. Invites audience to comment on interesting and encouraging points they found on pages 8-32.
10 min: Remind congregation of field service arrangements. Song 102 and closing prayer.
WEEK STARTING JANUARY 20
10 min: Song 115 and local announcements. Encourage congregation to read chapters 9 to 11 of Choosing book for this week’s public talk.
15 min: Consider local needs, or discuss the article “Wise Counsel Protects Against Crime” in October 22, 1979, Awake!, emphasizing the six scriptures highlighted.
15 min: “Presenting the Good News—By Showing Personal Interest in Others (Part I).” Talk, to help audience appreciate that our objective in field service is not solely literature placements, but reaching people, understanding their problems and needs, and using the Bible to show what can be done to help and how the Kingdom provides the solution.
15 min: What Would You Say to This Householder? Chairman arranges for the following three realistic situations:
(1) Housewife wearing apron and with mop in hand comes to door.
(2) Man comes to door with newspaper in hand.
(3) A teen-ager comes to door.
With each scene, have publisher approach door and as soon as householder appears, stop the action and ask audience for suggestions on ways to handle the situation with householder. Then, the publisher demonstrates a prepared approach.
 5 min: Song 20 and prayer.
WEEK STARTING JANUARY 27
10 min: Song 64 and local announcements. Read the Question Box.
15 min: “Are You the Only Member of Your Family in the Truth?” Question-and-answer discussion of article. Show what good such publishers are doing and how they are coping with their situation. Highlight how others can come to their aid and why their good example is appreciated. Suggest we all get to know who in congregation are in this category and see individually how we can offer help and encouragement to them.
 8 min: What Are Your Children Learning? A father (and mother if desired) considers with two or three young children Story 69 in My Book of Bible Stories about the little Israelite girl in Syria. Highlight how she was serving Jehovah all alone in a foreign land, yet she was moved to witness boldly concerning Jehovah and his true prophet. Help children apply what is learned. How can this be related to their witnessing to schoolmates and teachers? How can this help them in their taking their stand regarding holiday celebrations and birthday parties in school, and so forth?
17 min: How Have Our Meetings Helped Us? Review of points learned at meetings. Include following points as time permits (using some prepared publishers): (1) What opportunities have you found suitable for informal witnessing and what experiences have you enjoyed? (2)  How can we show personal interest in people we speak to in our territory? (3) Ask for any experience in using the new feature in Awake!, “Have You Ever Wondered . . . ?” or other field experiences. (4) Efforts that have been made or could be made to help other members of the congregation. (5) Points learned from Choosing book and public talks based on the book.
10 min: Briefly review offer for February and encourage all to support special arrangement for field service this Sunday. Song 108 and prayer.

