Part I—Presenting the Good News—By Showing Personal Interest in Others
1 When introducing ourselves at the door, we should always take the feelings of others into consideration. Without a doubt, people can sense whether we are interested in them as persons or if we just have some other objectives in mind, such as getting through our sermon or making literature placements. Obviously, to gain the householders’ attention and interest, we need to show a sincere personal interest in them.
2 How do we do this? Basically it is by finding their interest and building on it. One way this can be done is by being observant. As we approach a house, what do we look for? Are there children’s toys or bicycles? Is the yard well groomed, with no litter? Is there new paint on the house? Are there many locks on the door? Do you see something that possibly indicates their religion? Are there stickers or slogans on the door or the car that reveal something?
3 We may not always draw the right conclusion from these outward signs. However, what we observe may help to influence the initial direction that our conversation takes as we endeavor to establish a point of mutual interest. Remember, too, a little commendation often goes a long way with people. A kind word about their well-mannered children, or a comment on the fine way they care for their property may appeal to the householder and help you gain a hearing ear better than might any amount of “preaching.”
4 Keep in mind that men, women and youths have different interests. For example, older men and women often find the economy their chief concern. Working people traditionally base their interest on their career and personal attainment. Mothers are generally interested in the home, children and babies, as well as the affairs that anguish the heart—death, illness, accidents, community tragedies, crime. Youths want to know why they are here, where they are going and what the future holds.
5 A traveling overseer observed: “Those who are effective in their work (in the field) are not always those who are simply using techniques of one kind or another. They are publishers who show a love for people, reflect friendliness and a desire to help and encourage. Their calls are not directed solely at placing literature but getting acquainted and being interested in the people they meet, their problems, daily life and families.”
6 Can you show greater love for your neighbors by demonstrating a sincere personal interest in those you meet in the field?—Mark 12:30, 31.

