Reaching All Who Will Hear
1 Another not at home! Does that sound familiar? A circuit overseer reported working a territory in New York State where 75 percent of the people were not at home. Perhaps your territory is similar.
2 How can these people be reached? Calling back will help, but often it is the same people who are not there. Something else is needed. Informal witnessing? Yes! The following experience shows its effectiveness.
3 A couple stopped in a supermarket. The sister started a conversation with the butcher, who quickly responded to her discussion on the new order. He wondered how such a thing could be. The sister’s husband joined the conversation and suggested they continue the discussion at the person’s home. He agreed, inviting them to stop by that very evening. They witnessed to the man and his wife on one subject, God’s purpose for the earth. It made such an impression that the next day this couple went to the Kingdom Hall. Now baptized, they are informally witnessing to many of their relatives. Could informal witnessing aid you in reaching more people?
4 When witnessing informally to those you do not know the following suggestions may be helpful to you. Be friendly, warm and complimentary, and be sure your facial expressions reflect this friendliness. Pick a subject that is of interest to people in the community. You may offer some of the publications, or you may choose to share an appropriate scripture on the subject under consideration. If interest is aroused, you could suggest a further discussion at their home. If this does not interest them, wish them well and comment that it was nice to meet them.
5 During the winter months people are in a hurry to get out of the cold weather. Be alert. Use opportunities while indoors, waiting in lines at supermarkets, shopping plazas or other indoor areas. When warmer weather returns, people will be outside more, sitting in parks, window-shopping, working in their yards or just walking. Could you approach some of them? Take the initiative. Share the life-saving message we have with as many as you can.
6 Witnessing informally to those you know such as neighbors, relatives, workmates, and so forth, often brings good results. Most likely, your good conduct has already been doing some witnessing. Since you already know something about what interests them, use this as your topic of conversation.
7 A few reminders: Be considerate. It is often not wise to talk to a person if you are holding others up. Keep in mind that loyalty should be shown to your employer regarding time. It is usually best to establish one basic point that the person can remember and take home with him. Endeavor to have literature available. Practice your approach with members of your family.
8 All of us have a love for people and want to help them. (2 Cor. 1:3, 4) Will you endeavor to reach more of them by engaging in informal witnessing? By all means do!

