We Have What They Need!
1 For 100 years now, The Watchtower has been keeping watch in a spiritual way. It has been bringing its readers “comfort from the Scriptures” and reliable guidance that only God’s Word, the Bible, can provide. (Rom. 15:4; Ps. 119:105) Most of us owe much of our own spiritual development and growth to The Watchtower. How grateful we are for the “food at the proper time” provided by the “faithful and discreet slave.”—Matt. 24:45.
2 Some observers have said, however, that people in general are no longer readers, particularly when it comes to religious material. This brings to mind the questions: What about The Watchtower? Is it relevant to many of the public? Does it meet their needs? In what ways can it help them?
WHAT THE READERS SAY
3 There is no doubt that The Watchtower does not appeal to many worldly people. On the other hand, hundreds of thousands of sincere people the world over have expressed appreciation for its help. A university student in Japan said: “What particularly strengthens my faith are the clear explanations of Bible prophecies. I have been amazed by the stupendous depths of God’s wisdom that I have perceived through these wonderful articles.” A thankful young reader wrote: “When first introduced to The Watchtower, I was a disillusioned teen-ager. I felt insecure, had little communication with my parents, and was desperately in need of guidance. The Watchtower filled that need.”
4 Besides expressing appreciation in general, many are the comments on the practical and timely material in each issue. For example, a reader in South Africa wrote: “I want to tell you how much I enjoy and benefit from the articles on the Psalms. I have always found the Psalms hard to understand and am really grateful for these articles. I feel the same way about the articles on the Sermon on the Mount.” And note this interesting comment from a Jewish reader on the article “Something New About God’s Name”: “I grew up Jewish but never did I hear that name. You can’t imagine how thrilled I was to read the irrefutable evidence in this most recent article. I cannot wait to get my hands on more copies.”
5 So, back to the questions: Is it relevant to many of the public? Does it meet their needs? The answer is a definite Yes! Indeed, in the pages of The Watchtower we have what they need, and we have every reason to be positive in recommending it to others.
6 This month, we will be offering the subscription, along with a free book, on a $2.50 contribution. (See Announcements for details.) Also, you will be pleased to know that the January issues of The Watchtower will feature scriptures set off by themselves, or set in a box, so that they can be used easily in the field. Among them will be 2 Peter 3:13 and Revelation 21:4, which point to “God’s Promise of Something New.” Endeavor to help as many as possible to see that they, too, need The Watchtower.

