Memorial Invitations to Be Distributed Earth Wide!
 1. What special earth-wide campaign is planned before the Memorial?
1 “Keep doing this in remembrance of me.” (Luke 22:19) In obedience to this command from Jesus, worshippers of Jehovah will gather along with interested ones on March 30, 2010, to commemorate Jesus’ death. A special invitation to the Memorial will be distributed earth wide from March 13 to March 30.
 2. How may we offer the invitation?
2 How to Do It: You might hand the invitation to the householder so he can see the cover illustration, then say: “On the evening of March 30, millions around the world will meet to commemorate Jesus’ death. I’m here to give you and your family this invitation to attend. Your friends are also welcome. Please note the time and location of this local observance.” Depending on the circumstances, you may choose to read Luke 22:19 from the Bible to point out the Scriptural command. Keep in mind, however, that since we have a limited time to cover the territory, it is best to be brief.
 3. Whom may we invite?
3 If your congregation has a large territory, the elders may direct you to leave the invitations at not-at-homes the first time you call. When it is appropriate, offer the magazines in addition to using the invitation. Be sure to invite your return visits, Bible students, workmates, schoolmates, relatives, neighbors, and other acquaintances.
 4. Appreciation for Jehovah’s love in providing the ransom will move us to do what?
4 Prepare to Have a Full Share: The Memorial season is an excellent time to increase our activity. Can you adjust your schedule to auxiliary pioneer? Do you have children or Bible students making good spiritual progress? If so, approach the elders to see if the new ones are qualified to join in this special campaign as unbaptized publishers. Appreciation for Jehovah’s love in providing the ransom will move us not only to be present for the Memorial but also to invite as many as possible to join us in attendance.—John 3:16.

