“Come Be My Follower”
 1. What opportunity will the Congregation Bible Study afford us in the coming months?
1 The four Gospel accounts of Jesus’ life on earth paint an intimate portrait of the Son of God. Since Christians are to “follow his steps closely,” we will want to prepare well and pay close attention as we consider the book “Come Be My Follower” at the Congregation Bible Study beginning the week of March 1. (1 Pet. 2:21; Mark 10:21) Worthy of special consideration are the aspects of Jesus’ life that can encourage us in the ministry.
 2. How can Jesus’ example of endurance benefit us?
2 Example Set by Jesus: Have you ever met with a negative response while preaching from house to house? When we face such resistance, Jesus’ words ring clear: “If they have persecuted me, they will persecute you also.” (John 15:20) True, not all negative replies are a form of persecution. Nevertheless, it was the joy set before him that enabled Jesus to endure all sorts of tests and trials. We too can focus on gaining Jehovah’s smile of approval and the reward for our faithfulness. This will help us not to ‘get tired and give out in our souls.’ (Heb. 12:2, 3; Prov. 27:11) As we persevere in the ministry, we can also be confident of Christ Jesus’ support.—Matt. 28:20.
 3. How can we imitate Jesus’ view of the ministry?
3 “For This I Was Sent Forth”: Kingdom-preaching activity occupied the primary place in Jesus’ life. (Luke 4:43) He gave generously of himself in the ministry. He treated it as urgent, always seeking opportunities to speak about the Kingdom. Since we are followers of Jesus, where do his footsteps lead us? As we go about our daily routine, are there people with whom we can share the good news? May the love the Christ has compel us to give the good news the widest possible distribution!—2 Cor. 5:14.
 4. In what ways can we improve the quality of our ministry?
4 “Never Has Another Man Spoken Like This”: Jesus’ way of teaching astounded his listeners. (John 7:46; Matt. 7:28, 29) What set him apart from other teachers? He loved the truths he imparted, he loved the people he taught, and he used various teaching methods. By imitating the Great Teacher, we can improve the quality of our ministry.—Luke 6:40.
 5. What should be our goal as we study “Come Be My Follower”?
5 These are a few of the gems revealed in the life of Jesus. What other treasures can you find? As you examine the life of Jesus during the Congregation Bible Study, make it your aim to “know the love of the Christ” by imitating his words and deeds.—Eph. 3:19.

