Preach the Good News Everywhere
Kingdom News Points to Lasting, Satisfying Life
1 Jesus commanded his disciples to be witnesses of him “to the most distant part of the earth.” (Acts 1:8) In carrying out that commission his followers have used every appropriate means. They are keenly aware that the “good news” is to be declared “to every nation and tribe and tongue and people.” (Rev. 14:6) Reports confirm that the work is being done, and it is our privilege to share in it.
2 For fifty-five years, Awake! has been used to carry the message of the Kingdom to appreciative readers around the globe. Every two weeks, more than 8 million copies in 31 languages are put into the hands of a wide variety of people. It will be a pleasure to feature Awake! again during October.
3 Most people identify Awake! as a companion to The Watchtower. So why not offer both subscriptions, with six booklets, for $3.00? Both may be just as readily accepted, and the benefits will be twofold.
4 Awake! has promised to publish factual information about “vital topics on which you should be informed.’’ Regular readers confirm that it certainly does that. It comes to grips with issues of serious concern, ones that dominate the headlines every day. But Awake! provides insight that other news sources do not; it shows the meaning of it all and what the outcome will be. People need to know these things; this is a compelling reason for us to share wholeheartedly in the effort to obtain subscriptions during October.
5 Much good is also accomplished by distribution of the individual copies of the magazines. During October we have outstanding issues of both magazines to use. It will accomplish much good if we put forth an extra effort to get these into the hands of many people. Will you do so?
6 Awake! Is one of the many means that Jehovah’s people are using to get the “good news” preached everywhere. Jehovah is certainly blessing these efforts with marvelous expansion! In the United States, a large proportion of the congregations are working their territory every six months or less. Arrangements were made for all the 223 unassigned territories to be covered by congregations or by temporary special pioneers during the summer months. More are taking up the regular pioneer service, over 1,000 being added to the ranks every month. Besides that, tens of thousands have enrolled as temporary pioneers. Results are seen in that most Kingdom Halls are crowded to capacity, and new congregations are being formed at a rate of more than one a day. Very fine indeed!
DISTRIBUTE KINGDOM NEWS NO. 19
7 One feature of our service that contributed notably to the fine increase during the past year was distribution of Kingdom News. Many new Bible studies were started, and tens of thousands of new publishers shared in the distribution of those timely tracts. Our work with Kingdom News is not finished.
8 From November 1 to 10 it will be our privilege to distribute Kingdom News No. 19, which features a question that millions of people are asking: “Is This All There is to Life?” The message that it contains is warm, appealing. Once you have read it, you will want others to do so.
9 Work together as a congregation to see that all the tracts get into the hands of the public. About 100 for each publisher have been shipped to your congregation. Some of you may be able to distribute more; some, less. By united effort, endeavor to get all of them out by November 10. Perhaps some who are attending the meetings have never shared in the field service but would like to have a part in this work. If so, we encourage them to make this known to one of the elders before November. The elder will gladly discuss with them what is needed to qualify.
10 By zealously sharing in making known the “good news” we demonstrate our devotion to Jehovah, also our love for our fellowmen. Lives are involved. May willing hearts move us to share to the full in the work.
[Blurb on page 1]
Preach the Good News in All Creation Under Heaven.

