Presenting the Good News​—With the Eternal Purpose Book
1 Included among the many good things we rejoiced to receive at the “Divine Purpose” assembly was the fascinating new book God’s “Eternal Purpose” Now Triumphing for Man’s Good. We will waste no time in putting it to good use.
2 First, if we have not yet done so, it would be good to read it ourselves. It contains spiritual food that will strengthen us. To help us digest it, the public talks during November will highlight important points to remember. This will be followed by a page-by-page consideration at the book studies starting December 1. In the meantime, carry copies with you, offering it to neighbors, workmates and others that you contact in your daily routine. Make sure that interested ones previously contacted are offered a copy, along with encouragement to attend the public talks. It is recommended that, after we distribute Kingdom News No. 19, we return to the same territory with the new book. Many who read the tract may be glad to get more information.
3 What about a presentation to use in offering the book? If you wish, you may continue using the sermon “Does God Care?” which was suggested for use with the subscription offer during October. This theme is certainly appropriate, since God’s determination to carry out his eternal purpose is convincing proof that he cares a great deal for us. The very first chapter assures us that “We Are Within the Purpose of a Loving Creator.” You could also refer to page 186, paragraph 42, where pointed comments are made on the texts in that sermon.
4 You may prefer to ask a thought-provoking question and then refer to a scripture quoted in the book that provides the answer. For example: “Human plans are all failing. Can we trust God to succeed in fulfilling his purpose?” (Page 24, par. 38; read Psalm 33:9-12.) “Many say that God has abandoned this earth. Does he still have a worthwhile purpose toward this earth that will be fulfilled?” (Page 35, par. 16; read Isaiah 45:18.) “Human governments seem to be helpless in coping with world problems. Is there any government that God will use to bring lasting peace?”​—Page 127, par. 18; read Isaiah 9:6, 7.
5 If you want a brief presentation, you could turn to the illustration on page 4 and say: “God has an eternal purpose that will soon bring cause for much happiness to people in all nations. This book surveys that special purpose from its beginning and shows how you can be among those privileged to enjoy its blessings.”
6 You are sure to get other ideas about offering the book as you use it during the month and pay close attention to the public talks. Its contents provide an insight into the immediate future that is presently of great interest to many sincere people. Be alert to opportunities to start studies with those who show a desire to learn more.
7 Distribution of Kingdom News No. 19 will be our first objective during the early part of November, but as soon as your supply of tracts is exhausted or your territory is covered, concentrate on book distribution during the balance of the month. Many honest-hearted people will be comforted by this faith-strengthening explanation of God’s eternal purpose.

