Your Service Meetings
WEEK STARTING OCTOBER 13
15 min: Song 89. Introduction and brief family discussion of text. Family members also share with one another any good experiences heard in recent weeks from local publishers who had success in locating interested persons or starting Bible studies. Next, discuss obtaining of subscriptions; have various family members offer suggestions as to where they hope to obtain them: by house-to-house activity, from a neighbor or workmate, by giving a gift subscription, by calling back on an interested person, etc. Comment briefly on October 22 Awake! and why the featured subject is appropriate; briefly show how to offer it in magazine work. Father reviews congregation’s field service arrangements for the week; discuss how they as a family can share, with special emphasis on magazine distribution.
15 min: “Preach the Good News Everywhere.” Audience participation.
15 min: How to Engage Householders in Bible Discussions. Experienced publisher encourages newer one to share in house-to-house work with regular offer using Bible. Cover these points: (1) Jehovah uses all kinds of persons: not great personal ability but willingness needed. (2) We realize that most of the Jews rejected Jesus; we cannot expect a majority of persons to listen to us. (3) Select one scripture; be willing to read it if householder is willing to listen; practice doing it. (4) Discuss appropriate introductions that will stimulate interest and encourage householders to comment. (5) Listen when householder speaks; be discerning, not pushy.
15 min: Concluding comments. Branch Letter. If not already done, presiding overseer for the past year may review encouraging highlights made in his report to the branch office, also offer recommendations about what to work on during the coming year. Song 103.
WEEK STARTING OCTOBER 20
10 min: Song 70. Introduction text, and comments. Discuss items of interest from Theocratic News and Announcements.
 4 min: Accounts report.
10 min: Reporting Field Service. A talk. Questions have been raised about reporting time in the field service. Some ask if it is proper to count time spent taking “coffee breaks” or eating lunch. Is it all right to start counting time at a call near home and then travel a long distance to your territory? Can we start counting time by writing letters at home and then continue to count time thereafter while going to meet with a group for service? Other similar inquiries have been made.
An attempt to lay down rules is not practical, since circumstances vary in every case. All can be guided by the instruction to report “time spent in the activity of Kingdom-preaching and disciple-making, proclaiming God’s truths to those who are not dedicated, baptized Witnesses.” (Organization book, p. 126) After we get started, we may include time in getting from one house to another as we make our calls, and we may count the time whether householders are at home and willing to listen or not; our reason for calling is to preach. When some question arises, ask yourself: Has this time been spent in the preaching activity? Or has it been spent doing something else that is not actually part of that work? Report all the time you conscientiously feel was used in the preaching work. The amount you report in comparison with others is not important. (Gal. 6:4) The important thing is that the love in your heart has moved you to share your faith with others. (Luke 6:45) What we report should give us joy and not pangs of conscience. Our concern should be about results accomplished and not reports made about it. Our giving should come from a cheerful heart and not just a sense of obligation. (2 Cor. 9:7) With each one being guided by his own conscience and a balanced viewpoint of the Scriptures, reports made to the congregation will reflect, not “acts of eyeservice,” but good works motivated by a sincere heart.​—Col. 3:22.
18 min: “It Helps to Talk About It.” Questions and answers; look up scriptures and comment on them as time permits.
18 min: Concluding comments. Distribute a sample copy of Kingdom News No. 19 to each publisher; discuss the main points; read some excerpts; invite publishers to pick up supplies after meeting encourage all to have full share in distribution starting November 1.
October Kingdom Ministry contains Theocratic Ministry School schedule for the coming year; encourage all to keep their copy and use it in preparing for meetings. Song 85.
WEEK STARTING OCTOBER 27
15 min: Song 102. Introduction, text and comments. Discuss, with audience participation, the Question Box.
15 min: “The Craving for Excitement.” Group discussion of June 22, 1974, Awake! article, Older brother and sister chat informally with a group of teen-agers. Several teen-agers make expressions that reflect an impulsive, unbalanced view of popular pastimes. Discussion helps all to see the lack of wisdom and bad consequences from cultivating such interests. Comments stress logic, reasonableness without laying down rules.
10 min: Distributing Kingdom News. Emphasize ten-day distribution; discuss arrangements for group work, handling of territory; encourage sharing extra tracts with other publishers so that all are distributed. Include demonstration showing how to offer the tract briefly. Remind publishers that a copy of Kingdom News is to be left even when householder is not at home.
20 min: Awaiting the Divine Victory with Confidence. (Ps. 98:1, NE) Talk on theme for November. Stress reasons why we can have confidence in the following: Jehovah will protect his people as a group during the coming “great tribulation.” Not Just a few of God’s servants, but a “great crowd” will survive. (Rev. 7:9, 14) In determining who of mankind will survive, God will judge righteously; Jehovah’s way of handling matters is always the best way. (Deut. 32:4; Matt. 25:31-33) Guidance now provided by the “slave” is Jehovah’s provision. (Matt. 24:45-47) Now is the time to be busy in the work that God has given us to do: our faith, patience and industriousness will be richly rewarded.​—1 Cor. 15:58; Heb. 6:10-12.
Get expressions from audience (selected, in part, in advance) about effects of the two special service meetings in September. After sober thinking on the matters discussed, have some taken steps toward a more firm stand for the truth? Have some felt the need to be more zealous in the field service? Is there a greater feeling of urgency? Encourage all to be loyal, wholehearted. Urge all, before next week, to look up scriptures in service meeting outline.
Announce special public talk for this week, encouraging all to attend, bringing new book and Bible. Remind that Thousand Years book should be completed at book studies by end of November. Song 67.
WEEK STARTING NOVEMBER 3
10 min: Song 66. Introduction, text and comments.
30 min: Now is the Time to Decide. (Audience discussion) It is reasonable to expect that we will encounter critical situations in the near future where we may suddenly be compelled to make weighty decisions with far-reaching effects. Indecisiveness could be disastrous. (Jas. 1:6-8) The training now being provided by Jehovah helps us clearly to “distinguish both right and wrong.” (Heb. 5:14) NOW is the time to anticipate issues that may arise, consider the factors involved and decide what we are going to do. If we give no thought to such matters until they confront us, the pressures and uncertainties of the moment may overwhelm us with dire consequences. The following are some critical situations that we should already have considered and made a decision as to what course we will follow. Invite audience to comment, on how they view the following matters and why: (1) Relatives may threaten to disown you because of your faith. (Matt. 10:35-39; Mark 10:29, 30) (2) Facing the loss of much materially, perhaps due to bad economic situation. (Hab. 3:17, 18) (3) Being subjected to arrest or imprisonment as a Christian. (Matt. 10:18, 19; Rev. 2:10) (4) Having to endure physical hardships in connection with persecution. (Job 2:5; 1 Pet. 2:20; 2 Cor. 11:23-27) (5) Preaching work banned; meetings forbidden. (Acts 5:28, 29) (6) Pressure to give support to a worldly government. (Luke 4:5-8: Jas. 4:4) (7) Sudden temptation to immoral conduct. (1 Cor. 6:9, 10) (8) Confronted with demand to salute a flag. (Dan. 3:16-18) (9) Enticed by some worldly attraction. (1 John 2:15-17) (10) Temptation to retaliate for mistreatment or opposition. (Rom. 12:17-20) (11) Being urged by someone to ignore counsel from elders. (Heb. 13:17) (12) What if some former brothers turned rebellious? (1 Tim. 4:1, 16) (13) What if your own life is endangered by opposers? (2 Cor. 1:8-10)
Advance knowledge lovingly provided by Jehovah can help us to make future decisions right now and avoid a wrong course. (2 Pet. 3:17) A firm resolve to be guided by God’s Word can give us the courage we need to face whatever the future may bring.​—Prov. 3:5, 6.
10 min: Presenting the Good News. Two publishers discuss offering “Eternal Purpose” book. Practice offering it using sermon “Does God Care?” Interrupt sermon at certain points to discuss what is being done and why.
10 min: Concluding comments. Discuss what is needed to conclude tract work by November 10. Song 76.

