Watching the World
Stressed Caregivers
According to a Statistics Canada study, “three in 10 people aged 45 to 64 must tend to an elderly relative in need of care while also caring for children under 25 and in many cases balancing a full-time job as well,” says the National Post newspaper of Canada. The study found that of people caring for the elderly while also raising children, there is a higher rate of depression among women than among men. Working women devote about 29 hours a month to elder care compared with some 13 hours a month by their male counterparts. Women are also more likely to do more nurturing, such as cooking for and bathing the elderly. Over half the survey respondents felt that they “would do a better job if they could get a break every now and then,” says the Post.
How Long Should You Nap?
“Scientists are finding the old-fashioned nap can be a boon to productivity,” reports Australia’s Sydney Morning Herald. However, the length of time spent napping is important. After testing naps of varying lengths, Flinders University sleep expert Professor Leon Lack stated: “One minute of sleep seemed to produce no benefit whatsoever. Five minutes of sleep seemed to produce benefits for some people but not very dramatic ones. However, 10 minutes of sleep seemed to produce significant improvements in virtually all the measures we had.” In contrast, people dozing for longer periods—up to 30 minutes—reported feeling tired for up to an hour afterward.
Atheist Turns to God
A British philosophy professor who has been called “the world’s most influential atheist” now says that he believes in God. In an online preview of an interview scheduled to be published in the journal Philosophia Christi, 81-year-old Dr. Antony Flew said that he “had to go where the evidence leads.” According to Flew, this evidence includes recent scientific discoveries in the fields of cosmology and physics. Additionally, “the findings of more than fifty years of DNA research have provided materials for a new and enormously powerful argument to design,” he explained. Even the “biblical account [of Genesis chapter one] might be scientifically accurate,” he states. So, is he ready to become a practicing Christian? “It’s very unlikely,” he says. However, “if I wanted any sort of future life I should become a Jehovah’s Witness.”
Healthy Gums, Healthy Heart?
Regular brushing of teeth, which prevents periodontal disease, may lower the risk of suffering a stroke or a heart attack, reports Mexico City’s Milenio newspaper. Researchers from the University of Minnesota found that people with high levels of bacteria that cause periodontal disease also had a narrower carotid artery. One possible explanation is that “the microorganisms that cause periodontal disease emigrate and travel throughout the bloodstream, which stimulates the immune system and provokes inflammation,” says the paper. In turn, that inflammation increases the buildup of fatty deposits in the arteries or contributes to the formation of blood clots that can lead to heart attacks, researchers theorize. Therefore, “caring for oral health may have a significant impact on cardiovascular health,” says Milenio.
Memories of Auschwitz Fading
More than one million people died in the infamous Auschwitz death camp in Poland during World War II. Yet, according to The Daily Telegraph of London, “almost half the adult population [of England] has never heard of Auschwitz.” The poll of 4,000 people was commissioned by the British Broadcasting Corporation to mark the 60th anniversary of the liberation of the death camp.
A Doll for Teaching Braille
The Spanish National Organization for the Blind (ONCE) has introduced a doll called Braillín. Designed to teach young children Braille, the doll has a front panel with six large buttons that correspond to the matrix of six dots used in Braille. Even boys or girls without a visual disability can learn Braille while playing with Braillín. Thirty experts refined and tested the doll, and some 50 children helped to optimize its design. ONCE plans to distribute more than 1,100 Braillín dolls in its schools for the blind. According to María Costa of the Association for Research in the Toy Industry, “Braillín represents an excellent teaching tool. Moreover, it constitutes a novel way to play with dolls, one that links learning and fun.”
Deadly Air Pollution
“Every year, air pollution causes 310,000 deaths in Europe,” reports the Spanish newspaper El País. Experts are particularly worried about two contaminants: low-level atmospheric ozone and particles that are suspended in the air. These particles are produced by the combustion of fossil fuels, mainly by automobiles, power stations, and industrial plants. The worst levels in Europe are found in the Benelux area, followed by northern Italy and Eastern Europe. The newspaper adds: “Besides damaging human health, air pollution damages the environment. It is a source of acidification in forests, lakes, and other ecosystems. Ozone harms crops, and air pollution damages city buildings.”
Catholic Dioceses Bankrupt
By the end of 2004, three Catholic dioceses in the United States had filed for bankruptcy. All three were forced to take this step because of the financial costs of clergy sexual abuse scandals. A number of dioceses have talked about the possibility of having to file for bankruptcy, but the first to do so was the Archdiocese of Portland, Oregon, in July 2004. That action halted two lawsuits in which plaintiffs were seeking a total of $155 million in compensation for molestation. According to the National Catholic Reporter, “the archdiocese and its insurers already have paid more than $53 million to settle more than 130 claims by people who say they were abused by priests.” In September 2004, the diocese of Tucson, Arizona, became the second diocese to seek bankruptcy protection from multimillion dollar claims being brought against it. The diocese of Spokane, Washington, became the third, in December 2004.

