Kingdom Proclaimers Report
Integrity Under Ban
FOR 11 years the preaching work in one Southeast Asian country has been under official government ban. In recent years, however, the brothers have had reason to believe that some responsible persons in the government would like to relieve the situation. The ban appears to have been prompted by strong influence of Christendom’s religions in governmental circles.
At times the brothers have been subjected to surveillance, arrest, and intense interrogation. Those working for government institutions have been threatened with demotion or forced retirement if they do not join the State political party. A group of publishers was severely beaten.
Witnesses have also been stripped of legal rights, such as the services of civil courts and the right to conduct funerals. (The authorities appoint a clergyman to do this.) In some places, even registration of marriage is denied Witnesses!
Yet, those overseeing the work there report: “Invariably, where brothers face the issue boldly, respectfully giving a witness from the Bible, the interrogations eventually stop and surveillance lessens, enabling the brothers effectively to carry on the preaching and disciple-making work.”​—Matthew 28:19, 20.
For example, a sister under interrogation was asked where we get the name Jehovah. Courageously she opened her Bible to Exodus 15:3, where the name appears. The interrogator, a military commander, followed along in the Bible, saying: “Yes, indeed. It is in the Bible.” Then, turning to a clergyman who was also participating in the interrogation, he inquired: “Why don’t you inform the people about the name?” The clergyman lamely replied: “Oh, yes, the name is in the Old Testament. But because this country does not have diplomatic relations with Israel, we do not use the name.” The sister was immediately released!
Acting on a tip from an “interested” person, the police canceled the first of three district conventions the night before it was to begin! However, several favorably minded persons on the police force helped stop the ensuing interrogations. Fearlessly, the brothers held the other two conventions.
In spite of strong religious opposition in this country, there are still those who love righteousness. One employer, for example, having seen the brothers’ loyalty to their principles and belief, has even developed more trust in the brothers. They are given more responsibility on the job.
Similar things happen to the schoolchildren. Honesthearted teachers admire them for their firm stand taken for their belief.
Although the situation in the field has been easing up for the brothers, the churches still continue their harassment and try every possible means to stop the witness work. Sometimes they try to harm physically those who are studying the Bible with the Witnesses. However, interested ones are still flocking to Jehovah’s organization. One experience is that of a grandmother in her 70’s. After one of her eyes was operated on, she expressed her wish to auxiliary pioneer. Because of her age, she at first felt that the 60-hour requirement was too much for her, but after trying it, she discovered she could do it. In fact, in the first ten days, she put in 38 hours in field service; placed two books, three booklets, and two magazines in a difficult territory; and started two Bible studies. She was happy!
Overall, the field-service situation in the country is very good. Especially after the general election, the brothers have been able to pursue various features of witnessing. This has truly accelerated the work. A regular publisher is able to have seven to ten Bible studies. Previously, householders were very inquisitive about who we were, where we came from, and so on. Now the brothers hardly have to introduce themselves. The people are hungry for satisfying spiritual food. The field is really ready for harvesting.​—Matthew 9:37, 38.
Truly, the brothers in this land have kept integrity under trial, recently enjoying a 7-percent increase in publishers! They take the same stand that the psalmist David took when he said: “As for me, in my integrity I shall walk.”​—Psalm 26:11.

