Why Be Thankful?
LOOK at the front cover of this magazine. Surely, it reminds us that there are many beautiful things to offset the ugliness and squalor seen on every hand.
Do you appreciate things of beauty? Think about a rainbow with its serene, delicate blending of colors after the darkness of a storm. Imagine a cascading waterfall. Or try to visualize animals romping with their young. Picture a delightful flower garden or a bountiful crop of wheat. Yes, these are common sights to many people. But what effect do they have on you?
Easily Taken for Granted
Usually, the more often something is experienced, the more commonplace it becomes​—and the easier it is to take it for granted. This failing may seem more pronounced in the fast-moving 20th century. But not taking time to meditate or to count blessings and reasons for thankfulness has always been one of imperfect mankind’s shortcomings.
On the other hand, the psalmist David, under inspiration, often expressed thankfulness in song. These words addressed to God in one of David’s melodies are a prime example of thankfulness:
“When I see your heavens, the works of your fingers,
The moon and the stars that you have prepared,
What is mortal man that you keep him in mind,
And the son of earthling man that you take care of him?
You make him dominate over the works of your hands;
Everything you have put under his feet:
Small cattle and oxen, all of them,
And also the beasts of the open field,
The birds of heaven and the fish of the sea,
Anything passing through the paths of the seas.
O Jehovah our Lord, how majestic your name is in all the earth!”​—Psalm 8:3, 4, 6-9.
Thankfulness Can Suppress Gloom
The psalmist’s thankfulness for beautiful things helped to offset any gloom brought on by unpleasant sights or difficult situations. You too can have the same experience. How? By striving to appreciate more fully the many pleasant things around us. In this way, you can increase your happiness and that of those around you.
So why not let everyday sights of beauty and wonderment prompt heartfelt thankfulness to our beneficent Creator? Consider now some additional reasons to be thankful.

