From Our Readers
Cancer​—Can You Beat It?
I would like to thank you for your articles on “Cancer​—Can You Beat It?” (October 8, 1986) I had no idea when I received that magazine that two weeks later I would be diagnosed as having this “fearful” disease. But I am young and had an early diagnosis, all of which accounts for my 90% chance of complete recovery. Thanks to your articles, I understood a lot more about cancer than I probably ever would have, and I even knew what questions to ask my doctors.
L. F., United States
Thank you so much for your articles on cancer. I’m sure there are many who are suffering from this terrible disease who will find the articles encouraging. It’s nice to read correct information on the subject for a change. The newspapers hardly ever print success stories of the thousands who have beaten cancer, but the odd celebrity who becomes its victim makes headline news. This is very damaging to sufferers because we live on hope.
J. W., England
How refreshing and sustaining the article was on cancer. When I got the magazine, it was only two days after visiting a dear friend in the hospital who had to have a leg amputated because of cancer. I wanted to have some encouraging words when I visited him again. Your articles had all that I needed, and I recorded them on tape so that he could listen to it in bed. All the material is interesting, but I was particularly impressed with the material on page 12 under the heading “Facing Up to Cancer Treatment.”
A. M., Dominican Republic
Overcoming Stuttering
I can only heartily agree with the comments made in the article “Understanding the Stutterer’s Challenge.” (November 8, 1986) I myself have long had to struggle with this speech defect. I would like to add that stutterers should always be allowed to finish saying what they have started to say, regardless of how long it takes. It has always made me angry when the person I was speaking to finished my sentences for me, more often than not ending up saying things for me that I had not meant to say. This is particularly important when the stutterer is a child. Since becoming one of Jehovah’s Witnesses, I have made great progress in overcoming stuttering. Speaking to others in the preaching work forces me to concentrate on their problems and their thoughts, and I have no time to worry about my speech problem. This has been helpful.
B. Z., Federal Republic of Germany
I have benefited greatly from the article “Understanding the Stutterer’s Challenge.” It helped me to understand my child, who has been stuttering since the age of six. I hope that all parents of such children will read this article because it really helps us to communicate with our children. I do encourage other parents not to stop their children when they are trying to speak.
J. K., Malta
I want to thank you for the article on stuttering. It has helped me to see that other people also have this problem. It seems unbelievable, but I am recovering from my stuttering by following a treatment that is called “Rhythm against stuttering.” A device is used that transmits pulsations by means of an earphone. These serve as a guide for pronouncing the words, syllable by syllable.
D. C., Spain

