Lives Are at Stake!
1 The Bible makes clear Jehovah’s will “that all sorts of men should be saved.” However, it is also true that the life prospects of earth’s billions depend upon their attitude toward Jehovah God and his Kingdom by Jesus Christ. A proper attitude can be based only on “accurate knowledge of truth.” (1 Tim. 2:3, 4) While giving notice that soon the earth will be cleansed of all wickedness in order to make way for God’s new world of righteousness, we have also been commissioned to carry on a vital lifesaving work.​—Matt. 24:14; 28:19, 20; Rom. 10:13-15.
2 Why So Urgent? Jesus gave warning about a “great tribulation such as has not occurred since the world’s beginning.” (Matt. 24:21) That tribulation will reach its climax at Armageddon. (Rev. 16:16) The masses of people facing annihilation if they fail to respond to the good news include our unbelieving relatives, neighbors, workmates, schoolmates, and acquaintances. But our concern is to reach out to “all sorts of men” in imitation of God, who manifested his love for the entire world of mankind by giving his Son, Jesus Christ, as a ransom for all. (John 3:16) We must zealously endeavor to invite all to flee to God’s place of safety. By fully carrying out the preaching work, we can avoid bloodguilt.​—Ezek. 33:1-7; 1 Cor. 9:16.
3 What Is Our Objective? The importance of the preaching work is stressed throughout God’s Word. As expressed by the apostle Paul, “the love the Christ has compels us” to live in harmony with God’s ways. (2 Cor. 5:14) Additionally, The Watchtower often emphasizes our obligation to preach. Our Kingdom Ministry continually provides direction on how to get the preaching work done. The elders organize the work and encourage us to participate in it. Fellow publishers invite us to share with them in the ministry. We hear much about preparing our presentations, offering magazines and other literature, making return visits, conducting Bible studies, and using every opportunity to give a witness. All of this helps us in accomplishing the objective of saving lives.​—1 Cor. 9:22, 23; Eph. 1:13.

