“Should I Move?”
1 In response to Jesus’ command to “go . . . make disciples of people of all the nations,” many dedicated servants of Jehovah have moved to serve where the need is greater. (Matt. 28:19) They are imitating Paul, who responded to the call: “Step over into Macedonia and help us.” (Acts 16:9) How can this be done in a practical way?
2 Proceed One Step at a Time: Is there seldom-worked territory within your congregation? If so, you might concentrate your efforts on those areas. Before deciding to go elsewhere, consult with your elders to see if they feel that you are equipped to make a move. You might also ask your circuit overseer if he knows of a nearby congregation where you could expand your ministry. On the other hand, after carefully counting the cost, you may wish to consider helping in another part of the country or in a different land. If this is your desire, you along with your body of elders should write to the branch office where you are interested in serving, outlining your theocratic background. It may be wise to visit the area before deciding whether or not to make a permanent move.
3 Be Cautious About Immigrating: An increasing number of our brothers are moving to other lands because they are seeking either a better standard of living or relief from oppression. In the process, some have fallen prey to unscrupulous individuals who promise to help them get settled in the new land but who only take their money and then abandon them. In some cases these individuals even try to force the immigrants into immoral servitude. When they refuse, they are left at the mercy of the country they have entered. Thus the situation of the immigrants has become worse than it was in their homeland. They may even need to ask the brothers to house and otherwise assist them, putting a burden on other Christian families who are contending with their own problems and difficulties. Members of some households have been physically separated from one another, and families have been spiritually weakened by such ill-advised moves.​—1 Tim. 6:8-11.
4 If you want to make a move for personal advantage, keep in mind that no matter where you live, there are problems to be faced. It is easier to overcome problems where you already know the language and the culture, rather than starting anew in unfamiliar surroundings.

