Announcements
▪ Literature offer for June: Life​—How Did It Get Here? By Evolution or by Creation? July and August: Any of the following 32-page brochures may be used: Does God Really Care About Us?, Enjoy Life on Earth Forever!, “Look! I Am Making All Things New,” Should You Believe in the Trinity?, The Divine Name That Will Endure Forever, The Government That Will Bring Paradise, What Is the Purpose of Life​—How Can You Find It?, and When Someone You Love Dies. September: The Live Forever book will be used, and efforts should be made to start home Bible studies. NOTE: Congregations that have not yet requested the above-mentioned campaign items should do so on their next monthly Literature Request Form (S-14).
▪ The presiding overseer or someone designated by him should audit the congregation’s accounts on June 1 or as soon as possible thereafter. Make announcement to the congregation when this has been done.
▪ If it is necessary to telephone the Society’s Service Department, please use the following telephone number as of June 1, 1995: (914) 878-7000.
▪ New Publications Available:
“All Scripture Is Inspired of God and Beneficial”​—Romanian
Does God Really Care About Us?​—Georgian, Welsh
Elementary Bible Teachings​—Punjabi
How Can Blood Save Your Life?​—Russian
How to Find the Road to Paradise (for Muslims)​—Croatian, Spanish
Is There a God Who Cares?​—Bengali
Jehovah’s Witnesses in the Twentieth Century​—Tamil
Jehovah’s Witnesses​—Unitedly Doing God’s Will Worldwide—​Macedonian
My Book of Bible Stories (Large size)​—Estonian, Gujarati
Questions Young People Ask​—Answers That Work—​Polish
Revelation​—Its Grand Climax At Hand!​—Thai
School and Jehovah’s Witnesses​—Amharic
United in Worship of the Only True God​—Gujarati, Marathi, Nepali, Samoan
Watch Tower Publications Index 1991-1993​—French, Swedish
Watch Tower Publications Scripture Index 1986-1990​—Croatian
When Someone You Love Dies ​—Cebuano, Norwegian, Iloko, Swedish, Tagalog, Thai
Will There Ever Be a World Without War? (for Jews)​—Japanese
▪ New Audiocassettes Available:
Doing God’s Will With Zeal​—Arabic
▪ New Videocassettes Available:
The Bible​—Accurate History, Reliable Prophecy—​American Sign Language, Arabic, Chinese (Mandarin)
To the Ends of the Earth​—English

