Make Good Use of Your Time
1 Jehovah is time conscious. He wants us to be aware of time too. Through his organization he helps us to be time conscious. We are urged always to have “plenty to do in the work of the Lord.” (1 Cor. 15:58) In this way, we can be more effective in Jehovah’s service.
2 Each of us has the same amount of time each week​—168 hours. How well do we use our time? Do we show that we really know what time it is from Jehovah’s standpoint? Are we being distracted by nonessential activities?
3 It is important that we be well organized. Many try to maintain a priority list. Each item is put on the list according to its importance. How can that be determined? The Bible says that a man should “see good for all his hard work.” (Eccl. 3:13) Some tasks yield better results than others. Consider the results that each one will bring. Will finishing the job produce significant benefits? Will you “see good” for your hard work? If not, it may not be a high-priority task.
4 In Our Ministry: We appreciate it when others arrive at meetings for service on time, listen carefully to instructions, and leave promptly for the territory. We would rather be busy preaching than waiting. Paul obviously felt strongly about the need for good order when he wrote: “Let all things take place decently and by arrangement.”​—1 Cor. 14:40.
5 When we are out in field service, we can lose valuable time on coffee breaks. However, when weather conditions are severe, a break will refresh us and help us to keep going. Many, though, prefer to keep busy witnessing to people and forgo socializing with the brothers on coffee breaks during the time that has been set aside for the ministry. Balance is needed.
6 “Even the stork . . . well knows its appointed times” to migrate, and the ant “prepares its food even in the summer” in order to be ready for the winter, says the Bible. (Jer. 8:7; Prov. 6:6-8) Therein lies the secret of making good use of time. We too must ‘know our appointed times.’ Without being overly rigid, we should be time conscious. We need to know not only what we have to do but also when it needs to be done. We should get into the habit of thinking ahead, making allowances for possible delays. And we should also be willing to cut short some activities to make time for something more important, such as preparation for our meetings, field ministry, and other theocratic activities.
7 We want to be like our heavenly Father, Jehovah God, who teaches us that “for everything there is an appointed time.” (Eccl. 3:1) By making good use of our time, we can ‘fully accomplish our ministry.’​—2 Tim. 4:5.

