Question Box
▪ How can we comment most effectively at meetings?
We look forward to assembling together at weekly congregation meetings. There we have an opportunity to express our faith and encourage others by our commenting. (Prov. 20:15; Heb. 10:23, 24) We should view commenting as a privilege and strive to have a regular share. How can we do this most effectively?
Preparation is the first step. Reading and pondering over the material in advance is important. Try to capture the spirit of what is being presented. Although the subject may have been discussed in the past, look for any enlarged or enhanced points that are presented. Keep in mind the overall theme of the material. When preparing comments from a publication that features an in-depth study of a Bible book, such as the Revelation Climax book, try to see how a particular verse relates to the verses surrounding it. Following these suggestions will stimulate your thinking ability. It will help you to prepare good comments and find joy in your participation.
The best comments are concise, simply stated, and based on the publication being studied. The first commenter should answer the question directly, leaving other points for additional comments. Avoid long, rambling comments that take up excessive time and prevent others from sharing. Express yourself in your own words, rather than read your comment word for word from the publication. Auxiliary comments could include points covered in cited Scripture texts. Listen carefully to what others say so that you can avoid any unnecessary repetition.
It is good to raise your hand several times but not on every paragraph. We invite youngsters to share in commenting. If you are hesitant about speaking up, you may let the conductor know in advance which paragraph you would like to comment on, and likely he will be able to give you an opportunity to do so.
All of us should make an earnest effort to have something to share at congregation meetings that involve audience participation. Remember, the success of such meetings depends to a great extent upon our willingness and effectiveness in commenting.​—Ps. 26:12.

