Service Meetings for June
NOTE: Our Kingdom Ministry will schedule a Service Meeting for each week during the summer. Congregations may make adjustments as needed to allow for attending the “Joyful Praisers” District Convention and then for a 30-minute review of the program highlights at the Service Meeting the following week. The day-by-day review of the district convention program should be assigned in advance to two or three qualified brothers who will be able to focus on outstanding points. This well-prepared review will help the congregation remember key points for personal application and for use in the field. Comments from the audience and experiences related should be brief and to the point.
Week Starting June 5
Song 7
12 min: Local announcements and selected Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry. Review upcoming summer activities; remind all to keep active in the service, get to the meetings, and turn in reports.
15 min: “Jehovah Imparts Power.” Questions and answers. Relate experience in the February 1, 1992, Watchtower, page 32.
18 min: “Jehovah Is Our Creator.” Discuss with audience. Have two demonstrations showing how to use the suggested presentations. Include some brief suggestions about how to make a return visit, following up on placements of the Kingdom News distributed during April and May.
Song 17 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting June 12
Song 221
10 min: Local announcements. Accounts report.
17 min: “Christ as a Model for Youths.” Questions and answers. Include comments from the September 1, 1986, Watchtower, pages 4-6.
18 min: “Help Those Without Faith.” Congregation Book Study conductor reviews article with two or three publishers and then discusses how to use the material. They practice by demonstrating presentations to one another.
Song 122 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting June 19
Song 80
10 min: Local announcements. Demonstrate two or three brief magazine presentations that may be used in field service this week.
18 min: Grant Recognition to Others. Talk by an elder, based on December 1, 1994, Watchtower, pages 28-30. Stress the need to show honor and loving concern for others in the congregation.
17 min: “Make Good Use of Your Time.” Questions and answers. Regarding time spent watching TV, review suggestions under subheading “Taking Control,” on page 11 of the May 22, 1991, Awake!
Song 208 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting June 26
Song 75
15 min: Local announcements. Briefly discuss the importance of making return visits. The major part of our teaching work is done when we return to cultivate interest. Few people can make spiritual progress with the literature alone. When we fail to return, we miss our best opportunity to help them. Return visits produce Bible studies. Many publishers have got the best results by returning within a day or two rather than waiting a week.​—See Our Ministry book, pages 88-9.
15 min: Question Box. Questions and answers to be handled by Watchtower Study conductor. Make further comments based on School Guidebook, pages 91-2.
15 min: Review literature offer for July. Discuss outstanding features of the brochures the congregation has in stock. Have publishers briefly demonstrate how they can be offered at the door. Examples: Does God Really Care About Us? (Turn to pages 26-7, point out the illustrations, and discuss one of the scriptures about the coming Paradise.) What Is the Purpose of Life​—How Can You Find It? (Turn to pages 30-1, consider one of the quoted scriptures, and discuss the illustration.) When Someone You Love Dies. (Call attention to questions raised on page 2, and then comment on one or two comforting Scriptural thoughts found on page 31.) Let the congregation know what brochures are currently in stock.
Song 225 and concluding prayer.

