





COVER SUBJECT | ARE YOU IN CONTROL OF YOUR LIFE?
The Challenge: Negative Feelings




DO STRONG feelings—perhaps sadness, anger, or resentment—consume you? If so, you may have little time or energy to pursue what is truly important to you. What can you do about it?a



BIBLE EXAMPLE: DAVID

King David was subject to a wide range of emotions—including anxiety and sorrow. What helped him to keep functioning? David left matters in God’s hands. (1 Samuel 24:12, 15) He also wrote his feelings down. And as a man of faith, he prayed frequently.b



WHAT GREGORY DOES

As mentioned in the opening article, Gregory suffers from an anxiety disorder. “My excessive worrying was out of proportion and out of control,” he says. How did Gregory regain control? “To get perspective,” he says, “I accepted the kind help of my wife and friends. I also sought professional assistance and learned more about my condition. After making some lifestyle changes, I began to feel that I was in control of my condition, not that it was in control of me. Although I still experience bouts of anxiety, I now have a better sense of what triggers them, and I know how to manage my disorder.”
“A joyful heart is good medicine.”—Proverbs 17:22




WHAT YOU CAN DO

If negative feelings control your life, try the following:
           Write down your feelings in a journal.

            Express your feelings to a close relative or friend.

            Challenge your feelings. For example, ask yourself, ‘Is there really evidence to support such a negative view of myself?’

            Do not hold on to anxiety, anger, or resentment. Redirect your energies to something more productive.c


Bottom Line: Often, negative feelings are not the result of our circumstances but of how we view them.



Some negative emotions can be the result of a health problem that may need professional treatment. Awake! does not endorse any particular approach. Each individual should carefully evaluate his or her options before making a personal decision.
Many psalms in the Bible are prayers of David, which he put into writing.
For more information, see the cover series “How to Deal With Anxiety,” in the July 1, 2015, issue of The Watchtower.

