Draw Close to God
He Wants Us to Succeed
Joshua 1:6-9
CARING parents are eager to see their children succeed, to live a meaningful and satisfying life. Jehovah, our heavenly Father, likewise wants his earthly children to succeed. As an expression of his tender care, he tells us how to be successful. Consider, for example, the words he spoke to Joshua, as recorded at Joshua 1:6-9.
Imagine the setting, shown at right. Following Moses’ death, Joshua is the new leader of Israel, which numbers into the millions. The Israelites are preparing to enter the land that God promised to their forefathers. God has some advice for Joshua. If followed, it will help him to succeed. But this counsel is not given just for Joshua’s benefit. By applying it, we too can succeed.—Romans 15:4.
Jehovah tells Joshua to be courageous and strong—not once but three times. (Verses 6, 7, 9) To be sure, Joshua will need courage and strength to lead the nation successfully into the Promised Land. How, though, can he summon these noble qualities?
Joshua can draw courage and strength from the inspired writings. “Take care to do according to all the law that Moses my servant commanded you,” Jehovah says. (Verse 7) At the time, Joshua likely has just a few books of the Bible in written form.a However, the mere possession of God’s Word will not guarantee success. In order to benefit from it, Joshua needs to do two things.
First, Joshua must regularly fill his heart with God’s word. Jehovah says: “You must in an undertone read in it day and night.” (Verse 8) One reference work states: “God was commanding Joshua to remember His Law by ‘muttering’ it to himself, ‘pondering’ it, or ‘musing over’ it.” Reading and meditating on God’s Word each day will help Joshua to handle the challenges that lie ahead.
Second, Joshua needs to apply what he learns from God’s Word. Jehovah tells him: “Take care to do according to all that is written in it; for then you will make your way successful.” (Verse 8) Joshua’s success is linked to his doing God’s will. How could it be otherwise? God’s will always succeeds.—Isaiah 55:10, 11.
Joshua heeded Jehovah’s advice. As a result, he lived a full and satisfying life as a faithful worshipper of Jehovah.—Joshua 23:14; 24:15.
Do you want to live a fulfilling life, as Joshua did? Jehovah wants you to succeed. But merely possessing his Word, the Bible, is not enough. One longtime faithful Christian suggested: “Get that Bible off its printed page, and get it into your heart.” If you regularly fill your heart with God’s word and apply in your life what you learn, then you, like Joshua, “will make your way successful.”
[Footnote]
The inspired writings available to Joshua likely included the five books of Moses (Genesis, Exodus, Leviticus, Numbers, and Deuteronomy), the book of Job, and one or two psalms.

