Recipe for Happiness
YOU want to be happy, do you not? Almost everyone does. In fact, we spend most of our time and energy seeking happiness and life. So why should we not want to be happy? This happiness we desire, not only for ourselves, but for others as well. Why, then, is there not more happiness in the world? The world is obviously miserable. It is not happy. Life without happiness is not really life at all. Mankind’s continuous search, therefore, is for life and happiness. Where shall we look to find it? What shall we do to get it? Will fame or riches bring us happiness?
Many have erroneously concluded that by becoming rich they would be thoroughly happy, all their troubles would fly away. Not so, however. Paul the apostle counsels: “Those who are determined to be rich fall into temptation and a snare and many senseless and hurtful desires which plunge men into destruction and ruin. For the love of money is a root of all sorts of injurious things, and by reaching out for this love some have been led astray from the faith and have stabbed themselves all over with many pains.” How true! Is not this what we see in the world?—1 Tim. 6:9, 10, NW.
A mad scramble for wealth has led to much crime, jealousy, greed, selfishness and competition. Some have gambled fortunes for greater fortunes only to gain misery. Others have fallen victim to crime and corruption. Still others lie, steal, rob, bribe, cheat, blackmail and murder only to find themselves without either wealth or happiness. Most of these turn out to be miserable people stricken with guilty consciences, deep in debt, or paying for their crimes in penitentiaries. Others live in constant fear of being apprehended. They are forever hiding or running away. Wealth acquired in this manner has not brought happiness to anyone.
Those who have been fortunate to acquire riches through proper means are quick to testify that money is not everything in life, that, alone, it does not bring happiness. Money cannot buy good health or security. It cannot buy life. A rich young man inquired of Jesus: “Teacher, what good must I do in order to get everlasting life?” Jesus told him to “observe the commandments continually.” The young man replied: “‘I have kept all these; what yet am I lacking?’ Jesus said to him: ‘If you want to be complete, go sell your belongings and give to the poor and you will have treasure in heaven, and come be my follower.’ When the young man heard this saying, he went away grieved, for he was holding many possessions. But Jesus said to his disciples: ‘Truly I say to you that it will be a difficult thing for a rich man to get into the kingdom of the heavens. Again I say to you, It is easier for a camel to get through a needle’s eye than for a rich man to get into the kingdom of God.’” This young man’s wealth did not bring him happiness. It was cause for his grief, instead. His wealth ensnared him.—Matt. 19:16-24, NW.
Happiness is acquired by obtaining something more valuable than silver or gold, and that valuable thing is an accurate knowledge of God’s Word the Bible. Note what the wise man stated on this point: “Happy is the man that findeth wisdom, and the man that getteth understanding. For the merchandise of it is better than the merchandise of silver, and the gain thereof than fine gold. She is more precious than rubies: and all the things thou canst desire are not to be compared unto her. Length of days is in her right hand; and in her left hand riches and honour. Her ways are ways of pleasantness, and all her paths are peace. She is a tree of life to them that lay hold upon her: and happy is every one that retaineth her.” The things that bring lasting happiness, then, are wisdom, understanding and knowledge of God’s purposes. These give one hope, joy and comfort. They enable us to see the world for what it is, why all these woes have come upon it and what the outcome will be. Knowledge of God gives one a purpose in life, a goal, something to work for. It is this that makes us happy. Gaining this knowledge through study and applying it in our everyday life means more than happiness. It means that we have God’s approval, which in turn means everlasting life. Said Jesus: “This means everlasting life, their taking in knowledge of you, the only true God, and of the one whom you sent forth, Jesus Christ.”—Prov. 3:13-18; John 17:3, NW.
Happiness, then, comes about by proper knowledge, by right thinking, and by fixing our minds on the sure Word and promises of Almighty God. That is why Paul advises those who would be happy to think on these things: “Whatever things are true, whatever things are of serious concern, whatever things are righteous, whatever things are chaste, whatever things are lovable, whatever things are well spoken of, whatever virtue there is and whatever praiseworthy thing there is, continue considering these things. The things which you learned as well as accepted and heard and saw in connection with me, practice these; and the God of peace will be with you.”—Phil. 4:8, 9, NW.
We have all these good things embodied in God’s Word the Bible. The remedy outlined in the Scriptures is sure. It waits on us to apply it. Do so and be happy. Find even greater happiness by giving this recipe to others. For as Jesus said: “There is more happiness in giving than there is in receiving.”—Acts 20:35, NW.

