Announcements
● Literature offer for August: Two of the older 50-cent books for $1.00. This does not include Choosing, Commentary on James, Family Life, Truth or School Guidebook. If your congregation has any 384-page books in stock, special efforts should be made to use these first. September: HOPE tract along with any pocket-size book. October: Awake! subscription for $2.50. November: My Book of Bible Stories.
● As soon as the AUGUST report is compiled, the form (S-10) for supplying the Society with the activity of the congregation should be completed and sent promptly to the Society. Be sure to double check all information for accuracy. Keep the duplicate in the congregation file.
● Pioneer report cards and forms for use by the congregation during the coming year are being mailed in August.
● The Literature Inventory forms should be completed and forwarded to the Society no later than September 6.
● This is a notification that Raymond Victor Franz is no longer a member of the Governing Body and of the Brooklyn Bethel family as of May 22, 1980.
● A memorandum concerning American citizenship is being sent to each congregation. Any publisher desiring information on the subject can see the secretary of the congregation.
● Frequent requests are received by the Society for regular pioneers to be given a leave of absence due to health or other reasons. There is no arrangement for regular pioneers to take a “leave” from the pioneer work, but what is available to one who becomes sick for a short period of time is explained in the insert of the February, 1978, Our Kingdom Service.
● Any publisher or pioneer who wishes to serve where the need is greater should submit a letter to the congregation service committee including information on page 135 of the Organization book. Any not recommended by the committee should be told why in a kindly way. When sending the letter to the Society, the service committee should either sign the letter or attach one of their own. (Same basic arrangement as outlined for pioneers on page 137 of the Organization book.)

