Branch Letter
Dear Brothers:
No doubt all of you are concerned about whether there are any of our brothers and sisters among the more than 115,000 Cubans who have recently arrived in the United States as refugees. Yes, about 3,000 of our brothers and sisters were taken to the different camps in this country and they are being processed by the immigration authorities. More than 1,000 of our brothers were among the many thousands transported to Miami, Florida, where the Orange Bowl football stadium was used as a temporary site for the refugees. The rest are distributed in other camps set up by the government. Efforts are now underway to register and settle our brothers.
The Society immediately sent some funds to be used to aid the brothers. Additional contributions have been provided to benefit them. Congregations from Tampa to the Florida Keys have contributed some 15 tons of clothing and more than two tons of food have been donated locally in the Miami area. Our brothers from Cuba are in good spirits and are using every opportunity to spread the good news among others in the camps. Reports tell us that their conduct has been exemplary. Many have suffered much persecution in Cuba, but they are of good courage and are determined to continue walking in their integrity.
We are saddened to report at this time that five members of the Bethel family, and a few others in the New York city area have recently been disfellowshiped. There has been some apostasy against the organization and the promoting of sectarian divisions in some of the congregations of God’s people. (Titus 3:9-11) Living as we are in times difficult to deal with, it should not be surprising that such things occur. The first-century congregation also experienced deviations as we well know from our reading of the Holy Scriptures.—1 Tim. 1:20; 4:1; 2 Tim. 2:17, 18; 1 Cor. 15:12, 13; Acts 20:29, 30.
It is our hope that such ones will come to their senses, repent, and return to Jehovah’s organization which would be to their everlasting benefit.
To conclude, we hope all of you who may have already attended the “Divine Love” District Convention have enjoyed it to the full, and that those of you who will yet attend will find it spiritually stimulating and upbuilding.
Your brothers,
GOVERNING BODY OF JEHOVAH’S WITNESSES

