Presenting the Good News—In Seldom-Worked Territory
1 Our Lord, Jesus Christ, directed that the good news should be “preached in ALL the inhabited earth . . . ” (Matt. 24:14) It is for this reason that we should put forth extended efforts to help people who live in seldom-worked territory. Can we give them additional opportunities to hear and be saved?—Rom. 10:13, 14.
2 Perhaps your congregation has distant territory that is seldom worked. It is recommended that territory be covered at least once a year. If your congregation is unable to do that, could another congregation close by be of assistance? The circuit overseer is aware of your needs due to his reviewing the territory records when he visits. He will do what he can to arrange for help from nearby congregations.
3 Additionally, are there nearby parts of the congregation’s territory that may not be as productive as other parts? These could include affluent areas where little response has been seen over the years. Also included would be highly religious communities where opposition has been experienced. However, although there have not been “many of noble birth” who have responded since the first century when the Christian congregation was established, there have been some. Even some of the Jewish priests responded favorably. So, we do not want willingly to ignore any territories. We want to preach to all kinds of men.—1 Cor. 1:26; Acts 6:7. (See also Acts 16:6-10; 18:9-11.)
WAYS THIS CAN BE DONE
4 Service overseers can encourage and help organize the coverage of all the congregation’s territories. Some congregations have organized midweek and weekend groups to give special attention to seldom-worked territory. If you must travel some distance, you may find that getting an early start is helpful. Some plan to take a lunch and spend several hours or the entire day in field service.
5 Smaller groups of publishers may be assigned to follow through on not-at-homes and for covering sparsely populated areas. This economizes on time, keeps all in the group busy and minimizes needless waiting. When people are not at home in these territories, you can decide if it is practical to leave free literature. Keep in mind that literature should be left out of the sight of passersby. Literature should not be placed in mailboxes.
6 It is beneficial to prepare your presentation in accord with the territory you will be working. Always be warm, friendly and positive. When approaching the affluent, have in mind what would interest them. Grooming, dress and general decorum should especially be given attention. We do not want to give any “cause for stumbling, that our ministry might not be found fault with.”—2 Cor. 6:3.
7 If opposition has been experienced in the past, you may want to take that fact into consideration in your introduction and in the scriptures used in your presentation, as well as in what literature is offered. We are interested in ‘saving some.’ Let us prepare to become to them whatever will aid to this end.—1 Cor. 9:19-23.
8 Our desire to do Jehovah’s work and a sincere love for all kinds of people will prompt us to preach in seldom-worked territory. (Matt. 5:43-48) If love and sincerity are manifest in our conduct and speech in these territories, some may respond and give glory to Jehovah our God.—Matt. 5:16.

