Working What Is Good Toward All
1 Jehovah’s Witnesses are known as hard workers. But we are not the only people who work. There are many who no doubt work just as hard as we do. When the long workday ends, many persons of the world may be just as tired as we are. A housewife may burn up as much energy during a morning’s shopping trip as a Witness does in a morning of field service. A family man tinkering with his car may exert himself as much as the brother who labors over his upcoming public talk. Even a long trek to the Kingdom Hall may not exceed in energy a family’s weekend drive to the country.
AVOID VAIN WORKS
2 Yet our efforts in connection with pure worship are infinitely more valuable than any other work that could possibly be done. Why? Because we “work what is good.” (Gal. 6:10) The non-Christian may work himself into a state of exhaustion in efforts to benefit his fellowman. He may be motivated by noble ideas and goals, and yet often be “striking the air,” as it were. (1 Cor. 9:26) Whatever good he accomplishes may be short-lived. We, on the other hand, know that our deeds in Jehovah’s service are not in vain.—1 Cor. 15:58.
3 But how do we “work what is good”? A brief look at the context of Paul’s words to the Galatians is quite revealing. A number of Christians there, formerly holding to the Jewish faith, were laboring in vain. They had not fully accepted the undeserved kindness through Christ. Thus they still tried to prove themselves righteous by works of law. These Christian “Judaizers” promoted circumcision and holding to the Mosaic law’s dietary restrictions. Paul endeavored to show that such works of law are vain, and that salvation comes only through faith in Christ.—Gal. 2:16; 3:10-13.
4 The letter doubtless did much “good” in readjusting the Galatians. It encouraged Christians to “work what is good toward all, but especially toward those related to us in the faith.” (Gal. 6:10) Here Paul may have had in mind helping Christians to place their full faith and confidence in Christ, thus living according to the direction of God’s spirit. What work could have been more productive or satisfying?
5 Christians today also need encouragement from one another. We could miss the purpose of God’s undeserved kindness by thinking that salvation can come from following a particular rule of conduct. The pressures of this system of things could influence us to lower Christian standards of morality, or vainly strive for material security. All of the brothers are therefore to be commended for what they are doing on behalf of one another.
MEANINGFUL WORKS
6 A recent example of this is seen in the fine response of the brothers to the Society’s admonition to ‘Help One Another.’ Brothers have taken the initiative to invite “fatherless boys” to accompany them on Bible studies. Sisters have been helping other sisters who must endure difficult domestic situations and who are in need of encouragement. This is meaningful work! Much is being done to help our brothers ‘walk by spirit.’ True, this takes extra time and effort. It can be tiring. But it is worth it. Is it possible that you could do more toward helping “those related to us in the faith”?
7 Also, let us not forget those in our territories to whom we owe the ‘debt’ of sharing the good news. (Rom. 1:14, 15) Many people are working harder than ever before, just to make ends meet. Those without the good news need to know how to direct their efforts toward attaining salvation. Much literature has been printed by the Society to help them. If your congregation has a stock of older publications, would it not be wise to get these books into receptive hands where they can do much good? This month we will offer two of our older 50-cent publications. Why not arrange to help out in the field this weekend?
8 While we do not have a monopoly on hard work, it certainly is satisfying to realize that what we do accomplish can have such a lasting effect. Let us continue to work at “what is good” for the spiritual well-being of both our brothers and those of the world who have yet to taste of the true liberation that Christianity brings.—Gal. 5:1.

