Announcements
● Literature offer for July: “Let Your Kingdom Come” and certain of the older, large-size books in the congregation’s stock for a contribution of $1.00. (Regarding these older books, be sure to note further direction in the May 1982 issue of Our Kingdom Ministry.) August: My Book of Bible Stories for a contribution of $2.50 or a 192-page book for 75c. September: The Truth That Leads to Eternal Life for a contribution of 75c.
● The regular shipment of service forms will be sent to all congregations during the month of September. The pioneer report cards will be sent separately.
● The current and incoming presiding overseers should arrange to meet one or more times before September 1 to work out a smooth transfer. There are important matters that should be discussed. In the past, problems have arisen because the new presiding overseer was not aware of a number of things expected of him.
● Many letters requesting assistance have been received from parts of the country where Arabic, Cambodian, Laotian and Vietnamese people have settled. Families that speak the language and who are interested in working among these people may follow the instructions set out in the June 1980 Our Kingdom Service article: “Step Over into Macedonia and Help.” Speak to your presiding overseer. If the congregation service committee approves of your receiving such an assignment, then write a letter and give it to the congregation service committee and they, in turn, will send it to the Society.
● The special talk that was given in March, “The Only Cure for Sick Mankind,” will become a part of the regular series of talks given by elders in the congregations.
● So that congregations can make suitable arrangements for the Memorial celebration next year, the date will be Tuesday, March 29, 1983 after sundown.
● Publishers should submit all subscriptions they obtain, including their own personal subscriptions, through the congregation and not send them directly to the Society. The brother handling the subscriptions should promptly send them to the Society each week regardless of the quantity on hand.
● New Cassette Recordings Available:
The Good News According to Mark (set of two cassettes)—Portuguese
The Good News According to Luke (set of two cassettes)—French
To the Romans (single cassette)—Portuguese
To the Ephesians, Philippians, Colossians (single cassette)—French
The First to the Thessalonians through To Philemon (single cassette)—French
Jehovah’s Name to Be Declared in All the Earth (Drama) (single cassette)—Korean
● Out of Stock in U.S.A.:
New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures (Deluxe Edition) (Dbi12-F)—French
● New Publications Available:
Aid to Bible Understanding (Part 4, Ar - Asc)—Italian
My Book of Bible Stories—Fijian, Samoan

