Are You Studying Together as a Family?
1 Recently a Christian husband who was speaking to an elder said: “I try to conduct a family study regularly but I find it difficult. Sometimes I am guilty of canceling it, or my wife does not feel like studying, or the children have something else to do. Weeks go by without a serious effort being made to get back into the routine of a family study. I know we need the study and any suggestions or help we can get will be appreciated.” Do these comments sound familiar to you? They may since a number of families encounter these and other difficulties when it comes to holding a regular family Bible study.
2 Think about these questions: Why is a regular family study so important and what is its objective? Who should take the lead in conducting the study? What publications can be used? How can the study be kept lively and interesting, especially when children are of different age levels? Why are consistency and devotion so important to regularity of the family study? The Bible and Christian experience provide us with the answers to these questions.
PARENTS’ RESPONSIBILITIES
3 The Scriptures leave no doubt as to who should take the lead in teaching the children. “Fathers, . . . go on bringing them up in the discipline and mental-regulating of Jehovah.” (Eph. 6:4) Fathers should willingly accept their responsibility, yes, even be eager to impart knowledge and counsel to their children. However, if the father is an unbeliever, the believing wife should do her part to teach the children and conduct the family study. (2 Tim. 1:5) Or, due to other circumstances, a sister may have to assume full responsibility for teaching her children. (Prov. 1:8) In other cases an elder or another mature publisher can provide some help, depending on the particular needs in each situation. But such an arrangement should not be used to relieve parents, especially fathers, of their Scriptural responsibility to teach, train and care for their children.—Deut. 6:6, 7; 1 Tim. 3:2, 4.
FLEXIBLE AND INFORMAL
4 Flexibility will help to make the family study practical and stimulating. It may include reading and discussing portions of the Bible together and considering subjects or specific articles from the magazines or other Society publications. Material should be chosen according to the needs of the family. Problems youths face such as peer pressure in school, dating, involvement in school programs, sports, selection of music, fads and immoral tendencies can be considered. Repetition of Scriptural principles and viewpoints is beneficial, especially in anticipation of future dangers and temptations.
5 What are some things that should be taken into consideration when the family study is being conducted? While studies need not be as formal as congregation meetings are, they should be instructive. Make family studies enjoyable, not using the occasion to scold. Encourage the children to comment in their own words, since this will enable them to learn faster. Even if younger ones are not able to appreciate fully or understand everything that is being considered, their presence should be acknowledged and they should be helped to take part in the study. Wise parents give attention to each child’s needs, his comprehension, attention span and his ability to express himself. Family unity and increased spirituality will surely be the result of your diligent and loving efforts.
DO NOT GIVE UP!
6 Why is stick-to-itiveness so important in connection with the family study? Because life has many distractions and things tend to interrupt schedules for study. However, do not allow these to unduly interfere with arrangements for the family study.
7 Regular family Bible study trains and equips children to cope with life’s problems. You parents are in the best position to help your children by assuming your God-given responsibility. Surely Jehovah will bless you if you make every effort to hold your family Bible study consistently.

