Assisting New and Reactivated Publishers in the Field Ministry
1 When you first learned about the need to share in the field ministry likely you were not just given a territory to work and told to preach. No, someone kindly gave you a helping hand and assisted you to get started in this most important work. Would it not be fitting, in turn, to offer your assistance to a new or reactivated one, thus experiencing firsthand that there is “more happiness in giving than there is in receiving”?—Acts 20:35.
PROGRESSIVE ASSISTANCE
2 How would you go about assisting such a person? Of fundamental importance is preparation. You can do this together by discussing either the current Topic for Conversation or some talking points in the literature being offered. It is important for the new or reactivated one to be familiar with the literature being presented in order to feel more comfortable at the door.
3 Another thing that can be done is to discuss common objections that come up and what you would say in response. Why not have practice sessions, taking turns being the householder and raising common objections? This would help to avoid becoming flustered at the door because of an unexpected objection.
4 Your companion may be nervous and unsure of himself at the beginning, so it helps to have a definite appointment to work together. He will appreciate that someone is working with him to help out if the need arises. (Eccl. 4:9, 10) Initially it might be beneficial to work in a territory where it is easier to get into conversations so he can become involved and thus gain confidence.
5 Afterward it would be beneficial to discuss the calls made and what could be done to build interest on the next visit. Be positive and commend him for the effort put forth. (1 Thess. 5:11) Endeavor to make a specific appointment to work together again. In time he will develop confidence in his ability not only to present the Kingdom message at the doors, but to express the truth more fully to others.
6 As we progressively work with such ones we can discuss how to use the concordance or the Bible Topics for Discussion; how to lay the groundwork for a return visit on the initial call; how to prepare for and to make a return visit; how to start a Bible study and how to improve continually as a teacher. All of these are the important tools and skills of a productive minister.—2 Tim. 4:5.
BOOK STUDY CONDUCTORS
7 Each book study conductor should take a personal interest in those in his group so as to notice when someone is missing from the meetings or not doing well in the field ministry. (Prov. 27:23) He should strive to work with as many as possible in the various features of the field service, providing loving assistance when needed or requested. Why not see if you can work with your book study conductor or other capable publishers and benefit from their experience?
8 So, “in proportion as each one has received a gift, use it in ministering to one another as fine stewards of God’s undeserved kindness.” In doing this we do not seek glory for ourselves, but desire that “in all things God may be glorified through Jesus Christ.” As you use these ‘gifts’ to assist others you will be having an added share in glorifying God.—1 Pet. 4:10, 11.

