How You Can Benefit
1 Many have expressed pleasure and anticipation since learning that we will use Happiness—How to Find It in the Congregation Book Studies. You may well feel the same. But how can you benefit the most from the study? Or, if you will be conducting the study, what can you do so that all gain the most from this publication?
2 Recall that when we got the Happiness book at the Convention we learned that it was specially prepared for use with the sort of persons that we often meet today. This was highlighted in a letter from Brazil: “We are so thankful to have the book in Portuguese. It came at the right time, because people today are not so much interested in doctrines as they are in knowing who created us, why, and how they can overcome everyday problems.”
3 The book does cover the major doctrines of the Bible but they are treated in a different fashion compared to other books.
4 At the book study, then, keeping in mind the book’s design will be important. If you are a book study conductor, you can do much to help by carefully planning your opening comments and closing review of each study. Highlight points such as: What type of persons could be helped with tonight’s material? What main points can you remember so as to use them? How could you begin talking about this subject and then use this chapter—during the house-to-house work? During informal witnessing? How could a Bible study be started in this chapter? What in this chapter will touch the heart or motivate the student?
5 Since some chapters are on matters that most brothers know or accept, the study conductor faces a challenge. Can he help all to see the material’s practical value for the ministry? Can he, as a good teacher, aid the brothers to learn and remember lines of reasoning, facts and specific texts to use?
6 This publication does not have prepared and numbered questions at the bottom of each page to correspond with each paragraph. So when preparing for the study give thought to the ‘points for discussion’ at the bottom of the page. In covering the material in the Happiness book the study will not be simply a matter of getting answers to specific questions. Rather, there will be opportunity for more discussion, keeping in mind that this is what is often needed with the sort of persons for whom this book is particularly suited. From time to time the conductor will ask an auxiliary question or two.

