Making Wise Use of Our Literature
1 During the year 1982 the literature offer for our door-to-door work will have changed eight times. Why do we make these different literature offers? There are many good things that result from this tried and proven arrangement. As a whole, it makes for wise use of our literature.
WHY WE HAVE CAMPAIGNS
2 For one thing, it gives variety to our literature presentations in the field. We meet people of different educational and cultural backgrounds and so, while this month’s literature offer may not appeal to a certain person, it is possible that a future literature offer might. The apostle Paul wrote: “I have become all things to people of all sorts, that I might by all means save some.” Our goal is the same as Paul’s.—1 Cor. 9:19-23.
3 It also makes for interesting and educational variety for the publisher himself. The change is good for us, personally, in a number of ways. For example, we get better acquainted with our own literature, having to review its general contents in order to describe it and, in addition, selecting certain paragraphs in order to give specific examples of its benefits. Also, we try to give all persons in the territory a full opportunity to obtain and read the good news in its various forms that all of us cherish and benefit from so much. We all unite in presenting a vital testimony on a timely subject throughout the country.—Acts 20:21.
4 To add to the variety of literature we offer to the public we should keep in mind the 24 new issues of Awake! and the 24 new issues of The Watchtower that we make available during the year. Can anyone accuse us of continually “coming around with the same old thing”? Hardly!
ORDERING AND CARING FOR LITERATURE
5 Of course, in order to be able to share fully in these service campaigns and offer the literature specified for each month, it will be necessary for the congregation to have that literature on hand. The Society has heard from congregation publishers, pioneers and traveling overseers who say that they are not always able to get the needed literature for that month from the congregation supply. So, it will be good for the one caring for literature supplies and the service overseer to be aware, some months in advance, of what the coming literature campaigns will consist of, and in this way the needed literature can be ordered well ahead of time. (Compare Proverbs 30:25) What the literature offer is going to be is listed under Announcements in Our Kingdom Ministry usually about three or four months in advance so there is ample time to order.
6 Those responsible for placing the order will want to give careful thought to the quantities needed so that enough literature will be available but not so much as to become overstocked. When the publishers keep themselves informed of what the literature offer is for that month and when the congregation, through its elders and other responsible servants, sees that supplies are adequate, then it is possible to make wise use of our literature.

