Meetings to Help Us Make Disciples
WEEK STARTING JULY 4
Song 4
10 min: Local announcements. Encourage publishers to share in magazine work on second Saturday of the month. Have capable publisher comment on or demonstrate how he plans to present current magazines.
20 min: “Presenting the Good News—To All Kinds of Men.” Question-and-answer coverage of material with selected paragraphs and scriptures being read as time allows. Briefly demonstrate two presentations when considering paragraph 7.
15 min: “How You Can Benefit.” Talk by elder who is a good teacher. Some audience discussion. Help audience, and especially book study conductors, to appreciate that preparing for book studies with Happiness book will require additional thought. Have two book study conductors (good teachers) discuss and demonstrate the conducting of a good study, embracing the points in paragraphs 4-6.
Song 100 and prayer.
WEEK STARTING JULY 11
Song 60
 8 min: Local announcements, accounts report and consideration of daily text as time permits.
18 min: “Are You Studying Together as a Family?” Question-and-answer consideration with appropriate paragraphs and scriptures being read. At suitable intervals during discussion have family heads, or others, comment on how they have applied, or have seen others apply, certain suggestions and how beneficial results were realized. Conclude by encouraging all families to persist in working for regularity and spiritual progress in family study arrangement.
12 min: “Love or Infatuation—How Do I Know?” Awake!, April 8, 1982. Talk by elder who can handle this subject with dignity, kindness and seriousness.
 7 min: Service overseer will consider service report for April along with information at top of page 1. Tie in with local congregation’s activity for April.
Song 70 and prayer.
WEEK STARTING JULY 18
Song 94
10 min: Local announcements and appropriate Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry. Encourage sharing in magazine work fourth Saturday of month. Consider congregation’s field ministry report for June.
20 min: “Assisting New and Reactivated Publishers in the Field Ministry.” Consider by questions and answers. Demonstrate how a publisher might prepare for field service with one being assisted, using some of the suggestions in the article. As time permits, have prepared publishers comment on some successes and joys they have had in either helping others or receiving help in harmony with points made in this article.
15 min: “Keep Your Christian Balance.” March 15, 1982, Watchtower. Talk by capable brother who sets a good example.
Song 83 and prayer.
WEEK STARTING JULY 25
Song 18
 7 min: Local announcements and Theocratic News.
15 min: “Making Wise Use of Our Literature.” Discuss material with audience. Look up scriptures and have selected paragraphs read.
13 min: Plan this locally according to congregation needs or prepare an interesting and instructive talk using material in April 8, 1982, Awake! article, “The Art of Listening.” Make application to what you feel are needs of congregation.
10 min: In a warm and stimulating way encourage sharing in first Sunday of the month field service. Review literature offer for August, highlighting useful points for presenting offer. Make helpful comments on Topic for Conversation.
Song 74 and prayer.

