Presenting the Good News—To All Kinds of Men
1 One of our chief goals in the field ministry is to reach the hearts of those to whom we preach. The apostle Paul was very effective in doing this. The Bible record shows that he was instrumental, not only in helping many individuals to the point of baptism, but also in establishing many congregations.
2 What contributed to his success? At 1 Corinthians 9:22, 23 we read of one thing he did that should be helpful to us. He wrote: “I have become all things to people of all sorts, that I might by all means save some . . . , that I may become a sharer of it with others.” He adapted his approach to the kind of person he was speaking to, whether Jew, or Gentile.
3 He found it beneficial to adjust his presentation to suit the personal needs of each one. In that way his hearers would be more receptive to the message. (Prov. 25:11) We can greatly improve our effectiveness in the witness work by following Paul’s example.
PREPARE IN ADVANCE
4 Before sharing in service some publishers go over in their mind how to vary their approach in speaking with men, women, children, older persons, Jews, Catholics, atheists, evolutionists, and so forth. They consider what can be said that may appeal to the heart of the householder, avoiding that which may unnecessarily offend. They are ready to refer to different pages in the publication(s) being offered to help the householder appreciate that the literature will truly benefit him.
5 This month we are offering the “Kingdom Come” book. If the householder, is concerned about world conditions, we could discuss appropriate information on pages 6 and 7 with him. If the person is upset because God has permitted wickedness, we can refer to chapter 5 and use selected points highlighted at the top of page 44. When witnessing to youths, take advantage of the illustration at the beginning of chapter 1, perhaps discussing the first paragraph as appropriate.
6 Some have found it is helpful to have a variety of publications available which contain information appealing to different types of individuals. These might include books such as Evolution, Family Life, Great Teacher, Happiness, Truth, and so forth. Do not hesitate to offer a particular publication whenever you discern that the information it contains has special appeal to the householder.
BE ADAPTABLE
7 When witnessing to all sorts of men, it is best to try to find a common ground, avoiding controversy wherever possible. If you meet a person of the Catholic religion, you may choose to center your Scriptural presentation around Matthew 6:9, 10, referring to the “our Father” prayer, thus using his terminology and appealing to that sort of person. When conversing with Jews, it is often best to use a presentation from the Hebrew Scriptures, like Daniel 2:44. You will note from 1 Corinthians 9:19-21 that the apostle Paul thoughtfully considered the attitudes of those to whom he preached and adjusted his approach accordingly. We will improve our effectiveness and our joy in Jehovah’s service as we show a similar heartfelt concern for those in our territory today.

