VOL. XXIII. DECEMBER 1, 1902. No. 23. 



CONTENTS. 

Views from the Watch Tower 355 

The Church as the Maker of the 
World's Conscience 355 

Sees Industrial War Ahead 357 

The Mountain of the Lord's House 357 

"Speak, Lord; for thy Servant 

Heareth." 359 

Christmas Hopes and Joys 362 

Review of the Year 365 

"The Lord is My Shepherd." 365 

Interesting Letters 366 

Special Items 354 

page 354 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
--ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-131 GREEN ST., FOREST GATE, LONDON. 

PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE, 5c (2-l/2d.) A COPY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity 
or adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER, will be supplied FREE, if 
they send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting 
the paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our 
list continually. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



OUR CHARTS. 



WALL CHARTS, five feet long, painted on substantial curtain 
cloth, with spring roller. Suitable for parlor meetings and 
small halls. These are in good supply, at $1.50 each, express 
paid. 

We have been delayed in sending out the small prophetic 
charts suitable for insertion in the new Bibles, on account of 



our printers. We hope to have these before long, and will 
make further announcement later. 

TABERNACLE SHADOWS. 

MANY of the truths of the Gospel were "preached beforehand" 
in the types and shadows of the Jewish economy. In 
the service of the tabernacle in the wilderness were embodied 
the principles of the entire plan of salvation, based upon the 
sacrifice of Christ, as represented in the bullock whose blood, 
sprinkled upon the mercy seat, made atonement. 

The significance of each article in the tabernacle, as well as 
of the sacrifices made therein, is set forth in TABERNACLE SHADOWS 
OF BETTER SACRIFICES, a pamphlet of 120 pages, neatly 
bound and illustrated. We have this booklet in good supply 
now. Price, 10 cents, postpaid; 50 cents per dozen. 



R3112: page 355 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 

THE CHURCH AS THE MAKER OF THE WORLD'S 
CONSCIENCE. 

THIS TOPIC is treated in a manner with which we 
sympathize but do not agree, by Rev. S. Z. 
Batten, in an article in the American Journal 
of Sociology. He asserts that money and military 
glory are the "false ideals" before the world, and 
inquires whether or not the Church has really spoken 
out against either of these. He thinks not and 
proceeds:— 

"In church and college, in society and in the 
press, rich men are honored and flattered and held up 
as models to be adored and imitated. The influence 
of all this, as any one can see, is to degrade the common 
morals; it is to set up a false ideal of life; it is 
to fire the imagination of the young with unholy and 
unworthy ambitions; it is to cast discredit on the 
poorer and humbler workers in the kingdom of God. 
Every careful student of modern society declares that 
the reign of commercialism has come, and with the 
reign of this commercialism there has come a sad confusion 
of moral values. This commercialism places 
money above life, and things before men. 'Our whole 
society,' says Felix Adler, 'is infiltrated with the 
money-getting idea.' There is danger lest a commercialism 
utterly destitute of moral and spiritual 
conceptions shall usurp the place which should be held 
by truer and Christlier ideals.... 

"Closely akin to this is another false ideal which 
is set up before the people for honor and imitation. 
As every one knows, the military ideal has held sway 
for untold ages over the minds and hearts of men, and 



the great men of history are largely military leaders 
and conquerors. How far militarism is necessary in 
an imperfect and evolving society it does not concern 
us here to inquire. The military captain no doubt 
has had his work to do in the world, and let him have 
his wreath of laurel leaves. But the military ideal, it 
is needless to say, is not the Christian ideal, and the 
two can never be completely harmonized." 

Mr. Batten considers it the Church's duty to 
quicken the political conscience of the world; and 
considers it a dangerous sign that people have ceased 
to expect unselfishness in politics. He continues:— 

"As every one knows, a double standard of morality 
prevails, and men have one kind of right for their 
personal and family lives, and a different kind of right 
for their political and commercial lives. All such 
things as sentiment, conscience and love are ruled out 
of politics, and we are told that the Decalogue and the 
Sermon on the Mount have nothing to do with a political 
campaign. ...The chancellor of the German 
empire has lately declared: 'I can not conduct foreign 
policy from the point of view of pure moral philosophy. 
It is not ours to ask what is right and what 
is wrong. The politician is no judge of morals; he 
has solely to maintain the interests and rights of his 
country.' Another man, not himself a practical politician, 
but a political philosopher, Professor Willoughby, 
declares: It is, in fact, quite superfluous to show 
in this age that from their own inherent nature divine 
and moral sanctions can have no application to political 
matters.' So long as such sentiments prevail in 
high places, it is not surprising that they should 
appear in low places. And so long as such sentiments 
prevail, whether in high places or in low, that long 
the church of Jesus Christ will have a most fiery and 
relentless mission." 

Inquiring into the church's attitude on social 
questions, he declares that "in our time the power of 
Christianity is to be proved by its ability to create a 
Christian type of human society," and adds:— 

"It is intolerable to all right religion that numbers 
of people should be miserable and needy while 
there is plenty to spare in the Father's house. No 
one who believes in Jesus Christ can believe that it is 
the will of the heavenly Father that one part of the human 
family shall go hungry and destitute while another 
part is living in luxury and ease. The most tragic fact 
about this poverty and ignorance is not the hunger 

R3112: page 356 

and suffering, though these are sad enough. The saddest 

feature about it all is the waste of human life, 

the fact that the wonderful possibilities in these human 

brothers are never unfolded and realized. A 

social and industrial system in which one man controls 



thousands of lives and is possessed of millions of 
money; in which able-bodied men willing to work 
walk the streets in desperation looking for a job; in 
which thousands of women, owing to oppressive labor 
and small remuneration, are under a continual temptation 
to barter womanhood for gain; in which are 
tenements not fit for pig-sties where women fight with 
fever, and infants pant for air and wail out their little 
lives; in which the sweater's den and the grog-shop 
thrive— such a society is very far, indeed, from that 
order which God wishes and ordains." 

To the query, Isn't this a hazardous topic? he 
replies:— 

"That may be; but hazardous to whom? To 
the preacher? All the real hazard to him arises from 
the fact that he is faithless to his trust. To the 
hearers? Would to God it were more hazardous to 
those who are guilty of the monstrous wrongs which 
hurt their fellows and hinder the kingdom of God!... 

"The mission of the church is evident; the 
church's credentials are clear; the need of the world 
is great. Nothing could be more weak and pitiful 
than for the churches to confess that whole provinces 
of life lie beyond their interest. Nothing could be 
more cruel and cowardly than for the churches to say 
that they have no word to offer on the problems which 
make the peril and the opportunity of our time. 
Nothing could be more calamitous and short-sighted 
than for the churches to leave to outsiders, to unbelievers 
often, the discussion of current wrongs and 
the leadership in moral reform." 

THE GENTLEMAN'S WRONG VIEW-POINT. 

We admire Mr. Batten's zeal and courage for the 
right, but discern that, like many more, he is in trouble 
by reason of a misconception of the divine plan of 
the ages and the Church's mission thereunder. 

The Church should, indeed, "lift up a standard 
for the people," the world;— in her pulpits, in her 
press, and in the "living epistles" of her people. 
But she is not to blame that the world in general will not 
follow her precepts and example. Did our Lord himself 
or his apostles transform politics? or reconstruct society? 
or abolish wars and injustices in their day? 
Assuredly not. Unsatisfactory as is the condition of 
things at present it was much worse for the poor 
"groaning creation" then. (Rom. 8:22.) Were our 
Lord and the apostles at fault then? By no means. 
Neither is the Church to blame that present conditions 
are what they are. 

But perhaps Rev. Batten would reply: The conditions 
now are different from what they were in the 
days of the apostles;— now we have what we call the 
"Christian World" of Europe and America and in 
these lands of "Christendom"; surely we should expect 



Christian methods in politics, finance and society. 

What folly, dear brother! Is it possible for us 
to deceive ourselves into thinking that the world is 
Christianized? Is it possible for us even to consider 
that the professed church-membership is Christianized? 
Surely the term Christian world is as much 
a misnomer as the term Christian Scientist. Calling 
worldliness Christianity no more makes it so 
than calling black white would change it. 

The Church "whose names are written in heaven" 
consists only of those who have the spirit, mind, 
will, disposition of their Lord and Master, their Redeemer. 
These, today as ever, are but a "little 
flock" as compared to even the nominal church, and 
are scattered here and there throughout the sects, 
whose Babylonish, worldly, fleshly spirit troubles 
them, but whose wine of false doctrine deceives them. 
(Rev. 14:8; 17:2; 18:3.) Wherever they are, they 
are striving after and more and more attaining to the 
high ideals of their Teacher, whose word they hear, 
reverence and follow. During the absence of the 
Chief Shepherd the flock has become greatly scattered 
by "wolves," and misled by "goats" into various 

R3113 : page 356 

sectarian pens, where the wolf and goat influences 
are very unfavorable and trying to them; but they 
still remain sheep and still listen for the Shepherd's 
voice. 

We are living now in the day of the Shepherd's 
return;— he is calling his sheep not into a different 
pen and bondage, but to Christian freedom, with himself. 
And they are hearing his voice, "Come out of 
her, my people, that ye be not partakers of her sins, 
and that ye receive not of her plagues." (Rev. 18:4.) 
As at his first advent he gathered the Israelites 
indeed out of the Fleshly House, so now he will gather 
the same class out of the nominal Spiritual House. 
Then will his Kingdom come and his faithful have a 
share in it with their Lord. 

Then, the social and moral and religious and 
political and financial standards of the world will be 
in their hands (I Cor. 6:2); with full power and 
authority to execute justice and judgment, and to lift 
up the poor and the needy, and him that hath no 
helper under the present regime of selfishness. But 
now, the true Church does not rule the world, but is 
an insignificant minority, charged by their Master to 
learn lessons in meekness, patience, faith and character-likeness 
to himself and merely to let their "light" 
shine before men whom they are forewarned they 
will be unable to influence to any appreciable extent; 
—because the darkness hateth the light and will refuse 
to be scattered by their tiny lamps, and will flee only 
when the Lord and his glorious Kingdom shall shine 



forth as the Sun of Righteousness. 

R3113 : page 357 

The Church indeed is to have as correct standards 
as possible now, and to display these before 
the world. They have already modified and do continually 
modify the world's conscience and standards; 
but they cannot transform them. The few who are 
transformed become soldiers of the cross;— "not of 
the world" even as their Master was not of the world. 



As for the world, it is probably no worse at heart 
than it has ever been; but it has greater opportunities 
than ever for exercising its selfishness: moreover 
the world is probably more sincere, more candid, less 
hypocritical than of yore, and with a greater freedom 
each encourages the other to speak and act more 
nearly out of the abundance of the heart than formerly. 
This, however, it cannot be denied is dangerous 
under present conditions. Full liberty is sure to 
be more or less dangerous to all except saints,— the 
true Church— and even they must keep constant 
guard, and realize that they are not their own— that 
they have given up their liberty to the Lord and become 
his bond-servants, at liberty only to do what he 
approves. 

OURS A HIGHER STANDARD. 

The Lord's people are not to forget that while 
they should live up to the spirit of the world's best 
laws, they may go much farther than these in many 
respects. These laws represent the world's ideals as 
respects justice and generosity and kindness and unkindness; 
and frequently fall far short of the Lord's 
standards. It is not enough, therefore, that we keep 
within the laws of man: it is for the true members of 
Christ to "lift up a standard for the people"— God's 
standard, the Golden Rule. 

In morals, too, the Lord's people are not to measure 
themselves by the world's standards; but to remember 
that it is their duty as exponents of the divine 
standards to discern sin and meanness and selfishness 
in the bright light of the spirit of the Truth and 
to measure up to that as nearly as their imperfect 
bodies and their environment, with the Lord's grace 
assisting, will permit. 

SEES INDUSTRIAL WAR JUST AHEAD. 



Dr. E. G. Hirsch sees in the struggle between the rich 



and powerful of America and the dependent classes the same 
conditions that existed in France just prior to the French 
Revolution. In a sermon delivered last night at Temple Israel, 
treating on the situation in the anthracite coal region 
of Pennsylvania, he sounded a note of warning to the "men 
who so audaciously declare that the treasures of the earth 
are by unquestionable right their own, to have and to hold 
against all mankind." 

Today he reiterated the statements of the sermon. 

"Our religion teaches," he said, "that a man's property 
is not his own, but is merely held by him in trust for the 
benefit of all. The powerful of earth should realize that 
we are in the midst of the same conditions that existed in 
France and which brought on the Revolution. 

"The rich and powerful classes in France refused to 
take warning from what was going on about them and relied 
upon the power which they fancied they had. The 
Revolution came like the eruption of a volcano, and we in 
America should take warning. 

"The earth belongs to God and not to individual men. 
Therefore whatever man produces should be administered to 
the benefit of all and not for that of the selfish few. 

"The proper social condition is not one where men crush 
down the multitudes and disregard their claims upon their 
consideration, but where wealth is so distributed and organized 
that social well-being is within the reach of all 
honest and virtuous men. 

"Right now we are standing over a volcano which may 
burst forth with all the fury of Pelee. The security of the 
men who despise the downtrodden burden-bearers is a 
fancied security. 

"In times past the police and military forces of the 
country have been willing to protect them. They forget 
that these forces are drawn from the very ranks of the people 
they are oppressing, and that their sympathies are naturally 
with their own people. Therefore if they continue 
to disregard the wishes of the people and to fling insults at 
them the time will come when their calls for protection will 
fall upon unheeding ears. 

"It is a saddening thought that a 'captain of industry' 
could become so inflated with his own arrogance as to lay 
God-given claim to his holdings upon the earth. Such a 
man is but fanning the smoldering embers of hate, discontent 
and unrest, so that the prosperity for which he hopes 
will pay the penalty. If they are temporarily successful 
in their oppression they must expect the discontent and 
hatred of the conquered to continue to rankle and to burst 
forth anew as soon as the oppressed have rested and recruited 
their strength.— Chicago American. 



R3113 : page 357 

THE MOUNTAIN OF THE LORD'S HOUSE. 



"The earth is the Lord's, and the fullness thereof; the world, and they 
that dwell therein. For he hath founded it upon the seas and established 
it upon the floods. Who shall ascend into the hill of the Lord? 
or who shall stand in his holy place? He that hath clean 
hands, and a pure heart; who hath not lifted up his soul 
unto vanity, nor sworn deceitfully."— Psalm 24:1-4. 

IN THIS PSALM the prophet David takes the 

standpoint of the dawn of the Millennial age, 

when, after the great time of trouble, the 

kingdoms of this world will have become the Kingdoms 

of our Lord and of his Christ (Rev. 1 1: 15), — 

when the "Times of the Gentiles" will have been fulfilled, 

and "he whose right it is" will have taken unto 

him his great power and begun his glorious reign. 

Those who have studied the plan of the ages and its 

times and seasons know that this is due to be accomplished 

by the year 1915,— only 12 or 13 years from 

the present time. Then will the words of this prophecy 

be fulfilled— "The earth is the Lord's and the fullness 

thereof; the world, and they that dwell therein; 

R3113 : page 358 

for he hath founded it upon [instead of] the seas, and 
established it upon [in place of] the floods."— 
Verses 1,2. 

The earth, the world, the seas and the floods, the 
hills and the mountains are all used here, as in numerous 
other instances, in a symbolic, and not in a literal 
sense, which would be absurd in this connection. The 
earth and the world represent the present social order 
of things, or human society as at present organized. 
The seas and the floods represent an increasingly 
large class of mankind which restlessly recoils against 
the restraints of the present social order and at times 
grows turbulent and threatening. The hills and mountains 
represent governments. 

When the earth is the Lord's and the fullness 
thereof, it will not be because all the kingdoms of this 
world will have been converted to God and purified, 
and their kings permitted to reign by the grace of 
God, as they now claim to do, and because all the now 
restless masses of men will have become docile and 
submissive to the present governing powers; but it 
will be as the prophet declares, because God will have 
"founded it upon the seas and established it upon the 
floods." That is, the present earth, or social organization, 
and the present heavens, or ruling powers, will 
have passed away, and the new earth will be established 
upon the ruins of the old. When the waves of 
the restless sea-element of society shall have arisen 
in their might and overwhelmed the whole present 
social order, so that the wild and stormy sea of anarchy 
shall prevail everywhere, then, amidst the 
wreck and ruin, the desolation and universal despondency 



and despair, the voice of Jehovah will be heard, 
saying, "Be still, and know that I am God; I will be 
exalted among the nations, I will be exalted in the 

R3114: page 358 

earth." (Psa. 46:10). And out of the wild commotion 
of that stormy sea God will bring order and peace. 

Instead of this restless sea of humanity he will 
found the new earth, the new order of things; yea, and 
he will firmly establish it upon [in place of] the floods; 
there he will establish his Kingdom "which cannot be 
moved." (Heb. 12:28). And he will set his King upon 
his holy hill of Zion and give to him the nations for 
his inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the earth 
for his possession. (Psa. 2:6,8). Then, indeed, shall 
the King, the Lord's anointed, reign in righteousness 
and princes shall decree justice (Isa. 32:1); and, 
in consequence, there shall be abundance of peace so 
long as the moon endureth.— Psa. 72:7. 

There will then be but one Kingdom (mountain 
or hill) in all the world— the Kingdom of God; and his 
Anointed will be King in all the earth in that day. 
(Zech. 14:9). This hill or kingdom of the Lord is that 
to which the Psalmist refers when he raised the question, 
"Who shall ascend into the hill of the Lord, and 
who shall stand in his holy place?" To ascend into the 
hill of the Lord is to come into his Kingdom as loyal 
and obedient subjects, as true citizens, worthy of all 
its blessings and privileges; and not as aliens and foreigners, 
having no part nor lot in the common interests 
and inheritance of all the true and loyal people 
of God, viz., eternal life and all its blessings of righteousness, 
peace and everlasting joy. Who indeed 
shall be counted worthy thus to ascend into the mountain 
of the Lord? "And who shall stand in his holy 
place?" The reference here is to the antitype of the 
typical temple of God, which, standing upon the top 
of Mount Zion, prefigured the glorious true temple, 
the Church of the living God, in Kingdom power and 
glory. Who shall stand in that holy place in that age 
of glory and blessing now so near at hand?— who 
shall be counted worthy to reign with Christ in his 
Kingdom? 

The answer to both inquiries is the same "He that 
hath clean hands and a pure heart; who hath not lifted 
up his soul unto vanity, nor sworn deceitfully." 
These will be the required qualifications for citizenship 
in the Kingdom, when the Kingdom is established; 
and they are also the qualifications required now 
of all those who would be heirs of that coming Kingdom. 
It will be observed that the qualifications mentioned 
are not those of faith (for faith in the gospel 
of the Kingdom, which includes faith in Christ the 
King and Redeemer, is implied in the desire to be in 
the Kingdom in any capacity); but the qualifications 



mentioned here are those of character. The Scriptures 

elsewhere make more specific mention of the 

necessary faith, but always implying a character consistent 

with the faith. (Acts 16:31; John 3:16,36). 

The prophet does not ignore faith, but points to that 

character which is the legitimate consequence of a 

true faith exercised unto godliness. A faith which 

does not produce character is null and void. (Jas. 2:17). 

Therefore it is plain that both the heirs and 

the subjects of the Kingdom of God must have that 

character which is both begotten and developed by 

the faith of the gospel; for if the faith of the gospel 

be held in unrighteousness there is no place in the 

Kingdom for any such. (Rom. 1:18). Let us consider 

the character-requirements here mentioned. 

"Clean hands."— That means clean actions, clean 
conduct. If bad habits of any kind have been cultivated, 
they must be promptly forsaken. The hands 
must not be defiled with the holding of bribes, nor 
with the gain of oppression, and every evil thing must 
be resolutely put away. (Isa. 33:15). It is in vain 
that any profess loyalty to God and to his anointed 
King and Kingdom while they continue in a sinful 
course of action. Loyalty to the Kingdom signifies 
determined opposition to sin in all its forms and a firm 
resistance of it. 

"A pure heart."— That signifies purity of will, intention 
or purpose, which, like the needle to the pole, 
always turns toward righteousness. Though some 
sudden or strong temptation may for an instant, 
through the weakness of the flesh, draw it to the right 
or to the left, yet quickly it recovers its normal position 
which is true to righteousness and truth. A pure 
heart loves righteousness and truth, and hates iniquity. 
It loves purity, and despises all that is impure 
and unholy. It loves cleanliness of person, of clothing, 
of language and of habits. It delights only in 
the society of the pure, and shuns all others, knowing 

R3114: page 359 

that "evil communications corrupt good 
manners." 

"Who hath not lifted up his soul unto vanity."— 
Pride is an abomination to the Lord and to all those 
who partake of his spirit. It is a weed which, if once 
permitted to take root in the heart, will soon crowd 
out every grace. The Psalmist says, "I hate vain 
thoughts"; and such should be our sentiments. The 
grace of humility, meekness, is one of the most beautiful 
that can adorn the character. It takes a sober 
estimate of personal qualifications, is not puffed up, 
does not behave unbecomingly, and seeks to exercise 
its talents, not for pride and vain glory, but for the 
joy of doing good. It is modest, candid and sincere, 
both in consideration of its own qualifications and 



those of others. What comfort and pleasure are found 
in the society of those possessed of such a spirit! 

"Nor sworn deceitfully."— Those who make a solemn 
covenant with the Lord, and who thereafter wilfully 
despise or ignore it, have sworn deceitfully; and 
surely no such disloyal subjects can be admitted 
either to citizenship or heirship in the Kingdom of 
God. But those who, in this age, have made a solemn 
covenant with God and who are true to their covenant, 
even unto death, they shall ascend into the holy place, 
the temple of God— they shall be the heirs of the 
Kingdom, joint-heirs with Jesus Christ; while all 
such, in the age to come, shall be recognized and 
privileged citizens of the Kingdom. These shall receive 
the blessings of the Lord promised in his Word. 
After first receiving the imputed righteousness of 
Christ through faith, they may, under divine grace, 
be made perfect in righteousness and worthy of eternal 
life. 

This is the generation of them that seek the face of 
the God of Jacob. Men do not obtain these blessings 
without seeking them, nor without seeking them in 
God's way— through Christ, by humble reliance upon 
his finished work of redemption, and by the full consecration 
of all their ransomed powers of mind and 
body to his holy will, which is only our reasonable 
service. 

Beloved, ye who are called by his grace to stand in 
his holy place, let us ponder these things. Are our 
hands clean and our hearts pure? are we humble 
and faithful to our covenant? Let us see that we meet 
these conditions, and let us run with patience the race 
set before us, looking unto Jesus. 



R3114: page 359 
"SPEAK, LORD; FOR THY SERVANT HEARETH." 
-I SAMUEL 3:6-14.-DECEMBER M.- 
SAMUEL, the prophet, is one of the grand, strong 
characters of Old Testament times. The 
story of his early devotion to the Lord and 
his obedience and perseverance in well doing, constitutes 
a grand lesson, not only for young Christians, but also 
for those more advanced in years, including parents. 
As the story of Ruth gives us glimpses of a time of life 
of the Israelites such as is generally obscured by the 
records of wars and troubles, so also does the story of 
Samuel. He was of the tribe of Levi already consecrated 
to the Lord, and accepted. An insight into the 
deep piety of his parents is given in the first chapter 
of the Book. A child born under such circumstances 
of prayer and devotion to the Lord, could not, under 



natural laws, fail to be noble minded and religiously 
inclined. Would that we could impress this thought 
upon all Christians who become parents— that their 
children should be devoted to the Lord from the moment 
of conception! and daily prayer and effort should 
be made that the pre-natal influences might all conduce 
to the highest mental, moral and physical welfare of the 
offspring. "Who can bring a clean thing out of an 
unclean?" asked the Prophet, and he answers, "Not 
one." Our expectation should not, therefore, be that 
the children even of the saints would be absolutely perfect; 
but we are to remember that the Lord accepts 
the heart, the intention, the will; and that agreeably 
to his arrangement of nature, the mind, the intention, 
the will of the parents may be expressed in their child. 
True, the imperfect mind cannot even grasp or picture 
perfect things, but it can approximate them, and in 
that same proportion it can impress that approximation 
of character upon the offspring. There is an old adage 
that "blood will tell"— that is, that culture and good 
breeding will be marked in the offspring. It is surely 
a fact that character will tell. Christians, thoroughly 
devoted to the Lord and seeking day by day to know 
and to do the divine will, and who are under the 
instruction of the holy spirit in the school of Christ 
and somewhat developed in grace and in knowledge of 
the truth, whose minds are transformed by the renewing 
of the holy spirit, and their affections set upon 
things above, will surely mark and impress the spiritual 
qualities of their own hearts upon the natural offspring. 
Such children, well born and devoted to the 
Lord from conception, will, of course, in childhood be 
trained by the same parents in the ways of the Lord, 
in the ways of righteousness, of justice, of truth and of 
love. Thus begotten and thus trained, it seems very 
improbable that they should afterward depart from the 
way of the Lord, or that they should permanently remain 
transgressors, even though temporarily misled 
through temptation. 

While the Lord has directed his children not to be 
unequally yoked together with unbelievers, nevertheless, 
where the yoking or marriage has occurred prior 
to their covenant with the Lord, he has arranged that 
the fruit of their marriage, their children, shall be 
accounted as the Lord's through the consecrated parent; 
and his blessing will accordingly be with the consecrated 

R3114: page 360 

child regardless of the fact that one of its parents 
was an unbeliever. The Apostle clearly states this in 
I Cor. 7:14. 

It is a serious error— and one into which some 
Christians have fallen— to suppose parentage to be dishonorable 
or sinful— some even claiming that "original 
sin" was of this sort. The Scriptures teach quite to 



the contrary, declaring that "marriage is honorable in 

all, and the bed undefiled." We are to remember, too, 

that the divine plan for the propagation of the race was 

arranged and the command to multiply and fill the 

earth was given before sin entered the world— before 

the disobedience in Eden. The Apostle severely reprimands 

those "forbidding to marry," and distinctly 

says, in his letter to Timothy, "I will therefore that 

the younger women marry, bear children, guide the 

house, give none occasion to the adversary to speak 

reproachfully."— I Tim. 5:14. 

Neither is this in conflict with his declarations in 
I Cor. 7, that "he that marrieth doeth well but he 
that marrieth not doeth better." In his letter to Timothy 
he is speaking of the younger persons of the 
congregation; whereas in his advice in Corinthians he 
is addressing such members of the Church as had made 
a full consecration of themselves to the Lord, and were 
seeking to run in the race course toward the mark for 
the prize. And our advice to others on this subject 
should be strictly along these inspired lines. The 
advice not to marry will usually be found helpful to 
those who have made a full consecration of themselves 
to the Lord, who will find that they can accomplish 
more in the Lord's service free, as far as possible, from 
earthly obligations and division of heart. But for 
others who are not "new creatures," though moral 
and well disposed, marriage is the reasonable and proper 
expectation of life according to divine arrangement; 
it should not be hindered, but should be counselled as 
wisely as possible. 

We are to recognize a difference between the consecrated 
parents of Samuel and their prayers for a son, 
and the proper prayers of consecrated people of the 
present time. Only since Pentecost have the Lord's 
people been privileged to be "new creatures in Christ 
Jesus," begotten of the holy spirit; and such seek and 
pray for spiritual rather than natural children;— by 
spending their lives as did their Master seeking to transform 
children of the first Adam into spiritual children of 
God. It is in view of this, and when addressing spirit-begotten 
ones, that the Apostle declares that "he that 
marrieth not doeth better,"— because he will, generally 
speaking, find the unmarried condition most favorable 
to his new ambitions. 

Born in response to prayer and consecration, Samuel 
was, doubtless, a remarkable boy; and his parents 
showed the sincerity of their prayer in the fact that he 
was early brought to the high priest at Shiloh and formally 
presented to the Lord's service. We read that 
this was when he was "weaned," but are not to suppose 
that it was when as an infant he was weaned from 
the breast; but, rather, interpreting the word on a larger 
scale we should understand it was when he was weaned 
from his mother, in the sense of being able to get 
along without her care: this was probably when he 



was from ten to twelve years of age. 

We are often surprised that Christian parents, begotten 
of the holy spirit, do not manifest more of this 
spirit which actuated the parents of Samuel. Many 
seemingly consecrated people hold back their most 
precious possessions, their children, from the Lord, 
and incline to devote them to some worldly calling in 
life— medicine, law, industry. Whether their course 
is prompted by too great humility or by too great selfishness, 
it is not our province to determine; but seemingly 
they either have not the faith to believe that the 
Lord would accept their offering, or they cherish, perhaps 
but half consciously, a desire to see their children 
prosper after the manner of the world, and fear 
that their consecration to the Lord might in some 
manner blight their earthly prospects. What a great 
mistake! Do not such parents know that it is their 
privilege to present themselves to the Lord and all 
they have, including their children? and do they not 
know, too, that "The blessing of the Lord, it maketh 
rich, and he addeth no sorrow with it"? (Prov. 10:22.) 
Can they not realize that it is better to be a doorkeeper 
in the house of the Lord than to dwell in the 
tents of wickedness? and that greater happiness would 
accompany a devoted life, even though spent in poverty, 
than could come through any other course, even 
though surrounded by every luxury? Have they not 
learned these lessons from their own experiences? and 
can they not apply them likewise to their own children? 

Samuel ministered to Eli in the temple; that is, 
he served the high priest— who was specially the Lord's 
servant and representative— in his dwelling apartments 
which were close by the tabernacle,— for the temple 
was not yet built. Samuel's parents, in thus subjecting 
him early in life to the duties of a servant, were 
really putting him in a most excellent school. In our 
opinion it is a mistake to suppose that the early years 
of life— from ten to eighteen— should be largely spent 
in play; not only is the wisdom of bringing children 
early into positions of responsibility, and, more or less, 
of routine and drudgery exemplified in the case of 
Samuel, but it is also exemplified in the cases of many 
of the prominent people of this land today. Mr. Carnegie, 
whose fame is world-wide, entered early upon 
the drudgery of life as a telegraph messenger. Mr. 

R3114: page 361 

Edison, whose fame as an electrician is also world-wide, 
began life's drudgery as a newsboy. And thus it is in 
perfect accord with the experiences of today in worldly 
things that we perceive that the consecration of Samuel 
as a servant of Eli at an early age had probably 
much to do with the firmness and grandeur of his 
character when, subsequently, he became the Lord's 
prophet, and the last and the greatest of Israel's Judges. 



Our observation is that there is no more common 
mistake made by parents than that of supposing their 
children could not understand or appreciate religious 
things properly at an early age— say twelve years. The 
experience of Samuel and our own experience and that 
of many others assure us that some of the deepest religious 
sentiments may be experienced as early as twelve 
years of age. This should be watched for by the parent 
and should be cultivated with much more care 
than they cultivate the tenderest flowers in their gardens. 
The flowers of veneration, spirituality, hope, 
faith, trust, in the child-mind need and should have 
tenderest care and watering and weeding and assistance. 
The parent by nature and by divine direction occupying 
a responsible position as gardener to these, must 
appreciate flowers in the hearts of his own family; and 
if he neglect his responsibilities he is culpable and will 
surely suffer, not only disappointment in respect to his 
children in the future, but suffer also in that he will 
be the loser of certain blessings in his own heart; because 
it is a part of the divine arrangement that he 
that watereth others shall himself be watered. 

Public responsibilities and duties, and trying to 
save other people's children, can never excuse any 
Christian parent from his responsibilities toward his 
own children; nor can he shift his responsibilities 
upon Sunday School teachers. His neglect of duty 
will surely work to his own disadvantage as well as to 
the disadvantage of his offspring; and if in the past 
he has been negligent in this matter he cannot too soon 
rectify matters, though he will need to pray for and to 
seek to exercise greater wisdom necessary to overcome 
his past neglect. 

The story of the Lord's first message to Samuel is 
beautiful in its simplicity. The boy evidently was 
accustomed to obeying the calls of Eli for various services 
at various times, and to this end had his sleeping 
apartments near by— Eli was advanced in life, about 
seventy-eight years of age. Three times the Lord called 
Samuel, and he answered, "Here am I," and went 
to Eli. It was after the third call that Eli instructed 
him to say, "Speak, Lord; for thy servant heareth." 

The record is that for a long time such a message 
from the Lord had been "precious," that is, scarce: 
Eli, although a good man, and sincere and faithful and 
kind in his dealings with Samuel, had been too lax in 
his dealings with his own sons, who were priests and 
had much to do with the services of the tabernacle, and 
who, therefore, in every sense of the word should have 
been pious and exemplary men. The Lord had already 
sent Eli a warning message respecting his sons 
who were profligate and open transgressors, not only in 
financial affairs, but also in morals. Eli should have 
realized his responsibilities and should have checked 
their wrong course and, if necessary, should have dismissed 
them from the service of the tabernacle even 



though they were his own sons; but in proportion as 
he had grown weak in mind and body, they had grown 
strong, self-willed and impious, and the old man seems 
not to have had the necessary strength of character to 
deal with them. The Lord's message delivered to Samuel 
was in respect to Eli's family and the punishment 
that should come upon them for their sins, which were 
much more grievous in view of the fact that they were 
the exemplars and instructors of the people. 

Eli's experience with his wayward sons calls for 
our sympathy; yet doubtless in some respects, at least, 
he brought his difficulties upon himself by reason of 
his neglect of the early training of them in the ways of 
the Lord, in the ways of his righteousness. Doubtless 
he often looked at the faithful lad who ministered to 
him so patiently and industriously, and wished that 
his sons had been of similar disposition; but the time 
so to wish advantageously and profitably was long 
gone by; they should have been begotten in the spirit 
of consecration, and trained in conformity therewith, 
and the Lord's Word for it is that when they were old 
they would not have departed from it. There is a lesson 
for parents here, too; the fact that the Lord's 
service is to be considered of primary importance and 
is to be defended even at the expense of their own flesh 
and blood. 

In the morning Samuel hesitated to tell his 
kind master, Eli, the unfavorable message he had received 
of the Lord in the night; but Eli was anxious 
to know whatever the Lord had to say, and importuned 
until Samuel told him all. There is a good lesson here 
for the Lord's people— a lesson of humility and kindness; 
the lad might have felt puffed up to think that 
the Lord, who so seldom spoke to any, had now spoken to 
him; he might have felt himself honored and above Eli, 
in that the message spoke of the discomfiture of the latter; 
pride might have made him boastful and inconsiderate 
of the feelings of his master so that he would have 
taken delight in telling him of the calamities that 
would come, and how greatly he had been honored of 
the Lord. Samuel, on the contrary, exhibited the 
spirit of meekness, apparently not even considering the 
honor that had come to him; but, rather, sympathizing 

R3114: page 362 

with his master he would have preferred not to 
burden his heart with the message of calamity. 

The Lord is speaking now to some of his faithful 
ones through his Word, through his "knock" (Rev. 3:20), 
which tells us of his presence, through the signs 
which mark the incoming of the new dispensation: are 
any disposed now to be haughty and proud and boastful 
because the Lord has permitted them to hear his 
voice and to know something of his plan and of the 
calamities coming upon Babylon? Should they not 



rather be filled with humility so that self would be lost 

sight of entirely? Should not all favored of the Lord 

speak of the trouble coming upon Babylon sympathetically, 

with a disposition to assist to an escape, rather 

than a disposition to gloat over and rejoice in coming 

troubles in which present systems will be completely 

overthrown? 

The Lord speaks in our day in a different manner 
from that in which he spoke in olden times: as the 
Scriptures declare, "God, who at sundry times and in 
divers manners spake in time past unto the fathers by 
the prophets, hath in these last days spoken unto us by 
his Son. " (Heb. 1:1,2.) The Word of the Lord is 
still precious and scarce in that it is not, at the present 
time, given to all, but only to a certain class; as it is 
written, "He that hath an ear to hear let him 
hear." The majority of mankind have no ear to hear 
at the present time, no eye to see the glorious beauty 
of God's plan. As the Apostle explains, "The god of 
this world hath blinded their minds"— earthly things, 
earthly ambitions, earthly hopes, earthly calls and 
voices, distract their attention, fill their capacity; but 
blessed are our eyes for they see, and our ears for 
they hear, and blessed shall we be if, like Samuel, 
when we hear the Lord's message we respond promptly, 
"Speak, Lord, for thy servant heareth." Such as 
thus respond shall be taught of God— by the Word of 
his grace,— the words of the Lord Jesus, and the 
words of his inspired apostles— instructed and guided 
in the understanding of these through the holy spirit, 
through the various helps and channels and agents 
which the Lord is pleased to use— perhaps a tract, perhaps 
a book, perhaps a letter, perhaps a conversation, 
perhaps a sermon. 

He who would continue to be taught of the Lord, 
must continue to listen for his voice, continue to be in 
the hearing and obeying attitude of heart. The difficulty 
with some apparently is that their own wills are 
not fully extinct, dead— that their consecration is not 
complete; hence while consecrated enough to wish not 
to disobey the Lord's voice, they have certain ideas of 
their own respecting what his voice should say, and 
they prefer to interpret his message in conformity to 
their own preferences: they will to do more or less 
their own wills, and will to hear the Lord's voice directing 
them in accordance with their own wills. This is 
a most dangerous situation and is generally accompanied 
by self-conceit and self-assertion and will ultimately 
lead far from the Christian's goal. Let each of 
us resolve by the Lord's grace that we will out of honest 
heart continually seek to hear the pure Word of God, 
and that with a desire to obey it as far as we are able. 



R3114: page 362 



CHRISTMAS HOPES AND JOYS. 

--LUKE 2:8-20.-DECEMBER 31.- 

"For unto you is born this day in the city of 
David a Savior, which is Christ the Lord." 

CHRISTMAS (or Christ's festival) by general usage 
is celebrated on December 25th; and 
since its commemoration is not enjoined in 
the Scriptures, but is merely a voluntary commemoration 
of a great fact rather than of a particular date, we 
do well to celebrate it decorously at the usual time;— 
notwithstanding the fact that we disagree with the date, 
and hold, according to the evidences, that our Lord 
was born about October 1st, and that December 25th, 
nine months previous, was probably the date of the 
annunciation.*— Luke 1:30,31. 

Our confidence in Jesus that he was the sent of 
God, the Redeemer, the Messiah, the Deliverer of his 
people, rests not merely upon the testimony of the 
apostles in the New Testament records, wonderful and 
convincing as these testimonies are: they gain nine-tenths 
of their weight and importance from the fact 
that they evidence the fulfilment of promises, types 
and prophecies given by the Lord with more or less explicitness 
from time to time throughout the preceding 
4,000 years. He who does not discern something, at 
least, of the divine plan of the ages in connection with 
our Savior, his birth, his three and one-half years' ministry, 
his sacrificial death, his resurrection, his ascension, 
etc., fails to get the real strength of the divine 
revelation, designed by the Lord to be the firm foundation 
for his people's confidence in him and in all the 
glorious things which he has promised he would yet 
accomplish through this great Savior. 

Note the original promise of the Savior shortly after 
sin had wounded our first parents and brought them 
under divine sentence. (Gen. 3:15.) Note the promise 
made to Abraham respecting Messiah that he 
should be of his posterity. (Gen. 22:18.) Notice the 
same to Jacob. (Gen. 28:14.) To David. (2 Sam. 7:12-16.) 



*See MILLENNIAL DAWN, Vol. II., p.54. 

R3115 : page 363 

Through Isaiah the prophet, his coming 

and his greatness are foretold. (9:6,7; 11:1-9.) Daniel, 

the prophet, also refers to the importance of his 

work of making an end of sin and bringing in everlasting 

righteousness, and thus sealing the visions and 

prophecies which the Lord had just given respecting 



him and the favor to come through him. (Dan. 9:24.) 
We recall also how he was typified in Isaac who was 
not only the heir of the promises made to Abraham, 
but who was also in a figure put to death and received 
again from the dead. We remember also the types 
and figures of the Mosaic arrangement, and how Moses 
himself was declared to be like unto the greater one to 
come after him. 

Had the hopes of Israel been merely concoctions 
to deceive the people, we may be sure that the deceiver 
would have been careful to have marked out some 
remarkable line of parentage for the coming Messiah; 
—free from blights, scandals, etc.; but this was not 
done; instead, the weaknesses of the flesh amongst our 
Lord's progenitors are fearlessly noted. Judah, the 
son of Jacob, and head of the tribe from which our 
Lord sprang, was not above reproach and his general 
character was faithfully portrayed; his son, Phares, 
through whom our Lord's lineage runs, was born of an 
unlawful union. Rahab, the harlot of Jericho, a foreigner 
who became an Israelite indeed, was amongst 
our Lord's progenitors; so was Ruth, the Moabitess, 
another foreigner adopted as an Israelite. The line 
even through David is compromised by coming through 
Bathsheba, the widow of Uriah, the Hittite. The New 
Testament writers are similarly candid and make no 
hesitation in recording the genealogy. All of this is in 
full accord with the scriptural presentation of the matter; 
namely, that our Lord's virtue, his sinlessness, 
his separateness from sinners, was not through the 
flesh, not through his mother, but through his Father, 
God.* 

According to the flesh, Jesus Christ took hold of the 
seed of Abraham, as the Apostle explains; but as we have 
already seen, through various circumstances he was indirectly 
related also to the outside world. All of this is 
interesting to us, but nothing to be compared to our 
still greater interest in the fact that our Lord Jesus, 
although born a Jew under the Law, and redeeming 
those who were under the Law, did more than this, 
in that his death as planned by the Father and accepted 
by himself was a propitiation "for the sins of the 
whole world." He died as the ransom price for Adam 
and his sin, and thus purchased from condemnation 
not only Adam, but his entire posterity involved 
through his transgression; hence, as the Apostle points 
out, "He is able to save [deliver] unto the uttermost 
all who come unto God through him." (Heb. 7:25.) 
Not only so, but our Lord's circumstances of birth and 
early experiences in comparative poverty as a working 
man, impress us with the thought that he is indeed 
able to sympathize with mankind in every station of 
life; having passed from the glory of the Father to the 
lowest condition of humanity and back again, he is 
surely able to appreciate and to sympathize with all 
conditions and classes. 



The narrative of our lesson is so simple as to require 
few comments; our chief interest centers in the 
message which our heavenly Father sent us through 
the angels at the time they announced the birth of 
Jesus: "Fear not"— the angel understood well that 
through sin and degradation a fearful apprehension 
comes over man when he finds himself in contact with 
spirit beings; he is apprehensive of certain further condemnation 
or punishment; his acquaintance with man 
in influence, authority and power, leads him to dread 
the still greater authority and power of the Almighty, 
lest it should be injurious to him. Only the true 
Christian, having the eyes of his understanding opened 
to appreciate the length and breadth and height and 
depth of the love of God, can have that perfect love 
toward the heavenly Father which is built upon an 
intimate knowledge of his Word, and which casteth 
out all fear. We are reminded of the prophet's words 
respecting the Lord's people of today, "Their fear toward 
me is taught by the precept of men." (Isa. 29:13.) The 
Lord would have his people free from this fear, though 
not free from a proper reverence toward him. 

The message continues, "I bring you good tidings 
of great joy which shall be to all people." How slow 
the Lord's people have been to believe this message and 
to accept the Savior at his full worth! How prone 
they seem to be to suppose first of all that he was to be 
a Savior merely for the Jews; or secondly, a Savior 
merely for a special elect class; or thirdly, a Savior 
only for those who under present darkness, ignorance, 
prejudice, superstition and devilish influences, manifest 
a special love for righteousness! But how broad 
is the statement— great joy— for all people! Our faith 
is not broader than the positive declaration of the Scriptures, 
when we hold firmly that our God graciously has 
arranged that every member of our poor fallen race 
shall yet be blessed with a clear understanding not only 
of his own weaknesses and imperfections through the fall, 
but also by a clear understanding of the great redemption 
price paid by the Savior, and a share in the glorious 
opportunities thus secured to return, if he will, 
back to full harmony with God and to full blessings 
and everlasting life. 

The angels did not declare that our Lord came to 



*See MILLENNIAL DAWN, Vol. V., chap. iv. 

R3115 : page 364 

bring universal and everlasting salvation to all people; 
but they do declare that the good message of joy, 
of privilege, love, hope, shall extend to all people. 
The explanation of this is that a Savior had been born 
—a deliverer of the weak, the helpless, the dying, able 



to succor to the utmost all who would come to the 

Father through him; able to open the blind eyes and 

to unstop the deaf ears that all may come to an appreciation 

of the goodness of God shining toward them in 

the face of the Lord Jesus. 

The word Savior, otherwise rendered Deliverer, 
signifies in the Syriac language, literally Life-giver. 
What a wonderful thought is conveyed by that word! 
What is it that our poor, dying race needs? It needs 
deliverance from the sentence of death, and then it 
needs deliverance from death itself, into life complete 
and abundant and everlasting. Our Lord has already 
become our deliverer in the sense that he has bought 
us with his precious blood, that he has settled our 
account with Justice. As a result of this work already 
done (since the church which is the body of Christ has 
followed in the footsteps of our Lord and has about 
"filled up that which is behind of the afflictions of 
Christ," (Col. 1:24), very shortly now, under the 
sounding of the Seventh Trumpet, the mystery of God 
will be finished,— completed,— and atonement for the 
sins of the world shall be proclaimed with a full emancipation 
proclamation to all people. Good tidings of 
great joy it will surely be! full of gracious opportunities 
for enlightenment, restitution and obedience, and 
for a full return to all that was lost by father Adam, 
including life in perfect degree— lasting life! 

No wonder after this message had been delivered, 
the Lord permitted an angel host to serenade the proclamation, 
and incidentally to prophesy also of the grand 
results yet to flow from the great work of redemption, 
which was then only beginning in the birth of the 
Redeemer! Properly the anthem begins with praise to 
him that sitteth upon the throne, to him who devised 
the great and wonderful plan of redemption and who 
sent his Son, our willing Redeemer; glory to him in 
the highest— in the highest strain of heart and voice, 
with fullest appreciation of him as a Savior! Next 
came the consequences on earth; namely, peace;— not 
such a peace as men might patch up between themselves 
and between nations and parties, and that under 
present conditions would be sure very soon to be scattered 
to the winds; but a peace with God, a peace 
which comes from a restoration to the race of the divine 
good will. It was because divine justice could not spare 
the guilty, that the sentence of death, the "curse," has 
borne down upon our race for now six thousand years. 
Under that divine sentence of death the dying race has 
become impoverished, not only physically but mentally 
and morally, and selfishness has become the rule, and 
in its wake have come all our selfish ambitions and 
pride and strife and vain-glory and money love which 
have caused so much of the trouble that mankind has 
experienced. 

But now, glory to God in the highest! because 
peace has been established upon a firm foundation— 



the lifting of the curse through the payment of our 

penalty by the Lord's own arrangement! As soon as 

the body of Christ has suffered with the Head, the 

great antitypical day of atonement will be complete, 

and peace between God and man will be established, 

will be renewed, and as a consequence the Redeemer 

shall take to himself his great power and reign for the 

purpose of blessing and uplifting those whom he purchased 

with his own precious blood. In their interest 

it will be necessary that the great peace shall be introduced 

by the breaking in pieces of present institutions 

with the iron rod of the new Kingdom, as the vessel of 

a potter they shall be crushed as henceforth useless; 

that in their stead may come the grander and perfect 

institutions of the Lord's Kingdom. He will wound 

to heal, to bless, to bring in peace on the basis of everlasting 

righteousness; for ultimately he will destroy all 

those who, after being brought to a knowledge of the 

truth, will still love unrighteousness and tend to the 

corruption of the earth. He will destroy them, not in 

anger but injustice, in love, that an everlasting peace 

in full accord with that which is in heaven may prevail 

upon earth. 

Wherever the story of God's redeeming love has 
gone, even though confused by various falsities, it has 
carried more or less of blessing with it;— even to neglectful 
hearers and not doers of the Word, it has 
brought blessing; and still more blessing to others who 
hear partly and obey partly; but its greatest blessing 
has been to the little flock, the royal priesthood who, 
entering into the spirit of the divine arrangement, have 
realized themselves justified through faith in the precious 
blood, and in harmony with the invitation of the 
Lord have gone forward, presenting themselves living 
sacrifices that they might have fellowship with Christ 

R3116 : page 364 

in the sufferings of this present time, and also, by and 
by, in the Kingdom glories that shall follow. It is 
this class chiefly that is now rejoicing in a still fuller 
opening up of the divine Word so long beclouded by the 
falsities coming down from the dark ages; it is this class 
that is chiefly now rejoicing in the discernment of the 
lengths and breadths and heights and depths of the divine 
love and of the divine plan which has purchased the whole 
world and will eventually recover from present degradation 
all who under the favorable conditions of the 
Millennial Kingdom will develop the character which 
God demands of all who shall have eternal life— a love 
of righteousness and hatred of iniquity. 



R3116 : page 365 



REVIEW OF THE YEAR. 

-DECEMBER 28.- 

Golden Text— "Lord, thou hast been our dwelling 
place [refuge] in all generations."— Psa. 90:1. 

HAPPY surely will all those be who at the close of 
the year can look backward through it and 
realize that safe and secure in the city of 
refuge which God has provided for us as his people, we 
have been prospering, rejoicing, growing under his 
favor and guidance in a knowledge of himself and of 
his plans respecting mankind; and especially respecting 
the elect church, the body of Christ, which in the 
school of Christ is now being prepared for the glorious 
work of the Millennial Kingdom. We trust that our 
dear readers will find much of encouragement as they 
look back. If we can see that we have faithfully 
sought at every step to walk in the footsteps of Jesus, 
we will have special cause for rejoicing; and if we see, 
on the contrary, that some of the steps have been crooked 
and perverse, and if we mourn for such digressions 
from the narrow way, we may be sure that the Lord is 
very pitiful, of tender compassion, ready to forgive, to 
heal, to help. It is for this very reason that he provided 
this city of refuge, and for this very reason that 
we must needs abide in it continually— abide in Christ 
under the cover of his merit and his robe of righteousness. 
It will comfort our hearts, in any event, to 
remember the suggestion of the Apostle that if God so 
loved us while we were yet sinners that he gave his 
only begotten Son for our redemption, much more 
does he love us— more even than that, now that we are 
adopted into his family and seeking to walk in the 
footsteps of Jesus, however imperfectly our good desires 
may be accomplished. 

We need to make fresh resolutions continually 
along the way, and now at the close of the year is a 
favorable time for this. Not that we liberate ourselves 
in any degree from the everlasting covenant into which 
we entered with our Lord, but that recognizing its permanence, 
we strengthen ourselves by re-asserting it to 
the Lord, telling him of our good desires and intentions 
in respect to faith for the future, and improving so notable 
an occasion as the beginning of another year for 
this reiteration of our loyalty and of our confidence in 
his faithfulness. 



R3116 : page 365 

"THE LORD IS MY SHEPHERD." 
THE LORD, in calling his people his sheep, 



chose a very significant emblem of the character 

he would have manifested in them. The 

most noticeable characteristics of the sheep are meekness, 

docility and obedience to the shepherd to whose 

care they fully entrust themselves. They are very true 

to the shepherd: they study his voice, watch for the indications 

of his will, and trustfully obey him. When 

they hear his voice, quickly, and without the slightest 

hesitation or faltering, they run to obey it. But the 

voice of a stranger they will not follow, for they 

know not the voice of strangers. 

What a lesson is here for the Lord's "little flock," 
over whom he is the good Shepherd. The weakest 
lamb in the flock knows his voice and hears him say, 
"This is the way: walk ye in it." And while there are 
thousands of voices calling, now in this direction and 
now in that, the Lord's sheep, acquainted with his 
Spirit and his Word, turn away from all save the well 
known voice of the Shepherd. In various ways our 
Shepherd speaks to his flock of sheep and lambs. His 
written words treasured up in the heart mark the 
way of truth continually; his special providences further 
shape the peculiar course of each individual; and 
the abiding presence of his holy Spirit makes manifest 
every intrusion of any other spirit which seeks to beguile 
and to lead astray. The true sheep will carefully 
listen for the faintest accents of the voice of the 
Shepherd— i.e., he will treasure up his words in his 
heart; he will study his providences; and he will cultivate 
that communion and personal fellowship with 
the Lord which are his privilege. Those who thus 
abide in him can never go astray. 

"They can never, never lose their way." 

They may not have much learning, and, humanly 
speaking, would not be able to grapple with all the 
sophistries of error. But, being so well acquainted 
with the Master's voice, they quickly perceive that 
such voices are the voices of strangers, and they will 
not follow them; for they are loyal and obedient to 
the Shepherd only. 

In such an attitude of mind and heart is our only 
safety in the midst of all the difficulties and confusion 
of this evil day. And all such may confidently sing 
with the Psalmist— 

"The Lord is my Shepherd, I shall not want. He 
maketh me to lie down [to rest— the rest of faith] in 
green pastures [with abundance of satisfying food]; 
he leadeth me beside the still waters [deep, refreshing 
truths]. He restoreth my soul [reclaims it from 
death]; he leadeth me in the paths of righteousness 
for his name's sake [because I am his child and bear 
his honored name]. Yea, though I walk through the 
valley of the shadow of death [The entire journey of 
life since the fall has been through a vale of tears, upon 
which rests the shadow of death], I will fear no evil; 
for thou art with me; thy rod and thy staff, they comfort 



me. [Thy word and providences discipline and 
guide me in the way]." Our Shepherd's providence 
not only disciplines the true sheep, but protects them 
from the "wolves" and other foes. 

R3116 : page 366 

With the Prophet, we can also say, "Thou preparest 
a table before me in the presence of mine enemies [for 
even while beset by Satan and Sin, we are sustained 
by the Lord's abundant provision for every necessity]; 
thou anointestmy head with [the] oil [of joy], 
my cup [pleasure] runneth over [even while, as a pilgrim, 
I am beset with life's difficulties]." And, in 
view of the Lord's present and past leading, all, who 
continue to be truly his sheep, can certainly trust 
that— "Surely goodness and mercy shall follow me, 
all the days of my life; and I will dwell in the house of 
the Lord [will be recognized as a member of his 
household, as his child] forever." 

Let us seek to cultivate more and more the meek, 
docile and loyal character of the sheep, that so we may 
be abundantly blessed by the care of the good Shepherd. 
Such a disposition does not commend itself to 
the world— the wayward goat, the bold lion, or the 
stealthy bear, the subtle serpent and vicious vampire 
are more fitting emblems of their ideals, and are usually 
the emblems selected for their escutcheons. But 
let the world love its own, while we remember that 
we are not of the world, but are sent forth as sheep 
in the midst of wolves, and that our safety and spiritual 
prosperity depend, not upon our own wisdom and 
sagacity, but entirely upon our diligent hearkening to, 
and patient following of, the voice of the good Shepherd, 
who will very soon highly exalt his little flock 
and crown them with an exceeding and eternal weight 
of glory. 



R3116 : page 366 

LETTERS OF INTEREST. 

DEAR BROTHER:- 

Gratitude and love to a gracious God and to you, 
his servant, constrain me to write this note. I resigned 
the Southern Methodist pulpit in the town of 



this state. I resigned supposedly on account of my 
health, but really on account of my faith. I had not 
yet "added" courage to my faith (2 Pet. 1:5); was 
not yet really in the truth, but feeling for it. Keeping 
my "heretical" doubts to myself, I continued searching. 
Meanwhile, until last week, I have sustained 
supernumerary relations to the Conference which met 
last week, and, if they granted my request, which I 



suppose they did, John 8:32 is fulfilled in my experience. 
For the first time in my life "I stand erect 
and free." 

I was searching earnestly for the light in the city 
library in Denver, Colo., reading everything that promised 
to throw light on the hard problems of life and 
death, when my eye fell on your God-directed work, 
MILLENNIAL DAWN. I had heard of it and knew 
that it was much despised; nevertheless, I resolved 
to read it earnestly and with an open mind, for in my 
distress I had reached that point where I was willing 
to receive truth even from "Nazareth." I read all 

R3117 : page 366 

five volumes with my Bible always open and with 
ever-increasing delight. 

Again I thank you for pointing so constantly and 
faithfully to the "more sure word of prophecy;" truly 
it "shines as a light in a dark place." 

Enclosed find one dollar for the WATCH TOWER. 
I am working at my old trade, stone-cutting, and shall 
continue at it (D.V.). I should like to distribute 
some more tracts. Your brother, 

E. L. KENDRICK,-Missouri. 



page 366 

CHARLES T. RUSSELL, 

DEAR BROTHER:— I have been reading your book, 
"THE PLAN OF THE AGES;" it is indeed a wonderful 
book, and I thank God it ever came to me. My birthday 
was the second day of August and my niece, a 
worldly woman, sent me as a present five of your 
books. She little knew what she was giving me. Oh, 
the joy and gladness it has brought into my life! I have 
been a believer and been looking for the return of my 
Lord for many years, longing and hoping to live until 
he came; but for some time it seemed to me our people 
(Second Adventist) presented no new light, and 
we seemed to be standing still. Now this great restitution 
hope has come to us, bringing such a feeling as 
lifts us (so it seems) nearer our God and makes so 
many dark sayings in his blessed Word clear and 
beautiful. I never loved him so much as now when I 
see how great is his plan of salvation. 

My husband and myself have read the first book 
three times, and also read the second, and now in the 
third. Sometimes it has seemed so strange for us to 
believe some of the things you write, for we have been 
taught so differently; yet by prayer we have thus far 
been able to accept the blessed light and feel we have 
entered into the joy of our Lord, believing he has 
come and raised the dead, or those of them who are 



to be his bride. 

We feel such gratitude to you, our brother, for 
the light we now have that we greatly desire to know 
you personally. Again thanking you for the good 
received from your writings, and praying God to bless 
and keep you, I am, Yours in sisterly love, 

MRS. A. S. BARNEY,-Rhode Island. 



R3117 : page 366 

MY DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

I enclose you $ ; please send me one of those 

new reference Bibles, and the remainder please apply 
to the "Good Hopes" of myself and wife. I am sorry 
we cannot at this time send a larger expression of our 
"Good Hopes" for "the glad tidings of great joy 
which shall be to all people." We hope to supplement 
this offering shortly. 

And now I want to express to you and all those 
of the Bible House at Allegheny how we enjoyed the 
convention at Washington. It was the greatest privilege 
of our lives to meet with so many dear friends of 
like precious faith. It was truly a "time of refreshing 
from the presence of the Lord." Especially 
was I delighted to witness on this occasion the symbolic 
baptism of my wife into the death of our Lord 
Jesus Christ. We are now not only one in the flesh, 
but one in the spirit and body of Christ, and probationary 
members of the Church triumphant. We 
pray that we may pass our trial successfully and "rejoice 
in our sufferings and fill up that which is behind 
of the afflictions of Christ in our flesh for his body's 

R3117 : page 367 

sake," and in so doing may finish our course with 

joy. 

For your benefit and encouragement I want to 
say, dear Bro. Russell, the literature you are sending 
forth as "meat in due season," is making the household 
of faith strong, yea, brave in the Lord, by truth. 
This morning I was hailed on the street by my former 
pastor, a D.D. (in whose presence two years ago I 
would have quailed). He introduced me to another 
D.D., and asked if I had any news. I said, "Yes, 
good news!" and drew from my pocket one of the 
discourses as I had taken it down at Washington. I 
said, "Look here,— in Acts 3:21 God has promised 
restitution of all things, and that all the holy prophets 
had spoken of it," and I showed him in their 
respective order from I Samuel to Malachi they all 
had spoken of it copiously, and that further God himself 
had made a covenant with Abraham as to this 
restitution and affirmed the same to Isaac and Jacob; 



and now that these patriarchs were dead, together 
with countless millions who had not received those 
blessings, said I, "the Lord has shown us in Jno. 5:28,29 
when and where to look for the solution of this 
matter." In repeating the last clause of the 29th 
verse he broke in and said "damnation." I said, 
"No, sir! 'by judgment,' and you know as well as 
I do that 'by judgment' is the correct rendering. 
Now, gentlemen, why don't you preach the gospel of 
our Lord Jesus Christ?" By this time Bro. H 



had Bro. C by the arm, pulling him down the 

street, and said to me, "Well, I reckon you will have 
to make the ministers preach it right." May God 
have mercy on the preachers who are promulgating 
false doctrine! Yours in Christian love, 
W. B. SUTTON,-Virginia. 



MY DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

I want, in a few words, to express my appreciation 
of the good things which we all received at the Washington 
convention. It was the grandest feast it has ever 
been my privilege to attend, and the memory of it will 
remain with me as long as I remain in this tabernacle. 
I wish to express my thanks both to the Washington 
brethren, who contributed so much to the welfare and 
enjoyment of visiting brethren, and also to yourself 
and coworkers for the part which you contributed 
unto edifying the "body of Christ;" but above all I 
wish to thank our dear Lord for his manifest presence 
and blessing. I believe it is impossible to estimate 
the good resulting from these conventions, in the way 
of spiritual blessings. Each person gets some new 
light on different features of the plan and purpose, 
and these are taken home and given to the Lord's 
truth-hungry people who could not attend; and the 
"unity of the spirit" is so manifest at these gatherings, 
that the "body" is more and more "knit together 
in love," while all realize the significance of 
Paul's statement, "Forsake not the assembling of 
yourselves together," as they otherwise would not. 
In my own case, I can truly say that I received such 
an uplift and blessing as it has never been my lot to 
experience before. Praise God for his goodness, 
blessing and love, as it is now manifested to his chosen 
people. May his favor and his spirit be continued to 
you, dear Bro. Russell, and to all the brothers and 
sisters everywhere, and may we all be kept by the 
power of God until we shall receive the "change" 
promised,— is my daily prayer. 

Sincerely, your brother and servant in the Lord, 
R. H. BARBER, -New York. 



page 367 

MR. C. T. RUSSELL, 

DEAR BROTHER:-Although I could not go to 
either one of the general conventions this year (and 
oh, how hard it was to receive as from the Lord that 
I could not go!), it is with rejoicing that I write to 
tell you how true we find it to be, that it is hard to 
estimate the value of the knowledge and spiritual uplift 
received at these conventions, carried to other hundreds 
—in every direction. Our little company here 
has received so much of the convention drippings that 
we almost feel as though we had, all of us, been on 
hand at those love feasts. It brings to mind what 
Isaiah says, "As the rain cometh down and the snow 
from heaven, and returneth not thither, but watereth 
the earth, and maketh it bring forth and bud, that it 
may give seed to the sower, and bread to the eater; 
so shall my word be that goeth forth out of my mouth." 
So also the convention blessing cometh down from 
heaven, and does not return void, but bringeth increase 
to the recipient, a rich store to him that passeth it on, 
and joy and strength to all who take it in. 

Praise be to our God and glory to our Lord, who 
so abundantly blesses us! Remember Sister K., our 
children and myself at the throne of grace, as we do 
you always. With much love, your brother, 
J. G. KUEHN,-Ohio. 



MY DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:- 

Tomorrow will be the anniversary of the day 
when in Dallas you stood beside the pool in which I 
was buried in baptism with my Lord. At each recurring 
anniversary sweetest and most precious memories 
fill my heart to overflowing, and impel me to send to 
the WATCH TOWER missionary fund a thanksgiving 
offering for the same— as a tiny proof of my remembrance 
of the date. I enclose a money order. I would 
also like a few tracts for distribution. 

That God may forever have you in his tender 
care is the prayer of Your friend in him, 

MRS. EMMA PASCHAL,-Texas. 



R3117 : page 367 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

I am an old man 78 years of age, with a very limited 
education, but a subscriber to WATCH TOWER 
for two years and have MILLENNIAL DAWN. Pardon 
me for intruding on your precious time in telling you 
how I enjoy reading the DAWNS and TOWERS; and now 
after being a member of the M.E. church for 35 



years I have withdrawn from that church as I could 
not endorse its doctrines; am no member now, but 
trying to serve the Master as best I can. Pray for me. 
Yours truly, A. J. JONES,— Pennsylvania. 

[We trust, dear brother, that you may never withdraw 
from the true Church— "whose names are written 
in heaven."— Editor.! 



page 369 

SEMI-MONTHLY. 