What Will You Choose?
HISTORY testifies to the fact that the ideas and theories of men are always changing. What men say, therefore, simply cannot be depended upon to provide sound guidance for living. On the other hand, the Bible, as demonstrated during a period of many centuries, has provided safe guidance to those who have really followed it. In view of this, by which guide do you wish to live​—by the Bible or by the changeable opinions and philosophies of men?
Do not allow yourself to become discouraged by the fact that few people today live by the Bible. Their failure is not due to its being too hard to follow the Bible’s guidance. Note, for example, what God, through Moses, said to the Israelites about the Law given to them: “This commandment that I am commanding you today is not too difficult for you, nor is it far away. It is not in the heavens, so as to result in saying, ‘Who will ascend for us into the heavens and get it for us, that he may let us hear it that we may do it?’ Neither is it on the other side of the sea, so as to result in saying, ‘Who will pass over for us to the other side of the sea and get it for us, that he may let us hear it that we may do it?’ For the word is very near you, in your own mouth and in your own heart, that you may do it.”​—Deut. 30:11-14.
Not knowing the prophetic meaning that the Christian apostle Paul gives to those words of Moses at Romans 10:5-8, the Jews may have thought that all that was meant was this: The commandment was not beyond their ability to keep, so as to gain thereby God’s mercy. By means of the commandment they could readily understand what to do. For the Jews to learn what God wanted did not require scaling some heaven-high mountain, there to consult a representative of Jehovah God. No one had to travel to a distant land on the “other side” of the vast sea, perhaps to sit at the feet of some other man of God and take in instruction from him. The Law had been committed to writing and had been read in its entirety to the Israelites. Hence, it could be spoken of as being in their mouth and in their heart. The Israelites were able to make it a subject of their conversation, examination, reflection and heartfelt consideration.
Today, also, what God requires is not out of anyone’s reach. There is no need to undertake an expensive journey with a view to receiving special training in making the best of life now. The guidance needed for happy family life and for maintaining good relationships with fellowmen may, in fact, be right in your own home in the form of a copy of the Bible. If you do not have a Bible, doubtless you would have no difficulty in getting a copy in a language that you can read. Translations of the Bible, the whole or in part, are available in languages spoken by 97 percent of earth’s inhabitants.
If you are among the millions who have at least read parts of the Bible, you may, however, feel that it is not always easy to understand. This is true of some parts of the Holy Scriptures. But when the Bible deals with matters of daily living, it is clear and straightforward.
Nevertheless, a person should not limit himself to the portions of the Bible that are easy to understand. Since, not just part, but all of it is “inspired of God and beneficial,” a person certainly should want to understand as much of the Bible as he can.​—2 Tim. 3:16.
Perhaps you, too, would like to understand the Holy Scriptures better. Your attitude may be like that of the educated official serving in the court of the Ethiopian queen Candace. While this official was reading from the Bible book of Isaiah, the Christian evangelizer Philip approached him and asked, “Do you really grasp what you are reading?” “How can I,” the man replied, “unless someone explains it to me?”​—Acts 8:30, 31, New American Bible.
If you feel this way, Jehovah’s Christian witnesses in your area will be pleased to give the kind of help Philip gave to the Ethiopian official. At a time convenient to you, they will gladly study the Bible with you for about one hour each week, without any financial cost to you. Among the subjects you could consider are: “Who Is God?” “Why We Grow Old and Die,” “Where Are the Dead?” “Why Has God Permitted Wickedness Until Our Day?” “How to Pray and Be Heard by God” and “Building a Happy Family Life.” Might not a consideration of such subjects along with your Bible be of great help to you in gaining the benefits of a close relationship with God? Each year tens of thousands have been aided to do just that through weekly Bible discussions. Additionally, they have been enabled to find answers to problems that once perplexed them and to see that life can have real meaning and purpose.
As you grow in Bible knowledge, you will find that you can cope much better with problems that come up in life. In your own case you will see the fulfillment of the following words from the Bible: “If any one of you is lacking in wisdom, let him keep on asking God, for he gives generously to all and without reproaching; and it will be given him.”​—Jas. 1:5.
God-given wisdom to cope with trials and problems successfully is truly something desirable. Is that not the kind of wisdom you would like to have?
So if you are not presently studying the Bible with Jehovah’s Christian witnesses, why not do that and find out what a marvelous guide for living the Holy Scriptures provide? We are confident that you, like millions of others​—young and old, single people, married couples and family groups—​will be glad that you acted on this encouragement. Please get in touch with Jehovah’s Christian witnesses locally or write to the publishers of this magazine, expressing your wish to have a Bible study in your home or at another convenient location. Arrangements will then be made for someone to call on you.
[Picture on page 29]
Knowledge gained through Bible study can help you to cope with life’s problems successfully

