Where Sound Guidance Should Lead
Why are strong, unified families important? “Entire civilizations have survived or disappeared, depending on whether family life was strong or weak.”​—“World Book Encyclopedia,” Vol. 7, p. 24.
Selfishness, bitter quarreling, lack of communication, and suspicion undermine a family’s strength. What should sound guidance do for a family? It should lead a family away from these weakening influences. It should encourage, instead, unselfishness, deep affection and trust among all family members. Following a dependable guide should, therefore, be expected to produce better husbands and wives, better fathers and mothers, and better sons and daughters. Yes, the result should be unified families​—families in which each member is concerned, not primarily about himself, but about what will be in the best interests of all.
Sound guidance should also aid people to avoid or minimize stress that can be destructive to personal security, good health and fine relations with fellowmen.
Neurologists recognize that stress can bring about changes in a person’s system that may damage his health and jeopardize his life. A person who becomes physically ill due to frustrations, anxiety over making a living, or poor relations with fellowmen may regain his health if he can be helped to change his altitude and outlook. Hence, proper guidance should also serve as a preventive measure, contributing to a person’s enjoying the best from life under the present circumstances. What kind of guidance, then, is needed?
Man needs guidance that would lead him away from becoming too attached to material things and that would give him assurance that he will not be reduced Io a hopeless state. Such guidance should also aid him to overcome jealousies, hatreds, prejudices and suspicions. It should move him to shun habits that are physically and emotionally harmful.
Can any man or group of men provide the fine guidance that points to a secure and happy future for you and your loved ones?
[Picture on page 4]
Living in harmony with sound guidance should result in producing . . .
NOT THIS . . .   BUT   STRONG, UNIFIED FAMILIES
[Picture on page 5]
FROM THIS . . .         TO THIS

