page 1 

SEMI-MONTHLY 
VOL. XXV. JANUARY 1, 1904. No. 1. 
CONTENTS. 



Views From the Watch Tower 3 

Pray for the Reapers 4 

The Financial Storm 5 

The World's Outlook 5 

Special Trials Follow Consecration 5 

The Teacher and His Message 

Rejected 11 

The Earth Shall Yield Her Increase 15 

General Conventions, 1904 16 

Public Ministries of the Truth 16 

Special Items: 

Dawn Vol. VI Further Delayed 2 

R3294 : page 2 

THIS JOURNAL AND ITS MISSION. 



THIS journal is set for the defence of the only true foundation of 

the Christian's hope now being so generally repudiated,— Redemption 

through the precious blood of "the man Christ Jesus who gave himself 

aransom [a corresponding price, a substitute] for all." (I Pet. 1:19; 

I Tim. 2:6.) Building up on this sure foundation the gold, silver 

and precious stones (I Cor. 3:1 1-15; 2 Pet. 1:5-11) of the Word 

of God, its further mission is to— "Make all see what is the fellowship 

of the mystery which. ..has been hid in God,. ..to the intent 

that now might be made known by the Church the manifold wisdom of 

God"— "which in other ages was not made known unto the sons of men, 

as it is now revealed."— Eph. 3:5-9,10. 

It stands free from all parties, sects and creeds of men, while it 
seeks more and more to bring its every utterance into fullest subjection to 
the will of God in Christ, as expressed in the Holy Scriptures. It is thus 
free to declare boldly whatsoever the Lord hath spoken;— according to 
the divine wisdom granted unto us, to understand. Its attitude is not 
dogmatical, but confident; for we know whereof we affirm, treading with 
implicit faith upon the sure promises of God. It is held as a trust, to 
be used only in his service; hence our decisions relative to what may and 
what may not appear in its columns must be according to our judgment 
of his good pleasure, the teaching of his Word, for the upbuilding of his 
people in grace and knowledge. And we not only invite but urge our readers 
to prove all its utterances by the infallible Word to which reference 
is constantly made, to facilitate such testing. 

TO US THE SCRIPTURES CLEARLY TEACH 



That the Church is "the Temple of the Living God"— peculiarly "His 

workmanship;" that its construction has been in progress throughout the 
Gospel age— ever since Christ became the world's Redeemer and 
the chief corner stone of this Temple, through which, when finished, 
God's blessings shall come "to all people," and they find access to 
him.-I Cor. 3:16,17; Eph. 2:20-22; Gen. 28:14; Gal. 3:29. 

That meantime the chiseling, shaping and polishing, of consecrated believers 
in Christ's atonement for sin, progresses; and when the last of these 
"living stones," "elect and precious," shall have been made ready, 
the great Master Workman will bring all together in the First Resurrection; 
and the Temple shall be filled with his glory, and be the meeting 
place between God and men throughout the Millennium.— Rev. 15:5-8. 

That the Basis of Hope, for the Church and the World, lies in the fact that 
"Jesus Christ, by the grace of God, tasted death for every man," "a ransom 
for all," and will be "the true light which lighteth every man that 
cometh into the world," "in due time."— Heb. 2:9; John 1:9; I Tim. 2:5,6. 

That the Hope of the Church is that she may be like her Lord, "see him 
as he is," be "partaker of the divine nature," and share his glory as 
his joint-heir.-I John 3:2; John 17:24; Rom. 8:17; 2 Pet. 1:4. 

That the present mission of the Church is the perfecting of the saints for 
the future work of service; to develop in herself every grace; to be God's 
witness to the world; and to prepare to be the kings and priests of 
the next age. -Eph. 4:12; Matt. 24:14; Rev. 1:6; 20:6. 

That the hope for the World lies in the blessings of knowledge and opportunity 
to be brought to all by Christ's Millennial Kingdom— the restitution 
of all that was lost in Adam, to all the willing and obedient, at the 
hands of their Redeemer and his glorified Church— when all the wilfully 
wicked will be destroyed.— Acts 3:19-23; Isa. 35. 

CHARLES T. RUSSELL, Editor. 



LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-24 EVERSHOLT ST., LONDON, N.W. 
GERMAN BRANCH-MIRKER STR., 45, ELBERFELD. 

PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE, 5c (2-l/2d.) A COPY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity 
or adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER, will be supplied FREE, if 
they send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting the 
paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list 
continually. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



VOL. V. IN GERMAN. 



This translation is in good stock, and orders will have 
prompt attention. 

DAWN VOL. VI. FURTHER DELAYED. 



Volume VI. seems to be unfortunate. Our printers 
have disappointed us further. However, it is on the 
press and a short time will see copies in the hands of the 
patient watchers. Wholesale rates are granted to our subscribers 
on single copies or more. 

PASTOR RUSSELL'S DISCOURSES EVERY MONDAY. 



By a special arrangement with The Pittsburgh Gazette a stenographic 
report of Pastor C. T. Russell's discourses will be printed 
on Mondays. We will send you "The Pittsburgh Gazette" 
(daily) and ZION'S WATCH TOWER twice a month for a period 
of 12 months for $3.25, which is about the price of The Gazette 
alone. The subscriptions must be paid in advance and sent to us. 

NOTICE.— Where Gazette agencies are established the issues 
desired can be readily obtained through them. The Gazette refuses 
to mail papers to towns where they would interfere with 
the agents already located. 



R3295 : page 3 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 

FROM the standpoint of the Truth and its prosperity 
—its victory over error— no year in the past, 
in our experience, has ever offered so grand a 
prospect. During the past year the Lord has done 
great things for his people, whereof we are glad. 
Viewed from some standpoints it is difficult to imagine 
that the coming year could equal the past one, much 
less excell it. However, as we are learning more of 
the Lord's ways we are coming to have greater confidence 
in his almighty power, which is able to make 
all things work out his glorious plans as the due time 
of each item arrives. 

But our hopes have circumstantial foundations 
supporting our faith. We will mention some of these, 
that we may hope and rejoice together. (1) The number 
of the interested is greater than ever before;— the 
WATCH TOWER list is nearly twenty thousand, which 



represents about 40,000 readers and colaborers. (2) 
The consecration of all seems to be deepening. (3) 
These furnish nearly one thousand "Volunteers," and 
guarantee a circulation of at least three millions of 
tracts which we may hope will find and enlist other 
earnest, consecrated heads, hearts and hands. (4) The 
Colporteur brigade is now nearly 150 strong, and many 
of them well tried and experienced soldiers of the cross, 
whose zeal increases as they realize that "now is our 
salvation nearer than when we first believed." (Rom. 13:11.) 
These will surely put into the hands of the 
Christian people many thousands of volumes of Millennial 
Dawn— which, in turn, should assist much in 
breaking down prejudice and superstition in thousands 
and in bringing hundreds into fellowship with the 
Truth. (5) The Pilgrim service will, we trust, be 
blest of the Lord to those already fully committed. 
(6) The Pittsburgh Gazette each week publishes the 
editor's sermon to from 70,000 to 85,000 readers far 
and near. This should prove a help to some. Many 
will read in a secular journal what they would refuse 
to notice elsewhere. (7) The "Good Hopes" prospects 
are favorable so far, and encourage us to lay our 
plans broad and deep for the year beginning. 

The above prospects relate to the "machinery" 
which the Lord seems to have provided and blessed in 
connection with the "harvest" work. Now let us 
look to the conditions in the world outside our influence. 
We find that an increasingly large number of 
pious, Christian people are losing their prejudice and 
getting their eyes opened, little by little, to the beauties 
of the Divine Plan of the Ages. It may be that the 
millions of tracts and hundreds of thousands of DAWNS 
which we have unitedly circulated, and the other efforts 
put forth to proclaim the truth, have been used of the 
Lord to break down the prejudice and to anoint the 
dim eyes. We are glad to hope so: we would feel 
discouraged indeed with any other view. 

However, we are inclined to think that the results 
are largely the operation of forces at work in an opposite 
direction. While we are busy heralding the Truth 
and endeavoring to show the real meaning of God's 
Word and its sureness of fulfillment, Satan is no less 
busy and has powerful influences at work. For the 
past twenty years he has been carefully sowing and 
watering the seeds of unbelief— "Evolution" and 
"Higher Criticism"— in all the colleges and theological 
seminaries of Christendom. As a result the "leaven" 
—the corruption of faith— abounds in every 
direction. To such an extent is this true, that the 
term "orthodoxy" practically stands for this modern 
form of "rationalism" or unbelief. 

The effect of this growing skepticism, or "falling 
away" from the faith, is two-fold. To a large class 
it is infectious: never well established or convinced of 



R3295 : page 4 

the truth of God's revelation, they needed only the 
word of some one "highly esteemed among men" 
(Luke 16:15), D.D., to turn them away from the 
truth to fables. Soon they plume themselves upon 
their "advanced views," and learn to look down upon 
those who hold fast to the precious Word (Titus 1:9), 
and to think of them and speak of them as "credulous" 
and "old fogy." 

These "snares of the Adversary" will, we doubt 
not, entangle the great mass of professing Churchianity. 
They shall indeed be snared and taken. A 
thousand will fall to one who will stand. (Isa. 28:13; 
Psa. 91:7.) But the Lord's truly consecrated 
people will be kept by the power of God through 
faith. At first they are sure to be bewildered as they 
hear their trusted under-shepherds advance the very 
arguments once set forth by Ingersoll, Paine and 
other opponents of the Word. They wonder whether 
or not they heard correctly, and finally they wonder 
if they have been too slow and stupid and too 
credulous. 

Alas! many of these dear sheep have relied too 
much on the creeds and traditions of men, and have 
not sufficiently "proved all things" before acceptance, 
with the standard of God's Word. And so their faith 
may be sadly shaken and their peace and joy in the 
Lord destroyed. But as surely as they are the Lord's 
sheep he will not abandon them, but if they cry unto 
him he will deliver them from the Evil One. 

Deliverance will come to them just in time;— just 
when they have learned to deplore their loss of faith 
and its connection with the joys of the Lord. We 
are rapidly approaching a time of famine for the hearing 
of the Word of the Lord. Those who have always 
fed on the husks of human theory and tradition 
will not be aware of this famine; but those who do 
know the Lord will begin to feel the pangs of hunger. 
"Blessed are they that hunger and thirst after righteousness, 
for they shall be filled." The Lord will hear 
their cry for the bread of Present Truth and will send 
it to them by the hand of some of his willing servants. 
Verily they shall be fed and led into green pastures; 
because they are true sheep and under the care of the 
true Shepherd.— Psalm 23. 

It is, therefore, in the interest of the Lord's true 
sheep that the Evolutionists and Higher Critics should 
become more and more bold and aggressive soon. So 
much the sooner will the Lord's true followers discern 
that Babylon has been rejected— that instead of the 
name meaning longer the Gate of God, it now stands 
for Confusion. When once they get their eyes open 
on this subject they will listen more carefully than 
ever for the true Shepherd's voice, and seek for the 
flock he is feeding, that they also may feed in pastures 



green and be refreshed by the still, deep waters of 
Present Truth. 

Our view in this direction is most encouraging. 
The leaders of Babylon are nearly all Evolutionists 
and Higher Critics, and their numbers and influence 
are making them more and more bold and outspoken. 
We welcome this progress of error in this class, realizing 
that it is the Lord's way of letting error and all 

R3296 : page 4 

things work out good to those who really love him;— 
the called ones according to his purpose. Thus God 
will cause the pride and worldly wisdom and wrath 
and boastfulness of Satan and his deluded ones to 
praise him, to serve his cause, to deliver his true 
sheep from the bondage of Churchianity. Let us be 
vigilant to use every opportunity to serve these and 
to do good unto all as we have opportunity; but let 
us not forget that the "strong delusions" the Adversary 
is now permitted to bring upon Christendom will 
not be permitted by the Lord to deceive "the very 
elect. "-Mark 13:22. 

PRAY FOR THE REAPERS IN THE HARVEST. 
-MATT. 9:28- 

Seeing that the fields of Christendom are thus 
white for harvesting, that everything is ripe for the 
gathering of the "wheat" class, what should be our 
attitude toward the Lord's work? The Lord arranges 
matters so as to place opportunities for his service 
within our reach— such opportunities for printing and 
circulating the Truth as never before fell to the lot of 
the Lord's people. Are we doing all that we can for 
the Lord's honor, and for the assistance of brethren 
both in and out of Babylon? Some are doing heroic 
service and are being blest. It is our duty to 
stimulate all as best we can to seize and use the opportunities 
as they are daily passing us. If we fail 
so to do some in the future might reproach us with 
not having done all we could to bring them into the 
place of greatest blessing and security; for it is the 
zealous that are least likely to be ensnared by the 
Adversary— if their zeal be born of love. 

This time of great opportunity for the Lord's 
service is likewise a time of great opportunity for 
self-service— for "money-making," etc. It is a time 
of general activity, and the question is— In what 
direction shall our energies be expended? Whom will 
we serve? The Lord, his Truth and his brethren? 
Or self, or the world, or the flesh, or the devil? 

This is the hour of trial for the consecrated. We 
have solemnly told the Lord that we love him more 
than we love houses or lands, or father, or mother, or 
self, or any other creature, and now he is putting our 



professions to the test. The measure of our sacrifice 
of earthly privileges for spiritual ones will mark the 
degree of our love, our devotion, to the Lord; and 

R3296 : page 5 

our favor with the Lord, our growth in him, in his 
character-likeness, will be proportionate. 

We all see the issue squarely. Let us each resolve 
that by the Lord's grace we will yet hear his 
voice declare of us, as members of his Bride,— "She 
hath done what she could." This will mean more 
energetic and more persistent service. It will mean 
more "Volunteers," and a still greater area of the 
wheat-field attended to. It will mean more WATCH 
TOWER subscriptions (free or paid— for you know 
that the interested poor are as carefully served and as 
much esteemed as those who can and do pay). It will 
mean daily watching and praying, that neither fear 
of man, nor pride, nor sloth, nor any form of selfishness, 
shall hinder us from attesting to the Lord our 
love and loyalty, nor deprive us of the present and 
future joys and rewards of his service. 

We have specified labor in the circulation of our 
Society's publications, because we know of no others 
giving the "harvest" message— no others which the 
Lord is using so specially and peculiarly; and because 
we address those who we believe view the matter in 
the same light. We urge your cooperation, not only 
for the good that may thus be done to others, but also 
for the spiritual profit sure to come to your own souls. 
The work as we view it is one— the Lord's, and hence 
yours and ours, in proportion as we are the Lord's 
and are colaboring with him. TOWER subscribers now 
number 19,000; let us see what, under the Lord's 
blessing, we can make it by this time next year. In 
our last issue you saw the circulation of tracts and 
DAWNS for the past year; let us see what we each can 
do to increase those large figures for the year now 
commencing. The way to accomplish large results is 
not to hope that some one else may do and bear and 
get a blessing in this service; but for each to resolve 
to do what he can. Ask yourself,— What more can 
I do to increase the circulation of the WATCH TOWER 
and the DAWNS? How many more DAWNS can I put 
into circulation than I did last year? How many 
more WATCH TOWER subscriptions can I influence 
than last year? Remember, however, that our desire 
for the list is that it shall represent the interested, 
whether free or paid subscriptions;— especially are we 
desirous of having the Lord's saints on this list. 

Pray for reapers! And ask the Lord to help you 
more and more as one of them, to gather much fruit. 
But in all this labor for others let us not forget that 
our first duty is the cultivation of the graces of the 
Spirit in our own hearts. "He that reapeth receiveth 



wages, and gathereth fruit unto eternal life." 
THE FINANCIAL STORM. 

Whether the financial storm is over, or only begun, 
no man knows; but appearances seem to indicate 
a clearing financial outlook for 1904. In any 
event, care and conservatism, "moderation," is the 
proper course for the Lord's people to pursue. Seek 
first (i.e., chiefly) the Kingdom of God (to be joint 
heirs in it with our Lord), and seek its righteousness, 
—the righteousness it will uphold; and so far as possible 
get out of debt and keep out of it. 

We still think, as a year ago, that the next few 
years will be very favorable ones for the propagation 
of the Truth. This may be by the continuation of 
"good times," permitting the purchase of DAWNS by 
all classes: or it may be by a curtailment of prosperity 
which may give some the time for thought and 
study as well as the inclination now lacking. 

THE WORLD'S OUTLOOK. 

There are strong indications of war between Russia 
and Japan, and there would be no knowing where 
the matter would end if once begun. Alliances might 
involve other nations. We look for a great war in 
which the whole civilized world will be involved (Joel 3:10), 
but know not if the time for it is very near. 
Our confidence is that the Lord is at the helm of national 
affairs in a special sense now, and that all things 
permitted will work favorably to the establishment of 
the Kingdom for which we long and pray. 



R3296 : page 5 

SPECIAL TRIALS FOLLOW CONSECRATION. 

-MATT. 3:13-4:11. -JANUARY 17.- 

Golden Text:— "And lo, a voice from heaven saying, This is 
my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased."— Matt. 8:17. 

THIS lesson, relating to our Lord's baptism unto 
death and his temptations in the wilderness, 
which immediately followed, illustrates the experiences 
of all who follow in his steps. In order to become 
Jesus' disciples at all, we must take a step which he 
did not take, namely, that of justification from our sins to 
divine favor and relationship through faith in the blood 
of Christ. Having taken this step the call of the Gospel 
age has been for such as are of right condition of heart 
to forsake all and follow the Lamb whithersoever he 
goeth— in trials, difficulties, oppositions and persecutions 



in this present life and into the glorious honors and 
divine favors of the life which is to come. Our Lord's 
experiences, therefore, furnish a good basis for reflection 
respecting what is to be expected and endured by all of 
his faithful. 

Our Lord's baptism was more than "John's baptism." 
The latter was merely for sinners against the Mosaic 
Law, and indicated a return to harmony with that Law 
and to the relationship with God which that Law 
Covenant through Moses established. Our Lord Jesus 
needed no such repentance and reformation, being holy, 

R3296 : page 6 

harmless, and separate from sinners; hence it was that 
John was astonished when he presented himself for 
baptism. At first John declined, asserting that of the two 
he himself rather than Jesus needed that baptism, since 
they were both heartily obedient to the divine arrangement 
and had not at any time been open transgressors of 
the Law. 

LIKE A DOVE. 

Without explaining to John what the latter would not 
have understood respecting the new dispensation and the 
appropriateness of water immersion as a symbol of his 
consecration unto death, our Lord merely said, Permit 
the service to proceed, John. I have a reason for so desiring 
it, and it is proper that I should do it in the fulfilment 
of certain things which I recognize to be right. 
Then John baptized him, and immediately after Jesus' 
baptism was finished and he had come up from the water 
John beheld and heard peculiar things, which apparently 
others thereabouts knew nothing of. He saw as it were 
an opening in the heavens, and something which he understood 
to represent the holy Spirit, the power of God, 
descending upon Jesus. This was possibly a stream of 
light, which came not violently, like the lightning, but 
gently, like a dove, and he heard a voice saying, "This is 
my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased." 

Whatever sentiments John entertained toward his 
cousin Jesus previously, he was now convinced by what he 
witnessed that his cousin was the Messiah. Then he bore 
record, saying, "Behold the Lamb of God, which taketh 
away the sin of the world," and testified that when he was 
sent with the mission to baptize, and to preach the Kingdom 
of heaven at hand, he was distinctly informed that 
in due time he would know the Messiah by seeing the holy 
Spirit from God come upon him. Nothing in the account 

R3297 : page 6 

indicates that others than John saw this vision, nor was 
it necessary for others to see it. John was to bear record, 
and those who heard him had the same opportunity that 



we today have of knowing about this matter. 
CONSECRATION AND BEGETTING. 

To Jesus this was a great moment— the moment of his 
begetting of the Spirit. He had left the spirit condition 
that he might fulfil the Father's will and plan by becoming 
man's representative, substitute, ransom price; but he 
had been promised that the faithful performance of this 
would bring to him again the spirit nature, with added 
glory and greatness and divine favor. Now at thirty 
years of age, as soon as was possible for him to begin his 
ministries under the Law, he had made a full consecration 
of himself as a man— to give his time, his influence, 
his energy, his life, "all that he had," to purchase the 
forfeited life and inheritance of father Adam and his 
entire posterity. The consecration made by our Lord at 
the moment of his baptism is represented in the Scriptures 
in these words, "Lo, I come (in the volume of the 
book it is written of me) to do thy will O my God; thy 
law is written in my heart." This full consecration to 
death involved every human power, and there— as sealing 
the engagement— the Father gave him the holy Spirit as 
a firstfruits of the new spiritual nature, which he would 
receive completely in his resurrection. That anointing of 
the holy Spirit was the begetting which, in due time, our 
Lord being faithful, would bring him to the birth of the 
Spirit in the resurrection. We know from the Scriptures 
that he was faithful and thus became the firstfruits of 
them that slept, the firstborn from the dead. 

Immediately he was led into the wilderness— Mark 
expresses it "driven into the wilderness"— by the Spirit, 
the holy Spirit, which was now his own spirit or mind or 
will. We can readily understand why the spirit thus 
forced him away from the society of others. Jesus 
realized that he had a special mission in the world, 
different from others; that he had left the spirit plane of 
being and had become a man, that he might accomplish a 
work for mankind. He realized that this work was an 
important one in the Father's sight, and that already for 
centuries his coming and the great work he was to do had 
been foretold in the types of the Law and in the words of 
the prophecies. Even at the early age of twelve years he 
had felt anxious to be about the Father's business, and as 
soon as the legal age for his engaging in the Father's 
business had arrived, he had hastened to make his vow of 
consecration to do the Father's will in everything. As a 
man he could not understand and comprehend clearly 
and fully the meaning of the various prophecies, even as 
the prophets did not themselves understand these; and, 
although familiar with the letter of the Scriptures, he 
had been obliged to wait for a clear understanding of 
them until the time of his anointing of the spirit;— because 
"the natural man [however pure and perfect] 
receiveth not the things of the Spirit of God, neither can 
he know them, because they are spiritually discerned."— 



1 Cor. 2:10. 
"LORD WHAT WOULDST THOU HAVE ME TO DO?" 

Jesus then hastened into the wilderness, away from 
friends and acquaintances and every distracting thing, 
that he might make use of the power of the holy Spirit 
that had come upon him, that he might use the new sight. 
The eyes of his understanding had been opened to comprehend 
the lengths and breadths and heights and depths 
of the divine love and plan which he was to fulfil. He 
must not confer with flesh and blood respecting his future 
course, even if there had been any one perfect like himself 
with whom he might have conferred. He must confer 
with the Father. He must take the Father's words 
through the prophecies, and the lessons through the types, 
and must hear and see in these the great work mapped 
out for him. He must make no mistake at the beginning 
of his mission. He must not hastily conclude that the 
suggestions of others respecting the course Messiah 
would pursue were correct. He must not even take his 
own previous conceptions of his work. He must look at 
everything from the new standpoint of the spirit. No 
wonder he wished to be alone with God, and with the 
Word of God, which he had treasured up in his heart 
from infancy, and which, having a perfect mind, he unquestionably 
had before him as plainly as though he had 
the printed book. 

Forty days passed, yet so intent was he upon the study 
of the work the Father had given him to do, and so 
perfect was he physically, that he did not hunger until 
then, as it is written, "He afterward hungered." The 
season had been a precious one, and undoubtedly the 
close of that forty -day period saw the Lord fairly well 
equipped in an understanding of the divine arrangement 
respecting the necessity for his death. He understood 

R3297 : page 7 

that the payment of the ransom price for the world was 
a prerequisite to his coming reign of glory and to its 
privilege of blessing all the families of the earth with 
an opportunity for attaining all that had been lost 
through father Adam's disobedience. But just at that 
juncture, when he was weak from his long fast and 
probably also from lack of sleep— for he probably was so 
deeply engrossed respecting the study of the divine plan 
that he neither ate nor slept those forty days— at this 
juncture of his extreme physical enervation came the 
adversary's chief besetments. True, through the forty 
days, while thinking of the divine arrangements, there 
were opportunities for questioning the wisdom of the 
divine arrangement; but these apparently were all 
nullified in the Lord's zeal to know and do the Father's 
will, and hence the temptations that are recorded are 
those following the fasting. 



"HE WAS A MURDERER FROM THE BEGINNING." 

We may well suppose that the great Adversary- 
through whose deception mother Eve fell into disobedience, 
which brought in its train the wreck and ruin of 
the race— was an interested spectator in everything pertaining 
to the divine plan. Of course he knew the 
prophecies. Of course he knew of our Lord's birth and 
the annunciation of the heavenly hosts that the babe born 
at Bethlehem was to be the Savior of the world, the one 
whose coming was intimated to mother Eve— the seed 
of the woman who was to bruise the serpent's head. No 
doubt Satan had watched Jesus in all of his course up to 
this present time, had seen his baptism of consecration 
and had seen the Father's recognition of him by the 
anointing of the Spirit. No doubt he had kept track of 
him while in the wilderness. All this is intimated in 
the words of one of the fallen angels or demons, who 
subsequently said, "We know thee who thou art, the 
Holy One of God." It may be noted here, however, that 
the Greek word daimonion (demons) is the word 
generally translated devils when speaking of the evil 
spirits which our Lord and the apostles cast out of 
many, but in the narrative of our lesson this is not the 
word used. Here we have the word diabolus, preceded 
by the Greek article thus making it the diabolus, the 
devil, the one whom the Jews sometimes called Beelzebub, 
the prince of the devils— the one referred to in the 
Hebrew as Satan, an opponent of God and of 
righteousness. 

Satan realized that the most favorable time for an 
attack upon the anointed Jesus would be when he was 
weak from his long fast and vigilance, and hence it was 
at the close of the forty days that the temptations 
mentioned in this lesson were set before the Lord. 
It may be wondered by some why the Father would 
permit temptations, or why they would be necessary, or 
how they could be temptations to a perfect one. There 
is a difference between temptations which the Father 
considers proper and the temptations which come of the 
adversary. The former are tests of loyalty to God and 
to the principles of righteousness, and are intended to 
be a blessing and a help to all those who withstand them, 
and who thus demonstrate their loyalty to righteousness. 
The temptations of Satan, on the contrary, are in the nature 
of pitfalls and snares in evil and wrongdoing, 
temptations to make right appear wrong and wrong 
right, putting light for darkness and darkness for light. 
In this sense of misrepresentation and ensnarements in 
evil, God tempteth no man. (Jas. 1:12,13.) It was 
necessary that our Lord should be tested, and he was 
tested all through the three and one-half years of his 
ministry. Since he had consecrated himself and entered 
upon his work, it was necessary that these testings 
should begin at once, for if he manifested disloyalty to 



the Father, if he had a will of his own, a will that was 
not fully submitted to the Father's will in all points, he 
would not be worthy to be the Leader, the Captain of salvation 
to the many sons God intended to bring to glory. 
And unless proved perfect by testing his death should 
not have been accepted as an offset, the ransom price for 
the sin of Adam and for the sins of the whole world. To 
experience temptation does not imply sin, but it does 
imply liberty and freedom of will. 

The three temptations here recorded practically illustrate 
all the temptations that came to our Lord during 
his three and a half years of self sacrifice, and likewise 
they illustrate all the trials and temptations that come 
to his followers. We are not to think of the Lord Jesus as 
being tempted by the weaknesses of the flesh, for he had 
no such weakness. We are not to think of his being 
tempted as a father, for he was not a father. We are to 
remember the statement that he was tempted in all 
points as we are— not we the world, not we believers 
merely, but we the consecrated believers, who are likewise 
begotten of the Spirit and therefore subject to the 
besetments of the adversary along the lines in which the 
interests of the Spirit clash with the interests of the 
flesh, however good and pure the latter may be. 

"COMMAND THAT THESE STONES BE MADE BREAD." 

The first of these temptations related to the Lord's 
hunger. He had possibly been hungry before, but not 
until endued with the holy Spirit after his baptism had 

R3298 : page 7 

he that divine miraculous power at his command which 
would have permitted him to turn stones into bread. 
This temptation, therefore, did not signify that it is 
wrong to eat nor that bread is an improper food, but 
merely that the method of obtaining the food would not 
have been a proper or legitimate one. But why not, if 
he had the power, if he were the Son of God and God 
had given him this ability— why not use this power to 
satisfy his legitimate cravings? We reply, that the 
power that was given him was to enable him to carry out 
the consecration which he had made, and which involved 
the sacrifice of his flesh instead of its preservation. He 
might use this holy power upon others, to demonstrate 
his mission and to draw the attention of the people to 
the glorious restitution times prefigured in his miracles; 
but he might not use this holy power in any selfish 
manner for anything personal. To have done so would 
have been to misuse it and would therefore have meant 
sin. 

Let us stop here and notice the lesson there is in this 
temptation for the Lord's followers. We also have received 
of the begetting of the Spirit; and although we 
have the Spirit in less measure than our Master, it is for 



the same purpose— not to be used selfishly for the feeding 
of our material bodies nor for the healing of our 
bodily ailments, but simply and only for the service of 
the Lord, the brethren, the Truth. As our Lord declared 

R3298 : page 8 

in the garden, he could have asked the Father and have 

had twelve legions of angels to protect him; and so he 

could have asked the Father and have had the stones 

turned into bread, which would have nourished his body; 

but as our Lord declined to do both of these possible 

things, so should his followers, having consecrated their 

lives to the Lord, refuse to ask for divine interference 

for their own personal and temporal convenience or advantage. 

To do so would be to ask amiss, to ask selfishly, 

to ask what would be in opposition to the consecration 

made. 

"THOU SHALT NOT TEMPT THE LORD." 

Satan then tried another plan, suggesting a use of our 
Lord's divine protection which would bring him suddenly 
into notoriety amongst the people, and demonstrate that 
he was not an ordinary person but a special object of 
divine care. The suggestion was that he should go to 
the highest part of the temple structure, which overlooked 
the Valley of Hinnom, at a height of six hundred 
feet from its bottom— that he should leap from this 
prominent place in the sight of the people, and thus 
demonstrate his own faith in the Lord and in his mission 
as the Messiah, and attach to himself the awe and 
reverence of the people who would see the transaction or 
hear about it;— for all would know that without divine 
protection such a leap would mean certain death. The 
temptation had its plausible side. It seemed to imply 
great faith in the Almighty, and a refusal to follow the 
thought would seem to imply doubt on our Lord's part 
respecting his Messiahship and lack of faith in the 
divine power. It was a shrewdly put proposition. Additionally, 
it was backed up by Scripture texts: for Satan 
can quote Scripture when it suits his purpose just 
as, under his guidance, Spiritualists and Christian 
Scientists and other rejectors of the Word of God are 
ready at times to quote what they think will serve their 
purposes. The Scripture quoted was a very able one, 
"He shall give his angels charge concerning thee, and in 
their hands shall they bear thee up lest at any time thou 
shouldst dash thy foot against a stone." (Psa. 91:11,12.) 
It would almost appear that this Scripture implied that 
our Lord was to make such an exhibit as Satan proposed. 

First we inquire wherein such a course would have 
been an improper one— what Scriptural injunction or 
righteous principle would have been violated? We reply 
that if our Lord had been pushed from the pinnacle of 
the temple, or if he had been in a dangerous position in 



discharge of duty and his foot had slipped, and he thus 

had been precipitated to the valley below, he would have 

been quite right in assuming that the divine power could 

protect his interests and cause that all things should 

work for his good according to promise. But to deliberately 

place oneself in danger and to call upon or 

expect God to offset the deliberate act with divine protection 

would be a mistake. It would be tempting God. 

And this was our Lord's reply to Satan, "It is written 

again, Thou shalt not tempt the Lord thy God." 

We are here furnished a practical lesson in the interpretation 
of Scripture. Where two Scriptures seem to 
conflict we must examine the principles which underlie 
them, and the spirit of a sound mind, the holy spirit of 
loyalty to God and reverence for him, must assist us in 
determining the proper relationship of these Scriptures, 
or which one should be followed when they seem to be in 
conflict. It is quite possible that the time had not yet 
come for the Scripture which Satan quoted to be rightly 
understood. It is possible, therefore, that our Lord at 
that time did not know the proper interpretation of the 
words quoted by Satan; for if he had there would have 
been little temptation in the suggestion. He was guided 
by the principles of righteousness as well as by the 
Scriptural testimony which he quoted. He perceived 
that it would be wrong to do a foolish act and to tempt 
the Lord to shield him from the natural consequences of 
the act. This conclusion of our Lord's mind was fully 
backed up by the Scripture which he quoted. 

RIGHTLY DIVIDING THE WORD OF TRUTH. 

The Scripture quoted by Satan we may now understand 
clearly, and this proves that the due time for its 
comprehension has come. We now see that the Psalm 
from which this is taken refers to the whole Church of 
this Gospel age— Jesus the Head, and his faithful, the 
members of the body. We now see that while there have 
been feet members in some respects all the way down 
through this Gospel age, yet in a particular sense the 
Lord's people of this present time are the "feet of him 
that bringeth good tidings of peace." (Isa. 52:7.) We 
see that as the feet, the last members of the Jewish 
house, stumbled over Christ as the stone of stumbling 
and rock of offence in the end of the Jewish age, so now 
we see the feet members of the spiritual Israel in the 
harvest or end of this Gospel age will be in danger of 
stumbling over the rock of offence. As it is written, 
"He shall be for a stone of stumbling and for a rock of 
offence to both the houses of Israel"— the fleshly and the 
spiritual. (Isa. 8:1,4.) We see that as the fleshly 
house stumbled over the cross (1 Cor. 1:23), so the 
spiritual house is to stumble over the same obstacle— the 
cross. 

We see this stumbling now taking place, that higher 
criticism is undermining true faith in all denominations, 



and that the Evolution theories are making the cross of 

Christ of none effect— implying that Jesus and the 

sacrifice for sins was wholly unnecessary, that men have 

been evolving and progressing upward under a natural 

law of progression and evolution, that he needed no redemption, 

and that restitution to a former estate 

(Acts. 3:21) would be the worst thing which could 

happen to him. We see that in fulfilment of this 

promise the Lord has given his ministers a message for 

the feet class, designed to be helpful to them and to 

assist them over these peculiar stumbling stones of our 

day— to enable them to "stand" (Eph. 6:13); and this 

we see corresponds exactly to the assistance rendered to 

the feet members of the Jewish house— the Israelites 

indeed of that time. We remember how the Lord's dark 

sayings were not for any except those in a special attitude 

of heart, so that others hearing might hear and 

not understand, and seeing they might not perceive. So 

it is now: the great mass of Churchianity hear not, see 

not, and rejoice in conditions which they fail to recognize 

as stumblings and in falling away from the faith once 

delivered to the saints. 

"TEMPTED IN ALL POINTS LIKE AS WE ARE." 

Coming back now to the temptation, let us see whether 

R3298 : page 9 

or not there are temptations before the body of Christ 
similar to this one recorded of our Head. There are. 
Temptations continually assail the Lord's people— suggestions 
to do some wonderful works in his name, and to 
thus prove to themselves and to others that they are 
heaven's favorites. The lesson for us to learn is that the 
work which the Father has given us to do is not a work 
of convincing the world of showing his favor toward us 
and our greatness in him, but rather— "Hast thou faith, 
have it to thyself," as the Apostle says. Rather that we 
should quietly and humbly, yet as effectively as reason 
and propriety will permit, let our lights shine, and show 
forth the praises of him who hath called us from 
darkness into his marvellous light, and from a desire to 
be wonder-workers to the reasonable position of servants, 
ministers of the Truth. Let us fix our Lord's answer 
clearly in our minds, "It is written, thou shalt not tempt 
the Lord thy God." Let us as members of the feet of 
Christ not accept outward deliverances from the trials 
and difficulties and responsibilities of life, but expect 
that our protection, our upholding, will be along 
spiritual lines— that we shall be kept from falling and 
from injury as New Creatures in Christ Jesus, because 
our faith is stayed on him. 

We do not know that Satan was personally visible to 
our Lord during these temptations: we must assume 
that he was not visible, that he did not appear as a man, 



nor in any other tangible form. Undoubtedly, as the 
holy angels had power to appear as men, Satan and the 
fallen angels at one time had the same power or 
privilege. But the divine sentence against them after 
the flood is distinctly recorded in the Scriptures. They 
are "restrained in chains of darkness" until the judgment 
of the great day, until the dawning of the Millennial 
morning. However, it matters not to us in what 
way Satan communicated to our Lord these tempting 
suggestions. In the third temptation, however, it is 
evident that the taking of our Lord to a high mountain 
and showing him therefrom all the kingdoms of the 

R3299 : page 9 

earth, was not a literal taking, but a taking in spirit or 
in mind or in thought. There is no mountain in the 
world from which all the earth could be seen, and even if 
the Roman world were understood there was no mountain 
anywhere in Palestine from which any considerable 
portion of the Roman world could be seen. But the 
mind can be projected to any part of the world in an 
instant or to any part of the universe in imagination. 

Satan called to our Lord's mind, imagination, a great 
mountain or great kingdom, having supervision of the 
entire world. He suggested to our Lord that his mission 
would be accomplished if he should succeed in thus 
establishing a kingdom over all the kingdoms of the 
earth. This to some extent is the spirit of prophecy; 
namely that it is God's purpose to establish through 
Christ a world dominion which will rule all the people 
of the earth to their blessing and uplifting from sin and 
degradation to life, joy, and peace— or so many of them 
as will respond to the blessed influences of that Millennial 
Kingdom. Our Lord certainly understood that this 
was his mission— to lay the foundation for such a Kingdom: 
we cannot, however, suppose that he as yet fully 
understood or comprehended all the steps incidental to 
that Kingdom's establishment. Had he understood this, 
there would have been no temptation in Satan's 
presentation. 

SATAN AS AN ANGEL OF LIGHT WOULD MISLEAD. 

Having stated the proposition in a form that would at 
once appeal to our Lord as being largely in accord with 
the Father's plans he had come to execute, Satan would 
have our Lord feel that he sympathized with Jehovah's 
project and with our Lord Jesus in the execution of it, 
and was willing to render co-operation and assistance. 
In effect he said, Such a universal Kingdom, for the 
civilization, enlightenment, uplifting and blessing of all 
the world I know is your proposition, and I am fully in 
sympathy with it; but there are different ways of getting 
at the matter. If you attempt this great work in the 
wrong way you will merely bring disaster upon yourself 



and failure to your plans, but if you get at the matter in 
the proper manner you will succeed. I am the master of 
the situation— the whole world is under my influence. 
I admit that in many respects it is a painful influence, 
and I shall be very glad indeed to have it rectified and 
the world's government made righteous. My leading of 
mankind into sin and rebellion and superstition was not 
so much because I wish them evil as because I knew that 
only in this way could I hold my power over them. Now 
all that I ask for co-operation with you in this scheme of 
a great kingdom to bless the world is that I receive a 
share of the dignity and honor with you— that you 
recognize me. Let us be partners. I will recognize you 
and you will recognize me, and together we will effect 
this great work of reformation for the whole world, for 
which you have so grandly and nobly sacrificed every 
interest up to this moment. Now be wise, for I assure 
you that any other method will meet only with disaster 
and bring needless and fruitless pain upon yourself. 

As already intimated, the Lord had been studying the 
Scriptures from childhood; his perfect memory had 
grasped every detail of the prophecies, and now, since his 
anointing with the holy Spirit, he had come into the 
wilderness to determine this very point— how the great 
object of his coming into the world was to be made 
effective to the blessing of mankind— how he must proceed 
in order to fulfil the divine projects and become 
King of kings and Lord of lords amongst men for their 
blessing and uplifting. He heard Satan's proposition 
carefully, he noted the weight of the argument, he 
realized the truthfulness of much that Satan had said; 
but he saw in the Scriptures enough to indicate to him 
that the Father's plan was not the smooth one that Satan 
had suggested. He noticed in the Scriptures suggestions 
not only about glory, honor, dominion and power, and 
the bowing of every knee, and the confessing of every 
tongue, and the desire of all nations coming, and the 
knowledge of the Lord filling the whole earth, and the 
time coming when there would be no need to say to one's 
neighbor and to one's brother, Know thou the Lord, because 
all should know him from the least even unto the 
greatest; but he noticed also Scriptures and types which 
clearly intimated that there was to be a sacrificing work 
accomplished. All the sin-offerings implied this, and the 
testimony, "he shall be led as a lamb to the slaughter," 
etc. 

Reasoning on the question he could readily see that 
this sacrificing, slaughtering, etc. could not come after 

R3299 : page 10 

the glory and blessing and enlightenment of the world, 
and hence that it must precede the glory; for, as the 
Apostle Peter points out, the prophets "spake of the 
sufferings of Christ and the glory which should follow." 
Doubtless by this time the Lord had come to see that it 



was a clear teaching of Scripture that without the 
shedding of blood there could be no remission of sins, 
and that this meant that in some manner he should die 
for the people. Supposing that he saw this at the time, 
it meant that the temptation he experienced was all the 
stronger, because here Satan was proposing to him a 
method for dealing with the question from the opposite 
standpoint, without suffering, with exaltation and honor 
from the very commencement. 

COMPLETE CONSECRATION ESSENTIAL TO VICTORY. 

Our Lord was saved from any vacillation or manifestation 
of weakness on this subject by reason of the fulness, 
the completeness of his consecration, which he had 
symbolized at Jordan. There he had said, in heart at 
least, "I delight to do thy will, O my God, thy law is 
written in my heart." This desire to please the Father, 
to obey the divine law in his heart saved our dear Redeemer 
from any yielding to Satan's wiles, and similarly 
our consecration as members of his body must be 
thorough if we would hope to stand the testing which 
must come to each one of us as we pass along the narrow 
way, following in his footsteps, seeking the glory, honor 
and immortality which he has promised us. Our Lord's 
prompt and allsufficient answer was, Leave me, Adversary; 
for it is written, the Lord thy God shalt thou 
worship and him only shalt thou serve. I cannot be a 
co-worker with you in any sense of the word; to do so 
would be disloyalty to the great Jehovah. I must be 
loyal to the Lord and to the commission he has given me 
and to the doing of his will in his way whatever the cost. 

Members of the body of Christ following in his footsteps 
have temptations from the Adversary along similar 
lines. Not that he offers to divide the kingdom of earth 
with us, for so great a proposition would not appeal to 
us, being incredible; but to us he does propose deviation 
from the close following in the Master's footsteps. He 
suggests continually to the Lord's followers easier ways 
by which as much or more good can be accomplished and 
without sacrifice and self-denial. These ways of avoiding 
sacrifice and yet of seemingly attaining good ends 
always imply more or less of co-partnership with the 
Adversary directly or indirectly, an acknowledgment of 
him, a bending to evil— to evil men or evil principles. 

Under such circumstances we should note carefully 
the Lord's method and walk in his steps. We should refuse 
to have any partnership with sin or evil influences 
or methods in our endeavors to serve the Lord and his 
Truth. Satan does not approach us in human form nor 
in diabolic form, but generally through human agencies, 
through human ambitions, parties, sects, etc. If our 
Lord had made inquiry of Satan as to what would be the 
program, doubtless he would have advised him to become 
a Pharisee of the Pharisees at once, and through 
such steps gradually he would have proceeded to elevate 



our Lord over the Jewish people and ultimately over the 
world— if indeed he who was a murderer from the beginning 
and abode not in the Truth could be trusted in 
respect to any promise. 

Similarly, today, he proposes to the Lord's followers 
identification with nominal Churchianity. He flatters 
them with some trifling office larger in name than in 
fact or service; he persuades them that they have a large 
influence and that to withdraw from Babylon would be 
to incur suffering upon themselves and their families 
and to do general injury to the work which they seek to 
forward. By this means, if he cannot lead them onward 
step by step to full co-operation with him in the blinding 
of others, he at least can hinder those who yield to his 
propositions from ever stepping out boldly and courageously 
on the Lord's side and in opposition to superstition 
and error. He can hinder them from being more than 
conquerors and having a place in the body of Christ. 
What shall our answer be to his suggestions? Let us 
answer with our Lord that we can enter into no partnership, 
be members of the institution, nor co-operate with 
any along lines that would be either dishonoring to the 
character of our heavenly Father or in any measure 
contrary to those which he has marked out as the pathway 
for those who love him— the pathway of self-denial, 
and incidentally of suffering for the cause of right and 
truth. 

"ADD TO YOUR FAITH, FORTITUDE." 

Another thought: one great difficulty with the Lord's 
people is that, even when determined for a right course 
and thus resisting the temptation, they do not take 
sufficiently positive action. Many say to the tempter, I 
have concluded not to yield at this time. Thus they 
leave in their own minds an opportunity open by which 
the tempter may return. Our Lord's course was the 
proper one: we should dismiss the tempter once and 
forever. We should take our stand so firmly that even 
the Adversary would not think it worth while to come 
back at us along that line; "Leave me, Adversary," I will 
worship and serve my God alone. 

Our Lord's temptations thus terminated. Henceforth 
he had Satan for his Adversary, but the Father his protector 
and ultimately his deliverer. Had he not reached 
this final decision we may presume that Satan's temptations 
would have continued for days or weeks or years, 
and would have been a hindrance to the Lord in the work 
he had come to do. So with us, we must settle it if we 
would be on the Lord's side; we must decide that in no 

R3300 : page 10 

sense of the word will we yield to the Adversary, either 
from policy or to enter into any transaction either to 
protect life, name or fame. Our decision must be a firm 



one, somewhat as expressed by the poet:— 
"Vain, delusive world, adieu, 
With all thou callest good! 
To my Lord I would be true, 

Who bought me with his blood." 

"MARVEL NOT IF THE WORLD HATE YOU." 

When the Lord's followers take a firm stand on this 
subject as their Leader did, the results are the same. 
Satan is their implacable opponent; he will see to it 
that they do suffer, that there will be opposition not only 
by himself but by the world, which is largely under the 
influence of his spirit and in various ways. Taking this 
stand they must not marvel if the world hate them, and 
if all manner of evil be said against them falsely for 
Christ's sake. And the more prominent they may be, as 

R3300 :page 11 

in our Lord's case, the more virulent we may expect 
attacks against them to be— the more interested will the 
great Adversary be in overcoming them. This thought 
of Satan's opposition to us, and that we are contending 
not merely with flesh and blood but with principalities 
and powers and wicked spirits in high positions of power, 
would be appalling to us did we not on the other hand 
realize that by this same positiveness of decision we 
acquire great helps and assistances by other unseen 
powers. From that moment of our positive resistance of 
temptation and positive standing up for the Lord and his 
cause, we become stronger in the Lord and in the power 
of his might, and greater is he that is for us than all 
that be against us. 

It was so in our Lord's case. At once he was 
ministered to by the unseen messengers of Jehovah, and 
whatever terror lay in the intimated opposition of the 
Adversary was more than counterbalanced by the assurances 
of divine favor and assistance. So it is with us. 
If God be for us who can be against us— what will all the 
oppositions of the world, the flesh and the devil amount 
to since God declares that we are his and all things are 
ours, for we are Christ's and Christ is God's?— 
1 Cor. 3:21-23. 



R3300 :page 11 

THE TEACHER AND HIS MESSAGE REJECTED. 

-LUKE 4: 16-30. -JANUARY 24.- 

Golden Text: "He came unto his own and 
his own received him not."— John 1:11. 



OUR LORD began his ministry in Judea, and is 

supposed to have spent a year there before going 

to Galilee, the province in which most of 

his life had been passed. And even when he did go 

to his home province he chose to visit Capernaum before 

going to his native city, Nazareth. This was a 

wise course, considering the fact that a prophet is generally 

less esteemed at home than abroad. As it was, 

his fame in Judea and still later at Capernaum had 

aroused quite an interest in the people of Nazareth, 

where he had lived from about three years of age until 

thirty. A certain amount of pride in their fellow-townsman 

had thus been awakened, and we may be 

sure that there was a large attendance at the synagogue 

on the first Sabbath day after our Lord's arrival 

in Nazareth. 

But while it was an object of our Lord's ministry 
to awaken and draw the interest of the people of Palestine 
to himself and to the message which he had to 
deliver, nevertheless it was not the object of that message 
to gather all the people to the Lord, but rather to 
separate the wheat from the chaff— to gather the wheat 
to Jesus and, naturally, to array the chaff class in opposition. 
This foretold result of the Lord's ministry we 
see was fully accomplished. "He came unto his own 
[people] but his own received him not, but to as many 
as received him, to them gave he liberty [privilege] to 
become the sons of God"— to be transferred from the 
house of servants, of which Moses was the head, to the 
house of sons, of which our Lord Jesus is the Head. 
We remark incidentally, however, that although faithful 
servants were gathered during our Lord's ministry, 
they were not begotten again until Pentecost. Pentecost 
brought the begetting of the Spirit to such of them 
as were then ready— the begetting necessary to a spirit 
development of character, necessary to an ultimate 
birth of the spirit in the First Resurrection. 

The first verse of our lesson shows distinctly that 
it was our Lord's custom to attend the synagogue 
meetings every Sabbath day, and his custom also to be 
the reader for the congregation. The synagogue services 
were not at all like the temple services. The latter 
was the house of prayer, and the place where typical 
atonement was made for the sins of the people with 
the blood of bulls and goats, etc. The synagogue more 
nearly resembled present day Bible classes, where the 
Scriptures are read and freely discussed, not only by 
the leader but also by all in attendance as they may 
feel disposed. There are certain good features connected 
with this arrangement, one of which is the opportunity 
it affords for bringing out discussion on 
any Scriptural topic. We warmly commend the Bible 
study and Bible-class methods as still appropriate to the 
Lord's people and still beneficial for the elucidation of 
Truth. 



RIGHTLY DIVIDING THE WORD OF TRUTH. 

The Jews had a certain order in which the Scriptures 
were read in the synagogue, and apparently the 
book of Isaiah was the appropriate one for this occasion. 
The Lord turned to what we now call the sixty-first 
chapter of Isaiah and read the first verse and part 
of the second, and closing the book he sat down and 
made certain comments upon the passage read. We 
find that our Lord read discriminatingly, or, as the 
Apostle expresses it, he "rightly divided the Word of 
truth." He read the part appropriate to the time, but 
did not read about the day of vengeance. His teaching 
was to test the people: if his message were received 
no day of vengeance would be necessary; if not 
received the day of vengeance would follow, as it did 
follow upon that nation after it had rejected him. 
There is a lesson for the Lord's people in this: it is 
better that we should read one verse understandingly 
and appreciatingly than that we should merely read 
chapter after chapter of the Lord's Word in a formal 
manner. 

Our Lord brought home to his audience the meaning 
of his text, saying, "This day is this Scripture 

R3300 :page 12 

fulfilled in your hearing." It had been written centuries 

before and read hundreds of times, but now, in 

the harvest of their age, for the first time it could be 

said that it was fulfilled. The holy Spirit had come 

upon the Lord Jesus about a year before, after his consecration 

at Jordan. It constituted his anointing. The 

Jews were accustomed to this thought of anointing: 

their high-priests were anointed, as representing the 

Lord's power or spirit upon the priest, to authorize 

him to perform the sacrifices and to mediate between 

God and the people. Their kings were anointed, representing 

that divine power and guidance was upon 

them, and that they were specially authorized to represent 

the Lord in the government of the people. 

The promise was that the Lord's anointed, the 
Messiah, should by and by come and establish a reign 
of righteousness in the earth, and now our Lord announced 
himself as the anointed of the Father. He 
did not do this in any coarse or rude manner, saying, 
"I am the Messiah. I am the anointed of Jehovah, 
with authority as priest and king;" but he did it in a 
quiet, unassuming manner, by calling attention to the 
prophecy and declaring that its fulfilment had now 
taken place. The announcement was not that the 
Lord had anointed him to rule, but that the first part 
of his mission was to preach, to declare, to be the 
mouthpiece of God to humanity. He had a great 
message, which should ultimately be unto all people, 
but which at that time was only for so many as had 



ears to hear. 

It would undoubtedly be disappointing to many 
to have the royalty feature passed by, and to find that 
Messiah's work as herein delineated by the prophet 
and announced by the Lord, was one of preaching a 
good message rather than of raising a great army— of 
preaching to the meek and poor, rather than of rallying 
round himself the rich and wise and proud. They 
would be disappointed, too, at the part of the message 
which says that he was to bind up the broken-hearted. 
They had expected, perhaps, that, like the great warriors 
and leaders amongst the other nations, their deliverer 
would be the one who would cause the loss of 
many lives and the breaking of many hearts with sorrow 
and with trouble. Even those whose hearts were 
somewhat broken were probably disappointed because 
of their wrong expectations. 

The proclaiming of liberty to the captives and the 
opening of the prison doors to them that are bound, 
our Lord's hearers probably did not understand. Their 
thoughts may have gone out to John the Baptist, who 
at this time was in prison, and they may have wondered 
whether Jesus would take any steps for his release. 
They probably had little conception of the real 
meaning of this Scripture— that it signified the liberation 
of Satan's captives from the bondage of sin, and 
ultimately the release from death and its bondage of 
the millions who have gone down into that great prison-house, 
the tomb. Even the Lord's disciples, who had 
ears to hear his message and hearts to respond thereto 
and become his followers at any cost, could not at this 
time have appreciated the greatness of the Lord's work. 
Little by little he needed to make known unto them 
the meaning of the prophecies and explained that the 
hour is coming in which all that are in their graves 
shall hear the voice of the Son of Man and shall come 
forth. 

R3301 :page 12 

THE ACCEPTABLE TIME. 

"The acceptable year [time, period] of the 
Lord" mentioned by the prophet was not understood 
either. Blessed are our eyes that we now 
see that this acceptable year or acceptable time 
or acceptable period is the entire Gospel age, during 
which God is willing to accept all that come 
unto him through Christ— willing to accept them as 
joint sacrificers with Jesus, as members of the great 
Royal Priest. True, by and by, at the close of the 
Millennial age, the Lord will be willing to accept so 
many of the world of mankind as the great Redeemer 
shall have brought into heart-harmony with him, and, 
by restitution processes, back to the image of God. 
But that acceptance of the world, after restoration by 



Christ, is a very different one from the acceptance of 
the Church in this present time. 

Our acceptance now means our change of nature, 
our begetting to the new nature, the spiritual; and the 
terms or conditions of this acceptance are, as expressed 
by the Apostle, that having been first justified freely 
by God's grace through the redemption that is in 
Christ Jesus, we should, secondly, "present our bodies 
living sacrifices, holy and acceptable to God and our 
reasonable service." This acceptable day, then, means 
the day in which our heavenly Father is willing to accept 
the sacrifices of the anointed. He had only 
accepted Jesus' initiatory sacrifice of consecration, which 
later our Lord fulfilled and finished at the cross. It 
was the ground upon which the heavenly Father gave 
him the exceeding great reward of the First Resurrection 
blessing— to glory, honor and immortality. So 
with all the members of the body following in the footsteps 
of the Savior, justified by his blood— their sacrifices 
are counted in as acceptable to the Father during 
this antitypical Day of Atonement; and by its close 
all of these "better sacrifices"— then the typical bullock 
and goat sacrifices— will have been offered and 
will have been accepted, and thereafter no sacrifices 
will be either needed or accepted. 

This wonderful prophecy which our Lord declared 
was being fulfilled in his own person is still in process 

R3301 :page 13 

of fulfilment in the persons of his truly consecrated 
followers— the members of his body. This was shown 
in the type. The holy anointing oil was poured upon 
the head of Aaron, but ran down even unto the skirts 
of his garments, thus anointing in the figure each member 
of his body. So it is with us. We are members 
of the Anointed One, and that which was true of our 
Head is true in a measure also of each one of us. We 
are all anointed to preach, all authorized of the Lord 
to declare the good tidings of the coming Kingdom to 
all the meek and broken-hearted. It is a mistake to 
suppose that our commission and the Gospel message 
given us is intended of the Lord to break men's hearts. 
It is a mistake to suppose that we are commissioned to go 
especially to the froward. Our message, while given out 
broadcast, must not be expected to attract any except 
the meek and broken-hearted. True, the light shining 
in the darkness will reprove the darkness and convince 
of sin, of righteousness and of coming judgment, or discrimination 
between the righteous and the unrighteous; 
but this is an incidental feature. The real mission of 
the Gospel is to the meek and to the broken-hearted. 
As respects the world our general message, so far 
as they are able to hear it, is liberty to the captives 
and ultimately opening of the prison-doors of death, 
that all the families of the earth may in due time receive 



from the Lord through his Anointed the great 
blessing of the knowledge of the Truth, the opening of 
the eyes of the understanding, opening of the deaf ears, 
that they may know their God and be able to return 
by way of holiness and the restitution processes which 
will ultimately be at their disposal during the Millennial 
Kingdom. We can do still more for those who 
have ears to hear now. We can tell them of their liberty, 
of their freedom from the domination of Satan 
and sin and the weaknesses of the flesh. We can assure 
them in God's name, and through the merit of the 
great sacrifice for sins given by our Savior, that their 
past sins are forgiven and that their present weaknesses 
and imperfections are covered, if so be that they 
are trusting in Jesus and seeking to walk not after the 
flesh, but after the Spirit to the extent of their ability. 
This justification by faith is for the Lord's servants and 
handmaidens now, but an actual justification or release 
from the bondage of sin and Satan is the glorious provision 
for the world in general during the coming age, 
when Satan shall be bound, when he will deceive the 
nations (peoples) no more. 

GRACIOUS WORDS TO UNGRACIOUS HEARTS. 

The Lord's discourse is not given, but unquestionably 
it was a grand one based upon so grand a 
text. The record is that all present bore witness to the 
words of grace which proceeded out of his mouth- 
words of favor, of blessing, of comfort, of peace. We 
know not to what extent the Lord may have described 
the blessings yet to come upon the world through his 
Millennial Kingdom, secured by his work of redemption. 
His old neighbors and friends were beginning to 
think very highly of him, and apparently the old 
proverb that a prophet is without honor in his own 
country and amongst his own kin was about to be disproved. 
Apparently, also, the people of his home 
city were about to receive him as indeed being a great 
prophet, and rejoice in him and be proud of him because 
he was of their city— Jesus of Nazareth. 

But how short-lived was their appreciation of him! 
How quickly the natural mind and perverse reasoning 
turned everything upside down, and turned his admirers 
into enemies, hating him and seeking his life! 
They began to say, Is not this the one we have known 
as Joseph's son? And then they began to wonder what 
mighty works Jesus would do in their midst, having 
heard of the great miracles wrought by him in the 
province of Judea and in the nearby city of Capernaum. 
Our Lord interpreted their thoughts and said, 
"Ye will surely say unto me this proverb, 'Physician, 
heal thyself: whatsoever we have heard done in 
Capernaum, do here in thine own country.'" 

We know not why our Lord refused to perform 
miracles in Nazareth. We may surmise, however, 



that this being his home city, where he was well 

known and where undoubtedly he had previously 

read in the synagogue, the people being in a right condition 

of mind should have been ready to accept the 

good tidings without any attestation of miracles; 

whereas in the other cities, where the Lord was not 

known, the miracles were more or less necessary as his 

credentials, and none might have been expected to 

receive him and to accept his teachings without 

having either a personal acquaintance with him 

or the attestation of miracles. The thought would 

be that the miracles of our Lord were not intended 

to be restitution blessings, because the restitution 

times had not yet come— that the miracles 

performed were merely to witness, to attest, to substantiate, 

fortify and clinch our Lord's teachings. Secondly, 

the people of Nazareth should not have expected 

miracles, did not need miracles, having another attestation 

instead, namely, their acquaintance with Jesus. 

HAVE WE NOT DONE MANY WONDERFUL WORKS IN THY 
NAME7-MATT. 7:22,23. 

A lesson may be drawn from this circumstance 
applicable to our day. Miracles are not necessary today 
amongst the Lord's people, and hence they have 
passed away. Not that the Lord has any the less 
power, but that the time for restitution has not yet 
come, and the necessity for miracles as introductions 

R3301 :page 14 

to the Gospel message is no longer manifest. Hence, 
although not for a moment doubting the divine ability 
to heal all manner of diseases today, we are inclined 
to look with suspicion upon the miraculous healings of 
the present time, whether done by Mormons or by 
Christian Scientists or by Christian Alliance people or 
by Spiritualists or by Mr. Dowie and his followers or 
others. We are inclined to look upon miracles as some 
of the "wonderful works" mentioned by our Lord, to 
the performers of which he will say, I do not recognize 
you as my faithful disciples. 

Satan and his work are undoubtedly opposed to 
life and healing, etc.; nevertheless, he is quite able 
and willing to reverse his processes and to become 
either a preacher or a healer, as may best suit his convenience. 
Our Lord in speaking on this subject implied 
such a course on the part of Satan, but intimated 
that it would mean the fall of Satan's kingdom— that 
it would imply that such efforts were necessary in order 
to perpetuate the superstition and blindness which he 
has been exercising over mankind, necessary in order 
to distract attention from the glorious light of Present 
Truth, gradually breaking in upon the hearts and 
minds of those who are the Lord's truly consecrated 



people. 

The present time, so far as the Lord's people are 
concerned, is a time for sacrifice and not a time for restitution 
—a time for laying down their lives and not a 
time for saving them. It is a time for the binding up 
of their broken hearts, though not a time for the repairing 
of their marred bodies; a time for a reckoned deliverance 
from sin and death, but not a time for actual 
deliverance. As for the world, it has now a sufficient 
witness on every hand to the greatness of Messiah and 
to his merit as a teacher, it needs no temporary healing 
of the sick for this purpose, and as for the permanent 
healing of the world's sickness, the time has not 
yet come for this; but, as the Apostle Peter points out, 
it will come at the establishment of the Lord's Millennial 
Kingdom at his second advent. "The times of 
restitution of all things spoken by the mouth of all the 
holy prophets since the world began" shall follow, and 
they will indeed be "times of refreshing." 

The people of Nazareth were interested in Jesus 
from the standpoint of selfishness— pride in him as the 
representative of their city— and hoped that the great 
miracles that he had wrought in other cities would be 
more than duplicated at his home. And so when he 
intimated that he would do no such miracles there 
they were chagrined. His citation of previous similar 

R3302 : page 14 

dealings in no measure placated their anger. They 
were filled with wrath and rose up and thrust him out 
of the city in the direction of a precipitous hill about 
forty or fifty feet high, with the evident purpose of 
killing or maiming him by pushing him over the brink. 

"MARVEL NOT IF THE WORLD HATE YOU." 

What a picture we have here of the natural man 
in his fallen condition! At one moment rejoicing in 
the Master's gracious words, at another desiring to 
destroy him because of the failure of their selfish hopes 
and ambitions. So it has been with the Lord's people 
since, and particularly is this true in the present time, 
the harvest of this Gospel age. Many hear the good 
tidings of great joy for all people, and while declaring 
it to be the grandest Gospel message conceivable, yet 
selfish interests— especially sectarianism, and the feeling 
that instead of this message building up their favorite 
sect or party it will have the effect of discrediting 
the same— seem to evilly influence those who rejoiced 
in the gracious message but a short time previously. 

Apparently our Lord permitted the matter to go 
far enough to show the real spirit of his opposers, and 
then, turning himself, he overawed them with the 
glance of his eye and passed through their midst unmolested. 
He exercised this power because his time 



was not yet come. So, too, we may suppose it will be 
with all the members of his body. As the Father had 
a due time for the Son in which to accomplish his work, 
so, doubtless, divine providence is overruling and guiding 
the affairs of each member of the body of Christ so 
that not even a hair of their heads could fall without divine 
notice; and so, their lives being precious in the 
Father's sight cannot be taken from them in any manner 
until their time shall have come— until they shall have 
finished the work which the Father has for them to do 
—until they shall have experienced the chastening 
and polishing necessary to fit them for the Kingdom, 
or until by their own wilfulness they shall have taken 
their affairs out of the Lord's hands or have refused to 
walk in his steps. 

"HIS OWN RECEIVED HIM NOT, BUT-" 

Our Golden Text was fulfilled not by the above 
rejection of our Lord at Nazareth, but by his rejection 
by the whole nation of Israel. The Apostle, however, 
points out that, while the nation as a whole rejected 
the Lord, there were individual exceptions; and hence, 
while the nation as a nation was rejected by the Lord, 
these faithful individuals who became his disciples 
were received of him, were granted liberty to become 
members of the house of sons, and at Pentecost received 
the spirit of adoption, the spirit of begetting to 
the new nature. 

A parallel to this experience of fleshly Israel is 
to be sought and is readily to be found in antitypical 
Israel— nominal spiritual Israel. At our Lord's 
second advent he comes to Christendom as his professed 
people; and, in harmony with the prophets, 
he is again rejected— yet not by all. As there were 
some amongst the Jews ready to receive him and 
to follow in his steps, so, today, there are some to 
whom his words are applicable, "Blessed are your 

R3302 : page 15 

eyes for they see and your ears for they hear." 
Those of the spiritual house now accepting the Lord 
are in due time to receive a great blessing— the antitype 
of the Pentecostal blessing— it will be glorification. 
Soon shall the wheat class of this Gospel age be blessed 
and changed that they may "shine forth as the sun in 
the Kingdom of their Father." (Matt. 13:43.) Thus 
we see that the Lord will be for a stone of stumbling to 
both the houses of Israel, but for a blessing to some, 
the faithful of each. They shall become as the very elect, 
his body members, his Bride, and be associated with 
him not only in the anointing and sufferings of this 
present age, but also in the glories of the future work 
of blessing all the families of the earth with a knowledge 
of the Lord and with an opportunity to return to 



favor if they will. 



R3302 : page 15 

"THE EARTH SHALL YIELD HER INCREASE." 

THE following is a letter from a brother in the 

Truth illustrates well how all that the Lord 

has promised respecting food for the restored 

millions of our race now in death can be 

fulfilled: 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

I have recently learned of a matter which I 
believe will be interesting to you. It is this: 

About ten miles from Philadelphia there is a 
small farm of fifteen acres, the owner of which has 
brought it to an extremely high state of cultivation. 
The results are almost past belief. The matter has 
been attracting the attention of the United States' 
officials, who have been keeping tab on the wonderful 
doings of this farm for the past four years. 

I visited the farm and met the owner personally. 
He is a Minister in the nominal Church, and manages 
this little farm additionally. On the fifteen acres he 
was supporting, at the time of my visit, twenty-nine 
head of cattle and three horses. He raised all the 
feed for this stock on the fifteen acres, and sold additionally 
considerable hay and grain which he was 
unable to use. He has a good-sized house and barn 
on the premises, and last year, besides maintaining 
himself and family from the proceeds of the farm, 
cleared from it a profit of twenty-one hundred dollars. 
He has brought his farm to a condition where 
it produces three crops annually without expending 
a dollar for fertilizers of any kind. The vegetation 
is so heavy and luxuriant that weeds are completely 
choked out. There is scarcely a weed to be found 
on the place. All this has been done on an ordinary 
clay soil in only twenty years. About him on 
every side are farms many times as large where the 
owners use large quantities of imported fertilizers, 
gather only one crop a year and only just manage to 
get along comfortably. 

I at once thought to myself, this is an illustration 
of how the wilderness shall blossom as the rose 
and the earth yield her increase, and it is coming 
to the attention of mankind at just the proper time 
—at the beginning of the millennium. I suggested 
this thought to the minister, but to my sorrow he 
replied that he had no faith along that line; that 
he was in accord with Henry Ward Beecher's view 
that the fall of man must have been upward, and 
that we are gradually attaining by evolutionary processes 
the perfection of our race. 



I replied that my loyalty to the Scripture teaching 
that man passed under Divine condemnation 
through disobedience, so that he needed the redemption 
which our Lord Jesus accomplished as a ransom 
for all, and that he still needs the blessing of 
restitution to bring him back to the image and likeness 
of God in which he was created, forbade me 
to accept any such view. 

The minister replied that he once held similar 
views regarding the atonement until he went to college, 
and that there he learned to view matters very 
differently. Seeing that he discarded the foundation 
doctrines of the Divine Word, I felt that it would 
be useless to make further effort to interest him in 
the glorious Plan of the Ages. I said to myself, 
"Here is one of those mentioned by the prophet 
when he said, 'A thousand shall fall at thy side.'" 
This friend has fallen. Doubtless many others are 
similarly falling away from their relationship to our 
Heavenly Father through a loss of faith in the Redeemer 
he has provided. I at once applied to myself 
the words of the Apostle, "Let him that thinketh 
he standeth take heed lest he fall"; and while rejoicing 
that I still stood firm on the ransom, I uplifted 
my heart in prayer to the Lord that he would 
ever keep me loyal to himself and the great Plan of 
the Ages of which our dear Redeemer's sacrifice is 
the center and foundation. 

Returning to the subject of the farm, I made a 
little calculation as follows: In a little country village 
a total annual income of two hundred and fifty 
dollars, used carefully, will easily maintain for one 
year five adult persons who enjoy good health, even 
under present unfavorable conditions as respects the 
quality and prices of commodities. Thus this little 
farm of fifteen acres would maintain the minister's 
family of say five persons and forty-two other 
individuals or forty-nine in all— an average of about 
three per acre or one thousand nine hundred and 
twenty persons per square mile. 

The total land surface of the world is 52,299,431 
square miles, and doubtless under the Divine government 
nearly all of this will be reclaimed for purposes 
of cultivation; but let us suppose that one-third 
of it will always be waste land. This leaves 
34,866,287 square miles for cultivation, and, on the 
basis I have suggested, would support an army of 
66,943,271,040 people. 

It seems to me that the preacher's little farm 
comes pretty near making a basis for a mathematical 
demonstration of the earth's ability to yield crops 
sufficient for the support of all who will be found 
worthy of lasting life at the conclusion of the millennial 
age: even without allowing for supernatural 
power and bettered conditions. 

CLAYTON J. WOODWORTH. 



page 17 

SEMI-MONTHLY. 
VOL. XXV. JANUARY 15, 1904. No. 2. 
CONTENTS. 



Views from the Watch Tower 19 

Employers of Labor Agitating 19 

Fertilizing Soil with Bacteria 20 

Our Year-Text for 1904 21 

Fishers of Men 25 

The Good Physician 27 

The Pilgrim's Wants (Poem) 31 

New Arrangements for Pittsburgh 

Gazette 31 

Public Ministries of the Truth 32 

General Conventions, 1904 32 

page 18 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-24 EVERSHOLT ST., LONDON, N.W. 
GERMAN BRANCH-MIRKER STR., 45, ELBERFELD. 

PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE, 5c (2-l/2d.) A COPY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity 
or adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER, will be supplied FREE, if 
they send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting 
the paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our 
list continually. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



VOL. V. IN GERMAN. 



This translation is in good stock, and orders will have 
prompt attention. 



THE MUSICAL TOWER. 



A new edition of this choice selection of 12 numbers 
of Music, with words appropriate to our Scriptural 
hopes and aims has been issued. We supply them 
in any quantity at 2c per copy, post-paid. 

PASTOR RUSSELL'S DISCOURSES EVERY MONDAY. 



By a special arrangement with The Pittsburgh Gazette a stenographic 
report of Pastor C. T. Russell's discourses will be printed 
on Mondays. We will send you "The Pittsburgh Gazette" 
(daily) and ZION'S WATCH TOWER twice a month for a period 
of 12 months for $3.25, which is about the price of The Gazette 
alone. The subscriptions must be paid in advance and sent to us. 

NOTICE.— Where Gazette agencies are established the issues 
desired can be readily obtained through them. The Gazette refuses 
to mail papers to towns where they would interfere with 
the agents already located. 



R3303 : page 19 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 

EMPLOYERS OF LABOR AGITATING. 

THESE ARE THE CONDITIONS WE HAVE BEEN ANNOUNCING 

SINCE 1875, AS EVIDENCES THAT WE ARE 

IN THE GREAT "DAY OF THE LORD" AND 

THAT ITS BATTLE OR STRUGGLE IS 

IMPENDING. 

IN December last two important meetings of manufacturers 
and labor employers were held; one in Dayton, 
O., the other in Chicago, Ills. The proceedings 
at Dayton and the object of the meeting are thus 
described in the daily press— 

A resolution was adopted asking Congress not to 
indorse the eight-hour bill, when that document comes 
up for action. Another resolution requests all employers' 
associations throughout the country to affiliate 
with the national body. 

AGAINST UNION LABEL. 

The determined stand to be taken by the association 
is indicated in the passage of a resolution instructing 
all members of employers' associations affiliated with 
the national body not to place the union label on any of 



their output. 

It is proposed also to establish a labor information 
bureau, where will be kept a tabulated record of all law-breaking 
and undesirable workmen. 

The present methods employed by unions in conducting 
a boycott were bitterly denounced. 

A bureau of organization, publication, and education 
will likely be located at Dayton, although the headquarters 
will be at Indianapolis. 

PLATFORM ADOPTED. 

The following platform was adopted as an open 
letter to the public and affiliated associations: 

Resolved, By the executive committee of the Citizens' 
Industrial Association of America, that the present 
industrial conditions have become so deplorable by reason 
of the indefensible methods and claims of organized 
labor that the time has come when the employing interests 
and good citizenship of the country must take immediate 
and effective measures to reaffirm and enforce 
these fundamental principles of American government 
guaranteeing free competitive conditions. 

"In its demand for the closed shop organized labor 
is seeking to overthrow individual liberty and property 
rights, the principal props of our government. Its 
methods for securing this revolutionary and socialistic 
change in our institutions are also those of physical 
warfare. Because of this warfare the industrial interests 
of the nation during the last years have been injured to 
an irreparable degree. Many firms have been driven 
into bankruptcy, and the cases are innumerable in which 
workingmen have been disabled and even murdered, 
while numerous families have been rendered destitute by 
reason of the tyranny and seditious attacks upon society 
by the strike organizations. 

"CONDITION OF ANARCHY." 

"A condition of anarchy has existed continuously in 
some States for months past, and, in fact, the acts of 
lawlessness committed under the sacred name of labor 
are of such frequent recurrence that the public sense of 
their enormity has become blunted. The period of great 
prosperity brought about by the unrestricted operation 
of the law of supply and demand is also being destroyed 
by the acts of violence of organized labor, and as a result 
we are now confronted with the possibility of a period of 
depression. 

"While we most emphatically object to being classed 
as enemies of organizations of labor that are conducted 
upon lawful and beneficent lines, yet we are unalterably 
opposed to the present programme of violence, boycotting, 
and tyranny now being carried out by the majority 
of labor unions. 

"We therefore urge the rapid organization of those 



who believe in the maintenance of law and order and the 
perpetuation of our free institutions, to the end that 
they may wield their full and proper influence upon the 
destinies of the nation. Since organizations exist for the 
apparent purpose of defying law and common sense, and 
are able to intimidate and influence public men and 
municipal authorities, there is no alternative left to those 
who desire to preserve bearable conditions in our body 
politic than that of forming counter organizations. 

ORGANIZATION THE ONLY MEANS. 

"It is only through the machinery of organization 
that we can hope to exercise a potent and salutary influence 
over public thought and the conduct of public officials, 
to the end that the rights of American citizenship 
can be assured to free and independent labor, the rights 

R3303 : page 20 

of property protected and legislation of a socialistic 
nature prevented from being enacted into law. 

STRONG WORDS AT THE CHICAGO SESSION. 
BLOODSHED PREDICTED. 

"If the fight for the closed shop is allowed to continue 
there will be scenes of bloodshed in this country 
that will surpass the days of the French revolution. 
The closed shop is un-American, unrighteous, a restriction 
of the liberties of our people, and a death blow to the 
individualism that makes for success." 

The foregoing sentiment, expressed by W. B. Brinton, 
president of the Peru Plow Company, was cheered by 
600 members of the Illinois Manufacturers' Association at 
their annual banquet. 

"Our rights," declared Mr. Brinton, "are dependent 
on the settlement of the question once for all as to 
whether an employer can hire whom he pleases without 
being subject to the dictation of any organized body. 
The Chicago City Railway has won a great victory in 
establishing its right to engage its own employees. 
Without this right, which is becoming recognized by the 
great mass of people, the commercial supremacy of the 
United States will be at an end." 

FERTILIZING SOIL WITH BACTERIA. 

Because we are in the dawning of the Millennium, 
the Lord is graciously lifting the curtain and 
letting in the light upon one subject after ano there- 
to prepare for the great blessings of that 
glorious time and its re-awakened billions of humanity. 
From this standpoint the following article from the 
Literary Digest will be read with interest. It shows one 
of the ways the Lord's promises may be expected to be 



fulfilled and cause the wilderness to blossom as the rose. 
And every evidence of the kind adds to our general 
faith in our Father's willingness and ability to do all that 
he has spoken by the mouth of all his holy prophets since 
the world began. 

The article follows:— 

Soil that will not bear crops is suffering from starvation. 
This may be remedied by properly "feeding" 
it with fertilizers; but in certain cases the trouble 
may also be cured, like some diseases, by inoculation. 
In other words, soil deficient in nitrogenous matter may 
be treated with cultures of certain bacteria that enable 
plants to absorb and utilize atmospheric nitrogen, as has 
been shown in Germany by Professor Nobbe. Fertilizing 
material sufficient for an acre may now be purchased 
in a small glass bottle. Ray Stannard Baker tells in 
Harper's Magazine just how this discovery was made and 
how it has been utilized. According to Mr. Baker, it had 
its beginning in the earlier discovery that plants are fed 
largely from substances in the air and from consequent 
study of the problem of how the plant is able to appropriate 
this aerial food. Says the writer: 

"The chief chemical elements in all vegetable substances 
are oxygen, carbon, hydrogen, and nitrogen. 
...Nitrogen is the all-important element. 
Potassium and phosphorus are usually present in abundance, 
or they can be easily supplied in the form of wood-ashes 
and other fertilizers; but nitrogen is more expensive 
and more difficult to restore. Nitrogen is what 
makes the muscles and brain of a man; it is the essential 
element of all elements in the growth of animals and 
plants. ...If the world ever starves, it will be 
from lack of nitrogen; and yet if such starvation takes 
place, it will be in a world full of nitrogen. For there is 
not one of the elements more common than nitrogen, 
not one present around us in larger quantities. Four-fifths 
of every breath of air we breathe is pure nitrogen— 
four-fifths of all the earth's atmosphere is nitrogen. If 
mankind dies of nitrogen starvation, it will die with food 
everywhere about it and within it. 

"But unfortunately plants and animals are unable 
to take up nitrogen in its pure form as it appears in the air. 
It must be combined with hydrogen in the form of ammonia 
or in some nitrate. These facts have been well 
known to science for many years. At the same time it 
has been known, as a matter of experience among farmers, 
that when land is worn out by overcropping, with 
wheat or oats, for instance, both of which draw heavily 
on the earth's nitrogen supply, certain other crops would 
still grow luxuriantly upon it, and that if these crops are 
left and plowed in, the fertility of the soil will be restored, 
and it will again produce large fields of wheat and 
other nitrogen-demanding plants. These restorative 
crops are clover, lupin, and other leguminous plants— a 
classification including beans and peas. Everyone who 
is at all familiar with farming operations has heard of 



seeding down an old field to clover, thereby restoring its 
fertility in a degree." 

That this property of clover, beans, etc., is due to 
small nodules growing on their roots, and that these are 
produced by so-called "nitrifying" bacteria, is now 
known to all students of scientific agriculture. Acting 
on this knowledge, Professor Nobbe has developed his 
plan for soil-inoculation. Says Mr. Baker: 

"If these nodules were produced by bacteria, then 
the bacteria must be present in the soil; and if they were 
not present, would it not be possible to supply them by 
artificial means? In other words, if soil, even worn-out 
farm soil— or, indeed, pure sand, like that of the seashore 
—could thus be inoculated, as a physician inoculates a 
guinea pig with anthrax germs, would not beans and peas 

R3304 : page 20 

planted there form nodules and draw their nourishment 

from the air? It was a somewhat startling idea; but all 

radically new ideas are startling, and after thinking it 

over, Professor Nobbe began, in 1888, a series of most remarkable 

experiments, having as their purpose the discovery 

of a practical method of soil-inoculation. He 

gathered the nodule-covered roots of beans and peas, 

dried and crushed them, and made an extract of them in 

water. Then he prepared a gelatin solution with a little 

sugar, asparagin, and other materials, and added the 

nodule extract. In this medium colonies of bacteria at 

once began to grow— bacteria of many kinds. Professor 

Nobbe separated the radiocola— which are oblong in 

shape— and made what is known as a clean 'culture'— 

that is, a culture in gelatin consisting of billions of these 

particular germs and no others. When he had succeeded 

in producing these clean cultures, he was ready for his 

actual experiments in growing plants. He took a quantity 

of pure sand, and in order to be sure that it contained 

no nitrogen, nor bacteria in any form, he heated 

it to a high temperature three different times for six 

hours, thereby completely sterilizing it. This sand he 

placed in three jars. To each of these he added a small 

quantity of mineral food— the required phosphorus, 

potassium, iron, sulphur, and so on. To the first he supplied 

no nitrogen at all in any form; the second he fertilized 

with saltpeter, which is largely composed of nitrogen 

in a form in which plants may readily absorb it through 

their roots; the third of the jars he inoculated with some 

of his bacteria culture. Then he planted beans and 

awaited the results— as may be imagined, somewhat 

anxiously. 

"The beans in the first jar, we are told, starved for 
want of nitrogenous food, exactly as a man would starve 
under the same conditions. Those in the second jar 
grew about as they would in the garden. But the third 
or 'inoculated' jar showed really a miracle of growth. 



R3304 : page 21 

The soil in this jar was originally as free of nitrogen as 
the soil in the first jar, and yet the beans flourished 
greatly, and when some of the plants were analyzed, they 
were found to be rich in nitrogen. Nodules had formed 
on the roots of the beans in the third jar only, thereby 
proving that soil-inoculation was a possibility— at least 
in the laboratory. Mr. Baker goes on to say: 

"Having thus proved the remarkable efficacy of soil-inoculation 
in his laboratory and greenhouses, where I 
saw great numbers of experiments still going forward, 
Professor Nobbe set himself to make his discoveries of 
practical value. He gave to his bacteria cultures the 
name 'Nitragen'— spelled with an a— and he produced 
separate cultures for each of the important crops— peas, 
beans, vetch, lupin, and clover. In 1894, the first of 
these were placed on the market, and they had a considerable 
sale, altho such a radical innovation as this, so 
far out of the ordinary run of agricultural operation, and 
so almost unbelievably wonderful, can not be expected to 
spread very rapidly. The cultures are now manufactured 
at one of the great commercial chemical laboratories 
of the river Main. I saw some of them in Professor 
Nobbe's laboratory. They were put up in small 
glass bottles, each marked with the name of the crop for 
which it is especially adapted. The bottle was partly 
filled with the yellow gelatinous substance in which the 
bacteria grow. On the surface of this there was a mossy-like 
gray growth, resembling mold. This consisted of 
innumerable millions of the little oblong bacteria. A 
bottle cost about fifty cents, and contained enough 
bacteria for inoculating half an acre of land. It must be 
used within a certain number of weeks after it is obtained, 
while it is still fresh. The method of application is very 
simple. The contents of the bottle are diluted with 
warm water. Then the seeds of the beans, clover, or 
peas, which have previously been mixed with a little soil, 
are treated with this solution and thoroughly mixed with 
the soil. After that the mass is partially dried so that 
the seeds may be readily sown. The bacteria at once 
begin to propagate in the soil, which is their natural 
home, and by the time the beans or peas have put out 
roots they are present in vast numbers, and ready to begin 
the active work of forming nodules.... 

"Prompted by these experiments, a valuable series 
of tests has recently been made by the United States Department 
of Agriculture, and an improved method for 
distributing the bacteria has been devised. Instead of a 
moist culture in glass tubes the bacteria are put up in a 
small dry mass that resembles a yeast-cake. These may 
be sent anywhere without deterioration; a little soaking 
is all that is needed to prepare them for use in the soil. 
The Department is now formulating a plan for introducing 
these cultures extensively in localities in this country 
which are deficient in nodule-forming germs." 



R3304 : page 21 

OUR YEAR TEXT FOR 1904. 

[Reprint from Pittsburgh Gazette.] 

PASTOR C. T. Russell of the Bible House chapel, 
Allegheny, yesterday afternoon spoke on "A 
Text for the New Year." He said: 

I choose for my text the exhortation of the Apostle 
Paul to the Church at Philippi— appropriate to us also. 
I suggest that we each make it our year-text, and trust 
that our minds, continually recurring to it, may be 
profited, strengthened and assisted in the right ways of 
the Lord. The words are: 

"Finally, brethren, whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things 
are pure, whatsoever things are lovely, whatsoever things are reputable, 
if there be any virtue and if there be any praise, think on these 
things. "--Phil. 4:8. 

Few seem to realize the power of the mind, the 
power of thought, as an element in the formation of character. 
"As a man thinketh so is he." How important, 
then, it is that we should think properly— that our minds 
should be rightly directed. The Scriptures assure us, 
and the experiences of the noblest people of the world 
convince us, that we have all so inherited degeneracy 
from our father Adam, that "there is none righteous, no 
not one; all have sinned and come short of the glory of 
God." This degeneracy affects us physically— we are 
a dying race under the Creator's sentence, "Dying thou 
shalt die." And this dying affects us not only physically 
but mentally and morally. "We are prone to sin as the 
sparks to fly upward." The taint is in us from our 
birth, for were we not "born in sin and shapen in 
iniquity"? 

HUMAN REGULATIONS NECESSARY. 

There are various methods of appealing to humanity, 
the success of each varying with the individual. Some 
need imprisonment and "stripes," others can be profited 
by moral suasion, by appeal to their reason, by appeal to 
the better elements of their natures, even though tainted 
or tarnished through original sin. Both of these methods 
of appeal are recognized in the world to-day. Pulpits 
and newspapers are appealing to the minds of men with 
more or less propriety and with more or less success; 
but nevertheless society protects itself by penal institutions 
—reformatories, jails, penitentiaries, etc. So it is 
with the divine government. Nature has some general 
laws by which the whole world of mankind is dominated 
—laws of retribution, by which every virtue brings a 
certain degree of reward, satisfaction and peace, and 



every crime brings a certain measure of chastisement, 
pain, trouble and unrest. 

Nevertheless, the course of nature is so disordered in 
the present time by the prevalence of sin and its penalty 
and the operation of the laws of heredity that we cannot 
say that the laws of nature are at the present time absolutely 
just as respects each individual, whatever we may 
say of their general justice in respect to the race as a 
whole. Hence, as the Scriptures declare, "some men's 
sins go before to judgment and some they follow after." 

In the coming millennial age, when Christ's Kingdom 
shall administer justice amongst men, the rewards 
and punishments will be equitable. No longer will the 
child suffer for the sins of the parents. No longer will the 
righteous suffer; but only the evil-doers, for thus it is 
written. (Jer. 31:29; Psa. 72:7.) In that blessed 
time the Lord will use both methods of appealing 
to the world. (1) An appeal will be made to their 
hearts and consciences, with inducements and rewards 
for obedience to the principles of righteousness— the reward 
of physical, mental and moral restitution or uplift, 
which will bring the obedient gradually back to the full 
image and likeness of God enjoyed by father Adam before 
his fall. (2) This appeal to the hearts and consciences 
of mankind will be supplemented by stripes, judgments, 
chastisements "upon every soul of man that doeth evil." 
We can to some degree realize the great advantage that 
will accrue to mankind under such dealings— how great 
will be the assistance. 

R3304 : page 22 

THE LORD'S METHOD AT THE PRESENT TIME. 

In the present age the Lord does not use this double 
method of appeal, but merely the first. He appeals to 
our hearts, our reasons, saying, "Come, let us reason 
together." But those who will not reason with the 
Lord now are not chastised, even if they go into grievous 
sins. The worldly are permitted to take their course; 
they receive no particular stripes or corrections from the 
Lord, because the day of the world's trial or judgment 
has not yet come. As the Apostle says, "The wicked 
shall do wickedly and none of the wicked shall understand;" 
and so we have on every hand sin, wickedness 
abounding, and that without interference from the Lord. 
Only with one class is the Lord now dealing, namely, the 
Church. We recognize, of course, that there is a divine supervision 
over the nations; that the Lord has kept in his 

R3305 : page 22 

own power more or less of the times and bounds of the 
nations, as the Apostle expresses the matter. (Acts 17:26.) 
However, these dealings with the nations 
have little to do with the world as individuals, and nothing 



to do with the world's trial, which belongs to the 
next age. "God hath appointed a day [the millennial 
day— a day with the Lord is as a thousand years] in the 
which he will judge the world in righteousness by that 
man whom he hath afore ordained"— the Christ, head 
and body.-Acts 17:31; I Cor. 6:2. 

We repeat, then, that the Lord's special dealings at 
the present time are with those who believe and not with 
unbelievers. He sends his message, "speaking peace 
through Jesus Christ," to him that hath an ear to hear 
and a heart to receive the message— and these are very 
few, comparatively. The appeal of the evangelist who 
follows the scriptural pattern is an appeal to the heads 
and the hearts of the people who have the ears to hear. 
He is not privileged to mete out stripes or other judgments 
or corrections to those who disregard his message. 
Those who have the ears, and who receive the word with 
gladness, get a great blessing— and that in proportion as 
they receive it into good and honest and obedient hearts. 
Those who do not hear at all, whose hearts are not in the 
condition to respond to the Gospel message, suffer a loss— 
a loss of the joy and peace and blessing and "comfort of 
the Scriptures" which the believers enjoy. 

"BY THE FOOLISHNESS OF PREACHING." 

Not only does the Lord begin the work of grace among 
his people with the above-described message, speaking 
forgiveness and peace through Jesus, but, to those who 
do receive the message and who are exercised by it he continues 
the same process of dealing— still appealing to their 
hearts, heads and consciences. This is what the Apostle 
means when he says, "It pleased God by the foolishness 
of preaching to save them that believe."— I Cor. 1:21. 

To the world this method of appealing merely to the 
heads and hearts seems like a weak and unsatisfactory 
method of dealing. The world finds it necessary to 
resort to force, and wonders that the Almighty does not 
resort to force to compel obedience to His laws rather 
than merely to exhort obedience to them. We have 
just seen that in the millennial age the Lord will use both 
methods, and the question properly arises, Why does he 
not use both methods of appealing to mankind in the 
present time— first, appeal through the intellect and 
heart, and second, appeal through force? 

We answer, that the reason lies in the fact that God 
is now selecting a peculiar class— to use scriptural terms, 
he is now electing "a peculiar people." The class he is 
now seeking needs no stripes or punishments to constrain 
their obedience. They are constrained by love- 
love for God, love for the Redeemer, love for the principles 
of righteousness and a sympathetic love for the 
whole world of mankind, even their enemies. 

If force were introduced in the present time it would 
be a hindrance to the development of this particular 
class which the Lord is now seeking, each of whom must 



be in heart, in intention (not in flesh) a copy of God's 

dear Son. Those who require stripes, punishments, etc., 

to enforce obedience to the divine requirements cannot 

be of the "very elect," whose disposition of heart is represented 

by the words of our Lord expressed through the 

prophet: "I delight to do thy will, O my God; thy law is 

written in my heart."— Psa. 40:8. 

HOW GOD WORKS IN US TO WILL AND TO DO. 

It is in harmony with this thought that God is now 
operating in the Church along the lines of appeal to our 
sentiments and not along the lines of force. As the Apostle 
says: "It is God that worketh in you both to will and 
to do of his good pleasure." God works in this class 
through the intellect and heart. He makes known to 
them "the riches of his grace" little by little as they are 
able to appreciate and willing to respond. 

The first effect of this upon the proper heart is to induce 
a responsive sentiment, expressed by the Apostle 
thus: "The love of Christ constraineth us: for we thus 
judge, that if one died for all, then were all dead; and 
that we who live should henceforth live not to ourselves, 
but to him who died for us." (2 Cor. 5:14.) The 
class represented in this text have experienced the Truth 
working in them as the power of God up to the point of 
willing— willing to do the Lord's will; willing to renounce 
self; willing to follow in the footsteps of our Lord Jesus; 
willing to be copies of God's dear Son. The power of God 
continues to operate in such and unfolds to them more 
and more of the lengths and breadths and heights and 
depths of the love of God which passeth all understanding, 
and which is expressed to these in the "exceeding great 
and precious promises" of the divine Word. 

These promises operate upon the heart and mind 
and lead to works— obedience, self-denial, self-sacrifice- 
even unto death. It is such as are thus rightly exercised 
by divine grace and truth who may now hope to 
attain to all the great and wonderful things which God 
hath in reservation for them that love him. 

Not only does God thus appeal to our minds, our 
thoughts, our reasoning faculties, with his explanation 
of right and wrong, truth and untruth, righteousness and 
sin, and promises of his continued favor unto life eternal, 
or for the disobedient his disfavor unto cutting off from 
life in the second death; but he urges upon us co-operation 
with him along the same lines— that we take hold of 
our minds, of our thoughts, and shape them into conformity 
with the divine mind, with the divine will. 

This is the signification of our text: On the principle 
that every thought has its influence upon our words and 
conduct, the Apostle urges that our thoughts be the 
special objects of our solicitude, care, watchfulness. 
Our Redeemer expresses the same sentiment in different 
language saying, "Out of the abundance of the heart 
[mind] the mouth speaketh." And out of the heart 



R3305 : page 23 

(mind) proceedeth envies, malice, strife, etc.,— or contrariwise 
kindness, gentleness, goodness, love. 

IMPORTANCE OF A RIGHT HEART. 

It is all important, then, that we have right hearts; 
for as a bitter fountain cannot send forth sweet waters, 
neither can a heart that is in the bitterness of sin send 
forth blessing to those in contact with it. We admit 
that a certain amount of refinement and grace belonging 
to the children of God may be copied by the unregenerate, 
but it has no depth, it fails easily, it quickly discloses the 
real bitterness, selfishness and acrimony of the natural 
heart which underlies. 

In the present time, therefore, the Lord does not appeal 
to these bitter hearts to send forth sweet waters. 
The appeals of the Scriptures are to the regenerated 
hearts of consecrated believers, addressed in all the 
epistles as "saints," "children of God," "the sanctified 
in Christ Jesus," "the Lord's brethren," etc. These having 
new hearts, new wills, sanctified or set apart to the 
Lord, to righteousness, to truth, to goodness, need nevertheless 
to keep watch over their every deed, word and 
thought. 

Our text is the apostle's appeal to this class along 
this line. It is well that we should scan our outward conduct, 
to take note that our good intentions may not be so 
exhibited to others that they will misapprehend our real 
sentiments— "Let not your good be evil spoken of." It 
is right, too, that we should "set a guard upon our mouth 
lest we should sin with our lips," lest our words be such 
as would not be honoring to the Lord or edifying to the 
brethren or to the world. But the number of watchmen 
or pickets doing duty and standing guard over our 
actions and words will be fewer in proportion as the 
picket line guarding our minds, our thoughts, is a strong 
one. It is here that we need to be especially on the alert. 

"Out of the abundance of the heart the mouth 
speaketh." This general truth is particularly exemplified 
in the regenerate, who are more open in their conduct and 
language, proportionately, than others. Having the 
right sentiments at heart they are less on their guard in 
respect to their manner of expression perhaps than previously; 
but all the more, they need to remember the 
words of the Apostle. "If any man sin not with his lips, 
the same is a perfect man."— Jas. 3:2. 

LIKELIHOOD OF ERROR. 

The inference is that even the most advanced of the 
Lord's people are liable at times to err with their lips. 
Hence the appropriateness, to all of the Lord's people, of 
the prayer, "Let the words of my mouth and the meditations 



of my heart be acceptable in thy sight, O Lord, my 
strength and my Redeemer."— Psa. 19:14. 

Before coming more particularly to the items of our 
text let us briefly glance at the preceding context; for 
we notice that the Apostle introduces the text with the 
word "Finally." What comes before Finally? Let us 
see. His words are, "Rejoice in the Lord alway; and 
again I say, Rejoice! Let your gentleness be known to 
all men. The Lord is at hand: be not worried about anything 
but in everything by prayer and supplication, 
with thanksgiving, let your requests be made known 
unto God. And the peace of God, which passeth all 
understanding, shall guard your hearts and minds 
[thoughts] in Christ Jesus." 

What a wonderful exhortation this is! Those of us 
who are able to do so will do well to take the entire four 
verses for our Scripture text for the new year. The 
Christian is not to be sorrowful and moping. If he is a 
true Christian and understands the Father's message he 
must rejoice. True, as the Apostle elsewhere remarks, 
through manifold trials, discouragements, weaknesses, 
etc., there may be moments of dejection and sorrow; but 
these are only like the sun-showers of the summer-time. 
To the true followers of the Lord, instructed through his 
Word, the light of the Lord's kindness shines through all 

R3306 : page 23 

earth-born clouds and troubles, to bring him joy and 
peace and blessing. 

FORGETTING THE THINGS BEHIND. 

At the present time, at the close of the old year and 
the dawning of a new one, it is especially appropriate that 
the Lord's people should clearly apprehend the great lesson 
which the Apostle is here inculcating and which he 
also taught in another place, saying, "Forget the things 
which are behind, and press forward to things which are 
before." In the year that is past every enlightened and 
proper-minded child of God will be able to discern both 
weakness and success, defeats and victories. We know 
this because "There is none righteous, no not one"— 
none that come fully up to the mark of perfection. 

Hence all may look back and find in the year that is 
closing sources of regret as well as sources of joy and 
comfort. Are we to mourn over the failures of the past? 
Is this the will of the Lord concerning us— that we should 
stop, because we find that we have not been able to walk 
perfectly in every particular— not even up to our own 
imperfect standards? Nay, verily! With the Apostle we 
exclaim, "Let us go on to perfection." 

Perfection is not a thing of the past, but of the 
future. We cannot be satisfied with the past but we 
"shall be satisfied when we awake in his likeness," 
sharers in the glorious first resurrection. For this we are 



pressing along, forgetting the things that are behind. 

We forget the things that are behind, because it is 
right that we should do so. Because God forgets them, 
and declares that he has cast all of our imperfections behind 
his back; that our imperfections are all covered 
from his sight, by the merit of him who loved us and 
who died for us, and whom we love, and in whom we are 
trusting, and in whose steps we are seeking to walk with 
more or less of imperfection according to the defects we 
have inherited in the flesh. We are not meaning to suggest 
that slips or failures should be lightly esteemed or 
quickly forgotten; they should be rectified to the extent 
of our ability, and Divine forgiveness should be sought 
for these defects daily. 

It is for this very purpose that the Lord has provided 
access to the "throne of heavenly grace, where we 
may obtain mercy and find grace to help in every time of 
need." We merely mean that it is the Lord's will respecting 
us that, having corrected errors to the best of our 
ability, and having appealed for Divine forgiveness, we 
should believe the word of the Lord and accept his forgiveness 
and start afresh with rejoicing with each new day— 
and now, as we near it, start afresh for the new year, 1904. 

CULTIVATION OF GENTLENESS. 

"Gentleness," the forbearance or moderation mentioned 
in the context, is to be cultivated by each of us to 
such an extent that it will not only be manifested to ourselves 
and to the brethren, but to others. This may not 

R3306 : page 24 

mean the same amount of gentleness in each of the Lord's 
people, because the treasure of the new mind is in earthen 
vessels in every instance; and the possibilities for one 
may exceed the abilities of another. But, in any event, 
this quality of gentleness (moderation or forbearance) 
should be increasingly an outward manifestation of the 
grace of the Lord, dwelling in us richly and abounding, so 
that those who have known us in the past will at least be 
able year by year to see in us progress, development 
along this line. 

We have already referred to the necessity for prayer, 
supplication, mentioned by the Apostle. We now observe 
that those who are dwelling in close fellowship with 
the Lord will be so appreciative of the favors and blessings 
already enjoyed that they will not feel like asking for 
greater blessings, but rather like giving thanks with a 
realization that they have already received not only more 
than they deserved at the Lord's hands, but more than 
they could have asked or thought. And what has already 
been received is only a foretaste of the promised 
coming blessings. 

Our requests should be, increasingly, for grace and 
wisdom and the fruits of the spirit and opportunities for 



serving the Lord and the brethren, and for growing more 
and more into the likeness of God's dear Son. 

Under these conditions who can doubt that the promised 
"peace of God beyond all understanding" would 
"guard" such "hearts" and their "thoughts"? This 
peace would of itself dispel one of the great evils that 
afflict the hearts of many. Selfishness and ambition 
would find little room in a heart so filled with gratitude. 
God's peace, and not merely the peace of the world, 
would reign in such a heart, controlling ambitions and 
energies. Divine peace can dwell in our hearts and rule 
in them, so as to keep out the worry and turmoil of the 
world, even when we are surrounded by these disadvantageous 
conditions— even when the adversary himself 
is besetting us through deceived agents. 

EMPTIED OF THE OLD; FILLED WITH THE NEW. 

Then comes our text, suggesting that, with this 
peace ruling in our hearts, and keeping guard over our 
thoughts, so that they are spared from many of the intrusions 
of the world, the flesh and the devil, we should 
see to it that our hearts are not merely barren and empty 
of evil, but should give our thoughts food even as we provide 
sustenance for our bodies. We should see that their 
exercise is in a proper direction to produce proper and 
helpful conditions. 

We all know how easy it is to allow the old natural 
mind to assert itself, to allow envy, gossip, backbiting, 
malice, strife, pride, vain-glory, to enter our minds and to 
absorb time and attention. We all know that these need 
to be continually repelled; but all do not know how necessary 
it is that, while repelling these, we invite into our minds 
proper thoughts that will fill them and thus effectually bar 
the way and hinder the coming again of evil thoughts. 

It is along this line that the Apostle exhorts, that 
we believe it will be profitable for us all to specially exercise 
our attention during the year just at hand. While 
thanking God for the forgiveness of sins and for the new 
hearts, new wills, which we have attained by his grace, 
let us keep guard over our thoughts— let us exercise 
them upon the lines the Apostle lays down in this text. 

"Whatsoever things are true." The Lord's people 
are to be so in accord with righteousness that everything 
that is false or unjust or untrue in word, thought or act 
will be offensive to them— cause them pain. Truthfulness, 
then, must be the first test to apply to any matter 
that will be accepted by our minds. It is not for us to 
waste our time and attention chasing imaginary matters, 
errors, fictions, etc. First of all, we want to know, Is it 
true? While this truth will apply in a general way to 
everything in life, and to everybody, and promote a love 
for the right and the true, and a heart-opposition to all 
that is adulterated, yet the principle is specially applicable 
to the affairs of the new creation and to their spiritual 
food. 



In respect to the latter, our first inquiry should be, 
Is this the truth or is it to any extent contaminated with 
traditions of men, calculated to "make void the Word of 
God"? as our dear Redeemer expressed it. The prophet 
declares, speaking of God, "Thou desirest truth in the 
inward parts"— sincerity of heart. It is remarkable how 
many people would shun to tell an open falsehood, who 
nevertheless appear not to have a heart-love for the truth. 
Let us during the year beginning cultivate a love for the 
truth wherever we may find it, and at any cost. Let us 
take time to "prove" everything we receive as truth. 

THE THOUGHTS WE SHOULD ENTERTAIN. 

"Whatsoever things are honorable." This is a 
second test of what our thoughts should be permitted to 
rest upon. We cannot avoid the intrusion of thoughts 
which our judgments would disprove, but we must scrutinize 
and test our thoughts, as they present themselves, 
and must refuse to entertain or harbor those which are 
ignoble, dishonorable, unworthy of us as human beings, 
and especially as members of the new creation, "the 
body of Christ." Many things may be true which are 
not honorable, and their truthfulness must not give them 
a resting-place in our minds if they will not stand this 
second test. 

"Whatsoever things are just," or equitable. This 
is the third test which the Apostle would have us apply as 
we scrutinize suggestions made to our minds from any 
quarter. Things might be true and might be honorable 
so far as the principles were concerned, and yet not be 
just or equitable to others. A story might reach us of an 
honorable exploit of some friend; we might know it to be 
true, and yet it might reflect against some one else unfavorably, 
unjustly, inequitably. If so, the thought 
must not be entertained, but must be repelled. 

"Whatsoever things are pure." This is the fourth 
test which the Apostle urges us to apply to our thoughts as 
they present themselves from any quarter. Many things 
are true, just and perhaps not dishonorable that are not 
pure— calculated to awaken impure desires. Such 
things are strictly barred according to this inspired rule. 

"Whatsoever things are lovely." This is the fifth 
test. Amongst true, honorable, just, pure things which 
we may properly consider, there is a variety, some more 
and some less lovely, some more and some less admirable; 
and our thoughts, the Apostle suggests, should give preference 
to the lovely and loveable as being more ennobling, 
more calculated to lift us and profit us, and hence 
more inclined to help others through us; because our influence 
with others is on a parity with our mental status. 

"Out of the abundance of the heart [the mind] the 
mouth speaketh;" and hence those who follow this 

R3307 : page 25 



counsel of the Apostle will be found more and more speaking 
nothing but the truth, and avoiding truths that are 
not honorable, or not just and equitable, or not pure; 
and preferring especially those topics for meditation that 
are lovely. What a lovely character would be assured in 
one who could strictly and completely follow the Apostle's 
advice herein given. He would be a copy of Jesus— just 
what we all wish to be. None of us can attain this. 
"Whatsoever things are reputable, possessing any 
virtue or any praise." By this expression the Apostle 
seems to throw out general lines of test and examination. 
His words imply that we should have a scrutiny of our 
thoughts to the intent that only things that could be 
profitable to us and to others should be entertained, considered, 
discussed. Frivolous things would be excluded 
also by this test. Who will not admit that a mind thus 
freed from rubbish and evil and allowed only to entertain 
true, good, clean, profitable thoughts would be a mind 
which the Lord would be pleased with and which would 
conduce to the development of the character-likeness of 
our Lord Jesus, which is demanded of us if we would be 
his joint-heirs in the kingdom.— Rom. 7:29. 

"PERFECT AS YOUR FATHER IN HEAVEN." 

The standard which the Apostle has here raised resembles 
the standard which our Lord raised before us 
when he said, "Be ye perfect even as your Father which 
is in heaven is perfect." We cannot be perfect as the 
Father is perfect, but we can and do aim at that perfection; 
and whatever we come short in while thus endeavoring 
is made up to us of the Lord's grace through the merit 
of the precious blood. Likewise we cannot hope to attain 
so complete a control of our thoughts as the Apostle's 
words in this beautiful text suggest, but we can make 
that our standard; and in proportion as we view this 
standard and daily strive to measure up to it, in that 
sense and proportion no doubt we will have a blessing 
every day throughout the year, and at its close find ourselves 
considerably strengthened in mind, and advanced 
along these lines, which the Apostle elsewhere speaks of 
as "bringing every thought into captivity to the will of 
God in Christ."-2 Cor. 10:5. 

The scriptural proposition is that even the most 
saintly of the Lord's people, the most developed in character, 
will need the merit of Christ's righteousness imputed 
to them until they are made perfect in the first 
resurrection. Only in our minds, in our wills, have the 
old things passed away and all things become new. 
Actually, this great change will be accomplished when 
this mortal shall have put on immortality, when this corruptible 
shall be raised in incorruption— raised in glory, in 
power, spirit beings. But meantime, in order to be counted 
worthy of a share in the first resurrection, it is required 
of us that we shall demonstrate our willingness of mind, 
our earnest desire to be all that the Lord would have us 



be; and in no way can this be better demonstrated to the 
Lord and to ourselves, or prove more helpful, than by keeping 
a strict surveillance of our hearts and of our thoughts. 
The Lord's blessing will surely be upon all who shall seek 
to follow this word of his grace during the new year. 



R3307 : page 25 

FISHERS OF MEN. 

--LUKE 5: 1-11. --JAN. 31.- 

Golden Text:— "If ye continue in my Word, then 
are ye my disciples indeed."— JOHN 8:31. 

CAPERNAUM lay near the shore of the Sea of 
Galilee, a beautiful little lake of world-wide honor 
and distinction because of our Lord's association 
with it, and well stocked with fish, as we may judge from 
this lesson. It was to this lake shore near Capernaum 
that Jesus came after his rejection at Nazareth. He had 
a different reception here: the people pressed upon him 
to hear of the word of the Lord, and for convenience to 
himself and to them Jesus got into the fishing boat belonging 
to Simon Peter, that he might from the boat more 
effectually address the people, who doubtless sat or stood 
on the shore. 

We are inclined to wonder frequently that more of 
our Lord's discourses have not been preserved for us in 
the Gospel accounts. What we have are fragmentary, 
the sermon on the Mount being the principal one. As 
for the other references to Jesus' preaching, they are 
merely brief extracts— his parables and dark sayings. 
As an illustration of the latter, note his declaration that 
he was the bread that came down from heaven, of which 
if a man eat he should never die. Many of those who 
heard said, This is a hard saying, and walked no more 
with him. Our chief instruction in the great doctrines of 
the Gospel— respecting the ransom, our justification 
through faith in the precious blood, our adoption, begetting, 
resurrection, and the difference between the 
First Resurrection and that of others subsequently, etc., 
—comes to us through the epistles of the apostles and 
through the record of their discourses as given in the book 
of Acts. 

At first we would be inclined to wonder why this 
should be so, why we should not get our chief instruction 
on matters pertaining to the future life and godliness 
from the words of our Lord. But we understand the matter 
clearly since we discern that it was necessary that our 
Lord should pay the ransom price before any of our race 
could be adopted by the Father and receive the spirit of 
adoption. This explains the whole situation; for without 
the spirit of adoption we could not understand 



spiritual things, and consequently the things of a heavenly 

character which Jesus declared were parables and 

dark sayings to those of his time who heard them; for 

instance, his discourse on the new birth to Nicodemus, 

who could not understand. Our Lord remarked in this 

connection the fact that he taught merely earthly things 

and not heavenly things, saying, "If I have told you 

earthly things and you understood not, how would you 

understand if I should tell you of heavenly things?" 

(John 3:12.) Seeing that his hearers were not prepared 

to understand the heavenly things, our Lord gave his attention 

chiefly to discourses on earthly things, and to 

parables and dark sayings, which the Spirit would subsequently 

make known to his faithful ones. 

THE NATURAL MAN APPRECIATES NOT SPIRITUAL 
THINGS. 

This gives us a larger view of our Lord's ministry: 

R3307 : page 26 

first, teaching the natural man such things as the natural 
man could understand; secondly, healing the natural 
man's ailments, and thus laying a broad foundation for 
the spiritual work which he would begin at Pentecost and 
carry out during this Gospel age through his representatives 
the apostles, and those who should believe on him 
through their word. Throughout this Gospel age the 
Lord himself has been the teacher of the Church, which is 
"his body"— "his brethren": he has been attending to 
every feature of our instruction, feeding us upon the Truth 
—"things new and old." He is still the instructor, and 
whatever we receive through the apostles is merely his 
message through them and not their own messages. And 
whoever now speaks in the Lord's name is authorized to 
speak merely as a representative and ambassador, who 
must refer for his authority back to the words of the 
Lord himself, or to the words of those whom he inspired 
or directed in a plenary manner— the twelve apostles, 
Paul taking the place of Judas. 

Our Lord had been probably a year engaged in 
preaching, first in Judea, and latterly in Galilee, at the 
time this lesson opens. He was evidently already acquainted 
with these fishermen mentioned in our lesson, 
Peter, Andrew, James and John. It was probably at an 
earlier interview that our Lord gave Simon his surname 
of Peter, as it occurs in this lesson. These fishermen had 
probably met with Jesus and heard his preaching on other 
occasions, and were his disciples in a general sense of the 
word— that is, followers of him, believers on him, advocates 
of his teachings. Now, however, the time had 
come for our Lord's selection of the twelve apostles who 
should be with him continually and see his miracles and 
hear his teachings and be witnesses of all things said and 
done: and they in turn might in due time serve as his 



special representatives and be able to give to us, and to all 
of his subsequent followers accurate and truthful records 
of the principal events of his ministry. 

After preaching to the company on the shore from his 
seat in the boat, Jesus proposed to Simon and Andrew, 
the owners of the boat, that the boat be taken into 
deeper waters and the nets cast for fish; but Peter informed 
the Lord that this would be useless as the day was 
unfavorable, or for some reason the fish were not in that 
quarter of the lake at that time, for he and his companions 
had toiled all night and caught nothing. 
Nevertheless, to please the Lord, they did as he suggested. 
As they began to gather in the net they found it to be 
heavily laden with fish, more than their boat could hold. 
Their partners in the other boat were beckoned to, and 
gave a helping hand to save some of the fish. The lesson 
had its designed effect; Simon Peter at once fell on his 

R3308 : page 26 

knees before the Lord, recognizing that no ordinary 
human being could have produced such results under 
such circumstances. 

THE LORD LOVES ZEAL AND ENERGY. 

There is something very noble about Simon Peter: 
his impulsiveness by itself is an attractive trait. The 
zeal and energy with which he was disposed to take hold 
of any matter considered worthy of his attention is admirable. 
Indeed we know that Peter, James and John 
were the three whom the Lord specially loved of the 
twelve— the three who seemed to have the zeal, energy 
and vim which the Lord appreciates. They were practical 
illustrations of the admonition, "Whatsoever thy 
hand findeth to do, do it with thy might." Peter's 
words to the Lord, "Depart from me, O Lord, for I am a 
sinful man," represented his acknowledgment of the 
great difference between himself and the Master. He 
caught the true situation, that he was a sinful, imperfect 
man, while the one before him, the Master, was perfect 
and in full accord with the Father, and therefore permitted 
to be the dispenser of the Father's mercies. 

Peter's real sentiment was probably the reverse of 
his expression. He meant, "O Lord, although I am a sinful 
man, permit me to be near thee, that I may be 
blessed by contact with thee." This was the proper attitude 
of heart and the real prayer, which Jesus answered 
in making him one of his chosen twelve. 

The narrative breaks off suddenly and does not tell 
us whether it was the same hour or the next day that 
Peter, Andrew, James and John forsook their fishing 
business— their boats and nets— that they might be 
specially the companions of our Lord and ultimately his 
representatives, his apostles. We may reasonably suppose 
that the partnerships in this fishing business were 



family affairs, and that Peter left his boat and implements 

in the hands of brothers or sons or other partners 

or associates; and that likewise the sons of Zebedee left 

their paraphernalia in the hands of their father or others 

who had previously been interested with them in business. 

Indeed this thought is fully borne out by the fact that 

after our Lord's death, about two years later, these same 

men proposed returning to the fishing business, and apparently 

had some interest still in the boats, nets, tackle, 

etc. It was on the last-mentioned occasion that Jesus 

again gave a great draft of fishes, and that Simon Peter 

was the first again to recognize that the power to perform 

such a miracle could belong to no other than the crucified 

but risen Lord, whom he then recognized as the one upon 

the shore. 

CALLED TO A HIGHER VOCATION. 

Our Lord's words to Peter were, "From henceforth 
thou shalt catch men." These words were applicable 
also to Peter's associates, and doubtless were applied to 
them later as an invitation that they should with Peter 
join the Lord as his disciples or apostles. The account 
in Mark 1:17 mentions Andrew the brother of Simon 
Peter, and his partner in business also, and gives the invitation 
in slightly different language, namely, "Come ye 
after me and I will make you to become fishers of men." 
Probably the Lord made use of both expressions, but in 
any event they are of similar import. 

All of life's affairs will teach us lessons profitable 
throughout its future, if we will receive them. Ordinary 
affairs and business of every kind, in proportion as it is 
conducted along honest, proper and reasonable lines, will 
give valuable instruction and preparation for spiritual 
usefulness in the Lord's service, if they be properly received 
and wisely improved. Perhaps, however, there 
was something peculiarly helpful in the fishing business- 
something peculiarly like the great work in which the 
apostles were to engage the remainder of their lives. 
Our Lord intimates this in his call. Fishing requires 
energy, tact, proper bait, and that the fisherman keep 
himself out of sight. And these four things are requisites 
in the spiritual fishing in which the Lord privileges 
us to engage. Thus he admonished, "Be ye wise as 
serpents and harmless as doves." The Apostle Paul, 

R3308 : page 27 

speaking along this same line of the wisdom he used in 
presenting the Gospel tactfully, says, "Being crafty 
[wise] I took you with guile"— with bait. The Apostle 
took advantage of the natural tendencies and inclinations 
of his hearers to present the Gospel in the most practical 
form without, however, shunning or refusing to declare 
one single feature of it. In this his course is a model for 
us. We are to remember that as fish are easily alarmed 



when they find that any one wishes to take them, so 
humanity is shy of being captured by anything— especially 
if they have the least suspicion that they may lose 
their liberties: and thus consecration appears to the 
world. 

The apostles were not, as fishers for men, representing 
men or human institutions. They were not trying to 
get disciples into some sectarian bondage. They were 
fishers of men for the Lord and as the Lord's representatives; 
as though God did beseech men through them. 
Their mission was to catch men with the glorious hopes 
and prospects of the Gospel; to bring them into such 
relationship with the Lord that they would fully and 
gladly surrender their all to him. And this is the same 
course that is properly before the Lord's representatives 
to-day. We are to catch men for the Lord and for his 
service, not for our personal profit or gain,— not for sectarian 
upbuilding. We are not to give our own liberties 
to men, nor to seek to take away the liberties of others at 
the behest of men or sects. The message that goes forth 
from the true fishers of men whom the Lord commissions 
is nevertheless a message which implies a loss of liberty 
and a loss of life to those who are successfully caught. 
However, the fishing business does not fully illustrate the 
matter, because all who are of the Lord's catch must be 
willingly his, else they will not remain caught, but be cast 
forth: and their loss of personal liberty and life means 
a gain of glory, honor and eternal life. 

Our Lord used this fishing business as the basis of 
one of his parables, saying that the Kingdom of heaven 
is like unto a net cast into the sea which after gathering 
fish of every kind will be finally brought to shore. That 
net undoubtedly represented this Gospel age, and a 
general catch of all classes of people, suitable and unsuitable 
for the Lord's purpose as respects the Kingdom. 
The bringing of the net to the shore properly represents 
the "harvest" time of this age— the reckoning time, the 
time when this catch is concluded. The parable proceeds 
to say that the suitable fish were gathered into baskets 
and the unsuitable were cast away,— cast back into the 
sea. So the Gospel call, the Gospel net, the Gospel fishermen 
of this Gospel age are gathering out of the world of 
mankind a peculiar class of people suitable to the Lord's 
purposes in the Kingdom, and though others may get into 
it they are not desired and will relapse again to worldly 
conditions. The fishing of the next age will be different 
and on a much larger scale. 

APOSTLESHIP MORE THAN DISCIPLESHIP. 

There is a difference between apostleship and discipleship. 
There are but "twelve apostles of the Lamb" 
(Rev. 21:14), but the number of disciples is considerably 
larger. The word disciple signifies pupil or learner; 
and all who are now being called of the Lord, all who are 
now being caught as acceptable fish under the present 



arrangement are those who desire to be taught of the 
Lord and willingly respond to his teachings. Our Golden 
Text sets forth the conditions upon which we may be disciples, 
namely, that we not only accept the Lord but 
that we continue in his word— continue to be taught of 
him— continue to learn in the school of Christ. Before 
we enter his school we must learn that we are sinners by 
nature and that we need just the washing or the cleansing 
that he prescribes as necessary before we can enter 
his school or become his disciples. After we accept the 
word of counsel respecting the need of washing in the 
precious blood, and after by faith accomplishing this 
cleansing of sins, and after we have started as pupils, we 
find that there are various lessons to be learned, all necessary 
to our progress. 

It is the Teacher who is to be the decider of what 
lessons we need, what experiences, what trials, what 
difficulties, what encouragements, what assistance are 
necessary to us. The promise is, that no good thing will 
he withhold. He will give the warnings, the corrections, 
the encouragements, the blessings and the promises, according 
as we need them and are in a condition to make 
profitable use of them. Not everyone who starts to be a 
disciple will win the great prize as a graduate from the 
school of Christ into the Kingdom of glory and join t-heirship 
with the Master; but he who faithfully and 
patiently continues in discipleship— continues to learn 
the lessons which the great Master teaches, until he shall 
have finished his course, will surely receive his crown at 
the hands of the Lord. 



R3309 : page 27 

THE GOOD PHYSICIAN. 

-MARK L21-34.-FEBRUARY 1 .- 

Golden Text:— "He laid his hands on every one 
of them, and healed them."-LUKE 4:40. 

ALTHOUGH Simon Peter and Andrew were natives 
of Bethsaida, a few miles north of Capernaum 
(Jno. 1:44), they had evidently settled down in 
the latter city, perhaps because larger and more favorable 
to their business. When Peter, Andrew, James and John 
accepted the Lord's invitation to become fishers of men 
they did not immediately depart from home. Some hours 
if not some days elapsed between the fishing experience 
and the narrative of this lesson. The Sabbath was come, 
and Jesus with the four disciples went into the synagogue 
where he was recognized and given an opportunity for 
teaching. In the synagogues of olden times there was 
great liberty to anyone who had the necessary education 
and faith in the holy Scriptures, to discuss their messages. 



In some respects that greater liberty was more 
favorable to the Truth than the present circumscribed 
methods of Christendom, in which each party or sect 
holds absolute control and refuses liberty of discussion of 
its own tenets as well as of the Scriptures. The Lord's 
people should jealously guard Lord's day opportunities, 
so that they be not occasions for the overthrow of faith 
by those who reject the Word of God. At the same 
time the blessing of the Lord's day, the purity of Truth 
and the clearness of the faith would certainly be greatly 

R3309 : page 28 

stimulated by a full liberty of discussion of the meaning 
of the Scriptures in a reverent manner. 

In very few Church gatherings of today would our 
Lord Jesus be granted opportunity to set forth his doctrines. 
He could not and would not accept authority 
from any of the denominations of Christendom, because 
he could not and would not indorse any of their creeds as 
a whole; hence he would be deprived of any opportunity 
for promulgating the Truth in this manner in this our enlightened 
twentieth century. Likewise those who follow 
his word closely, and who for similar reasons cannot indorse 
fully any of the creeds of Christendom, are deprived 
of opportunities for presenting the Truth in the 
synagogues of today; and are obliged to adopt other methods 
of reaching the Lord's sheep with the message of 
the great King, now due to be understood. However, 
the Lord has greatly blessed and used these efforts outside 
the synagogues— especially the printed page, DAWNS, 
Tracts, WATCH TOWERS, etc. 

Our Lord's teaching impressed his hearers as being 
reasonable and positive; and this is one of the characteristics 
of the Truth today. The Lord's message is so 
clear and so forceful that it cannot be gainsaid. It appeals 
to the minds as well as to the hearts of reasonable 
people now as it did then. On the contrary, the general 
mixture of error as then held by the Scribes and Pharisees 
and Doctors of the Law, and as now held by the 
various denominations of Catholics and Protestants and 
their Doctors of Divinity, is confusing, indefinite, self-contradictory 
and generally unsatisfactory. 

THE DEVIL A CHURCH GOER. 

The devil went to Church then as he not infrequently 
does now, and he was as opposed to having the Truth 
preached then as he is now. The attendants of the 
Capernaum synagogue, however, were seemingly of a 
nobler type than that of Nazareth, which gnashed upon 
our Lord and sought to take his life. In this case the 
majority of the people were less under the influence of 
Satan, although one of their number was more particularly 
possessed by a demon, here called "an unclean 
spirit." We know nothing of our Lord's discourse, but 



from the fact that this demon became so excited under 
the preaching, we may draw the inference that our Lord 
was explaining to the people the origin of sin and the 
power of Satan and of the fallen angels in respect to 
humanity, how all these downward tendencies were 
more and more injurious to men and should be resisted, 
how divine fellowship and communion should be sought, 
and how repentance and reformation and resistance of 
the evil one were necessary to physical health as well as 
to a closer approach to our God. 

The demon— one of the fallen angels from the time 
of the flood, mentioned by Jude and by Peter (Jude 6,7; 
2 Pet. 2:4)— believed that the Lord's teachings were 
condemnatory of himself and his associates in evil, and 
cried out, using the mouth of the possessed man. Unquestionably 
the fallen angels, although restrained by 
chains of darkness from manifesting themselves to humanity 
until a certain time, have contact with each 
other and are well aware of procedures in general. As 
Satan recognized Jesus in the temptation, so all of the 
fallen angels knew that the Holy One of God had become 
a man for the purpose of redeeming and reclaiming and 
restoring humanity from the fallen condition superinduced 
by Satan's lying ambition. Apparently, too, these 
demons had some knowledge of the divine times and 
seasons, though we need not suppose that they had a 
particular or definite knowledge, for our Lord declared 
that at that time neither himself nor the holy angels 
knew of the day and the hour of his coming in glory and 
the establishment of his Kingdom. It is not supposable, 
therefore, that the fallen angels knew more on this subject. 
However, there is a great difference between not 
knowing the exact day or hour of a matter and not having 
any idea whatever respecting it. Apparently this 
demon recognized that the time was still distant when 
the power of Satan and all the fallen angels is doomed to 
be overthrown. 

"BE YE CLEAN THAT BEAR THE VESSELS OF THE 
LORD'S HOUSE." 

The testimony of the demon seemed to be reverential, 
and might by some have been construed to be a 
testimony in the Lord's favor. Jesus, however, was not 
willing to accept such a testimony from such a source, 
even as the Apostle Paul was similarly unwilling to 
receive testimony of the possessed woman, who declared 
of Paul and Silas, "These be the servants of the 
Most High God, which show unto us the way of life." 
(Acts 16:17.) The divine method seems to be to make 
a clear separation between the servants of God and the 
servants of evil. The privilege of testifying for God or 
being ambassadors for the Truth is a favor reserved for 
the Lord's own people. He seeketh not the evil one nor 
the fallen demons nor evil men or women to be heralds of 
the good tidings. The Lord's people should note this 



matter carefully, and resent the services of any who do 
not give evidences of being in heart-union with the Lord. 
"Unto the wicked God saith, What hast thou to do to 
take my covenant into thy mouth? Seeing thou hatest 
instruction, and casteth my words behind thee." (Psa. 50:16.) 
Spiritualists, Trance Mediums, Hypnotists, 
Christian Scientists, etc., would fain associate themselves 
more or less with the name of Jesus and seem to be servants 
of the light; but all children of the light should be 
on their guard against these, who, however sincere they 
may sometimes appear, are undoubtedly the tools of the 
prince of darkness, who would array himself as an angel 
of light that he might deceive and mislead the children of 
the light— the children of God. 

But some one will say, Did not Jesus surely say, 
"Greater works than these shall ye do because I go unto 
my Father," and are not those words genuine? Yes, we 
answer, they are genuine, and most precious words; but 
how have they been fulfilled? Have any of the Lord's 
disciples done any greater miracles than Jesus did so far 
as healing physical ailments are concerned? Assuredly 
not. We have no record of greater works of this kind 
than are recorded in the Gospels. Have any of the 
Lord's disciples at any time done as great works according 
to the flesh as Jesus did? Have any of them ever 
awakened the dead? Surely none except the apostles 
have done this wonderful work. What then could our 
Lord have meant by this expression? 

"GREATER WORKS THAN THESE SHALL YE DO." 

We answer that in our last lesson we saw that Jesus in 
his ministry dealt only with the natural man, and could 
not communicate to natural man respecting spiritual or 

R3309 : page 29 

heavenly things except in parables and dark sayings, 
which could be but imperfectly comprehended until 
after Pentecost gave the enlightenment of the holy Spirit. 
To our understanding, therefore, the greater works that 
have been done by the Lord's followers since the ascension 
have been such works as related to the hearts of men 
rather than to their bodies. The whole creation is 
groaning and travailing in physical discomfort, but the 
worst of all groans and pains comes from the anguish of 
the soul— broken hearts. 

The Lord's followers, even the humblest of them, in 
proportion as they receive of his Spirit, may communicate 
it through his word and bring to wounded and 
broken hearts peace and joy and blessing, regardless of 
physical conditions of discomfort, so that as the Apostle 
explains they may rejoice even in tribulation, knowing 
what the tribulations are working out for them in the 
way of greater glory and blessing and association with 
the Lord in his Kingdom. (Rom. 5:3.) Would not he 



who has had the eyes of his understanding opened, that 
he might see with clearness the lengths and breadths and 
heights and depths of the love of God, esteem this blessing 
as of much greater value and importance than simply 
the restoring of natural sight? Who that has tasted that 
the Lord is gracious has not participated in a greater 
miracle than did those who tasted of the loaves and fishes 
which our Lord so miraculously increased that they fed 
the five thousand? It is true indeed, then, that the Lord 
has made it possible for his humbler servants in the 
humbler walks of life and with few natural abilities, but 
possessing his Spirit and his Word, to do mighty works 

R3310 : page 29 

even today— "Mighty through God to the pulling down 
of strongholds" of error and of sin. 

THE NECESSITY FOR MIRACLES IS PAST. 

There was a reason why miracles were necessary at 
the beginning of this Gospel dispensation. Had our 
Lord Jesus performed none of the miracles recorded in 
the Scriptures how could we today feel the confidence, 
the assurance, that we do feel respecting him? Had he 
gone about as a preacher of righteousness and expounder 
of the divine Word merely, and had he then died just as 
he did die, would the proof have been as sufficient as it 
now is that he was indeed the Son of God and that his 
death was indeed the sacrifice of a perfect one for the imperfect 
one and his progeny? Would our Lord in preaching 
to the Jews have accomplished any work without the 
use of miracles? Were they not necessary to him as a 
demonstration of his right to take the place of Moses as 
the antitypical leader of the Israelites indeed? Assuredly 
this is true. But we have no necessity for such 
manifestations of miraculous power today. On the contrary, 
we behold Christianity already too popular with 
the world. As it is, too many tares are pretending to be 
wheat. The conditions, therefore, seem to be the very 
reverse of those which at the first advent demanded miracles 
for the establishing of the Church on a proper faith 
basis. 

"WHO HEALETH ALL THY DISEASES." 

But some one will urge, Does it not seem more reasonable 
that the Lord's people should go to him in prayer 
or go to the elders for healing by miraculous power, than 
that they should use drugs or medicines or surgery? 
Yes, we reply; it is very natural. That is just what the 
natural mind would expect and crave, but the Lord is not 
dealing with his people of today as with natural men. 
We are not natural Israelites, but spiritual Israelites. It 
is to the New Creature that the Lord now appeals; it is 
the New Creature that now has the privilege of experiencing 



healing at the Lord's hands, forgiveness of sins, 

covering with the robe of Christ's righteousness, so that 

we have the standing before the Father of absolute righteousness, 

without spot, wrinkle, or any such thing; we 

know no man after the flesh, we know no perfection after 

the flesh, but we do know the perfection and miracles 

after the spirit; and many a time have the Lord's people 

marveled at the wonderful healing of mind and faith and 

hope, and the wonderful refreshments, with joy unspeakable, 

—the holy anointing oil received from our spiritual 

and glorified Head. 

"WE ARE TO WALK BY FAITH AND NOT BY SIGHT." 

Not only is this the clear statement of the Word, but 
the logic of the proposition must be evident to any one. As 
for the Lord's saints, have they not taken their physical, 
human, earthly rights and privileges, secured through 
the death of Christ, and exchanged these with the Lord 
for heavenly things, the heavenly body that is to be received 
at the First Resurrection, the heavenly hopes and 
heavenly joys which are already the first-fruits of the 
Spirit in us? Yea, verily, they have. Have they not 
sacrificed thus the earthly interests, hopes, rights, privileges, 
for the heavenly ones? How then can we who 
have thus devoted or consecrated our earthly advantages 
for the heavenly ones ask to have again the earthly 
advantages? Would not such a prayer, such a request 
intelligently made, signify a withdrawal of our consecration 
—signify our preference for the earthly rather than 
the heavenly gifts, privileges and advantages? And 
would we as spiritual Israelites be willing to make such an 
exchange again if the Lord were willing to let us do so? 
Surely not. Would one who appreciates the privilege 
of sacrificing earthly interests with Christ, of laying 
down the earthly life and its privileges in participation 
with the Lord and in hope of joint-heirship with him in 
the divine nature and Kingdom, wish for a moment to 
have the Lord cancel this arrangement and give him 
back earthly rights, restitution privileges? 

As for the world we grant that the Lord has secured 
for them restitution privileges and blessings, and that in 
due time they will have them— that in due time Satan 
will be bound and all of his coadjutors be restrained, and 
that then the good Physician, with his whole staff of co-laborers, 
the members of his body, his Bride, will participate 
in the great uplifting of the millennial age, in administering 
the blessings of restitutions, mental, moral 
and physical, to all the willing and obedient of that 
glorious time. (Acts 3:19-23.) But the time of restitution 
has not yet come. It will not come until the close 
of this Gospel age— until the Church shall have finished 
her course, walking by faith and not by sight, enjoying 
the spiritual miracles and not the natural ones. 

The demon came out of the man, tearing him— that 
is to say, causing a convulsion, a fit. Luke, describing 



the event, says that he threw the man in the midst— that 
is, he fell on the floor of the synagogue in the midst of the 
people in a fit, but was otherwise unhurt, the demon not 
having power to do him injury, under the Lord's command. 
The assembled company was astonished, and 

R3310 : page 30 

inquired, What new teaching is this which has authority 
to cast out the evil demons? Our Lord's enemies, it will 
be remembered, subsequently charged him with casting 
out demons by Beelzebub, the prince of demons, Satan; 
hence we see the wisdom of his having refused to receive 
testimony from this demon. To have received their 
testimony would have been more or less acknowledging 
them and giving them credit for truthfulness; whereas 
the Scriptures everywhere represent Satan and his 
fallen spirits as lying spirits, deceiving the people. 

Undoubtedly there are cases of demon possession today 
—obsession. The custom of our day removes these 
to asylums, where they are called insane. It is not our 
thought that all the inmates of insane asylums are 
possessed of demons; but that many of them are. So far 
as we are able to form a conclusion on the subject, it 
would be that probably more than half are demon 
possessed, and less than one half are insane through 
disease of the brain. In all parts of the world this demon 
possession seems to prevail, and the tendency seems 
always to be downward— they are unclean spirits, delighting 
not in holy, pure and good things, but in impurity 
and unholiness. Their influence is exerted not 
only upon the possessed ones but upon others, in an evil 
direction. 

WE ARE NOT IGNORANT OF SATAN'S DEVICES. 

Even spirit mediums are well aware of the danger 
they encounter in acting as mediums at all. They caution 
one another not to yield the will too far, to maintain 
a self control to a certain extent, to yield themselves to 
the control of these spirits only in a definitely limited 
degree lest they become obsessed, because the evil spirit 
obtaining full control, the human will is therefore powerless 
to expel the intruder and they are at the mercy of the 
demon, and from man's standpoint are denominated 
crazy— more particularly so if several demons gain possession 
of the same person and thus several wills seek to 
control the one organization. In proportion as a knowledge 
of God and the principles of righteousness advance 
and open the eyes of human understanding, in this same 
proportion the evil spirits find it necessary to be coy in 
their deceptions, and proportionately the Lord's people 
need the protection which the Lord has provided for 
them, namely, the holy Spirit, the spirit of a sound mind, 
the spirit of love, joy and peace in the holy Spirit of the 
Lord. 



Apparently, however, the masses of the people were 
less deceived on this subject at that time than they are today. 
Today Satan, acting more skilfully than in the 
past, is leading on as a scientist and is pooh-poohing suggestions 
that there are evil spirits or a Beelzebub or 
prince of demons. To such an extent has he prevailed 
that many of the leading theologians of the world, in all 
denominations of Christendom, agree that there is no 
devil, that there are no demons and that our Lord performed 
no such miracles as are here recited. They claim 
that the poor ignorant people of our Lord's day did not 
understand what they were talking about, and said that 
a man had a devil when he merely had a nervous disease, 
a fit, etc. Christian Science is one of Satan's latest fads, 
which, under the guise of morality, is seeking to destroy 
both common sense and Christianity amongst the Lord's 
people. It is one of Satan's latest devices, disproving 
himself and thus turning attention away from the powerful 
influence which he exercises in the world. "We are 
not ignorant of his devices." (2 Cor. 2:1 1.) "We 
wrestle not with flesh and blood, but with principalities 
and powers, and wicked spirits in high places." (Eph. 6:12.) 
"But greater is he that is for us, than all they 
that be against us." (2 Kings 6:16.) The revised 
version translation of the 28th verse is preferable. It 
reads, "And the report of him went out straightway everywhere 
in all that region of Galilee round about." This 
fame of Jesus subsequently aided greatly in his ministry, 
when he went to all the towns and villages throughout 
Galilee. 

ST. PETER'S MOTHER-IN-LAW CURED. 

After the synagogue incident our Lord went to the 
home of Simon Peter and Andrew, James and John accompanying 
him. Peter's mother-in-law lay sick of a 
fever, and one of the evangelists intimates that it was a 
violent form of fever. For the first time it seems to have 
occurred to the disciples that the Lord's power, which 
they had seen manifested on various occasions, might be 
exercised on behalf of this sick woman. Now, their faith 
grown stronger, they mentioned her case to Jesus and he 
took her by the hand and lifted her up. Immediately 
the fever left her. Not only so, but instead of being 
weak and enervated, as is usually the case after a severe 

R3311 : page 30 

fever, she was strong and vigorous and able to serve the 
family, probably in the setting forth of refreshments and 
other household matters. This demonstrates that her 
cure could have been nothing short of miraculous. The 
operation of the mind, even if it could in any measure 
have destroyed the fever condition, could not have made 
good the waste of strength in the system accomplished 
by the fever. 



Sunset saw the gathering of numbers of the sick and 
demon-possessed ones. This was probably for two 
reasons: (1) that it would be during the cooler time of 
the day in which the diseased could come in a warm country 
such as Palestine; (2) it was the Sabbath day, and 
the Jews, however irreligious and even devilish some of 
them were, were all strict Sabbatarians. We remember 
how on another occasion the Pharisees found fault with 
Jesus because he had healed a man on the Sabbath day, 
and how our Lord exposed their hypocrisy in the matter 
by showing that if it had been an ox or an ass that had 
fallen into a ditch, and where there might be a monetary 
loss if the creature were not assisted, their reasoning 
would be more correct. Our Lord, however, seems to 
have preferred the Sabbath days for his healing work: 
at all events some of his most notable miracles were done 
on the Sabbath days. His reason for so doing was not, 
we believe, to exasperate the Pharisees and Scribes or 
merely to show the hypocrisy of their formalism, but because 
the Sabbath days served a special purpose as an 
illustration of the great Sabbath that is to come, the 
Millennium, in which all the families of the earth shall be 
blessed by this good Physician, who has already given 
his life for the redemption of the life of the world, and 
who during the millennial age (his Bride, the Church, 
cooperating) will bless and heal all the willing and obedient 
of the human family— lifting them up, up, up out of 
Adamic sin and death conditions to the perfection of life 
lost in Eden through the disobedience of the first Adam. 

SATANIC POWER CAN AND DOES NOW CURE. 

Many of the Lord's consecrated people of today, 

R3311 : page 31 

noting the cure of diseases by spirit mediums, mind 
curists, hypnotists, Christian Scientists, Mormons, etc., 
are inclined to think of these cures of our day in much the 
same light as we think of our Lord's cures recorded in 
this lesson and its Golden text. This is a natural tendency 
—it is natural for us to seek to walk by sight and not 
by faith. Some of these dear friends inquire of us, Is not 
our Lord Jesus as able to heal the sickness of our bodies 
today as he was able to heal the sickness of the Jews at 
Capernaum? We answer, Yes, unquestionably. More 
than this, we hold that our Lord has more power today 
than he had then. 

It was after our Lord had finished his sacrifice, after 
he had risen from the dead, a life-giving spirit, that he declared 
to the disciples, "All power is given me in heaven 
and in earth." We have not a question, therefore, respecting 
the ability of our Lord to perform today and 
through his people of today any miracles that he performed 
at the first advent in person. We are asked, If 
this be so, should we not expect such healings? Did not 



our Lord say, "These signs shall follow them that believe: 
In my name shall they cast out devils and heal the sick, 
and if they drink any deadly thing it shall not harm 
them, etc."? (Mark 16:18.) We answer, that these 
words are spurious,— that they are not found in any of 
the old manuscripts, that all scholars admit that they are 
forgeries, and that no part of the 16th chapter of Mark, 
after the 8th verse, is genuine. 



R3311 : page 31 

THE PILGRIM'S WANTS. 

I want that adorning divine, 

Thou only, my God, canst bestow; 
I want in those beautiful garments to shine, 

Which distinguish thy household below. 

I want— Oh! I want to attain 

Some likeness, my Saviour, to Thee, 
That this longed for resemblance I at once may attain, 

Thy comliness put upon me! 

I want to be marked for Thine own, 

Thy seal on my forehead to wear; 
To receive that "new name" on the mystic white stone 

Which none but thyself can declare. 

I want so in Thee to abide 

As to bring forth some fruit to Thy praise. 
The branch which thou prunest, though feeble and dried, 

May languish, but never decays. 

I want Thine own hand to unbind 

Each tie to terrestrial things— 
Too tenderly cherished, too closely entwined, 

Where my heart too tenaciously clings. 

I want, by my aspect serene, 

My actions and words, to declare 
That my treasure is safe in a country unseen— 

That my heart's best affections are there. 

I want, as a traveller, to haste 

Straight onward, nor pause on my way; 

Nor forethought, nor anxious contrivance to waste 
On the tent only pitched for a day. 

I want— and this sums up my prayer— 

To glorify Thee till I die; 
Then calmly to yield up my soul to thy care, 

And breathe out, in faith, my last sigh!— Selected. 



R3311 : page 31 

NEW ARRANGEMENTS FOR PITTSBURGH GAZETTE. 

MANY of our readers have been anxious to procure 
the Pittsburgh Gazette on account of its 
containing Pastor C. T. Russell's Sunday discourses 
in each Monday's issue. About 1000 of our readers 
have accepted the arrangement for a clubbing rate, which 
would make the Gazette cost them for the year $2.25. 
Many of these desire extra copies of the Monday issue 
only, but the Gazette people refuse to supply the papers 
by mail in this way. We have arranged with them, 
however, that those who wish may subscribe for three 
months for 60c. or for six months for $1.15. These 
prices they would not accept direct from the subscribers, 
but will accept from us on the clubbing principle. 
Some may desire to subscribe for the shorter periods, and 
if so we will be pleased to hear from them at once. 

In the interest of the friends who desire to circulate 
numbers of these Monday papers amongst their neighbors, 
and who believe that matter thus printed is more 
likely to be read than if conveyed in some other form, we 
have made an arrangement with the Gazette and a news 
agent by which ANY ONE WHO IS A SUBSCRIBER FOR THE 
Gazette (either for three months, six months or a year) 
shall have the privilege of ordering extra Monday copies 
of the discourse sheet through us at the following rates, 
viz.: 

Seven copies every Monday for 10 weeks, by mail, $1.00 
Fifteen copies every week for 10 weeks, by mail,. 2.00 
Fifty copies every week for 10 weeks, by express, 
prepaid 5.00 

In sending orders for extra Monday issues, the 
writer must state explicitly that he is a regular Gazette 
subscriber, or must include an order for a regular 
subscription. 

We are bound to consult the wishes of the Gazette 
publishers, because only upon condition of their securing 
a good list of regular subscribers do they propose to continue 
the publication of these discourses. The arrangement, 
however, is, that in the event of their discontinuing 
a proportionate amount of the subscription money will 
be returned. 

By this new arrangement one regular subscriber can 
act as agent for the others of the friends in his vicinity, 
and thus all who desire may be supplied for their own 
reading, as well as have such supply as they desire for 
giving or loaning to their friends and neighbors. We 
believe that good is being accomplished in this manner, 
and trust for a still larger fruitage. Some of the friends 
have interested newspapers in their vicinity, and thus 
secured a re-publication of the discourses. The daily circulation 



of the Gazette is about 70,000, amongst the most 
intelligent and religiously inclined people of this city and 
Pittsburgh. 

We are not at liberty to order for the Monday issues 
under this arrangement for less than ten weeks to any one 
person. 

We have still special issues of the Gazette containing 
reports of the entire six debates. These can be supplied 
at 2c. each, postpaid, or 50 or more at lc. each by 
express prepaid. 



page 33 

SEMI-MONTHLY. 
VOL. XXV. FEBRUARY 1, 1904. No. 3. 
CONTENTS. 



Views from the Watch Tower 35 

Cost of Christianizing the World 35 

Science Falsely So Called 36 

Entered Into His Rest 36 

"My People Do Not Consider" 36 

"Power on Earth to Forgive Sins" 39 

The Sabbath Was Made for Man 41 

Who are Real Christians? 43 

"Filling Up That Which is Behind" 46 

Public Ministries of the Truth 48 

Memorial Supper, 1904 34 

page 34 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-24 EVERSHOLT ST., LONDON, N.W. 
GERMAN BRANCH-MIRKER STR., 45, ELBERFELD. 

PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE, 5c (2-l/2d.) A COPY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity 
or adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER, will be supplied FREE, if 
they send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting 
the paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our 
list continually. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



R3308 : page 34 

1904.-MEMORIAL SUPPER.- 1904. 



On the evening of Tuesday, March 29th, after six 
o'clock, will be the proper time for the celebration of our 
Lord's Memorial Supper;— on its anniversary according to 



the Jewish system of reckoning in vogue in our Lord's 
day and still. The Jewish Passover, lasting a week, begins 
the next evening at six o'clock. We do not celebrate the 
Passover, but the killing of the an ti typical Passover Lamb. 
"Christ our Passover (Lamb) is slain for us, therefore let 
us keep the feast."— I Cor. 5:7. 

page 34 

PASTOR RUSSELL'S DISCOURSES EVERY MONDAY. 



By a special arrangement with The Pittsburgh Gazette a stenographic 
report of Pastor C. T. Russell's discourses will be printed 
on Mondays. We will send you "The Pittsburgh Gazette" 
(daily) and ZION'S WATCH TOWER twice a month for a period 
of 12 months for $3.25, which is about the price of The Gazette 
alone. The subscriptions must be paid in advance and sent to us. 
For terms for extra copies of the Monday Gazette, see our issue of January 
15th. 

NOTICE.— Where Gazette agencies are established the issues 
desired can be readily obtained through them. The Gazette refuses 
to mail papers to towns where they would interfere with 
the agents already located. 



R3312:page35 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 

FT takes $300,000,000 a year to "keep up the work 
of Christianizing our own land," says the Central 
Christian Advocate (Kansas City, Mo.), 
while "fully 1,000,000" is annually absorbed in the 
Christianization of the whole world. "The money is 
almost wholly voluntary." Of the sum required for 
the United States, the same paper says:— 

"The sum of $3 1,000,000 was laid on the altar by 
Catholics, $26,000,000 by Methodists, $20,000,000 by Presbyterians, 
$14,000,000 by Episcopalians, $12,000,000 by 
Baptists, $75,000 by the Salvation Army. In addition to 
these expenditures noted above, there were also paid 
out, under church supervision, funds estimated as follows: 
For new buildings, $27,000,000; for hospitals $28,000,000; 
for education, $21,000,000; and for Sunday 
schools $7,000,000. 

"The progress and wealth of church institutions in 
this country can be impressively illustrated by a single 
comparison. In 1800 there were 2,340 churches, valued at 
$1,500,000; to-day there are 178,481, valued at $724,971,372. 
These figures speak not of selfishness, but of the truest 
altruism, of philanthropy, and of the willingness to pay 
the price of enthroning Christ in the world." 

Fifty years ago, we read further, the annual outlay 



for church purposes throughout the entire world was but 

half as much as it is to-day, or $500,000,000. The $1,000,000,000 

of the present year, moreover, will be wholly inadequate 

in the years that are to follow, because "the resistless 

advance of Christianity is accompanied with an increasing 

cost," which can be met only by "the free-will 

offerings of men, women and children." "This cost is in 

a sense the measure of the increasing determination of 

good people that Christ shall be enthroned king." 

"The philosophy of the ages is the Christianizing of the 
world. That is the key to the evolution going on everywhere. 
Christianity is making its steady and resistless 
advance, now here, now there, now everywhere, like the 
rising waters of a universal tide. It explains the past 
achievements of the best in the race, and inspires our hope 
for the future of the race. What will be, ultimately, will 
be well, because it will be Christlike. 



A blessing surely comes to everyone who conscientiously 
sacrifices time or money in the laudable 
effort to help fellow-creatures. We rejoice to 
give credit for some measure of unselfishness being 
represented in these figures, but reflect that some 
of this money may have been drawn, threatened or 
coaxed from rather unwilling givers, and that the 
collectors of some large benevolent societies receive 
one-half of their collections for their services, which 
are not perhaps wholly unselfish. However, even 
if we were uncertain that present compassing of sea 
and land to make a proselyte were no better in its 
result than in the olden times missions (Matt. 23:15) 
we should still agree that the stirring of 
men's hearts to sympathy and giving does good to 
the givers: another demonstration that it is "more 
blessed to give than to receive." 

On the other hand we are not so sure either 
that this money was given to "enthrone Christ in 
the World." A strong evidence to the contrary is 
that when our Lord's second coming and kingdom 
are referred to, even amongst preachers, the subject 
falls flat, if indeed it does not arouse angry 
opposition. These things and others lead us to fear 
that it is self-enthronement in the world that is 
sought. Sectarian or Churchianity enthronement, 
we believe, is greatly coveted by Protestants as 
well as Catholics. They could almost ignore their 
differences and combine— so anxious are they to 
conquer the world. 

But we are glad that even though the Lord 
may permit them again to get a measure of control, 
as Papacy had it during the dark ages, we have 
the assurance of his Word that it shall not again 
triumph to the same extent, but be cut short by the 
great time of trouble which will usher in the real 



reign of Messiah, which they do not desire. 

We are glad, too, to believe that their opposition 
is largely the result of blindness, and that 
with the later opening of the eyes of their understanding 
they will rejoice in the new heaven and 
new earth conditions (the new social and ecclesiastical 
conditions) introduced by that long-promised 
Kingdom of heaven, which will surely prove 
to be "the desire of all nations."— Isa. 65:17-25; 
Hag. 2:6,7. 

Meantime now, as during the dark ages, God 

R3312:page36 

has "a peculiar people" whom he is calling out and 
educating for his coming work. These bend their 
energies, physical and financial, to the work they 
see directed in the Lord's Word:— the preaching of 
the gospel of the Kingdom and the gathering of 
those having hearing ears, not to sectarian "bundles," 
but to the Lord himself. Though insignificant 
in name and fame amongst the worldly wise 
and mighty, these are mighty now in the Lord's 
hands to the pulling down of the strongholds of 
error. And in the future, glorified as the "Lamb's 
wife," they shall be joint heirs with their Lord in 
the glorious Kingdom work of blessing all the families 
of the earth with the true light and assistance. 
These can afford to be peculiarly like Christ and 
the apostles now, that by and by they may be like 
them in glory. 

SCIENCE FALSELY SO CALLED. 



Our wise men, anxious to disprove the Bible 
record of the Creation, "prove" much by the stone 
formations of the earth's crust; and freely talk 
about millions of years being necessary to produce 
the stone conditions which are everywhere apparent. 
Their long arguments and wise conclusions 
were made to look very silly recently by an accident 
near East St. Louis. A car of lime and a car 
of potatoes were partly submerged together in the 
river. The slacking lime fired the car and the astonishing 
result was that every potato was turned 
to flinty stone in less than twenty-four hours. The 
Lord's people have no need to feel ashamed of the 
old Book. 



R3314:page36 

ENTERED INTO HIS REST. 



PILGRIM Brother Henry Weber has passed beyond 
the vail, to be forever with the Lord. We rejoice 
on his behalf. He finished his earthly 

course on Thursday, January 21st, at 2.15 p.m., at his home 
—Oakland, Md.— and was buried on Saturday, the 23rd. 
A large gathering, composed of his family, friends and 
neighbors, was addressed by the Editor of this journal, from 
the text, "Blessed are the dead that die in the Lord from 
henceforth: yea, saith the Spirit, they shall rest from their 
labors, but their works shall follow them."— Rev. 14:13. 

The dear Brother's faithfulness as a servant of the Lord 
and the Brethren and the Truth is too well known to our 
readers to require comment. He had been a true Christian 
for many years. At first an active Episcopalian and 
Y.M.C.A. worker, he was counted of the Lord worthy to 
know of Present Truth, and from then until the day of his 
death, he was "not slothful in business, fervent in spirit, 
serving the Lord." Very many now rejoicing in the light 
of the divine plan of the ages have good cause for thanking 
God for the efficient services of this dear Brother,— either as 
the planter or the waterer of the good seed of the Kingdom. 

As we believe that we are now living in the time indicated 
in the text by "henceforth"— the time of the Lord's 
second presence for the setting up of his Kingdom,— and 
as we believe that our dear Brother was one of the faithful 
of the Kingdom little flock, so let us believe that, his labors 
(toil and weariness) having ceased, his work nevertheless 
continues— beyond the vail. 

We are not Scripturally informed what is the character 
of the work of the Church beyond the vail (the Lord and 
the risen and "changed" saints), but we may be certain 
that in some way it pertains to the "harvesting" of the 
"wheat" and the binding of the "tares," etc. Hence, 
although we will sadly miss our dear Brother, as a friend 
and as a Pilgrim and as Vice-President of the Watch Tower 
Bible and Tract Society, nevertheless we sorrow not as 
others who have less substantial hopes. Rather we rejoice 
with him and hope soon to see him and the dear Redeemer 
and all the Royal Priesthood, and to participate in the 
heavenly service. But meantime it behooves us to remember 
that our remaining days in the flesh are further opportunities 
for running toward the mark for the prize, or for 
standing fast thereat, that no man take our crown— but 
that we make our calling and election sure, so that an abundant 
entrance into the Kingdom may be granted us by 
our Lord, with the words, "Well done, good, faithful 
servant, enter thou into the joys of thy Lord. Thou hast 
been faithful over a few things, I will make thee ruler over 
many things!" 

Brother Weber left a very interesting family— his wife 
and one of his sons being confessors of the Lord and his 
Truth. For the remainder of the family we have strong 
hopes that the good influence of the father's character in 
daily life may be still stronger with them since his death- 
drawing them also to full consecration to the same Savior 



and his "reasonable service." 



R3312:page36 

"MY PEOPLE DO NOT CONSIDER." 

"Consider what I say, and the Lord 
give thee understanding."— 2 Tim. 2:7. 

CONSIDER-reflect, think, study, ponder. Whatever 

may be said of the heathen religions and 

of churchianity in respect to their requiring 

little thought, little study, this is not the case with the 

religion of the Bible. It is not a religion of credulity— 

"shut your eyes and open your mouth," and swallow 

what is put therein. True, it is a religion of faith;— 

but a faith based upon reasonable evidences— a knowledge 

of God, whose plan and character it reveals. Hence 

it is that the Scriptures invite the faithful to consider, to 

search, to prove, saying, "Come, let us reason together." 

And it is worthy of note that all the false systems of 

R3312:page37 

religion and churchianity, misnamed Christianity, to a 
large extent reverse this scriptural order, endeavoring 
to obtain harmony, union, on a basis of comparative 
ignorance, rather than on a basis of growth in grace and 
in the knowledge of the Truth. 

As we see this to be true today in nominal spiritual 
Israel, so we find it was true in olden times in fleshly 
Israel, to whom the Lord declares,— "The ox knoweth 
his owner and the ass his master's crib; but Israel doth 
not know, my people do not consider." (Isa. 1:3.) We 
are not to understand the Lord to mean that the Jews 
had no knowledge of him whose sacrifices and ceremonial 
law and worship had their daily attention: neither 
should we be understood to imply that nominal Christians, 
who in various ways manifest some respect and 
reverence for the Lord, are wholly ignorant of him. The 
thought is rather that God's professed people today, as 
in olden times, while knowing something about their 
Creator and Redeemer, do not know him in the sense of 
being really acquainted with his character. In many 
respects they worship a strange God, because they have 
failed to get rightly, thoroughly, acquainted with him. 
Such an acquaintance can only be obtained along the 
line suggested in our text: by giving heed, by considering, 
reflecting, studying the revelation which God has 
made respecting himself. Not that the Scriptures give 
us a detailed description of our Creator; but, rather, by 
revealing to us his plans, they permit us through an 
understanding of the divine plans to have an understanding 
of the divine character which those plans exemplify 



and illustrate. As a man is known by his works, 
so God is known by his works. Whoever, therefore, 
would know God— appreciate the divine character- 
must come to such a knowledge through an acquaintance 
with the divine plan which God is outworking. 

Satan, the great adversary, seems to understand 
this matter thoroughly, and employs his arts of deception 
to hinder men from appreciating the divine plan, 
and thus to hinder an appreciation of the divine character 
—to prevent a real knowledge of God. He has been 
successful, marvelously so, as the Apostle declares, 
along these lines. The God of this world has blinded 
the minds of them which believe not,— lest the glorious 
light of the goodness of God, as it shines in the face of 
Jesus Christ, should shine into their hearts. (2 Cor. 4:4,6.) 
It is impossible for him to hinder all knowledge 
and all appreciation of the Creator, because the quality 

R3313 : page 37 

of reverence is deeply engraven in the natural man who, 
though fallen and deranged, nevertheless instinctively 
looks for a God to worship. Satan's work, therefore, is 
and has been the blinding and deceiving men,— 
many of whom, as the Apostle declares, are feeling after 
God, if haply they might find him.— Acts 17:27. 

The adversary's success in blinding mankind would 
not be so easily accomplished were it not that he persuades 
men not to reason upon religious subjects;— that 
upon every other subject than religion, thought, consideration, 
reasoning, are advisable, but that on religious 
subjects, credulity, mistaken for faith, is the safe, the 
wise, the acceptable course. So great has been his success 
that we find not only the heathen world in ignorance, 
and superstitious upon religious matters, but that 
the same principles, in a lighter form, prevail in Christendom 
—not only amongst Catholics but also amongst 
Protestants. The remedy for this general evil must be 
sought and found by all who would be saints, overcomers, 
—every one of whom must know the Lord not 
merely theoretically but actually, through a knowledge 
of his character by a knowledge of his plan. 

Let us note how the Scriptures urge God's people 
to consider. They are to consider the natural things of 
the Lord's provision, as they touch with these in the 
course of human life, and are to read in them certain 
great lessons respecting the Creator. For instance, 
notice our Lord's statements, "Consider the lilies of the 
field." (Matt. 6:28.) "Consider the ravens." (Luke 12:24.) 
Our Lord calls attention to how such simple 
things in nature should be studied, be considered. The 
lessons to be learned in connection with all the affairs 
of life will be helpful to such as approach the study from 
the right standpoint, of faith in the Creator, and a realization 
that he is necessarily the embodiment and representative 
of the very highest and very noblest qualities 



of which the human mind could conceive;— that he is 
perfect in Justice, perfect in Wisdom, perfect in Power, 
perfect in Love. From this standpoint of faith we can 
learn a great lesson from considering the lilies. Their 
beauty teaches us that the Lord has a keen appreciation 
of the beautiful, and the fact that it comes to them 
without their toiling or spinning, teaches us that God is 
abundantly able to produce the beautiful without our 
aid, and that if necessary he could likewise clothe us 
miraculously. It teaches, further, that since he has not 
thus made provision for our necessities, it must be because 
he has seen (as the Word declares) that the experiences 
of life in the development of the resources of 
nature, in providing for our own needs, will be helpful 
to us. 

As we consider the ravens and sparrows, and note 
how the Lord has made provision for their necessities 
without barns for the winter time, it teaches us that his 
power and wisdom could similarly, if necessary, provide 
for the necessities of his people, miraculously or otherwise; 
and that in leaving humanity more subject to the 
vicissitudes of life than the little birds, the Lord doubtless 
intends thus to instruct mankind and to develop 
its reasoning faculties in respect to life's interests and 
necessary provisions, and in a manner that will be more 

R3313 : page 38 

helpful to him, better calculated for his development 
than would such a provision as is made for the dumb 
brutes. Faith can learn in all the affairs of life lessons 
of divine wisdom, and may assure itself reasonably, in 
harmony with the Lord's suggestion, that human beings 
are much more valuable than many sparrows, many 
ravens, many lilies, in God's sight; and that we may 
therefore more reasonably trust to his goodness and his 
interest in human affairs. 

Thus considering, and looking through the little 
affairs of life, and noting the divine character as revealed 
in them, the mind is prepared for the still greater revelation 
of God's goodness set forth in his Word, which 
assures of his sympathy for humanity in its fallen condition, 
and of his willingness to assist in man's recovery 
from sin and death along lines in harmony with 
justice and love. Considering, from this standpoint, the 
love of God revealed through his Son Jesus commends 
itself at once to our hearts as being in full accord with 
what we find to be his general character— justice, wisdom, 
love. The heart that thus considers makes progress, 
grows in grace, in knowledge, in love. The heart that 
fails to consider the little things fails to be able to appreciate 
the larger things, and thus is hindered from a 
proper consideration of God and from a proper appreciation 
of his plan, and thus from a proper appreciation 
of his character. 

It is David, the prophet, who exclaims, "When I 



consider the heavens, the work of thy fingers!" (Psalm 8:3.) 
To the Prophet, whose mind was rightly directed 
and who considered these things, "day unto day uttered 
speech and night unto night showed forth knowledge;" 
and as a result King David— before the Gospel dispensation, 
before the giving of the holy Spirit of adoption, 
before the coming of the inestimable blessings which 
are ours today— gained a large appreciation of his Creator, 
which became to him an anchor of the soul, both 
sure and steadfast. The large conception of the divine 
character gained from the consideration of the divine 
work, even as seen in nature, brought the prophet-king 
near to God, in humility, in veneration, in 
love. 

But if such a consideration of the heavens and the 
things of nature are profitable and helpful, how much 
more profitable is the consideration of the still higher 
things revealed to the Gospel Church through the holy 
Spirit since Pentecost. The Apostle Paul calls our attention 
in this direction saying, "Consider the Apostle and 
High Priest of our profession, Christ Jesus." (Heb. 3:1.) 
But how few of those who read the Scriptures 
have ever followed the Apostle's suggestion? how few 
have ever considered Jesus from the standpoint suggested, 
—as the Church's Apostle or special teacher sent of 
God to specially guide and instruct the Church, and as 
the church's High Priest to whom the faithful occupy 
the relationship of under priests? Had more consideration 
been given by the Lord's people to these matters, 
a larger number would undoubtedly be much farther 
advanced than they are today, in the knowledge and 
love of God. They would have seen that if Christ is a 
special teacher, a special High Priest of the Church, 
and the Church his special pupils, brethren and under 
priests, then there must be, according to the Scriptures, 
at some future time, a still greater blessing in which 
both High Priests and under priests will be the agents 
of God in blessing all the families of the earth. 

Again the Apostle speaks of the high spiritual 
things which we are to consider, after we have taken our 
first lessons in considering the natural things, the lilies, 
ravens, heavens, etc., saying, "Consider him who endured 
such contradiction of sinners against himself, lest 
ye be wearied and faint in your minds." (Heb. 12:3.) 
Alas, how many of God's true children become weary 
and faint in their minds, and are in danger of losing 
the chief prize because they have failed to think upon, 
to study out, to comprehend, to consider the Lord and 
what he faithfully endured of opposition. As they 
would consider his perfection and how, as represented 
in him, the light shined in darkness and was not appreciated, 
so they would expect that the light shining from 
them would not be appreciated either.— (John 1:5.) 
As they would consider how the Lord suffered in 
every sense unjustly and for righteousness' sake, and 
then would reflect that their own conduct, even though 



well meant, is imperfect, it would strengthen them to 
endure hardness as good soldiers, and not to be weary 
in well doing, and not to faint under opposition. It 
would enable them to realize what the Scriptures plainly 
declare, namely, that experiences and testings are necessary 
to the Lord's people and if rightly received these 
all work out everlasting blessings. 

Such consideration of the Lord and what he endured 
and the reflection and realization of their own 
imperfections while seeking to walk in his footsteps, 
would tend to bring them not only to appreciation of 
the Lord's sympathy for his people and his grace toward 
them in covering from his sight their unwilling imperfections, 
but additionally, this consideration would lead 
to sympathy for their fellows in the narrow way. The 
Apostle intimates the propriety of such reflections, saying, 
"Consider one another to provoke [incite, inspire] 
unto love and good works."— (Heb. 10:24.) Oh, how 
much the Lord's people need to remember this injunction, 
if they would have proper forbearance and love 
one toward another,— to consider one another's sacrifice, 
to think of each other's imperfections, peculiarities 
or good qualities, as the case may be. With the Christian 
brother consideration always means to think kindly, 

R3313 : page 39 

charitably, even of the blemishes which love cannot hide. 
These blemishes are not to be considered lest they sour 
our hearts and arouse in our minds an opposition to one 
another; nor are they to be considered as an excuse for 
gossip or slander. The Apostle explains that we are to 
consider one another with a view to ascertaining how 
we can be most helpful to each other in the narrow way, 
most edifying, most strengthening, most inspiring. 

But now another matter: Looking back to our 
text we find that the Apostle has united in it two 
thoughts: first, the necessity of considering; second, 
the necessity of having divine assistance in order to 
the reaching of a right understanding. "Consider 
what I say; and the Lord give thee understanding." 

The natural man may assent to a great deal of what 
we have here written; yet in some particulars it will be 
beyond his grasp. It is only for those who approach 
the study of the divine will from the right direction- 
only for those who consider from the standpoint of the 
school of Christ, learning of him— only such have the 
divine assistance which the Apostle mentions, the understanding 
which comes from the Lord. It requires faith 
in God and his Word in order to be able to rightly 
appreciate either the natural or the spiritual things 
which are ours, and to feed thereon in our hearts and 
to grow strong thereby in our characters. 



R3314:page39 

"POWER ON EARTH TO FORGIVE SINS." 

-MARK2:1-12.-FEBRUARY 14.- 

AFTER the busy experiences of the Sabbath day, referred 

to in our last lesson, our Lord withdrew 

from Capernaum to a desert place for private 

communion with the Father. Later his four disciples 

joined him, as also others, who urged his return to Capernaum, 

but instead he went for a time to other cities and 

villages of Galilee. Our lesson marks his return to Capernaum, 

where the people soon learned of his presence and 

gathered in large numbers to see and hear him. 

It was probably at Peter's house, which in construction 
was 

LIKE OTHER ORIENTAL HOUSES, 

that the gathering was held. Many of these houses are built 
with a central court or yard, from which access is gained to 
the various rooms, which receive their light and ventilation 
from the yard and are usually one story in height. Oft-times 
a part of this yard is covered with a tile roof, making 
of it a kind of veranda. The outside wall extends 
two or three feet above the roof, which is reached by an 
outside stairway and in summer is the usual sleeping place. 
Some of the incidents of this lesson imply that this was 
the arrangement of the house in which our Lord was stopping, 
the multitude coming around by the door in the courtyard, 
and our Lord probably addressing them from the 
further end of the veranda or covered part of the court. 

"He preached the Word unto them." How we would 
have enjoyed hearing him! how we would like even now 
to have a stenographic report of his "Wonderful Words of 
Life"! His text must have been from the Old Testament, 
as the New was not yet written. Quite probably his message 
was respecting sin and the defilement which comes to 
humanity through sin, and the penalty which God has 
prescribed, namely, death. We can mention many excellent 
texts for such a discourse, as, for instance, "Though 
thy sins be as scarlet, they shall be as white as snow." Or 
the types of sin and its cleansing, as represented in the treatment 
of the lepers under the Mosaic Law; or the types of 
the Law showing the necessity for the sin offerings and 
the work of the atonement day, as being the blotting out 
of sins and the reconciliation of the people to God; or the 
type of sin represented in the fiery serpents of the wilderness 
and the cure for their venom in a look at the brazen 
serpent on the pole, typifying our Lord. In any event 
we may be sure that the grand truths of the Gospel were 
gloriously set forth by him who "spake as never man 
spake." 

While the preaching was in progress, four men bearing 
on a stretcher a palsied companion approached the house; 



but the throng at the door, intent upon hearing and seeing, 
would not make way, even in the prospect of seeing a 
miracle performed. Full of faith, the bearers carried the 
stretcher up the stairway to the top of the low roof over to 
the veranda: some of the tiling was lifted and, apparently 
without ropes, the stretcher was handed to those below, 
immediately in front of the place where the Lord stood 
preaching. Of course 

THE PREACHING WAS INTERRUPTED. 

However, the Lord evidently interwove the circumstances 
of the interruption with the lessons of his discourse. 
He quietly waited and mentally reflected upon the faith of 
the man and his companions while the sick one was thus 
being lowered before him, and then said to the sick, "Son, 
thy sins be forgiven thee." We doubt not that in the 
Lord's providence this declaration of the forgiveness of 
sins came in opportunely with Jesus' previous discourse. 
Here was an opportunity to show that the great difficulty 
afflicting the whole human family is sin, without which 
there would be no sickness, no pain, no death, no separation 
from God. The Lord did not ask the man respecting 
his previous course in life, nor wait for him to express 
sorrow for sin, but handed him a pardon as a gift or benefaction. 
One thing, however, he did have— a condition 
indispensable to pardon— he had faith, faith in the Lord 
as the sent of God; and at that time he could have had no 
greater faith than this, no more particular understanding 
of how the grace of God extends toward us through Jesus. 

R3314:page40 

This teaches us several lessons: First, how important 
faith is in the Lord's estimation— he asked for faith, not 
for works— though of course he knew, and we all know, 
that if true faith were exercised corresponding works 
would naturally and unavoidably follow. Another lesson 
it taught is the willingness of the Lord to forgive sins, to 
ignore them, to deal with us as though we were free from 
sin. This, however, does not mean a total blotting out 
of the sins, so that they could not be revived by our loss 
of faith or misconduct. The parable of the two servants 
who were forgiven a large debt, and one of whom was 
subsequently cast into prison for the very debt he had 
been forgiven, because he did not exercise mercy toward 
his fellow-servant, is a proof of this. Forgiveness extended 
to us now on account of faith is of the nature of a 
covering or hiding of our sins. As the prophet expresses 
the matter, "Blessed is the man whose sin is covered— 
unto whom the Lord imputeth not iniquity." (Psa. 32:1,2.) 
Our sins are not imputed so long as we would renounce 
them and seek to follow the Lord in faith and in 
sincerity. The time for the blotting out of sins, their 
complete eradication, is future, as the Apostle Peter declared. 
Our sins will be blotted out when we receive our 



new perfect bodies, in which there will remain no trace 
of the weaknesses, imperfections and maladies that came 
upon us because of original and subsequent sin.— 
Acts 3:19-21. 

"WHO CAN FORGIVE SINS BUT GOD ONLY?" 

Our Lord perceived the thoughts in the hearts of some 
of his hearers in connection with this declaration that the 
sick man's sins were forgiven him, and he answered the 
objection— not specifically and in detail, but in a general 
way. He asked them to bear witness as to which would 
be the easier thing to do, and which therefore would be 
the more complete test of his divine authority and powers. 
They had thought that the forgiveness of sins would represent 
greater power and authority than the doing of miracles, 
but our Lord illustrated how much easier it is to declare 
the forgiveness of sins than to perform a cure, and 
then he did perform a cure as proof that he did have the 
authority to forgive sins. He said to the palsied man, 
"Arise, take up thy bed and go thy way." And immediately 
the miracle took place; the sick man was cured 
and able to bear away his couch on which he had previously 
been carried. 

The question of the scribes may arise in some minds today 

R3315 : page 40 

and we confess that it is not entirely answered even by 

the miracle. The miracle shows us that the Lord did have 

the power to forgive sins, but it does not explain to us the 

philosophy of the arrangement by which our Lord Jesus 

was permitted to suspend the condemnation of sin which the 

Father had imposed. We suggest that he had authority to 

do this, to pronounce the forgiveness of the sins, because 

he had come into the world to be the Redeemer of mankind 

—because he had already made a covenant of consecration 

unto death at the time of his baptism— because at 

the very moment when he made this declaration he was 

in process of giving his life, "laying down his life," for 

man's redemption. Our Lord's authority, therefore, is 

well established. He had already done much of the work 

necessary for the blotting out of sins; he had left the 

glory which he had with the Father; he had become a 

man; he had consecrated his life; he had partially given 

it, and very shortly the sacrifice would be complete at Calvary. 

On the strength of all these facts, our Lord was 

evidently justified in declaring the man's sins forgiven. 

CAN OTHERS FORGIVE SINS? 

We may perhaps put an old thought in a newer and 
more startling form when we say that others besides Jesus 
can forgive sins. We do not refer to the claim of power 
by Catholic priests that, through the operation of forms 
and ceremonies and the sacrifices of the mass, they are commissioned 



to forgive sins; but we do refer to the commission 
of God's consecrated people, the Royal Priesthood. 
These, as the members of the body of Christ, as ambassadors 
for God, as mouthpieces of the Lord, are fully qualified 
to declare to people today— to all true believers in 
Jesus— the very words which he addressed to the paralytic 
of this lesson. We have said, and do say, and will continue 
to say to all penitent believers in Jesus— to all who 
have come to a knowledge of God's grace in Christ, and 
accepted him and his Word— to these we are privileged to 
declare, Thy sins are forgiven thee;— thy sins are covered 
by the sacrifice of Calvary, and if thou wilt continue steadfast 
in faith and in obedience, thy sins shall ultimately be 
completely blotted out, and thou shalt have a share in the 
glories of thy Lord, in resurrection power, free from every 
sin and stain and blemish.— Acts 3:19. 

Which is the greater power, to work miracles upon 
the natural body or to work a miracle of grace in the 
heart?— to straighten crooked limbs or to straighten out 
moral characters?— to heal those palsied and benumbed in 
body or to apply the vitalizing current of Truth, which will 
vivify and quicken those who are morally comatose, benumbed 
by sin, deadened to righteousness, truth, goodness, 
etc.?— to open blind natural eyes or to open the eyes 
of men's understanding, that they may see the lengths and 
breadths and heights and depths of the divine character 
and plan? 

Again we hold, as in our last lesson, that the great 
Head of the Church has given to the members of his body 
greater works to do than those which he did; because under 
his blessing and guidance we are living in the time 
when, under the anointing of his Spirit, it is possible to do 
these higher and greater works. 

THE LESSON OF HELPFULNESS. 

Several other lessons may be drawn from this narrative. 
One of these is the propriety of helping to bring one another 
to the Lord, to the Truth, to the influences and benefits 
and blessings sure to come from the contact with Jesus 

R3315 : page 41 

or the members of his body. A very large proportion of 
the blessing which has been bestowed upon the Lord's people 
through the Gospel has come through individual and 
private effort. In saying this we do not make light of 
preaching, studying, tract distribution, etc., etc.,— we are 
glad to believe that the Lord uses all of these to carry forward 
the Truth and to make it known,— nevertheless, we 
believe that there is an individual work also to be done, a 
personal work. We advise that all of the Lord's people, 
while giving diligence to use opportunities for general service 
of the kinds mentioned, do not forget nor neglect to 
look for opportunities for individual service in bringing 
their friends and neighbors to the Lord and into contact 



with the Truth. 

Many in the world hear about Jesus, hear about the 
great Jubilee times of restitution coming, hear about the 
blessing of all the families of the earth through the Seed of 
Abraham, hear about the call and the election of the Seed 
of Abraham at the present time, and have the desire to approach 
the Lord and to make consecration and to obtain 
a share in the blessing that is now being offered, yet they 
are morally paralyzed. They need some one to help them 
into the Lord's presence, to help them to the point of making 
a consecration of their all to the Lord. They have 
faith to some extent, yet they are weak in other respects, 
and they need others who are stronger than themselves to 
assist them. 

To what extent are we each and all zealously using the 
opportunities which the Lord has put in our power to glorify 
his name and to bless our sin-sick neighbors, not only 
by telling them about Jesus and his wonderful words of 
life, but to what extent are we additionally helping them 
to come to him? There are various ways in which we 
may assist, by word, by letter, by invitation to meetings, 
etc. However, one necessary element in all help is that 
our own course of conduct must be in accord with that 
which we commend to others. If we ourselves have been 
to Jesus and learned of him and caught some of his self-sacrifice 
and love, we will be the better able to help others 
who desire to come to him. They who would be the ambassadors 
of the Lord in telling men of the forgiveness of 
sins and the privileges of sonship in the present time, must 
themselves manifest not only a faith in their own forgiveness 
but, additionally, must show a transformation of life in 
progress, evidencing the fact that they are now the friends 
of God, that they have been with Jesus and learned of him. 

It is one thing to "bore" our friends and children with 
our religion, and quite another thing to manifest always 
such an interest in their spiritual welfare as would draw 
them to us for assistance when, under divine providences, 
they might desire to seek the Lord. Our experience 
teaches that many parents, otherwise loving and careful, 
neglect this matter, and hold themselves too much aloof 
from their children, particularly on religious matters. Furthermore, 
there is a delicacy on this subject with the sincere, 
lest they should be thought hypocritical, that makes 
them more diffident than on most other subjects. And 
many desirous of a word or two of encouragement and 
sympathy, have approached friends for advice, and 
have been repulsed by a joke or a worldly spirit. Every 
member of Christ, every Royal Priest, should remember 
that his first business in life, aside from his own development, 
is to help others to the Redeemer. Let us each 
strive this year, more earnestly than ever, to let our lights 
shine out, so that those seeking the Lord may be drawn 
to us as his representatives; and that in coming to us they 
may not be repulsed by our words or manners, but find us 
anticipating, sympathetic, helpful. 



R3315 : page 41 

THE SABBATH WAS MADE FOR MAN. 

--MATT. 12:1-13.-FEBRUARY 21- 

Golden Text:— "It is lawful to 
do well on the Sabbath days." 

FOR A TIME our Lord's ministries were attractive. 
The "common people heard him gladly," and "wondered 
at the gracious words that proceeded out of 
his mouth." But by and by the scribes and Pharisees, 
the prominent people, socially and religiously, of that time 
and country, began to feel envious of him. Our Lord's 
conduct and teachings were in sharp contrast with their 
own, which were largely tinctured with hypocrisy. The 
more popular the Lord became with the people the more 
envious were those who considered themselves the religious, 
the intelligent, the God-respecting Jews. They despised 
others, calling them publicans and sinners. They 
evidently realized that although the promises were made 
to their nation as a whole, yet when the time would come 
for the establishment of the Kingdom only the true Israelites 
would be accepted as participants in it. They flattered 
themselves that they would be this favored class and 
correspondingly held aloof from the "common people." 

There is a considerable similarity between the classes of 
scribes and Pharisees in our Lord's day and the so-called 
orthodox Christians of our day. In some denominations 
particularly there is evidenced this same spirit of despising 
others outside the favored cults. We are not meaning to 
say that there were no good Pharisees, nor are we meaning 
to say that there are no good people amongst those professing 
"orthodox" views today. Quite the contrary: but 
we do claim that orthodox and social and financial lines 
do distinctly mark and separate the people. We hold that 
the Lord is no respecter of wealth or of men's persons, but 
that he looketh at the heart, and that the pure in heart 
and the sincere in consecration are acceptable to him regardless 
of color or social or other standing amongst men. 
We see at the present time that the Truth is gleaning in 
every quarter— gathering some from amongst the wealthy 

R3316 : page 42 

and intelligent, some from amongst the outwardly pious 
and strict, some from amongst the poor, and some "publicans 
and sinners." 

NOT MANY GREAT, WISE OR SELF-RIGHTEOUS. 

It is noteworthy that quite a good many WATCH TOWER 
subscribers are prisoners in penal institutions. These men 



became culprits under the traditions of men taught by the 
scribe and Pharisee classes of today, who have since found 
the Lord precious to their souls, and his Truth sanctifying 
to their heads and hearts. Reports received from the 
Columbus, Ohio, penitentiary from a Brother who is serving 
a life sentence there for crimes committed before his 
eyes were opened to the Present Truth, tells of the work 
done in that prison during the past year. Over one hundred 
and fifty copies of Volume I. DAWN (and some of 
succeeding volumes) have been in circulation in the prison, 
besides thousands of tracts and sample WATCH TOWERS. 
We have now thirteen regular WATCH TOWER subscribers in 
the institution. Four public meetings were held during 
the year, besides numerous private conferences on the precious 
Gospel of God's dear Son. 

"THERE WAS A DIVISION OF THE PEOPLE 
CONCERNING HIM." 

Thenceforth, during our Lord's ministry, the scribes 
and Pharisees and doctors of the law continually opposed 
him. And it is noteworthy that it was their attacks upon 
him that brought forth some of the most precious truths of 
our Lord's ministry. As some one has said on this subject, 
"The flint of opposition struck out divine fire that 
has never ceased to burn. It was like the cannon ball from 
the enemy at Sebastopol, which opened a spring of cold 
water for the besieged garrison." And thus it is still: 
those who today make an attack upon the Truth only cause 
its beauties and harmonies to be the more clearly discerned 
by those whose eyes of understanding are opened and 
whose hearts are in a proper attitude to appreciate the 
Truth. Thus our Lord's ministry and the ministry of all 
his faithful people since has been in the nature of a testing. 
The light shined in the darkness and the darkness opposed 
it and comprehended it not, but was nevertheless reproved 
by it. 

Our lesson tells us some of this opposition. Pharisees 
who were unjust in their dealings in daily life, and who 
our Lord declared were ready to devour widows' houses, 
by taking advantage of circumstances to buy them in 
cheaply at forced sale, etc., and who he declared made 
long prayers in public for show, that they might be thought 
religious— these same people were great sticklers for the 
Sabbath day, and being amongst the Lord's most violent 
opposers they found fault with his more reasonable interpretation 
of the Sabbath law. Our Lord's conduct and 
language respecting the Sabbath show that he dealt with 
the matter from the standpoint of principle rather than of 
technicalities. 

GOD'S LAWS ARE MEANT FOR BLESSINGS. 

The Sabbath was made for man— was made for the benefit 
of mankind, for men's physical, mental and moral rest 
and recuperation and strengthening. The Pharisees 



viewed the day as though God specially desired to have 
the Sabbath day observed, and had created man for that 
particular purpose. Evidently they were in error, and our 
Lord had the proper conception of the Law and fulfilled 
it accurately. 

As the disciples with the Lord walked through the field 
of grain, feeling hungry, they rubbed some of the kernels 
in their hands to separate the chaff, and blowing the latter 
away they ate the grain. Under the strict divisions which 
the Pharisees had framed this would be counted as threshing 
and winnowing the grain, and would be forbidden as 
violating the day of sacred rest. Our Lord defended the 
disciples against the charge, and in proof pointed out to 
these Pharisees how David, when pursued by King Saul, 
had procured from the priest the unleavened cakes on the 
Sabbath day, and that this was a clear violation of the 
Law, which forbade any other than the priest to eat that 
bread. Our Lord wished his hearers to see that the emergencies 
of the case justified the deviation from the rule. 
It was a case of necessity— it was to preserve life. 

Another illustration he gave was that of the priests 
serving in the temple every Sabbath day, and how the Law 
specifically provided for the labor which they would perform, 
and hence that such labor could not be considered 
a profanation of the Sabbath. He then called attention 
to the fact that these disciples who were with him and serving 
him were doing still more consecrated work than 
the priests and Levites in the temple, because he— the 
representative of the Father— was greater than the temple; 
hence anything made necessary in the service of the Master 
should not be considered a violation of the Sabbath Law. 

Turning the matter upon the accusers our Lord declared 
that they did not understand the principles underlying 
the divine arrangement, else they would not have 
been seeking an accusation against persons who were innocent. 
He would have them see that the whole difficulty 
lay in their own hearts. They had evil thoughts and 
wished to find fault and had erred, whereas if their hearts 
had been in the proper condition they would have been 
full of feelings of mercy and compassion. 

THE SPIRIT OF GOD'S REQUIREMENT IS MERCY. 

This fault-finding disposition, that is ready to accuse 
and condemn everybody, indicates a wrong condition of 
heart— one which all the Lord's people should be on guard 
against. It is not the spirit of mercy and kindness and 
love which, as the Apostle explains, thinketh no evil. It 
is a spirit out of harmony with God's disposition, for, as 
our Lord explains, God desires mercy rather than slaughter; 
and those who are ready to condemn others give evidence 
that they lack the Lord's spirit of mercy and 
forgiveness. 

R3316 : page 43 



This was the offense which our Lord charged against 
two of his noblest disciples in the early part of their discipleship. 
When the people of Samaria refused to sell the 
disciples food, because the Lord did not stop with them 
and perform miracles amongst them, as he was doing 
amongst the Jews, the disciples, James and John, were indignant, 
and said to the Lord, "Wilt thou that we command 
fire to come down from heaven and destroy these 
men and their city?" but Jesus answered, "Ye know not 
what manner of spirit ye are of: the Son of man came not 
to destroy men's lives but to save them." So with all of 
the Lord's disciples: their continual study should be to 
avoid that hypercritical disposition to sentence and to destroy 
other people while desiring mercy for themselves. 
The rule which the Lord establishes is that we must expect 
from him mercy only in proportion as we shall exercise 
this grace toward others. 

LOVELESS CRITICISM PERVERTS THE MIND. 

As illustrating this tendency to fault-finding and how 
it grows upon one, a story is told of a young lady who 
once expressed to Hogarth, the great satirist, a wish to 
learn to draw caricatures. Hogarth replied, "Alas, it is 
not a faculty to be envied. Take my advice and never 
draw a caricature. By the long practice of it I have lost 
the enjoyment of beauty. I never see a face but distorted, 
and have never the satisfaction to behold the human face 
divine." So it is with those who unsympathetically practice 
fault-finding and criticising others' faults; they become 
so proficient in the matter that they never see good 
qualities, but merely the deficiencies. Their own happiness 
is thus injured, as well as the happiness of others. It is 
well that we should be able to note defects— that we should 
not be blind to them entirely; but we may here well apply 
our year-text, and remember that we ourselves are most profited 
in noticing in others whatsoever things are true, whatsoever 
things are just, whatsoever things are reputable, whatsoever 
things are pure, whatsoever things are lovely, rather 
than by noticing and thinking upon their defects and ignoble 
qualities. 

"THE SON OF MAN IS LORD OF THE SABBATH." 

We do not understand this to mean that our Lord 
claimed authority to set aside the Sabbath day, which God 
had appointed to the Jews in the Law— in the ten commandments. 
We do understand it to mean that as the 

Father's representative, as the great Teacher, he was competent 
to expound what constituted the proper observance 
of the Sabbath. To as many as received him his word 
on the subject would constitute the highest law— the 
highest interpretation of the divine law, far exceeding any 
dignity, rules and regulations of the Jewish Talmud or system 
of law interpretations and definitions. To his followers 
his words still constitute the highest law, and by his 



grace we are able to comprehend the meaning of his statement 
that the entire ten commandments are comprehended 
in the one word, Love— love for God supremely and love 
for our fellow-man. 

This talk about the Sabbath and our Lord's defense of 
his disciples doubtless occurred while they were on the 
way to the synagogue. It was a part of the Pharisaic interpretation 
of matters that no food should be eaten by any 
true Jew until after he had gone to the synagogue and worshipped. 
This probably accounts for the disciples being 
hungry and eating of the ripe grain en route. 

In the synagogue was a man with a withered hand, and 
the Jews wishing to find ground for an accusation against 
the Lord before the congregation, the latter was asked the 
question whether or not it would be lawful to heal on the 
Sabbath day. Since our Lord's healing was not done by 
manual labor, but merely by the word of his mouth, the 
captiousness of his adversaries is most evident. Their 
hearts were wicked, even while they were apparently arguing 
for a more strict observance of the divine law. Let us 
learn from this that the heavenly Father is not pleased to 
see us even defend what we believe to be right in a captious 
and unjust attitude of mind. Mercy, goodness, love, 
are the elements of character which he desires to see in the 
spiritual Israelites, and without which we cannot long continue 
to be his children. 

Our Lord soon answered the query and showed the 
weakness of his opponents. They knew well enough that 
nothing in the Mosaic Law could be construed by them to 

R3317 : page 43 

interfere with pulling an ox or an ass out of a pit on the 
Sabbath, even though it might require considerable exercise, 
—a good deal of labor for several persons. How foolish 
then for them to find fault with our Lord, who by one 
word could rebuke the disease and help one of their brethren 
of the seed of Abraham. After thus rebuking them 
and explaining that it was lawful to do good on the Sabbath 
day, our Lord healed the cripple. 

We have no space here to enter into a discussion of 
present-day Sabbath observance— to point out the distinction 
between the seventh-day Sabbath, which was given by 
the Lord to the Jewish nation and to it only, and the 
Christian privilege which we enjoy at the present time, of 
worshipping and praising the Lord and studying his Word 
and being free from business cares and responsibilities on 
the first day of the week. This subject, however, is treated 
quite at length in MILLENNIAL DAWN, Vol. VI., which 
we trust will soon be in the hands of all the interested 
readers of this journal. 



R3317 : page 43 



WHO ARE REAL CHRISTIANS? 

--MATT. 7:21-29.-FEBRUARY 28.- 

Golden Text:— "Be ye doers of the Word, 
and not hearers only."— James 1:22. 

FOLLOWING our Lord's course, we reach in this lesson 
a more particular stage in his work. After the example 
of Peter, Andrew, James and John, others 
became disciples or followers of the Lord, until we may 
presume that his company was of considerable numbers. 
It was about this time that, after prayer in solitude in the 
mountain, our Lord made choice of the twelve who should 
be his special representatives or apostles; and whether it 

R3317 : page 44 

was before or after this selection from amongst the other 
disciples or followers that he gave the Sermon on the 
Mount, we may not be too positive, but evidently the two 
events occurred about the same time. 

Our lesson is really a portion of the Sermon on the 
Mount— a conclusion to it. Supplementing Matthew's 
statement with that of Luke 6:43-49, we find that our 
Lord gave several illustrations of true discipleship at this 
time: (1) The straight gate and narrow way by which 
any might become his disciples; (2) the fruit-bearing test 
of being his disciples; (3) the difference between words 
and deeds in the Lord's estimation; (4) the vital results 
as illustrated by the two buildings, the one on the sand 
and the other on the rock. 

THESE TESTS IGNORED BY CHURCHIANITY. 

In our day, when the public teachings of the ministry 
of nearly all denominations is so different from the teaching 
of the Scriptures, we believe that the degeneracy 
of faith and practice would be much more rapid than it is 
were it not that very many feel it a duty to read a portion 
of the Scriptures daily, even though they think little about 
their meaning. In such readings lessons like the one we 
are now considering occasionally present themselves; and 
the lines of true discipleship are here so distinctly drawn, 
that the mere nominal professor is made to shudder while 
the true Christian is profited in proportion as he determines 
by the grace of God he will seek to so conform his 
life that he may become more and more a copy of God's 
dear Son. 

The general thought of today in the pulpits and in private 
conversation and at funerals seems to be that in civilized 
lands everybody is a Christian and sure to go to 
heaven eventually, except such persons as are moral reprobates 
—such as are to be found in penitentiaries and prisons 
—and even for them hope is entertained that ere they 
die they may express some regret for their misdeeds. Such 



regrets are seized upon by their friends as evidence that 
they have become Christians, and gone to heaven too. 

FALSE DOCTRINE IS CHARGEABLE FOR THIS. 

While condemning the foregoing as wholly wrong, we 
nevertheless sympathize with those whose confusion of 
thought is thus manifested. Their unscriptural views of 
what constitutes a Christian is the result of two things: 
(1) Teachings of the dark ages handed down through the 
creeds of Christendom from the "mother of harlots" to 
her "daughters"— creeds inspired by the teachings of those 
who, in centuries gone by, persecuted one another to the 
death for differences of opinions on doctrinal subjects- 
tortured one another with rack and sword and fagot. (2) 
To this bad foundation of error there has come within recent 
years a larger spirit of enlightenment and generosity 
in which we rejoice. But the two qualities— the errors of 
the past and the generosity of the present— produce a very 
bad combination of doctrine for modern Churchianity— a 
doctrine which seeks to be reasonable with itself, and which, 
in so doing, runs counter to a great many teachings of 
Scripture. The present lesson is an illustration of this. 

From the standpoint of orthodox Churchianity and its 
teaching of eternal torture for all except those who become 
Christian, our Lord's words in this lesson seem very unreasonable, 
very unsatisfactory, very heart-rending. From 
their standpoint a strict application of this lesson would 
mean not only that the heathen world is without hope in 
the future, but also the civilized world and the vast majority 
of those called Christians have nothing to expect in 
the future except tribulation— eternal torment, because rejected 
of the Lord and not recognized as Christians, not 
recognized as members of his Kingdom, his Body, of his 
Church. 

THE TRUTH ALONE IS CONSISTENT. 

It is only when we get rid of the smoke and darkness 
and confusion of Babylon and the dark ages and their 
creeds, and get back to the pure, unadulterated words of 
the Lord and apostles and prophets, and by the grace of 
God are granted some opening of the eyes of our understanding, 
only then can we see these matters in their true 
light. Our Lord's discourses continually reiterated that 
he was seeking for some who should be counted worthy to 
constitute his Kingdom, to sit with him in his throne, to 
be his joint-heirs, to rule and to judge Israel and all the 
nations of the world. Not until we learn to differentiate 
between the Church, his Bride, the members of his Body, 
the Kingdom class, and the world that is to be judged or 
ruled by this Kingdom class in due time, can we get a 
clear conception of the divine purposes progressing 
throughout this Gospel age. 

From this standpoint we can see most clearly why none 
can be of the Kingdom class unless they shall develop 



faith and character above and beyond that of the world in 

general. We can see why these should be called upon to 

bear the good fruits; we can see why they must walk the 

narrow way of self-denial, self-sacrifice and character development 

in order to be fitted and prepared for the great 

work the Lord has for them to do for the world in the 

coming age— in the Millennium. It seems to be peculiarly 

difficult for the majority of people long blinded by 

false doctrines to see that the heavenly Father has 

SPECIAL TIMES AND SEASONS FOR THE VARIOUS DEVELOPMENTS 
OF HIS WORK. 

The world is getting a certain kind of experiences in 
the present time which will be valuable to it in the future 
—when God's due time shall come for blessing all the 
families of the earth to be on trial for life or death everlasting. 
Meantime, with those present experiences come 
the disciplines of the laws of nature— under which poverty, 
sickness and mental and moral derangements follow excesses 
of evil doing as pain follows contact with fire. 
And it is not an unreasonable hope that with the lessons 
of the present time before them, the world during the Millennial 
age will act more wisely than at present; that under 

R3317 : page 45 

the favorable conditions prevailing then many will not 
only rejoice in the great plan of salvation, but will avail 
themselves of it— many who are now careless in such matters, 
partly because they cannot see or walk by faith. 

It is when we realize that the present time is one for 
schooling, discipline, chastening, proving the characters 
of those who hear and accept the divine invitation, that 
we see the reasonableness of all the restrictions and requirements 
attaching to such special discipleship. No longer 
do we wonder that our dear Redeemer said, "Strait is the 
gate and narrow is the way that leadeth unto life, and few 
there be that find it"; no longer do we wonder that it is 
recorded that he spake in parables and dark sayings to the 
intent that the majority should not understand his message 
—to the intent that only Israelites indeed might appreciate 
and accept his call. No longer do we wonder that he 
declared that only those who would forsake all could become 
his disciples; no longer do we wonder that discipleship 
means self-sacrifice even unto death. Now we see 
that our heavenly Father could make no easier terms than 
these in connection with the peculiar high calling to joint 
heirship with his Son in the Kingdom to which he is now 
calling a little flock. 

"NOT EVERY ONE THAT SAITH UNTO ME, LORD, LORD, 
SHALL ENTER INTO THE KINGDOM OF HEAVEN." 

The point of this lesson is specially for those who have 
named the name of Christ, and who are professing to be 



his disciples. It is not enough that we profess discipleship; 
unless the matter goes deeper than this we will be 
rejected. Our professions of discipleship must be sincere, 
and the Lord knoweth the heart and will. Although he 
will judge us leniently so far as unwilling and unintentional 
weaknesses and imperfections are concerned, he will 
judge us most strictly in respect to our purposes, the intentions 
of our hearts. Our Lord is not here referring to the 
Church in her present condition as the embryo Kingdom: 
he refers to the glorified, actual Kingdom to be established 
at his Second Advent. His faithful will enter into 

R3318 : page 45 

that Kingdom by the resurrection change— by participation 
in the First Resurrection, which is to include only the 
blessed and holy.— Rev. 20:5,6. 

While the Lord's people of the present age are not to be 
judged by their works but by their faith, as the Apostle Paul 
distinctly points out, saying, "By the deeds of the Law shall 
no flesh be justified in God's sight," but we are justified 
by faith, nevertheless, works will be required. By our 
works we must demonstrate our faith, and, thank God, 
imperfect works can demonstrate to him the loyalty of our 
intentions, our wills. Hence the Apostle James says, "I 
will show thee my faith by my works," and to this all the 
Scriptures agree. If our works demonstrate to the Lord 
the sincerity of our faith, that faith will be acceptable to 
him and we will be counted perfect and be granted a share 
in the Kingdom, great and precious things which the Lord 
has in reservation for those who love him— not merely in 
word but also in deeds— for those who strive by the deeds 
of life to show forth, to demonstrate, their love. 

The Lord carries this illustration to a considerable 
length, showing that he does not merely refer to people 
who are nominally called Christians en masse. From the 
Lord's standpoint the great majority of these would be 
merely classed as Gentiles; because they have never entered 
into any covenant relationship with God. The reference 
in this passage is evidently to those who have outwardly 
made a consecration of themselves to the Lord- 
to those who have outwardly professed a change of heart 
and vital relationship to the Lord. More than this, he 
includes not only a few, but "many," who in their outward 
course of life have in some measure acknowledged 
the Lord publicly and as here expressed. 

"IN THY NAME HAVE CAST OUT DEVILS, DONE MANY AND 
WONDERFUL WORKS." 

This represents a class claiming relationship to the 
Lord and public ministry in his name— far above the ordinary 
masses of Churchianity. Our Lord declares that unless 
our consecration shall lead us to more than miracle-working 
and calling ourselves Christian, and preaching to 
others in the Lord's name, it shall profit us nothing. In 



order to have his approval "in that day" it will be necessary 
that we shall develop characters in conformity with 
the Father's will— in conformity to the Lord's Word. 
Nothing but character will stand the final tests. 

All about us in so-called Christian lands we see and 
hear many in public prayer and hymns of praise call repeatedly 
Lord, Lord, yet whose conduct, so far as we 
can see, bears no good fruit, but rather evil fruitage. 
Many of them are like the thorns and briars to which 
the Lord likened them. They reach out with helping 
hands to lift man up, to bless and to ennoble, but the 
thorns and briars tear and do injury. We live in a day 
when little of this injury is done physically, because the 
laws of civilization would take cognizance of such evil 
deeds and punish the evil doers. Nevertheless, the 
thorny and briary people find abundant opportunity for 
injuring others with their lips, with their tongues. Slandering, 
backbiting, malice, hatred, envy, strife, proceed 
from them because this is their nature. These bramble 
and thorn bushes may indeed tie on clusters of grapes 
and figs to deceive, but the thorny and brambly character 
will be sure to manifest itself to those who come 
near them in the contact of daily life. 

No wonder that our Lord determines that such are 
unfit for a share with him in his Kingdom and its great 
work of judging and blessing the world of mankind. How 
could busybodies and backbiters and slanderers be fit for 
the Kingdom of God's dear Son? Saying, Lord, Lord, or 
performing some miracle in his name, does not warrant 
them in expecting the great blessings which the Lord has 
in reservation for those who love him and who in turn are 
controlled by the spirit of love toward him and toward all 
the household of faith. 

R3318 : page 46 

OUR FAITH STRUCTURE MUST HAVE PROPER FOUNDATIONS. 

We are aware that in our day the confused and confusing 
doctrines handed down from the dark ages have become 
so obnoxious to reasoning people that they are inclined 
to say, Away with doctrines! it matters not what a 
man believes; it matters everything what he does. We 
sympathize with those who hold this sentiment, although 
we cannot at all agree with it. We hold to the 
contrary that doctrine is all important both to faith and 
works. If it were not so the Lord would not have given 
his doctrines so important a place in his teachings and in 
his parables as in the one now under consideration. No 
man can build a proper life unless he have some foundation, 
some doctrine, some faith. A man with no faith, 
no hope, is sure to be correspondingly lacking in character. 
We believe that the important thing is that we should 
have a proper foundation, a proper faith, a proper doctrine 
upon which to build character and good works. 

Our Lord's illustration shows the possibility of building 



upon two kinds of foundation— a worthy and unworthy 
sort. But let us notice before we go further that this parable 
does not represent the heathen in any sense of the 
word, nor does it represent any who, living in civilized 
lands, have the eyes of their understanding so beclouded 
by ignorance and superstition, and their ears so dulled by 
the god of this world, that they do not hear distinctly the 
Lord's message. The parable is addressed to him "that 
heareth these sayings of mine"— who understands my 
teaching. The heathen have no place under this designation, 
neither have the great majority of those who profess 
Churchianity. 

The parable then most clearly finds its two classes in 
those who have heard the good tidings and who have received 
them who outwardly have made consecration 
to the Lord, and who outwardly are building their hopes 
upon his promises. The hopes built upon the Lord's 
promises and unaccompanied by works are hopes built 
upon the sand. It is only a question of time until the 
great testing time shall come and such hopes will be shown 
to be worse than useless. They will be shown to have 
deceived their possessor, who thought himself safe in his 
assurances of a share in the Kingdom. Such hopes, such 
faith, as fail to obediently strive to do the Lord's will, 
such faith and hopes as consider that obedience is not essential 
to a place in the Kingdom, are falsely founded; 
their overthrow will come with great disaster. 

On the contrary, those who build with obedience, their 
hearts as well as their tongues confessing and honoring the 
Lord, their deeds corroborating their faith, and their fruits 
bearing testimony of their vital relationship with the Lord 
—these shall pass through all the storms of life and shall 
never be moved, never be shaken, because they are on the 
foundation. No wonder that his hearers thought that our 
Lord's teachings were different from those of the scribes 
and Pharisees. There was a positiveness in his teaching 
not to be found elsewhere. And so it is today: the Word 
of the Lord is reasonable, logical and satisfying in a manner 
and to a degree that nothing else is. 

"SAVED SO AS BY FIRE." 

The Apostle Paul (I Cor. 3:10-15) uses this same illustration 
in a slightly different manner. His illustration 
shows only those who are built upon the rock, Christ Jesus, 
but shows that two classes are building upon the rock 
and that while all such builders will be eventually saved, 
gain everlasting life, there will be nevertheless two classes 
of them— some saved abundantly in the Kingdom and others 
"saved so as by fire"— by passing through great tribulation. 
The Apostle's explanation is equally possible, 
whether we apply the gold, silver, and precious stones of 
the proper building to true doctrines, in contrast with the 
wood, hay and stubble to false doctrines, or whether we 
apply these symbols of gold, silver and precious stones as 
signifying character development, the results of sound doctrine, 



and the wood, hay and stubble the deficiency of 
character development. 

The general tenor of all these lessons is that all those 
who think worth while to be on the Lord's side at all in 
this present age will do wisely if, after counting the cost, 
they completely lay aside not only their besetting sins but 
their ambition and their hope and every desire of an earthly 
kind— that their entire interests may be devoted to the 
Lord, to knowing his will, to serving him. These are 
they who really love the Lord more than they love houses 
or lands or father or mother or children or self; these are 
the Lord's Jewels, who shall be joint-heirs with him in the 
Kingdom and in the great work of blessing all the families 
of the earth in due time. "They shall be mine, saith the 
Lord, in that day when I make up my jewels." 



R3318 : page 46 

"FILLING UP THAT WHICH IS BEHIND." 

Question.— (1) What significance should we attach 
to the Apostle's words, that the heavenly things 
are cleansed by "better sacrifices" than those offered 
by the Jewish priesthood for the cleansing or atonement 
in the typical system? (2) When did those 
better sacrifices begin and when did they end? (3) 
What will follow the completion of those better sacrifices? 
—that is, what will be the outward manifestation 
or blessing that will follow their completion? 

Answer.— The better sacrifices are the antitypical 
ones begun by our Lord Jesus, and participated in by 
his faithful footstep-followers, who are invited by the 
Lord, through the Apostle, to present their bodies 
living sacrifices, holy, acceptable unto God, and their 
reasonable service (Rom. 12:1); and assured that in 
so doing they are filling up that which is behind of 
the afflictions of Christ for his body's sake, which is 
the Church (Col. 1:24), those antitypical sufferings 
occupying the entire Gospel age. They began when 
our Lord consecrated himself to death at baptism. 
They reached a large degree of accomplishment when 
he finished the sacrifice at Calvary. The finished 
sacrifice represented in value all that Justice did, or 
could, demand as the ransom price for Adam and his 

R3319 : page 47 

entire race. Consequently our Lord, when he ascended 
up on high, was fully prepared to present his 
sacrifice to divine Justice as in full offset for the sins 
of the whole world. 

But the divine plan contemplated an Anointed 
One composed of many members, under the headship 
of Jesus; and in harmony with this arrangement those 



who would be invited to be members of the anointed 
body were granted the opportunity of participating 
with the Head in his sacrifice, that they might also in 
due time be participators with him in the divine nature 
and the glorious work of the Kingdom, the restitution 
work. For this reason alone, and not because 
of any lack of sufficiency in our Redeemer's sacrifice, 
his work before the Father when he ascended up 
on high was merely applied for the household of faith 
and not for the world. 

True, certain passages of Scripture speak of our 
Lord's work as "a propitiation for our sins [the 
Church's sins] and not for ours only, but also for the 
sins of the whole world." This, however, according to 
the clear showing of the type, is an accommodated expression, 
referring to all the work which will ultimately 
be accomplished by our Lord as the result of 
his atonement sacrifice. Nothing is more clearly 
taught in the Scriptures than that atonement has not 
yet been accomplished on behalf of the world, but as 
yet only on behalf of believers. 

All this is most beautifully typified in the Day of 
Atonement sacrifices.* These are shown to be one, in 
the sense that they are all performed by the High 
Priest and in the one day, and as parts of the one 
great atonement; but they are distinctly divided into 
two as respects the sacrifices: (a) the bullock, which 
represented our Lord sacrificed, and its blood applied 
specifically for the priest's members, and his house, 
typical of the body of Christ and the household of faith; 
(b) following this came the sacrifice of the goat, not 
for the same class— not for the members and household 
of the priest— but "for all the people." The 
blessing of God resulting from the sacrifice of the 
bullock was merely upon the priestly tribe, representing 
the Church, and the household of faith of this 
Gospel age. Only by reason of our Lord's sacrifice 
would any of us have any standing whatever before 
the Lord, or any privilege whatever in the way of 
sacrifice. Not until the sacrifice of the goat had been 
complete, and its blood had been sprinkled upon the 
Mercy Seat, was there a passing over or remission of 
the sins of the people. And so, in the antitype, the 
blessing of the Lord has come to the household of 
faith during this Gospel age, granting us the great 
privilege of becoming joint-heirs with the Lord, while 
the foretold blessing of the world, "all the families 
of the earth," waits— waits until the sacrifice of 
the goat shall have been finished— waits until the 
High Priest shall thus, by the sacrifice of his body-members, 
make atonement for the sins of mankind in 
general. As soon as that work shall have been accomplished 
we may be sure that the blessing of the 
Lord, the manifestation of his forgiveness, etc., will 
be made known to the whole world of mankind, and 
the curse still resting upon the race as a whole will then 



be lifted from every creature, and instead the light of 
the knowledge of the glory of God shall flood the 
earth. 

"Ye see your calling, brethren"— your invitation 
to the priesthood— the Melchisedec priesthood. 
We see our Lord Jesus as the great High Priest, 
and his faithful ones of this Gospel age, as a Royal 
Priesthood, under his headship. We thus consider 
the High Priest of our profession, order, Christ 
Jesus. Only the High Priest could offer the blood 
of these atonement sacrifices at the Mercy Seat. 
He offered first himself, and during this age has been 
working in his members to will and to do, enabling 
them thus to sacrifice, and giving merit and character 
to their sacrifices, making them acceptable as a part of 
his own. He will shortly finish the work and present 
the whole before the Father, and this will signalize 
the closing of this Gospel age of sacrifice; for there 
will be no opportunity of participating in this sacrifice 
after the elect members shall have filled up the 
measure assigned to them by their Lord. 

When we think of our priesthood, let us call to 
mind the statement of the Apostle, that every priest 
must have somewhat to offer. (Heb. 8:3.) Our Lord 
had himself, the Perfect One, to offer— a sacrifice well 
pleasing to the Father. No other soul in all the world 
could have presented this sacrifice, for no other was 
worthy, and any addition to it would have been not 
only a superfluity, but an insult to him who arranged 
the plan. But the redemption having been guaranteed 
in our Lord's death, Justice could make no objection, 
and did make no objection to his appropriating a 
portion of this merit to those who, believing in him 
and being justified by faith in his blood, and thus 
accounted righteous, should desire to follow in his 
steps of sacrifice, and be counted in with him, and have 
their sacrifices, counted in as a part of his sacrifice on 
behalf of the sins of the whole world. In order to be 
members of this Royal Priesthood, then, it was necessary 
that we offer something, and we offer ourselves. 
We offer ourselves, not as ourselves, but as those justified 
through our Redeemer's merit, and desirous of 
being counted in as members of his body, and having 
whatever sacrifice we may perform counted in as 
a part of the general sacrifice of our Lord. The 
heavenly Father is pleased to accept the matter in this 
way; more than this, he planned it and foreshadowed 
it in the typical sacrifices of ancient times. 

This is in full agreement with the Apostle's 
statement, "By man came death, and by man came 
also the resurrection of the dead." The first man, 
who brought death, was Adam; the second man, who 
brought life is our Lord; but our Lord has accepted 
a little flock as members of his body— "one new man." 
This is in harmony with the statement, also, that 
"there is one mediator between God and man, the 



man Christ Jesus, who gave himself a ransom for all, 
to be testified in due time." It was for all in the most 
absolute sense— because without that sacrifice all could 
not have received the intended blessing, and because 
all are to receive the blessing as a result of that sacrifice, 
in God's due time. The fact that the Church 
is associated with the Lord as his members during 
this Gospel age alters the matter not one whit. It is 
still of him and by him and through him, and not of 
us nor by us nor through us, that the blessings are to 
come to mankind. 



*See "Tabernacle Shadows of Better Sacrifices." 



page 49 

SEMI-MONTHLY. 
VOL. XXV. FEBRUARY 15, 1904. No. 4. 
CONTENTS. 



Views From the Watch Tower 51 

Selfishness Rules Both Sides 51 

What U.S. Commissioner of Labor 
Thinks 51 

"Find a Hell and Preach It" 52 

Can the Ethiopian Change his Skin? 52 

New Law Pleases Catholics 53 

"Behold the Goodness and Severity 

of God!" 53 

"He Maketh the Storm a Calm" 58 

Bargains that Were Costly 60 

Sunday Discourses in Gazette 50 

page 50 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-24 EVERSHOLT ST., LONDON, N.W. 
GERMAN BRANCH-MIRKER STR., 45, ELBERFELD. 

PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE, 5c (2-l/2d.) A COPY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity 
or adversity, are unable to pay for the Tower, will be supplied FREE, if 



they send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting 
the paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our 
list continually. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



R3321 : page 50 
SUNDAY DISCOURSES IN PITTSBURGH GAZETTE. 



Friends write that they can get people to read these 
published discourses who would not read the same from 
the WATCH TOWER or a tract. One brother tells that his 
friend who would not agree to read the debates, did finally 
agree to read Dr. Eaton's side only. But after reading 
that, he wanted to read our side, and did so. Since then 
he reads the Gazette reports regularly, and wants more 
and more-TOWERS, DAWNS, etc. 

It is to permit a general use of these reports that we 
have arranged for quantities of them at the low rates quoted 
in our recent issue, which for the convenience of all we 
here repeat. We can supply you the Pittsburgh Gazette 
daily (except Sunday) for: 

A year (313 issues) postpaid, for $2.25 

Six months (156 issues) postpaid, for 1.15 

Three months (78 issues) postpaid, for 60 

Anyone thus a regular subscriber for the daily Gazette 
is privileged to receive extra copies of Pastor C. T. Russell's 
weekly sermons at the following rates:— 

Seven copies every Monday for 10 weeks, $1.00 

Fifteen " " " " 10 " 2.00 

Fifty " " " " 10 " 5.00 

For 20 or 30 or 40 weeks, or for 100 or 200 or 500 
copies at proportionate rates. 



R3319 : page 51 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 
SELFISHNESS RULES BOTH SIDES. 



WE hear much about the selfishness and tyranny 

of capital, and how it at times is unjust, 

unless restrained by law. We even hear 

claims made that the laws favor the rich. We 

could expect nothing else under the present course of 



this world, under the law of selfishness. We have often 
wondered that our laws are so just, so equitable toward 
all classes as they are. 

But while longing for the reign of love, let us not 
look for it in any other than the one direction: let us not 
look to man, but to God, and wait and pray, "Thy Kingdom 
come, Thy will be done on earth as it is in heaven." 
Some are inclined to look for the reign of equity and love 
under Socialism. They are sadly deceived. The poor, 
if they had the power, would be no more equitable than 
the rich, no more generous, no more loving or gentle. As 
an illustration, take the following account of the operation 
of Socialism in Australia, where it has achieved great 
influence, but is not yet in absolute control of the government, 
courts, etc. Judged by its fruits there, it 
would be a long time in bringing "peace on earth, good 
will to men." We quote:— 

The Philadelphia Public Ledger publishes some correspondence 
from Sydney that throws additional light on 
the Australian labor situation, as reviewed the other day 
in the editorial columns of The Journal. The article says 
that New South Wales appears destined to lose much of 
its shipping trade because of the exactions of labor unions. 
A case in point is cited. 

The American ship Andromeda arrived at Fort Jackson 
loaded with lumber. The vessel had a union crew 
and proceeded to discharge its cargo, when the captain 
was informed he must employ only members of the Sydney 
Wharf Laborers' union, and that his donkey engine 
must also be run by members of the Sydney Donkey 
Enginemen's union. The captain, finding it impossible 
to unload otherwise, finally consented to employing the 
Sydney laborers, although his own sailors were union men 
and were being paid to do the work. However, he refused 
to employ the Sydney donkeymen, and the result 
was that he was taken into court and fined in all $350, the 
money to go to the members of the Sydney Wharf Laborers' 
union. 

WHAT THE U.S. COMMISSIONER OF LABOR THINKS. 



Speaking recently before the Society of Ethical 
Culture, Col. Carroll D. Wright said:- 

"The wages system will pass away. In its stead, I 
believe, there will come a system which will be composed 
of the profit-sharing and the co-operation ideas. The 
great labor question means the struggle of humanity for 
a higher standard of life. The employer must consider 

R3320 : page 51 

his employe, as well as the stockholder, as an investor." 

Of scarcely less interest than his prediction of a 
new labor system was Col. Wright's approval of a plan to 



insure labor against incapacity resulting from accident, 
illness or advancing age. The German idea was quoted, 
under which the employer pays one-fourth the cost of a 
sick and death benefit policy, the employe one-fourth and 
the government one-half. "England," said Col. Wright, 
"has taken up this question, and we of the United States 
are steadily approaching it." 

Continuing, Col. Wright said: "Capital charges to 
the consumer the depreciation of property and machinery. 
Why should not the depreciation of labor's machinery, its 
hands, its brains, its body, be included in the final cost? 
We see in every progressive community that the demand 
of the workingman is no longer for a wage sufficient to 
enable him to keep body and soul together. 

"Labor has been taught to feel that it is a social as 
well as an economic power in the community, and this 
educating process has gone on until the demand of labor 
is for a reasonable margin beyond that fixed by the iron 
law of wages. 

"The wages system will pass away. It has, as has 
been shown, unsatisfactory conditions in many of its applications. 
It depends too largely for its equities upon 
the generosity and greatmindedness of employers. 
That there are many such who would scorn to influence 
the votes or actions of their employes and who would be 
incapable of taking petty advantage of their workmen is 
happily true. That there are others that will make use 
of these opportunities proves the weakness of the system 
and argues for a greater measure of independence for 
those who labor. 

"The system that will take the place of that under 
which mere wages are paid probably will be composed of 
the profit-sharing and co-operation plans. The work 

R3320 : page 52 

people will then acquire the interest of investors, the 
more capable will rise to their opportunities and the less 
worthy will find their level." 



The Commissioner is a fore-seer. He reasons out 
from observation what God's people know from the 
Scriptures. We see, however, what Col. Wright does 
not see, viz.: that the change of program is not coming 
about peacefully, but by a great time of trouble such as 
was not since there was a nation, which will introduce 
the Golden Rule of Immanuel's Kingdom. 



FIND A HELL AND PREACH IT. 



We clip the following from a daily:— 

"We must find a hell and preach it," declared Rev. 



Dr. Burt, of Nottingham, presiding at the monthly meeting 
of Methodist ministers at the Y.M.C.A. building 
Monday morning. 

"I was never reminded of this so strongly as this 
morning," he said, "when I read of the devilishness of a 
man who could calmly write to a friend of his intentions, 
then go home, greet his wife lovingly, rise up in the night, 
murder her, murder his three children, lie down beside his 
wife's body and kill himself. 

"Such a man ought to be damned; he must be 
damned. If such a murderer's punishment is not swift 
and awful there is no just God. It would be a good text 
for all of us— to preach of this terrible crime and the justice 
of God." 

Dr. Burt's remarks came in a discussion of a paper 
on revivals, read by Rev. Dr. Warner and discussed by 
Revs. Mitchell, Moore, Cory and others. The paper regretted 
the tendency to preach less of an actual hell than 
of subjects more pleasing to the congregations. Dr. 
Warner believed churchgoers thought more of good 
worldly appearance than of salvation and said many a 
church was dying for need of a spiritual revival. 



Poor blind guide! The abundance of his ignorance 
betrayeth him. He wants a man damned and tortured 
who already is suffering from the damnation, curse or 
sentence pronounced upon father Adam! Does this 
"Doctor" of Divinity not know what ails our poor race? 
Does he not know that "By one man's disobedience sin 
entered into the world and death as a result of sin,— and 
thus death has passed upon all men"? Does he not know 
that this murderer's ailment is that he was mentally, 
morally and physically more than nine-tenths dead 
when he committed the crime,— else he would not have 
committed it? 

What the man needed was a release from the curse 
he was under. He needed to have the Good Physician 
take him in charge mentally, physically and morally. 
He needed the very thorough, drastic treatment which 
the Lord tells us he proposes to give during the Millennium 
to all of our race who do not in the present age hear 
his voice and voluntarily enter his school. 

Had this Doctor of Divinity and others done their 
duty, this poor man might have been released from 
some measure of his malady. They should have informed 
him respecting the teachings of God's Word. 
Those who look to them for bread should not be given 
stones ! The unscriptural traditions of the dark ages 
respecting eternal torment are no longer believed by the 
people any more than by the clergy. Consequently, 
those lacking in moral stamina or in intellectual balance 
no longer have anything to restrain them. Such conclude 
that— as "orthodoxy" includes them when computing 
the Christians of the world, and teaches that all 



Christians are bound for bliss the next moment after 
death— they will exercise faith in God and go 
sooner than some of their neighbors. 

Who is to blame for these misconceptions? We 
answer, The Doctors of Divinity, who promulgate such 
false teachings. How differently this poor man would 
have felt on the subject of death had he been Scripturally 
taught, that death is the extinction of life, that life 
itself is most precious, and that in proportion as it is 
wisely used in harmony with the divine regulations; 
that an eternity of life and joy unspeakable has been 
made possible for all through the great sacrifice at 
Calvary; that it is attainable only through the acceptance 
of the Savior and obedience to his instructions. Who 
can say that the truth, thus presented to this weak mind 
might not have sobered it and steadied it; or, as the 
Apostle expresses the matter, it might have given this 
man the spirit of a sound mind. 

This poor murderer and suicide was merely deliriously 
intoxicated with false doctrine, and we have no suspicion 
that the Great Judge will feel toward him as Dr. 
Burt expressed himself. The case is analogous to that of 
the saloon-keeper who kicked out the poor drunkard 
after he had taken his money for the vile stuff that 
robbed him of his senses. In our opinion the Great 
Judge will most severely arraign those who for the sake of 
money and popularity have dealt out the intoxicating 
errors. (Rev. 18:3.) He will have greater compassion 
upon their dupes, we are sure. "Ye know 
not what spirit ye are of: the Son of Man came not to destroy 
men's lives but to save them." (Luke 9:55,56.) 
Thank God for the coming Kingdom and its righteous 
judgments and assistances to all who are now blinded by 
the god of this world. (2 Cor. 4:4.) "Thy Kingdom 
come! Thy will be done on earth, even as it is done in 
heaven." 

"CAN THE ETHIOPIAN CHANGE HIS SKIN?" 



We answer, No. But all will admit that what the 
Ethiopian cannot do for himself God could readily do 
for him. The difference between the races of men and 
the differences between their languages have long been 
arguments against the solidarity of the human family. 
The doctrine of restitution has also raised the question, 
How could all men be brought to perfection and which 
color of skin was the original? The answer is now provided. 

R3320 : page 53 

God can change the Ethiopian's skin in his own 
due time. 

Prof. H. A. Edwards, Supt. of Schools in Slater, Mo., 
has written for the public press an elaborate description 



of how Julius Jackson, of New Frankfort, Mo., a negro 
boy of nine years, began to grow white in September, 
1901, and is now fully nine-tenths white. He assures us 
that this is no whitish skin disease; but that the new 
white skin is as healthy as that of any white boy, and 
that the changed boy has never been sick and never has 
taken medicines. Realizing that his story would be 
doubted, he interested Dr. F. A. Howard, chief division 
surgeon of the Chicago and Alton Ry., who corroborates 
the statement in the following published extract from a 
letter: 

"I am obliged to you for an opportunity of seeing and 
examining the negro child, Julius Jackson. 

"I found his heart action, respiration and temperature 
perfectly normal and his mental faculties seem acute 
for one of his age. 

"The white skin now covering at least 90 per cent, 
of his body is, so far as I am able to judge, in full possession 
of all its organs and those organs seem to be performing 
their natural functions— no roughness, chalky, or 
ashen appearance is present. 

"It seems to me that the conditions warrant your 
opinion— the change is certainly caused by chemical conditions 
of the blood. Very truly, 

"F. A. HOWARD." 

NEW ENGLISH LAW PLEASES CATHOLICS. 



The common schools of England are under religious 
control, and henceforth the dominant sect in each district 
will largely have control. Referring to this an exchange 
notes the following:— 

"The Pope received an English pilgrimage, which, 
with the British residents of Rome, including the Duchess 
of Newcastle, numbered over three hundred persons. 

"They were introduced by the Most Rev. Francis 
Bourne, archbishop of Westminster, and presented an 
offering of "Peter's Pence," besides an address containing 

R3321 : page 53 

the following passage: 

'"Next year a great measure in support of the freedom 
of religious teaching in education comes into force in 
England, Catholic children and teachers being gradually 
put on an equality with the most favored children and 
teachers of the nation. Your Holiness will welcome for 
us such a great act of justice, since it shows that among 
the English the last shadow of bigotry is dying out.' 

"The Pope thanked and encouraged the pilgrims for 
their faith and loyalty to Rome and imparted the apostolic 
benediction." 



R3321 : page 53 

"BEHOLD THE GOODNESS AND SEVERITY OF GOD. 

"Know ye not that the unrighteous shall not inherit the 
Kingdom of God. Be not deceived."— 1 Cor. 6:9,10. 

GOD'S SEVERITY consists in his insistence 
upon absolute righteousness— his refusal to 
approve sin in any sense or degree. The very 
first statement of the divine law is that death, destruction, 
must be the wage or penalty for transgression 
against his righteous regulations. For six thousand 
years the Lord has maintained this original position 
—has refused to sanction sin or permit sinners to live. 
Such an unchangeable attitude at first seems severe, 
especially when we consider that we were born in sin 
and shapen in iniquity, infested by weaknesses and 
surrounded by evil influences. It seems severe on 
God's part to insist upon perfection, when all of our 
experiences teach us that it is impossible for fallen 
humanity to attain absolute righteousness in word and 
deed and thought. Indeed the Scriptures confirm our 
experiences, declaring, "There is none righteous, no, 
not one."— Rom. 3:10. 

The goodness of God is not seen in the severity, 
but, wholly separated, it stands side by side with it. 
God's goodness, his generosity, his mercy, kindness, 
love, which are not manifested in the sentence and in 
the execution of its penalties, are manifested in the 
great gift of his love— the Lord Jesus and the Redeemer 
provided in him— a redemption coextensive 
with the fall and with the condemnation. The Apostle 
expresses the matter pointedly in the words, "In 
this was manifested the love of God toward us, because 
that God sent his only begotten Son into the 
world, that we might live through him." (I John 4:9.) 
God's love was not previously manifested; for 
over four thousand years only the severity, the justice 
of the divine character was manifested, though a 
hint was given to Abraham and subsequently through 
the prophets, that God had kind sentiments toward 
the fallen and tainted race, which in due time would 
bring blessings to all the families of the earth. 

THE GOSPEL AGE A PARENTHESIS. 

The period between the first advent of our Lord 
and his second advent is in some respects a parenthesis 
in the divine plan, during which the Church is 
specially dealt with, as we shall see later. The redemption 
of the world and its reconciliation with God, 
based upon divine goodness expressed in the death of 
the Redeemer, wait for its further expression to the 
world until the end of the Gospel age and the opening 



of the Millennial age— "the world to come." When 
the morning of that new day shall dawn, the goodness 
of God will be seen more distinctly than ever by mankind. 
Indeed it may be said that the world as yet 
has seen nothing of the goodness of God; it has 
merely seen his severity, his justice, executed against 
the entire human family for the last six thousand 
years. A comparatively small proportion of humanity 
has ever heard of the grace of God in 
Christ, the "only name under heaven given among 

R3321 : page 54 

men, whereby we must be saved." And even those 
who have heard to some extent have been measurably 
deceived by the great Adversary in respect to the 
nature of the penalty for sin and the fullness and 
wideness of the mercy extended to men in the person 
of the Redeemer. 

In that new dispensation the facts will all be 
made clear. The blessings then coming to the world 
—peace, righteous government, helpful influences, 
the restraint of evil, the knowledge of the Lord and 
understanding of his gracious arrangements and purposes 
—these will all be most convincing proofs to 
mankind of God's sympathy and mercy in Christ. 
The Adversary who now deceives mankind will then 
be bound, that he should not deceive the nations any 
more until the thousand years be finished, and the 
Word of God, which is in general now a sealed book 
to the world, will then be opened, and as a result the 
knowledge of the Lord shall fill the whole earth as the 
waters cover the great deep. 

Nevertheless, we are not to understand that this 
triumph of God's mercy and goodness then displayed 
will in any wise imply a change of his character or of 
his attitude towards sin. God never changes; "He 
is the same yesterday, today and forever." (Heb. 13:8.) 
When we come to understand the matter thoroughly, 
this unchangeableness on God's part is a 
guarantee that the blessings to be bestowed under his 
arrangements will be everlasting, unending blessings. 

The goodness and severity of God will be displayed 
side by side throughout the Millennial age to 
every creature. All must learn the lesson that God 
is kind, generous and full of blessing to all those who 
are in harmony with him and his principles of righteousness, 
but that he is and always will be like a consuming 
fire to all who are not in accord with 
righteousness. 

REDEMPTION ONLY THE FIRST STEP TOWARD 
SALVATION. 

The redemption of the world by the sacrifice of 
our Lord merely entitled humanity to a reawakening 



from the sleep of death, to be granted an opportunity 
of full reconciliation to the Father. Not a reconciliation 
in sin, however, but a reconciliation in righteousness. 
It is manifest that no change takes place in 
the character of any during the sleep of death: the 
awakening must be to the same conditions of heart 
and mind that went down into death. The awakened 
ones will, therefore, find themselves at first in the 
same attitude of rebellion against God and the principles 
of righteousness that they were in when they 
went into death. But there will be this difference- 
that when awakened under the Kingdom conditions 
they will find their surroundings totally different from 
those of the present life: themselves the same, all 
things surrounding them will be changed. The powers 
of evil to tempt their fallen tendencies will be 
absent; temptations to selfishness, covetousness, etc., 
seen in the dominion of the prince of this world, shall 
find no part in the dominion of the prince of light, in 
the world to come— in the new dispensation. Indeed 
the awakened ones will find love and righteousness 
and kindness the laws in general force throughout 
the world. 

And if their fallen tendencies shall still grasp 
after the selfish things as before, they will steadily 
learn the lesson that under the changed arrangements 
selfishness will not be advantageous to them 
but disadvantageous, bringing to them shame and 
contempt. Gradually they will learn the rules of the 
Kingdom, the laws of righteousness based upon justice 
and love. Gradually they may come into accord 
with these if they learn the lessons of experience during 
that golden age under the great Teacher, the 
Christ, Head and body, and under the immediate supervision 
of the earthly ones appointed to be their instructors 
and helpers in the good way and their correctors 
in respect to their fall. Instead of the rule 
which now prevails in the Church, namely, that "whosoever 
will live godly will suffer persecution," etc., 
they will find, instead, that whoever will live godly 
shall prosper and have increasing evidences of divine 
favor. In that day the ungodly shall suffer "stripes," 
"corrections in righteousness," "judgments," a 
prompt and just recompense of reward for every good 
and every evil deed. 

R3322 : page 54 

THE FATHER HATH COMMITTED ALL JUDGMENT TO 
THE SON. 

The world then will be entirely in the hands of 
Christ, in whom the Father has centered all his mercy 
and all his provisions of grace. Only those who will 
then come into accord with the Son, the glorified 
Christ, and continue in accord with the laws of the 



Millennial Kingdom— and none others— will be prepared 

by the close of the Millennial age to be delivered 

over directly to the Heavenly Father and the operations 

of his absolute law of justice without mercy. 

This is the period spoken of by the Apostle in I Cor. 15:24-28, 

when Immanuel shall have put down all 

sin, all unrighteousness, all insubordination to God; 

when he shall have raised up as many of the redeemed 

human family as would hear his voice, as would obey 

him— raised them up, up, up, to the very top notch of 

human perfection— to all that was lost in Adam, with, 

additionally, the large stores of knowledge gained 

through the fall, the redemption and the uplifting 

processes. 

Nor need we fear the fact that the world will then 
be turned over to the Father's judgment and law of 
justice without mercy, because having reached perfection 

R3322 : page 55 

they will need no mercy. God's laws are not 
impossible to the perfect, but only to the imperfect, 
and by that time all the imperfections of all the willing 
and obedient will have been removed— all the blights 
and marks of sin in mind and in body will have been 
"blotted out. "-Acts 3:19. 

The angels who kept their first estate in obedience 
and perfection needed not an exercise of clemency 
toward them, needed no mercy, because they were not 
transgressors of the divine law. The law of the Lord 
is just and perfect and good, and every way desirable 
to and for those who are perfect. The difficulty of 
mankind under that perfect law, and their need for a 
Mediator and for clemency, all rest on the fact that as 
an entire race we are sold under sin through disobedience, 
and that we are all imperfect and prone to sin 
because of imperfection. 

Thus seen God's law and exhortation to mankind 
in due time will be, "He that doeth righteousness is 
righteous; he who committeth sin is of the devil," the 
Adversary, and opposed to the divine being by being 
opposed to the divine regulations and arrangements of 
righteousness. God's attitude toward all wilful sinners 
during the Millennial age and at its close will be 
in full accord with the same severity which has always 
marked his attitude toward sin— a destructive severity 
—not a torturing severity, delighting in the anguish 
of the victim, but a just severity which has decreed, 
and will never alter the decree, that only those who 
love righteousness and hate iniquity shall have everlasting 
life on any plane. 

THE OPERATION OF GOD'S GOODNESS AND SEVERITY 
TOWARD THE CHURCH DURING THIS GOSPEL AGE. 

Having traced the operation of God's plan toward 



the world, as he instructs us it will be carried out 
during the Millennial age, we now return to the still 
more important matter respecting the operation of 
God's goodness and severity toward ourselves— toward 
the Church during the present time. Why the Lord 
should make a difference between his dealings with 
the Church in this Gospel age and the world during 
the Millennial age can only be appreciated by those 
who accept the Scriptural declaration that during 
the present time God is making special selection of a 
special class, possessed of special characteristics and 
for a special service both now and hereafter. It is because 
of all these special features that the Church has 
a different experience from that which the world will 
have by and by. 

All will agree that the reasonable, fair test that 
could justly be applied to mankind is the one which 
will be applied during the Millennial age to all the 
human family— a test under fair conditions, as favorable 
to righteousness as to sin, and more so, a test as 
to loyalty to principles of righteousness. But in 
the present time God makes a test which might be 
considered a severer one than would be fair, and hence 
this testing is not a general or world-wide test, but is 
confined to a limited number, who are assured in the 
Scriptures that in being granted this extra severe testing 
God is showing them a great favor. The favor 
belongs mainly to the future, and hence, as the Lord 
and the apostles everywhere pointed out, the inspiring 
incentive presented to this favored and specially called 
class is a hope, a future hope of glory, honor and immortality, 
joint-heirship with our Lord in the Kingdom 
privileges and blessings of the Millennial age and subsequently 
to all eternity. 

"THINK IT NOT STRANGE CONCERNING THE FIERY 
TRIALS WHICH SHALL TRY YOU." 

To this class are given fiery trials, temptations, 
etc., more than justice, equity, would call for. It is 
required of this class in its call that they not only love 
righteousness and hate iniquity, but that they shall 
do so at the cost of the sacrifice not only of the pleasures 
of sin but also at the cost of many reasonable 
pleasures, comforts, joys, etc., which are not of themselves 
unrighteous. This class are called to be sacrificers, 
and are distinctly told that if they would come 
up to the requirements of their call they must be prepared 
not only to resist sin and weaknesses of their 
own flesh and temptations from others, but additionally 
to suffer for their well-doing, to suffer for godliness, 
for righteousness— to be evil-spoken of falsely for 
the Lord's cause' sake. They are even informed that 
unless they suffer chastisements, trials, persecutions, 
oppositions of some kind in the present time, they lack 
the evidences of adoption into God's family as new 



creatures: "For what son is he whom the Father chasteneth 

not? If ye be without chastisement then 

are ye bastards and not sons"— not new creatures. 

Heb. 12:8. 

It is with this class that our text especially deals; 
for while the whole world is blind to the precious 
things of the Word of God, nevertheless, when the new 
dispensation shall have been fully ushered in and the 
Sun of righteousness shall have shed forth his beams 
and scattered all the night of darkness, evidently the 
Lord's Word, which is now our lamp, will not be the 
only instructor and guide of the world— having been 
supplanted by the full light. That which is perfect 
having come, that which is in part will be esteemed 
only as a precious friend, whose testimony will be in 
full accord with all the gracious manifestations of 
divine love, wisdom and power then resulting. 

The Apostle is addressing the Church when he 
speaks of the goodness and severity of God, and it is 
highly important that we apply his words correctly. 
The Church has perceived the severity of divine justice, 
and has also been granted the opening of the eyes 

R3322 : page 56 

of understanding to discern the Goodness of God in 
the provision of the Savior and the blessings which 
flow to us through him. The Church has tasted of 
the good Word of God and been made partaker of his 
holy Spirit, has come to some knowledge of the powers 
of the age to come and the blessings then to be actually 
conferred. Now she rejoices in all these things 
by faith— faith in God, faith in Christ, faith in the 
grand outcome as delineated in the Scriptures. The 
words of our text are specially applicable to this very 
class in this very time, as we have just seen. They 
will also be applicable to the world in its trial-time in 
the coming age. 

Now, the Lord speaks to the New Creation, saying, 
"Know ye not that the unrighteous shall not 
inherit the Kingdom of God? Be not deceived." At 
first we are inclined to stand amazed and say, God has 
made no provision for our attaining actual perfection, 
all the provisions for such restitution belonging to the 
next age! How then can he require righteousness of 
us, who still have the blemished bodies, imperfect 
judgments, etc., resulting from the fall? After telling 
us that there is none righteous, no, not one, 
how shall we understand the declaration that the unrighteous 
shall not inherit the Kingdom of God— not 
be joint-heirs with Christ in the Kingdom— not inherit 
the glorious things which we have hoped for by 
the Lord's grace? The answer is that God has made 
special provision for the Church of this Gospel age. 
Instead of making us perfect in the flesh, and then 
requiring absolute perfection in word, deed and 



thought, as will be required of the world at the close 

of the next age, the Lord deals with us in an imputed 

manner. To those who exercise the requisite faith 

he imputes righteousness, which offsets the unrighteousness 

or natural blemishes of their flesh. But only 

to those who exercise the faith is there such an imputation 

of Christ's righteousness; those who cannot 

exercise the faith are still in their sins, aliens from 

God until the coming of the new dispensation, when 

the blotting out of sins will begin in an actual way. 

But to those who do believe and to whom the righteousness 

of Christ is imputed because of faith, there 

is still a testing of the heart. 

It would be useless for the Lord to offer the prize 
of joint-heirship in the Kingdom to anyone perfect in 
the flesh when there are none such— our Lord Jesus 
being the only one, and he because he was not of the 
Adamic stock. God's provision, therefore, is that the 
justified by faith shall be counted perfect, counted 
righteous so long as their hearts, their wills, their 
best endeavors, are for righteousness. How simple 
and yet how sublime this arrangement, how it adapts 
itself to all the circumstances and conditions of the 
Lord's people! It is respecting this justification by 
faith, this "righteousness of God by faith," that the 
Apostle, says, "Being justified by faith, we have 
peace with God through our Lord Jesus Christ"— 
being justified freely from all things.— Rom. 5:1. 

SEE THAT YE RECEIVE NOT THE GRACE OF GOD IN 
VAIN. 

There is danger, however, here: some are disposed 
to take advantage of God's grace and kindness 
and mercy, and while willingly, knowingly indulging 

R3323 : page 56 

in sin, to hope for justification in sin instead of from 
sin. The Apostle is bringing this matter to our attention, 
and implies that there is great need of care. 
He says, "Be not deceived." God knoweth the 
heart: we might deceive ourselves but we cannot deceive 
the Lord. It behooves us, therefore, to be on 
our guard respecting righteousness, justice, to see 
that the sentiments of our hearts are continually in 
opposition to unrighteousness, to sin, to all in-equity. 
The Apostle proceeds to point out that faith in Christ, 
and the acceptance of the divine law as our regulation 
principle in life, mean more than faith in the Lord 
Jesus. They mean our very best endeavors to speak 
and act and think in accord with the divine will- 
namely, in accord with righteousness. 

THE "MARK" MUST BE ATTAINED, ELSE THE PRIZE 
WILL NOT BE OURS. 



There is no standstill for the New Creature. He 
must go on and reach a certain standard of perfection, 
else he cannot be counted in as one of the Kingdom 
class. The Apostle does indeed speak of the New 
Creatures as at first being babes in Christ, but the 
Kingdom will not be made up of babes in Christ, but 
of overcomers, and the overcoming is not, as we know, 
a matter of age or physical stature, but a matter of 
spiritual development, of growth in grace and knowledge 
and love. We are to grow in love, and love is 
the principle thing, but before we can make much 
development in the cultivation of love, we must learn 
to be just, right, righteous. It is a proper presentation 
of the matter that is given in the proverb, that a 
man should be just before he is generous. 

It behooves the Lord's people, therefore, the New 
Creation, that they study this subject of justice continually, 
and daily put into practice the lessons inculcated 
in the divine Word. All of the saints must be the 
foes of sin. Wherever sin is they must wage a warfare 
against it, and see to it that in their hearts at 
least they are free from sin, that in their hearts they 
do not countenance sin but oppose it, that sin finds 
no harboring place or sympathizing weakness in their 
hearts. This will make them radical as respects the 
words of their mouths, the conduct of life and the 
meditations of their hearts, that all of these shall be 
in absolute accord with the divine Word and its spirit 

R3323 : page 57 

of righteousness, holiness, truth, etc. Such as get 
this proper foundation of character before they begin 
to build love will find that they are making progress 
properly. All love that is founded upon injustice or 
wrong ideas of righteousness is delusive, is not the 
love which the Lord will require as the test of 
discipleship. 

"BE NOT DECEIVED." 

The Apostle's words in our text, "Be not deceived," 
imply just what we see all about us: that 
many profess to be the Lord's people, profess to love 
him, profess the golden rule as their guide in life, and 
yet are blind to justice (righteousness) in many of the 
affairs of life. They exercise too much mercy in dealing 
with their own shortcomings and too little when 
examining the faults and weaknesses of others. 

The Apostle proceeds to specify some of the unrighteous, 
unjust things to which the Lord's people 
should find themselves opposed. As these are examined 
individually they are all found to contain a weakness 
in favor of self at the expense of others; they all imply 
an injustice to others for the pleasure or advantage 



of self. Some of these unrighteous things specified 
are very gross, and one might suppose would be 
recognized as unrighteous even by worldly people; 
yet the Apostle intimates that some who profess to be 
the Lord's people have such lax ideas of justice that 
they do not perceive how abominable these unrighteous 
matters are— fornication, adultery, thievery, drunkenness, 
etc. Those who find themselves in any degree 
of sympathy with these evil qualities, these unrighteous 
acts, are deceived if they think themselves to be 
the Lord's people. "God is not mocked: he that 
doeth righteousness is righteous."— Gal. 6:7. 

In other words, it is in vain that we profess to be 
the Lord's people, profess to be the servants of righteousness 
and truth, and love these principles, if our 
conduct clearly demonstrates that we love unrighteousness. 
For such persons to profess to be the 
Lord's people is to mock God by assuming that he 
cannot read the heart, and that what may be hidden 
to some extent from earthly beings is equally hidden 
from the Almighty with whom we have to do. He 
that doeth righteousness is not necessarily he only 
who is perfect, but rather he that doeth righteousness 
to the extent of his best ability and who is trusting in 
the Redeemer's merit to compensate unintentional 
shortcomings— he is righteous in God's sight— he is 
approved. 

VARYING MANIFESTATIONS OF SELFISHNESS, SIN. 

The Apostle proceeds to specify other unrighteous 
conduct, not so gross as the sins already enumerated, 
but nevertheless wholly inconsistent with membership 
in the Kingdom class. These are specified as covetousness, 
revilings, extortioners, etc. Those who have 
made any advancement in the Christian way, we may 
surely trust, are far from having sympathy with the 
gross evils; and they may therefore have special need 
to examine themselves carefully in regard to these 
other more subtle evil qualities, deleterious to their 
interests as prospective heirs with Christ in the Kingdom. 
What is covetousness but selfishness— the desire 
to have, possess, enjoy something at the expense of 
another? What is idolatry but selfishness, the idolizing 
of money or fame or influence or child or self or 
some other creature, exalted to and receiving the honor 
due to the Almighty? 

What is reviling but an exhibition of selfishness 
again, which takes this method of doing injury to the 
feelings or to the reputation of another?— evil speaking 
is classed by the Apostle in another place as one 
of the works of the flesh and of the devil. It is wholly 
out of harmony with justice and the golden rule,— for 
who would like to be reviled or evil spoken of?— it is 
therefore injustice, unrighteousness, and cannot be the 
disposition of those who are in any degree begotten of 



the Spirit and growing in grace. What is extortion 
but selfishness, injustice, unrighteous dealings with 
others?— accepting from them, either because of ignorance 
or stress of circumstances, such money or valuables 
as are not fully, justly, righteously due. 

SOWING AND REAPING-TO THE FLESH OR TO THE 
SPIRIT. 

The Apostle in another epistle repeats these words, 
"Be not deceived;" and adds, "Whatsoever a man 
soweth that shall he also reap; for he that soweth to the 
flesh shall of the flesh reap corruption, but he that 
soweth to the Spirit shall of the Spirit reap life everlasting." 
(Gal. 6:7,8.) He is not addressing the world; 
it is the New Creation that is either sowing to the 
flesh or sowing to the Spirit, and that either will reap 
of the flesh or reap of the Spirit. We sow to the flesh 
every time we allow the fleshly, selfish, unjust, unrighteous 
desires of the flesh to have sway in our hearts 
and lives, and each sowing makes easier the additional 
sowing and makes more sure the end of that way 
which is death— Second Death. On the contrary each 
sowing to the Spirit, each resistance to the desires of 
the flesh toward selfishness, etc., and each exercise of 
the new mind, of the new will, in spiritual directions 
toward the things that are pure, the things that are 
noble, the things that are good, the things that are 
true, is a sowing to the Spirit, which will bring forth 
additional fruits of the Spirit, graces of the Spirit, and 
which, persevered in, will ultimately bring us in accord 
with the Lord's gracious promises and arrangements- 
everlasting life and the Kingdom. 

"LET NO MAN DECEIVE YOU." 

The Apostle John has a word to say also about 

R3323 : page 58 

the danger of being deceived after we have become 
New Creatures in Christ. His words are, "Let no man 
deceive you; he that doeth righteousness is righteous, 
even as he is righteous. He that committeth sin is of 
the devil; for the devil sinneth from the beginning. 
For this purpose the son of God was manifested, that 
he might destroy the works of the devil." (I John 3:7,8.) 
The Apostle is not speaking here of some one 
whose heart is loyal to the Lord and who is momentarily 
overtaken in a fault, for he declares respecting 
such that there is forgiveness for them because of the 
weakness or the ignorance which permitted them to 
be ensnared. He is, however, speaking most distinctly 
of a willingness of the heart to sin, to do unrighteousness. 
He indicates a great truth when he suggests 
that there are but two sides to the question,— that 



Satan is on the side of sin, and that all who love and 
with willingness practise sin are on his side. On the 
other side of the question are the Father and the Lord 
Jesus Christ, who gave himself as the Redeemer of 
mankind, that he might destroy Satan and all who 
sympathize with Satan in their opposition to God and 
his righteous arrangements. 

"LET US EXAMINE OURSELVES." 

The Apostle continues, "Whosoever is born [begotten] 
of God doth not commit sin; for his seed 
remaineth in him: and he cannot sin because he is born 
[begotten] of God." The thought is that those begotten 
of the good seed of Truth, begotten of the holy 
Spirit, cannot, so long as that seed of Truth and the 
Spirit of the Lord is alive in them, wilfully, deliberately 
turn to sin to practise it. If such should turn 
to sin wilfully and deliberately it would be conclusive 
evidence that the seed, the holy Spirit with which they 
had been begotten as children of God, had perished. 

The Apostle adds, "In this the children of God 
are manifest from the children of the devil: whosoever 
doeth not righteousness is not of God— neither he 
who loveth not his brother." Here again the question 
is sharply drawn as between the children of God and 

R3324 : page 58 

the children of the devil. All who are on the side of 
righteousness are on God's side. These will love justice 
and oppose selfishness, and sin which is related to 
selfishness, in every sense and in every degree compatible 
with their opportunities and commission. But 
this is not enough: they must do more than love to 
do what is right; they must have such a love for the 
truth as would even lead them to sacrifice their rights 
on behalf of the Lord or any of his "brethren." If we 
have tasted that the Lord is gracious, is good, we have 
tasted also that he is just, and in that sense of the 
word, severe. Let us then, while rejoicing in divine 
favor, see to it that we walk circumspectly, and that 
our walk in life is not after the flesh, which leads more 
or less directly to death, but after the Spirit, after 
righteousness, after Truth, all of which lead, under the 
Lord's blessing and guidance, to everlasting life and the 
Kingdom honors and glories with our dear Redeemer. 



R3324 : page 58 

"HE MAKETH THE STORM A CALM."-PSA. 107:29. 
-MARK 4:35-41. -MARCH 6.- 



OUR Lord's ministry is supposed to have covered 

two years at the time of the miracle of the calming 

of the sea, recorded in this lesson. After 

the selection of the twelve apostles and the Sermon on 

the Mount, etc., our Lord returned to Capernaum and 

soon after began his second tour of Galilee. It was during 

this interim that he awakened from the sleep of 

death the son of the widow of Nain— the first recorded 

instance of its kind in our Lord's ministry. Then came 

teachings by parables, and in the afternoon of a busy 

day of teaching— after three o'clock, while still sitting 

in one of the boats as on a former occasion, having concluded 

his teachings— he directed that the boat be taken 

to the opposite side of the lake. The multitude, after 

being informed that the discourses were ended, were dismissed, 

and without delay the boat was started. From 

the various accounts we judge that all the twelve disciples 

were with him, and apparently other "men"— seamen, 

as Matthew's account implies. 

Travelers tell us that the Sea of Galilee is quite 
subject to wind storms. Dr. Thompson, describing his 
own experiences on this little sea, says: "The sun had 
scarcely set when the wind began to rush down toward 
the lake; and it continued all night long with constantly 
increasing violence, so that when we reached the 
shore the next morning the face of the lake was like a 
huge cauldron. The wind hurled down every wady from 
the north-east and east with such fury that no efforts 
of rowers could have brought a boat to shore at any 
point along that coast. To understand the causes of 
these sudden tempests, we must remember that the lake 
lies low, 600 feet lower than the ocean; that the vast 
and naked plateaus of the Jaulan rise to a great height, 
spreading backward to the wilds of Hauran, and upward 
to snowy Mt. Hermon; that the watercourses have cut 
out profound ravines and wide gorges, converging to the 
head of the lake, and that these act like gigantic funnels 
to draw down the cold winds from the mountains." 

"WE ARE NOT IGNORANT OF HIS DEVICES." 

Our own opinion is that "the prince of the power 
of the air" (Eph. 2:2) had something to do in the development 
of this storm— that it had more than natural 
causes, although the latter might have assisted or even 
been sufficient. We remember that the Adversary had 

R3324 : page 59 

already endeavored to induce our Lord to leap from the 
pinnacle of the Temple, but had not succeeded. Apparently 
now he would drown him in the sea. But the 
Lord, who declares himself able to make the wrath of 
man to praise him, caused the wrath of Satan or the 
wildness of the elements, whichever it was that induced 
the storm, to praise him— to show forth his mighty 



power. 

During the storm our Lord lay asleep in the hinder 
part of the vessel on a cushion. Evidently he was 
thoroughly exhausted from the labors of his journey 
and ministry. Meantime, as the storm increased, the 
boat with its precious load began to fill with water 
more rapidly than it could be bailed out. No wonder 
the disciples, fishermen and experts at sea though they 
were, were alarmed. We cannot avoid the thought that 
in some manner the Lord's providence had something 
to do with his prolonged sleep under such circumstances, 
and that the intention was to put the faith of the disciples 
to the test. They had seen his mighty works, his 
healing of the sick, and his awakening of the dead, and 
they had heard his teachings and had taken a miraculous 
catch of fish under his direction where they had failed 
before, and by this time they should have had considerable 
faith in his power everyway. The fact that they 
approached him at all indicates that they did have faith 
to some degree, though not implicit faith. 

The slightly different accounts of the event given 
by Matthew, Mark and Luke, some one has paraphrased 
as follows,— Matthew: "Save, Lord, we perish;" Mark: 
"Teacher, carest thou not that we perish?" Luke: "Master, 
Master, we perish." All three accounts are correct 
—one disciple cried out in one way and others in different 
words. Some one puts it thus: "Little Faith 
prayed, 'Save us;' Much Fear cried, 'We perish;' Distrust 
urged, 'Carest thou not?' More Faith said, Lord;' 
Discipleship cried out, 'Teacher;' Faint Hope cried, 
'Master, thou with authority.'" Jesus arose (awoke) 
and commanded peace and quiet, which immediately 
followed. The record mentions the cessation of the 
wind and additionally the calming of the sea. Some 
one might claim that a storm which came up suddenly 
might happen to stop with equal suddenness, but this 
would not account for the calming of the sea. Waters 
thus lashed to a fury could not be calmed thus 
quickly except by superhuman power. This, indeed, 
we may assume to be a prominent feature of the 
miracle. 

It is rather peculiar that the Greek word used for 
"Be still" in this text is the same word used by our 
Lord to the demon. (Mark 1:25.) This rather corroborates 
the suggestion foregoing respecting the storm being 
the work of the Adversary. In any event this miracle 
shows clearly that storms should not be accredited, 
as they frequently are, to divine malevolence; for if 
the Father had caused the storm the Son would not 
have interfered with it. We do not wish to intimate, 
either, that every storm is of Satanic origin; we do not 
dispute that many of them arise from natural causes; 
but we do hold that some of them are supernatural and 
of the Adversary, and as a Scriptural evidence along 
this line we cite the whirlwind raised up by Satan, 
which smote the house in which Job's children were 



feasting.-Job 1:13,19. 

That our Lord intended this experience to be a lesson 
to the disciples, along the line of faith in him, seems 
to be borne out by verses 40,41. He said unto them, 
"Why are ye fearful? Have ye not yet faith?" Has 
your faith not yet developed to such a degree that you 
can trust me, and realize the Father's favor and power 
ever with me for my protection, and that while with me 
no harm could possibly overtake you— nothing that is 
not wholly under my control? No wonder the apostles 
gained additional reverence for the Lord as a result of 
this miracle. Apparently it came just in the right time 
and order to be their appropriate lesson. In fact we 
may conclude that every item of their experience and 
every item of our Lord's conduct, teaching and mighty 
works was especially for the instruction of these twelve, 
who were to be his witnesses to us and to the nations 
of the earth respecting that ministry. 

SPIRITUAL LESSONS FOR THE SPIRITUAL HOUSEHOLD. 

There is a precious lesson in this miracle for all of 
the Lord's followers outside of the apostleship, too. We 
also have need of faith and need of tests to our faith. 
Our daily experiences since we became the Lord's followers 
have been guided and guarded apparently by the 
power unseen, to the intent that as pupils in the school 
of Christ, we may all be taught of him and develop 
more and more of the graces of the Spirit, and particularly 
more and more faith. How important this item 
of faith is we probably cannot fully appreciate now. 
It seems to be one thing that the Lord specially seeks 
for in those now called to be followers. "Without faith 
it is impossible to please God." "With faith all things 
are possible." Proper faith is understood, of course, 
not credulity, not reliance upon the words of men, but 
implicit faith in the Lord for all that he has promised. 
"According to thy faith be it unto thee." 

So important a grace must of necessity require 
many lessons for its proper development, and it does 
not surprise us that in our individual experiences as 
Christians we find those which correspond to the experiences 
of the apostles noted in this lesson. How 
suddenly the Adversary may at times bring against us 
a whirlwind of temptation or of opposition or of persecution. 
How at such times our sky seems overcast, dark, 
foreboding; how the waves of adversity or affliction 
have almost overwhelmed us, and how the Lord seemed 

R3325 : page 60 

asleep and heedless of our distress and indifferent to our 
necessities! Such experiences are tests of our faith, as 
this one was a test to the faith of the apostles. If our 
faith be strong enough under such circumstances, we 
would keep on with our proper endeavors to adjust 



matters corresponding to the bailing of the boat and 

the working of the oars; but meantime, with an implicit 

faith in the Lord's promise that "all things shall 

work together for our good," we would be able to sing 

as did the Apostle Paul and Silas after being beaten 

while in the stocks for their faithfulness to the Lord. 

They rejoiced that they were accounted worthy to suffer 

for the name of Christ. So according to our faith 

will we be able to rejoice even in tribulation. We cannot 

enjoy the sufferings; we can enjoy the thought 

which faith attaches to them, namely, that these are 

but light afflictions working out for us a far more exceeding 

and eternal weight of glory. 

Each experience of this kind should be helpful to 
us. If at first we were fearful and cried aloud, by and 
by we received the succor, with perhaps the reprimand, 
"O, thou of little faith;" but as lesson after lesson has 
come to us, the Master will expect— and we should expect 
of ourselves— greater faith, greater trust, greater 
peace, greater joy in the Lord, greater confidence in his 
presence with us and his care over us, and in his power 
to deliver us from the Adversary and from every 
evil thing, and to bring us eventually in safety to the 
port we seek— the heavenly Kingdom. 

THE CHURCH'S EXPERIENCES PREFIGURED. 

Some one has suggested, apparently on reasonable 
grounds, that this experience of Jesus and the Apostles 
in the boat during the night pictured the experiences of 
the Church during this Gospel age. The Lord assured 
his people, saying, "Lo, I am with you alway, even to 
the end of the age," and "I will come again and receive 
you unto myself, that where I am there ye may be 
also," and "nothing shall by any means hurt you," etc. 
The Lord's faithful people all through this age have realized 
with more or less distinctness the certainty of these 
precious promises; they have felt that the Lord indeed is 
with his Church; yet it has seemed at times as though he 
were asleep, inattentive to the prayers of his faithful, and 
inattentive to their cries and groans. For eighteen centuries 
his dear ones have been tempest-tossed by the Adversary, 
persecuted, afflicted, buffeted— all through this 
dark night, in which the only light available has been 
"thy Word a light to my feet." The experiences of 
others in the past are our experiences in the present. 

We of today represent the Lord's cause in the 
midst of the raging elements of human passions, oppositions, 
etc.; and as the Apostle declares of his day, so 
it is still true that "we wrestle not with flesh and blood, 
but with principalities and powers and spiritual wickedness 
in high positions." The storms may seem to 
come from the world, but really beyond the world is 
the Adversary. "We are not ignorant of his devices;" 
our hearts would be at times dismayed except as faith 
is able to see the Lord with us in the ship, and able to 



grasp the thought of his mighty power in his own time 
and way to speak peace to the world. 

Soon the time will come for him who careth for us 
to exert his great power on our behalf, to deliver his 
people, to say to the raging elements, Peace, be still. 
Then will follow the great calm, the great rest from the 
evil one for a thousand years, for he shall be bound that 
he shall deceive the nations no more. Then will come 
the eternal rest of the heart to all who are now in the 
boat with the Lord, and then will come the opportunity 
for all these to be co-laborers with him in the great 
and glorious work of blessing the world. It must not 
surprise us, however, if a dark hour is before us— if the 
time will come when the stormy winds will be so fierce 
that many will cry out in fear and trembling. Let us 
learn well the precious experiences of the present time, 
so that then our faith shall not fail us— so that in the 
darkest hour we shall be able to sing and to rejoice in 
him who loved us and bought us with his own precious 
blood, and to sing the song of Moses and the Lamb. 



R3325 : page 60 

BARGAINS THAT WERE COSTLY. 

-MATT. 14:1-12.-MARCH 13.- 

Golden Text:— "Be thou faithful unto death, and 
I will give thee a crown of life."— Rev. 2: 10. 

JOHN THE BAPTIST had been imprisoned about 
a year when he was beheaded, as narrated in this 
lesson. He had preached only about a year, but 
in that time evidently made a profound impression 
throughout Palestine— an impression, however, which 
signally failed to accomplish the purpose intended by 
him— failed to prepare the hearts of the people, through 
repentance and contrition for sin, to receive Jesus as 
the Messiah. Josephus supposes that he was confined 
in a dungeon connected with the castle Macherus. 
Geike gives us his opinion of the kind of dungeon in 
these words: "Perhaps a cage of iron bars like one I 
saw at Gaza, to which friends of the prisoner could 
come with food or for gossip, but with no conveniences 
or provision of any kind for living or sleeping, and only 
a bare stone floor." This would account for John's 
ability to send his disciples to Jesus, inquiring, "Art 
thou he that should come, or look we for another?" 
We cannot wonder that his experiences were in some 
respects disappointing to him, though from our standpoint 

R3325 : page 61 

we can see that he did the work which the Father 



intended. This may serve as a lesson to us. We, 

too, should do our parts faithfully as unto the Lord and 

leave all the results in his hands, assured of his wisdom 

and power to overrule all things to the final accomplishment 

of his gracious purposes. The words of the 

poet are appropriate to John and to many other faithful 

souls,— 

"We live in deeds, not years; in thoughts, not breaths; 
In feelings, not in figures on a dial. He most lives 
Who thinks most, feels the noblest, acts the best. 
That life is long which answers life's great end." 

As there is a striking resemblance between John 
and Elijah, his type, so there is a strong resemblance 
between the experiences of John and those of the faithful 
Church,— the great antitype of Elijah. While Elijah 
fled from Ahab, his real persecutor was Jezebel, who 
sought his life. So John the Baptist was apprehended 
and finally executed by Herod, but his real opponent 
was Herod's wife, Herodias. Similarly the greater Elijah, 
the faithful body of Christ in the flesh, has suffered 
and will yet suffer further at the hands of civil power, 
yet the real persecutor behind the civil power has been 
the antitypical Jezebel mentioned in Revelation 2:20— 
the antitypical Herodias— the nominal Church adulterously 
allied to the kingdoms of this world while nominally 
espoused to Christ. All Bible students will recognize 
the various pictures of this apostasy in Revelation, 
whether they understand the resemblance distinctly or 
not. 

HEROD, HERODIAS AND SALOME. 

Herod the Great left several sons ambitious to be 
his successor. Herodias married the eldest of these, 
anticipating that thus she would become the queen. 
The Roman Emperor decided otherwise and chose Antipas, 
the Herod of this lesson. Thereupon Herodias, 
still strong-willed and ambitious to be a queen, brought 
her captivating influences to bear upon Antipas, induced 
him to repudiate his former wife, and to accept 
her as queen instead. John the Baptist, preaching 
against sin, had evidently declared in public against 
this unlawful union— declared that Herod and his wife 
were living in adultery— the king separated from his 
own wife and improperly associated with his brother 
Philip's wife. We cannot wonder that such haughty, 
ambitious, and lawlessly disposed persons as Herod and 
Herodias must have been should feel resentment against 
any preacher who would dare to call in question the 
conduct of the regal pair. The result was the imprisonment 
of John. Evidently this course was instigated 
by Herodias, who had everything to fear from John's 
preaching. If Herod should feel conscience-stricken, 
or if the people should become aroused to such an extent 



as to influence his course aside from his conscience, 

the results would surely be disastrous to her 

interests. She would not only lose the high social position 

she had sacrificed her life to attain, but she would 

lose everything and become a homeless wretch. Evidently 

she strove to incite her husband to put John to 

death at the time he was imprisoned; but her influence 

was offset by Herod's fear of the effect of such a 

course upon the people, who esteemed John to be a 

prophet. 

The queen, still plotting, determined to take advantage 
of the king's birthday festival. She knew the 
king's disposition, and that on such occasions it was 
customary to have great hilarity and to use intoxicating 
beverages with more than usual freedom. It was the 
custom of the time for such gatherings of men to be 
entertained by dancing girls in more or less transparent 
garments, executing voluptuous dances; and 
the queen arranged that the king's party, as a special 
honor, on this occasion should be served by her daughter 
by her former marriage, Salome. Her scheme was 
extremely successful: the king and his courtiers were 
charmed, and instead of the paltry gift usual on such 
occasions, the king, under the heat of wine and his 
admiration for his adopted daughter, told her to ask 
whatever she desired— even to the half of his kingdom 
(Mark says). 

THE KING'S BAD BARGAIN. 

Only a judgment unbalanced by excitement and 
alcohol could have made so rash a promise, and bound 
it with several oaths, as the original indicates. Here 
is one of the advantages possessed by the Lord's people. 
They are not only protected from such excesses 
and the distortions of natural judgment caused thereby, 
but additionally, as the Apostle intimates, they receive 
the "spirit of a sound mind." (2 Tim. 1:7.) The 
mind of Christ, the disposition of Christ, lifts the heart 
from such follies and places it upon more reasonable 
things. It gives us a truer estimation of values. Whereas 

R3326 : page 61 

the spirit of the world, the spirit of pride, the spirit 
of ambition no less than the spirit of envy, tends to 
pervert the judgment, to give false conceptions of value. 

Along this line we call to mind various bad bargains: 
amongst others that of Esau, who for a mess of 
pottage sold his birthright as the first-born of Isaac, the 
natural heir of the Abrahamic promise. We call to 
mind Judas' bad bargain, by which he received thirty 
pieces of silver, sold his Lord, and lost everything. 
Herod's was one of these bad or costly bargains. He 
lost his peace of mind as the lesson records— "The king 
was sorry." We may be sure that his mind was frequently 



disturbed with the thought of his injustice, and 

the further thought that quite probably his crime was 

against one of the Lord's special favorites— against a 

R3326 : page 62 

prophet. The popularity of Jesus did not evidently become 
so general until after John's death. Herod, hearing 
of the matter about that time, was perplexed, and 
wondered whether or not there might be some truth in 
the Grecian theories that the dead were not dead, but 
had power to communicate through other living persons, 
after the manner of spirits through mediums in the 
present day. His mind was troubled, yet he was not 
penitent. 

Similar conditions prevail today: people do those 
things which they recognize to be wrong, they violate 
their consciences, they feel sorry; yet this is not the 
godly sorrow, for, as the Apostle explains, a godly sorrow 
—a sorrow of the kind which God recognizes and 
appreciates— leads to repentance. Every other sorrow 
is apt to have an injurious effect merely, but a godly 
sorrow is profitable. It leads to repentance, to reformation, 
to reconciliation with God through his appointed 
provision in Jesus. Let us as the Lord's people 
seek to be filled with the Lord's spirit, and proportionately 
emptied of the worldly spirit, the spirit of intoxication 
and the spirit of self-will, and have the spirit of 
a new mind, of a sound mind. Yet if any find himself 
in sin through yielding to the desires of the flesh, let 
him remember that each step in the downward way is 
a step to be retraced if ever any good shall result, or is 
to be attained in the future. Let such make haste at 
any cost to seek the Lord, and to be purged, washed, 
cleansed, in the merit of the precious blood, and henceforth 
more than ever be on their guard against sin. 

DID JOHN ACT IMPRUDENTLY? 

It is not for us to sit in judgment upon the course 
of John the Baptist, to determine whether or not he 
exceeded his duty in his criticism of the king and queen. 
We are inclined, however, to think that he did exceed 
his duty. So far as we may be able to judge, there were 
many officials at the time against whom serious charges 
might have been brought by Jesus and the apostles, 
yet we have no evidence that any of these ever took 
the course which John took. Jesus was before Pilate, 
and, later on, was before this very Herod, yet we have 
no record that he ever said a word on the subject concerning 
which John felt free to speak; Paul was personally 
before Agrippa and Felix and others prominent in 
that time, some of whom, according to history, were 
disreputable men, yet he made no personal attack upon 
them, and his only appeal was to Agrippa, "I would 
that thou wert altogether as I am, except these bonds," 



and this was in reply to Agrippa's remark, "Almost 
thou persuadest me to be a Christian." 

In our understanding of the teachings of the Scriptures 
it is not the duty of the Lord's people to go 
through the world rebuking sin, but preaching the Gospel. 
It is the Gospel, which we preach by our words 
and by our lives, that is the "power of God unto salvation 
to every one that believeth." We emphasize this, 
because it is our observation that some of the Lord's 
people feel it their duty to copy John's course in such 
matters rather than to copy the Lord Jesus and the 
apostles, and we believe that herein they err. The 
Gospel is not sent to break men's hearts but to bind up 
the broken-hearted— to heal those whose hearts are 
already broken. Sin and its natural penalties are the 
sledgehammers which are breaking men's hearts. The 
great time of trouble which is approaching is God's 
method apparently for the breaking of the hearts of the 
whole world— to prepare them for the balm of Gilead 
and the general blessings of the Millennial age which 
shall follow it. He who uses the Gospel as a hammer 
has mistaken his commission, which for the whole Christ 
reads, "The Spirit of the Lord God is upon me, because 
he hath anointed me to preach good tidings to the 
meek, to bind up the broken-hearted," etc.— Isa. 61:1. 

A PARENT'S INFLUENCE, FOR GOOD OR EVIL. 

The power of Herodias over Herod is illustrated 
by her power over her daughter Salome. The king's 
generous offer must have carried weight in the mind of 
a young girl. Riches, splendors, apparel, palaces, apparently 
flitted before her mind; but as her previous 
course had been under her mother's direction, she now 
sought the mother's advice, "What shall I ask?" 
(Mark 6:24.) Here we have an illustration of parental 
influence. Evil woman as she was, Herodias evidently 
had retained the affection of her daughter and her absolute 
confidence and obedience. It was hers to direct 
the young mind into good or evil channels. To some 
extent this is true of every parent, particularly of every 
mother. How great, then, is the responsibility of fathers 
and mothers for the course of their children! The 
spirit of a sound mind in the Lord's people will certainly 
prompt them to use this mighty influence, which is 
theirs by natural relationship and opportunity, so as to 
guide those under their direction into right paths. 

Alas, how some, even Christian mothers, fail 
to seize such opportunities and to direct their children 
in the heavenly ways. They seem to have so 
much of the worldly spirit themselves that, even while 
desiring to sacrifice their own earthly interests for the 
cause of the Lord and to lay up treasure in heaven, 
they shrink from having their children participate, failing 
to realize that wisdom's ways are ways of pleasantness 
and that all other paths lead to present and future 



trouble. They fail to appreciate the Apostle's words, 
"Present your bodies living sacrifices, holy, acceptable 
to God, which is your reasonable service." Every other 
course is unreasonable, irrational, unwise. 

R3326 : page 63 

Some one has put these words into the mother's 
mouth in answer to the daughter's desires for the great 
things proffered her by the king: "Little fool, you know 
not what you ask: what would all these things be to 
you and me unqueened and outcast, as we may be any 
day if John the Baptist live?" The mother's thought 
evidently was that with the Prophet out of the way all 
other advantages were accessible to herself and her 
daughter. She bade her daughter ask for the head of 
the Prophet and that at once, here, now, on a charger 
(one of the large platters used at the feast). Haste was 
deemed necessary lest the king's ardor should cool and 
his better judgment take control— while the flush of 
excitement and liquor was upon him, and while his 
counselors were present who had heard the oath, and 
before whom any indecision in respect to a prisoner 
would stultify himself. The king yielded, yet Herodias 
was not saved from the fate she dreaded; for history 
records that within ten years her ambition prompted 
Herod, against his better judgment, to solicit at Rome 
an additional dignity. The request was refused, and 
Herod was deprived of his dominion and banished to 
Lyons in Gaul, where he died. 

POSSIBILITIES OF THE FUTURE TO US. 

We have already referred to the fact that John the 
Baptist was an antitype to Elijah, and to the fact that 
the Gospel Church, Head and body, the Christ in the 
flesh, is still the higher and grander antitype. For 
eighteen centuries or more this grander Elijah has been 
preaching righteousness in the world and calling for 
repentance, etc., announcing the coming of the Christ, 
the glorified Church, as the Kingdom of God to judge 
and to bless the world. As Elijah only found a few 
loyal to God in Israel, so Elijah the second found only 
a few ready to meet Jesus in the flesh, and similarly 
the great an ti typical Elijah (the Church in the flesh) 
has found only a few, a little flock, to heed and to 
properly prepare for the Kingdom. Nevertheless it is 
the work designed, and, as foretold by the Prophet Malachi, 
the failure to accomplish larger results means that 
the Kingdom will be introduced not peaceably but 
forcefully; that in order to the establishment of the 
King of Glory as the Prince of the earth it will be necessary 
to smite the nations with the rod of iron, to break 
them in pieces as a potter's vessel, that all the Gentiles 
may seek unto the Lord, and that the knowledge of the 
Lord may fill the whole earth, that his Kingdom may 



come, and his will be done on earth as in heaven. 

Another point here: The first Jezebel persecuted the 
first Elijah so that he fled into the wilderness, and even 
after his coming again and performing a great miracle 
and turning the hearts of some to the Lord, he was a 
second time obliged to flee from Jezebel, who sought his 
life. In the case of the second Elijah, John the Baptist, 
the experiences were somewhat similar, and the 
Herodias Jezebel succeeded eventually in accomplishing 
the destruction of the Prophet. In the case of the 
third Elijah (the Church in the flesh) the woman Jezebel 
is mentioned by name (Rev. 2:20); and her pernicious 
work, the flight of the Church into the wilderness 
(Rev. 12:6), and her return from the wilderness 
condition since Reformation times are all known. Now 
we are to anticipate a second attack upon the true 
Church (not upon the nominal system), and this may 
mean, as in the case of John the Baptist, a second and 
a seemingly complete victory of the Babylonish woman 
and her paramour, the world, over the faithful members 
of the body of Christ in the flesh. We shall certainly 
not be surprised if the matter so results; but 
this and all things must work together for good to those 

R3327 : page 63 

who love the Lord. We must all die to win our heavenly 
prizes beyond the veil. The Elijah class this side 
the veil must and will be vanquished, but the apparent 
defeat only hastens the Kingdom glories, powers and 
blessings promised. "Be thou faithful unto death and 
I will give thee a crown of life." 

GO TELL IT TO JESUS. 

The disciples of John knew where to go with the 
message— where to find sympathy and consolation in 
respect to their loss. There is a lesson for us in this. 
To whom shall we go with trials, difficulties, sorrows, 
troubles, disappointments? The Lord invites us to 
come to him with everything which is too heavy for 
ourselves, with every care. He cares for us and will 
grant the blessing to trusting souls. Doubtless those 
who went to Jesus became his disciples, and thus their 
trials in connection with their leader and teacher brought 
them into closer knowledge and fellowship with the 
great Teacher. And so it will be doubtless with those 
who are the friends of the Lord's people at the present 
time: the vengeance of the antitypical Jezebel upon the 
an ti typical Elijah will move their friends and associates 
to still greater love and interest, and will be the means 
of attracting more closely to the Lord the "Great 
Company." 

OUR GOLDEN TEXT. 



Those who prepared the lesson evidently did not 
see that John the Baptist belongs to a separate class of 
the saved from those addressed in the text. No promise 
was made to John of a crown of life. That promise 
belongs to us, the Gospel Church— called chosen, and 
faithful. John, however, will have a great blessing, for 
we mark again our Lord's words, "There hath not arisen 
a greater prophet than John the Baptist— and yet I say 
unto you that the least in the Kingdom is greater than 
he." 



page 65 

SEMI-MONTHLY 
VOL. XXV. MARCH 1, 1904. No. 5. 
CONTENTS. 



Views From the Watch Tower 67 

"Wars and Rumors of Wars" 67 

Ten Thousand in Israel Who Have 
not Bowed the Knee to Baal 69 

Justice Woodward on Republic's 
Peril 70 

A People's Palace 70 

Bibles Printed but Not Read 70 

"Do all in the name of the Lord Jesus" 71 

"Under His Wings" 74 

"Give Ye Them to Eat" 76 

Quarterly Review 79 

page 66 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-24 EVERSHOLT ST., LONDON, N.W. 
GERMAN BRANCH-MIRKER STR., 45, ELBERFELD. 

PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE, 5c (2-l/2d.) A COPY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity 
or adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER, will be supplied FREE, if 
they send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting 
the paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our 
list continually. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



THIS JOURNAL IS PUBLISHED IN THE 

FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, DANISH AND ITALIAN LANGUAGES. 

SAMPLE COPIES AND TERMS FREE. 



R3331 : page 66 



DAWN, VOL. VI. IS READY! 



This long-delayed volume has at length reached our 
friends who have waited so patiently for it. We can fill 
all orders for it now promptly— in cloth and leather bindings. 
There will be no paper-bound edition. 

page 66 

REMITTANCES IN POSTAGE STAMPS. 



We are pleased to receive small remittances in postage 
stamps of with orders for books, etc., if that is more convenient, 
but we request our friends to use great care in 
sending them. If carelessly inserted in letters so that the 
stamps are folded in the middle they are broken and become 
absolutely valueless. Fold them only on the perforations. 
Remember that the 25c and 50c packets sold by 
post offices are only worth 24c and 48c to us! 

1904.-MEMORIAL SUPPER.-1904. 



On the evening of Tuesday, March 29th, after six 
o'clock, will be the proper time for the celebration of our 
Lord's Memorial Supper;— on its anniversary according to 
the Jewish system of reckoning in vogue in our Lord's 
day and still. The Jewish Passover, lasting a week, begins 
the next evening at six o'clock. We do not celebrate the 
Passover, but the killing of the an ti typical Passover Lamb. 
"Christ our Passover (Lamb) is slain for us, therefore let 
us keep the feast."— I Cor. 5:7. 



R3327 : page 67 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 
"WARS AND RUMORS OF WARS." 



IN using the above words (Matt. 24:6) our Lord indicated 

by their connection that the mere fact of 

war should prove nothing to his people respecting 

the consummation of the age. They were to be otherwise 

guided in their discernment of the signs of the 

times. Whatever therefore we have to say respecting 

wars is based on some knowledge of the divine plan, 

aside from these frequently occurring disturbances. 



Our expectations respecting a war have been realized. 
We based that expectation not on any private information, 
nor on prophecy, but upon the thought that 
unless war intervened to prolong the commercial prosperity 
of Christendom a great financial depression would be 
sure to come speedily; and because we could not see 
time enough for such a depression and a recovery from 
it and a subsequent depression, all before October, 
1914, when prophecy teaches us to expect the great climax 
of earth's troubles. We have in the Scriptures 
what we think is clear testimony respecting that date, 
but no particulars or dates for the intervening time. 
It is not our intention to enter upon the role of prophet 
to any degree, but merely to give below what seems to 
us rather likely to be the trend of events— giving also 
the reasons for our expectations. 

The present outlook is that the success of the Japanese 
over the Russians thus early in their war will 
prolong the conflict and quite probably draw into it many 
other civilized nations. The Russian character is badly 
damaged by the fall, and, as a result, haughtiness, pride 
and contempt for others, are among the unenviable 
characteristics of their ruling classes,— and the peace-loving 
Czar is under their control. This will make it 
doubly difficult for Russia, as a great nation, to accept 
defeat at the hands of a small nation like Japan, which 
they have scarcely been willing to acknowledge as civilized, 
or in any degree a factor in the world's affairs. 
It would, we believe, be wisdom on Russia's part to propose 
terms for peace; but remembering the proverb, 
"Pride goeth before destruction and a haughty spirit 
before a fall," we incline to think that Russia will blunder 
into a prolonged war, disastrous to her prestige, 
finances, etc. 

Meantime Great Britain is seemingly disposed to 
use the opportunity of Russia's distraction to add 
Thibet-China to her empire, either directly or as a suzerainty. 
Thibet is a rich country, adjoins India on 
the east, and its people are peaceable— unskilled in modern 
warfare and could be easily subjugated if no European 
nation interfered— and Russia alone could or would 
interfere. The present, therefore, is England's auspicious 
moment for satisfying her "land-hunger"— for 
opening up a new market for the products of 
civilization. 

Turkey will be restless, too, when she sees her chief 
opponent, Russia, busy afar off. 

France, Russia's ally, will feel keenly for Russia, and 
were it not for the alliance between Great Britain and 
Japan she most surely would back her ally and send 
her powerful fleet against the Japanese. She well 
knows, however, that this would bring England to the 
assistance of Japan, and that the British fleet is the most 
powerful in the world. Still, pride and "honor" are 
powerful factors with the French, who are a very excitable 
people, and there is no knowing when she may 



conclude that "French honor" demands her participation 
in the war. 

The German Emperor, we may be sure, could scarcely 
remain quiet at such an auspicious moment as the 
present one for "cutting a dash" that would bring himself 
and Germany into prominence before the world. 
He will probably seek to befriend Russia, his powerful 
neighbor on the east, to secure her friendship and also 
to, if possible, break the tie now uniting France and 

R3327 : page 68 

Russia. Thus Germany and France may yet vie with 
each other for Russia's friendship and may both be led 
into the war. 

Even the United States may become involved, improbable 
as that may at present appear. If the Great 
Powers of Europe become involved, as above suggested, 
it would be very difficult for this nation to remain neutral. 
The seed for trouble is already planted in the 
"Note" sent by the American Secretary of State to the 
Great Powers, proposing that the war be limited so as 
not to involve the independence of China. The "Note" 
is simple enough and well intentioned, and beneficent, 
and has been generally assented to, but it may not be 
lived up to by all, and the United States may yet feel 
"honor-bound" to insist on the terms of that agreement, 
and this may mean participation in war. 

We do not say that the foregoing will take place, 
nor that it is likely to occur: we are merely outlining 
bare possibilities. Nevertheless, there is something behind 
it worth considering; because the Scriptures seem 
to imply some sort of a general war preceding or connected 
with the great time of trouble— anarchy— with 
which this age will close and usher in the Millennial 
period. For instance Joel (3:9-16) calls on all the nations 
to prepare for war; to beat plowshares and pruninghooks 
into swords and spears, to cause pursuits of 
agriculture to give place to pursuits of war, and for 
even the weak among the nations to feign strength. 
The connection shows this to be at about the present 
time, and mentions that the "harvest" is ripe (also Rev. 14: 15-20) 
and the Lord's holy ones as about to "come 
down." This may be fulfilled in the anarchy in which 
"every man's hand shall be against his neighbor," but 
we incline to expect its fulfilment in a general and 
worldwide call to arms. 

Another reason why we incline to expect a general war 
is, that at present the nations are so strong that a successful 
anarchous uprising against them would be little short 
of a miracle. But such a general war would increase taxation 
and breed general discontent alarmingly and quickly, 
causing the seeds of Socialist propaganda to shoot 
up and blossom and bring forth red-handed anarchy 
speedily. The credit of the nations would be weakened 
also by their increased debts; money would become 



proportionately scarce and interest rates proportionately 
higher, with corresponding effects influencing 
the general welfare and prosperity of Christendom. 

ANOTHER FACTOR-RELIGIOUS AMBITIONS. 

It may appear strange to consider religious ambitions 
a factor provocative of war; but it is true, nevertheless, 
that misguided emotions, supposedly religious, 
have been potent factors in many wars. Just now the 
apathy of the public of Christendom on religious subjects 
is noted as a result of the love of money and the 
cares of business. All the more those of religious proclivities 
are looking for another issue more popular than 
personal repentance, faith in the precious blood and 
consecration to divine service. They have been seeking 
it in "social uplift" schemes which have been more or 
less successful; and now the "civilization" of the uttermost 
parts of the earth is the popular scheme amongst 
them. They tell us that the conversion of the world is 
merely a question of dollars and cents, but do not explain 
to us why it is that the lands of dollars and cents 
are the lands of discontent and murder and suicide, etc., 
more than others. As an evidence of this spirit of 
aggression "for Christ's sake," note the following:— 

R3328 : page 68 

EXTRACT FROM (METHODIST) BISHOP FOWLER'S "GREAT 
MISSIONARY SERMON," GIVING HIS VIEW OF THE 
POWER WHICH WILL WIN THE WORLD 
FOR CHRIST. 

"If the storm breaks upon the world too suddenly, 
and all the other Powers stand back and leave the contest 
to the English-speaking peoples, we even then can 
defend our rights, save the world from Russian absolutism 
and meet the high obligation thrust upon us by a 
friendly Providence; provided that the strife is like the 
old Talke-knife strife of the Swedes, where the contestants 
were bound together by a rope around their waists 
and, each armed with a stout knife, fought the mortal 
combat to the finish; provided that we understand its 
decisive character and have but one argument, and that 
war to the bitter end; that we have but one plan, and 
that victory or death, and that we have but one purpose, 
the absolute control of the Pacific, cost what it 
may. With such convictions and purposes we can help 
Liberty to her last and final triumph, and secure civil 
and religious freedom for mankind forever.... A wise 
and sleepless Providence has cared for us, even before 
our cradles were made, and furnished defences for our 
use. 

"So God has made ready his channels, and can easily 
cut the leashes of storm and tempest about the centers 
of English-speaking peoples, these homes of liberty 



and Christianity. It is for us merely to use the defences 
offered us." 

The Bishop then proceeded to say to the assembled 
mission-workers that "the great Methodist Church is 
only playing at saving the world;" that if an earnest 
effort were made to straighten the traces, the M.E. 
Church alone, instead of struggling to raise one million 
and a half could raise more than three hundred million 
dollars a year for missions. "But even with one-third 
of that amount of holy, consecrated money what could 
we not accomplish?" exclaims the Bishop, and adds: 
"The world's salvation is reduced to a question of dollars 
and cents ! We have the blood of the atonement; 
we have the resurrection of the Son of God; we have 
the Gospel; we have the experience of saving grace; we 
have the theology and a host of scholarly believers; we 
have the material agencies, Bibles, presses, steamboats, 
railroads and an open world— everything ready and 
waiting— all we lack is money." And yet he concludes, 

R3328 : page 69 

"This generation of believers will see the salvation of 
this generation of sinners, and the kingdoms of this 
world will become the Kingdoms of our God and of his 
Christ." 

TEN THOUSAND IN ISRAEL WHO HAVE NOT BOWED THE 
KNEE TO BAAL. 



Quite a furor of excitement has been aroused 
in Presbyterian circles in Canada by the action of 
the congregation known as "Cooke's Presbyterian 
Church." This Church, in company with others, has 
been in the habit of taking up yearly collections 
to assist in maintaining Knox College, Toronto. At 
the usual time for voting the money this last year, the 
pastor called attention to the fact that if the money 
were donated as usual, it would be in effect the rendering 
of assistance to the enemies of God's Word. He set 
forth that the teachings of the college were along the 
lines of higher criticism, especially arraigning Professor 
McFayden. He pointed out that higher criticism was 
really the worst form of infidelity that had yet attacked 
the Lord's people, and recommended that the donation 
be not made until the congregation had some assurance 
from the college authorities that such donations would 
not hereafter be used against the Word of God, but for 
the reverent expounding of it. 

We are glad to note this evidence that some are still 
on the side of the Lord and of his Word. The majority 
are rapidly falling away into unbelief, and day by day 
the cleavage, the separation between these two classes, 
believers and unbelievers, in all the churches of Christendom 



is becoming wider and wider. 

Prof. McFayden is unquestionably a full-fledged 
higher critic, otherwise an agnostic. But he is one of 
the wise ones who, instead of attacking the Bible, has 
written recently what might properly be termed AN 
APOLOGY FOR HIGHER CRITICISM. His book, while 
avoiding higher criticism most explicitly, is written to 
show that higher criticism is honest, is candid, is truthful, 
is necessary, that it will do no harm, that ultimately 
it will do much good, and, to use his own expression, 
"while removing the old landmarks, it will not remove 
the land." These subtle leaders and teachers are the 
most injurious of all. They pretend a reverence for 
the holy things and a disinclination to mar them, but 
assume superiority of wisdom and of honesty which 
compels them to take the stand they do in opposition 
to their own preferences. We have no right to question 
the honesty of Prof. McFayden, and other college and 
seminary professors and ministers, any more than we 
have a right to question the honesty of Voltaire, Thomas 
Paine or Robert Ingersoll. We assume that these men 
were all honest, but they were none the less enemies of 
the Lord's Word, adversaries in the most absolute sense, 
as the Lord used that word concerning Peter when the 
latter opposed the Truth. The difficulty with all of 
these professors and free-thinkers is that they are 
natural men and not New Creatures— that they were 
never begotten of the holy Spirit, and hence cannot see 
and understand spiritual things. Besides, their position 
in society and professionally has made them arrogant 
and self-conceited. From their standpoint the 
words of the Book have become to them foolishness. 
As the Scriptures declare, the world by wisdom knows 
not God. The Word of God is to be understood from 
its internal testimony. "If any man will do my Father's 
will, he shall know of the doctrine." To us who 
believe, the Gospel of Christ, as expressed by Jesus and 
the apostles, and their reference to and corroboration of 
the prophecies, is the power of God and the wisdom of 
God. But these are evidences only to those who can 
see them, and none can see them except the eyes of his 
understanding be opened that he "may be able to comprehend 
with all saints the lengths and breadths and 
heights and depths, and to know the love of God which 
passeth all understanding." (Eph. 3:18.) As our Lord 
said on the same line to his faithful followers, "To you 
it is given to know of the mysteries of the Kingdom of 
God, but to them who are without all these things are 
done in parables and dark sayings, that hearing they 
might hear and not understand." Again he said, "I 
thank thee, Father, Lord of heaven and earth, because 
thou hast hidden these things from the wise and prudent 
and revealed them unto babes: Even so, Father, 
for so it seemed good in thy sight."— Luke 8:10; 10:21. 

We wondered to what extent the action of "Cooke's 
Presbyterian Church" would meet with the approval of 



other Presbyterians, and a Toronto journal, dated January 
23, before us, gives us the desired information. 
A reporter for this paper called upon the other Presbyterian 
ministers of Toronto to ascertain how the question 
appealed to them, and their replies are given. So 
far as we observe, every one of the seventeen ministers 
either avowed their sympathies with higher criticism, 
or dodged the question, and thus implied that they 
were to some extent at least ashamed of the Lord and 
of his Word. One of the ministers, Rev. T. R. Robinson, 
said that he was amused at the course of Cooke's 
Presbyterian Church, and did not think it would likely 
have many imitators. He added that he thought the 
chief danger to Knox College was not so much the loss of 
financial support, as a possibility that Professor McFayden 
might become weary of the treatment he was 
receiving from his opponents, and leave. 

How clear are the evidences that the falling away 
from the faith is upon us, and that, as the prophet 
foretold, a thousand shall fall to one who stands. 
(Psa. 91:7.) How necessary that we should have well 
in mind the words of the Apostle, "Take unto you 
the whole armor of God, that ye may be able to stand 
in the evil day, and having done all, to stand."— 
Eph. 6:13. 

R3328 : page 70 

JUSTICE WOODWARD ON THE REPUBLIC'S PERILS. 



Speaking at a secular gathering in Plymouth Church, 
Brooklyn, N.Y., recently, Justice Woodward said in 
part:— 

"Ours is a democratic government founded on ideas 
of equality and simplicity, but nowhere is there more of 
ostentation or of enervating luxury. Fundamentally, 
also, we are opposed to war and to the entangling diplomatic 
complications, yet we have forsaken the policy 
of the Fathers and have chosen a road whose end no 
man can see. 

"In no country is the Church so strong as in America, 
yet in no civilized country is there so much of robbery 
and of murder. No other land has so excellent a 
school system, so free a press, and so just and equitable 
a law, yet no modern nation has suffered so much from 
the violence of the mob. 

"We all recognize also the absolute perfidy of the 
citizen who, chosen to public office, proceeds to plunder 
the community that has invested him with the seal of 
its confidence; yet of such malfeasance in office we hear 
almost every day. 

"Every true patriot— that is, every man who has the 
future of his country at heart— must, during the last 
year, have been brought to an intense realization of the 



fact that we are face to face with a crisis— a crisis 

whose results no man knows, and which it is our supreme 

duty to meet like men. 

"We are not now confronted with an alien foe; neither 
are we menaced by rebellion. But the dangers that 
threaten us today are no less to be feared. Far more 
insidious, they threaten the very life of the Republic. 
How shall we stem the money madness of the time? How 
shall we combat the growing canker of official dishonor? 
How shall we overcome the menace of the mob? These 
are the evils that suck the very life-blood of our liberties, 
these are the sins that tarnish our national honor 
with deep stain.... 

"We have enlarged the sphere of our influence in 
Europe, in Asia, and on the seas— until today we are 
hailed as the foe of tyrants and the friend of the oppressed. 

R3329 : page 70 

We stand ready, if need be, to conquer the 

wide world— but alas, like the great Alexander, we have 

failed to conquer ourselves." 

A PEOPLE'S PALACE. 



The New York Tribune, says:— 

"The largest Congregational church of New Jersey 
has begun the erection of a people's palace, in which there 
will be rooms for dancing and card games as well as for 
Church meetings and Sunday School. The corner-stone 
of the structure was laid yesterday on Jersey City Heights. 

"In the words of the pastor, the Rev. John L. 
Scudder, 'the People's Palace' will sanctify all legitimate 
amusements, and not let the devil have a monopoly of 
them. It will keep boys off the streets, young men out 
of saloons and young women out of the dance halls." 
Accordingly, beneath the roof of this building, there will 
be bowling alleys, pool and billiard tables, rifle ranges, a 
theatre, a ballroom, an armory, a gymnasium, together 
with accommodations for many more amusements, and 
on the roof there will be a garden for summer recreations. 

"Above the auditorium, on the fourth and top floors, 
will be situated the gymnasium, which is also to be used 
on certain occasions as an armory. Among other innovations, 
Mr. Scudder has established a cadet corps, composed 
of 175 boys, and in this room they will be drilled 
in the use of weapons of war. A large adjacent room is 
to be devoted to the quartermaster's department, and 
will be fitted up with gun racks, drums, cannon and other 
military paraphernalia. The armory floor will be of hard 
maple and the walls will be lined with maple sheathing. 

"The entire basement will be devoted to popular 
amusements. It will contain six regulation bowling 
alleys, and individual and club lockers will be furnished 



those who prefer private tenpin balls and a place to keep 
their bowling slippers. Other space will be devoted to 
shuffleboards, pool and billiard tables and table tennis. 
Separated from these amusements by a heavy brick wall 
there will be a rifle range with an adjustable counter to 
increase or diminish the shooting distance. Near by 
there will be a smoking room which may, by means of 
folding doors, be connected with a restaurant, and thus 
furnish a large hall for diners or smokers. From an elevated 
platform spectators will be able to watch the 
games." 



Evidently the old idea that a change of heart— a full 
consecration of the life to the Lord— is a prime necessity 
for the production of a true Christian, is rapidly giving 
way to the thought that a Christian is just the same as 
others, except that he avoids grossness and offensiveness. 
Morality is now the standard and not, as previously, 
Faith and Morality. We are in the "harvest" time and 
both the "tares" and "wheat" are ripening, and daily it 
becomes easier to distinguish the one from the other. 
Now is the time to thrust in the sickle of Present Truth 
and gather the wheat to fellowship with the present 
Lord. 

BIBLES PRINTED AND SOLD BUT NOT READ. 



Dr. N. M. Butler, president of Columbia University, 
discussing the subject of Religious Education recently, 
said, as reported in the N.Y. Journal:— 

"One of the most pathetic sights in America is the 
ordinary Sunday School, taught by untrained persons not 
properly co-ordinate; text books the poorest; ideals the 
most vague; yet to that we are supposed to trust the rising 
generations for their systematic religious teaching." 

"Public opinion in the United States is overwhelmingly 
in favor of secular education," he declared, "for men 
will agree on the history of everything of the past or the 
present except religion." 

Dr. Butler said that the place for the religious education 
was in the family and in the Church, but that "the 
trouble with the Church is that it preaches too much and 
does not teach enough." He then spoke of the teaching 
in the Sunday School, and said that there was next to no 
religious teaching in the home. He said that every time he 
had said that, he was told that the Bible Society had sold 
many more Bibles this year than the year before. "I 
don't care how many Bibles are sold," said the Doctor 
"I want to know what becomes of them. I am pretty 
sure they are not read." 



We fear that Dr. Butler's opinion is too true— that 
Church-going, Sunday-School attendance, Bible-owning, 
and participation in the exercises of Epworth Leagues, 
etc., are forms of godliness which to the majority are 
without the power of the holy Spirit— the power of 
consecration. 

R3329 : page 71 

A NEW DOGMA: THE "ASSUMPTION" OF VIRGIN MARY. 



It is nearly fifty years since Pope Pius IX. decreed 
the dogma of the Immaculate Conception of our Lord's 
mother. The present pope, Pius X., it is said, purposes 
soon to decree that it shall be the faith of Romanism 
that the Virgin's flesh did not corrupt in death— 
that she was received direct into heaven. It is conceded 
that the place and time of her death are not certainly 
known. On the strength of this lack of knowledge 
the Pope assumes that she experienced 
"Assumption." 

The dogma of the Virgin's immaculate conception 
is not only contrary to the Word of God— that condemnation 
passed upon all of Adam's posterity— but it 
reflects against the divine character and plan thus: If 
God could justly and properly so arrange that one of 
Adam's race should be born sinless he might have done 
the same for us all. And if our birth in sin is God's fault, 
to that extent he is responsible for all the deformity, 
mental and physical, with which we are born. In that 
event Christ's death as the ransom-price for Adamic 
sin was unnecessary. Let God be true— let his Word 
stand, though it make every creed and dogma of men 
appear foolish. 

Similarly the dogma of the Assumption is unscriptural. 
Ascension to glory is to come by resurrection. Our 
Lord himself was the first-born from the dead, and no 
member of his Church was to be received into glory 
with him until he would "come again and receive us 
unto himself." 

SAMSON'S BEE-STORY PARALLELED. 



The account of Samson's slaying a lion by tearing it 
open, and of his subsequently finding honey in its carcase, 
has been very widely discredited; because bees 
are particular and generally seek very different storehouses 
for their honey. However, the workmen in the 
J. W. Goodwin lumber camp in Ovid Township, Branch 
County, Michigan, have recently come across a parallel 
instance. On cutting down a black ash tree recently 



they found it hollow, and in the cavity the carcase of a 
large raccoon full of wild-bee honey and apparently preserved 
by the sweets, though some of the hair of the 
hide had fallen off. The curiosity was sent to the 
Smithsonian Institute, Washington, D.C. 

CONSOLIDATIONS SAVING $5,000,000 A YEAR CAUSE 
HARDSHIP TO MANY. 



Following its announced policy of centralization, 
the International Harvester Company has decided to lay 
off 7,500 of its 19,000 employes, and thus save $5,000,000 
a year. Already 1,500 employes of the Deering division 
have been informed that their services were no longer required, 
and as many more are to be laid off. In the McCormick 
division 1,500 employes are slated for dismissal. 
The other 3,000 workers to lose positions are employed in 
the mills in Milwaukee, Springfield, Ohio, and Piano. 



R3329 : page 71 

"DO ALL IN THE NAME OF THE LORD JESUS." 

"Whatsoever ye do, in word or deed, do all 
in the name of the Lord Jesus."— Col. 3:17. 

WHETHER he realizes it or not, each one who professes 

to be a Christian speaks and acts in the 

name of the Lord Jesus. The thought of our 

text therefore must be that we should endeavor to keep 

this fact continually before our minds, to the intent that 

our actions and words may properly represent our Lord 

and honor the name which he has permitted us to bear. 

Imagine a maiden from the lower strata of society married 

to a prince of royal blood. We can imagine a true 

wife under such circumstances extremely careful of her 

every word and action, seeking to have these as nearly as 

possible comport with her new station in life— her new 

relationship. We can well imagine that from the moment 

of her espousal the thought of her husband's high position 

and of her responsibility as his helpmate and family representative, 

would lead her to guard particularly her every 

action and word. From the time that she assumes his 

name, or acknowledges that she is espoused to him, whatever 

she does or says must of necessity be either to the 

credit or the discredit of his name. Elsewhere the Apostle 

wrote respecting the Lord's people, likening them to a 

"chaste virgin espoused to one husband, which is Christ;" 

hence this picture very accurately represents our present 

responsibilities to the great name which our heavenly 

Bridegroom has granted us permission to use as his espoused. 

What an honor to be his representatives in the 



world! and what a responsibility to bear his name! 

Another scriptural illustration well represents the manner 
in which our words and conduct— good or bad— are 
all done in the name of the Lord Jesus from the time we 
formally confess him. The Apostle's words are, we are 
"ambassadors for Christ," "who also hath made us able 
ministers of the New Covenant." (2 Cor. 3:6; 5:20.) 
The United States appoints ambassadors or ministers of 
state to foreign countries. These are all supposed to be 
persons of good, reputable character before they are chosen, 
but we can well suppose that the most honorable and 
discreet amongst them, after realizing the dignity of such 
an appointment, would feel doubly impressed with the responsibility 
of his position. Previously he acted in his 
own name, and because of his own self-respect and personal 
love of justice, truth, honor, etc., he was careful of his 
words and conduct; but now he has not only the same 
personal responsibility but, additionally, an appreciation of 

R3330 : page 72 

the fact that the nation he represents will be either honored 

or dishonored by his course. If he were careful about his 

language and conduct before, his carefulness would be increased 

many fold. And then, because of his official position 

as the representative of a great nation, his words and 

actions would be more critically weighed than previously 

by those who know him to be the American ambassador; 

and we may be sure that morning, noon and night a realization 

of his position as representative of a great nation 

would be with him, prompting him to prudence. He 

would realize as never before that, whatsoever he said or 

did, all would be either to the credit or discredit of the 

nation whose general character and policy he represents— 

in whose name he speaks and acts. 

If it is an honorable matter to represent one great civilized 
nation of earth before another, how much more honorable 
it is to represent the heavenly Kingdom and its 
King of kings and Lord of lords before the "children of 
this world." If we as Christians could keep this thought 
always prominent before our minds what a dignity it would 
add to our character! what a transforming power it would 
be! what an assistance to the new nature in its battle with 
the low and groveling tendencies of the old nature now 
disowned by us and reckoned dead! "Our citizenship is 
in heaven," says the Apostle. "Ye are not of this world, 
even as I am not of this world," says our Master, Jesus. 
While still living in the world we are not of it, but have 
transferred our allegiance and citizenship to the heavenly 
Kingdom,— set free through the merits of "him who loved 
us and bought us with his precious blood." And now as the 
appointees of our Kingdom, while still living in the world 
amongst aliens and strangers, we as representatives and 
ambassadors should feel both the dignity and the honor 
of the position and the weighty responsibilities, and ever 
keep in memory the Apostle's words, "Whatsoever ye do 



in word or deed do all in the name of the Lord Jesus." 

Another scriptural figure represents us as the "members 
of the body of Christ" under our Lord Jesus as our Head. 
"As he was so are we in this world." When Jesus was 
here in the flesh he suffered, the just for the unjust, that 
he might bring men to God. Since his exaltation according 
to the divine plan such of the redeemed ones as 
now enjoy the hearing ear and understanding heart, and 
as are in full sympathy with the Lord's great plan, are 
called to be joint-heirs with him in his Kingdom— to be 
changed from human nature to spirit nature in a resurrection 
like that which highly exalted our great Head. But 
all such are called upon to demonstrate their loyalty to the 
Lord by walking in his footsteps. Because of their ignorance, 
superinduced by the great Adversary, the world 
hated our Master, opposed him, said all manner of evil 
against him falsely; and he requires that those whom 
he shall ultimately recognize as members of the glorious 
Kingdom class shall now attest their loyalty by being 
so faithful to him, and to the principles of righteousness 
for which he suffered, that they will draw upon 
themselves more or less of the same opposition of the 
world which he endured. 

As his was a most honorable position as the ambassador 
and representative of the Father, so ours is the same, for 
he counts us as members of his body, his flesh and his 
bones. But he forewarns us not to expect worldly appreciation 
of the high standards of his teaching, but contrarywise, 
in proportion as we are faithful unto him and the 
heavenly Kingdom of light— in proportion as we let our 
light so shine that men may see our good works and glorify 
our Father in heaven— we will, nevertheless, draw 
against ourselves the opposing forces of darkness. Our 
Lord explains this, saying, that the darkness and those 
who are of the darkness hate the light, and therefore oppose 
all who are children of the light in proportion as they 
are faithful representatives of it. 

We see, then, that when the prophets spoke "beforehand 
of the sufferings of Christ and the glory that should 
follow," those sufferings included not only the tribulations 
upon the Head, Christ Jesus, but those also to be 
endured by all the members of his body before the ushering 
in of the Kingdom glories— before the change of all 
the members of the body to the spiritual nature— before 
their shining forth as the sun in the Millennial Kingdom 
glory, for the blessing of all the families of the earth with 
the true light and opportunity for return to harmony with 
God. 

As ambassadors, therefore— as representatives of the 
Lord Jesus, members of his body, bearers of his name— we 
are not to expect under present conditions that our embassage 
will be highly esteemed among men; rather we 
should "marvel not if the world hate us, for we know that 
it hated him before it hated us." (John 15:18; I John 3:13.) 
But we are also to remember that an ambassador 
of a hated government is more critically and unsympathetically 



watched than under other circumstances, and 

that such ambassadors would endeavor to be all the more 

careful as respects their every word and action. 

This subject may be viewed from still another standpoint. 
With some the tendency is that, whatsoever they do, 
whether in word or deed, they shall do all in their own 
name— for their own credit, for their own glory. This is 
a spirit and disposition contrary to those which the Lord is 
seeking, and he who maintains such a disposition will surely 
not be accounted worthy of any place in the Kingdom, 
whatever may be his ultimate end. The class which the 
Lord is seeking will be composed of those only who have 
such an appreciation of the Lord and his grace, manifested 
in their redemption and forgiveness of sins and call to 
fellowship with him in his suffering and subsequent glory, 
that they will take delight in crediting all the honor, all 
the praise, to him. Not only their honor and praise for 
salvation, but additionally their credit for any kind deeds 
or benevolences or services they may be able to render to 
any. They will be glad to be able to do something in his 
name— to the glory of him who did so much for them. 

R3330 : page 73 

Their sentiment of heart is well expressed in the Apostle's 
words: "We thus judge, that since one died for all, all 
were dead, and that we who live should not henceforth 
live unto ourselves but unto him who died for us"— "doing 
all things in the name of the Lord Jesus." 

Another erroneous custom amongst those who have 
named the name of Christ is that of ignoring his name in 
favor of some sectarian name. Such as are thus misled 
consecrate themselves, devote their lives, talents, etc., 
and spend these talents and opportunities in seeking to 
glorify the names of human institutions. One does all 
in the name of Methodism; another in the name of Presbyterianism; 
another in the name of Lutheranism; another 
in the name of Roman Catholicism, etc. This is all a 
mistake. None of these names were ever authorized by 
the Lord; and who can confidently depend upon it that 
even the best of works done in these names and for the 
upbuilding of these institutions, which the Lord and his 
apostles neither instituted nor authorized, will be accounted 
of the Lord as just the same as though his admonition 
through the Apostle had been heeded,— "Do all things in 
the name of the Lord Jesus"? 

Another view of the subject is this: many are unauthorizedly 
using the name of the Lord Jesus in combination 
with the name of some earthly institution. Mark the 
words:— "Unto the wicked God saith, What hast thou 
to do to take my name into thy mouth, seeing thou hatest 
instruction and casteth my words behind thee?" The 
wicked here are not the worldly wicked, but those who 
have a form of godliness and deny the power thereof— 
those who draw nigh unto the Lord with their lips while 
their hearts are far from him. These covenant-breakers are 



the wicked of this text. These the Lord reproves, telling 
them that they have no right to take his name— to attempt 
to speak in his name and call themselves Christians, to advertise 
themselves before the world as his representatives and 
ambassadors, when as a matter of fact he disowns them. 

If a sharply dividing line were drawn in the Church, 
which would place on the one side the sincere believers in 
the precious blood, begotten of the holy Spirit, and thus 
recognized of God as his ambassadors,— and on the other 
side of the line all those who are merely nominal Christians 
and without either ability or authority to act as representatives 
of the heavenly Kingdom, what a small number 
it would leave on the Lord's side amenable to the 
Apostle's words in our text and ready to be influenced by 
the presentation of them we are here making ! There are 
some who are anxious to get the worldly to sing the song 
of Zion, to get the worldly to name the name of Christ 
in religious profession: but we are not of these. We are 
anxious to recognize as brethren in the Lord all who hold 
"the faith once delivered to the saints"— faith in the Lord 
and in the salvation which he is yet to bring to us at his 
revelation— and who on the strength of such faith have 
presented their bodies living sacrifices to God, and are 
therefore commissioned of the Lord to be his representatives 
and to bear his name; but we would be glad indeed 
to see all others than these discard the precious name 
which they misrepresent. 

Would it seem like a great falling away? We answer 
that it would affect only the "tare" class, and that all the 
true "wheat" would be much better off separate from the 

R3331 : page 73 

"tares." It is only the holy class the Lord recognizes as 

his, anyway. The great mass of professors have neither 

part nor lot in his present grace. The sooner we learn 

that at the present time the Lord is choosing out of the 

world a peculiar people, zealous for his name and delighting 

to do his will, and that the hope of all others lies in 

the Millennial Kingdom, with its chastisements and corrections 

of righteousness and uplifting influences, the greater 

will be the benefit to ourselves who are seeking to make 

our calling and election sure to a place in that Kingdom. 

One of the ten commandments given to the Jews forbade 
their taking the name of the Lord in vain; and although 
this commandment was not given to spiritual Israel 
we can readily see how the spirit of it comes to us. The 
spirit of that commandment applied to us would not relate 
to profane swearing, cursing, etc., but rather to a misappropriation 
of the Lord's name. We have taken the 
name of Christ as our name. We are counted as members 
of the body of Christ. The holy name of the Head belongs 
to all the members of the body. The honored name 
of the Bridegroom belongs to his espoused. What carefulness 
the thought of this should give us, and how appropriately 
we should say to ourselves:— "I must see to it 



that I have not taken the Lord's name in vain,— that I 
appreciate the honor, dignity and responsibility of my position 
as his representative and ambassador in the world. 
I will walk circumspectly, seeking as far as possible to 
bring no dishonor to that name, but contrariwise to honor 
it in every thought and word and deed." 

Nothing in this should be understood to mean that our 
Lord expects from us absolute perfection. He merely expects 
us to do all in our power to glorify him "in our bodies 
and our spirits which are his." Nor are we to consider 
the Apostle to mean that whatsoever things we do, in word 
or in deed, are all to be done in the name of the Lord 
Jesus— with the hope that by thus doing things well we 
shall obtain salvation. The thought is really the reverse 
of this. Those whom the Apostle is addressing are the 
"saints at Colosse," and the words are applicable today 
only to a similar class— "saints." Only the "saints" are 
authorized to take the Lord's name and act as his ambassadors 
and representatives. And this honorable position 
came to them because their sins had already been forgiven 
by the grace of God— through faith in the precious blood; 
and because on the strength of this forgiveness of sins they 
had been called to membership in the body of Christ which 
is the Church;— and because they had accepted this invitation 
and presented their bodies living sacrifices to the Lord. 

Having thus properly, legally, officially taken the name 
of Jesus upon us, and having been acknowledged by having 

R3331 : page 74 

had his Spirit shed abroad in our hearts, and having 

been promised in addition the completion of this work of 

grace at the close of this age, we seek to speak and to act 

to his name and to his glory, not in hope of obtaining forgiveness 

of sins, but because we have obtained divine favor 

and because we appreciate the same and love him who first 

loved us. This loving devotion to him whose name we 

bear must with all "saints" be the power of God, working 

in us to will and do his good pleasure;— to honor his 

name and to serve his cause to the best of our ability. 

And the best of our ability, thank God! is accepted in 

the Beloved as perfection. How gracious are the divine 

providences! The more we realize these things the more 

careful and circumspect they will make us,— that whatsoever 

we do, in word or deed, it shall all be done in the 

name of Jesus and to his glory. 



R3331 : page 74 

"UNDER HIS WINGS!" 

"He shall cover thee with his feathers, and under his 
wings shalt thou find shelter."— Psa. 91:4.— Leeser. 



IN the midst of the "perilous times" of this "evil 
day," and of the warning voices of prophets and 
apostles pointing out snares and pestilences and 
subtle dangers on every hand— and in the midst, too, 
of a realizing sense of the actual existence of such evil 
besetments and perils— how precious to the saints are 
the assurances of divine protection and care and personal 
love! 

We call to mind the gracious promises of our Lord 
—"The Father himself loveth you;" "Fear not, little 
flock; it is your Father's good pleasure to give you the 
Kingdom;" and "He that loveth me shall be loved of 
my Father, and I will love him and will manifest myself 
to him;. ..and my Father will love him, and we 
will come unto him and make our abode with him.... 
Peace I leave with you, my peace I give unto you. 
Let not your heart be troubled, neither let it be afraid." 
-John 16:27; 14:21,23,27; Luke 12:32. 

But warning voices and wholesome counsel are 
also necessary; and he is not wise who turns a deaf 
ear to them, and takes cognizance alone of the comforting 
assurances which are designed only for those 
who faithfully "watch and pray lest they enter into 
temptation." Every soldier of the cross needs to 
heed the Apostle's warnings— "Take unto you the 
whole armor of God, that ye may be able to withstand 
in the evil day, and having done all, to stand;" 
and again, "Let us fear lest, a promise being left us 
of entering into his rest, any of you should seem to 
come short of it;" and fear also "lest, as the serpent 
[Satan] beguiled Eve, through his subtlety, so your 
minds should be corrupted from the simplicity that is 
in Christ;" "for grievous wolves shall enter in among 
you, not sparing the flock. Also of your own selves 
shall men arise, speaking perverse things to draw away 
disciples after them." "Behold," said our Lord, "I 
send you forth as sheep in the midst of wolves: be ye 
therefore wise as serpents and harmless as doves."— 
Eph. 6:13; Heb. 4:1; 2 Cor. 11:3; Acts 20:29,30; 
Matt. 10:16. 

It is necessary for the discipline, trial and final 
proving of the Church of God that they should be subjected 
to these adverse influences; for to him that overcometh 
them is the promise of the great reward. If we 
would reign with Christ, we must prove our worthiness 
to reign by the same tests of loyalty to God, of 
faith in his Word, of zeal for the Truth, of patient endurance 
of reproach and persecution, even unto death, 
and of unwavering trust in the power and purpose of 
God to deliver and exalt his Church in due time. To 
such faithful ones are the blessed consolations of Psa. 91. 
Hearken— 

Verse 1 . "He who abideth in the secret place of 
the Most High [typified by the Most Holy or Sanctuary] 
shall rest under the shadow of the Almighty." 
We thus place ourselves under the divine protection 



when, having come to a knowledge of God's willingness 

to accept us as his children, we gratefully accept 

the invitation and approach in his appointed way, 

through Christ our Redeemer, and consecrate ourselves 

fully to his service. Such may sweetly rest in 

the precious promises of God, all of which are "yea 

and amen in Christ Jesus." (2 Cor. 1:20.) The world 

does not see the overshadowing wings of divine protection, 

but the faithful have a blessed secret realization 

of it. Praise the Lord! 

Verse 2. "I [Christ Jesus, whom David here, 
as elsewhere, personifies, and who thus addresses his 
body, his Church] will say of Jehovah, who is my 
refuge and my stronghold, my God in whom I ever 
trust" (John 20:17)- 

Verse 3. "That he will surely deliver thee from 
the snare of the fowler, [from the deceptions of Satan, 
in which all those not protected shall stumble; for 
our Lord said that so subtle and deceptive will they 
be that, if it were possible, they would deceive the 
very elect. But this is not possible, for those who 
are making their calling and election sure abide under 
the protection of the Almighty] and from the pestilence 
of destruction." [Not from the destructive pestilences 
of physical disease, but from the moral and 
spiritual pestilences of destruction— from the sinful 
propensities of the old nature, which, in unguarded 
moments, are liable to assert their mastery and overwhelm 

R3331 : page 75 

the souls of those who are not abiding under 
the secret protection of the Most High; and from the 
spiritual pestilences of false doctrine which, with subtle 
sophistry, destroy the faith of the unwatchful. 
Such pestilences are already abroad in the shape of 
so-called Christian Science, Spiritualism and the various 
no-ransom theories which take the name of The 
Larger Hope, and which bid fair, both from present 
prospects and from the prophetic outlook, ere long to 
become epidemic. From all these pestilences the 
Lord's elect shall be protected, resting sweetly under 
the shadow of the Almighty.] 

Verse 4. "He shall cover thee with his feathers, 
and under his wings shalt thou find shelter. [So 
close to his heart does Jehovah gather his loyal and 
faithful children that they feel the warmth of his love, 
and the responsive language of their hearts is, "I 
will abide in thy tabernacle"— under thy protection 
—"forever: I will trust in the covert of thy wings; 
for thou hast been a shelter for me and a strong tower 
from the enemy; for thou hast heard my vows"— my 
consecration— "thou hast given me the heritage of 

R3332 : page 75 



those that fear thy name."— Psa. 61:4,3,5] His 
truth shall be thy shield and buckler"— thy protection. 
Yes, his Truth— that grand system of truth 
comprised in the divine Plan of the Ages— is an ample 
shield and buckler to all who in simplicity of heart 
receive it and prove faithful to it. It is the armor of 
God which the Apostle urges all the faithful to put 
on— to appropriate, to meditate upon and to store up 
the Truth in mind and heart— that they may be able, 
by its use, to withstand error and evil in every form 
presented to them in this evil day. 

Verse 5. "Thou shalt not be afraid of the terror 
of the night [the dark night of which the Prophet 
Isaiah and also the Lord spoke, saying, "The morning" 
—the Millennial morning— "cometh, and also 
the night"— the great time of trouble which shall immediately 
precede it, the night "wherein no man can 
labor" for the dissemination of divine truth: so great 
will be "the terror," the tumult and trouble and persecution 
of that night. -Isa. 21:12; John 9:4]; nor 
for the arrow ["even bitter words" of the opponents 
of the Truth-Psa. 64:3] that flieth by day" [at the 
present time, which, in comparison with the dark 
night that is coming, is called day]. 

Verse 6. "Nor for the pestilence [moral and 
spiritual] that walketh in darkness [that spreads and 
makes its victims among those who are ignorant of 
the Truth, or who are unfaithful to it and hence unworthy 
of it, and who therefore lack the divine protection 
and are subject to the "strong delusions" of 
error— 2 Thes. 2:11]; nor for the destruction [caused 
by these pestilences] that wasteth at noon-day" [that 
subverts the faith and hope of many, just when the 
light of divine Truth is shining clearest upon the faithful, 
as it is shining upon us today.] 

Verse 7. "A thousand shall fall at thy side, and 
ten thousand at thy right hand [so great will be the 
falling away from the Truth, even among those who, 
like ourselves, received it once with joy and who did 
for a time run well]; but it shall not come nigh thee." 
—Because of thy loyalty and uncompromising faithfulness 
and because of the ample armor of truth and 
righteousness, thou shalt stand and not fall. 

Verse 8. "Only with thine eyes shalt thou behold 
and see the recompense of the wrongdoers"— 
who reject the Truth or who prove unfaithful to it. 

Verses 9,10. "Because thou hast said, 'The 
Lord is my protection;' because the Most High thou 
hast made thy refuge, no evil shall befall thee" [no 
evils of the kind above referred to; and any other 
seeming evils shall, under divine providence, work 
together for your good— Rom. 8:28]. 

Verse 11. "For he shall give his angels [messengers] 
a charge concerning thee, to guard thee in 
all thy ways. [That is, God will raise up some faithful 
pastors and teachers who will "watch for your 



souls as they that must give an account." True, 

there shall arise false teachers, perverting the Word 

of the Lord and seeking by cunning sophistries to 

subvert your souls; but if in simplicity of heart God's 

children require a "Thus saith the Lord" for every 

element of their faith, and carefully prove all things 

by the Word, they will be able to distinguish readily 

the true from the false. And having done so, the 

Apostle Paul (Heb. 13:17) counsels us to have confidence. 

The Lord, our Shepherd, will care for the 

true sheep.] 

Verse 12. "They shall bear thee [all the members 
of the body of Christ, individually and collectively] 
up in their hands [using their strength], lest 
thou dash thy foot against a stone"— any stumblingstone 
of false doctrine, and especially that great fundamental 
rock-doctrine of the redemption through the 
precious blood of Christ;— that "rock of offense and 
stone of stumbling" to both the houses of nominal 
Israel (fleshly and spiritual). (Isa. 8:14.) The 
"feet" of the body are its last members; the saints 
now living are members of the "feet of him" (Christ), 
the ones who are now in danger of being stumbled, as 
the feet of the Jewish house of servants were in danger 
in the end or harvest of the Jewish age. 

How do such messengers of the Lord bear up the 
feet of Christ? By helping them to a clear understanding 
of the Truth, and teaching and encouraging 

R3332 : page 76 

them by word and example how to be faithful to the 
Truth, and how to run so as to attain to the mark for 
the prize of our high calling. 

Verse 13. "Thou shalt tread upon the lion and 
adder; the young lion and the dragon shalt thou 
trample under feet."— Thus borne up in the hands of 
the Lord's faithful messengers and guarded by their 
vigilant watchfulness, and under the constant protection 
of the Most High, God's trusting, faithful children 
shall triumph over every device of Satan either 
to overpower or beguile them— whether he boisterously 
goes about as a roaring lion, or whether, serpent-like, 
he stealthily lurks about to insert his 
venomous poison. 

Verse 14. "Because he hath set his love upon 
me [saith Jehovah], therefore will I deliver him [from 
the pestilence, etc.]: I will set him on high [exalt 
him to joint-heirship with Christ, make him a member 
of the "Royal Priesthood," and a "partaker of 
the divine nature"], because he hath known [appreciated] 
my name." 

Verses 15,16. "He shall call upon me and I 
will answer him; I will be with him in trouble; I will 
deliver him and honor him. With long life [eternal 
life-John 10:28,29; Rom. 2:1] will I satisfy him, 



and show him my salvation"— make him understand 
my plan. 

Praise the Lord for such assurances of his loving 
care! "Bless the Lord, O my soul; and all that is 
within me, bless his holy name!" 



R3332 : page 76 

"GIVE YE THEM TO EAT." 

-MATT. 14:13-23.-MARCH 20.- 

Golden Text:— "Jesus said unto them, 
I am the Bread of Life."— John 6:35. 

ON hearing of the death of John the Baptist, Jesus 
crossed the Lake of Galilee,— out of the dominion 
of Herod. Possibly his thought was that his ministry 
was not yet concluded, and that Herod, having shown 
such boldness against John, might seek to interfere with 
his labors and the completion of his ministry. Or possibly 
he feared that a rebellious spirit might be aroused 
amongst the people— and his teachings would seem to foster 
this. An intimation of the kind is given in the fact 
that after the miracle the people sought to make Jesus 
king. To have encouraged any such matter would be to 
have opposed what he recognized to be the divine 
arrangement. 

Possibly, as some of the epistles seem to intimate, Jesus 
sought privacy with his apostles that he might contemplate 
the character of the work he was to do. Evidence 
of his growing popularity at this time is given in the fact 
that so large a multitude went afoot for many miles around 
the shore of the lake that they might be with him and 
hear his precious words of life— parables, etc., respecting 
the Kingdom which he proposed to establish, and in which 
all his apostles and all his faithful were to share. 

INSTANT IN SEASON AND OUT OF SEASON. 

When Jesus saw the multitude his heart was filled with 
compassion, and he could not withhold himself from them. 
In season and out of season, so far as his convenience was 
concerned, he must work the works of God, lay down his 
life inch by inch, hour by hour. We read that "he had 
compassion on the multitude," for they were as sheep 
without a shepherd. They had a heart-hunger, although 
they knew not what it was really, for they longed for 
higher, better, nobler conditions than surrounded them, 
and this great Teacher seemed to have words such as none 
other had for them— words of hope, of reconciliation with 
God, of divine providence and care. Those who sat in 
Moses' seat (scribes and Pharisees, Matt. 23:2) were so 
filled with a misconception of their proper attitude toward 



God, misled so, that they merely banded themselves together 
to enjoy the divine promises and to appropriate 
them to themselves, and give up the remainder of their 
nation as publicans and sinners, considering them too 
lacking in piety to have divine favor or any part or lot in 
the Kingdom privileges. Jesus, however, passed by these 
self-righteous ones who rejected him and the only way of 
approach to God, and showed his special favor to the 
humbler poor, who heard his message gladly and wondered 
at the "gracious words that proceeded out of his 
mouth"— words telling them that God despises not the 
imperfect and weak if they are sincere and consecrated to 
him. 

It was after three o'clock in the afternoon, in the early 
evening, that the disciples suggested that it was time 
for the multitude to be dismissed that they might find 
food and lodging in the surrounding villages. John 
and Mark record a dialogue on the subject between Jesus 
and Philip, the home of the latter being in the 
adjoining town of Bethsaida, and who was therefore 
acquainted with the region, its resources, etc. Jesus 
inquired of Philip, "Whence shall we buy bread that 
these may eat?" Philip replied that it would require 
two hundred pennyworth of bread to give each of them 
a little. This would mean about two hundred dollars' 
worth of bread according to our present day reckoning. 
All of the apostles then seemed to join in with the suggestion 
that the multitude be sent away that they might 
buy their own provisions as well as secure lodging— though 
as a matter of fact the people of the East make little ado 
about lodgings. They will camp almost anywhere, and, 
wrapping their cloaks about them, lie down in the fields 
or by the roadsides to sleep— in any place not supposed to 
be dangerous. 

R3333 : page 77 

SEEKING FIRST A NATURAL SUPPLY. 

It was then Jesus said to his disciples, "Give ye them 
to eat." Mark says that they inquired, "Shall we go and 
buy them 200 pennyworth of bread and give them to eat?" 
Jesus asked, "How many loaves have ye? Go and see." 
It was the Apostle Andrew who returned with the word 
that a lad of the company had five loaves and two small fishes 
which he had put at their disposal. Jesus accepted the 
situation and instructed that the multitude be directed to 
be seated in companies. It is supposed that they arranged 
themselves in groups of fifty, and that there were 100 
groups, making in all 5,000. Apparently they adopted 
the form of a three-sided square, after the shape of a Roman 
reclining table, the disciples who served them passing 
in at the open side and thus being able to reach the 
entire company. We are not informed how the five barley 
loaves and two small fishes were increased so as to be sufficient 
for the five thousand people with a remainder of 



twelve baskets full. Quite probably the increase was 
while being broken in the Lord's hands, though possibly 
also the increasing continued at the hands of the apostles 
as they in turn distributed the food to the people. 

If such a story were told us respecting an ordinary person 
we could not believe it. Indeed it would be not 
faith but credulity on our part to believe it. So it is with 
those who deny the heavenly origin of our Lord Jesus: 
they do not believe that he could or did do such works as 
are recorded in the Scriptures. Neither could we believe 
the matter from their standpoint. It is because we believe 
that Jesus was the only begotten of the Father, who came 
into the world to be our Redeemer— because we believe 
that the Father poured upon him the divine spirit or power 
that we can also believe that he had power to still the 
tempest or thus increase the food by his blessing. 

EVERYDAY MIRACLES OVERLOOKED. 

But, after all, the greatest skeptics in the world do believe 
in miracles: they see them all about us, in all the 
affairs of life. They well know that the same amount of 
barley that composed those five loaves, if planted, might 
have brought forth a harvest sufficient for the five thousand; 
they also know that the two fishes in the ordinary 
course of nature in a short time might have brought forth 
a sufficient supply of fish for the five thousand. It is easy 
to be seen that he who arranged the provisions of nature 
had full control of the situation, and could as easily supply 
the needed food in the way he did as by some other 
method. Who will deny that it is a miracle from man's 
standpoint to have the grain grow and the fishes produce 
their kind? These miracles of nature are going on about 
us every day, and hence they are common to us and we 
forget that they are miracles. It is a fact, nevertheless, 
that while we can analyze the fish and determine exactly 
its component elements, and could bring these same elements 
together in a dish and could form them into 
shapes of fish, we could not give life to the fish or cause 
them to bring forth of their kind. That to us would 
be a miracle. 

It is also true that we can analyze the barley and determine 
definitely its component elements and could bring 
them together in the same proportions and shapes, yet it 
is beyond our power to cause the products to germinate or 
to increase. Let these standing miracles that surround us 
every day convince all those who trust in the omnipotent 
God that he is able to do all that he is recorded to have 
done through his Anointed One. And let us remember 
that these things which Jesus did, as the Apostle declared, 
"manifested forth his coming glory"— illustrated and exemplified 
the coming power and glory of the great King 
of the world, who is to bless and feed and uplift the race 
of Adam and give life everlasting to as many as will receive 
it upon his terms. 

If we could not accept these Scriptural testimonies respecting 



the power of Jesus over natural things, neither 

could we accept the declarations of the prophets and 

apostles respecting his coming power in the Kingdom. 

If we can accept the Scriptural declaration respecting 

him as the great Restorer of all things, God's representative, 

Emmanuel, who in the future shall bless the whole 

world of mankind, then with equal propriety and with 

the same kind of faith we can recognize him as the one in 

whom the Father's power operated in a small way in connection 

with the miracles under consideration and others 

at the first advent. 

CAREFUL USE OF DIVINE BOUNTIES. 

The whole lesson was intensified by the Lord's direction 
that the disciples should gather up the fragments; 
and, besides, another lesson was given, namely, that however 
great and bountiful are God's provisions for people, 
none of them are to be wasted. We cannot see wastefulness 
in any of the Lord's consecrated people without feeling 
that, however great progress they have made in understanding 
the mind of the Lord in some respects, they are 
still deficient in this particular. An appreciation of the 
gift and respect for the Giver implies a carefulness and a 
stewardship in respect to all that comes to us from our 
heavenly Father— things temporal and things spiritual. 
According to our Lord's parables he is measuring our love 
and zeal in a considerable degree by our use or abuse of 
the talents, opportunities, blessings, temporal and spiritual, 
now bestowed upon us. 

We may be sure that in this miracle as in the others 
our Lord intended to inculcate some important lesson of 
faith or practice— not so much for the public as for his 
special followers, his disciples. We may presume, therefore, 
that he had a twofold purpose in sending them away 
by ship while he remained and dismissed the multitude, 
telling them that his discourses and miracles were at an 
end. One of these purposes doubtless was private fellowship 
and communion with the Father in the mountain— 
apart from the multitude— apart even from his beloved 

R3333 : page 78 

twelve apostles. There are times when we love to join 
our hearts and voices with others at the throne of heavenly 
grace, and come as a company of the Lord's people 
into fellowship and communion with him, and there are 
other times when we seem to need individual, personal, 
private communion with God, as our Lord seemed to have 
required on this occasion. 

Our Lord's second object was, doubtless, to give his 
disciples opportunity for thinking over the miracle and 
talking it over by themselves in his absence. They might 
thus speak more freely one with the other, and get more 
benefit than if he had been with them, and they would 
have been under a certain degree of restraint in his presence. 



The Lord wished this great lesson to be thoroughly 
impressed upon their minds: it would be helpful to them 
in future years to remember how he had power to increase 
their temporal food without human interference and independent 
of human conditions. It would be a lesson also 
respecting the spiritual food, that they should not despise 
the day of small things; that if sent by him to break the 
bread of life to the people, they should not be fearful and 
hindered by reason of unpropitious conditions prevailing, 
but should have full confidence in him that he had the 
power to overrule in all the affairs of life, that all his gracious 
purposes might be accomplished. 

WE MAY DISPENSE THE BREAD FROM HEAVEN. 

There is a lesson for us of the present day, too, in this 
matter, as there has been a lesson for the Church all the 
way down throughout this Gospel age. We may feel that 
the multitude is large and that the means at our disposal 
for reaching them with the bread of life are limited. We 
may be inclined to say here, we have such and such 
things, but "what are they among so many?" Let us 
hearken to the Lord's Word, "Give ye them to eat." It 
should be sufficient for us to know that any one is present 
who is hungering and thirsting after righteousness. "He 
that hath an ear to hear, let him hear." Tell him the 
good tidings, no matter in what form they must be presented, 
no matter how intolerable the conditions. The 
important thing is that here are some who are hungry for 
the Truth, and that if we will the Lord will bless us in 
ministering it to them. 

We have been reminded of this parable sometimes as 
we made out our annual reports of the work done by the 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY-and endeavored 
to realize the immense amount of spiritual food borne to 
the people all over the civilized world, and our privileges 
connected with its dissemination. We have marveled 
how the Lord blessed the comparatively small amount of 
money so that it reached so far;— it seemed to multiply 
under the Lord's blessing. The matter is with us as it was 
with the apostles. The Lord himself raises the question 
of how much it will require. We look about us and see 
how few are hungering and thirsting for the Truth, how 
many grasping after multitudinous errors, false gospels, 
new lights, etc., and we hear the Lord's word, "Give ye 
them to eat." It requires faith to go forth and to hope 
to accomplish the great harvest work under present limited 
conditions, but so surely as the Lord is the Chief Reaper, 
his blessing upon what he has given us to dispense will 
make it sufficient, so that all who are really hungry may be 
fed. 

Let the lesson sink deeply into our hearts; let us have 
the more confidence in him who not only provided the 
temporal food centuries ago, but who now according to 
his promise has come forth a second time and is dispensing 
again spiritual food, meat in due season, things new 



and old from the treasury of his Word. Let us be swift 
to appropriate these promises to our hearts, seeing to it 
that we are still hungering and thirsting after clearer views 
of the divine character and plan. Let us be on the alert 
to give to all who are hungering and thirsting the blessed 
food which has so greatly refreshed and strengthened us. 

R3334 : page 78 

If they do not get it they will faint by the way as they go 
looking for other provisions. We have the very thing 
which all of the household of faith need; without it they 
cannot maintain their standing, they cannot press on, 
they shall surely become discouraged. A thousand shall 
fall at our side and ten thousand at our right hand without 
this needed nourishment. Let us be alert. 

THE USE OF MEANS-THEN AND NOW. 

The lad who had the loaves and fishes and who put them 
at the disposal of the Lord, we may be sure was greatly 
blessed, although we hear nothing further of him than is 
here mentioned. It was a case of opportunity, and we 
may be sure that the boy thus willing to put his all at our 
Lord's disposal, instead of attempting to sell it to the hungry 
at famine prices, received a corresponding blessing. The lesson 
for all is that whatever we may have of financial means 
for sending forth the bread of life to others, or whatever we 
may have of knowledge of the Truth, is neither to be selfishly 
hoarded nor selfishly partaken of by ourselves. It is 
to be consecrated to the Lord, and out of that consecration 
the Lord will bring blessing to others and increased 
blessings upon our own heads and hearts. 

The Golden Text of our lesson may be said to be 
the very heart of it in some respects. It was after Jesus 
had spent the night in prayer and toward morning 
came to his disciples still on the lake in the boat— 
stormstayed— and after they had come to the landing 
safely, that some of those who had been with him and 
who had partaken of the miraculous bread and fish had 
returned to the vicinity of Capernaum and sought Jesus 
again, that he upbraided them and accused them of seeking 
him more for the loaves and fishes than on account of 
the truths which he proclaimed; and using this as a text, 
proceeded to tell them of himself as the Bread of Eternal 
Life that had come down from heaven, of which if a man 
eat he would never die— the bread of life everlasting. 

Blessed are our ears for we have heard! blessed are the 
eyes of our understanding for we have seen him ! blessed 
are we for we have tasted of this Bread of Life! Blessed 

R3334 : page 79 

are we if we are still hungering and thirsting after righteousness, 
and day after day being more and more filled 
according to the promise. 



A FAMINE FOR THE WORD OF GOD . -- AMOS 8:11. 

We live in very stirring times, in times when there is 
a greater hungering for knowledge, for wealth, for influence, 
for power, for everything, than there ever was before. 
Everybody seems to be hungry. Yet our day is so full of 
philosophies, inventions, sciences (true and false), moneymaking 
schemes, financial schemes, theological schemes, 
etc., etc., that the whole world is absorbed in attempts 
to satisfy these various hungerings of the soul. 
Yet these things do not satisfy even the worldly;— they 
still hunger and thirst; and nothing will ever satisfy them 
but the living bread— the Truth. Now is the time for us 
who have become "new creatures in Christ Jesus" to see 
to it that we dispense to others the true bread and water 
of life; and that our own earthly hunger for earthly things 
shall not be prospered or gratified at the expense of our 
spiritual hunger for spiritual things, but that the latter 
shall have our special attention and care and provision. 

The more people are satisfied with earthly things the 
less inclination they will have for the heavenly things, and 
the more we are satisfied with the heavenly things the less 
of appetite will we have for the earthly things. The new 
nature flourishes at the expense of the old nature, and the 
new ambitions, hopes and desires at the expense of the 
old. Likewise when the old nature flourishes, it is at the 
expense of the new in all of life's affairs. Let us then, 
realizing the difference between the food that perisheth 
and the food that brings divine blessing— eternal life— let 
us choose the latter, let us feed more and more upon the 
Lord and upon his Word and thus grow strong in the Lord and 
in the power of his might, and be more and more weaned 
from the world, its spirit, its hopes, its ambitions. We 
seek a heavenly country, a heavenly Kingdom, a heavenly 
nature, and heavenly qualities, fitted and prepared for 
that heavenly nature. We have found the great Lifegiver, 
the one who can and does supply this bread from 
heaven. It is our great privilege to be the dispensers of 
this bread— "Give ye them to eat." "He that hath an 
ear let him hear." 



R3334 : page 79 

QUARTERLY REVIEW-MARCH 27. 

Golden Text:— "Jesus went about all Galilee, teaching in their synagogues, 
and preaching the Gospel of the Kingdom, and healing all manner 
of sickness."— Matt. 4:23. 

THE Sunday lessons for this quarter have given us numerous 

profitable pictures and studies in the life of 

Christ. Beginning with his birth we have traced 

his life from boyhood to manhood, and there noted his 



consecration even unto death and his consequent begettal 
of the holy Spirit as the beginning of the New Creature 
of God— the Head of the Church. We have followed him 
through the various steps of his ministry, noted many of 
his wonderful miracles on the sea and on the land, and in 
every particular have seen him faithful to his mission, 
"Wist ye not that I must be about my Father's business?" 
his expression as a boy, seemed to be with him through all 
the affairs of life. 

We are to remember that while Palestine at the present 
time has a population of about 600,000, it had about ten 
times as many in our Lord's day. Galilee, where most of 
his miracles were performed, as recorded in this quarter's 
lessons, is supposed to have had over 100 towns of 15,000 
population, or a total population of over 3,000,000. The 
people of Galilee were evidently thrifty, prosperous work 
people. The aristocracy centered more about Jerusalem, 
and the explanation is given that Jesus could no more 
walk in Jewry because the Jews sought to kill him. Hence, 
as we have seen, much of his time was spent in Galilee, 
and evidently with the people best prepared to receive his 
teachings. We remember that he was called the "Galilean," 
and his disciples were "men of Galilee." 

The essence of this quarter's lessons to the Lord's consecrated 
people should be specially that of discipleship— 
following the footsteps of this great Teacher and Savior. 
He has called us also to be fishers of men, and we have 
responded to his call and left all to follow him, to be his 
disciples, to share his experiences and whatever ignominy 
may come as the result of faithfulness to him and the 
truths which he proclaimed. To us also he has displayed 
his powers, permitting us to see and know things which 
are kept secret from those without. To us he has given 
the good tidings of the Kingdom to encourage us, to inspire 
our hearts with love and loyalty. Blessed were those 
disciples of old, and blessed are the disciples of today! 
The blessing then was largely dependent upon the nearness 
of the disciples to the Lord, and the nearness was 
marked largely by the degree of zeal and devotion; and 
thus we must expect it to be today. It was Peter, James 
and John, who were the most zealous of the apostles, 
that had the special favors when such were to be given. 
And so it is today; those who most cheerfully, most zealously 
forget self and earthly ambitions, aims and projects, 
and who most fully give themselves to the Lord and to his 
service, these may walk nearest to the Lord at all times; 
these may go with him to the Mount; these may be special 
witnesses of his powers, and these in special times 
may be close to the Lord. Some, like John, may not only 
sit at meat with him, but sit next to him— in his bosom. 
In proportion as our lives are copies of the Lord's, all the 
time and influence at our disposal, outside of necessary 
obligations for things needful to ourselves and families, 
will be spent as he spent his time— in doing good unto all 
men, especially unto the household of faith. 



page 81 

SEMI-MONTHLY 
VOL. XXV. MARCH 15, 1904. No. 6. 

CONTENTS. 



Views From the Watch Tower 83 

The Era of Religious Toleration 83 

Views of a Cleveland D.D 84 

Russia and the War 84 

Noah's Ark Well Proportioned 85 

Mental Toxin and Anti-Toxin 85 

"His Way Is Perfect" 86 

"Christ Brought Life and Immortality 

to Light Through the Gospel" 87 

"What Think Ye of Christ?" 91 

Interesting Questions Answered 94 

Public Ministries of the Truth 96 

page 82 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-24 EVERSHOLT ST., LONDON, N.W. 
GERMAN BRANCH-MIRKER STR., 45, ELBERFELD. 

PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE, 5C (2-l/2d.) A COPY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity 
or adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER, will be supplied FREE, if 
they send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting 
the paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our 
list continually. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE 



THIS JOURNAL IS PUBLISHED IN THE 

FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, DANISH AND ITALIAN LANGUAGES. 

SAMPLE COPIES AND TERMS FREE. 



The Pittsburg Gazette publishes one of Pastor C. T. Russell's 
sermons each week. See terms on last page. 

VOLUNTEER MATTER FOR 1904. 



We are ready for your orders for Volunteer matter for this 
year. Please observe the following rules: (1) Write us what 
will be the full number required. Where these orders amount 
to over 2,000 we expect to send them in four equal parts; 
where less than 2,000 in two equal parts. (2) State when you 
will be needing and ready for each separate installment. 
(3) Give particulars readdress, to which they should be sent. 

R3342 : page 82 

THE AUSTRALIAN BRANCH. 



Brother Henninges reports that he and his wife have arrived 
safely at destination after a pleasant voyage. They 
have secured suitable quarters and the Melbourne Branch 
is an accomplished fact. May the Lord's blessing be with 
the work and workers there as elsewhere we surely all pray. 
AUSTRALIAN BRANCH--32 JOHNSTON ST., FITZROY, MELBOURNE 

page 82 

MARKED NEW TESTAMENTS. 



We have a good stock of these on hand— cloth binding, 
red edges, minion type. Convenient for the pocket. 
The special feature is the marking in red and black of the 
passages which refer to salvation through Christ. Price, 
15c; 2 for 25c, postpaid. They are not our publication, 
nor marked exactly as we should have preferred. 



R3334 : page 83 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 
THE ERA OF RELIGIOUS TOLERATION. 



DR. ALEXANDER McKENZIE, pastor of the 
oldest Trinitarian Congregational Church in 
Cambridge, and Dr. DeNormandie, pastor of 
the ancient Unitarian Church of Roxbury, exchanged 



pulpits recently; and the next Sunday the Rev. Dr. 
George A. Gordon of the Old South (Third) Church and 
the Rev. James Eells of the First Church (Unitarian) 
exchanged pulpits, and, later in the day, Drs. Gordon 
and Eells officiated together at the communion service 
in the First Church, to which Dr. Gordon invited his 
people. 

These facts have much significance when locally 
appraised, but they are only part of a movement by no 
means sectional or denominational. The pastor and 
pastor emeritus of the leading Trinitarian Congregational 
Church in the State of Iowa have just refused, on 
conscientious grounds, to belong to the Ministerial Association 
of Des Moines, "so long as fellowship is denied 

R3335 : page 83 

to Jews, Catholics and Unitarians," and this because, 

"in their opinion, the action of the association 

in withholding fellowship from the ministers of these 

churches does not represent the Christian sentiment of 

the churches; does not measure up to Western standards 

of hospitality, and finds no justification in the 

ideals of modern civilization." Notwithstanding the 

Rev. B. Fay Mills still affirms that he is a Unitarian 

in theology, he is being welcomed to the pulpits of 

more than one Orthodox Congregational Church in Wisconsin, 

and is being accepted as a teacher of social 

Christianity. So that this new mood of fellowship between 

two long-alienated wings of the one denomination 

is not confined to Massachusetts or to Connecticut— 

as the recent State conference's action with respect to 

the church in Plymouth proved— but has extended to 

the interior, hitherto deemed unreservedly conservative." 

—Boston Transcript. 



PILATE AND HEROD MADE FRIENDS. 

The very occasion of our Lord's rejection and crucifixion 
was the same in which Pilate and Herod were 
reconciled. Similarly, as the foregoing shows, we have 
now reached the time when the wide extremes of Trinitarianism 
and Unitarianism are reconciled; but in this 
the very moment when both should be harmonized by 
the Truth, both unite against it. It seems a trifling 
thing that Unitarians, who utterly repudiate our Lord's 
pre-existent state and his leaving the glory of the Father 
and that he was our Redeemer, should be fellowshipped 
by those who go to the opposite extreme and 
claim that Jesus was one in person, in substance, with 
the Father and his equal in power and glory. 

Why, under the circumstances, should the view 
which harmonized all the Scriptures on the subject- 
that shows our Lord's pre-existence next to the Father 



and above all others, which shows him while on earth 
to have been "the man Christ Jesus," "holy, harmless, 
undefiled, separate from sinners"; and which Scripturally 
presents him as now "highly exalted, far above 
angels, principalities and powers— be opposed in every 
way imaginable? 

The secret reason is that all these ministers have 
become Higher Critics and Evolutionists;— in plainer 
terms Agnostics or Infidels. The Trinitarians no longer 
believe in the trinity and have repudiated the Bible as 
a divine light. They are fulfilling prophecy, unwittingly, 
and fancy that they are making a great advance. 
(Isaiah 29:14). Truly they are ridding themselves of 
unscriptural traditions received from the dark ages, 
but at what a cost! They are discarding cardinal 
truths which their errors obscured and which alone 
kept them at all in touch with the Lord. We want 
none of their union in unbelief: but the "One Lord, 
one faith, one baptism," and one God and Father of 
our Lord Jesus, who is above all. 

Now is the time for true soldiers of the cross who 
have put on the "whole armor of God" to wisely, 
carefully, loyally help the dear "brethren" who are 
still loyal to the Lord and confused by present-day 
developments. Let us not hesitate to "lay down our 

R3335 : page 84 

lives for the brethren"— our time, talent, influence- 
doing all as unto the Lord, the Captain of our 
salvation. 

VIEWS OF A PROMINENT CLEVELAND D.D. 



Evidently some ministers realize their true situation. 
Note the following plain statements, clipped from 
the Cleveland Plain Dealer: 

"In speaking yesterday of his recent utterances regarding 
the surprisingly small number of persons who 
joined Cleveland churches last year, Dr. Wood said: 

"The arithmetical phase of the church problem 
today, I believe, can be explained in no other way than 
by the expression, "Old things have passed away, all 
things have become new." 

"The old systems of thought and expression, and 
the corresponding action, are working today, and there 
is abroad in the world a deep-seated conviction that 
something better is needed— a crying out of the soul 
for something that the church has not yet been able to 
supply, but is earnestly reaching after. The apparent 
decay of, and lack of interest in, the present religious 
life, instead of being discouraging and disheartening, 
ought to be considered in the light of truest optimism. 

"There is a marked transition. Yet I believe that 



out of all the debris of the present will come a new way 
of thinking, which will be more in accord with the divine 
plan for the uplifting of the race. 

'"Preachers today are conscious that the message 
they bring to the people is not a message which supplies 
the heart's demands, and many of us, I believe, 
would be glad to become prophets of the Higher Truth 
were it not for the fear of losing our positions as safe 
leaders among men. But the time is near at hand 
when, if the voice of the Christian ministry is to be 
heard, clergymen must take their stand for those things 
which are true, as against those things which they have 
been trying to make themselves and the world believe 
are true.'" 

RUSSIA AND THE WAR. 



Russia in Manchuria is thus described by Senator 
Beveridge, who has recently visited there: 

"Although the Russians are slothful, their course 
in Manchuria has been wonderfully modern. By the 
side of every filthy, reeking Chinese town has arisen a 
clean, orderly Russian town, with wide streets, often 
paved, handsome residences, public buildings, amusement 
halls, churches, parks with band-stands, drives— 
in every respect like the modern small cities of our Middle 
West. Thus is the Chinese population of Manchuria 
being taught, not by precept but by example. 

"One of the great services Russia has rendered 
Manchuria and all the countries of the globe which 
sought to trade with that province was the destruction 
of the thriving bands of brigands who invested the 
country, and whose power had so grown that they captured 
every shipment of goods across the country not 
previously protected by insurance in an office established 
by the bandits for that purpose. The Russians, 
it seems, in a short war on these marauders, slew over 
two thousand, and hunted the remainder to the far corners 
of the empire." 

Senator Beveridge finds the Russian to "have more 
understanding of the Oriental temperament and Oriental 
conditions than is possessed by any other European 
people, and scarcely less than the Japanese themselves 
have. Because of this fact Russia has succeeded 
so well in eastern Asia. It is feared and hated in war, 
but liked in peace. The Russian never retreats from 
ground once occupied, and when he makes war he is 
terrible. He never parleys. In peace he is quiet, orderly, 
just. He minds his own business, and is kind, 
untiringly patient and conciliatory. But when he 
makes war he makes it so thoroughly that he never 
needs do the same job over again. This is the keynote, 
as sounded by Skobeleff, the hero of all Russians: 
'My system is this— to strike hard, and keep on hitting 



until resistance is completely over; then at once to form 
ranks, cease slaughter, and be kind and humane to the 
prostrate enemy.'... 

"Holy Russia looks to the regeneration of the 
world as one of her great, if, indeed, not her greatest 
historic mission. Of course, even the most fanatical 
Russian churchman does not consider this a thing of 
the present day or the present decade or the present 
century. Indeed, the centuries, to the thought of the 
Russian churchman (or, for that matter, the Russian 
statesman), are small matters. 'All in God's own 
time' is the motto of the Russian peasant. If 'the mills 
of the gods grind slowly' to us, they do not grind slowly 
to the Russian. He sees no particular reason for 
hurry. Let the processes of evil and good work out 
their distinct results naturally. Let the world's age-old 
battle between darkness and light not be waged in 
the flash of a spark struck from the meeting of swords 
of single combatants in some portion of the universal 
field. It is a gigantic struggle, in which the decades are 
but moments and the centuries but hours. In the end 
light will conquer darkness, thinks the Russian; and, to 
his mind, the Christian faith is the all-conquering light 
and the Greek Orthodox Church the only true bearer 
of that sacred torch." 

The New York Press contains the following interesting 
item on the war: 

"A United States naval officer of high military 
reputation gave The Press his opinion at the outbreak 
of the war that the Russian war-ships, guns and torpedoes 
would be of no value to the Czar, because his 
'people do not know how to use their tools.' Since the 
Russians have so abundantly confirmed his judgment 
of their navy— blowing up their own ships on their 
own mines, firing into their own lines and generally doing 
more harm to themselves than to the enemy— it 
will be of interest to see if his views are also well founded 
as to the Russian army. This officer believes that 
the Russian army will be proved far inferior to its efficiency 
of thirty years ago, for the reason that the Russian 
in the ranks is not a thinking man or capable of 
independent action. In the old manner of fighting in 
mass one man was as good as another so long as he had 
a strong stomach for combat, since he could be directed 
and controlled by the officer standing near him, 
even flogged (literally with whips) into quick and soldierly 
action. 

"In the fighting line of today, however, the men 
of the ranks, strung out at great distances, in 'open 
formation,' taking ranges where the enemy cannot even 
be seen, and in return being fired at by those they cannot 
see and whose position they cannot locate (thanks 

R3336 : page 85 

to smokeless powder) without intelligent deduction, 



must all be capable of independent action and thoughtful 

action or they will fail to perform any useful function 

in a battle. A subaltern cannot be near all his 

men. He cannot give them commands except for general 

formation and maneuver unless by signal. If a soldier 

does not find the right range, there is no one to 

give it to him, if he is firing to the right when his enemy 

is to the left of him, no one will discover the fact for him. 

On the firing line today every man who carries a rifle, 

to be an efficient soldier, must be capable of self-command, 

his own sub-lieutenant, lieutenant and captain 

when necessary. And he must know something of the 

science of war, of which, the American officer declares, 

the Russian in the ranks, having an extremely low intelligence 

and absolutely no education (ninety-six per 

cent, of the Russians cannot read), is totally and 

densely ignorant. 

"However brave the Russian is, therefore— and 
the American officer concedes him the greatest amount 
of sheer animal courage— he is not expected by military 
men of the modern school of war to make much 
better use of his fighting tools on land than on sea. If 
this opinion should prove to be a fact in the land campaign 
which is now following the brilliant performances 
of the Japanese afloat, the Czar, with his hope of military 
ascendancy utterly crushed, will begin to think, 
no doubt, of educating his millions on millions of subjects 
who have never been permitted even to see a 
printed letter; and in such event the Russian war, 
terrific defeat though it should be, would come to be 
a blessing to the Russian people gaining this boon, and 
to the world." 

RUSSIA'S AWAKENING. 



"Russia's behavior since war with Japan was declared, 
and especially in the interval since the Port Arthur 
engagement and the sinking of two Russian warships 
at Chemulpo, is suggestive of anything but a 
power flushed with confidence. The studied and insistent 
appeals to Christendom that are proceeding from 
St. Petersburg, setting forth the respects in which Japan 
has violated, or seems to Russia to have violated, 
the law of nations since the beginning of hostilities may 
be warranted or not, in the judgment of competent international 
lawyers. But at any rate it is apparent 
that Russia has been surprised, and that she is beginning 
to realize poignantly the difficulties by which she 
is confronted. Her complaints are a plain confession of 
physical weakness. It would be no marvel if Russia 
should succeed, by the diplomacy which has for many 
decades been her chief reliance, in so enlisting the sympathies 
of France and Germany as to complicate affairs 
in the gravest manner."— Pittsburg Press. 



NOAH'S ARK WELL PROPORTIONED. 

The New York Tribune credits to the Syren and 
Shipping the following comparison of the ark with modern 
vessels: 

"Within the last ten years the general dimensions 
of the ark have been closely followed by cargo steamship 
builders for deep sea and the American Great Lakes 
service. According to the Bible, the ark was 480 feet 
long, 80 feet wide and 48 feet deep. Her tonnage was 
1 1,413, and she had plenty of room for pairs of all the 
distinct species of animals that are classed by Buffon— 
244— and she could have accommodated a thousand 
persons, and then have had plenty of room for the storage 
of supplies. In the seventeenth century Peter Jansen, 
a Hollander, built a vessel of the exact proportions 
of the ark, and she was successful, as the records of the 
time show, in making money for her owners. Noah, 
'the Father of Naval Architecture,' is held in profound 
respect by naval architects of today, who know how 
immeasurably the Phoenicians, Greeks and Romans and 
all other shipbuilders fell short of the excellence of the 
type of the ark as a commodious, safe and economical 
vessel." 

MENTAL TOXIN AND ANTI-TOXIN. 



That thoughts may poison is a well-proven fact. 
Depressing thoughts interfere with the cerebral circulation, 
impairing the nutrition of the cells and nerve 
centers. The result is that the organs and tissues manifest 
lost or impaired function— loss of general nutrition 
follows— and a break-down is inevitable. Fear, worry, 
anger, envy, jealousy, and other negative thoughts, 
reflect themselves most disastrously in the human system. 
Fear has paralyzed nerve-centers, and turned 
hair white over night. A mother's milk has been poisoned 
by a fit of anger. Fear and hate— father and son 
—have produced insanity, idiocy, paralysis, cholerma, 
jaundice, sudden decay of teeth, fatal anaemia, skin diseases, 
erysipelas and eczema. Epidemics owe their 
rapid spread and heavy death rate to fear and ignorance. 
Epidemics may kill their dozens— fear kills its 
thousands. All the brood of negative, fearful, selfish, 
hateful thoughts manifest themselves in physical conditions. 
Stigmata or marks upon the body, caused by 
fear or desire, are quite common in the annals of medical 
science and psychology. 

Professor Gates, of the Smithsonian Institution 
of Washington, D.C., in his investigations of the 
effect of mental states upon the body, found that irascible, 
malevolent and depressing emotions generated in 
the system injurious compounds, some of which were 



extremely poisonous; he also found that agreeable, 
happy emotions generated chemical compounds of nutritious 
value, which stimulated the cells to manufacture 
energy. He says: 

"Bad and unpleasant feelings create harmful chemical 
products in the body, which are physically injurious. 
Good, pleasant, benevolent feelings create beneficial 
chemical products which are physically healthful. 
These products may be detected by chemical analysis 
in the perspiration and secretions of the individual. 
More than forty of the good, and as many of the bad, 
have been detected. Suppose half a dozen men in a 
room. One feels depressed, another remorseful, another 
ill-tempered, another jealous, another cheerful, 
another benevolent. Samples of their perspiration are 
placed in the hands of the psycho-physicist. Under 
his examination they reveal all these emotional conditions 
distinctly and unmistakably." 

Remember, this is not "the airy fancy of some enthusiastic 
mental scientist," but is the testimony of a 
leading scientific investigator in the laboratories of the 
Smithsonian Institution, one of the best known scientific 
institutions of the world. "Chemical analysis," 
mind you— not "transcendental imaginings." 

R3336 : page 86 

Now I have said enough about the toxin and a little 
about the anti-toxin of the mind. I might go on 
for hours, stating example after example, illustration 
after illustration; but the tale would be just the same. 
Now, what are you going to do about it? Are you 
going to keep on poisoning yourself and those about 
you with vile, malignant thoughts reeking with the 
miasmatic effluvia of hate— emitting the noxious exhalation 
of fear and worry? Or will you cease being a 
psychic pest-house, and begin to fumigate and disinfect 
your mind? And after getting rid of all the microbes 
of fear and worry and the bacilli of hate, jealousy and 
envy, open wide the windows of the mind and admit 
the bright sunshine of love, and the bracing air of confidence 
and fearlessness. 

Come, friends, let us get out of this habit of poisoning 
the air with fear, worry and hate thought. Let 
us join the ranks of the Don't Worry company— the 
fearless brigade, the invincible, conquering army of 
Love. Let us be bright, cheerful and happy— the other 
things are not worth while. Let us be confident, expectant, 
hopeful and cheerful— these things are winners. 
Let us be filled with love for all men and God, and we 
will find that life is one sweet song. Love, faith and 
fearlessness are the ingredients of life's great antitoxin. 
Try it and be blessed.— Selected. 



R3336 : page 86 

"HIS WAY IS PERFECT." 

"As for God, his way is perfect: the Word of the Lord is tried; he is a 
buckler to all those that trust in him. For who is God, save the Lord? 
or who is a Rock, save our God?"— Psa. 18:30,31. 

GOD'S way is his plan or purpose, that which he 

purposes to accomplish and which he is steadily 

working out according to the counsel of his own 

will. Men also have various plans and purposes of their 

own which they try to work out as nearly as possible. 

Some men purpose to amass a fortune; some to acquire 

a liberal education and vastly to increase their mental 

capacity and power; others to gain fame and popular 

applause, or social or political preferment, etc., etc. 

But to most men the way they choose proves unsatisfactory 

after a brief trial, and they turn restlessly from 

one way to another; and even when they pursue one 

way to the end they realize that it has been an unprofitable 

way— that the end was not worthy of the strife 

necessary to gain it. 

Then again men have their various ways or theories 
as to how God will or ought to accomplish the world's 
salvation. Some claim that it will be accomplished by 
a process of evolution, and that it is due to the race by 
right. Some of these blasphemously claim that the 
present degradation of the world is directly chargeable 
to God, who, they say, is the real author of all the sin 
and wickedness we see in the world— that he made men 
so, and is therefore bound IN JUSTICE to bring them up 
to a better condition. There are others who claim that 
God has predestinated the vast majority of mankind to 
eternal torment without any will or choice of their own, 
their doom having been unalterably sealed before they 
were born, while a small minority were likewise unalterably 
elected to eternal salvation and happiness. 

But these and various other incongruous theories 
are only the ways of men, and have no foundation in 
the Word of God, except as men pervert that Word. 
It is a serious matter for any of God's children to accept 
or entertain such views of his character and plan 
when they are so clearly stated in his inspired Word; and 

R3337 : page 86 

any one who can hear our heavenly Father's character 
thus traduced without feeling or expressing his righteous 
indignation is disloyal to God and unworthy to 
bear the name of Christ. If we have so much regard 
for the friendship of those who advocate such views of 
God's character that we cannot reprove their course, 
we also rank ourselves with the enemies of the Lord, 
and he will surely so regard us. Such indifference to 
God and his Truth shows clearly that there is something 



wrong at heart; and sooner or later such will 

drift into the outer darkness unless they promptly repent 

and resolutely determine to make no compromises 

with error, and to cultivate no friendships with 

the enemies of the Lord. 

But, "As for God, his way is perfect;" and his 
Word clearly sets forth his way to all the simple-minded 
ones who take him at his word and who have no 
fine-spun theories of their own to establish. In coming 
to God's Word it is always important to remember 
that our attitude should be that of the disciple and not 
of the teacher. Such an attitude is itself a long step in 
the direction of a knowledge of the Truth; for it is written 
that God resisteth the proud, but giveth grace to 
the humble. (James 4:6.) If we come to his Word as 
reverent students, expecting to find therein the delineation 
of the pure and righteous character and plan of 
our God, that plan and character will be revealed to 
us; but if we come to it in a captious spirit and with 
impure and unholy thoughts and ambitions, we have 
just the kind of poor, imperfect brains that can warp 
and twist the Scriptures to suit our own ideas. If we 
put on the colored glasses of prejudice we can read 
God's Word as seen through them only. 

And this is what the Psalmist implied when he 
said, "With the merciful thou wilt show thyself merciful; 
with an upright man thou wilt show thyself upright; 
with the pure thou wilt show thyself pure; and 
with the froward thou wilt show thyself froward. For 
thou wilt save the humble people, but wilt bring down 
high looks." (Psa. 18:25-27.) And again we read, "A 
scorner seeketh wisdom and findeth it not, but knowledge 
is easy unto him that understandeth;" and, "There 

R3337 : page 87 

is a way which seemeth right unto a man, but the end 
thereof are the ways of death."— Prov. 14:6-12. 

Oh, how we need to beware of "high looks" and of 
the pride that goeth before destruction and of the 
haughty spirit that precedeth a fall! (Prov. 16:18.) For 
if in pride we go about to establish our own ways, and do 
not fully submit ourselves to the right ways of the Lord, 
we will surely deceive ourselves and be led away by the 
error of the wicked, so that God's way or plan, as 
viewed through the colored glasses of our ambitions 
and prejudices, will seem to our obscured vision as the 
Psalmist describes— unmerciful, impure and perverse, 
instead of what it really is— merciful and holy and 
righteous altogether. There is nothing more dangerous 
than pride, whether it be manifested in a love of display 
or in ambitions to be great or to be thought well 
of by others. If we are ambitious to be more generous 
than God, and go about to establish the idea of 
the absolute certainty of the everlasting salvation of 
every individual, when God plainly speaks to the contrary; 



or if we ignore God's appointed means of salvation, 
which is by faith in the precious blood of Christ 
shed for the remission of sins, and endeavor to climb 
up to life by some other way, and to teach others to 
make the same effort; or if we repudiate the doctrine 
of the original perfection of man, who was created in 
the image of God, and also that of his own free will he 
fell into sin and thereby incurred its just penalty— 
DEATH, and not eternal torment; or if we seek out any 
other human invention contrary to the Word of God, 
and go about to establish it, it is pride that is asserting 
itself; and if it be not promptly humbled it will surely 
and shortly end in complete alienation from God. 

Dearly beloved, let us fear lest a promise being left 
us of entering into God's rest— into the rest of abiding 
faith in his way, his glorious plan— any of us should 
come short of it, and instead of calmly and confidently 
resting in God's way and in the blessed hope of its 
glorious outcome, we be left in confusion and doubt 
upon the whole subject. 

But if you have thus far stood firmly in the faith 
of God's way we are persuaded better things of you; 
and if, with the Psalmist, you can say, "My heart is 
fixed, O God, my heart is fixed" (Psa. 57:7); if your 
heart is established in love and reverence and faith in 
the sure Word of God, then you may also say, "For 
thou wilt light my candle: the Lord my God will enlighten 
my darkness." (Psa. 18:28.) Yea, has it not 
been even so? Surely hitherto the Lord hath led us. 
The language of the prophet applies to all those humble 
and faithful ones whom the Lord has been leading 
—"For by thee I have run through a troop [of opposing 
enemies]; and by my God have I leaped over a 
wall" [of bondage, into the glorious liberty of a son of 
God]. -Psa. 18:29. 

Beloved, have you been thus overcoming? have 
you been following the Lord's leading? have you found, 
and are you still abiding in the sweet rest of faith in 
his plan, in his way, and not your own? "As for God, 
his way is perfect": it is just and merciful and benevolent 
and wise and practicable, and sure of a glorious 
termination. "The Word of the Lord is tried": when 
fully understood it will stand the test of every argument 
that could be formed against it as to its justice, 
its wisdom, or its benevolence. Of this we are fully 
assured by our Lord, who prophetically declared that 
the testimony of those who come to a full knowledge of 
God's plan will be— "Great and marvelous are thy 
works, Lord God Almighty; just and true are thy ways, 
thou King of saints."— Rev. 15:3. 

"The Lord is a buckler [a defense] to all those 
that trust in him; for who is God [is mighty] save the 
Lord? or who is a rock [a safe anchorage to our souls] 
save our God?" There is no other one to whom we 
may anchor our faith and hope; but securely anchored 
to him we may trust and not be afraid, and may sweetly 



rest under the shadow of his wing. "The Lord liveth; 
and blessed be our rock; and let the Lord of our 
salvation be exalted."— Psa. 18:46. 



R3337 : page 87 

"CHRIST BROUGHT LIFE AND IMMORTALITY TO LIGHT 
THROUGH THE GOSPEL." 

-MARK 7:24-37.-APRIL 3.- 

Golden Text:— "Without faith it is 
impossible to please him."— Heb. 11:6. 

WITH this lesson we start a new quarter in studies 

of the earthly life of Christ. Since it falls 

on what is generally observed as Easter Sunday, 

those who have arranged the lessons suggest, without 

breaking the narrative of Christ's ministry, that 

this lesson be treated from the resurrection standpoint. 

The thought is a good one, especially for those whose 

eyes of understanding have been opened to some realization 

of the glorious things of the Millennial Kingdom, 

for which the whole creation is groaning and waiting. 

These and not others can properly get a connection 

between our Lord's miracles and the resurrection life 

of the Millennial age. 

LIFE-RIGHTS FOR THE WORLD 
SECURED BY THE PRECIOUS BLOOD. 

From this standpoint we perceive that while our 
Lord Jesus came into the world to die on man's behalf, 
to redeem Adam and his race from the sentence of sin— 

R3337 : page 88 

namely, death— he did, additionally, two other important 

works. The redemptive work was the principal 

one, without which there could be no future life of any 

kind. The laying down of life daily until the sacrifice 

was finished at Calvary may, therefore, be designated 

the principal or foundation work accomplished by our 

Lord. Without that nothing else could have been of 

any avail, but on that foundation the other two works 

could proceed. The Apostle declares that the Lord 

brought life and immortality to light through the Gospel. 

This means that no clear and definite hope respecting 

eternal life had ever previously been given to 

any one— even to the Jews. While other nations were 

without God, having no hope, the Jews did have a sufficiency 

of divine revelation to inspire a hope in the 

resurrection; though the philosophy of it— how God 

could be just and yet release those whom he had justly 



sentenced to death— they could not see, because it was 
not time, and therefore was not yet revealed. 

Christ brought LIFE to light by explaining to those 
who had ears to hear that he had come into the world 
to "give his life a ransom for many." (Mark 10:45.) 
He explained further that the time would come when 
all in their graves should hear his voice in kingly 
authority, and awaken from the sleep of death— come 
forth from the prison house of the tomb. The people 
even then might have wondered what advantage there 
would be in such a release from the tomb if they would 
still be subject to the pains and aches and demon oppositions 
of the present time. Our Lord fortified the 
testimonies of the prophets respecting the Millennial 
age, which they declared would be a period of universal 
blessing, with nothing to hurt or destroy in all the holy 
Kingdom. He showed how this could be by the various 
miracles which he performed; for he not only preached 
the Kingdom of God, taught his disciples to look forward 
to it and to pray for its coming and blessing and 
power, but in the various miracles which he performed 
he illustrated that its powers would prevail amongst 
men for their blessing. 

He healed all manner of diseases and cast out demons, 
and thus gave evidence that in God's due time, 
as the great Physician, he will be armed with the abundant 

R3338 : page 88 

power which will completely restrain Satan and 

all the fallen angels from all work of evil in respect to 

the human family, and when he will lift up the poor, 

the lame, the deaf, the blind, the dumb, out of their 

present tribulation. And moreover, this temporary 

release which he brought to those who by faith accepted 

his favor, illustrated still higher blessings, labors and 

privileges— the opening of the eyes of the understanding, 

the curing of the leprosy of sin, the returning of 

the withered powers, as well as the awakening of the 

dead— that all might see and hear and know of the 

righteousness which God approves and of the life everlasting 

which will be its reward, and that all might be 

helped out of the present bondage to sin and imperfection, 

etc., into the full liberty of the sons of God. Thus 

the Lord brought life— everlasting life— to the view, to 

the knowledge, of those who hear his message of the 

Kingdom and the blessings to flow from it. 

IMMORTALITY OR DIVINE NATURE ONLY FOR THE ELECT. 

He brought IMMORTALITY to light also. In addition 
to everlasting life for the world, he opened up a 
way by which a special class of footstep-followers might 
share with himself the glory, honor and immortality 
of the divine nature. The world in general was not 
expected to understand or appreciate this. On the contrary, 



the natural eye hath not seen nor ear heard, 

neither hath it entered into the heart of man the things 

which God hath in reservation for them who love him 

—for the New Creatures— for those who are begotten 

of the holy Spirit, and that make their calling and election 

sure to joint-heirship with him in the Kingdom. 

Our Lord's ministry and teachings can only be 
rightly appreciated when viewed from these three standpoints: 
(1) His own sacrifice as the redemption price for 
Adam and his race— laying down his life day by day 
until he cried, "It is finished." (2) His general teachings 
—which in due time will be applicable to the whole 
world— respecting the outcome of the redemptive work, 
the reconciliation of the world to God, the complete 
forgiveness of the world's sins, the great trial or judgment 
or opportunity then to come to the world through 
the Kingdom which the Redeemer, as the Mediator between 
God and man, will establish for the deliverance 
of mankind from the adverse conditions within and 
without, and for the assistance of all who desire to return 
to harmony with the Creator. (3) The call to 
special discipleship, to walking in the narrow way, to 
be baptized with the baptism of death that he was 
baptized with— and thus by divine grace through this 
arrangement to be fitted and prepared for a share in 
the heavenly Kingdom— to sit with Christ in his throne, 
and participate in the dispensing of all the wonderful 
blessings of the Millennium to all the families of the 
earth. 

It is with this thought that we follow the lesson 
before us. Jesus and his disciples, after the feeding of 
the five thousand and the stormy night upon the sea 
of Galilee, spent some time in Capernaum. There the 
Lord gave the sermon which illustrated that his hearers 
should think less about the loaves and fishes which 
he had given them, and should appreciate more the 
higher things. They should recognize him as the Bread 
of Life that came down from heaven; they should feed 
upon his words and thus gain life everlasting. The 
time had not yet come, however, for the general dispensing 
of this life everlasting— that work belongs to 

R3338 : page 89 

the Millennial age. He therefore was seeking specially 
for such as were particularly hungering and thirsting after 
righteousness. Of this class were the apostles, whom 
he was now training for the future work which he 
would accomplish through them after the new dispensation, 
to begin at Pentecost. 

GOD'S FAVORS FOR HIS CONSECRATED PEOPLE. 

With his disciples our Lord traveled north-westward 
to the borders of the country called Tyre and 
Sidon, so named because of the prominent cities by 



these names which were there situated. He did not 
announce himself publicly to the people there, but his 
presence soon became known, showing that the fame of 
his miracles and teachings had spread throughout the 
whole of Palestine. A Canaanitish woman living as a 
Greek was amongst the first to hear of his presence, 
and coming before him she cried or wailed for assistance 
for her daughter. Our Lord on this occasion acted 
very differently from his custom, and doubtless for the 
purpose of imparting a lesson. Although usually so 
prompt to hear and to sympathize and to heal, on this 
occasion he paid no attention to the woman, according 
to Matthew's account, who tells us that the disciples 
came to the Lord and urged him to send her away— 
either grant her request and send her away or refuse 
her request and authorize her expulsion. 

The poor woman's importunities were not for herself 
but for her daughter, who was possessed of a demon, an 
unclean spirit; and, so far as we have any knowledge, 
most of these fallen spirits, demons, are unclean, depraved, 
and their influence upon those possessed by them is an 
unclean, injurious one. Sometimes they do indeed simulate 
purity, and on numerous occasions we have heard 
of their attempts to personate holy ones— even the 
Lord; nevertheless the whole tendency of these evil 
spirits seems to be toward impurity of thought and 
conduct on the part of those possessed and through 
them upon others. 

Finally, in answer to the woman's cries and to the 
expostulations of the disciples, our Lord did speak, but 
very differently from his usual message. He merely intimated 
to the woman that his miracles and services were 
not intended for the world in general but for God's covenanted 
people, the Jews. He followed the Jewish custom 
of the time, of speaking of the Gentiles as dogs, 
yet he modified the matter, for instead of using the 
word which would signify the detestable brutes which 
infest the Orient and are the scavengers of the streets, 
he used another word signifying the little or pet dogs 
of the family. The woman, strong in her faith in the 
Lord's power, was equal to turning the unfavorable 
answer to her own benefit, and to urge that as the little 
pet dogs got some of the surplus from the table of 
the children, so she as an outsider might be granted 
some of the Lord's favors without in any degree working 
disadvantage to the Jews, to whom our Lord's ministry 
was specially sent and given. 

WITHOUT FAITH IT IS IMPOSSIBLE TO PLEASE HIM. 

This shows the earnestness and faith of the woman. 
Such an exhibit would surely be pleasing to the Lord. 
Indeed we can see in our own experiences as Christians 
that many of the Lord's dealings with us are along the 
lines of developing and testing of our faith. He is good 
and gracious of heart, however we may have misunderstood 



him in the past, and however his character 

and plan may have been maligned and misrepresented 

by the Adversary. It is impossible for us to come near 

to the Lord except as we shall exercise faith and trust 

in him, in his goodness, in his power, in his wisdom, in 

his love. All things are possible, only believe— is the 

lesson which the spiritual Israelite of today needs continually 

to learn, as the apostles of old prayed, "Lord, 

increase our faith." Along this line it were well that 

we should pray, and that we should seek continually to 

accept the lessons of life from this standpoint— as lessons 

or instructions in faith. We are not in this ignoring 

the necessity of obedience to the divine Word, but 

are holding that wherever faith exists the works will 

correspond to it and be proportionately large or small. 

Hence the stronger our faith, the more our works are 

sure to be under the divine arrangement. Our Golden 

Text well says that without faith it is impossible to be 

pleasing to the Lord. 

Faith is a matter of cultivation, of development. 
The same apostles who cried out in terror when the 
storm was upon the Sea of Galilee gradually grew 
stronger and stronger in faith until, as the records 
show, they could and did trust the Lord in his absence 
and where they could not trace him. Similarly it should 
be a part of our daily lesson to cultivate trust in the 
Lord, and to think of the experiences in the past in our 
lives and all of these lessons in his Word, that thus our 
faith in him may become rooted and grounded. 

FAITH REWARDED AFTER BEING TESTED. 

The Lord said unto her, "O, woman, great is thy 
faith." (Matthew.) Her faith was strong in its love 
for her daughter, in its perseverance and persistency, in 
its humility, recognizing matters just as the Lord recognized 
them, and not according to the general sentiments 
of the Greeks and Gentiles— that the Jews were merely 
pretentious and not more in divine favor than other 
peoples. It was strong in overcoming great obstacles, 
—even our Lord's apparent repulsion. We would not 
consider this heathen woman's conduct to be in every 
sense of the word a pattern for the Lord's consecrated 
and enlightened people. The strength of faith is the 
only one that we should copy. As for us who have 
become the Lord's people, and are no longer strangers, 

R3338 : page 90 

foreigners, dogs, but children adopted into the Father's 
family and recognized by the Lord as "brethren," it 
would be no longer appropriate that we should cry or 
entreat or beseech in any wise for things which the 
Lord is not pleased to give us. 

The Master himself represented the difference between 
the things which the Gentiles might do and the 



things which we as his disciples might do, saying that 
our petitions and seeking should not merely be for the 
bread that perisheth, for after such things do the Gentiles 
seek— merely the earthly things and with importunity; 
but seek ye first, chiefly, the Kingdom of God 
and the righteousness which is appropriate thereto, and 
all these things of an earthly kind will be added unto 
you— in such measure as will be for your best interests. 
Our petitions, our requests, our cries to the Lord, therefore, 
should be for the holiness of heart, for the filling 
of his Spirit, for the spiritual food, refreshment, 
strength; and as for the natural things, he knoweth the 
way we take and what would be to our best interests as 
New Creatures. We are to leave this to him: he would 
not be pleased to see us importuning him for things 

R3339 : page 90 

which he did not give us, for to do so would not be an 

exemplification of faith in him, but the reverse— an exemplification 

of doubt, a manifestation of fear, that he 

was forgetting or neglecting his promise to give us the 

things needful. 

Our Lord informed the woman that the faith manifested 
in her saying was sufficient, that her request 
was granted, that the demon was gone from her daughter. 
The woman's faith was further manifested by her 
immediate withdrawal. She took the Lord's word 
implicitly; if he were what he claimed and had the 
power that she believed, he would not lie to her. Many 
of the Lord's people today seem to lack faith along 
these lines— to have less than this poor heathen woman. 
Many of them hear the Lord's word assuring them that 
those who come to him have their sins forgiven, yet 
Little Faith bids them doubt and keep on bemoaning 
their sins and requesting forgiveness, which the Lord 
has assured them would be accomplished from the time 
of their acceptance of it. They fail to exercise the 
faith and they fail proportionately of the blessing and 
peace and joy. 

So far as the record goes our Lord did nothing in 
that quarter except for this poor woman, and the spiritual 
lessons connected with it were evidently less for 
her than for the disciples, for we have no record that 
he taught her or taught anyone of that vicinity. Departing 
thence, our Lord took an easterly course along 
the northern borders of Palestine, and crossing the river 
Jordan began to come southward toward the Sea of 
Galilee. Matthew says that he made a stop in the 
mountain, and that a great multitude brought their 
sick to him; the lame, blind, dumb, maimed and many 
others they led to Jesus' feet and he healed them, and 
the multitude wondered and glorified the God of Israel. 

Our lesson gives one particular instance from this 
multitude of healings. A man who was both deaf and 
dumb was brought to Jesus, and his treatment was 



peculiar; the Lord took him apart privately, perhaps 
to impress upon him the lesson. The man could not 
hear, and hence the Lord imparted the lesson through 
signs, touching his tongue and touching his ears, and 
then with a sigh he glanced heavenward, as indicating 
that the sympathy of heaven was moved for the man's 
assistance, and immediately the blessing came and he 
was healed. This may have been the first miracle in 
that region, and possibly the multitude coming, as 
Matthew records, were attracted by it. Our Lord's injunction 
that it should be kept quiet seems to have 
been understood, not as a command, but rather as a 
suggestion that he was not seeking publicity. Nevertheless, 
when the faith was manifested and the poor 
afflicted ones were before him the Lord never refused to 
give the blessing. Thus we are taught that when the 
due time shall come for the blessing of all the families 
of the earth, the Lord will not withhold a blessing from 
any; all who desire to be blessed may then have his 
favor. 

BLESSED ARE OUR EYES AND EARS OF UNDERSTANDING. 

As New Creatures who have already in a figurative 
sense risen with Christ to walk in newness of life, to 
walk in his footsteps, we have our eyes opened and our 
ears unstopped and our tongues loosed, so that we may 
not only see and enjoy the grace of God ourselves, but 
we may speak of his goodness and love to others. In 
many respects those to whom the Lord grants the special 
knowledge of the Truth in this present time have a 
suggestion that it is not for everybody, that we are to 
be discriminating in our endeavors to dispense the 
Truth, and that some of these great blessings of the 
Lord which are to us like pearls are not meant for all; 
that we should not cast our pearls before swine, or before 
those who manifest no disposition to know of or 
receive the Lord's favors. But with us, as with the 
healed one in this lesson, the message is too good to 
keep; we love to tell the story, it did so much for us; 
we desire that all who are blind and deaf may come to 
the great Physician and be healed; we desire that all 
who are stammering in their endeavors to tell the good 
tidings may have their lips touched by the Master and 
henceforth speak plainly the glorious things of the Gospel 
of Christ. And as the Master would not reprove 
this one in the lesson, neither does he reprove us if in 
our zeal we go sometimes to the extreme of trying to 
tell the good tidings to those who have no ear to hear, 
or endeavor to make disciples of those who are swinish 
and not at all inclined to spiritual things, or of following 
the Lamb whithersoever he goeth. 

R3339 : page 91 

The heart of this lesson is that we who are risen 



with Christ in the spirit of our minds should walk in 
newness of life while still in this mortal body and still 
amongst men; that we should look forward to the 
glorious change of the First Resurrection, when we shall 
be actually in the Lord's likeness and see him as he is, 
sharing his glory and participating with him in dispensing 
all these blessings of life and healing to whosoever 
will accept these favors in the glorious Kingdom 
time which we rejoice to know is near at hand. 



R3339 : page 91 

"WHAT THINK YE OF CHRIST?" 

--MARK 8:27-38.-APRIL 10.- 

Golden Text:— "Thou art the Christ, the 
Son of the living God. "-Matt. 16:16. 

IT was probably toward the close of the third year 

of our Lord's ministry that the incidents of this 

lesson transpired. In all this time of now three 

years from the beginning of John's ministry, we have 

no record that either John or Jesus had publicly proclaimed 

the Messiahship of the latter. There was wisdom 

in this. When we remember the expectations of 

the Jews for eighteen centuries, that the coming of the 

Messiah was to be the great event for their nation and 

for the world, and that his Kingdom was to accomplish 

the blessing of all the families of the earth, we can readily 

see that their ideas of the glories connected with this 

heavenly King were such that had Jesus announced himself 

the Messiah at the beginning of his ministry, the 

effect would have been disappointment to the degree 

of disgust. Without political or social influence, without 

wealth or name or fame as a leader and commander 

of the people, or a general of armies, he would 

have been regarded as mentally unbalanced to have 

made such a claim. 

He merely took the position of a religious teacher 
with whom divine power was specially present, divine 
power manifested in the dignity of his manner, the 
grace of his lips, the authority of his teaching, and his 
wonderful works— healing diseases, casting out devils, 
walking upon the water, stilling the storm, etc. It 
would appear that John the Baptist knew more than 
anyone else respecting our Lord's mission. This is indicated 
by the sending of the query to Jesus, "Art thou 
he that should come, or look we for another?" John's 
knowledge apparently came less through Jesus than 
through the spirit of prophecy, which indicated to him 
that the one upon whom he saw the holy Spirit descend 
was the special ambassador of Jehovah. Even John's 
faith was staggered by the absence of the glory and 



prosperity he had anticipated for Jesus. What, therefore, 
the sentiment of the masses would have been, had 
Jesus been publicly proclaimed the Messiah, we can 
readily imagine. 

BE YE WISE AS SERPENTS, HARMLESS AS DOVES. 

But now, after his disciples had been intimately 
associated with him for three years, and after John 
the Baptist had been dead for a year, the time had 
come for Jesus to prepare the disciples for the ignominy 
and death which he knew to be in store for him. But 
even then the matter was approached in a wise and 
careful manner. O, that all of the Lord's dear people 
could learn the value of wisdom in connection with 
their endeavors to serve the Truth! Our Lord not 
only taught us to be wise as serpents and harmless as 
doves, but he exemplified this lesson in his own course, 
saying on another occasion to the apostles, "I have 
many things to tell you, but ye cannot bear them 
now." We, too, should learn that there are opportune 
and inopportune times for mentioning certain truths, 
and that there are wise and unwise methods of presenting 
them. It is not enough that we do not speak untruths, 
it is not enough that we speak the truth; additionally 
we should see to it that we speak the truth in 
love, and love that is trained uses wisdom that it may 
accomplish the more good. 

Our Lord would draw out the apostles and seek to 
crystalize in their minds the thought which he knew 
already was forming or formed. Leading up to his 
intention he inquired respecting the general voice of 
the people as to who he was. The answer that some 
thought him John the Baptist risen from the dead, and 
others thought him Jeremiah or one of the other great 
prophets risen from the dead (Matthew's account), 
showed that the public mind was being exercised— was 
noting that he was not an impostor. As we read later 
on, some of the people were ready to inquire, "When 
Messiah cometh, will he do greater works than this man 
does?" All of these sentiments indicated the wisdom 
of the course pursued by our Lord, and that it was taking 
effect— that instead of being ridiculed, he was 
respected by the people, some of whom even thought 
to take him by force to make him their King. 

Now the Lord addressed his disciples as implying 
that they were separated in his mind from the rest of 
the people, and should have a clearer knowledge of him 
than others, and his question is. "Whom say ye that I 
am?"— with the intimate acquaintance that you have 
had, what is your opinion? Peter, probably the eldest 
of the disciples, and in general a leader and spokesman 
amongst them, answered for them all,— "Thou art the 
Christ [God's Anointed One: Hebrew, the Messiah], the 
Son of the living God." This answer proved that Jesus 



R3340 : page 92 

had rightly judged that the time was ripe for such a 
confession of him amongst his apostles, and for the first 
time he intimated to them that their surmises on the 
subject were correct— that he was more than Elijah, 
Jeremiah, or any of the prophets— that he was the 
long-promised Messiah. 

THE HUMILITY OF OUR LORD. 

Our Lord's answer, given in another account, distinctly 
acknowledges the correctness of Peter's statement, 
and declares that flesh and blood had not revealed 
it unto Peter, but the Father in heaven. We 
are struck with the modesty of our Lord Jesus in respect 
to this proclamation of himself as the great Messenger 
of the Covenant. How beautiful a lowly mind 
is! and if it was beautiful and appropriate in our Lord, 
how much more appropriate it is for us who are his 
followers and who have nothing of ourselves— nothing 
that we have not received through him. How appropriate 
the Apostle's words, when, after speaking of how 
Jesus humbled himself to become a man, and to be obedient 
unto death, he exhorted us saying, "Humble 
YOURSELVES, therefore, brethren, under the mighty 
hand of God, that he may exalt you in due time." Indeed, 
we may be sure that none will share with the Lord 
in his exaltation who do not learn at heart this lesson 
of humility. "The Lord abhorreth the proud but giveth 
grace to the humble." 

Jesus charged his disciples that they should tell no 
man that he was the Messiah. This was an item of 
truth intended only for themselves as yet; and to have 
proclaimed it in a general way might have created more 
or less of insurrection, and might have hindered the 
carrying out of the divine arrangement respecting his 
ignominious death. They could still proclaim the 
Kingdom of heaven at hand, they could still speak of 
Jesus as the great Teacher and man, they could still 
wonder as to whom he might be; but the proper time 
for making him known as the Messiah would be after 
he had finished the work of sacrifice which the Father 
had given him to do. Indeed he could not be the Messiah 
except by accomplishing this work. He must purchase 
the world of mankind before he could become its Lord 
and Life-giver, its Restorer, its Messiah. 

Now for the first time Jesus began to teach his disciples 
to expect his ignominious rejection by the Jews, 
his ultimate death, and his resurrection on the third day. 
Matthew's account makes this still more explicit, saying, 
"From that time he began to teach them these 
things." What a sifting, what a testing of the hearts 
of his apostles, and yet how wisely it was done! They 
must be prepared in advance for his shameful death, 
else it would prove such a shock to their faith that 



they could not recover from it, neither believe in his 

resurrection. But now, after nearly three years of experiences, 

and when they had just confessed him to be 

the Messiah, and by so confessing had crystalized the 

thought in their own minds, it must have been a severe 

blow to all their hopes and aspirations to be told of 

his ignominious death. How could he be the Messiah, 

and yet suffer death at the hands of his enemies? How 

could he bless all the families of the earth, and yet be 

put to death as a malefactor? 

These things must at first have appealed to them 
as inconsistent; but all the more the announcement 
would prepare their hearts for the explanation of the 
Scriptures which Jesus was ready to impart. The statement 
that he began to tell them about his coming 
death implies that thereafter this was frequently a subject 
for discussion and consideration between him and 
them. The same Lord, with no less wisdom, is still 
guiding in the affairs of his Church, and still teaches us 
line upon line, precept upon precept, as we are able to 
bear the Truth, and our preparedness for it will be proportionate 
to our nearness and fellowship with him. 
It is worthy of note, also, that the deep things of the divine 
plan are revealed to us only as we have confessed 
Christ. To this class it is given to know the mysteries 
of the Kingdom which are withheld from others. Only 
if we have fully confessed Christ are we granted a 
knowledge of the fact that all who would be his disciples 
must take up their cross to follow him, must suffer 
with him if they would reign with him, must be dead 
with him if they would live with him. 

SLOW TO SPEAK AND SWIFT TO HEAR THE GREAT TEACHER. 

Our Lord uttered this statement respecting his 
rejection and death openly— before the entire twelve 
apostles; but Peter, possibly elated by our Lord's words 
of commendation that the Father had revealed the 
matter to him, took our Lord aside privately to whisper 
to him that such sentiments should not be introduced 
nor expressed before the apostles— that it would 
be discouraging to them all, and that anyway there 
was certainly a mistake about the matter, for such 
things could never happen to him— must not happen; 
he must so order his speech and his conduct that these 
things would not happen. He must not violently antagonize 
the chief priests or elders, to thus lead them to 
conspire for his death. Allowance must be made for 
Peter, in that he was not only the eldest of the apostles, 
but quite a good deal older than our Lord, and that he 
was of a very ardent disposition, strong and impulsive. 
However, Jesus— who had a few moments before commended 
Peter for his appreciation of the fact of his 
Messiahship— now rebuked him, not privately, but in 
the presence of all the apostles. He probably knew 
that this would be the best method of correcting Peter's 



sentiments, which, should they spread amongst the 
apostles, would be very injurious to them all. Hence, 

R3340 : page 93 

our Lord's rebuke was pointed, sharp, and made known 
to all the apostles. He said, Get thee behind me, Satan 
—adversary; thy words are not in accordance with 
divine wisdom, but in accord with human wisdom. We 
are not to understand that Peter was turned into Satan, 
nor that Satan got possession of him, but rather in 
taking such a position he was becoming an opponent of 
the divine arrangement, as Satan was and still is. 

There is a great lesson in this for us. Even though 
we be the Lord's disciples, and honored ones at that, 
we might very easily reach such a position as would be 
antagonistic to the divine arrangement and thus put 
ourselves unintentionally on the side of Satan, and become 
his ministers or servants. Our Lord emphasized 
this again on another occasion, saying, "His servants 
ye are to whom ye render service." It is not enough 
that we have named the name of Christ and have placed 
ourselves under his banner, and called ourselves by his 
name, and rejoiced to be accounted his servants; it is 
necessary that we see to it that we are rendering him 
service, and that our energies are not being spent 
in opposition to him and really in cooperation with the 
Adversary. 

It is our opinion that a great many are in this very 
position today. Unwittingly they are on the Adversary's 
side of many questions connected with Churchianity 
and sectarianism, and especially does this seem true 
of many ministers in the nominal Church. We may assume 
that some of them, at least, have made a full consecration 
to the Lord, yet as a whole they are standing 
in opposition to the Truth— supporting the errors of the 
dark ages and helping to blind and mislead the people. 
Let us each be careful, let us each see to it that we be 
not disposed as Peter was to be wiser than the Lord, and 
to attempt to tell him how matters should be conducted. 
In everything connected with the Lord and his 
service, let us, as the Apostle exhorts, be slow to speak 
and swift to hear and to obey the divine plan. 

THE MILK OF THE WORD-THEN ITS STRONG MEAT. 

The foregoing special lessons were to the apostles 
apart from the multitude; but later on Jesus began to 
teach the multitude as well as his disciples some of the 
deep things pertaining to his mission and the conditions 
upon which any might become his disciples. There is 
a lesson in this also for us: We are not to put tests of 
discipleship to the forefront in the preaching of the Gospel. 
We are not to meet inquirers with the announcements 
of the "straight gate and narrow way" and the 
lessons of self-sacrifice, as they come to us to hear something 



about the Gospel of God's dear Son. There are 

primary lessons for them to learn first. They should 

be instructed respecting the goodness, love and mercy 

of God, respecting the redemption accomplished through 

the blood of Jesus and that it is free and for all, respecting 

the glorious times of restitution which God 

hath spoken by the mouth of all the holy prophets since 

the world began, and respecting the call of this Gospel 

age to association in the Kingdom. They should know 

these things with considerable clearness before being informed 

of the cost— the self-sacrifice even unto death 

which is the price of joint-heirship in the Kingdom. 

This appears to have been the Lord's method, and we 

cannot do more wisely than follow it. 

The time had come when not only the twelve 
apostles but all of the people, who were deeply impressed 
with the teachings of Jesus, should know what 
it meant to be his followers. In other words, a time 
of sifting had come— the time for presenting doctrines 
that would shake off, sift out, from close sympathy, 
fellowship and discipleship, all except the Israelites in 
whom there was no guile. We remember that while 
there were thousands who attended the Lord's ministry 
and were miraculously fed by him— amongst all the 
thousands upon thousands who heard him and profited 
by his healing, his teaching, and the wonderful words 
which proceeded out of his mouth, only "about five hundred 
brethren" (I Cor. 15:6), true disciples, remained 
faithful to the end. The remainder were all sifted out 
by such teachings as these that were now for the first 
time promulgated. 

The substance of these discourses is briefly stated 
to have been that, if any man would be the Lord's follower 
or disciple, he must practice self-denial and cross-bearing. 
Of course these words are used in a figurative 
sense: they signify that all who will be the Lord's 
disciples and share his Kingdom and glories, will be 
tested in faith and obedience to such an extent that 
they will fall out by the way unless their faith and interest 
are so deep as to lead them to ignore themselves, 
their own earthly interests, pleasures, appetites, and to 
seek chiefly for this joint-heirship with the Master in 

R3341 : page 93 

the Kingdom. They must regard the pearl of great 

price as worth more than all else, so that they will be 

willing to dispose of, to give in exchange for it, every 

earthly interest and thing— houses or lands, parents 

or children, the love and esteem of friends and neighbors 

—choose obedience to the divine arrangement at 

any cost, else they will not be worthy of the Kingdom. 

They must count upon such crossbearing, such a crossing 

of their own wills, submission to the divine will. 

CHOOSING BETWEEN GOD AND MAMMON. 



Emphasizing this lesson, the Lord says that it 
amounts to a question as to whether we love the present 
or the future life. He who sets great store by the 
present life, in whose heart the joys promised in association 
and joint-heirship with our Lord in the life to 
come does not overbalance present interests and hopes 
and aims, that person would lose the life which the Lord 

R3341 : page 94 

was proposing to give to his disciples— the life eternal, 
in the Kingdom, with "glory, honor and immortality." 
While our Lord used these words particularly in reference 
to the elect class which he is seeking as joint-heirs 
in the Kingdom, and therefore particularly in respect 
to immortal life of the Kingdom class, nevertheless 
there is a large sense and degree in which his words 
will always be applicable to all men— in the next, the 
Millennial age, as well as in the present age. Whoever 
will attain eternal life, either as member of the 
Church which is being elected now or as members of 
the restitution class which will be developed during the 
Millennial age, can only have the eternal life by a full 
submission of himself and every interest to the will of 
the Lord. Whoever self-willedly refuses such complete 
submission will thus prove himself unworthy of 
eternal life on any plane, for the terms of life-eternal 
are full obedience to the divine will. 

From this standpoint the force of our Lord's words 
is manifest: it would profit no man if he should succeed 
selfishly in gaining the whole world, and as a result 
of that selfish will, which is opposed to the divine 
will and its law of love, bring upon himself the utter 
destruction of the Second Death. What would compensate 
a man for the loss of his soul— his existence? 
Assuredly nothing would compensate, for without existence 
there could be no possession or pleasure. 

The lesson then is that if we are granted hearing 
ears and understanding hearts in this present time, and 
a knowledge of the exceeding great and precious things 
which God is offering during this Gospel age, we would 
be without excuse before the Lord if we were to despise 
his offers and selfishly choose self-control and a 
share in the world rather than joyful submission to the 
divine will and a participation in the sufferings of the 
present time and the glories which shall follow when, 
as members of the Kingdom, it will be our privilege 
to participate in the showering upon the world of the 
blessings secured by our dear Redeemer's sacrifice. 
(Gal. 3:29.) Similarly, those who will live during the Millennial 
age, after the present offer of the Kingdom shall 
have been withdrawn, and when the offer of restitution 
will be made to every creature, those who then selfishly 
refuse to submit their wills to the Lord's will fail 
to make progress in the highway of holiness toward perfection, 



and instead of gaining life eternal they will fail 
and fall into the Second Death. In other words, there 
will never be any other way of attaining life than a full 
renouncement of every selfish aim, object and desire, 
and the full acceptance of the divine will. 

A SAVOR OF LIFE UNTO LIFE OR OF DEATH UNTO DEATH. 

Our Lord sums up this lesson respecting the necessity 
for self-denial and cross-bearing by showing what 
it would really mean— that to confess him and the great 
truths of the divine plan for which he stands as the 
representative, would surely mean at the present time 
to bring upon one's self the opprobrium of the world, 
for whosoever will live godly in this life shall suffer 
persecution. To live godly will mean not only to abstain 
from crimes, but to live up to the light which God 
gives us, to be faithful to the principles of truth and of 
righteousness. Those who are blinded by the god of 
this world so that they do not recognize Jesus as the 
Messiah, the sin-bearer and coming King, are proportionately 
irresponsible at the present time. Their responsibility 
will come when this knowledge reaches 
them, and ultimately the knowledge of the Lord shall 
fill the whole earth. 

The time, therefore, will come when they will be 
responsible, and when the Truth will be to them either 
a savor of life unto life everlasting, or a savor of death 
unto death everlasting— the Second Death. But those 
who know the Truth, and who allow shame to hinder 
them from espousing it, may be sure that they are not 
disciples of Christ, that they cannot share in the life 
which he is now holding out as the reward of the overcomers 
—immortal life. All those who will be acknowledged 
before the Father and before the holy angels at 
our Lord's second advent will have proved so loyal to 
the Lord and to the principles of righteousness that he 
will take pleasure in acknowledging them, and the 
Father will also acknowledge them as being copies of 
his dear Son, their Lord. 

The Lord has given us examples of those who are 
bartering the glorious hopes and opportunities of participating 
in the Kingdom for the things of this life. 
The type in the Old Testament mentioned by the Apostle 
Paul is that of Esau, who for a mess of pottage sold 
his birthright. Foolish as was that transaction, it was 
only a type: much more foolish is it for those who are 
now having the opportunity by the Lord's grace of becoming 
joint-heirs with the Lord Jesus, in the glory, honor 
and immortality of the Kingdom, to lose all these privileges 
and advantages and favors— to trade them, as it 
were, for a mess of pottage— for a more favorable condition 
in this present life, for greater honor amongst 
men, or for wealth, or for the affection and sympathy 
of husband or wife, parents or children. The prize is 
of so great value that nothing is comparable to it. 



R3341 : page 94 

INTERESTING QUESTIONS ANSWERED. 

Question.— Why did the Jews ask the question 
recorded in John 1:25, evidently surmising that Christ 
would do a baptizing work? 

Answer.— They recognized that John was doing 
a great work in reformation outside the nominal 
church system of their day, and they assumed him to 
be a messenger of God; and as all were in expectation 
of Messiah and of an Elias to precede him, 

R3341 : page 95 

they inquired of John as to the matter; and when 
he very humbly disowned any great authority 
or position, they raised the question of your text, 
which implies: If you are a person of no special 
authority, neither the Messiah himself, nor his forerunner, 
nor a special prophet, why do you start in to 
do a special reformatory work, and introduce as a 
symbol of cleansing this baptism, which is known as 
John's baptism, and wholly without precedent among 
the Jews? 

Question.— What hope will there be for the progeny 
of the fallen angels? (Gen. 6:1-4.) Have we 
any reason to hope that they share in the redemption 
accomplished by our Lord, or that they will be participators 
in any measure in the restitution and resurrection 
processes of the Millennial age? If not, why not? 
Would they not stand related to the human family 
in much the same way as our Lord Jesus stood related 
to the same through the mother and not through the 
father? Would not this seem to imply that they 
should be sharers, therefore, in the redemption and 
restitution? 

Answer.— You will find this subject very fully 
treated in DAWN, Vol. V. See Chapter 4, on "The 
Undefiled One," and page 1 15, respecting the Nephilim, 
children of the fallen angels by the daughters of 
men. In connection with the fuller treatise on this 
subject we link the two together as your question 
does, and repeat that we find no hope for these Nephilim, 
since they were not of Adamic stock. We 
call your attention to the fact that our Lord Jesus, 
not being of Adamic stock, was not a sharer in its 
condemnation and curse, and hence, similarly, would 
not have been a sharer in its blessings. We are to 
remember that the way in which he profits our race 
is not by being one of us in sin and imperfection, but 
because he was not one of us he was able to give his 
separate and uncontaminated existence as our ransom-price. 



The blessing upon Adam and his family, coming, 
as it will, through Jesus, as its purchaser, who 
gave himself instead of Adam, thus redeemed him 
and all who were in him at the time of his transgression 
and condemnation. This clear-cut distinction 
most positively shows us that the fallen angels and 
their progeny were in no sense of the word Adamic 
stock, and, hence, were in no sense of the word covered 
by the ransom. 

Please consider a few questions along the line of 
practical life. (1) Is it sinful to compose or sing 
secular songs? 

Answer.— We would not consider it sinful to compose 
secular songs so long as the moral tone of them 
would be good and helpful to mankind. We are to 
use our talents in the highest and best manner known 
to us. In respect to attending theatres of high class: 
We think that very generally this question may be 
decided by the aid of the following questions: (a) 
Have I the means to spend in this manner, and is it 
the best use I can make of those means to the Lord's 
glory? (b) Would my influence be helpful to others 
if thus spent? (c) Could I make a better use of my 
time— to make it more beneficial to myself or to others 
in personal upbuilding? 

(2) Is levity improper in Christian life? Answer. 
—The Apostle urges us to sobriety. This, however, 
need not mean moroseness of disposition, conduct, 
language, etc., but rather earnestness. We 

R3342 : page 95 

have as Christians undertaken a great contract— a 

death-contract as regards the flesh; and levity is not 

to be very much expected in such a funeral, and especially 

not from the corpse. We may say, however, that 

we differ constitutionally; and while the Lord has said, 

"Blessed are those who weep," he certainly has not 

forbidden us to laugh. Quite probably, experience 

tends to bring sobriety, and sobriety is, generally 

speaking, the most proper condition for the representatives 

or ambassadors of the great King. 

(3) Is it sinful to dress well? Answer.— It is 

not sinful; but many things that are not sinful are still 
not expedient. We are to consider ourselves stewards 
of the Lord's means, and whether or not he would 
approve of rich and extravagant clothing. We are 
to consider, secondly, whether or not such clothing 
would be helpful to us in our influence in favor of 
the Truth. We are to consider whether or not such 
dressing would be calculated to have a very good influence 
or a very bad influence on those who cannot 
afford rich clothing. These things would seem to 
indicate modesty and simplicity, yet they need not signify 
coarseness nor carelessness nor mean appearance. 

(4) Is dancing improper? Answer.— Not in itself. 



That is to say, the mere exercise of dancing 
might in some respects be beneficial, especially if 
gentlemen danced with gentlemen and ladies with ladies. 
But with such limitations we fancy that dancing 
would lose much of its charm. We reason, 
therefore, that its charm is not morally helpful and 
that Christians would do well to avoid it, and to take 
their exercise in some other manner, better calculated 
to stir up heart purity. 

(5) Is it wrong to eat meat? Answer.— The 
eating of meat is not sinful, if the meat be honestly 
obtained and of good quality and healthful to the 
system. Our Lord ate meat during his ministry and 
also, on two occasions, at least, after his resurrection. 
This is a sufficient answer to those who claim that the 
eating of meat is sinful. "In him was no sin." 



page 97 

SEMI-MONTHLY. 
VOL. XXV. APRIL 1, 1904. No. 7. 
CONTENTS 



Views From the Watch Tower 99 

Religious Aspect of the War 99 

Russia's Internal Troubles 99 

Crime Threatens National Life 100 

The Gold in the Vatican 101 

For Organic Church Union 101 

Joshua's Long Day 102 

A Vision of Coming Glory 103 

"He that Heareth You Heareth 

Me." 105 

Letters 110 

Public Ministries of the Truth 112 

page 98 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-24 EVERSHOLT ST., LONDON, N.W. 
GERMAN BRANCH-MIRKER STR., 45, ELBERFELD. 

PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE, 5c (2-l/2d.) A COPY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity 
or adversity are unable to pay for the TOWER, will be supplied FREE, if 
they send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting 
the paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our 
list continually. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE 



THIS JOURNAL IS PUBLISHED IN THE 

FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, DANISH AND ITALIAN LANGUAGES. 

SAMPLE COPIES AND TERMS FREE. 



VOLUNTEER MATTER FOR 1904. 



We are ready for your orders for Volunteer matter for this 
year. Please observe the following rules: (1) Write us what 
will be the full number required. Where these orders amount 
to over 2,000 we expect to send them in four equal parts; 
where less than 2,000 in two equal parts. (2) State when you 
will be needing and ready for each separate installment. 
(3) Give particulars re address, to which they should be sent. 

PASTOR RUSSELL'S DISCOURSES EVERY MONDAY. 



By a special arrangement with The Pittsburgh Gazette a stenographic 
report of Pastor C. T. Russell's discourses will be printed 
on Mondays. We will send you "The Pittsburgh Gazette" 
(daily) and ZION'S WATCH TOWER twice a month for a period 
of 12 months for $3.25, which is about the price of The Gazette 
alone. The subscriptions must be paid in advance and sent to us. 
For terms for extra copies of the Monday Gazette, see our issue of January 
15th. 

NOTICE.— Where Gazette agencies are established the issues 
desired can be readily obtained through them. The Gazette refuses 
to mail papers to towns where they would interfere with 
the agents already located. 



R3342 : page 99 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 
RELIGIOUS ASPECT OF THE WAR. 



THE SUCCESS of Japan bids fair to make of her a 
"Christian Nation"— for are not the successful 
fighting nations Christian nations? And are not 
the unsuccessful fighters the barbarians? As a matter 
of fact the heathen masses of the Japanese are tractable 
and obedient to their rulers, economical and industrious 
and very poor. The leaders of that nation have 
adopted the civilization of Europe and America, but 
very little Christianity, except as it appeals to them as 
indispensable to foreign relations and the advancement 
of their own nation's interests. So far as we can ascertain, 
the majority of those rated as Christians are no 
more worthy the name than are the Evolutionists and 
Higher Critics of Europe and America,— they are Agnostics. 
The name Christian is a respectable one now-a-days, 
and many good fighters and brilliant thinkers prefer 
and adopt it as in contrast with Heathen. 

We even hear that the "Anglo-Israelites" have 
about concluded that the Japanese must be part of 



what they are pleased to term the "ten lost tribes." 
Why? We presume because they are successful fighters! 
Alas, that the professed disciples of the Prince of 
Peace should measure the affairs of earth by such carnal 
rules! 

The New York Independent contrasts the paganism 
of Japan and the Christianity of Russia thus:— 

"Russia claims to be fighting the battle of Christendom 
against a pagan nation. It is not so easy to 
say which is the Christian nation. Japan allows liberty 
of conscience. There are members of Christian 
churches who command her battleships, who sit in her 
cabinet, who preside over her parliament. There is the 
full civilization that has grown out of Christianity: 
public schools, the best education, the institutions of 
business and benevolence which are the product of 
Christianity. This has been given to Japan under the 
tutelage of Christian nations, frankly adopted from this 
and other countries. There is a constitutional government, 
elected rulers, courts and freedom. 

"But what do we see in Russia? An absolutely 
autocratic government, with no local self-government, 
no congress, no constitution, no public-school system, 
no religious liberty, the Dukhobortsi, the Jews and the 
Lutheran Finns equally forced into exile, and the Armenians 
in the Caucasus driven to frenzy by the robbery 
of their churches and schools. Which is the 
Christian country?" 

RUSSIA'S INTERNAL TROUBLES. 



Geneva, Switzerland, March 13.— Japan is not all 
that is worrying the Russian government at present. 
As a matter of fact, the opinion prevails in revolutionary 
circles here (and this is headquarters for the whole 
revolutionary movement in Europe) that St. Petersburg 
is in far greater dread of the work of the revolutionary 
party at home than of the legions and warships of the 
Mikado in the far east. 

Geneva swarms with Russian spies, and the movements 
of known Nihilist leaders are watched as closely 
as possible; but despite all the efforts of the Czar's police, 
the presses are busily turning out revolutionary 
literature and most of it finds its way across the frontier 
and is distributed throughout Russia. 

There is no doubt that plans are being made for a 
series of demonstrations against the government at the 
first favorable opportunity. A decisive defeat of the 
Russians in Manchuria would unquestionably be regarded 
as the opportunity. 

One of the leaders of the Russian revolutionists 
here said recently: 

"We don't propose now to make war on the Czar. 
Our efforts will be directed against the creatures who 



use him as a cloak for their reactionary designs. I 
believe that if the Czar were freed from the influence of 
such men as Pobiedonestzeff, Plehwe and those they 
represent, the nobles who think more of their privileges 
than of the good of the country, that his majesty would 
ultimately be willing to go as far in the direction of 
liberalizing Russia as is desirable at this time. We 
realize that there is a vast population in Russia, the 

R3342 : page 100 

descendants of former serfs, who are not ready for a full 
measure of self-government, but we believe the day for 
the autocratic government of Russia in the name of the 
Czar by an oligarchy of noble grafters is nearly passed. 

"Russia's defeat by Japan would be the very best 
thing which could happen to the fatherland, and the 
revolutionary party will spare no means to encompass 
it. This is not a war for Russia. It is a war for the 
nobility, and the defeat of the nobility means that the 
people will come to their own. That there will be 'removals' 
of high officials when the time comes is altogether 
probable. 

"All reforms in a country like Russia must be accomplished 
by agitation, and the dagger and bomb 
properly applied are potent agitators. Even the most 
radical revolutionary, however, will not move against 
the Czar. His danger lies not with the Nihilists, but 
with the oligarchs whose power is threatened. His 
liberal ideas and predilection for peace may cost him 
his life, but if he is slain it will be by the men who have 
dragged Russia into this predicament. 

"That the Nihilists will be blamed in case the Czar 
is assassinated is altogether probable, but you may say 
that those who wish to see Russia enter a new era of 
greatness under a constitutional government look upon 
the present Czar as more likely to bring this about than 
any man living, and would regard his death as a national 
calamity." 



It is well for those who are followers of him who 
is the Way, the Truth and the Life to avoid extreme 
views and positive assertions respecting the Russo-Japanese 
war. The new King, Immanuel, has taken the 
helm of earth's affairs— Michael has assumed command 
(Dan. 12:1) and matters will no longer be allowed to 
"drift." The outcome will be favorable to the preparation 
for and the establishment of the Kingdom of 
the Lord under the whole heavens, however disappointing 
the intermediate steps may be to those with whom 
"the secret of the Lord" is not. Let us not forget that 
the Lord is preparing for "his act, his strange act," utterly 
incomprehensible to those not acquainted with his 
"secret," revealed through his Word only to his "little 



flock": 

"God moves in a mysterious way, 

His wonders to perform; 
He plants his footsteps in the sea, 

And rides upon the storm. 

page 100 

"Blind unbelief is sure to err, 

And scan his work in vain; 
God is his own interpreter, 

His Word will yet be plain. 

"Ye fearful saints, fresh courage take; 

The clouds men so much dread 
Are big with mercy, and shall break 

With blessings for the 'dead'." 

R3343 : page 100 

CRIME THREATENS NATIONAL LIFE. 



In an address on "Suggestion and Crime," delivered 
before the members of the Patria Club last evening, 
President Henry Hopkins of Williams College declared 
that the prevalence of crime in this country was 
greater at the present time than ever before, and that 
the very foundations of the national life are seriously 
threatened. He said:— 

"The heart of the American people is sound and 
its head is level. Our business interests still rest upon 
a basis of honesty and honor. The sacredness and integrity 
of the family as the foundation of domestic, social 
and civil institutions are still our cherished faith. 
Reverence for law and a willingness to make any 
sacrifice to maintain the law continue to be national 
characteristics. 

"Nevertheless the foundations of personal character 
and our national life are threatened. There are 
some very ugly features in the present situation. There is 
abounding evidence of an alarming increase in crime, of 
crime of every sort, but especially of the kind that undermines 
honesty, chastity and respect for law. Statistics 
of crime are for several reasons unreliable. Prof. 
Commons, ten years ago, said that crime would indicate 
degeneracy and danger of collapse. The blood of the 
body politic may become vitiated and the whole tone 
of public health lowered. 

"We have been discussing and revising penal codes, 
improving our houses of correction, and correcting 
our prison discipline, and in the meantime crime has 
been multiplying. In philanthropic work we have been 
seeking to rescue the fallen rather than to prevent a 



man from falling. It is a thousand times better to 
stand in the way of his fall and ten thousand times 
more hopeful than to raise him broken, bruised and 
defiled after he is down. 

"This is an era of scientific philanthropy, and under 
this head no more important work has been done 
than in the department of penology. Indeed the hopeful 
sign of our time is the number of trained minds 
which are carefully investigating our social problems. 
It is at last almost true that the watchword of modern 
reform is prevention, and it is beginning to be recognized 
that its true method is displacement versus 
repression. 

"The causes of crime have only begun to be scientifically 
studied. These causes are of course complex 
and diverse— density of population, economic conditions, 
family circumstances, the character of the Police 
Department. For forty years crime has increased five 
times as fast as population. Whatever value we may 
place upon this estimate, the facts for the last ten years 
have been worse. 

"Leaving out of consideration the ghastly growth 
in the number of murders and suicides, we are compelled 
to admit that there is a growing infidelity to 
financial trust in the business world, so that there is a 
visible loss of confidence of man in his fellow man. Defalcations 
continue and multiply in disheartening succession. 
The proportion of divorces to marriages is 
astonishing and sickening, not only in the newest States, 
but in the oldest Commonwealths. Disintegration, decadence, 
and often destruction of the family and lowering 
of the ideal of the home goes on unceasingly; and 
back of it all is a vast and swelling volume of dishonesty, 
unchastity and crime. 

"But most startling and disheartening of all is the 
progress of the spirit of lawlessness in our towns and 
cities, where there have grown up crowds of idle hoodlums, 
where there is an increasing population who 

R3343 :page 101 

break out into reckless violence at times of strikes 
and lockouts... 

"Lynch law as we have lately seen it is a defiance 
of all moral order, a denial of free civil government, a 
crime against the life of the State itself. Considering 
society as an organism, the extensive prevalence of the 
luxury, artificiality and materialism of our life, the get-rich-quick 
craze, alcoholism, the drug habit, cigarette 
slavery, the social vice, and disease, all tending to weaken 
the brain tissue, to destroy moral fibre and to bring 
on not only neurosis, but insane or semi-insane 
neurosis."— New York Times. 



We prefer now and again to quote expressions like 
the foregoing from men of national repute rather than 
make the same statements ourself. Were it our 
statement many would claim that we were pessimistic, 
—that we saw the world through spectacles colored by 
our understanding of the teachings of the Scriptures. 
But how well the facts do correspond to the predictions 
of the Bible respecting the characteristics of nominal 
Christendom of our day! The fulfilment is marked- 
remarkable: 

"Men shall be lovers of their own selves, money-lovers, 
boasters, proud, railers, disobedient to parents, 
unthankful, unholy, trucebreakers, slanderers, without 
self-control, fierce, despisers of those that are good, 
traitors, headstrong, puffed up, lovers of pleasure more 
than lovers of God; having a form of godliness, but denying 
the power thereof."— 2 Tim. 3:2-5. 

THE GOLD IN THE VATICAN. 



The gold contained in the medals, vessels, chains 
and other objects preserved in the Vatican would make 
more gold money than the whole of the present European 
circulation.— Pittsburg Dispatch. 



If true, is not the Vatican, as well as the demonetizing 
of silver, responsible for much of the financial 
stringency? And may not this have an important 
bearing on the fate in store for Papacy?— Rev. 18:21. 

FOR ORGANIC CHURCH UNION. 



Should the Presbyterians, Methodists and Congregationalists 
of Canada unite to form one Church? That 
was the subject of an informal conference of representative 
ministers and laymen of those churches held in 
this city (Toronto, Canada) yesterday. The answer to 
the question, according to the sentiment and resolution 
of the conference, was affirmative, and the question of 
organic union of these three denominations will in consequence 
be raised in a more formal way and with 
practical ends in view. 

Dr. Carman explained that this conference was 
both informal and unofficial. He reviewed the history 
of the present movement, touching upon the efforts in 
the direction of union previously made, the action of 
the last General Conference of the Methodist Church at 
Winnipeg in approving with confidence and hope of an 
effort looking to the cooperation and organic union of 
the Methodist, Presbyterian and Congregational denominations, 



and the action of both Presbyterians and 
Congregationalists along the same lines. Committees 
had been appointed to correspond and confer on the 
question of such union and to report to their respective 
Church courts. Yesterday's informal conference 
was merely introductory to the formal meeting of 
those denominational committees. 

Dr. Carman further expressed his own personal 
sympathy with the movement and his confident belief 
that such a union is not only possible but necessary, if 
the pressing religious needs of Canada are to be met. 
He presented the attitude of the Methodist Church, 
and, despite the difficulties, urged wise, progressive, 
confident action. 

Dr. Warden, convener of the Presbyterian Home 
Mission Committee, was even more hopeful of organic 
union than was Dr. Carman, and instanced the experiences 
of the union of the various branches of Presbyterianism 
and of Methodism in Canada in support of it. 

Dr. Sutherland, Missionary Secretary of the Methodist 
Church, corroborated Dr. Warden's testimony as 
to the good effects of the action taken last year looking 
to cooperation in Western Canada, and indicated 
the necessity for union and marked the increasing conditions 
favorable to it. 

Mr. O'Hara, President of the Congregational 
Union, was heart and soul in favor of such a union as 
would conserve the best in doctrine, polity and life in 
the three denominations, secure reasonable liberty for 
individual peculiarities and preferences, and guard 
against the waste of overlapping and competition. 

Rev. J. W. Pedley saw in the movements of recent 
years the way being prepared for the larger Church 
unions. Theological controversies are of the past. 

Said Chancellor Burwash: "It would be the fulfilment 
of my life-dream, the answer to my life-prayer, to 
see these three Churches one in organization as well as 
in spirit. And the barriers are breaking down. There 
is no insurmountable obstacle either in the theology or 
in the organization of the denominations. 

Dr. Cleaver read a letter from Rev. Dr. Rose of 
Hamilton, in which he confessed himself to be an out 
and out unionist, and declared that the continued separate 
and competing existence of the three Churches 
named had ceased to be regrettable, and had become 
criminal. Dr. Cleaver expressed sympathy with those 
sentiments and urged action. He believed the people 
would become enthusiastic if the ministers were in earnest 
and would lead the way. 

The conference passed a resolution favorable to the 
calling of the several denominational committees by 
their respective conveners, after which a joint meeting 
for the more formal discussion of the questions involved 
will probably be held and such steps be taken as further 
conference may warrant. Dr. Carman, Dr. Warden 
and Mr. O'Hara were appointed a committee to arrange 



for any further conference meetings.— Toronto Globe. 
PRESBYTERIANS PROPOSE UNION. 



St. Louis, Feb. 19.— After three days' conferences 
the Committee on Church Cooperation and Union of 
the Presbyterian churches of the United States and the 
Committee on Fraternity and Union of the Cumberland 

R3344 : page 102 

Presbyterian Church unanimously adopted an agreement 
as a basis of the union of the two churches. It 
is in the shape of a report to the general assemblies, 
and will have to be ratified by both before it becomes 
operative. Both general assemblies meet May 19, the 
Presbyterian branch at Buffalo, and the Cumberland 
branch at Dallas, Tex. 

This action of these committees will make the 
Presbyterian church national in character with a membership 
of 1,250,000. 



R3344 : page 102 

JOSHUA'S LONG DAY. 

HERE is another suggestion respecting the so-called 

"long day" of Joshua,— namely, that it 

was a dark day, notable for its manifestations 

of divine power against Israel's enemies. We quote as 

follows:— 

"I have read that Adam Clarke, the commentator, 
wrote that Joshua's 'sun standing still' had 'kept him going' 
three weeks. Of course he had other work in those 
weeks besides writing his commentary; but it has been a 
passage which has received much attention, and yet the 
explanation of it is very simple. 

"Our English word 'sun' has more than one meaning. 
We speak of 'sitting in the sun,' which does not 
mean in the orb around which the planets revolve, but in 
the sunshine; and probably we oftener use the word 'sun' 
for sunshine than for the orb itself. 

"Our English word 'stand' also has several shades of 
meaning, and one of them is 'to remain'; and 'still' 
sometimes means 'silent' These words are given in 
Joshua 10:12-14 as the equivalents of the Hebrew words 
of Joshua, and they may be understood in a sense agreeing 
with the Hebrew; or they may be, and generally are, 
taken in a sense which contradicts the words of Joshua 
and actually convey a meaning the very opposite of that 
of the inspired record, as interpreted by common sense. 

"The Hebrew, though a language of very few words, 



has two words for sun: chammah and shemesh; this in 
Joshua is shemesh, 'the servant of the sun,' that is, sunshine, 
the sun's rays. There are also two words for moon: 
levonoh and yareach; and this in Joshua is yareach, 'the 
scent of the moon,' the moonlight. In Deut. 33:14, we 
read: 'For the precious fruits brought forth by the shemesh, 
sun'; not the body of the sun, millions of miles distant, 
but the light and influence sent forth by that body; 
'and for the precious things put forth by the yareach, 
moon'; not the orb, but its shining; (indeed the word is 
plural here, 'moons'). 

"Now, what concerned Joshua, and what is spoken 
of, was not the two bodies called sun and moon, it was 
simply light, sunlight, or, more properly, direct sunshine, 
and moonlight. So we say, for example, 'The moon's 
on the lake.' 

"A 'dark moon' would not have concerned Joshua in 
the least, therefore the moon was not then near its 
'change'; in other words that day was not when sun and 
moon were near 'conjunction,' as astronomers call new 
moon; so Professor Totten cannot locate this miracle on 
a day when there would have been 'no moon.' 

"Now we had better turn to the chapter, Joshua 10th, 
and read the history; and perhaps you have a map 
of Canaan also, which you can look at. There seem to 
have been several 'Gilgals.' The word means 'circle,' 
and places were so called where circles of memorial stones 
were set up (Joshua 4:20); but there is no proof given that 
Joshua's headquarters were not still at the Gilgal between 
the Jordan and Jericho. 

"Joshua and all the mighty men of valor 'went up 
from Gilgal all night' (v. 8), to the relief of Gibeon, which 
was besieged by the five kings of the Amorites (or hillside 
men); the Gibeonites having beguiled Israel into making 
a league with them. Now what happened? 

'"And the Lord discomfited them'— mark this, and 
do not give the credit to Joshua when it reads, 'Jehovah 
doth crush them before Israel.' (—Young.) 'Jehovah 
rageth at them [or, 'useth violence upon them'] before 
[literally, to the face of] Israel, and slew them with a great 
slaughter.' 

"Before an Israelite sword was drawn, while yet the 
two armies were apart, 'The Lord cast down great stones 
from heaven upon them, unto Azekah, and they died; 
there were more which died with hail stones than they 
whom the children of Israel slew with the sword.' The 
words rendered 'hail stones' signify 'stones of congelation;' 
probably they were not meteoric stones, but great hail 
of frozen water. Such hail, 'every stone about the weight 
of a talent,' is spoken of in Rev. 16:21; and the smallest 
Greek talent was fifty-seven pounds, avoirdupois weight. 
See also Job 38:22; Rev. 8:7; 11:19. 

"The artillery of heaven turned upon the Amorite 
host, probably while drawn up in order of battle to meet 
the attack of Joshua's men, and certainly before the two 
armies had met and mingled in hand-to-hand combat 



with swords, else the Israelites must have suffered from 
the great hail equally with the Amorites. 

"The formation and discharge of such hail implies a 
dense, dark cloud, and much electrical disturbance. Thunder 
and lightning would not be absent. The Amorites, 
having known of the dividing of the Jordan and the falling 
of the walls of Jericho, now perceived that the God of 
Israel was fighting against them; and they fled in terror 
at the blackness of the heavens above them, and from the 
slaughtering hail. What does Joshua now wish for? is it 
that the darkness may pass away, the sun shine forth 
bright and clear, ending the terror of the panic-stricken 
fugitives, and perchance giving them opportunity to rally 
and make a stand and fight? 

"No such thing ! He desired the darkness and terror 
to continue. 'Then spoke Joshua to the Lord in the 
day when the Lord delivered up the Amorites before the 
children of Israel, and he said in the sight of Israel: 
"Shemesh, be-Gibeon dum.'" That word DUM is the identical 
word which we spell 'dumb;' the margin informs 
us that the Hebrew means 'be silent' We apply it to 
not giving forth sound; the Hebrew with its much fewer 
words applies them to things analogous. Here it is used 
for not giving forth light. We use the same word with 
this application, but then we spell it 'dim.' The Hebrew 
DUM is the origin of both our 'dumb' and 'dim.' Observe, 
we are not speculating on what Joshua meant, we are giving 
the very words of Joshua; and what he said was 'Sun 
[or sunlight] in Gibeon be dumb [or dim]. He called 
not for light, but for darkness; and the Amorite host was 
broken by Jehovah before Joshua called for a continuation 
of the gloom to continue their panic, and enable him to 
annihilate their cowed and fleeing remnants. 

'"Sun in Gibeon.' This preposition, be, is the first 
letter of the Bible— In the beginning.' It has some latitude 

R3344 : page 103 

of meaning: 'in, at, to, by,' etc., but it does not 
mean 'over,' or 'on the meridian of Gibeon;' another 
preposition would have to be used to express that. This 
prepositional prefix is just our English prefix 'be,'— used 
in 'be-fore'— in the front; 'be-hind'— in the rear; 'be-low;' 
'be-side,' etc. We can thus easily see what it 
means. The position of the orb of the sun in distant 
space— although it is on the meridian of Gibeon at noon 
there, every day in the year— is not, and cannot be denoted 
by Joshua's words; and the sun never was in the zenith at 
Gibeon or any other place outside of the tropics, since the 
earth had its present position. But let us go on. 

"We-yareach be-emeg, Ajalon— And the moon [or 
moonlight] in the valley of Ajalon.' Here is the be, 'in,' 
again. The shining of the moon has been in that valley, 
but the orb itself, never. 

"And the sun stood still': literally, And DUM is the 
sun.' Not a word of the orb pausing in its apparent 



course. 'The sun stood still [that is, remained silent, 
dumb, dim], and the moon stayed [amad, stood, continued, 
"dim" as it was] until the people had avenged 
themselves upon their enemies.' 

"If we bear in mind that the Canaanites worshiped 
the sun and moon, we will see more force in this incident. 
Had Jehovah's cloud passed away and the sun shone out 
bright and clear, they would have been likely to think 
that their god Baal (who was associated with the sun) had 
vanquished Jehovah in the heavens, and would assist them 
to vanquish Jehovah's people; and their leaders would 
not have failed to attempt to rally them by appealing to 
them to see how the sun-god had scattered Jehovah's 
cloud and silenced his artillery. What Joshua asked for 
was not a bright day nor a long day, but for a continuation 
of the darkness and gloom which had terrified the 
Amorites. 

"So the sun stood still [amad, stayed, as it was] in 
the midst of heaven, and hasted not [literally, 'pressed 
not'— the sunshine did not press through the pall of 
cloud] to go down [bo, literally meaning either 'to go,' 
or 'to come,' or 'to come in,' 'to arrive'— there is no word 
here for 'down'] about [literally, as] a whole day.' The 
sunshine, usually so bright in Syria, did not pierce through 
the clouds all that day. 

"I see not a word here, or elsewhere, of the day being 

R3345 : page 103 

lengthened. The battle began at Gibeon and by the 
grape-shot of Jehovah's hail the Amorite army was soon 
routed; up to Upper Beth-Horon they fled, the hail continuing 
upon them and driving them over the crest of land 
down to the Lower Beth-Horon, and on in a distracted, 
huddling mass down to the bottom of the descent in the 
valley of Ajalon: that is, those of them who could get so 
far. This remnant of them were as it were in a trap; and 
if the darkness might last for the day and the coming 
night, and no shining of sun or moon give heart to them 
to rally and fight their way out, Joshua thought he might 
finish his work and cut them to pieces to the last man. 
The command was, 'Thou shalt save alive nothing that 
breatheth.'-Deut. 20:16. 

"That is what the Book says. The versions may be 
twisted to say that the central body of the solar system 
ceased its motion; or ceased to emit that electric or other 
influence which causes the earth to rotate on its axis, so 
that the fact of the case was that it was the earth which 
stopped, and this caused the sun to appear stationary. 

"But, supposing that it is an influence from the sun 
which causes the earth's daily rotation upon its axis, were 
that power withdrawn, the earth would spin on till it gradually 
slowed down, and such a slowing down would not 
at all meet the requirements of the case. And an instant 
and forcible stoppage would have given a tremendous jar 
to everything. What a jerk it gives when a car stops suddenly; 



everything is thrown forward. Suppose an express 
train running fifty miles an hour is suddenly checked 
by some obstacle, as in a collision; the passengers will be 
violently pitched to the forward end of the cars; but the 
earth's rotation is twenty times the velocity of an express 
train, and such a stoppage is not supposable or reconcilable 
with the narrative. 

"The fact is, there was no 'long day' there; and all 
figuring as to when it was, or when it was not, is a waste 
of time. 

"There was indeed a day when the five Amorite 
kings were defeated; 'And there was no day like that before 
it or after it,'— for its length? no— 'that the LORD 
hearkened to the voice of a man: FOR THE LORD FOUGHT 
for Israel.' 

"Hab. 3:11 may be thought to sanction the idea of 
the stoppage of the sun in Joshua's day; but see the R.V. 
The shining of the sun and moon are poetically represented 
as standing abashed,— 

"At the light of thine arrows as they went, 
At the shining of thy glittering spear.' 

"And it is not historic but prophetic."— A. Armour. 



R3345 : page 103 

A VISION OF COMING GLORY. 

-MARK 9:2-13.-APRIL 17.- 

Golden Text:— "A voice came out of the cloud, 
saying, This is my beloved Son: hear him." 

SIX DAYS after Peter's confession that Jesus 
was the Messiah, and after our Lord had explained 
to the apostles that instead of immediate 
honor and glory in the world he would meet with 
contempt, persecution and death, and that the conditions 
of discipleship were willingness to suffer with him 
and joy in proclaiming his message, Jesus took the 
three leaders of the apostles, Peter, James and John, 
up to a high mountain— presumed to be Mt. Hermon. 
Luke tells us that he went there to pray, and we may 
reasonably suppose that the three apostles joined with 
him in prayer. This little prayer meeting, small in 
number, and the glorious result or answer to the prayers 
—the vision of coming glory in the Kingdom— may 
well be accepted as an encouragement to us all, and 
stimulate us to a remembrance of the Lord's injunction 
that we watch and pray lest we enter into temptation, 
and that where two or three are met in his name 
he will meet with them, which will insure a blessing. 
Frequently the blessings received are mental visions of 
the glorious things which the Lord hath in reservation 
for those who love him. 



Luke says that it was while they prayed that our 
Lord's features and garments were transfigured: Matthew 

R3345 : page 104 

says that his face shone like the sun. Two others 

appeared on the scene, Moses and Elias, of radiant appearance, 

though evidently less so than our Lord. It 

was a vision: our Lord was not actually changed to 

spirit conditions until after his resurrection from the 

dead, but now by a miraculous power he appeared so 

transformed— transfigured. Moses and Elias (Hebrew, 

Elijah) were not actually present on the mount, for 

their resurrection had not yet taken place, and, as the 

Apostle very clearly points out, it will not take place 

until after the resurrection and change of the Church, 

the body of Christ. His words are, "They without us 

shall not be made perfect."— Heb. 1 1:40. 

We have two testimonies to the effect that this 
entire matter was a vision, after the same kind that 
John had on the Isle of Patmos, recorded in the Book 
of Revelation. As John saw horses, beasts, angels, men, 
and heard them talking, and talked himself, so in this 
vision the Apostle heard conversation going on about 
the Lord and those who appeared with him in the vision, 
and the words were in reference to our Lord's 
death at Jerusalem, of which he had already informed 
them six days previously. The circumstances all corroborated 
the thought that it was a vision; but we are 
not left to circumstantial evidence, for we have our 
Lord's plain statement to this effect. As he came down 
the mountain side with the three apostles, he charged 
them straitly, saying, "Tell the vision to no man until 
the Son of man be risen from the dead."— Matt. 17:9. 

PICTURING GLORY TO FOLLOW. 

The Apostle Peter, one of the three who saw the 
vision, refers to it in his epistle, saying, "We have not 
followed cunningly devised fables when we made known 
to you the power and coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, 
but we were eyewitnesses of his majesty. For he received 
from the Father honor and glory, when there 
came such a voice to him from the excellent glory, This 
is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased. And 
this voice which came from heaven we heard, when we 
were with him in the holy mount."— 2 Pet. 1:16-18. 

What was the object of this vision? We answer 
that it was to establish the faith of the apostles. The 
Lord took the three who saw the vision from amongst 
the strongest of the number, and that it did make a 
deep impression is evidenced by Peter's reference already 
quoted. It was a heart lesson for them to learn 
—that Jesus, the Messiah, the great King, who was to 
rule and to bless Israel and through Israel the world, 
and who was to establish them with him as associates 



and joint-heirs in the Kingdom, was about to die and 
apparently thus to frustrate all their hopes, and about 
to disprove his own claims of Messiahship. The time 
that elapsed between the breaking of the news to them 
and the vision, six days after, was just about enough 
to permit them to discuss matters and digest the meaning 
of our Lord's words. Then came the vision on the 
mount which corroborated our Lord's testimony in 
both respects— the conversation of the vision corroborating 
his statement that he would suffer a martyr's 
death at Jerusalem; and the glorious vision itself, as 
well as the words from heaven, indicated that our 
Lord was indeed what he claimed to be— that they 
were safe in accepting him as the Messiah, that they 
were not being deluded by "cunning fables." The 
vision evidently answered its divine purpose. 

"THY KINGDOM COME." 

The vision itself represented the Lord's Kingdom: 
Moses was the representative of the Jewish dispensation, 
the house of servants, as in a previous lesson 
Elijah was shown to represent the Gospel Church in 
the flesh. There was glory and honor attached to 
the Jewish dispensation and to the Gospel dispensation, 
but a still greater glory was manifested in the presence 
of Jesus, who represented the Millennial dispensation 
and the divine Kingdom in glory, which shall 
indeed bless the whole world. Not many heard, understood, 
appreciated, obeyed, or sought to obey the 
Law given by Moses. Not many have heard, understood 
or obeyed, or even sought to obey the Gospel 
invitation; but when the glorious Millennial age shall 
come, when "the glory of the Lord shall be revealed, 
all flesh shall see it together." (Isa. 40:5.) In his 
day the righteous shall flourish and all the families of 
the earth shall be blessed. In that day it shall be the 
will of God that all shall hear the voice of the Son of 
man, as expressed in the vision, "This is my beloved 
Son: hear ye him." Thank God, we can look forward 
to such a glorious time and anticipate with confidence 
such a glorious consummation of the ages. Thank God, 
also, that as those who have heard and obeyed during 
this Gospel age, we are privileged to be the members of 
this glorious one whom the world will soon hear and by 
whom it will soon be blessed and every creature be 
granted an opportunity for the attainment of life 
everlasting. 

The vision vanished as suddenly as it appeared, as 
John's visions vanished and changed from time to time. 
One account says that the apostles were heavy with 
sleep, and yet the vision seems not to have been a 
dream, but rather, as already stated, of the kind given 
to John on Patmos. The vision had a great lesson for 
the apostles, and as they followed Jesus down the mountain 
side to rejoin the waiting remainder of their number, 



they questioned one another respecting the rising 
from the dead, and what that signified. Our Lord had 
already mentioned to them that after he had been dead 
three days he should rise again, and now in the vision 
this had been repeated. It was evidently the divine intention 

R3346 : page 105 

to impress the matter of the resurrection upon 

their minds. Nevertheless, when the resurrection of our 

Lord did take place on the third day, we perceive that 

it was with great difficulty still that they comprehended 

the situation. How great would have been their difficulty 

had it not been for this previous instruction of 

our Lord and through the vision! 

"HE KNOWETH OUR FRAME." 

One lesson to us in this connection is that divine 
wisdom notes our weaknesses and needs and in advance 
makes full and thorough preparation for them. How 
comforting it is to us that the same Lord who then so 
carefully supervised the interests of the faithful ones, 
is the same yesterday, today and forever, and is equally 
caring for us now. This thought is brought out in the 
ninety-first Psalm, "He will give his angels charge concerning 
thee, and in their hands they shall bear thee 
up, lest at any time thou dash thy foot against a stone." 
There will be no danger of the stumbling of the feet 
members so long as we abide faithful to the Lord. His 
care will be over us and we will continue to be recognized 
as his members, and, as such, no provision for 
our interests will be neglected. 

The apostles were gradually getting the thought 
that the Kingdom was to be deferred, and that the 
King and his associates in the Kingdom were to be of 
a higher order than the humanity they would rule and 
bless and uplift. They were seeing distinctly, too, that 
Jesus was the Messiah, and this led them to ask of the 
Lord whether or not the Doctors of the Law were correct 
in saying that the Scriptures taught that Elijah 
would come before the Messiah. The Lord corroborated 
the teaching of the scribes that Elijah must first 
put in an appearance for the purpose of restoring all 
things— for the purpose of making ready the world for 
the Kingdom. But the Lord pointed out that John the 
Baptist had served in a sense as Elijah to those who received 
him as the Messiah, and that instead of accomplishing 
a work of restoration, John as the antitype 
of Elijah had been slain, and that likewise Jesus himself 
would suffer. 

Our Lord did not go on to explain to them how he 
and they and all of the faithful of the Church would, while 
in the flesh, represent the higher an ti typical Elijah, and, 
as the Gospel Church, would endeavor to do a restorative 
work preparatory to the Second Advent, but without 



success; and that hence the inauguration of the 
Kingdom at the Second Advent will not be peaceable, 
as of happy subjects receiving a glorious kingdom, but 
forceful, as of a King taking possession of a realm in 
disobedience, in rebellion, who by force will subdue all 
things unto himself and reign until he shall put all enemies 
into subjection, the last enemy being death. It 
was not yet due time for the disciples to understand 
that from the human standpoint it would be a long 
period between the suffering of the Head of the body 
and the suffering of the last members of the body, 
though this same period, from the divine standpoint of 
a thousand years being but as yesterday, would, as 
Scripturally referred to, "shortly come to pass." This 
was one of the many things that the Lord had to tell 
them which they could not bear then, but which the 
holy Spirit has brought to light in due time through 
the words of Jesus and the Apostles and the prophets. 
-John 16:12,13. 

Let us accept the Golden Text as the very essence 
of this lesson, and apply it each to himself. Let us 
each learn to listen particularly for the heavenly direction. 
Let us remember that we are to hear the Lord 
and his chosen mouthpieces rather than to follow our 
own imaginations or the imaginations of other uninspired 
men. We may accept assistance from any one 
able to give it, but we are to scrutinize every helping 
hand and every voice to know that it is of the Lord 
and leads us to him and is in accord with his instructions. 
"My sheep hear my voice, and they follow me. 
A stranger will they not follow, for they know not the 
voice of a stranger."— John 10:5. 



R3346 : page 105 

"HE THAT HEARETH YOU HEARETH ME." 

-LUKE 10:1-16.-APRIL 24.- 

Golden Text:— "Pray ye therefore the Lord of the harvest, 
that he would send forth laborers into his harvest." 

THE HARVEST work during the three and a half years 
of our Lord's ministry seems to have been crowded 
chiefly into the last nine months of that period. 
We have followed the course of the gradual unfoldment of 
the Truth, then due, and now, about five months before 
our Lord's crucifixion, we take note of his statement that 
the fields were white for harvesting, and the laborers few. 
The first verse of our lesson records the sending forth of 
the seventy men, two by two, as advance missionaries to 
proclaim the Kingdom of God near at hand, and thus to 
prepare the people for the later arrival of Jesus in the 
various cities of Israel east of the Jordan. 



These seventy were not apostles in the special sense. 
They were additional to the twelve apostles— they were 
evangelists; they had not as large experience with the Master 
and his teachings, nor so important a work to do as that 
assigned to the twelve. Nevertheless, any service to the 
Lord is an important service, and to the extent that they 
did the Lord's will they represented him. They were 
undoubtedly a part of the "five hundred brethren" mentioned 

R3346 : page 106 

by the Apostle as having seen our Lord after his 

resurrection. (I Cor. 15:6.) As the twelve apostles corresponded 

to the twelve tribes of Israel, so the seventy 

evangelists corresponded to the seventy elders of Israel 

appointed by Moses in the wilderness and afterward represented 

in the Jewish Sanhedrin, which numbered 

seventy. 

As the seventy elders appointed by Moses, and their 
successors, the Sanhedrin, were the elders of Israel, so in 
a general way these seventy whom the Lord sent forth in 
the end of the Jewish age represented all the leaders or 
elders amongst his people today. Elsewhere we have 
shown what are the present duties and responsibilities of 
elders as respects the Lord's flock;* and have also shown 
how at the present time these are chosen or set apart under 
the Lord's direction where his guidance is sought and 
the instructions of his Word followed. We have also 
shown that in a general way all of the people are fully commissioned 
in the same sense or degree to speak officially 
or as the mouthpieces of his body. To the extent of their 
abilities and time-given opportunities all are privileged to 
tell the good tidings of great joy to all who may have the 
ear to hear. But special blessing and special privileges in 
connection with the service of the Truth attach to those 
who in any particular manner are selected through the 
Lord's instrumentality for the service of the Truth— either 
as chosen elders of local companies of the Lord's people 
or as chosen pilgrims or accepted colporteurs. Each may 
serve according to opportunities and the divine blessing. 

THE JEWISH HARVEST AND OURS. 

We see that the Lord designated the end of the Jewish 
age as the "harvest" time, for the reaping of the wheat 
of that people and the gathering of them into the garner 
of the Gospel dispensation, and for the rejection and symbolical 
burning of the chaff of that people in the great 
time of trouble which came upon them gradually after the 
rejection of Messiah, and was fully accomplished in the destruction 
of their nation in A.D. 70. We are specially interested 
in everything connected with that harvest time 
after learning that it was a figure or type or foreshadowing 
of the harvest time in the end of this Gospel age— the 
harvest in the midst of which we now find ourselves. Our 
Lord called attention to these harvest conditions at the 



same time that he sent forth the laborers, possibly indeed 
before commissioning them. Sympathizingly he drew the 
attention of the believers of that time to the ripeness of 
the conditions around them, and urged them to pray to 
the Lord for laborers to assist in garnering the true wheat. 

Apparently it was those who prayed to the Lord and 
felt an earnest desire for the prosperity of the Lord's 
work, and the finding of the Israelites indeed who consecrated 
themselves to this service, this evangelistic ministry. 
But no matter whether they were taught first and 
prayed first and gave themselves to the work afterward, 
or whether they gave themselves first to the work and 
prayed afterward— the praying and engagement in the 
service were associated in the Lord's mind and evidently 
in the minds of those who participated in that harvest 
work. And so it is today. As we look all about us we see 
nominal Christendom like a great wheat field, ripe and 
ready for the reaping. The true children of God greatly 
need the message which would gather them to the Lord 



*See MILLENNIAL DAWN, Vol. VI., chap. 6. 

R3347 : page 106 

out of all sectarian bondage, and all who have the Lord's 
Spirit feel drawn to render the assistance necessary, at any 
cost of personal inconvenience, etc. 

As we think of our dear friends groping in darkness 
and stumbling into Higher Criticism, Infidelity, Evolution 
theories, Theosophy, New Thought, Christian Science, 
etc., etc., we cry out to the Lord for more laborers 
for the vineyard, knowing that he delights to see us thus 
interested in the work he is carrying forward. In response 
he is pleased to send a full company of laborers, represented 
by the seventy of our lesson. We may be sure 
that those who are most earnestly sympathetic and most 
earnestly praying are those who are most earnestly laboring 
in this harvest— whether they are permitted to labor 
in a public manner or are restricted to more private means 
of personal conversation, tract distribution and mail correspondence, 
whether they have the larger opportunities 
of the volunteer work on a systematic scale, or whether 
they have the still larger opportunities of the colporteur 
service or pilgrim work, etc. 

"HOW SHALL THEY PREACH EXCEPT THEY BE SENT?" 

Our Lord intimated that it would be a great honor 
for any to be sent forth, and intimated also that none 
could engage in the service unless they were sent forth by 
him— the Lord of the harvest. We are not then to consider 
that any and everybody may engage in this work today 
any more than in the harvest of the Jewish age. 
We are to pray for the privilege and opportunity of service, 
and when it comes to us are to seize it and use it 



with zeal, as appreciating the privilege of being co-workers 
together with the Lord in the greatest and 
grandest work imaginable. There is a distinctly drawn 
line as to who are privileged to engage in this work. 
The harvesters acceptable to the Lord can surely be 
none others than those who are fully consecrated to him 
and accepted as members of the body of Christ. If others 
engage we cannot expect for them the success and blessing 
that we are authorized to expect for such as the 
Lord sends forth. In harmony with this suggestion we 
find that unbelievers, book agents and book stores are 
not successful in handling our publications. The blessing 
seems to go only with those who are consecrated to 
the Lord and with those of their families who are 
pleased to cooperate with them in this harvest under 
their direction. 

AS LAMBS AMONG WOLVES. 

Our Lord's illustration, that his representatives sent 
forth would be as lambs among wolves, seems a very 
strong and almost overdrawn statement of the case until 

R3347 : page 107 

we get the proper standpoint of observation. Those represented 

as wolves were Jews, Israelites, nominally God's 

favored people for centuries— the natural heirs of the Abrahamic 

covenant and promises. They were the people who 

according to the flesh were the Lord's sheep, as represented 

in the twenty-third Psalm, "The Lord is my Shepherd." 

Yet how grievously they had lost as a whole the 

proper sheeplike characteristics is clearly indicated by our 

Lord's words likening them to wolves. The sheep is an 

innocent and almost a helpless creature, harmless; the 

wolf is ravenous, destructive, selfish. Doubtless, our Lord's 

words seemed harsh even to his disciples, who, accustomed 

to the selfishness of the world, failed to see it from the 

same standpoint as viewed by our Lord, who was holy, 

harmless, undefiled, separate from sinners, in the most 

absolute sense and degree. Our Lord, however, "knew 

what was in man" and judged not by the outward appearances. 

What, therefore, might have been an uncharitable 

judgment and saying on the part of the apostles 

was not so on our Lord's part. His own experiences less 

than six months afterward, and the experiences of his 

faithful disciples, all attested the wisdom and justice of 

the term "wolves" as applied to the self-righteous, Sabbath-keeping 

street-corner praying, tithe-giving scribes and 

Pharisees, who had the form of godliness but not the 

power of it in their hearts and lives. 

Continuing to draw lessons from the Jewish harvest 
and to apply them in this harvest, we begin to realize 
that nominal Christendom of today is likewise wolflike 
rather than lamblike, and that those who receive the 
Lord's message and go forth in his name now are similarly 



as lambs amongst wolves. The Apostle draws a picture, 
not of the heathen world, but of the nominal Christian 
Church of today, when writing to Timothy he prophetically 
described the conditions in the end of this age. His 
words are, "In the last days perilous times shall come." 
"For the time will come when they will not endure 
sound doctrine; but having itching ears will gather to 
themselves teachers after their own desires; and they 
shall turn away their ears from the truth, and shall be 
turned unto fables. "--2 Tim. 3:1-5; 4:3,4. 

A GREAT WORK SOON DUE. 

As the principal part of the Lord's work at the first 
advent was crowded into the closing six months, so we 
anticipate that the principal work of the present harvest 
will be crowded into the last six years. Already we see 
evidences that the work of harvest here is broadening. 
Many more have the hearing ear for the Truth than had it 
a short time ago, and many more are praying for the outcome 
of the harvest and cooperating with their prayers 
by presenting themselves, all of their opportunities and 
talents available, to the Lord's service in the various departments 
of the work. It should not surprise us, therefore, 
if in the closing six years the evidences would be far 
stronger than ever before of the wolfish disposition of 
many who have a form of godliness and outwardly claim 
to be the Lord's sheep. Should the sheep suffer at their 
hands, we may be sure that it will not be permitted until 
the due time. It will not be permitted to interfere with 
the harvest work, and none can be seriously molested except 
by the permission of the great Chief Reaper, and until 
his time shall be fully come. All such trained in the 
school of Christ will be ready, we trust, to say as did the 
Master at the close of his career— "The cup which the 
Father hath poured me, shall I not drink it?"— and rejoice 
to be counted worthy to suffer for the name and for 
the cause we love. 

"THIS ONE THING I DO." 

The seventy were sent out without baggage. They 
took no changes of clothing, they wore only sandals, and 
took no house shoes or slippers; their journey was to be 
quickly made and all attention was to be given to their 
missionary duties; they were not to attempt to make themselves 
specially comfortable. It was the custom of the 
time to entertain travelers, and especially such as had a 
religious mission, prophets, etc.; and these evangelists 
were not to take up any collections, and hence were to 
take no pocket-books with them. They were to ask 
nothing for their services, but wherever they went they 
were to heal the sick, cast out devils, and proclaim 
their mission to the people as heralds of Jesus, declaring 
to them that the Kingdom of God was near at hand, 
soon to be established. The command to salute no 



man by the way did not signify that they might not 
say "Good morning," but that they were not to follow 
the custom of their time of stopping by the way to 
discuss whatever matter of news might be carried from 
one village to another. They were not news-gatherers, 
nor news heralds, but the heralds of the Lord, ambassadors 
of the Kingdom, and were to give their time 
and attention specially to that one service. 

We might draw a parallel between these representatives 
of the Truth in the end of the Jewish age, and 
similar ministers of the Truth in the present harvest 
time. We might note that the Pilgrim brothers go from 
place to place, taking up no collections, engaging in no 
other business, and declaring the same message— that the 
Kingdom of God is near at hand. We might note the 
same in regard to the colporteurs: they, too, have the 
one mission, and while their message is delivered through 
the printed page, it is the very same message— the King, 
the Kingdom, are at the door. And although the message 
is sold for a price that price is no more than the 
seventy received as they went from place to place. 
Neither do these laborers lay up treasures on earth, but 
are content merely to meet their daily expenses, and 
glad that thus doing they can feel that they are giving 
more than material value for every penny that they receive, 
besides the incalculable spiritual blessings which 
will go with the matter they are circulating to those who 

R3347 : page 108 

have the ears to hear and the hearts to appreciate the 
tidings of the Kingdom. The volunteers who scatter the 
tract matter in every city and village similarly are bearing 
the message that the King is at the door, and similarly 
are laboring without remuneration, and similarly are 
content with such things as they have and are not seeking 
for earthly reward. The spirit of the work now going 
on and that which was carried on in the close of our 
Lord's ministry have a noticeable correspondence. 

BLESSED THE PEACEMAKERS-CHILDREN OF GOD. 

Each laborer in the present harvest should note well 
the Lord's instruction in verses five and six. Wherever 
the Lord's representatives go peace should go, not 
strife, confusion, turmoil, quarreling. True, the Truth 
will prove to be a sword that will arouse opposition, yet it 
should be the Truth that causes the opposition and division 
and not any rudeness or unkindness of word or action 
on the part of the Lord's representatives. There are 
plenty of things to aggravate mankind in this our busy 
day, and all who have received the Truth should receive 
also its spirit, "speaking peace through Jesus Christ." 
The "peace of God which passeth all understanding" 
should have control of each one who would represent the 
Lord and his message, that a hallowing influence should 



R3348 : page 108 

go with each, especially in every service and word spoken 

in the name of the Prince of Peace. The true character 

of his people is described by our Lord: they who would 

be properly termed the children of God should be peacemakers 

and not peace disturbers. "So far as lieth in you 

live peaceably with all men." It is not possible to live 

peaceably with all and yet be true to principles, but the 

interest of peace should be conserved in any and every 

proper way by the Lord's representatives. 

According to the customs of our day it might be considered 
extreme if we were to apply the Lord's words literally 
and say "Peace to this house," before entering; 
and so also it would be considered extreme today if, not 
being welcomed, we were to stamp the dust from our shoes 
in departing from the house. However, the spirit of both 
these matters should be with us. On entering any house 
our thought should be to do good, to carry blessing, to 
exercise a favorable influence for peace, joy and blessing to 
those within; and if we, as the Lord's ministers, were rebuffed 
and disdained, not wanted, we should be careful 
not to intrude ourselves further, and, in that figurative 
sense of the word, we should wipe off the very dust. 

"If a son of peace be there, your peace shall rest 
upon him." If at any place we find one having the same 
spirit of the Lord, desirous of knowing and doing the 
Lord's will, we should rejoice to meet him as a brother 
and communicate to him the harvest message as he might 
have ears to hear it, and thus a blessing would be his; 
otherwise we should not remain. The Lord's people 
should never intrude themselves further than to make 
known briefly their message and work. If these be properly 
presented and meet with no response, the Lord would 
not have us violate the proprieties of courtesy by imposing 
ourselves or our teachings upon those who are unappreciative. 
Our Lord set us a good example in this matter. 

BEGGING FOR THE LORD NOT AUTHORIZED. 

The disciples were not to go from house to house as 
beggars, to get a meal here and a lodging there but were 
to expect that if the Lord had guided them providentially 
to those who had received them, the Lord meant to 
give their hosts through them a blessing proportionate to 
the cost of their brief entertainment. They were not to 
consider these hospitalities in the light of alms, for as the 
Lord's representatives they were there to confer blessings 
more than they would receive, and as common laborers 
even the service they rendered should be worth at least 
their keep. This principle was to apply not only to a 
house but to a city. They were not to be fastidious, but 
to accept such hospitalities as were proffered them; and if 
this meant no hospitality, they were to leave the city and 
go to one that would receive them and their message more 



cordially. 

Verse 9 might at first appear to be a special message 
applicable in the Jewish harvest yet not applicable to the 
Gospel harvest; but not so. There is spiritual as well as 
physical sickness, and the Lord's ambassadors of today 
should consider it to be their mission, their business, to 
open blind eyes and unstop deaf ears, and generally heal 
the sick in a spiritual way with the balm of Gilead, the 
good tidings of great joy now due to be understood. 
Moreover, it is our privilege now as it was their privilege 
then to declare, "The Kingdom of God is come nigh unto 
you." This announcement has not been a proper one all 
down through the age but merely in the ends or harvests 
of the two ages. After our Lord's death and resurrection 
the apostles no longer preached, "The Kingdom of God is 
come nigh unto you." On the contrary, they declared that 
the Kingdom of God, which had been offered to Israel, 
had passed away from them now to be given to a spiritual 
Israel which should be selected from all the peoples and 
kindreds and nations. But now we have come to the end 
of this period of selecting spiritual Israel, and in the harvest 
time of this age the proclamation again goes forth, 
Behold, the King is at the door, the Kingdom is at hand, 
and the wise virgins are preparing and will enter into the 
marriage, as the Lord represented in the parable of the 
wise and foolish virgins. (Matt. 25:1-12.) It is still 
true that in some places the Lord's representatives will be 
unkindly received no matter how wisely and kindly they 
seek to proclaim their message, and they should heed this 
same injunction. 

A MERE "FORM OF GODLINESS" WORSE THAN NONE. 

Then the Lord calls the attention of his disciples to 
the cities in which his principal works were done, Chorazin, 
Bethsaida and Capernaum, declaring that if the 
same works had been done in the heathen cities of Tyre 
and Sidon, or even in the city of Sodom, which was destroyed 
in Abraham's day, such works as he did would 

R3348 : page 109 

have been sufficient to have aroused the heathen inhabitants 
of those cities to repentance and seeking the Lord's 
favor. He then points out that when the great judgment 
day shall come it shall be more tolerable for Tyre and more 
tolerable for Sidon and more tolerable for Sodom than 
for those who had received favor in so large a measure and 
yet were not moved to repentance and obedience. These 
words suggest several important thoughts. 

(1) Why was it that these Jewish cities, so long under 
divine instruction through the Law and the prophets, 
should be more dull, less ready to hear the good tidings 
than the heathen? We can only account for it on the 
general lines suggested by the Apostle when he declared 
that all the knowledge any of us may receive is either a 



savor of life unto life or a savor of death unto death— either 
affects us favorably to draw us into accord with the Lord 
and the principles of righteousness, or unfavorably, so as 
to alienate us the more from him. This is a general 
principle, and we can readily see that the Truth coming 
to the fallen man under present conditions would to the 
few work a great blessing, and to the many would in a 
measure result in hardening of heart. 

(2) We say to ourselves, What is to be the fate of the 
people of Chorazin, Bethsaida and Capernaum in the day 
of judgment, in the Millennium? We see that, so far as 
the present life is concerned, they have shared the same 
fate as the cities— all of the six cities mentioned are utterly 
destroyed and their inhabitants are all totally dead. 
Will those people have an awakening in the future— will 
they arise from the dead? Our Lord answers the question, 
saying, "All that are in their graves shall hear the voice 
of the Son of man and come forth." Well, then, we ask, 
for what will they be brought forth? Our Lord answers 
that their coming forth will be in that day— the Millennial 
day, the day of the world's judgment, the thousand 
years of Messiah's reign— when Satan will be bound and 
when, as the seed of Abraham, Christ and the Church will 
reign as Kings and Priests to bless all the families of the 
earth.-Rev. 5:10. 

"MORE TOLERABLE FOR SODOM." 

Our Lord's declaration is that it will be more tolerable 
for Tyre and Sidon than for the cities of Galilee in 
that Millennial time. What can this mean? It means 
that under that blessed arrangement conditions will be favorable 
or tolerable even for those people who witnessed 
the Lord's miracles and yet were not moved by them to 
repentance and discipleship; and it will be still more tolerable 
for the heathen peoples of Tyre and Sidon— yes, 
for the degraded ones of Sodom, who never heard of the 
grace of God, who never tasted of the divine favors, or 
witnessed divine healings, or had opportunities of being 
taught of the Lord, or being accepted as disciples of 
Christ. 

The Apostle tells us that as soon as this Gospel age 
is completed, the Lord's favor will turn again to natural 
Israel, and that as a result blindness shall be turned away 
from them— Israel shall be saved from their blindness. 
(Rom. 1 1:25,26.) He goes on to explain that this will 
not be for anything of merit on their part, but because of 
the Lord's mercy, compassion, forgiveness through Christ. 
The prophet takes up the matter at the same point and 
declares that Israel shall look upon him whom they have 
pierced and shall all mourn because of him, and that the 
Lord will pour upon them the spirit of prayer and of supplication 
in connection with that mourning. Thus the 
blessing shall come again to those who rejected the Lord 
and crucified him, and with eyes opened still wider under 
the favorable conditions of the Millennial age, under the 



wise administration of the Lord himself as the great King 
over all the earth in that day, and with the influences of 
Satan bound and restrained that he may deceive the nations 
no more by "putting light for darkness and darkness 
for light," the people of Chorazin, Bethsaida and Capernaum 
shall have a further blessing, though a somewhat 
different kind from that which they rejected. They rejected 
the privilege of becoming disciples and joint-heirs in 
the Kingdom. That will never be offered to them again, 
because when next divine favor is exercised toward them 
it will be with the privileges of restitution to human nature 
—to that which was lost in Adam and redeemed by 
the death of the one whom they crucified. 

"THUS IT IS WRITTEN." 

The Lord through the Prophet Ezekiel (16:48-60) 
tells us particularly about the Sodomites, explaining the 
reason why they and their city were blotted out, and explaining 
also why the Israelites were rejected from his favor; 
but further explaining that when he shall have compassion 
upon Israel for the fathers' sake, and, according to his 
promise, bring them back again to their own land and to 
greater privileges under the Millennial Kingdom, then also 
he will have compassion upon the people of Sodom and recover 
them also to their former estate, to all that was lost, 

R3349 : page 109 

to restitution privileges. O, how grand are the divine arrangements 

and plans! Some may say, these are blessings 

that are coming; but our Lord intimated that certain 

great tribulations were coming upon the cities of Galilee. 

What were they? We have already referred to these. 

The people of the cities of Galilee and of all Palestine were 

involved in the great time of trouble with which the Jewish 

age was wound up and that nation blotted out of existence 

as a nation, its members being scattered amongst 

all nations. This was a great tribulation and sore loss to 

the people of Chorazin, Bethsaida and Capernaum— especially 

when compared with what they might have enjoyed 

if they had become obedient to the Lord's message— had 

they become disciples and thus attained join t-heirship 

with the Lord and the apostles and all the saints in the 

Kingdom. 

But how will it be more favorable in the Millennial 
age for those people of the heathen cities named than for 
those of Galilee? Will not the terms of the Millennial 
age be equally open to all the world of mankind? 
We answer, Yes, but all mankind will not be in equal 

R3349 :page 110 

readiness to profit by those blessed conditions of the 
Kingdom. It is a law of nature that a blessing having 
been once despised, and Truth having been once rejected, 



is on that account more difficult to be grasped if offered 

again. This our Lord intimated when he said of the efforts 

of the Jews to make proselytes amongst the Gentiles, 

"Ye compass sea and land to make a proselyte, and when 

he is made he is twofold more a child of destruction than 

he was before." Truths received under unfavorable conditions 

and into unready hearts are not really blessings 

but are sometimes injurious. When the Kingdom conditions 

shall be made known to the people of Sodom and 

Tyre and Sidon, they will doubtless be more ready to bow 

to them, accept them and conform to them than some who 

already have had a measure of light but have been unfaithful 

to what they did see. Hence we may expect it to 

be more tolerable in the Millennial age for many of the 

heathen peoples— more favorable for them to fall in line 

with the Lord's gracious arrangements— than it will be 

for some who have enjoyed high place and position in 

the Jewish and Christian systems, but whose hearts have 

been far from appreciative of the principles of righteousness, 

etc., involved. 

"AMBASSADORS FOR CHRIST." 

The last verse of the lesson is most impressive, most 
encouraging, most stimulating. The Lord would have us 
know that when sent out with his message and under his 
direction we fully represent him, so that he that heareth 
us heareth him. What a wonderful honor is thus conferred 
upon the most humble of the Lord's mouthpieces, 
"He that despiseth you, despiseth me, and he that despiseth 
me, despiseth him that sent me." If as the Lord's 
people we could always have this thought with us, it would 
certainly be a blessing to us in two ways: 

(1) It would prompt us to feel the dignity of the 
smallest service rendered to the Lord's cause. It would 
banish fear of man and all feelings of weakness and trepidation. 
Recognizing ourselves as the Lord's representatives 

we would be courageous to go anywhere, to do any 
service called for in his commission and providential 
leading. 

(2) This thought would bring to us such a sense of 
our responsibility that all the affairs of the present life 
would seem trivial and insignificant in comparison to the 
one great thing that we do— our heavenly mission and 
commission. We would be more dignified in manner, 
more earnest in our service as well as less careful of what 
man might say of us. Our whole concern would be that 
we might please him who hath chosen us to be soldiers in 
his Royal Legion, to be ambassadors and heralds of the 
Kingdom and of its terms and conditions. 



R3349 :page 110 
ENCOURAGING WORDS FROM FAITHFUL WORKERS 



DEAR BRO. RUSSELL,- 

Enclosed herewith I send our application for the continuation 
of Pilgrim visits for 1904. 

We greatly appreciate the privilege of these visits and 
the rich blessings with which they are always accompanied. 
Our hearts are full of gratitude to our dear heavenly 
Father that he has seen fit, in his wonderful condescending 
goodness, to thus supply us with the help we so much 
need. 

The work at this place has made very slow progress, 
it seems, to our waiting hearts, nevertheless there have 
been some results. When Bro. Draper was here this 
month we had one "new" sister at our little parlor meetings 
who eagerly drank in the sweet, blessed truths brought 
out in Brother Draper's Bible talks. She seemed to be 
greatly blessed and benefited, and our own hearts throbbed 
with tenderest love and sympathy for her in her new-found 
joy. Praise God for one addition to our number. 

I have just read, through tears of joy, your annual 
report. I cannot express what I feel when I ponder the 
glorious harvest work now going on in the dear Master's 
wheat field, while the tares are sleeping in ignorance and 
indifference. I am constantly saying to myself, Who am 
I that I should be permitted to share in this the greatest 
work ever given to mortal man for accomplishment? I 
am so glad our heavenly bodies will have the capacity of 
expressing what the heavenly mind will feel, and not be 
so limited that they will simply ache for want of such capacity. 
Thank God for the assurance that every want of 
the perfect New Creation will be abundantly supplied. I 

have just returned from a visit at L . While there I 

heard a sermon from a man who was my pastor twenty 
years ago. His text was from the fourteenth chapter of Job, 
"If a man die shall he live again?" His theme, 
"Immortality." Almost the entire time devoted to the 
subject was given to the labor of attempting to show that 
immortality was proven from nature, reason, science and 
philosophy. About ten minutes were devoted to revelation 
and the resurrection of Jesus as additional proof. 
The number of Scripture references used was three, beside 
the context. I was sitting between one of my sisters and 
her husband, who is a Baptist preacher, and when the 
speaker declared that by the resurrection of Jesus "life 
and immortality was brought to light," I could not resist 
giving expression to an emphatic little "Amen," realizing 
that he had spoken the truth without meaning to. As I 
listened to all he had to say, and summed it all up, my 
heart was stirred with unspeakable pity for my dear old 
friend and all my other loved ones who had such scanty 
fare. I watched very closely for some indication of unsatisfied 
hunger, but they all seemed full. Oh, the pity of 
it! All noble hearted and clean handed before the world, 
and all seeming to have real love for our dear heavenly 
Father and all believing they are loyal to him ! 

Dear brother, I have wanted to tell you how greatly 



I rejoiced that our sweet and comforting belief— the truths 
that we greatly prize above life itself— were presented to 
so many people during your debate with Dr. Eaton, and 
presented in such a lovely Christlike way. All my Christian 
life I have longed to see my blessed Lord and Master 
so represented before the world. 

May his blessings continue and increase throughout 
the coming year upon you and all the dear brethren who 
labor with you. 

Yours in fullness of joy, 

(MRS.) AUGUSTA KENT-Texas. 

R3349 :page 111 

MY DEAR BROTHER,- 

It is with deep and inexpressible gratitude to the 
great "Giver of all good gifts," and to you, his honored 
servant, that I take up my pen this morning. I have read 
and re-read your dear Christmas letter [of greeting to the 
Colporteurs] and my heart echoes every sentiment 
expressed. 

How truly "unspeakable" are our heavenly Father's 
gifts, not for one day only, but for every day, and for 
"ages to come," for he will show unto us "the exceeding 
riches of his grace (favor) in his kindness to us through 
Christ Jesus." 

The year just past has been one of great blessing to 
me. The Lord's "table" never seemed so bountifully 
spread as it is now— perhaps my appreciation is increasing, 
too— and our standing in Christ Jesus, and our present 
privileges in the service of his Truth, never seemed 
more grand. Angels certainly would esteem it a pleasure 
to be in our places. 

The dear Chief Reaper has permitted us to see some 
results of our feeble efforts, and this has caused our hearts 
to bubble over with joy, and has more than compensated 
for all the trials incident to our work. 

Our prayer is that we may be given grace and strength 
to continue in this glorious harvest work as long as the 
door of opportunity stands open. We realize also that 
the time is growing very short, and we desire to be diligent 
in his service, and pray also that the "Lord of the 
harvest will send forth more laborers into his harvest." 

We rejoice more and more in the knowledge of 
the "good tidings of great joy which shall be to all 
people." It is the one thing which makes life worth living, 
and even makes it a pleasure. And "our hearts up-leap 
in fond anticipation"— knowing that our "union with 
the Bridegroom draweth nigh," and soon the blessing of 
the "groaning creation" will begin. Oh, that we may 
"walk worthy of him who hath called us to glory and 

R3350 :page 111 

virtue," that we may be ever in the attitude of our dear 
Brother Paul, who rejoiced that he was "counted worthy 



to suffer shame for his name," who did so much for 
us! 

"For him, I count as gain each loss, 

Disgrace for him, renown; 
Well might I glory in the cross 
While he prepares my crown." 

May these be the sentiments of each dear "footstep 
follower (I Pet. 2:21) until they "finish their 
course with joy" and see their dear Redeemer face to 
face. 

With true Christian love, I remain yours in the "one 
hope of our calling," 

M. M. SPRINGER,-Colporteur. 



DEAR BRO. RUSSELL,- 

I have been long wanting to write to you. Since 
August last year when the Lord graciously called me, I 
have been by his gracious help holding steadily on to the 
faith. Your books, together with ZION'S WATCH TOWER, 
(to which I look forward eagerly) and other interesting 
tracts, etc., have been a valuable help to me, so instructive 
have they been. 

It has helped to give the daily reading of the Holy 
Word an additional delight. Many passages having struck 
me as being peculiarly beautiful, I have learned them by 
heart, and while at my work (being an engine driver) I 
love to repeat them over and over to myself amid the roar 
and rattle of the revolving machinery. I have tried, oh, 
so hard, with, I hope, the blessing of the Lord, to interest 
some of my fellow-workmen in the great Truth, and as 
you know have caused two of them at least to become 
subscribers to the WATCH TOWER. As a child of God, 
wholly consecrated to Him, I am anxious that all around 
me should partake of the blessings and peace of mind that 
a child of God has amid the numerous distractions of life. 
My eyes have been opened to the fact that there are many 
blessed privileges I can live up to even in this life, and 
my Father has been surpassingly good to me. I am a simple 
man and do not know very much, but the good fortune 
that has come to me, and in which you have, under 
God, taken a part, impels me to write to you, repeating 
my thanks with a rejoicing heart. 

With much Christian love, yours very sincerely, 
W. R. CONYERS,-India. 



DEAR BRETHREN,- 

Some weeks ago I received (as a Presbyterian minister, 
I suppose) a free copy of your "Divine Plan of the 
Ages." Before acknowledging it, I have taken time to 
read it. I now ask that you will send a cloth-bound copy 
of it to a friend and send your bill to me. You can also 



put me down as a subscriber to ZION'S WATCH TOWER. 
expect later to order the MILLENNIAL DAWN series in 
leather. It is needless to say that the "Divine Plan of 
the Ages" has both interested and comforted me. I am 
anxious to follow up the series and to exchange a personal 
letter or two on some points. 
Yours very truly, A. W. N.,— Missouri. 



DEAR BROTHER.- 

Regarding the article in the Feb. 1 TOWER, "Can 
the Ethiopian Change His Skin," allow me to say, that 
I have ascertained by inquiry, from different colored 
people, that in this small town there are several instances 
of this change taking place. It usually begins 
with a small spot on some part of the body and gradually 
enlarges, and, strange to say, the individuals are 
loath to speak of it. My information extends to other 
communities, and the same experiences are occurring 
there. This appears to be general amongst the race all 
over the country. If a general inquiry was made 
amongst the colored people throughout the country it 
would be found that this is generally the case. I think 
that this is one of the many indications of the great 
changes that will soon take place when our dear Redeemer 
assumes his power and reigns. 

Yours in the service of the loving Master, 
C. C. SEABROOK.-Kansas. 



GENTLEMEN,- 

Being in possession of the first three volumes of 
the MILLENNIAL DAWN series, through a rather peculiar 
circumstance, I request information in regard to the 
succeeding volumes, and prices. 

I may as well inform you that heretofore I had 
been a skeptic in regard to the Bible until I got 
hold of the books mentioned. 

No person of intelligence can read these books and 
not be convinced. They are truly wonderful and show 
that God would surely raise up men who can and will 
interpret the Scriptures harmoniously. 
Yours respectfully, 

H. C. MITCHELL.-Ohio. 



page 113 

SEMI-MONTHLY. 
VOL. XXV. APRIL 15, 1904. No. 
CONTENTS. 



Views From the Watch Tower 115 

Could the Heathen Do Worse? 115 

Dr. Russell Conwel Says Church 

is Dying, Slowly but Surely 116 

The Trial of Faith 116 

The Memorial Celebrated 116 

"Pray Without Ceasing" 117 

"Like Unto Men Who Wait for 

their Lord" 122 

"To Obey is Better Than Sacrifice" 

(Poem) 126 

Interesting Questions Answered 126 

Los Angeles General Convention 114 

page 114 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-24 EVERSHOLT ST., LONDON, N.W. 
GERMAN BRANCH-MIRKER STR., 45, ELBERFELD. 
AUSTRALIAN BRANCH-32 JOHNSTON ST., FITZROY, MELBOURNE. 

PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE, 5c (2-l/2d.) A COPY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity 
or adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER, will be supplied FREE, if 
they send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting 
the paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our 
list continually. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE 



THIS JOURNAL IS PUBLISHED IN THE 

FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, DANISH AND ITALIAN LANGUAGES. 

SAMPLE COPIES AND TERMS FREE. 



GENERAL CONVENTION, LOS ANGELES, CAL., MAY 7,8,9. 



All sessions of the Convention will be held in Elks 
Hall, 231 S. Spring St. Visiting friends who desire accommodations 
secured for them should write in advance 



their intention to attend, stating the number in each party, 
the name, color and sex of each individual, and the price 
of accommodations desired. On account of long distance 
from Allegheny, applicants for accommodations should address 
the chairman of Committee direct, viz., Brother F. 
P. Sherman, 211 N. Spring St., Los Angeles, Cal. 

Accommodations can be secured at 50c each for three or 
four persons in a room and $1.00 each for rooms for single 
persons or couples. 

Reduced rates are available over the railroads on account 
of "M.E. General Conference." From points within 
the State of California the rate is one fare and a third for 
the round trip. Very Low Rates are granted from outside 
the State. Travellers should enquire for "General 
Conference Excursion Ticket." Friends arriving over 
the Santa Fe Railroad can reach hall by Washington St. 
car; and those arriving by Southern Pacific, should board 
yellow car marked "Arcade Depot." 

Going and returning the Editor will hold several 

ONE-DAY CONVENTIONS, AS FOLLOWS: 

DALLAS, TEX., MAY 1.--A morning rally at 10 o'clock 
will be held in the Woodmen's Hall, 349 Main St. The 
public afternoon meeting will be held at 3 o'clock in Carnegie 
Hall, Public Library. Subject: "To Hell and 
Back! Who are there? Hope for the return of many." 
An evening meeting specially for the interested will take 
place at 7.30 in Woodmen's Hall. 

HOUSTON, TEX., MAY 3.--A11 meetings will be held in 
the Auditorium; at 10 a.m., a rally, and at 2.30 p.m. a 
meeting for the interested. A public meeting will be 
held at 7.30 p.m. Subject, "The Oath-bound Covenant." 

SAN ANTONIO, TEX., MAY 4.-Morning rally, at 10 
o'clock, and afternoon meeting, specially for the interested 
at 3 o'clock, will be held at Red Men's Hall, 219 
St. Mary's St. Public meeting at 7.30 p.m. at Beethoven 
Hall, 418 S. Alamo St. Subject, "To Hell and Back." 

SAN FRANCISCO, CAL., May 12. PORTLAND, ORE., May 
15. ST. PAUL, MINN., May 19. ALLEGHENY, PA., May 22. 



GAZETTE SERMON REPORTS FOR THE POOR. 



"Blessed is the man that considereth the poor." A 
dear friend of the cause, interested in the weekly published 
discourses by Brother Russell, has handed the Society a 
sum of money to be used in purchasing Gazettes every 
Monday and mailing said discourses to such as may request 
them amongst the WATCH TOWER readers too poor 
to purchase for themselves. We will do this and stamp 
each one, using the money so far as it will go. Send in 
your orders: postal cards will do. If samples of the paper 



containing the six Eaton-Russell debates are desired, say so. 

Others who can pay for their papers are referred to the 
special "clubbing" rates granted by the Gazette on 3 mos., 
6 mos. and yearly subscriptions, etc., in our issue of Feb. 
15, page 2. 



R3350 :page 115 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 
COULD THE HEATHEN DO WORSE? 



GENERAL Alexel Nicolaevitch Kouropatkin, the 

famous soldier, upon whom Russia depends for 

the success of her army in the far east, is said to 

be the most popular officer in the Russian service, and 

is recognized as the Czar's best general. He was a boy 

of eighteen when he began his military career under Skobeleff 

and participated in all the brilliant engagements 

in the war against the Bokharans. Kouropatkin did 

not become well known in the Russian army, says Ernest 

Haskell in the New York Evening Post, until years 

afterward, when he was Skobeleffs favorite captain and 

chief of staff at Plevna, Turkestan, in the conquest of 

Khokand. Here is a picture of Kouropatkin as presented 

by the Indianapolis Journal: 

"It has been twenty-two years since the capture 
of Geok Tepe; perhaps Kouropatkin has become less 
sanguinary with age. But if he should live to be a 
hundred and in that time should become as mild-mannered 
and soft-hearted as any humanitarian of the age, 
he could never live down the memory of that dreadful 
day. Geok Tepe was a fortress in Central Asia held by 
the Turkomans and besieged for a month by Russian 
forces under Skobeleff. Kouropatkin was the active 
commander, and when at last the stronghold fell he 
gave orders to give no quarter on account of age or 
sex. And here he added the crowning touch to the 
unlovely reputation as a human tiger which he had 
gained in the Russo-Turkish war. 

"The words of an eye-witness give a faint idea of 
the glories of civilized warfare as exemplified by this 
famous general. He says: 'The whole country was 
covered with corpses. The morning after the battle 
they lay in rows like freshly mown hay, as they had 
been swept down by the mitrailleurs and artillery. 
Hundreds of women were sabered, and I myself saw 
little babies bayoneted or slashed to pieces. Many 
women were dishonored before being killed. The 
troops, mad with drink and the lust of fighting, were 
allowed to plunder and kill for three days after the 
assault.'"— Literary Digest. 



FROM TALK TO ACTION. 



"Hitherto Socialism has been a theory. It has 
been debated by doctrinaires; it has sometimes been 
applied in microscopic experiments, but never until 
now has it captured the government of a State as important 
as Saxony. There is no parallel to it in the 
history of civilization. 

"It would seem to be good policy for the German 
Socialists to concentrate their efforts on making Saxony 
an object lesson in the value of their theories. Of 
course their road is not yet clear. The lower house of 
the Saxon Parliament is chosen by a complicated system 
of double election, and most of the members of the 
upper are appointed for life. Still these paper barriers 
cannot long stand against a determined popular majority 
of a hundred thousand. If the Saxon people really 
want Socialism they can get it. 

"Like the other German States and the Empire itself, 
Saxony has advanced some distance in this direction 
already. The railroads and telegraphs are public 
property. The business which in this country is done 
by express companies, insurance companies and private 
savings banks is done there largely by public agencies, 
municipal, royal or imperial. If we should begin now 
to socialize our business affairs it would take us 
twenty years to reach the point at which Germany 
stands today. 

"Since the State in Germany now does everything 
that it can do consistently with the maintenance of the 
present social system, the advocates of a new social 
system have no preliminaries to dispose of before putting 
their own theories to a complete test. They 
have waded through the shallows of public ownership 
of public utilities, and the next move must be to strike 
out into the deep waters of Socialism. 

"It seems to be 'up to' the German Socialists to 
try this experiment in Saxony. A kingdom as populous 
as Ohio furnishes an ample field for a fair test. 
The great cotton mills of Chemnitz, the machine shops 
of Zwickau, the type foundries of Leipzig, the mines of 
the Erzgebirge, would be impressive examples of socialized 
industry if they were worked successfully by the 
State. Probably the success of such an experiment 
would complete the triumph of the Social Democrats 
in the German Empire, and it would certainly give a 
powerful impetus to their agitation throughout the 
world. On the other hand, its failure would, of course, 
have a dampening effect on the movement everywhere. 
But the Socialists must believe that their theories would 

R3351 :page 116 



work well or they would not hold them. They have 
been talking for a good many years with great effect. 
Now is their opportunity to act."— Literary Review. 

DR. RUSSELL H. CONWEL SAYS CHURCH IS DYING 
SLOWLY, BUT SURELY. 



"In an address which was the feature of the fourth 
annual meeting of the Baptist Social Union of New 
York, Rev. Russell Conwel, D.D., pastor of the Baptist 
Temple of Philadelphia has declared that modern 
churches are dying slowly but surely, because of indifference 
of pastors and congregations. 

'"The modern Christian Church,' he said, 'is becoming 
submerged because of laxity. Pastors are growing 
indifferent, and congregations are all the time becoming 
smaller. There are too many movements, too many 
office holders and differing phases of creed. The result 
is that the parent Church is dying. The only reason 
that a young man goes to Church nowadays is because 
he knows that his best girl is there. 

"The Y.M.C.A. is more prosperous than the 
Church, because it is made attractive by its books and 
gymnasiums, with a true Christian spirit. With hospitals 
and colleges the sectarian spirit is waning. Men 
who make large endowments, as a rule, stipulate that 
the institutions they help shall be non-sectarian. If 
the Church is to live we must get back to the first 
teachings of Christ.'"— Exchange. 

THE TRIAL OF FAITH. 



"The Edomite saint must have looked into birds' 
nests when he used the comparison, I said, I shall die 
in my nest.' That is what a good many people say. 
They build each a nest for himself, and not for a summer, 
but for a life. They say that they shall die in it 
after many years of enjoyment of it. But they need 
the treatment the mother bird gives her young. Her 
first step is to make the nest uncomfortable. 'As an 
eagle stirreth up her nest,' she mixes the thorny outside 
with the downy inside. So God, by his testing 
providences makes the place of rest one of unrest to us, 
and thus lures us out to trust ourselves to his care and 
guidance over untried ways. And so he brings us to a 
stronger, maturer, more useful life. The wind roots 
the tree deeper in the soil. The stormy waves cause 
the anchor to take a stronger grip. There are advantages 
in disadvantages. Disappointments have proven 
God's best appointments. Financial ruin has proved a 
man's salvation. Sickness has brought many highest 
health. -Dr. G. Hallock. 



R3351 :page 116 

THE MEMORIAL WIDELY CELEBRATED. 

REPORTS of the observance of our Lord's Memorial 
Supper on March 29th, its anniversary, 
have come in quite promptly this year— much 
to our pleasement. We rejoice to be able to announce 
that the interest and the numbers reported show quite 
an increase over those of last year and previously. In a 
sense the present is the opening of the year to us, as it 
was to typical Israel. Our remembrance of the Master's 
sufferings— "the just for the unjust"— and of our debt 
to him, and of our consecration to die with him in the 
battle of righteousness against sin, all press home on 
our hearts and serve to reinvigorate us for a fresh start 
in the service we love to render, even at the cost of 
afflictions and self-denials which, with the Apostle, we 
count but "light afflictions, working out for us a far 
more exceeding and eternal weight of glory." 

The letters received from every direction breathe 
the same spirit of love and devotion, with resolves for 
the future year, and prayers for the prosperity of the 
work centered here at Allegheny. We also remembered 
you all and continually do so in our daily worship. 
Brethren, continue to pray for us. As the work widens 
and deepens we need more of heavenly wisdom in 
connection with its general direction. 

Of those already reported the following are those 
showing the largest attendances: Allegheny, Pa., 366; 
Altoona, Pa., 36; Boston, Mass., 197; Cleveland, O., 68; 
Dayton, O., 39; Los Angeles, Cal., 112; Lynn, Mass., 
34; New York City, 62; Philadelphia, Pa., 170; Toronto, 
Ont., 68; St. Louis, Mo., 69; Washington, D.C., 
67. We append a few of the letters, remarking that 
they are samples of all as respects sentiments. 

The Church at Allegheny had a most enjoyable 
season of fellowship with the Lord and fellow-members 
on the 29th ult. The attendance, 366, was the largest 
we have ever had— overcrowding our conveniences— 
and so far as we can judge all but fifteen partook of the 
Memorial emblems. The Spirit of the Lord was richly 
with us at the afternoon session, also, when a baptism 
service was held. Owing to the fact that at Allegheny 
we have given opportunities for symbolic baptism on 
the first Sunday of each month there were fewer baptisms 
on the 29th than some above reported. That 
day there were thirteen. 



page 116 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL: 

Sixty-seven brethren and sisters met tonight in Bro. 

M 's studio and partook of the spiritual privileges of 

the Memorial, as well as the emblems thereof. The 
number is exactly the same as last year, but since 
January 1 st no less than five faithful ones have entered 
other fields of usefulness, colporteuring or otherwise. 
Besides, several were unable to be present. It was a 
blessed occasion of refreshment as our hearts feasted 
together in faith upon those verities which the emblems 
so beautifully symbolize. 

We were happy to adopt the suggestions made in 
Vol. VI. pertaining to the order of the service, in which 
I enjoyed the privilege of being the leader. Brothers 

F and R respectively offered our prayers of thanksgiving 

and praise for the "bread" and "wine," and 
various brethren shared in other portions of the service, 
while all were enabled to share in the heart-communion 
with the Lord. 

Your brother in Christ, E. T.,— Washington. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL: 

The Church in this place and vicinity met last 

page 117 

night in our home and celebrated the Memorial Supper, 
and thus we remembered him who redeemed us by his 
blood. 26 were present, who all partook. We rejoiced 
together that the "unspeakable gift" of everlasting life 
was reckoned to us by the sacrifice of our dear Lord, 
appropriated to us by faith, and we pledged ourselves 
afresh to serve him faithfully, even unto death, saying: 
"O for such love I would make some return," and realizing 
that "my humble offering I know he'll not spurn." 
Within the past year— from Memorial to Memorial- 
ten have been immersed and in about a year four of 
our number have entered the harvest work as colporteurs. 
The spiritual health of the Lord's people here 
seems good, if one may judge by the thoughtfulness 
and loving consideration which all seem to manifest one 
toward another, and it seems correct to think of Love 
as the golden reed by which God measures us. Oh, 
that we may come up to this mark of perfect love! 
Your brother in this blessed hope, 

D. K., -Springfield, Mass. 



CHAS. T. RUSSELL: 

Dear Brother in Christ,— It gives me great pleasure 
to advise you of the blessed privilege extended once 
more to the Church at New York of commemorating 
the death of our dear Redeemer. Sixty-two partook 



of the emblems of the broken body and shed blood of 
our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, which sacrifice I am 
sure we appreciate much more than we did one year 
ago. May the feast continue until by his grace we 
shall celebrate it anew with him in his Kingdom. Our 
dear Brother R— ably set forth the Truth in detail; 
the service altogether was very impressive and of great 
blessing to many. 

No doubt you will be pleased to know that fourteen 
of like precious faith symbolized their consecration 
at the baptismal service Sunday, the 27th. 

Yours in the faith, fellowship and service, 
S. Y.,-New York. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL: 

The Lord's Memorial Supper was celebrated last 
evening in the vestry of the People's Temple with 197 
adults and three children present. The season was, as 
it has always been, a blessed and impressive one. All 
or nearly all of the thirty-seven dear ones who were 
immersed symbolically into Christ last Sunday were 
present— an object lesson and illustration to the Church 
of Boston and vicinity of the truth that "he that reapeth 
receiveth wages." No one had any idea that so 
many as sixteen brothers and twenty-one sisters were 
to be baptized, the number being the largest we have 
ever had, as was also the number partaking of the 
emblems of our dear Lord's body and blood. 

Our hearts are touched as we think of the suffering 
of our Head and Elder Brother, yet we glory in his 
great victory o'er the grave, the redemption bought 
thereby, and rejoice that we are one year nearer, if 
faithful, to drinking anew with him of the fruit of the 
vine in our Father's Kingdom. One of our beloved 
and faithful Elders served the Boston assembly, while 
the other served friends in another city. A number of 
the brethren were also with smaller companies in neighboring 
towns. 

With new courage and zeal for the Master's service, 
I am, as ever, and in behalf of all of the brethren, 

Yours in the Beloved, H. A.,— Boston. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL: 

The friends at this place met at our hall in commemoration 
of our Lord's death. Each year seems to 
make this season dearer to us and we can truly say 
that this one has been the most blessed of all. 

We feel more keenly the responsibilities as well as 
the blessings that come to us through participation in 
the loaf and cup. There were thirty-four present and 
the emblems were sent to some who were unable to be 
present. We are looking forward to that time when 



we shall drink the "new wine" in the Kingdom with 
our dear Master. 

With Christian love, I am, as ever, yours in the 
faith, C. B.,-Lynn, Mass. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL: 

About 170 of the friends gathered in the Church at 
10th and Dauphin Sts. this evening to commemorate 
the death of our Lord. Seventeen symbolized their 
consecration by immersion at an earlier hour. 

All the friends send you Christian love and greeting. 
Your brother, H. P.,— Philadelphia. 



R3351 :page 117 

"PRAY WITHOUT CEASING" 

-LUKE 11:1-13.-MAY 1.- 

Golden Text:— "Ask, and it shall be 
given you; seek, and ye shall find." 

WE ARE NOT to suppose that the disciples had 
never prayed up to the time mentioned in 
this lesson, when they asked the Lord to instruct 
them in the matter. On the contrary, we are to 
suppose that they had, in common with the Jews in 
general, and in harmony with our Lord's example, been 
accustomed to go to God in prayer. They seem to have 
realized that, as our Lord's teachings were considerably 
different from those of the Scribes and Pharisees on 
various points, so also his conception of prayer was 
probably different, and they desired to have instruction 
on this subject along the lines of his advanced teaching. 
Several instances are recorded in which our Lord Jesus 
prayed in the presence and in the hearing of his disciples 
—a sufficient number to preserve us from the error 
of some who claim that public prayer is improper. 
Nevertheless, apparently our Lord's usual method was 
to go to the Father privately, after the manner he 
described to his disciples when he said, Enter into thy 
closet, and when thou hast shut thy door, pray to thy 
Father in secret. 

The spirit of this injunction was carried out by 
our Lord when he withdrew from his disciples into 
a mountain alone for prayer, and we have several records 

R3351 :page 118 

of his spending a considerable portion of the night 
thus in communion with the heavenly Father. One 
lesson to us from our Lord's example would be that if 



he in his perfection needed to have spiritual fellowship 
and communion with the Father in order to carry on 
the assigned work, we, his disciples, imperfect according 
to the flesh, and every way lacking the wisdom, 
etc., which he possessed, have much more need to look 
continually to the Lord for the guidance and comfort, 
the sustenance needed in all the trials and difficulties 
of life in the narrow way. It is in accord with this that 
the Apostle exhorts, "Pray without ceasing,— in everything 
giving thanks." 

THE SECRET OF A HAPPY DAY. 

We do not understand the Apostle to mean that 
the Lord's people are to be continually upon their knees, 
but rather that their hearts are to be constantly in an 
attitude of prayer, mentally, spiritually, looking to the 
Lord for guidance in all the affairs of life, and to see 
that their conduct has the divine approval. This thought 
of perpetual communion with the Lord, continually 
looking to him for his smile, continually watching that 
no earth-born cloud arise and hide from us the Father's 
face and blessing, is the attitude of the advanced Christian. 
To such an one every day and every hour is a 
time of fellowship with the Lord. Whenever business 
cares, household worries, etc., interfere with such communion 
it is an evidence that we are being overcharged 
with the cares of this life, and the difficulty should be 
corrected: either we should rectify matters by diminishing 
our business responsibilities, etc., or, if this be 
impossible, we should counterbalance the cares of life 
with the more earnest and more repeated turning of our 
hearts to the Lord for guidance in even the trivial affairs 
of life, much more in the great ones. 

It was probably on our Lord's return to his disciples 
from such a season of private fellowship with God 
that they asked him respecting prayer, as recorded in 
our lesson. Had he been much in the habit of praying 
with them audibly we may presume that they would 
have known to take his style of praying as proper copy 
for their own. 

The account of this prayer, as given by Luke, differs 
considerably from the account given by Matthew, the 
latter, apparently, being much the more complete statement 
(Matt. 6:9). We are not to understand that our 
Lord meant, Say ye, but rather, as it is elsewhere given, 
After this manner pray ye. In other words, our Lord 
gave, not the words for our prayers, but a general sample 
of style. We incline to think that our Lord's followers 
have, to a considerable degree, neglected the 
style, and, instead of the brief, orderly petition, all seem 
inclined to adopt more or less of the mannerism which 
our Lord ascribed to the improper prayer; namely, vain 
repetitions, as though it were expected that the prayer 
would be accepted only if it were of certain length. We 



R3352:page 118 

are not to suppose that our Lord spent hours in prayer, 
and yet used so brief a form as the one here given to 
the Apostles, but we may reasonably expect that the 
order which he here set forth would be the one which 
he observed, namely— (1) The address, 

"OUR FATHER, WHICH ART IN HEAVEN." 

The term, Our Father, would necessarily be a new 
one to the Jews, for they were a house of servants. By 
this the apostles were to understand that, having become 
identified with the Lord Jesus, they were now 
privileged to consider themselves sons of God, and he 
their Father. Perhaps that was one of the particular 
points on which they desired instruction. They may 
have heard the Lord Jesus addressing God as his father, 
and may have wondered whether or not they would be 
so privileged to address him. This prayer would assure 
them that God recognized them, not as servants merely, 
but as sons. This is in accord with the statement made 
by the Apostle John (John 1:12), "To so many as received 
him, to them gave he the privilege to become sons 
of God." The term is one of special endearment. 

The affection of a true father for his child, being 
one of the most precious in the world, is used to illustrate 
the relationship of the Lord's consecrated members 
to the Creator. It is necessary to be some time in 
the school of Christ as disciples, learners, before we are 
able properly to appreciate the meaning of this word 
Father as applied to God, but the more we come to know 
of the love of God, which passes all understanding, and 
the more we are enabled to draw near to him through 
faith and obedience, the more precious will this term 
Father become. 

(2) "HALLOWED BE THY NAME." 

This expresses adoration, appreciation of divine 
goodness and greatness, and a corresponding reverence. 
In addressing our petition to the Lord our first 
thought is to be, not a selfish one respecting ourselves, 
nor a thought respecting the interests of others precious 
to us, but God is to be first in all of our thoughts and 
aims and calculations. We are to pray for nothing that 
would not be in accord with the honor of our heavenly 
Father's name; we are to wish for nothing for ourselves, 
or for our dear ones, that he would not fully approve 
and commission us to pray for. Perhaps no quality of 
heart is in greater danger of being blotted out amongst 
professing Christians today than this thought of reverence 
for God. However much we have grown in knowledge, 
and however much we have gotten free from superstitions 
and errors, and however advanced in some 
respects is the Christian's position of today over that of 



a century ago, we fear that reverence has been losing 
ground, not only in the nominal church, but with many 

R3352:page 119 

of the members of the one "Church of the living God, 
whose names are written in heaven." Every loss of 
reverence is a distinct disadvantage, both to the Church 
and to the world, paving the way to various evils, and 
ultimately to anarchy. 

The difficulty is that ignorance and superstition 
were the foundation for much of the reverence of the 
past, and, as the light of Truth dispels the error, only 
the few receive the precious Truth instead of the error, 
and real reverence of love instead of reverence of superstition 
and fear— and even with these the transition 
sometimes involves loss of considerable reverence. The 
Lord's people will do well to cultivate this quality, and 
they will be helped so to do by following the order of 
prayer which our Lord has here laid down— considering 
first the will and honor of God as superior to their 
own and every other interest. 

(3) "THY KINGDOM COME." 

As God and his glory and honor are to be first in 
the minds of his children, so their next thought should 
be for the glorious Kingdom, which he has promised 
shall bless the world. However much our own personal 
interests and affairs may be pressing upon us, and however 
much we may desire to have the Lord's blessing 
and guidance in them, they are not to outrank our appreciation 
of his beneficent arrangements which he has 
so clearly promised in his Word. We are to remember 
that the Kingdom, when it shall come, will be a panacea 
for every ill and every trouble, not only for us, but for 
the whole world of mankind. We are not, therefore, to 
permit our own personal needs to be too prominent, but 
are to remember that the whole creation is groaning and 
travailing in pain together, waiting for this glorious 
Kingdom and the blessing upon all the families of the 
earth, which our heavenly Father has promised shall 
yet come through the seed of Abraham. 

This thought respecting the Kingdom, its necessity, 
and the blessings that it will bring will keep prominently 
before our minds our own high calling to joint-heirship 
with our Lord in this Kingdom. And in proportion as 
that hope is clearly before our minds it will be, as the 
Apostle explains, as "an anchor to our souls, sure and 
steadfast, entering into that which is within the vail." 
This anchorage of hope in the future, in the Kingdom, 
will enable us to pass safely, and with comparative quiet, 
through the trials and storms and difficulties of this 
present evil world. More than this, our thoughts respecting 
the Kingdom will remind us that if we are to 
be heirs of the Kingdom it will be necessary that we 



have the appropriate discipline and training. And so, 

while praying, Thy Kingdom come, our hearts will naturally 

think next of the fact that our hopes are that when 

the Kingdom comes we shall be participators, with our 

dear Redeemer, in its glory, and in its great work of 

blessing the world. And in proper order then will come 

the thought that we must now have the necessary trials, 

difficulties and disciplines to properly fit and prepare 

us for the duties of the Kingdom. This thought in 

turn will make all the afflictions and trials of this present 

time seem to us light afflictions, knowing that they 

are working out for us a far more exceeding and eternal 

weight of glory. Thus the very offering of this prayer 

in its proper order will bring us a measure of relief from 

our perplexities, trials and disappointments before, in 

their proper order, we reach these to mention them at 

the throne of grace. 

(4) "THY WILL BE DONE ON EARTH, AS IT IS DONE IN 
HEAVEN." 

This petition offered from the heart implies that 
the one offering it has made a full consecration of his 
will, his heart, to the Lord, and that as he hopes for the 
Kingdom by and by to come and subdue all unrighteousness 
and to establish the divine will from sea to sea, 
and from pole to pole, so now, the petitioner being thus 
in accord with the Lord's will, and thus wishing that it 
might be universally in control, will see to it that this 
will is ruling in his own heart— that in his own affairs 
God's will is done to the best of his ability in his earthly 
condition, even as he hopes to have it perfected in 
the Kingdom. No one can intelligently and honestly 
offer this petition and not desire and endeavor to have 
the Lord's will done in himself while on earth. Thus 
a blessing comes to the one who offers this petition before 
he has asked any special blessing upon himself or 
others. The mere thought of the divine arrangement 
brings a blessing, a peace, a rest, a sanctification of 
heart. 

(5) "GIVE US DAY BY DAY OUR DAILY BREAD." 

Matthew's statement is, we think, preferable on 
this point also: "Give us this day our daily bread." 
The thought seems to be that of continual dependence 
upon the Lord, day by day, for the things needed— accepting 
for each day the Lord's providential care and 
direction of our affairs. Daily bread should here be 
understood in the broad sense of food and raiment- 
things necessary. The Lord's people, who recognize 
him as their Father, must trust him as children, while 
seeking to use the various instrumentalities and opportunities 
within their reach. They are to provide the 
things necessary for themselves, yet to recognize the 
divine provision and care which has pre-arranged matters 



so as to make their present conditions and blessings 
attainable. Agnosticism and higher criticism in 
general may deny, if they please, divine providence in 
connection with the grains and other supplies for man's 
necessities; but the eye of faith sees behind these supplies 
the love of God, and the wisdom of God, and the 
power of God, making ready for man's necessities, and 

R3352 : page 120 

giving the things necessary in such a manner as will be 
for the advantage of mankind— through sweat of face, 
etc. 

The petition does not warrant us in asking for particular 
kinds of food and delicacies. Whether our energies 
and carefulness in respect to life's affairs shall 
result in temporal prosperity, accompanied with the 
comforts and some of the luxuries of life, or whether 
we shall barely have sufficient, and that with unceasing 
toil, we are to leave to the Lord's providence to direct. 
The Scriptures admonish us that we are not to be avaricious, 
but, while "not slothful in business, fervent in 
spirit, serving the Lord," we are to "be content with 
such things" as divine providence may grant us. 

The child of God on common fare and in common 
clothing may really be much happier than are some 
much more prospered in temporal matters. His contentment 
with inferior conditions arises, not from a less 
ambitious mind, but rather from his faith and hope 
and love, which, under the guidance of the Lord's 
Word, discern that the present life is merely a vestibule 
to eternity, and in realizing that the Lord is supervising 
the affairs of his people. So the trials, persecutions, 
discouragements and disadvantages in the 
present time will work in them and work out for them 
preparation of heart, development of character, which 
will make them meet for the inheritance of the saints 
in light. 

(6) "FORGIVE US OUR SINS." 

Those who come to God in prayer acceptably must 
approach him with a realization of their own insufficiency 
and unworthiness: they must realize that they 

R3353 : page 120 

are by nature sinners, and that their flesh is both fallen 

and weak ("so that they cannot do the things which 

they would"). Not the Adamic sin, but personal transgressions 

are here referred to, for Adamic sin, unrepented 

of and unforgiven, would stand as a barrier so 

that the supplicant would have no right to go to God 

in prayer at all until he had thus repented and been 

forgiven through the merit of the Mediator. He would 

have no right whatever to call God his Father, but 



would still be one of the Adamic race— unregenerated. 
Our coming to God in prayer and calling him Father 
imply that we have accepted the mediation of the great 
Redeemer, through the merit of his sacrifice— imply 
that our sins have been forgiven, that we have been 
covered with the robe of Christ's righteousness, and 
that the Lord is no longer dealing with us as sinners. 

What sins, then, have we to confess? We reply 
that all should recognize that their very best efforts in 
the flesh necessarily come short of perfection— short of 
the glory of God. Although the forgiveness of sins is 
not here mentioned as being through the merit of our 
Lord Jesus Christ, yet other Scriptures clearly show us 
that this is the only ground of our fellowship with God, 
—that there is no other name given under heaven or 
amongst men whereby we must be saved from our sins. 

To petition the Lord for forgiveness of sins implies 
that we are at heart opposed to the sins, and that any 
sins committed have not been wilful ones; and the 
Lord, according to his covenant of grace with us, agrees 
to accept the intention of our hearts as instead of the 
actual, full, complete, perfect obedience to the divine 
requirement in thought and in word and in act. This 
petition, then, signifies that we recognize that the robe 
of Christ's righteousness granted to us has become 
spotted or sullied, and that we desire to be cleansed, 
so that we may again be without spot or wrinkle or 
any such thing. On the contrary, this cannot refer to 
wilful sins, because, as the Apostle explains, if we sin 
wilfully, after that we have received the knowledge of 
the Truth, there remaineth no more sacrifice for sins, 
and hence no more a basis for forgiveness; and the end 
of wilful sin is Second Death. It is, however, proper 
to remark that there are what might be termed mixed 
sins— sins in which a measure of wilfulness may have 
combined with a measure of ignorance or inherited 
weakness. 

In the case of such sins the Lord expresses his willingness 
to cancel the wrong upon its being properly 
repented of, but he reserves to himself the giving of 
stripes, or chastisements appropriate and necessary to 
his child as an instruction in righteousness, and correction 
of weaknesses, etc. Happy are they who, with 
growth in grace and knowledge, find their hearts so 
fully in accord with the principles of the divine arrangement 
that they will never transgress with any measure 
of wilfulness; but blessed also are those who, finding 
some measure of wilfulness in their deflections from 
the divine rule, are pained thereby, and who, as the 
Apostle says, are led to discipline or correct themselves 
that they may the more quickly learn the lessons, and 
bring their bodies more completely into subjection to 
the new mind— "I keep under my body and bring it 
into subjection: lest that by any means, when I have 
preached to others, I myself should be a castaway." 
"For if we would judge ourselves, we should not be 



judged." 

(7) "FOR WE ALSO FORGIVE EVERYONE THAT IS INDEBTED 
TO US." 

Again Matthew's rendering is better: "Those who 
trespass against us." As we are imperfect and cannot 
keep the divine law, so likewise others are imperfect. 
As the degrees of deflection from the divine law vary 
with the degrees of the fall, so also we must expect 
that the trespasses of ourselves and others, one against 
another, will vary, according to natural temperament, 
weakness, etc. As we realize that we have received, 
and will still need, divine compassion and mercy in respect 
to our shortcomings, so the Lord teaches us that 

R3353 : page 121 

we must exercise similar benevolence toward our fellow-creatures, 

both in the Church and outside. Elsewhere 

he lays down this rule very stringently, that if we do 

not from our heart forgive those trespassing against 

us, neither will our heavenly Father forgive our trespasses. 

Thus the Lord would develop in his consecrated 

people the spirit of the Father, even as he instructed 

us, saying: "Be ye holy, even as your Father 

which is in heaven is holy." 

That is to be the standard. However far short of 
it we may come, we can have no lower standard than 
that; and in proportion as we are striving for that 
standard and realize our own weaknesses and imperfections, 
we should have proportionate compassion upon 
fellow-creatures and their shortcomings toward us. 
This is love, sympathy, compassion,— and whoever 
does not attain this degree of love which will have compassion 
upon others and their weaknesses, and which 
would be ready to forgive them and glad to forgive 
them; and whoever does not succeed in this matter to 
the extent of being able to love his enemies, so as to 
even pray for them, that person fails to reach the mark 
of character which the Lord demands, and he may be 
sure that his own deviations from perfect rectitude will 
not be overlooked, because he is lacking the one important 
quality of love, which covers a multitude of 
sins of every kind. None, surely, will gain a place in 
the Kingdom class, in the Bride class, except they have 
this forgiving quality, this quality of love. 

(8) "BRING US NOT INTO TEMPTATION." 

We are to remember the words of the Apostle (Jas. 1:13) 
to the effect that God tempteth no man, and we 
are to apply this thought to the prayer. So doing our 
prayer will not signify that we fear God will tempt us, 
but that we entreat him that he may guide our steps, 
our cares in life, so that no temptation, no trial, shall 



come upon us that would be too severe for us; that he 
may bring us by a way in which we will not be tempted 
above that we are able, and provide a way of escape, 
when we are sore distressed. The Apostle assures us 
that this is the divine will, and that such a prayer 
would be in accordance with it. He says God will not 
suffer us to be tempted above that we are able, but will 
with every temptation provide also a way of escape. 
The temptations are of the Adversary, and of our own 
fallen natures— through our own flesh, and through the 
weaknesses of others. God is not responsible for these, 
but he is able to so guide the way of his people that 
they shall not be overwhelmed in these natural difficulties, 
weaknesses, besetments, nor by the wiles of the 
Adversary. 

(9) "BUT DELIVER US FROM EVIL." 

These words are not found in the original, but corresponding 
words are found in Matthew's record: "Deliver 
us from the Evil One." There never was a time 
when there was greater need of this petition than at 
present. The Evil one is specially seeking to trap and 
ensnare the Lord's people in the present time, and the 
Scriptures inform us that God is permitting this, and, 
in that sense of the word, that he is sending strong 
delusions— permitting the Adversary to bring strong 
delusions upon the world and upon the nominal 
church. Our Father is permitting this because the 
time has come for a complete separation of the wheat 
from the tares. He has promised, however, that those 
who are truly of the wheat class— the sanctified in 
Christ Jesus, who are seeking to walk in his steps- 
shall not be stumbled, shall never fall, but shall have 
an abundant entrance ministered unto them into the 
everlasting Kingdom. The question, then, is one of 
loyalty of heart to the Lord. 

The trial of this day shall try the work of every 
man [in the Church] of what sort it is. It will be so 
severe that if it were possible the very elect would be 
deceived; but this will not be possible, because the 
Lord will specially care for these. Nevertheless the 
Lord will be inquired of by his people in respect to 
these matters which he has already promised, and as 
they pray, Deliver us from the Evil One, they surely 
will labor in the same direction. It is our expectation 
that very shortly now the forces of evil will gain much 
greater strength than at present, with all deceivableness 
of unrighteousness; and meantime the Lord is 
staying the adverse forces that his true people may 
put on the armor of God and be able to stand when the 
evil day shall come. 

FAITH AND HOPE DEVELOPED BY DELAY. 

In verses 5-8 our Lord gives us a parable, showing 



how importunity might bring an answer from an earthly 
friend who at first declined a request. Our Lord 
uses the illustration in respect to the heavenly Father, 
not by way of implying that God is averse to his people's 
requests and will only grant them when their 
comings become tedious to him, but by way of showing 
what patient persistency men will have in connection 
with some slight earthly favor desired, and as illustrating 
how the Lord's people need to be much more solicitous 
and earnest in respect to the heavenly blessings 
they desire. Our heavenly Father has good things; 
he has promised them to us; he takes delight in giving 
them to us, yet some of them are afar off. For instance, 
he has allowed his dear people to pray, Thy 
Kingdom come, thy will be done on earth as it is done 
in heaven, for nearly nineteen centuries. Why has he 
not answered the petition sooner? Why did he suggest 
that we should so pray, if the answer were to be so 
long delayed? 

We reply that the Lord had a plan, including the 
time for the Kingdom, already mapped out before he 
taught us to pray for it; and that the prayer of now 

R3354 : page 122 

nearly nineteen centuries, going up from the hearts of 
his people, have been blessings to their hearts, and 
have led them to appreciate and long for the Kingdom 
far more than if they had not thus prayed. The longing 
for the Kingdom has been a blessing of itself and 
has been an encouragement, and so we are praying today, 
more earnestly perhaps than ever before, Thy 
Kingdom come, because we appreciate the need of 
God's Kingdom more and more as we get down to the 
time when it will be ready to be given to us. 

ASKING, SEEKING, KNOCKING. 

Our Lord's words in conclusion of the lesson are 
very soul-satisfying to those who have faith: "I say 
unto you, Ask, and it shall be given unto you; seek, 
and ye shall find; knock, and it shall be opened unto 
you." We have the Master's words for this, but we 
are to remember the order as already expressed to 
us in prayer; we are to ask nothing that will not be 
hallowing and honoring to our heavenly Father's name; 
we are to ask nothing that would be an interference in 
any measure or degree with the coming of his Kingdom, 
or the doing of his will on earth as in heaven; we 
are to ask in harmony with the divine plan, and to be 
assured that that divine plan, revealed in the Word and 
prayed for by us, will ultimately be fully accomplished, 
and that it will be a most heart-satisfying portion when 
we do receive it. 

The asking, seeking and knocking are to be done 
by us individually. We may ask the Lord for a share 



in the Kingdom, and may labor for it, praying his blessing 
upon our labors; but we may not attempt to direct 
the divine arrangement and to ask the Lord to specially 
favor others in connection with the Kingdom. Because 
some one is related to us and very dear according to 
the flesh, is no reason why we should conclude that 
the Lord would necessarily choose such an one for a 
member of his Bride. On the contrary, we are to 
preach the Word to such an one, to tell him of God's 
goodness and grace, and of the Kingdom, and of the 
blessing, and to encourage him to make a consecration 
of himself to the Lord; and, in connection with that 
consecration, we are to urge him to ask for himself, to 
seek for himself and to know for himself that he may 
receive and find and enter into the blessed favors of 
the Lord. 

EVERY GOOD AND PERFECT GIFT COMETH FROM THE FATHER. 

Our Lord appeals to the fatherly spirit in man, reminding 
his hearers of how they would delight to give 
good gifts of food to their children, how they would not 
only not give them something poisonous or injurious 
when they asked for good blessings, but they would 
not even give them the injurious things when asked 
for. Much more is our heavenly Father good, kind, 
benevolent, and disposed to bless his children. Much 
more will he give to us the right things. We have 
thought of this frequently when hearing some of our 
dear friends praying that the Lord would baptize them 
with fire, as he promised in the Scriptures. We are rejoiced 
to think that God, in his goodness, would not 
answer that prayer, would not take advantage of the 
misunderstanding of the matter, and answer a prayer 
which would be so injurious to the petitioner. What 
they desired was a measure of divine blessing; what 
they were asking for was the curse, or trouble which 
came upon the chaff in the end of the Jewish age, and 
which is again to come upon the tares in the end of 
Gospel age. 

We trust that the Lord's people will more and 
more cultivate a spirit of prayer, and that so doing 
they will more and more appreciate their relationship 
to God as children, and come to him as to a father, 
with simplicity, with sincerity. We are not at all advocating 
the thought that is today so prevalent, of the 
fatherhood of God and the brotherhood of man. That 
false doctrine finds no place in the Word of God. God 
does not stand sponsor for the depraved race as it now 
appears. He was the father of Adam in his perfection, 
but these imperfections, which have come to have so 
prominent a place in the children of Adam, the Lord 
declares to be of the Adversary, and to some he said, 
of his day, Ye are of your father, the devil, and his 
works ye do. In order to get back again into the family 
of God, as Adam was, a son of God, before he 



sinned, it is necessary for us to go by the appointed 
way— through the merit of Jesus, the merit of his sacrifice 
for our sins. More than this, having been thus 
justified as sons on the human plane, we have been 
accepted in the beloved one to sonship, as New Creatures 
in Christ. It is from this standpoint that we 
come to the Father, from this standpoint that we have 
our fellowship, and from this standpoint that we are 
hoping, trusting, believing that all things are working 
together for good to us, because we love God and have 
been called according to his purpose. 



R3354 : page 122 

"LIKE UNTO MEN WHO WAIT FOR THEIR LORD." 

-LUKE 12:35-48. -MAY 8.- 

Golden Text.— "Blessed are those servants whom 
the Lord when he cometh, shall find watching." 

FOLLOWING up his instruction respecting his approaching 
death and resurrection, and after the 
transfiguration vision which emphasized this lesson 
to the apostles, our Lord began to explain to them 
something respecting his second coming and what their 
attitude should be in the interval. The present lesson 

R3354 : page 123 

emphasizes this matter. During the Lord's absence 
his people were to be continually on the alert; their 
loins girded would represent that they were to be ready 
for service all the time— actively engaged in promoting 
the interests of the Kingdom. According to the custom 
of that time, loose, flowing garments were used, and 
the girdle at the waist drew these into proper place so 
as to permit of the ordinary services of life. When 
rest was sought the girdle was loosed. Consequently 
the lesson of the figure is constant activity on the part 
of the Lord's people during his absence from us. We 
are not to become charged with the cares of this world 
and slumber and sleep, and thus refrain from attending 
to the duties properly devolving upon us. 

Each one of the Lord's servants is represented as 
a light bearer, and instructed to let his light so shine 
before men that they, seeing his good works, may glorify 
the Father in heaven. The picture is that of general 
darkness, ignorance, superstition and sin in the 
world, while the Lord's disciples have been granted the 
light of divine revelation and wisdom and understanding, 
which not only transforms them and makes of them 
New Creatures, but also shines through them unto all 
with whom they come in contact. "Ye are the light 



of the world." A suggestion is here in place, namely, 
that the Great Light, the glorious sunrise of the Millennial 
morning, has not yet taken place; the Lord's people 
are still in the world as little lights, shining in the 
midst of general darkness and watching and waiting 
for the morning. The Prophet's words were in line 
with this when he said, "Weeping may endure for a 
night, but joy cometh in the morning." This night 
time of darkness and ignorance and sin began with the 
curse of death, which came upon our race through 
father Adam's disobedience, and the whole creation is 
groaning and travailing together, waiting for the morning, 
waiting for the manifestation of the sons of God 
—Christ Jesus and his brethren, his joint-heirs in the 
Kingdom. 

Our Lord gave a parable to illustrate the alertness 
and attentiveness that should characterize his followers. 
Amongst the Jews there would be no occasion on which 
the servants of the household would be expected to be 
more alert or to manifest more interest in the welfare 
of the household than on the night or morning on which 
their master would come to his home bringing with him 
his bride. And so the Lord chooses this as an appropriate 
illustration of the alertness that should characterize 
his followers while waiting for his second coming. 
As a matter of fact, the servants in this parable are the 
bride of another parable, but represent the matter from 
another standpoint. The sole lesson here is that diligence 
in service, that watchfulness for the interests of 
the Master's cause, that faith in his promise to return 
and expectancy of the event, serve as an aid or stimulus 
to proper service. When the master of the house 
should arrive with his company it would be a reflection 
against the interest of his servants and their love and 
devotion for him if on such an occasion they were found 
asleep or otherwise than ready to open the door at the 
Master's intimation of his arrival. 

IF THOU WILT NOT WATCH THOU SHALT NOT KNOW. 

The parable implies that at our Lord's second coming 
he will have arrived before any of his faithful servants 
will be aware of the fact. His presence will be 
made known by the knock, and the knock would correspond 
to an announcement, through some special 
servant or servants, either orally or by the printed 
page, setting forth the evidences of the Master's presence. 
For instance, the publishing of time prophecies 
showing that the time is fulfilled— that certain prophecies 
marking events belonging to the close of the Gospel 
dispensation and the opening of the Millennial dispensation 
are accomplished, and that certain signs 
mentioned in the Scriptures are fulfilled— such testimonies 
are in the nature of a knock, which would be 
heard by such of the servants of the Lord as would be 
awake at that time. It is not for the servants in general 



to do the knocking, but for the Master himself to 
set in operation the forces and agencies he may choose 
to use for producing this knock and the 
announcement. 

A blessing is promised to those servants who at 
that time shall be on the alert and hear the knock and 
understand it, and welcome the Master. Verse 39 
shows quite distinctly that none except the servants 
are to appreciate the knock— that the world in general 
will not know of the time of the Master's return, but 
only his servants. No particular time for the Master's 
coming is set, but the intimation is clearly given that 
it is not for them to know the times and seasons, but 

R3355 : page 123 

for them to be on the alert continually, not only during 
the first watch, but during the second and during 
the third, that at whatever time the Master's knock 
may be heard they may respond promptly. It is not 
the thought, let it be noticed, that the servants are 
never to know when the Master will come: it is the 
thought that on his arrival he will cause such a knocking 
to be made as will be appreciated by all of his servants 
who are awake and waiting and watching. 
Wherein would be the use of the knock if the servants 
were not to know when they heard the knock? The 
knock is to be the evidence of the presence, and the 
servants are not to know in advance, but are to know 
at the time of the arrival and that without seeing. 

THE MASTER WILL SERVE HIS SERVANTS. 

What will be the special reward of these servants? 
The parable states it: their Master will "gird himself 
[he will become their servant] and will make them to 

R3355 : page 124 

sit down to meat and will come forth and serve them." 

This implies that at our Lord's second coming he will 

be present before any of his servants know of his arrival. 

He will knock or cause announcement of his 

presence to be made. Those who will hear the knock 

will be such only as are awake and ready, expecting 

him and on the alert for the knock. These will receive 

a special spiritual feast. It will be special because 

it is on a special occasion and intended as a special reward 

for their manifestation of interest and devotion. 

It will be special also, because the Master of the household, 

turned to be its servant, would have all the keys 

to all the riches of grace and blessing, and, as elsewhere 

explained, will bring forth from his treasuries— his pantries 

—things new and old, substantials and delicacies. 

The faithful ones will surely have a royal feast, such as 

never before was granted them. 



These things, we hold, have already been fulfilled. 
The knock, or proclamation of the Lord's presence, as 
indicated by the Old Testament prophecies, has been 
given since 1875 and is still being given. The knock of 
the parable might appropriately be but for a few seconds, 
but the fulfilment would properly cover a period 
of years. The servants of the household are taking notice, 
and each one as he opens his heart and mind to 
the fact of the Lord's presence receives a fulfilment 
of the blessing promised— receives a feast of fat things, 
spiritual— an understanding and appreciation of the divine 
plan and a soul nourishment and strengthening such 
as was never his before. That this serving of the servants 
by the Master should be understood to be an individual 
work and not merely a collective service and 
feast, is evidenced by the Lord's statement in Revelation 3:20. 
Here the Lord represents the same event 
in connection with his message to the last phase of his 
Church nominal, the Laodicean phase. He says, "Behold, 
I stand at the door and knock: if any man [individual] 
hear my voice [knock] and open the door, I will 
come in to him and sup with him, and he with me." 

"A THOUSAND YEARS. ..ARE AS A WATCH IN THE 
NIGHT." 

According to the ancient Jewish method of reckoning 
the night time, the second watch would be from 
ten to two o'clock and the third from two to six o'clock. 
The parable does not state in which watch the Master 
may be expected. That question was left open; the 
faithfulness of the servants would be tested in proportion 
to his delay. Many would find it easy to keep 
awake and alert during the first watch, not so many 
during the second watch and still fewer during the 
third. It is in accord with this implication of the parable 
that we find today general lethargy prevailing 
amongst Christian people respecting the return of the 
Bridegroom and the glorious things of the Kingdom 
then to be brought unto his faithful household. Many 
are asleep in Zion, many are overcharged with the 
cares of this world and the deceitfulness of riches. Not 
only have worldly people made a god of business, 
money and pleasure, but many who are at heart lovers 
of righteousness and who desire to be considered servants 
of the Lord, are seriously overcharged— absorbed 
in worldly things. Their hearts are so filled with these 
and their minds so occupied with dreams of Churchianity 
and pleasure and personal interest that they cannot 
hear the knock. They know not of the Master's presence; 
they open not their hearts to this wonderful announcement, 
for which the Lord's people have waited 
so long and prayed so earnestly, "Thy Kingdom come." 
They are missing, as a consequence, a great blessing 
implied in our Lord's parable, and definitely stated in 
Daniel's prophecy— "O, the blessedness of him that 



waiteth and cometh to the thousand three hundred and 
five and thirty days."— Dan. 12:12. 

HIS PRESENCE UNKNOWN TO THE WORLD. 

"But know this, that if the master of the house 
had known in what hour the thief would come, he 
would have watched, and not have suffered his house 
to be broken through." 

The reference here is to a thief-like coming, and 
the Greek word, translated broken through, would 
mean literally "dug into." Many of the houses of olden 
time were not built of stone or bricks but of dried 
mud, somewhat like what are known as adobe houses 
in some parts of the West and in Mexico. Entry into 
such houses could be gained more quickly by digging 
through the wall than by forcing the door. The goodman 
of the house or its master does not refer to the 
Lord, for the house referred to is the "present evil 
world"— the social structure as at present organized. 
It is not necessary to conclude that Satan is meant, 
although he is in a general way the master of present 
institutions, "the god of this world," the "prince of 
this world." We may properly enough understand the 
goodman of the house to here signify earthly governments, 
the powers that be, the representatives of the 
ten toes of Daniel's image and of his fourth beast. 

This matter of the second coming of the Lord and 
the knock which will be heard by those of his servants 
who are awake, but not heard by his servants 
who are asleep and overcharged, will be totally unknown 
to the world. To them his presence will not be 
that of a master longed for and served, but that of an 
opponent whose house they have in his absence taken 
possession of and used contrary to his interests. These, 
if they knew the time of his coming, would have fortified 
themselves in some manner and have sought to 
defend present institutions and to perpetuate them. 

The coming as a thief upon the world signifies a 

R3355 : page 125 

quiet coming, unostentatious, unknown, without heralds 
or any commotion likely to disturb. The breaking 
up of the strong man's house— the breaking up of 
present institutions, civil, religious, political, financial— 
is already under way, just as the knocking for his servants 
is in process. The entire social structure is under 
control of the new Prince. He is marshaling his 
forces, and will cause even the wrath of man to praise 
him and to work out his purposes in the overthrow of 
every known institution built upon selfishness. Great 
will be the fall thereof— "a time of trouble such as was 
not since there was a nation"; but upon the ruins the 
King of kings and Lord of lords will rear the grand 
Kingdom of the Lord, for which all who are his already 



pray, "Thy Kingdom come," and which, when 

it shall come to be instituted by the Lord, will be indeed 

the "desire of all nations."— Haggai 2:7. 

"IN SUCH AN HOUR AS YE THINK NOT." 

The essence of this lesson is summed up in the 40th verse, 
"Be ye also ready; for in an hour ye think not 
the Son of man cometh." No one will be aware of the 
hour of the Son of man's coming; it is not a matter 
that is left in such a form as to be speculated upon in 
advance. His knock will be the first intimation of his 
presence. And so it has been fulfilled: none of us knew 
in advance when the Lord's coming would take place; 
it was after it had occurred that we heard the knock— 
his voice through the prophets of the Old Testament, 
declaring to us that we are already in the harvest time 
and in the days of the presence of the Son of man. 
Here we have fulfilled the words of the Lord in Matthew 24:37, 
"As the days of Noah were, so shall also the 
parousia [presence] of the Son of man be." The text 
shows that the thought is that as the world was ignorant 
of coming events in Noah's days, and, being ignorant, 
was eating and drinking and planting and building, 
so it will be in the days of the presence of the Son of 
man: the world will be ignorant of the fact of his presence, 
and the ordinary affairs of life will be progressing 
as usual. Only "ye brethren" who hear the knock 
will discern the presence and get the blessing. 

Peter inquired whether or not this parable was 
applicable only to the twelve apostles, or to all those 
who were disciples in a general sense. Our Lord measurably 
ignored the question in his reply, "Who then is 
the faithful and wise steward whom his lord shall set 
over his household, to give them their portion of food 
in due season?" The implication seems to be that 
when the right time should come for understanding the 
parable, it would be clearly set forth: that at the time of 
the parable's fulfilment the Lord would appoint a servant 
in the household to bring these matters to the attention 
of all the servants, and that certain responsibilities 
would rest upon such a one respecting the dispatch 
of his duties. If faithfully performed a great 
blessing would be his reward, and if unfaithful to his 
charge severe penalties would be inflicted. The implication 
would be also that if faithful the servant would 
be continued in his service, and if unfaithful he would 
be dismissed and another take the position and its 
responsibilities. 

"THE FAITHFUL AND THE WISE STEWARD." 

We would naturally enough endeavor to interpret 
our Lord's words as signifying a composite steward— 
that is that a certain number or class of brethren together 
would constitute the steward of this parable. 



In endeavoring to make such an interpretation we are 
R3356 : page 125 

met with several difficulties, however. 

(1) To suppose such a class in the Church would 

be to recognize what is elsewhere denied— to recognize 

a clerical or authoritative class as distinct and separate 

from the remainder of the Church, because this steward 

is to dispense the meat in due season to the household, 

to the fellow-servants. The Church of Christ, we hold, 

is not composed of clergy and laity, but "ye are all one 

in Christ Jesus, and one is your Master, even Christ." 

There would be no violation of principle, however, in 

supposing that the Lord at the time indicated would 

specially use one member of his Church as the channel 

or instrument through which he would send the appropriate 

messages, spiritual nourishment appropriate at 

that time; because at various times in the past the 

Lord has used individuals in such a manner. For instance, 

Peter used the "keys" of the Kingdom of heaven 

at Pentecost, and again at the home of Cornelius, and 

in both places he was used as a special servant in connection 

with the dispensing of special truths. This did 

not constitute Peter a lord over the other apostles or 

over the Church, but merely a servant. 

(2) However much we might endeavor to apply 
this figure to the Lord's people collectively, the fact 
would still remain that the various items stated would 
not fit to a company of individuals. For instance, in 
the 42nd verse, in the common version it is rendered, 
that faithful steward; the revised version, the faithful 
steward; as though a particular one were meant and 
the term not used indefinitely for a number. Turning 
to the Greek text we find that the emphasis is there 
also and in double form— the faithful, the wise steward. 
If it were a case in which we could apply 

this text to Christ, there would be no difficulty, or 
if it were a case in which it could be applied to the 
whole body of Christ, there could be no difficulty, in 
harmonizing the one with the many members of the 
one body of Christ; but since the servant mentioned is 
to dispense food to the other members of the body, his 
fellow-servants, the term seems to be limited to some 
particular individual. However, just as we said of Peter, 
that he was not by reason of special use made a 
lord over the brethren, so we say of whoever is meant 

R3356 : page 126 

in this passage, that in no sense of the word would 
this constitute him a lord, or dictator or master, or imply 
his inspiration. All that we could say would be 
that it would be one who would be privileged to be a 
servant, and not many seem anxious to fill such a position 
in the true sense of the word. This servant, if 



found faithful, would be intrusted more and more 
with the distribution of every feature of Present Truth 
as represented in the parable, by his being given the 
dispensing of the food in due season to the household. 
Unfaithfulness on the part of this appointed one would 
mean his degradation from this service, and presumably 
the service would go on at the hands of another, 
his successor. 

The expression, "Verily I say unto you, He shall 
make him ruler over all his goods," should not be understood 
to apply to future glories and honors, but 
merely to a more general charge or stewardship as 
respects the dispensing of the Lord's "goods" or truths 
due to be protected or disbursed during the remainder 
of this "harvest" time. In other words, the steward 
through whom the Lord will dispense Present Truth in 
this "harvest," will, if found vigilant, humble, faithful, 
be continued in the stewardship and be used of the 
Lord more and more in the service of the household- 
down to the close of the "harvest." 

"NOT AS LORDS OVER GOD'S HERITAGE." 

That this servant must not act or be regarded as a 
lord is clearly indicated in the 45th verse, which shows 
that such a misuse of his appointment would work his 
downfall. At no time has the Church ever had need to 
be on guard against its servants who really endeavored 
to serve it and to hand forth from the Lord's treasure 
house the meat in due season. The Church's dangers 
have always arisen from those who sought to lord it 
over God's heritage, and to dispense their own wisdom 
or the wisdom of other men instead of the Word of the 
Lord. 

Verses 47,48, seem to imply that the servant's responsibility 
to the Lord will be in proportion to his 
knowledge of the Lord's will; and that the Lord will 
deal with him on the principle that having had much 
knowledge and opportunity, the requirements at his 
hands will be proportionately large. 

While this exhortation in general seems to apply to 
one particular servant through whom the other servants 
are to be supplied (see Matt. 24:45-51), we can see that 
the same principles in a general sense would apply to 
each servant in turn, as he would receive either food or 
stewardship. His responsibility would be in proportion 
to what he received or had opportunity to receive, 
and to the manner in which he used the blessing. We 
of today, living under such great favor from the Lord, 
enjoying the light of Present Truth as we do, have 
every reason to give thanks and more and more to appreciate 
the things new and old from the Master's storehouse 
of Truth that he is now dispensing to us, and 
which each in turn is privileged to dispense to 
others and has responsibility for in proportion to his 
knowledge. The Lord help us each to be faithful, 



and to remember that our Lord was a servant as well 
as a Son, and that our highest privilege as sons is to 
be faithful servants, stewards of the manifold grace of 
God. 



R3357 : page 126 

"TO OBEY IS BETTER THAN SACRIFICE" 

Obedience to the Lord our God 

Is what he doth require; 
He looketh not for sacrifice 

Without his Spirit's power. 

The light of Truth that shines from God 

And shows to us his way, 
Reveals the path wherein to walk 

While in this house of clay. 

If God's great plan in vision speaks, 

As prophets said it would, 
Oh, may we heed its welcome voice 

And be among "the good." 

Pray, do not compromise the Truth; 

Oh, sell it not, my friend: 
Obedience doth our God require 

Until our course shall end. 

If faithful to our trust on earth 

And hold "the faith" once given, 

Then will our Master say, "Well done! 
Come thou, and enter heaven." 
—James Hay. 



R3356 : page 126 

INTERESTING QUESTIONS ANSWERED 
CONCERNING BAPTISM OF JEWS. 



Question.— Would a Jew coming into Christ today 
symbolize consecration just as do Gentiles, or would his 
baptism signify repentance for remission of sins, as per 
Acts 2:38? 

Answer.— The special favor of God toward natural Israel 
as a nation ended at the time of Christ's rejection when 
their house was "left desolate." A personal favor continued 
with the true Israelites for a further 3-1/2 years to the end 
of their covenanted 70 weeks of years. It is possible that 



some sort of special favor continued with this class until 
the full end of the Jewish "harvest," A.D., 69, but certainly 
no longer. 
The Apostle Paul refers to this change, saying that 

R3356 : page 127 

"the middle wall of partition" between Jew and Gentile 
had been broken down. It follows, therefore, that Jews 
could not now come into relationship with Christ on any 
other terms than could Gentiles. As natural branches 
they are "broken off," and would require re-engrafting 
just the same as would the wild-olive branches.— 
Rom. 11:19-24. 

Question.— Was there any difference between the immersion 
of John and that mentioned by Peter 
(Acts 2:38)? 

Answer.— Yes; John's preaching of repentance was 
merely an exhortation to renounce sin and prepare for a 
coming Messiah. The exhortation of Peter was to repent 
of sin, because the Messiah had come, and the sin to be 
repented of included the national sin of rejecting Messiah 
and crucifying him; hence, of the latter it is said that it 
is a baptism in the name of Jesus. 

Question.— In Eph. 4:5 we read that there is "One 
Lord, one faith, one baptism." How does this agree with 
the thought that the Jews were immersed for the remission 
of sins, whereas the Gentiles were immersed into Christ? 

Answer.— The one baptism is not the symbolic one, 
but the actual one, viz., the burial into Christ. This, in 
the case of those who are Gentiles, signifies a full consecration 
and full burial into the will of Christ; but this 
same baptism to the Jew would mean a transfer from Moses 
to Christ, from being dead in Moses to being dead in 
Christ. The sin of violation of the Jewish Law Covenant 
being repented of and forgiven, the Jew who was under 
that covenant is thenceforth counted as being under the 
New Covenant, and to him the outward form or symbol 
of baptism would mean a repentance from the works of 
the Law and his failure under the Law Covenant, and his 
acceptance in Christ, the new Mediator of the New Covenant. 
To us who are by nature Gentiles there can be no 
such repentance from the dead works of the Law, for we 
were never under that Law, and there can be no such 
transfer from Moses to Christ, because we never were in 
Moses. 

Question.— Does Rom. 10:12 have any bearing on 
this question? "There is no difference between the Jew 
and the Greek: for the same Lord over all is rich unto all 
that call upon him." 

Answer.— It has a bearing, but not as contradicting 
the foregoing. There is no difference between the Jew 
and the Greek when both have come into Christ— thenceforth 
they are on the same plane, on the same footing; 
but there was a difference in the way the Jew and the 
Greek properly attested their coming to Christ at the 



opening of this Gospel age. 

Question.— Was the re-immersion mentioned in Acts 19:3-5 
made necessary because the persons were Gentiles, 
and had symbolized their baptism in a manner appropriate 
only to the Jews? 

Answer.— We think it was, for the latter reason. 

HOW DOES THE ANTITYPICAL SCAPEGOAT CLASS BEAR 
THE SINS OF THE PEOPLE? 



Question.— What is represented in the typical confession 
of sin by the high priest over the "scapegoat" in 
the Tabernacle sacrifices, as recorded in Lev. 16:20-22. 

Answer.— We understand that this goat represents a 
consecrated class which fails to perform sacrifice; and 
that its being sent into the wilderness at the hand of the 
"fit" man represents that all the consecrated who have 
not sacrificed their lives according to covenant, but who 

R3357 : page 127 

have, nevertheless, not repudiated the Lord, will be 
brought, in the time of trouble approaching, into such 
straits that they will be forced either to deny the Lord or 
to lay down their lives for the Truth. But since this laying 
down of life will be in a sense compulsory, it is not 
reckoned as being a "sacrifice" but a "destruction of the 
flesh." Here your inquiry comes in, Why does the high 
priest confess over this class certain sins which have already 
been atoned for by the blood of the bullock and the 
blood of the goat? We reply that sin may be considered 
from two standpoints: First, as the divine condemnation, 
which cannot be liquidated by the sufferings of the transgressor, 
but which must be met by the atonement sacrifice 
of the great High Priest, Head and body. Second, there 
is a retributive operation of divine law amongst men 
which brings upon the sinner a measure of suffering for 
sins. This latter, we believe, is represented in the sufferings 
of the scapegoat in the wilderness. As the Lord 
charged up against the living generations of Jews at the first 
advent, who had the light and knowledge peculiar to their 
own day, and who sinned against this light and knowledge, 
and required at the hands of that generation all the blood 
shed from Abel down, so we understand that, similarly, 
there is a great responsibility in God's sight resting upon 
those who today constitute nominal Christendom, who are 
nominally children of the Lord and tethered at the door of 
the tabernacle. At the hands of nominal Christianity 
today will be required much, for if nominal Christendom 
entire were consecrated to the Lord there would be no 
necessity for the time of trouble to come at all, but the 
Lord might come and set up his Kingdom amongst a willing 
people without the necessity of overturning present 
institutions in a day of wrath. Consequently, when 



the day of wrath comes, it will be but the just recompense, 
and the divine wrath should be fully manifested upon and 
toward this nominal class. 

RESPECTING DEUTERONOMY 29:29. 



Question.— Please make some comment on 
Deut. 29:29. 

Answer.— We understand this to mean that the 
Lord's people are to be careful to study and obey all that 
the Lord our God has commanded, searching diligently to 
appreciate it as it may become due to be understood. 
There are questions, nevertheless, respecting which the Lord 
has made no particular revelation, and we are to avoid the 
waste of time in considering those things, and to realize 
that had they been important for us to know the Lord 
would have revealed them in his Word. This is in harmony 
with the Apostle's statement, "All Scripture that 
is given by inspiration of God is profitable for doctrine, 
for reproof, for correction in righteousness, that the man 
of God may be perfect, thoroughly furnished unto every 
good work." These assurances of sufficiency of the meat 
in due season to the household of faith should not only 
relieve us from anxious thought on outside lines, but 
should make us suspicious of anything and everything 
that is being taught that is additional to the Scriptures, 
as well as contrary to them. 



page 129 

SEMI-MONTHLY 
VOL. XXV. MAY 1, 1904 No. 9. 
CONTENTS 



Views From the Watch Tower 131 

College Education Anti-Christian 131 

The Search for God 131 

Calls Scriptures Intolerant Lies 132 

A Minister's Indictment of His 

Profession 133 

France Freeing Herself from 

Romanism 134 

When Did the Stone Strike? 134 

"Bring Forth the Best Robe and 

Put It on Him" 135 

Only the Humble Shall be Exalted 138 

The Last Supper 141 

page 130 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-24 EVERSHOLT ST., LONDON, N.W. 
GERMAN BRANCH-MIRKER STR., 45, ELBERFELD. 
AUSTRALIAN BRANCH-32 JOHNSTON ST., FITZROY, MELBOURNE. 

PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE, 5c (2-l/2d.) A COPY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity 
or adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER, will be supplied FREE, if 
they send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting 
the paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our 
list continually. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE 



THIS JOURNAL IS PUBLISHED IN THE 

FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, DANISH AND ITALIAN LANGUAGES. 

SAMPLE COPIES AND TERMS FREE. 



GENERAL CONVENTION, LOS ANGELES, CAL., MAY 7,8,9. 



All sessions of the Convention will be held in Elks 
Hall, 231 S. Spring St. Visiting friends who desire accommodations 
secured for them should write in advance 
their intention to attend, stating the number in each party, 
the name, color and sex of each individual, and the price 
of accommodations desired. On account of long distance 
from Allegheny, applicants for accommodations should address 
the chairman of Committee direct., viz., Brother F. 
P. Sherman, 211 N. Spring St., Los Angeles, Cal. 

Accommodations can be secured at 50c each for three or 
four persons in a room and $1.00 each for rooms for single 
persons or couples. 

Reduced rates are available over the railroads on account 
of "M.E. General Conference." From points within 
the State of California the rate is one fare and a third for 
the round trip. Very Low Rates are granted from outside 
the State. Travellers should enquire for "General 
Conference Excursion Ticket." Friends arriving over 
the Santa Fe Railroad can reach hall by Washington St. 
car; and those arriving by Southern Pacific, should board 
yellow car marked "Arcade Depot." 

Going and returning the Editor will hold several 

ONE-DAY CONVENTIONS, AS FOLLOWS: 

DALLAS, TEX., MAY 1.--A morning rally at 10 o'clock 
will be held in the Woodmen's Hall, 349 Main St. The 
public afternoon meeting will be held at 3 o'clock in Carnegie 
Hall, Public Library. Subject: "To Hell and 
Back! Who are there? Hope for the return of many." 
An evening meeting specially for the interested will take 
place at 7.30 in the Maccabees' Hall, 373 Main St. 

AUSTIN, TEX., May 2. --Meeting for the interested at 
1401 E Ave., at 7.30 p.m. 

HOUSTON, TEX., MAY 3. -All meetings will be held in 
the Auditorium; at 10 a.m., a rally, and at 2.30 p.m. a 
meeting for the interested. A public meeting will be 
held at 7.30 p.m. Subject, "The Oath-bound Covenant." 

SAN ANTONIO, TEX., MAY 4.-Morning rally, at 10 
o'clock, and afternoon meeting, specially for the interested 
at 3 o'clock, will be held at Red Men's Hall, 219 
St. Mary's St. Public meeting at 7.30 p.m. at Beethoven 
Hall, 418 S. Alamo St. Subject, "To Hell and Back." 

SAN FRANCISCO, CAL., May 12.-Meetings will be held 
in Alcazar Building, OFarrel St., between Stockton and 
Powell. At 2.30 a meeting specially for the interested; 
at 7.30 a public service— subject, "The Oath-bound 
Covenant." 

PORTLAND, ORE., MAY 15. -All meetings in Elks Hall, 
Marquam Building, Sixth and Morrison Sts. Morning 
rally at 10 o'clock. Meeting for the interested at 2.30; 



and for the public at 7.30— subject, "The Oath-bound 
Covenant." 

ST. PAUL, MINN., May 19. -Meeting place, Central 
Hall. At 3 p.m. for interested friends, and 7 p.m. for the 
public. Subject, "The Oath-bound Covenant." 

MILWAUKEE, WIS., May 20. -Meeting for the interested 
at 2.30 p.m. at Christ Chapel, 465 Superior St. 



R3357 :page 131 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 
COLLEGE EDUCATION IS ANTI-CHRISTIAN. 



WHAT we have already pointed out,— that the 

whole trend of college training is along the 

lines of skepticism as respects the revealed religion 

of Bible, along the lines of "higher criticism"— is 

well sustained by the following statement of the matter 

by Doctor J. A. Leavitt, President of Ewing College, 

Ills. Among other things he says in the March Homiletic 

Review:— 

"Every observant person has known of numerous 
instances of believers who have had their faith unsettled 
by their scientific studies. ...Can studies so pursued 
as to atrophy one's spiritual nature be said to tend 
toward Christ? Can an education be truly Christian 
that does not increase one's powers to apprehend God 
and to make him known? 

"It will hardly be supposed by any one that the 
study of the ancient classics tends toward Christ. Few 
thoughtful parents will entertain for a moment the idea 
of having their children study for years modern authors, 
however beautifully written, which are based upon 
the amours of characters like Paris and Helen, and 
such corrupt beings as pagan gods and goddesses. It 
is known that the rites and practices in the worship of 
some of them were prohibited by the heathen themselves. 
White, in his 'Mythology,' says: 'There can 
be no doubt that the stories concerning them had an 
unfavorable influence on the pagan world, and they 
contributed to weaken whatever respect remained for 
public or private virtue.' Is it reasonable to suppose 
that the imagination of our youth can dwell for years 
upon the vices of the pagans and their gods and remain 
untainted? 

"Students should be grounded in the fundamentals 
of morals. Christian evidences should have a 
larger place. Psychology should be Biblical and emphasized 
on the spiritual side.... 

"The ancient classics should be greatly curtailed. 
In its place we should have much of the oldest and 



purest history, the most exalted poetry, and the profoundest 
thought found in the Bible; the most productive 
of originality, the most fertile in ideas, the most 
disciplinary of any work given to man. It is a misnomer 
to call any college Christian which studies pagan 
authors six or eight years and gives the Bible only a 
nominal recognition.... 

"The sciences should have a large place. God has 
given us three books, each one revealing himself. The 
first is external nature, the second is the nature of man, 
and the third is the Word of God. It is absurd to suppose 
that these three works by the same omniscient 
Author are not in perfect accord. Wherever a lack of 
harmony appears, there is a lack of the truly scientific. 
...Our education should be Christocentric. In so 
far as any education is not Christocentric, it is partial, 
inadequate and unscientific." 

THE SEARCH FOR GOD. 



We extract the following from the public press. 
The more we perceive the blind, unsuccessful groping 
of the worldly-wise after truth, the more do we value 
it; and the more do we appreciate the Scriptural declaration 
that "the secret of the Lord is with them that 
fear him"— the humble. 

"The era in which we live has often been called an 
age of religious doubt. Perhaps it could more correctly 
be described as one of religious hesitation 
and helplessness. The bewildering changes of recent 
years have created for us a new world, but we have 
not discovered a heaven to match it. The old conception 
of God has become impossible, and we have not 
found another to take its place. So has come about 
what a recent writer regards as "one of the most wonderful 
phenomena in the history of religion,"— the withdrawal 
of multitudes of good men from affiliation with 
the Church. They have turned their backs upon Christianity, 
not at all because they are out of sympathy with 
the religious impulse, but because they are intellectually 
unconvinced. They have lost faith in God. 

"Such is the train of thought suggested by a perusal 
of the Rev. S. D. McConnell's new book, entitled 
"Christ"; and the significance of the "phenomenon" 
disclosed is best indicated in his own words: 

"This is the situation of modern men by the thousands. 
'Where is now my God?' they ask in every mood, 

R3358 : page 132 

from flippant contempt to moral despair. Nothing less 
than the rediscovery of God will serve the occasion. 
Most of the medicaments offered to the spiritual malady 
of the times must avail little or nothing because 



the diagnosis has not been sufficiently searching. It is 

no mere phase of superficial skepticism through which 

we are passing. Half the men we meet are 'agnostics,' 

and this whether they call themselves that or call themselves 

Christians. As Professor Flint truly says: "As 

regards knowledge of God, religious and irreligious men 

take up the same attitude. Both endeavor to persuade 

men that there is and can be no such knowledge, that 

the best attainable is to be content with unreasoned 

and unenlightened belief." 

'"But that sort of belief is becoming more unsatisfying 
every day. Belief in a God about whom the 
believer avowedly knows not anything may be sustained 
for a time as a sort of religious obligation, or as 
a surviving habit, but sooner or later must be given up. 
One cannot stand on tiptoe forever stretching up his 
hands to the inane. He gets tired, settles down upon 
his feet, and goes about his every-day business. This 
is what men are doing. Numbers of them have given 
up all idea of ever getting hold of anything coherent 
in the realm of religion, and disturb themselves but 
little about the matter. Still larger numbers yet join 
with the worshipers and listen to the preachers, hoping 
that they may yet, somehow, be converted and 
enlightened.' 

'"If we would understand the religious restlessness 
of our age, we must remember,' says Dr. McConnell, 
that 'the idea of God, as it floats in the mind of the 
average man, is compounded of three or four inherited 
conceptions, each of which has to a large extent ceased 
to fit in with the other portions of his mental furniture, 
and all of which have grown to be impossible.' 
There is, first of all, the conception of the 'Kingly God,' 
called into being by a Hebrew people who believed implicitly 
in absolute monarchy, and who regarded the 
earth as the center of the universe. There is, secondly, 
the conception of a God of Justice— a Roman God, worshiped 
by Calvin and Augustine and Tertullian. Thirdly, 
we have to deal with the idea of God considered purely 
as the Creator— an 'infinitely skilful Architect and 
Engineer,' who may awaken awe, dread, wonder, or curiosity, 
but who 'has no commerce with the conscience 
or the heart' Fourthly must be mentioned the quasipantheistic 
conception of a 'God Immanent,' which appeals 
to the mystic sense, but is 'too incoherent and 
evasive to serve the every-day uses of the average 
man.' Dr. McConnell continues: 

"At this point speaks the philosophy which controls 
the thought of our time. Its word is, "God is 
Unknowable." This is not the judgment of evil or shallow 
men. It is the deliberate conclusion of the earnest-minded 
and best men. Nor is it an excuse offered by 
intellectual laziness or moral indifference for declining a 
painful and difficult task. It is the sober judgment of 
those who have tried by "searching to find out God," 
and have failed. It is the conclusion of Christian and 



non-Christian philosophy alike. When Mr. Herbert 
Spencer had arrived at this conviction for himself, he 
preferred to state his conclusion in the words of Dr. 
Mansel, a dignitary of the Church of England. Spencer, 
the master in philosophy, formulates the dictum; 
Mansel, the master in theology, phrases it; Huxley, the 
master in science, gives it its name— Agnosticism; Balfour, 
a Christian prime minister, indorses and extends 
it. "Who by searching can find out God?" To the 
challenge of Job comes the reply of today, No one.' 
"But Agnosticism, in spite of all the forces ranged 
on its side, is not, according to Dr. McConnell's view, 
the final word. It has failed to reckon with the strongest 
argument of all, the argument of Christ. It has 
overlooked the words of one who said: 'Ye have not 
known him, but I know him. ...I am the light of the 
world; he that followeth me shall not walk in darkness, 
but shall have the light of life.'" 

THE WORLD BY WISDOM KNOWS NOT GOD 



The discovery of the new element which has been 
named Radium, is remarkable, not only as pointing to 
the existence of hitherto unsuspected forces in creation, 
but also as exposing the folly of the dogmatism of scientists. 
How frequently have we been told that much 
of Bible statement has collapsed before the tests of 
science, and that some finite theory of the universe has 
superseded the inspired narrative. Yet here we have 
the unexpected discovery of an element possessing the 
quality of developing illimitable heat and light without 
combustion, and which throws off "spontaneously" 
minute particles traveling at the rate of 186,000 miles 
per second. It is said the discovery "will be of vital 
interest to the future of humanity." Meanwhile, it 
would not be without value if it inspired some of our 
scientists with a little more humility in the presence of 
the handiwork of God, "when he appointed the foundations 
of the earth." (Prov. 8:29.)— The Christian. 

CALLS SCRIPTURES INTOLERANT LIES. 



London, April 9.— Canon Hensley Henson of Westminster, 
one of the most distinguished of Anglican militant 
divines, has aroused a terrific storm by his outspoken 
declarations on the future of the Bible. He 
says:— 

"The very fact that so many of our people are 
prepared to acquiesce in what they hear from the lectures, 
and even believe that, in some way or other, what 
they hear is divinely true, makes the present indiscriminate 
reading of the Bible in public an extremely perilous 



proceeding. 

"Educated men have at their disposal a means of 
escape from the perplexities stirred in their minds by 
the incredible, the puerile, or the demoralizing narratives 
which the Old Testament contains. But the 
transition is prompt and obvious in untutored minds 
from a sacred volume— too sacred for discussion— to a 
pack of lies too gross for tolerance. 

"What will be the place of the Bible in the future? 
It cannot be questioned that many causes have conduced 
to work something like a revolution among educated 
Christians throughout the world with respect to 
the sacred writings of Christianity. In time there will 
be a great revolution in current teaching with respect 
to the New Testament. Three broad considerations justify 
in the future the paramount place which the Bible 
has traditionally held in the life of Christian society: 

"(1) The Bible remains the best manual of fundamental 
morality which experience has any knowledge. 

"(2) It is the best corrective of ecclesiastical 
corruption. 

R3358 : page 133 

"(3) It is, perhaps, the most effectual check on the 
materialistic tendencies of modern life." 

The Bishop of Norwich, the Rev. Dr. Sheepshanks, 
commenting on these remarks, says: 

"There is not at the present time that bright, 
hopeful feeling among churchmen which prevailed until 
within the last few years. Religion is by no means 
gaining ground throughout the country. Definite belief 
in the Bible is on the wane, and the forces of indifference 
and irreligion are gaining strength." 

"Sir Oliver Lodge asks, 'Now that religion is becoming 
so much more real, whether the formal statement 
of some of the doctrines we have inherited from medieval 
and still earlier times cannot wisely and inoffensively 
be modified?' He shocks many of his coreligionists 
by declaring that he regards the 'doctrine of 
atonement in its concrete form as a survival from barbarous 
times,' repudiating the belief in 'an angry God 
appeased by the violent death of Christ,' and maintaining 
that human nature now is 'rising to the conviction 
that we are part of nature and so part of God. In this 
sense the union of divinity is what science some day 
will tell us is the inner meaning of the redemption of 
men.' 

"These outspoken utterances have caused public 
and private appeals to be made to the Archbishop of 
Canterbury, but so far no action has been taken." 



The duplicity of the leading ministers respecting 
current doctrines of Christianity, the inspiration of the 



Bible, etc., is giving way. Increasing numbers of them 
dislike the dishonesty they have long been practising, 
and are publicly expressing the unbelief that for so long 
has possessed them— engendered by "Higher Criticism" 
and "Evolution." The above are samples. As the 
clergymen find that the public in general will stand it, 
they will in larger numbers and in more explicit terms 
avow themselves. 

We are glad of it. The more outspoken the error 
the more clear and the more precious the Truth will 
appear to those who have it and love it. Those who 
are appealing to the Archbishop to have such utterances 
squelched little realize that the Archbishop and 
nearly all prominent ecclesiastics really sympathize 
with the views, and merely think such men as Canon 
Henson, Lodge and others too outspoken for public 
appreciation— yet. 

It will soon be evident that only the few know or 
care much for such matters— that the vast majority 
merely draw near to the Lord on Sunday in a formal 
manner with their lips, while their hearts are immersed 
in other things. 

Ere long the prediction will be fulfilled, "A thousand 
shall fall at thy side"— a thousand shall thus fall 
into unbelief to one who will stand firm for the Lord 
and his Word. "Who shall be able to stand?" Those 
who have on the whole armor of God, St. Paul explains. 
(Eph. 6:13.) Our Lord says that those who 
will stand will be the "very elect."— Matt. 24:24. 

A MINISTER'S INDICTMENT OF HIS PROFESSION. 



The New York Independent publishes anonymously 
an article from a clergyman under the title: "Why 

R3359 : page 133 

I Gave Up the Ministry— a Soul's Tragedy." The 

writer claims that "every man in the ministry today" 

is "in much the same condition" as himself. He declares 

in this article, that of thirty men who were graduated 

with him from a theological seminary six years 

ago, ten have already abandoned the ministry. He 

says: 

"I am thirty-two years old— at that point where 
I should be most active in that profession for which I 
have spent my life thus far in fitting myself, and just 
now ought to be most happy in it. Instead, I am deliberately 
resigning it and leaving all behind me. My 
purpose here is to set forth a statement of my motives, 
to analyze a situation, and to search for reasons why 
other men along with myself are doing this.... 

"The church has sent its clergy out, or at least 
has allowed them to go out, to do many things in the 



name of religion which have nothing whatever to do 
with it. The clergy today are busy? Yes. But busy 
doing what? Not things they ever were ordained to do. 
They are busy as managers of institutions, as members 
of committees, as representatives on boards, as trustees 
of asylums, orphanages, schools, and hospitals, dispensaries 
and colleges, and builders for themselves of parish-houses, 
where they organize and execute affairs of 
clubs and guilds, societies and institutes. They were 
not 'ordained' to do these things, nor did they need 
years of professional training to become able to do 
them. Thus it would seem that those men who are 
busiest in the ministry today are busy only doing things 
which lie wholly outside of that especial sphere, so far 
as there ever was a special sphere for work in which 
they were specially trained, in so far as they ever were 
specially trained. For my own part I must either find 
for myself some work in the Church which is sufficiently 
unique to justify my continuing in the unique position 
of a 'calling,' or I must abandon the latter here to find 
the former somewhere else." 

ADVANCING TOWARD CHURCH FEDERATION. 



The Christian Observer (Presbyterian) says:— 
"In Britain, all the non-conformist churches have 
formed a 'free church union' in the interest of their 
common cause over against the established Episcopal 
Church. In Scotland, the United Presbyterian Church 
and the Free Church came together after years of negotiation 
to form the United Free Church of Scotland. 
In Canada, a good many years ago, the Methodists and 
Presbyterians, both of whom had several branches in 
the Dominion, united, so that there is only one Presbyterian 
and one Methodist Church in the wide domain 
north of us. In Australia the Presbyterians have gotten 
together, and now the Congregationalists and Presbyterians 
are talking of some sort of federal union. 
For some time there has been talk of union between 
the United Presbyterian and the Associate Reformed 
Presbyterian bodies in this country. And most of our 
readers are aware that union between our Church and 
the Reformed [Dutch] Church has been mooted more 
than once." 

R3359 : page 134 

FRANCE FREEING HERSELF FROM ROMANISM. 



The work of breaking the shackles of Priestcraft in 
France continues. Priests and nuns are no longer permitted 
to teach in the public schools; no private schools 



taught by them or others are licensed where government 
inspection is not permitted; the court houses are being 
stripped of crucifixes and other religious emblems; the 
army and navy are being freed from bondage to Romanism. 
The new conditions are roundly denounced 
by Catholics as high-handed, infidel and anti-christian; 
but thus has Papacy ever fought Protestantism and 
liberty until they got free from her power; then she 
was propitious toward them, and, as in this country, 
would pose as a leader in the crusade for Liberty and 
Truth. 

HIGHER CRITICS AND THE BIBLE. 



If the press report is correct, another College president 
has spoken— Dr. Samuel Plantz of Lawrence University. 
He said: "The fact is that men have overlooked 
the great truth that the Bible is literature, and 
put hard mechanical interpretations on what is to be 
regarded, and what was conceived and executed in the 
free and flowing spirit of imagination." It cannot be 
that a university president believes, if he believes anything 
that men have not noticed that the Bible is literature. 
It must mean merely literature uninspired, like 
other "literature [fiction] conceived and executed in the 
free and flowing spirit of the imagination." He adds: 
"We must not feel that the Bible is worthless because 
Job is not a historical character; is Hamlet worthless 
because there never was a real Hamlet?" 

If the Bible be "free and flowing imagination" is 
Christ historical or only an imaginary character? 
Would the Gospel be worthless with its Hamlet left 
out? What an "imagination" the imaginary Christ had! 
We need not now hesitate to term much higher critical 
literature as "conceived and executed in the free and 
flowing spirit of imagination." 

WHEN DID THE STONE STRIKE THE IMAGE? 



We quote with approval the following clipping 
forwarded to us by one of our friends:— 

"The image is the symbol of the world power in 
its whole future development and of its final 
destruction. 

"The transfer of political power from Judah, now 
a captive of the nations, to the Gentiles, is also indicated 
by it. 

"The image measures the duration of the times of 
the Gentiles— Luke 21:24. 

"The Stone is symbolic of a supernatural power, 
'not made with hands,' heavenly, divine; the mountain 
is the Messianic Kingdom; all is symbolic of Messiah 



and his Kingdom. --Gen. 49:24, Isa. 2:1-4; Matt. 21:44; 
Luke 20:17,18. 

"The toes of the image correspond to the ten horns 
of the Beast of chapter seven, i.e., the horns are kingdoms, 
the toes are kingdoms. 

"Now, when did the Stone strike? 

"I. The Stone struck when there were feet and 
toes to be struck. 

"There were no feet in the Babylonian day, none 
in the Medo-Persian, none in the Graeco-Macedonian, 
and none in the Roman, when the iron legs of a Western 
and Eastern Empire did not yet exist in a divided 
form; in other words, toes and feet of iron and clay 
must be looked for at a time later than the twelve 
Caesars, and nearer to a time when the iron of imperialism 
and the clay of democracy in vain try to cleave 
together [We should say— the iron of civil power and 
the clay of ecclesiastical power]; and not until then 
does the Stone strike. 

"It is evident, therefore, the Stone cannot have 
struck at the birth of Christ, nor at Pentecost, nor at 
the destruction of Jerusalem, nor at the edict of Constantine, 
for there were no feet or toes of ten kingdoms 
to strike. 

"II. The Stone struck when the whole image went 
to pieces 'together;' i.e., suddenly and simultaneously. 

"It did not strike repeatedly, but once, and so 
shattered all together. The image did not decrease 
gradually, but 'together;' all became like chaff and was 
swept away that no place was found for them. 

"Such total and final ruin of all the kingdoms that 
once composed the Roman Empire or succeeded it did 
not overtake them when Christianity began to be 
preached, or since; the world power of the Gentiles is 
still a reality, and will be until the Stone falls and grinds 
it to powder. 

"It is therefore evident that such a crushing, annihilating 
blow is utterly unlike the peaceful power of 
the Gospel. 

"III. The Stone struck before it began to grow 
and not while it was growing into a great mountain. 

"It would seem incredible that such a notion could 
ever have been drawn from this prophetic vision, but 
it is the popular idea that the Stone is growing while 
the kingdoms are shattering. 

"In a certain volume of 'Messianic Prophecy' by a 
'Higher Critic,' it reads: 'The living stone rolling down 
from the mountain, growing as it descends in strength 
and power, is a simple but appropriate symbol of the 
Kingdom of God.' 

"This is even worse, for here the Stone is said to 
be growing in strength and power before it strikes. 

"Daniel says the Stone grew after it struck, and 
then covered the place once possessed by the kingdoms. 

"There is not the least hint that as the Stone increased 
the image decreased. The two are not seen 



side by side, one gradually encroaching upon the other's 
ground; but with mighty blow on its brittle feet, the 
colossal form crushes into shapeless ruin, and is swept 
away like the chaff of the summer threshing floor, and 
for it no more place was found. 

"It is therefore evident that if the world-power 
disappears in one simultaneous and sudden ruin, the 
Stone Kingdom has not yet begun to grow and the 
mighty Stone is yet to fall. 

"In other prophetic language 'the times of the 
Gentiles' are not yet fulfilled; Jerusalem is still trodden 
under foot of the Gentiles; their God-defying and man-defying 
governmental power is to meet its crisis and 

R3359 : page 135 

catastrophe in a day still future; the nations are yet to 

become angry against Jehovah and his Christ; the winepress 

of the wrath of God is yet to be trodden, and not 

till then will the Son of man set up his Kingdom, of 

whom it is written: 'And there was given him dominion 

and glory and a kingdom, that all people, nations, 

and languages should serve him; his dominion is an 

everlasting dominion, which shall not pass away, and 

his kingdom that which shall not be destroyed.'— Daniel 7:14." 

— W. J. Erdman. 



R3360 : page 135 

"BRING FORTH THE BEST ROBE AND PUT IT ON HIM. 

-LUKE 15:ll-24.-MAY 15.- 

Golden Text: "Come and let us 
return unto the Lord."— Hosea 6:1. 

OUR Lord gave three parables illustrative of God's 
grace: (1) The parable of the hundred sheep, of 
which one was lost and carefully sought. (2) The 
parable of the ten pieces of silver, of which one was lost 
and carefully sought. (3) The parable of the two sons, 
the lost one of whom was so eagerly welcomed back on 
his return. 

The Pharisees "trusted in themselves that they were 
righteous and despised others." They had forms of 
righteousness, ceremonies, outward obedience to God and 
his laws, and reverence, piety and sanctity in outward 
appearance. We may assume that with some these matters 
were genuine— of the heart and not merely of formality; 
but the evidences are strong that there were few of 
this professed "holiness people" who were really at 
heart holy, as judged by the Lord's standard. The harvesting 
of the Jewish age surely found all of the true wheat, 
all the truly holy; and, so far as we have knowledge on 



the subject, comparatively few of these were found amongst 
those who outwardly made the profession of special sanctity 
—the Pharisees. 

PUBLICANS AND SINNERS. 

There was a measure of truth in the assertion of the 
Pharisees that the majority of people were living in sin, 
neglecting the divine Law, and thus living much after the 
manner of the Gentiles, who were without God and had 
no hope in the world. But our Lord wished them to see 
that they took a wrong attitude in the matter. Instead of 
holding aloof from their fellow Jews, their brethren, they 
should have been deeply interested in them and ready to 
do anything in their power to help them back to harmony 
with God and fellowship with themselves. Instead, the 
Pharisaical class rather delighted to proclaim that they 
were the heirs of God's favor and that the others were 
estranged from God. These estranged ones were called 
publicans and sinners. The sinners were the more or less 
immoral, who made no professions of keeping the Mosaic 
Law, observances of the more sacred rites and ceremonies, 
holy days, etc. True, they took part in some of the festivals, 
but largely from the standpoint of the merchant and 
trader and sightseer rather than from the standpoint of 
worship offerer. The publicans were Jews who had become 
somewhat estranged to their laws and to the patriotic 
sentiments of the nation, and who accepted service 
under the Romans as tax-gatherers. They were looked 
down upon by those who held that the seed of Abraham, 
heirs of the great Oath bound Covenant, should never, in 
any sense of the word, become the servants of a foreign 
master, and particularly should not serve the foreign master 
in collecting taxes from his brothers; for they held 
that it was not proper that they should pay taxes to 
Caesar's government. 

Our Lord, though attentive to all of the duties of the 
Jew under the Law, was out of touch with such Pharisaism, 
and instead of holding himself aloof from the publicans 
and sinners, "the common people," he preached his 
message to everyone who had ears to hear, making no distinction 
as between scribe and Pharisee, publican and sinner. 
For this the Pharisees scorned him, considering that 
thus he acknowledged himself and his teachings to be on 
a lower plane— more closely allied with the common people, 
the sinner class. The three parables already referred 
to were spoken particularly as a reproof to the Pharisees— 
to show them the impropriety of their attitude toward the 
masses, "the common people." 

Our Lord did not deny that the publicans and sinners 
were in the wrong, were in some respects further estranged 
from God than the Pharisees; but he wished the latter to 
see that their hearts were not in accord with the mind of 
the Lord, else they would not feel so indifferent toward 
their brethren. The three parables were lessons drawn 
from the common affairs of life— which man of you having 



an hundred sheep, if he lose one would not go after it? or 
which woman of you having a bracelet with ten pieces of 
silver ornaments, prized as a marriage memento, would not 
search diligently if one of these pieces were lost? and if 
so, why should they not consider a brother of much more 
value than the sheep or a coin, and why not seek for the 
brother and endeavor to bring him back again? As capping 
the climax came the parable of the prodigal son, 
which constitutes our present lesson. It represents our 
heavenly Father and his attitude toward the two classes. 
The elder son represented the Pharisees; the younger man, 
the prodigal, represented the publicans and sinners; the 
father represented God. The parable showed God's willingness 
to receive back again the penitent one, and forcefully 
represented the impropriety, the inconsistency, of the 
Pharisees in objecting to the recovery of their brothers 
from the ways of sin and their return to the family of God. 

THE YOUNGER SON OF THE PARABLE. 

The wrong course of the publicans and sinners is 
graphically illustrated: they had been in God's favor under 
the Mosaic Covenant, but feeling released from the 
restraints of home, the restraints of the Law of Moses, 

R3360 : page 136 

they had wandered from God into the ways of sin and 
suffering, looking for pleasures and prosperity in the 
wrong direction. They should have been glad to remain 
under divine protection and care and to have enjoyed the 
Father's house and all of its blessings. They should have 
realized the blessed privilege they enjoyed of being separated 
by the Lord from the world in general; but they 
did not appreciate this, and had gone off into sin, and, 
though really Israelites, had been living after the manner 
of the Gentiles, and worse than some of them. They had 
been serving Satan, and many of their sicknesses were the 
result, as well as much of their destitution and especially their 
moral degradation. God's covenant with them as Jews 
was that, if obedient to his arrangements, they should 
have temporal prosperity. In this particular their position 
was the reverse of ours, to whom the Lord promises 
temporal adversity and spiritual prosperity under the 
Gospel dispensation. 

Satan may be said to be master of this far country— 
afar from God and his love and protection and care. He 
it was who degraded them to the level of swine, and in 
his service they starve for any satisfying portion. The 
swine in the parable represented the worldly, those engrossed 
in the things of the present time and wholly indifferent 
to spiritual matters, and this prodigal is represented 
as having nothing more for his sustenance than 
have the worldly; yet there was a difference between him 
and the swine, for while the swine could fill their bellies 
and grow fat on the bean pods of the locust or carob tree, 



the prodigal found it hard to subsist on that diet. He 
realized his degradation. "He came to himself," he realized 
that he had been insane, stupid, dreaming, when he 
left so gracious a father's house and so great blessings as 
he had once enjoyed and come down to this degraded 
position, where his whole being hungered and thirsted for 
the blessings of the home he had left. The first thing he 
did was to resolve to will, and then he proceeded to do. 
The willing would have amounted to nothing had it not 
been followed by the doing, but the doing could not have 
preceded the willing. 

The picture drawn by the Lord of the beggared and 
tattered prodigal, with a look of shame and fearful forebodings 
of what reception he might have from his father 
and from his brother, is graphically set forth in the Lord's 
parable. His elder brother, represented by the Pharisees, 
was not on the lookout for him; but the father, representing 
God, saw him a long way off— was looking for him, 
was compassionate toward him, and, lest he should be discouraged 
in his fearfulness, the father ran to meet him, to 
welcome him. His reception was as though he had never 
sinned: the best robe, the shoes, the ring, all were his, 
and the feast proclaimed the father's joy to the entire 
household. This is given by our Lord to show the Pharisees 
how God viewed the returning of these publicans and 
sinners who were hearing the Gospel message and coming 
back to lives of righteousness and harmony with God. 

SCRIBES AND PHARISEES THE ELDER SON. 

The majority of our Lord's followers were of this 
class, and the Pharisees, instead of hating the Lord and 
hating the message which was attracting these former wanderers 
back to love and service and hope and of fellowship 
with God, should have been glad. Then, picturing the 
Pharisees and their attitude in the matter, the Lord showed 
them that they were angry with the Father because of his 
goodness, and were refusing to go into the feast to which 
they were made welcome by the Father, and which they 
should have enjoyed with these returning prodigals. The 
loss would be theirs, the gain would be that of the more 
humble minded. The Father, who was pleased to give 
them his blessings in every way and pleased to continue 
with them, would not force them to have his favors, even 
though by nature they were his chosen ones. If they 
would not come in to share the Father's hospitalities with 
the returned prodigal they could not share them at all. 
The Gospel feast is but one feast, and all who participate 
in it must come in under the Father's terms and 
arrangements. 

While the parable is thus seen to be, strictly speaking, 
a Jewish parable which in none of its features includes 
the Gentiles, we may nevertheless draw from it an 
illustrative application to our day. As we have frequently 
noted, fleshly Israel was a type or foreshadowing 
of spiritual Israel, and the harvest of the Jewish age 



a pattern of foreview of the harvest of this Gospel age. 
In a broad sense of the word the whole world may be 
viewed in the light of this parable. Those who have 
sought to remain in harmony with the heavenly Father— 
those who have striven to walk in holiness of life and in 
obedience to the divine will— may be considered the elder 
brother; while the younger brother represents those described 

R3361 :page 136 

by the Apostle in Romans, first chapter, "Who 
when they knew God glorified him not as God, neither 
were thankful; but became vain in their imaginations and 
their foolish hearts were darkened. Professing themselves 
to be wise, they became fools, and changed the glory of 
the incorruptible God," etc. "Wherefore God gave them 
up to uncleanness, to the lusts of their own hearts," etc. 
"For this cause God gave them up unto vile affections 
...and even as they did not like to retain God in their 
knowledge, God gave them over to a reprobate mind, to 
do those things which are not convenient, being filled 
with all unrighteousness," etc. 

From this standpoint nearly the whole world of mankind 
is still in a far country, in the land of the enemy, 
under the blinding influences of the god of this world. 
And now by the grace of God we learn in advance that 
ultimately an opportunity is to be given to all of these 
everywhere to come to themselves, to realize what they 
have lost, and come to realize the Father's willingness to 
receive them back again— an opportunity for reformation 
during the Millennial age under the ministry of him who 
loved us and bought us with his precious blood. To those 

R3361 :page 137 

who are in the right attitude of heart this message gives 
joy and rejoicing, while to another class today the very 
thought of the estranged world being granted an opportunity 
for returning to the heavenly Father and to have 
the robe of Christ's righteousness placed upon them, and 
to be accepted to sonship to God again, is a repulsive 
thought, just as the thought of the favor of God going to 
the publicans and sinners was repulsive to most of the 
Pharisees of our Lord's time. 

The first returning prodigal under the new dispensation 
will be the poor Jew— for thus it is written, 
"There shall come out of Zion the Deliverer, and shall 
turn away ungodliness from Jacob: for this is my covenant 
with them when I shall take away their sins. As 
concerning the Gospel they are enemies for your sake; 
but as touching the election, they are beloved for the 
fathers' sakes. For the gifts and calling of God are 
without repentance." (Rom. 11:25-30.) The Prophet 
describes the experiences of the Jew as a prodigal returning 
to the Father's house, saying, that the Lord 
will pour upon them the spirit of prayer and of supplication, 



and they shall look upon him whom they have 
pierced and shall mourn because of him. Neither will 
they be the only ones upon whom the Father will pour 
his Spirit, as it is written, "After those days [after the 
Gospel age, the time of dealing with the servants and 
handmaidens only] the Lord shall pour out his Spirit 
upon all flesh."— Joel 2:28,29. 

MANKIND IN GENERAL PRODIGALS. 

The same thought is brought to our attention in Nebuchadnezzar, 
who in a general way represents the madness 
upon the world. At the end of the days— at the end of 
his period of bestial degradation— he came to himself, and 
we read, "At the end of the days, I, Nebuchadnezzar, lifted 
up mine eyes unto heaven, and my understanding returned 
unto me, and I blessed the Most High and I 
praised and honored him that liveth forever... my reason 
returned unto me; and for the glory of my kingdom, 
my honor and brightness returned unto me." (Dan. 4:33.) 
So at the end of the Gentile times, after 1915, reason 
will begin to come back to the prodigal ones, and the 
light of the Lord Jesus will begin to shine in every quarter, 
and a blessing will come to the whole human family 
released from the blinding influences of the Adversary. 
The Prophet again describes this coming blessing to the 
whole world saying, "At that time many nations shall go 
and say, Come, let us go to the mountain of the Lord's 
house; he shall teach us of his ways, and we will walk in 
his paths; for then the law shall go forth from Mount 
Zion [the spiritual Kingdom, the glorified Christ] and the 
word of the Lord from Jerusalem [earthly representatives 
of the Millennial Kingdom and glory]." 

"THE SAME YESTERDAY, TODAY AND FOREVER." 

It is remarkable how some people can see a little yet 
are unable to grasp the glorious vision of divine wisdom 
and power. For instance, Rev. Alex. McKenzie, writing 
along the lines of divine compassion and the open door 
for those who will return to the Father's house, couches 
his thought in the following words: 

"It would not be amiss to say that the Gospel of 
Christ is the Gospel of the second chance. Men have 
curiously wondered if there was a second chance in another 
world. There is something much better than that, a second 
chance in this world. 'Now,' cries the great Archer, 
'now is the accepted time to try again! Now is the day 
to hit the mark.' Repentance is a new opportunity. So 
the prodigal came back to his father, saying, 'Father, before 
heaven and in thy sight I have missed the mark. Let 
me be as one of thy servants to make bows and arrows for 
better men.' But his father understood the confession. 
'Bring out a new bow and give it to him.' The brother 
said, 'But, father, he has had his bow and missed the mark.' 
'Bring out the best bow and give it to him. My boy has 



come back to try again.'" 

We are glad that our heavenly Father gives us and 
our brothers and sisters and children opportunities to recover 
themselves after they have wandered into sin— opportunities 
to profit by the lessons of life and the sad experience 
of being strangers, aliens from God. It is well 
for us that we can see this. Fortunate it is that so few 
have gotten the thought that one failure, one mistake, 
would seal their destiny. Glad we are that so many are 
able to realize the divine compassion and forgiveness 
manifested through Jesus, which makes allowances not 
only for our original estrangement but for various missteps 
subsequently. But shall we limit the grace of this 
God when he himself has expressed no limits? Shall we 
say that it is only to those who have heard his voice and 
come into his family in the present time that his grace 
shall be extended at all? Why is it that so many find it 
difficult to realize that the same God who has had compassion 
on their weaknesses and failures and has accepted 
them back as prodigals, without any violation of 
justice, may not be equally generous toward those who as 
yet have not even had an ear to hear or the eyes to 
see his grace and goodness in Christ? 

It is passing strange that now, in the dawning of the 
new dispensation, as the Lord brings to our attention the 
glorious features of his plan, which shall surely make 
for the uplift of the world of mankind and their complete 
restitution if they are willing, back to all that was 
lost in Eden— purchased for them by the Father through 
the gift of his Son at Calvary— these blessings should arouse 
the opposition and anger of any who have ever named 
the name of Christ, or have ever been made in any measure 
partakers of the Father's spirit. How is it that 
such close their ears to the message respecting our dear 
Redeemer— "This is the true light that lighteneth every 
man that cometh into the world"? How is it that they 
refuse to give credence to the message which the Lord sent 
by the angel choir on the plains of Bethlehem— "Behold, 
we bring you good tidings of great joy which shall be 
unto all people"? 

NONE BUT REPENTANT PRODIGALS RECEIVED. 

In the parable there was joy at the return of the 

R3361 :page 138 

prodigal from the fields of sin and disloyalty, and this 

was explained by the Lord to mean that there is joy 

in heaven over the return of every one who, after being 

a child of God, has wandered from the Father's house. 

The same principle now holds true in this Gospel age, 

and any who, having been accepted in Christ, shall wander 

away and return again in true humility, as represented 

in the parable, may again experience God's favor and 

have their past forgiven, and the robe of Christ's righteousness 



shall cover their blemishes. They shall have the 
evidences of divine favor and mercy again. We can see 
that God's heart is large enough to have made a provision 
for the world of mankind through the same Redeemer 
and through the same precious atonement sacrifice; and 
not only do we rejoice to see this unfolding of the larger 
features of the divine plan, but we are sure that the angels 
in heaven likewise rejoice to see the lengths and breadths 
and heights and depths of the love of God as exhibited 
toward his fallen creatures. 

Nothing in the above is meant to intimate in any 
sense of the word that any will be received of God at any 
time on any other terms than are represented in this 
parable, in the case of the prodigal. The prodigal must 
will to return, the prodigal must strive to return, but 
the Father will meet him on the way to encourage him, 
to receive him, to bless him, to bring him into all the 
glorious things which he has in reservation for those 
who love him and his righteousness. There is a part, 
however, in all such reformation which belongs in some 
measure to divine providence— it is that represented by 
the words, "When he came to himself." Sin and degradation 
have brought unreason, unbalanced judgment, 
and have made the good to appear bad, the light to 
appear darkness, the true to appear false, and contrariwise. 
It is of divine providence that the eyes of our 
understanding open to see just where we are, and to 
realize our need and our loss. And so, as we have 
shown above, divine promises reach out for the world 
of mankind and attest to us that in due time God will 
cause reason to come to mankind that they may appreciate 
their lessons and desire to return to the Father's 
house. The will and the effort, however, they must exercise, 
else the results will not be attained. All through 
the Millennial age mankind will be brought to a discernment 
of their needs, and as they respond they will 
have the Father's provision in Christ for meeting them 
on the way and helping them back through the provisions 
of restitution to a condition that will be full of 
peace and blessing in accord with the Almighty. 

The eye of some prodigal may rest upon this article, 
and he may feel a longing for the Father's house, 

R3362 : page 138 

the family association and the gracious blessings and 

spiritual fellowship which belong there and which he in 

the past enjoyed and has left. If so, we remind 

him that this thought is the beginning of the return to 

reason— he is coming to himself. Let him arise immediately 

and go unto the Father through the appointed 

way, the Lord Jesus; let him be assured of the Father's 

willingness to receive him; but let him not return in 

any self-righteous or self-excusing attitude of mind, 

which would be sure to frustrate the blessing hoped for. 

He must go back as did the prodigal, with contrition of 



heart, with full confession of his error, and with a willingness 
to take the very lowest place in the Father's family as 
a servant. It is to such that the Father is pleased to give 
a full restoration of the privileges of sonship. 



R3362 : page 138 

ONLY THE HUMBLE SHALL BE EXALTED. 

--MARK 10:35-45.~MAY 22.- 

Golden Text: "For even the Son of man 
came not to be ministered unto, but to minister." 

SEVERAL weeks intervened between the incidents 
of the last lesson and the present one. In that 
time the Lord had crossed over Jordan in answer 
to the request of Mary and Martha that he should come 
and heal their brother Lazarus, who was sick. Jesus arrived 
intentionally too late for this, but awakened Lazarus 
from sleep, and thereby aroused a great storm of opposition, 
especially amongst the scribes and Pharisees, who 
sought to put him to death. Knowing that his time was 
not yet come, he retired into a mountain of northern Judea, 
but at the time of this lesson he with his twelve apostles 
was en route for Jerusalem. He had just explained to 
them more particularly the ignominy, shame and death 
which he would experience, and repeated his assurance of 
his resurrection. The rich young ruler had just visited 
him, and gone away sorrowful upon learning the terms of 
discipleship. Jesus had just said, How hardly shall they 
who have riches enter into the Kingdom; the apostles 
had inquired what they should have since they had left all, 
and Jesus assured them that they should have a hundred 
fold more in this present time, with persecution, and in 
the world to come everlasting life. 

The context says that Jesus was walking in advance 
of the twelve, who were discussing matters amongst themselves, 
overawed by the stupendous things which the Lord 
had declared to be imminent. The courage of our Lord 
in the narrow way fills us with admiration. What a strong 
character was his! He had no thought of turning back; 
he was intent upon accomplishing his Father's will— upon 
sacrificing himself in the interest of others. A noble pattern 
the apostles saw before them— greatness in humility, 
victory through service. 

A GOODLY HERITAGE DESIRED. 

It was at this time that James and John approached 
the Lord in a private manner. Matthew tells us that their 
mother Salome was with them and really made the request 

R3362 : page 139 



for them in their names. Salome is supposed to have 
been the sister of Mary, the aunt of Jesus, in which event 
James and John were his full cousins. Realizing that matters 
were drawing to a crisis they sought of the Lord an 
assurance that they two might be very close to him in the 
Kingdom, one on his right hand and one on his left, the 
two positions of chiefest favor. 

Our Lord did not reprove them, for doubtless he read 
in their hearts a great love and loyalty toward himself; 
and the desire for the positions indicated not merely the 
desire for the honors and authority implied, but specially 
because this would bring them closer to himself. Had 
the Lord seen in their hearts an evil form of ambition, 
undoubtedly he would have reproved it on the spot. His 
answer, however, was so framed as to impress these brothers 
and all of his followers since with what is implied in 
joint-heirship with the Lord in the Kingdom. Very forceful 
is the expression, "Ye know not what ye ask. Are ye 
able to drink of the cup that I drink of, and be baptized 
with the baptism that I am baptized with?" 

The cup signifies experiences— as, for instance, when 
our Lord said, "The cup which my Father hath given me, 
shall I not drink it? " (John 18:11.) Our Lord wished 
his disciples to see clearly that the Father had poured for 
him a special cup of experiences, and had required of him 
special baptism into death, as conditions precedent to his 
glory and Kingdom; and that whoever would become his 
associates in the Kingdom must become also his associates 
in the sufferings of this present time— in the ignominy and 
whatever experiences the Father might see best to permit as 
tests of faith and devotion and character. Our Lord did 
not refer to the Memorial Supper cup, but to the experiences 
which it symbolized, even as he did not refer to water 
baptism, but to the baptism into death which is symbolized 
by the water immersion. 

How heart-searching was this question! It meant, 
Are ye willing? because it would be impossible for the 
disciples to have known their own ability except in the 
sense of having confidence in God that he would give the 
ability to those who had their wills thoroughly subjected 
to his. This is illustrated in the symbolical baptism, in 
which one no more buries himself than he raises himself. 
We merely surrender our wills, our all, to the Lord, and 
he by his Word and grace works in us to will and ultimately 
to do his good pleasure— expecting from us only 
the possibilities, and assisting us to these with grace sufficient 
for us, for every time of need. 

"MY GRACE IS SUFFICIENT FOR YOU." 

That these two noble apostles were not inspired by 
selfish ambitions in this request is evidenced by their 
prompt reply to the Lord's searching question and later on 
evidenced by their faithfulness even unto death. They 
said, "We are able"— that is, "We are willing. God 



helping us, we will sacrifice everything to follow in your 
footsteps; we will count nothing dear unto us; we will 
lay aside every weight and every sinful besetment; we 
will run with patience the race set before us, looking unto 
Jesus, the author and finisher of our faith." This we may 
assume to be a larger statement of their devotion. 

Our Lord's love and sympathy went out to them 
afresh as he answered them, guaranteeing that with such 
willingness of heart they should indeed have the experiences 
necessary to fit them for a place in the Kingdom. 
What a comfort this is to even the weakest of the Lord's 
followers who are sincere. 

The Lord looketh at the heart, and if he sees there 
full devotion to himself, he is pleased to grant to such his 
blessing, his aid, saying, "I will never leave thee nor forsake 
thee." "My grace is sufficient for thee— my strength 
is made perfect in weakness." We, too, are desirous of 
sharing the Kingdom with our Lord, yet not from love of 
exaltation above others, but from a desire to have this 
evidence that we please our Father and our Lord Jesus— 
to have this closeness of relationship to him, and to have 
the privilege of participation with our dear Redeemer in 
the great work of blessing all the families of the earth in 
due time. It is well that we should have the Lord's answer 
clearly before our minds, and know that unless we 
partake of his cup and are immersed into his death, we can 
have no share in his Kingdom of glory. Let us then 
count all things else as loss and as dross to obtain this 
necessary experience. As it comes to us let us not be fearful, 
nor think strange of the fiery trials that shall try us, 
as though some strange thing had happened unto us. On 
the contrary, even hereunto were we called, that we might 
now suffer with the Lord and by and by be glorified together 
with him. 

As for the particular place to be occupied in the 
Kingdom by the sons of Zebedee or by us, our Lord pointed 
out that the assigning of such positions was in the 
Father's hands— the choicest positions shall be given to 
those for whom they have been prepared by the Father. 
Not that we are to understand that the Father prepared 
the places in advance by any arbitrary divisions, but 
rather that the Father's pre-arranged plan is that each of 
the followers of Jesus shall have positions of honor in the 
Kingdom proportionate to the zeal of their faithfulness in 
the present time— for none shall have any part in the 
Kingdom who do not now prove faithful. 

THE MEEKEST AND MOST ZEALOUS. 

It is not for us to decide the zeal and faithfulness of 
the apostles— to say which two would better fill these positions 
of chiefest honor. The Father will make no mistake. 
It will not surprise us, however, should we find the 
Apostle Paul in one of these two positions. His faithful, 
loving zeal and loyalty seem to shine out conspicuously 
even amongst those who were also faithful and loyal. It 



is not for us to have any ambitious feelings respecting this 
matter, except that we desire always to serve the Lord 
and be pleasing to him, and eventually to be as close to 
him as possible. When we remember that the closer 
we come to him in the present trials and experiences and 

R3362 : page 140 

suffering with faithfulness the closer we will be to him in 
the future, it explains to us the meaning of the Apostle's 
words when speaking of his severe trials: he called them 
light afflictions but for a moment, working out a far more 
exceeding and eternal weight of glory.— 2 Cor. 4: 17. 
We recall that there had been, a little while before, 
some rivalry amongst the apostles as to which should be 
greatest in the Kingdom. At that time Jesus took a 
little child as an exemplification of candor and guilelessness, 
and assured them that unless they became as little 
children— simple-hearted, honest, candid, they could in 
no wise have any part in his Kingdom. Now, when the 

R3363 : page 140 

ten other disciples learned the special mission of Salome 
and the request made by and for James and John, they 
were indignant at them. Possibly some of them, Judas 
included, were very anxious for the authority and power 
and dignity of the throne, but without the very special 
love and longing to be near the Master himself which 
seem to have influenced James and John in their request. 
But Jesus set matters straight with them all, and turned 
their displeasure into an opportunity for another good lesson, 
by the assurance that the chief positions in the Kingdom 
would be given along the lines of meritorious service, 
and that thus each one of them would have his opportunity 
to strive for the chief position by striving to render 
service to the others. 

Amongst the Gentiles the rulers are lords, who do no 
serving but are served, but among the followers of Jesus 
the rule is to be reversed; he who would serve most was 
to be esteemed most highly. What a beauty there is in 
the divine order of things ! how thoroughly all who are 
right minded can sympathize with the principles here 
laid down! How reasonable they are and how contrary 
to the spirit of the world. Truly, the Lord's followers 
will in this sense of the word be a peculiar people in their 
zeal for good works— for serving one another and for doing 
good unto all men as they have opportunity. The 
Apostle Peter emphasizes this point (I Pet. 5:6), "Humble 
yourselves therefore under the mighty hand of God, 
that he may exalt you in due time." "He that humbleth 
himself shall be exalted, and he that exalteth himself shall 
be abased."— Luke 14:11. 

OUR LORD SERVANT OF ALL. 



The Lord did not have one standard for his followers 
and another standard for himself. Consequently, when 
they heard him say, Whosoever of you will be chief shall 
be servant of all, they could promptly recognize that this 
was the course that he had pursued— that he had been servant 
to them all; and it was on account of the services 
that he was continually rendering them that they delighted 
to serve him, to acknowledge him their Master and to 
walk in his steps. Indeed they had seen only a small fragment 
of the Lord's sacrificing and of its far-reaching influence 
as a service to others. We can see this as we recognize 
the fact that our Lord was about to die, not merely 
for his disciples, not merely for the Jews, but to be a propitiation 
for the sins of the whole world, that the whole 
world eventually might have a blessing— a blessed opportunity 
for coming to life eternal through the merit of his 
service. Our Lord called this to their attention, saying, 
"For verily the Son of man came not to be ministered 
unto [served] but to minister [serve], and to give his life 
a ransom for many." This is one of the very explicit 
statements of Scripture respecting the object of our Lord's 
death— that it was not for his own sins that he died, that 
on the contrary it was for ours, and that in thus dying he 
gave himself a ransom price— a corresponding price for 
the sins of the whole world. 

No other lesson requires to be so carefully learned by 
the Lord's people as this lesson of humility. It has to do 
with the very humblest of the flock, as well as with those 
who are teachers and elders and pilgrims, etc.; but the 
degree of force that seems to come with the besetment or 
temptation seems to multiply in proportion to the position 
and attainments of the individual. Pride and ambition 
may be in those who have no official position in the 
Church, often asserted in fault-finding and criticism 
which, to the hearers, is intended to imply superior wisdom 
or ability on the part of the critic— that his wisdom and 
ability only wait for opportunity to manifest his greatness 
above his fellows. We are not objecting to a kindly brotherly 
word of criticism given privately and with a view to 
helpfulness, but merely to the kind which vaunteth itself 
and seeks to do injury to the reputation of another occupying 
a preferred position. 

"BE NOT MANY OF YOU TEACHERS." 

As the Apostle intimates, however, this besetment 
bears chiefly upon those who have some talent, some ability, 
and whom their fellows have to some extent honored 
as teachers. Little men, like little ships with broad sails, 
are in great danger of being capsized if too strong a wind 
of popularity play upon them. Not only so, but we believe 
that even the most humble, the most faithful, the 
most zealous to be servants of the cause, have continual 
need to be on their guard lest their good intentions should 
be used of the Adversary as a trap for their ensnarement. 
Let us remember the Apostle's words, "Be not many of 



you teachers, my brethren, knowing that a man [who is a 
teacher] shall receive greater condemnation"— he is exposed 
to greater trials and temptations as a result. This 
must not hinder any who have talents from using them, 
but it should make each one very careful that he does not 
think more highly of himself than he ought to think, but 
to think soberly. If the judgment of the majority of the 
congregation does not recognize his adaptation to the 
service of a teacher, he should humbly accept its conclusion 
as correct, no matter how highly he had thought of 
himself previously. And even if the majority should conclude 
that he is worthy of a position as a teacher in Zion, 
he should tread very softly before the Lord, very humbly, 
realizing that those who in any degree attempt to impart 
instruction in spiritual things to others are to that extent 

R3363 :page 141 

acting as representatives and mouthpieces of the Lord himself, 

the Head of the body; and all should keep in mind 

the Lord's words in this Golden Text and his own exemplification 

of the matter— that he who serves most and not 

he who lords it most should have the chief respect of the 

Lord's people. 



R3363 : page 141 

THE LAST SUPPER 

-MATT. 26:17-30. -MAY 29.- 

JESUS and the apostles came to Bethany, near 
Jerusalem, that they might eat the Passover 
Supper in the holy city, and that our Lord might 
suffer at the hands of his enemies, as he had foretold 
his disciples— that thus he might accomplish an atonement 
for the sins of the people. His arrival was just a 
week before his crucifixion. The following day at the 
supper Mary anointed him. On the next day he rode 
on the ass into Jerusalem, was not received, wept over 
the city, and said, "Your house is left unto you desolate." 
On the following day he visited the temple, 
driving out the money changers with the scourge of 
cords. The next day he gave his last public teaching 
in the temple, declaring himself to be the light of the 
world. Every night he seems to have returned to Bethany 
to the house of Lazarus and Martha and Mary, 
which was also the home of himself and the apostles 
whenever they were in that vicinity. The next day, 
Wednesday, the Lord remained in Bethany in retirement, 
and on Thursday sent two of his disciples to 
make ready the Passover, which was eaten by himself 
and the twelve that night— "the same night in which 
he was betrayed." 



The feast of Passover lasted a week, and was one 
of the most important celebrated under the Jewish arrangement. 
During that week, leaven, as a type of sin, 
was carefully put away from all the food and destroyed 
in every house, in intimation of the holiness and purity, 
the unleavenness, of the Lord's people— spiritual Israel 
—typically represented by natural Israel. The whole 
week was a festival of rejoicing because of God's deliverance 
of Israel from the bondage of Egypt. The feast-week 
began on the 15th day of the first month, Jewish 
reckoning, but it was preceded on the 14th by the killing 
of the lamb, and the sprinkling of its blood upon the 
doorposts of the houses, as a memorial of what took 
place in Egypt on the night in which the Lord spared 
the first-born of Israel under the blood and slew the 
first-born of the Egyptians, and thus made the latter 
willing to let his people go free. It was for the eating 
of this memorial lamb on the night previous to the beginning 
of the Passover feast-week that our Lord sent 
his disciples to make ready, as explained in our lesson. 

Luke tells us that it was Peter and John who were 
sent on this mission, and Mark tells us that they were 
to know the man at whose house the feast would be 
held by his carrying a pitcher of water. It has been 
surmised by some that the house was that of Mark's 
mother, Mary, and that the upper room thus used was 
the same one in which the apostles subsequently met 
and where the pentecostal blessing was poured out upon 
them. We do know that it was at the house of this 
Mary that many gathered to pray for the release of 
Peter from prison. It was a "large upper room" and 
was already prepared with a suitable dining couch of 
proper dimensions. It has been surmised that Jesus 
took this indirect way of indicating the place that Judas 
might not be informed until the time for the gathering, 
so that there might be no interruption of the 
feast and our Lord's subsequent discourses, recorded in 
John 14:17, on the part of those who were seeking his 
apprehension. Peter and John made ready the Passover 
in the sense of furnishing and preparing the lamb, 
the unleavened bread, bitter herbs and the fruit of the 
vine, and in the evening at the appropriate time the 
entire company gathered for the celebration. 

A LESSON IN HUMILITY. 

Luke only records (22:24-30) that there was strife 
amongst the apostles on this occasion, though John (13) 
also implies this. We are not to suppose that the 
apostles were actuated wholly by ambition and selfishness. 
We may well suppose that the strife was for 
position of nearness to the Master because of their love 

R3364 : page 141 

for him. The Lord improved the opportunity to give 



them a most wonderful discourse, which doubtless lasted 
them through the remainder of their lives. They 
had arrived late in the afternoon, over dusty roads, 
and, not being of the wealthy class, no servants were 
there to receive them and to wash their feet; and instead 
of thinking to do this one for another, to their 
mutual comfort, they had been striving with one another 
for favored positions at the table, John evidently 
gaining the most desired position next to the Master- 
possibly accorded him because he was not only a relative, 
and one whom Jesus specially loved, but also because 
he was the youngest of their number. 

The customs of olden times differ from those of 
the present in many respects. In eating they reclined 
on a couch surrounding a table. They leaned on their 
left elbow and used the right hand for conveying food 
to the mouth; thus their heads were brought comparatively 
close together, while their feet extended out behind 
over the couch. Apparently permitting the dispute 
to run its course and the supper to begin, Jesus 
arose, and going behind them began to wash the feet of 
one after another of them. Such a service rendered to 

R3364 : page 142 

them by the Master was of course a severe reproof. 

They should have thought of washing his feet and each 

other's and now probably wished that they had done 

so, but at the time each was apparently intent upon 

establishing the fact that he was in no degree inferior 

to the others. They had forgotten so soon the lesson 

of a short time before— that he who would be greatest 

amongst them should be servant of all. Our Lord here 

had the opportunity of illustrating this very matter: 

he was willing to serve them all, was continually serving 

them all in the spiritual things, and hence they regarded 

him truly and properly as their Master; but now 

he showed them his humility to the extent that he was 

willing to serve them in the most menial capacity also. 

Valuable lesson! May it never lose its import amongst 

the Lord's true followers. Some, however, have erred 

in supposing that this became an institution or ordinance 

similar to the Lord's Supper and baptism: to our understanding 

the lesson to be conveyed by this symbol, 

and its application to each of us at any time and at any 

place, would be that we should seek to render some useful 

service to the brethren regardless of how menial it 

might be, and that so doing to them it would be reckoned 

of the Lord as though done unto him. 

"BETTER THAT HE HAD NOT BEEN BORN." 

It was while they were at supper that Jesus, appearing 
very sorrowful, gave as an explanation that it 
would be one of his own chosen twelve that would betray 
him and thus become accessory to his death— one 



of those who dipped with him in the dish, partaking 

of the same supper, the same bread, the same 

roasted lamb. Then he pointed out that although this 

was all written, and thus no alteration would be found 

in respect to the divine plan, nevertheless it signified a 

very gross breach of friendship— one sad to contemplate. 

It really made no difference to the Lord, so far 

as his intention and consecration were concerned, 

whether he were apprehended by the rulers without 

any betrayal or whether the betrayal were by a comparative 

stranger or by a disciple: the fact would make 

no change in the divine arrangement; but it was a cause 

for great sorrow that it should be one who had been a 

bosom friend and disciple. 

"It had been good for that man if he had not been 
born," implies to us that, from the Lord's standpoint, 
Judas had already experienced so large a measure of 
knowledge and opportunity for better things that his 
responsibility for his act was complete, and that there 
would be no hope for him at any time in the future. 
We will certainly have no objection to it if the Lord 
should find some excuse for granting Judas a further 
opportunity for correcting his character, but we see no 
Scriptural reason for thinking there will be such further 
opportunity. From our standpoint it appears as 
though he sinned against great light, experience and 
knowledge— contact with the Lord and under the 
power of the holy Spirit— one of those commissioned 
to heal diseases and cast out devils in the name of the 
Lord, and as his representative, and using his power. 
His end was a sad one: every suicide by his act confesses 
his wish that he had never been born. 

"LORD, IS IT I?" 

Another account tells us that each of the disciples 
inquired of the Lord. "Is it I?" and last of all Judas. 
The others felt sure that they had nothing to do with 
it and wished the Lord to confirm their innocency, and 
the eleven having asked and no response from the Lord 
indicating their culpability, the implication would be 
that Judas was the one; yet such was his spirit of bravado 
that he also asked the Master, "Is it I?" Jesus 
answered him, "Thou hast said," or "It is you." How 
noble was the Lord's reproof; he could have scarcely 
said less— not a threat, not an imprecation, not a manifestation 
of bitterness, but merely an expression of sorrow 
and of pity. What a lesson for us! Our enemies 
are to be pitied, not hated; to be blessed as far as we 
are able, but never to be cursed. It is well for all of 
Jesus' disciples to watch and pray against any Judas-like 
disposition to sell the Lord or his Truth or his 
brethren for money or other selfish considerations. 
Knowing that there will be others of the Judas class, 
let us guard our hearts and ask, "Lord, is it I?" 

While they were eating the Passover Supper prescribed 



by the Jewish Law, or rather while they were 
still at the table after they had finished the supper 
proper, Jesus took some of the remaining bread— which 
in shape at least more particularly resembled what we 
today would call crackers— he blessed it, broke it and 
gave it to his disciples saying, "Take, eat, this is my 
body." Another evangelist adds, "broken for you." 
Romanists and some Protestants claim that in consequence 
of the form of this statement, "this is my body," 
and the next statement, "this is my blood," we should 
understand that whenever the memorial bread and 
fruit of the vine have been consecrated they are 
changed from being bread and wine and become the 
actual body of Christ and his actual blood. We dissent 
from this as being most unreasonable and most 
untrue; the bread and the wine merely symbolized or 
represented the body and blood of our Lord. In absolute 
proof of this note the fact that our Lord at the 
time he used these words had not yet been broken and 
his blood had not yet been shed. Hence to have used 
these expressions in any other way than the way we do 
use them, namely, as meaning that the bread and the 
wine represented his body and his blood, would have 
meant to misrepresent the truth— to have falsified; and 
we cannot perceive that this was done or would have 
been proper to have been done by the Lord or any of 
his followers. 

R3364 : page 143 

The bread, as our Lord explained, represented the 
bread from heaven— his flesh which he sacrificed for the 
sins of the world. He invites all of his followers to 
eat of it, and we partake of his flesh when we appropriate 
to ourselves the blessings, the mercy, the grace 
secured by the breaking of his body. We thus appropriate 
to ourselves the benefits of the sacrifice which 
secures to us the forgiveness of sins and reconciliation 
with the Father. 

"THE BLOOD OF THE NEW COVENANT." 

He took the cup and gave thanks and gave it to 
the apostles, saying, "Drink ye all of it, for this is my 
blood of the New Covenant which is shed for many for 
the remission of sins." This represents my blood— it 
will continue to represent my blood with you and with 
all my dear followers at all times, and will be to you 
on such occasions a reminder of my death and of the 
covenant which was thus sealed between God and sinners 
by myself as the great Mediator between God and 
man. 

The New Covenant or New Testament sealed by 
the blood of Christ is the one that is mentioned throughout 
the Old Testament and referred to by the Apostle 
in his letter to the Hebrews (8:6-13; 10:29; 12:20). It 



supersedes the Law Covenant. The latter, mediated 
through Moses, provided that whosoever would do the 
commandments of the Law should have everlasting 
life; but the New Covenant provides for mercy, and, 
recognizing the fact that in our fallen condition we 
cannot do the things we would, the Mediator of the 
New Covenant, by his death on behalf of the people, is 
able to keep Justice whole and yet deal with us according 
to our intentions instead of according to our actual 
accomplishments, and meanwhile to lift mankind up, up, 
up, out of degradation to that plane or condition of 
being where they will be able to do perfectly all the 
good desires of true and honest hearts. 

The Apostle Paul shows us that this bread and cup 
had a still further and broader signification. He it was 
who had so clear an understanding of the "mystery"— 
Christ in you— that we are members of the mystical 
body of Christ, participators now in his sufferings, and, 
if faithful, to be members of his glorious body and participators 
also in his glory. From this standpoint, as 
the Apostle explains, the broken loaf represents not 
only the breaking of the Lord Jesus personally, but the 
breaking of all his mystical members throughout this 
Gospel age; and the drinking of the cup was not only 
his own participation in death that he might thus seal 
the New Covenant on behalf of mankind, but that his 
invitation to us to join with him in partaking of the 
cup, "Drink ye all of it," implied that we could have 
participation with him in the sufferings and death in 
the present time— participation with him in the inauguration 
of the New Covenant conditions during the 
Millennial reign. How grand is the thought, how deep, 
how broad! What a wonderful privilege that we should 
be permitted to fill up that which is behind of the 
afflictions of Christ and to look forward to a participation 
in his glories in the future. From this standpoint 
we see fresh force in his word to the apostles noted in 
a previous lesson, namely, "Are ye able to drink of the 
cup that I shall drink of, and be baptized with the 

R3365 : page 143 

baptism that I am baptized with?" As not every 
one is worthy to be invited to such participation, so 
also not every one who is invited will so appreciate the 
privilege as to participate in this matter joyfully and 
gratefully. Let us each resolve and say to the Lord, as 
did James and John, "Lord, we are able"— we are willing. 
By thine aid we will come off conquerors and 
more than conquerors. 

THE NEW WINE-THE JOYS OF THE KINGDOM. 

Our Lord declared that he would no more participate 
in the fruit of the vine until he would drink it new 
in the Kingdom. The thought is not that he would 



drink new or unfermented wine in the Kingdom with 
them, but that until in the Kingdom the new or antitypical 
thing represented in the wine would not be fulfilled. 
When the Kingdom shall come all the sufferings 
and trials of the present time will be past, the treading 
of the winepress, the wine making, will all be over, and 
instead the wine shall be that of joy and exhilaration, 
representing the joys and the blessings beyond imagination 
or expression that will be the portion of all those 
who truly have fellowship with our Redeemer in the 
sufferings of this present time and also in the glories that 
shall follow. The Kingdom time is very close at hand 
now— certainly 1800 years and more nearer than it was 
when our Lord spoke these words— and the evidences 
of its steady inauguration are multiplying on every 
hand. Our hearts should be proportionately rejoicing 
in anticipation and we should proportionately be 
faithful in the present time in the drinking of the cup 
of sorrow, suffering, shame and contumely, and thus 
testifying of our love and our loyalty. 

Following this was the discourse which has blessed 
so many of the Lord's people down through intervening 
centuries recorded by John (chapters 15, 16, 17). 
Then they sang a hymn and went out to the Mount of 
Olives— to the Garden of Gethsemane and to fresh trials 
upon all of the disciples. So it has seemed to us that 
with every recurrence of the Memorial season, and 
every fresh symbolization of our pledge to the Lord, 
come fresh trials, fresh testings, fresh sittings upon the 
Lord's people. Who shall be able to stand? Let us 
hold fast the confidence of our rejoicing firm unto the 
end, hold fast the faithful Word, hold fast the exceeding 
great and precious promises, hold fast to our Passover 
Lamb, our Deliverer! 



page 145 

SEMI-MONTHLY 
VOL. XXV. MAY 15, 1904. No. 10. 



CONTENTS 

Views From the Watch Tower 147 

Possibilities of a European War 147 

The Essential Unity of all 
Religions 147 

Volunteer Work, 1904 149 

"Choose Ye This Day" 149 

How and Why Christ was 

Crucified 155 

Public Ministries of the Truth 160 

Special Items: 



Editor's One-Day Conventions 146 

page 146 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-24 EVERSHOLT ST., LONDON, N.W. 
GERMAN BRANCH-MIRKER STR., 45, ELBERFELD. 
AUSTRALIAN BRANCH-32 JOHNSTON ST., FITZROY, MELBOURNE. 

PRICE $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE, 5c (2-l/2d.) A COPY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity 
or adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER, will be supplied FREE, if 
they send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting 
the paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our 
list continually. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE 



THIS JOURNAL IS PUBLISHED IN THE 

FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, DANISH AND ITALIAN LANGUAGES. 

SAMPLE COPIES AND TERMS FREE. 



ONE-DAY LOCAL CONVENTIONS ADDRESSED BY THE 
EDITOR OF THIS JOURNAL AS FOLLOWS: 

PORTLAND, ORE., MAY 15. -All meetings in Elks Hall, 
Marquam Building, Sixth and Morrison Sts. Morning 
rally at 10 o'clock. Meeting for the interested at 2.30; 
and for the public at 7.30— subject, "The Oath-bound 
Covenant." 

ST. PAUL, MINN., May 19. -Meeting place, Central 
Hall. At 3 p.m. for interested friends, and 7 p.m. for the 
public. Subject, "The Oath-bound Covenant." 

MILWAUKEE, WIS., May 20.-Meeting for the interested 
at 2.30 p.m. at Lincoln Hall, Sixth St., off Grand Ave. 

ALLEGHENY, PA., MAY 22. 
INDIANAPOLIS, IND., MAY 29. 
HAMILTON, ONT., JUNE 12. 

OUR MOTTO STOCK EXHAUSTED. 



We are unable to supply more mottoes until our stock 
is replenished. We are ordering a new lot from Great 
Britain, which will be in place about November. Hold 
your orders until further announcement. 



R3365 : page 147 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 
POSSIBILITIES OF A EUROPEAN WAR. 



NEWSPAPERS and magazines are discussing the 
possibility of the Russo-Japan war eventuating 
in a world-wide war. It is generally 
conceded that it would be the part of wisdom for 
Russia to back down and sue for peace proposals, but 
equally certain that the pride of that great nation 
will hinder such a course. If, therefore, the land 
fighting should go against Russia it is surmised by 
many that her diplomacy would manage to bring 
on a general war, in which her own defeat by little 
Japan would be measurably lost sight of in the glare 
of still more momentous conflicts. Matters have this 
appearance, though they may not reach such a culmination 
very soon. 

Meantime the great nations are preparing for 
emergencies— especially Great Britain, France and 
Germany. Naval warfare is steadily undergoing a 
radical change: the prospect is that the great battleships 
will soon be of little value under the new conditions. 
The new models of fighting craft are the auto-boats 
and the submergible-boats. The latter can be 
sunk completely under water— 100 feet if desired— 
in six seconds, and can thus travel toward their 
opponents unobserved, and can discharge torpedoes 
at close range and be gone. England has about 
twenty of these boats nearly completed and a large 
number ordered. France has more, and by the close 
of this year she will have at least thirty. These boats 
carry gasoline for fuel— enough for a 400-mile journey, 
and require but small crews. They would, of course, 
operate near a harbor or in conjunction with larger 
vessels. The auto-boat can be operated by one intrepid 
man, can travel 20 miles an hour and in the 
dark could creep close to a great ship and attack her 
with a torpedo. A large, swift ocean liner could 
carry twenty or thirty of these little auto-boats and 
make great havoc— in the night or in a fog. 

Experts are speculating on the possibilities of 
these two new craft and conclude that no port would 



be secure against them— that four million dollar battle 
ships with hundreds of men aboard could be sunk 
almost instantly and without a sight of their enemy. 
Others still believe that air-motors will soon come 
into prominence and be used in dropping explosives 
upon ships and cities and armies. 

We are to expect great things— shortly. The 
passions as well as the ingenuity of men will ere long 
wreck present civilization according to the Scriptures. 
We recall our Lord's prophecy of the days now near 
at hand, "Except those days were shortened there 
should no flesh be saved." But, for the elect's sake, 
they shall be shortened;— the "elect," Head and body, 
will assume the Kingdom control at the right time 
to stay the awful anarchy which will follow the great 
war. 

The prospects for the immediate future are conceded 
on all sides to be more favorable for peace, 
because of the recent amicable settlement by Great 
Britain and France of differences between them which 
have long been a source of friction. The large navies 
of these two nations far outweigh all the combined 
navy power of the world. 

THE ESSENTIAL UNITY OF ALL RELIGIONS. 



Rev. R. Heber Newton, D.D., of New York City 
(Episcopalian), in a recent article in The North American 
Review, proves to his own satisfaction, and doubtless 
to the satisfaction of many of his readers, that 
all the religions of the world are really one;— that 
they differ merely in proportion to their degrees of 
evolution. This is the view of "higher critics" and 

R3365 : page 148 

Evolutionists the world over. It ignores and laughs 
to scorn the Bible teaching of Adam, Eve and the 
fall (Rom. 5:12 and 1:21-28). It has no place for 
Jesus except as a great teacher like unto Confucius, 
Moses, Darwin, Spencer, and others. His work as 
Redeemer— as the sacrifice for man's sins, by which 
alone reconciliation to God was possible— it entirely 
discredits, but ignores because a few "good people" 
still so believe. 

Doctor Newton likens the religion of the world 
to a great tree with many branches and sub-branches. 
Buddhism is a branch, Brahminism is another, Confucianism 
is another, Mohammedanism is another, 
Christianity is another— its various shoots and smaller 
branches representing the various sects and denominations 
of Catholicism and Protestantism. 

As usual, the wisdom of this world misses the 
mark it thinks it hits. It is Devildom that the Doctor 



sees as a tree with these many branches. In every 
branch it has a "form of godliness" to deceive men— 
to satisfy the craving originally a part of man's nature 
when he was in the image of God— a craving which 
since persists notwithstanding the fall, though now 
through the blinding influences of Satan deteriorated 
into superstition and formality. Let us ask the 
Apostle Paul's inspired judgment on the subject. He 
tells us respecting these heathen worshipers that they 
worship devils and not God. See his testimony in 
I Cor. 10:20,21; I Tim. 4:1. 

When the Apostle would use a tree to illustrate 
the Church, he pictured a very different tree and 
very different branches. This inspired account is 
found in Rom. 11. There his olive-tree represents 
not all nations, but the one nation of Israel, each Jew 
a branch, drawing strength and vitality from the root, 
namely the oath-bound covenant made with Abraham 
and his seed. The Apostle shows plainly that no 
other tree is recognized in the divine plan, and tells us 
that when the Jews rejected Jesus all the rejectors 
were broken off from the relationship the tree represented, 
and that only believers in Jesus were privileged 
to be engrafted to take the places of the broken-off 
branches, as members of the spiritual seed of Abraham. 
-Gal. 3:29. 

Our position as Gentiles he distinctly pictures as 
"children of wrath even as others"— strangers and 
aliens and foreigners— without God and having no hope 
in the world. (Eph. 2:3,19,12.) How different 
the view of this modern Divinity Doctor from that of 
the great Apostle to the Gentiles! Mark the agreement 
of the Apostle John's testimony. He says of 
the Christian believers and all the world outside,— 
"We know that we are of God, and the whole world 
lieth in the Wicked One." (I John 5:19.) This reminds 
us of our Lord's words to some of the nominal 
Israelites: "Ye are of your Father the devil." 
(John 8:44.) Doctor Newton says:— 

"Religion develops the same great institutions in 
different lands and ages which the varying religions 
of man vary indefinitely. 

"The Church, spelled with a capital C, was an 
institution of Chaldea, India and Egypt, millenniums 
ago, as it is of Italy and England and America 
today. The Buddhist felt toward his 'order' much 
as the Romanist feels toward his church. A sacred 
ministry, a class of men set apart for the divine offices 
of religion, would have been found of old in Babylon 
and Thebes, as it is found now in Rome and London. 
The pagan temple was the Christian basilica and 
cathedral, baptized with another name. The altar 

R3366 : page 148 

stood in the sacred spot of the heathen temple, as it 



stands in the holy place of the Christian minister. 
Monasticism developed in the East long before it 
arose in the West. Monks and nuns and hermits 
would have been found along the Nile valley ages before 
Christendom poured its host of sad souled ascetics 
up the sacred river, peopling the hills for thousands 
of miles. Good Father Hue was utterly astonished 
to find in the Far East tonsured priests bowing before 
splendid altars, while acolytes swung the fragrant 
censers by their side. His naif explanation was, that 
the devil had counterfeited in advance the mysteries 
of true religion, in order that the elect might be deceived 
into perdition. A less heroic solution of the 
problem finds in these resemblances hints of the oneness 
of religion, generating the same sacred institutions 
among different religions." 

"Good Father Hue," in recognizing the similarity 
between the Catholic and the heathen ceremonies, 
was not astray in attributing the heathen ceremonies 
to Satan's instigation. He should have gone farther 
and have realized that he and his associates had likewise 
fallen into the "snares" and "wiles" of the 
adversary. 

Doctor Newton proceeds to prove that all religions 
are shown to be from one source because related 
in worship. We agree that all world-religions are of 
one spirit— the spirit of "the prince of this world." 
But the true Church, "whose names are written in 
heaven," is in all but a "little flock,"— not of the 
world, but separate from it. "I have chosen you out 
of the world." Of the world's worships the Doctor 
says: 

"The sacred symbolisms through which art ministers 
to worship meet us in the temples of paganism 
as in the churches of Christendom. The circle, the 
triangle, and the trefoil were graven by pagan chisels 
on the walls of the sacred buildings reared by religions 
which thought of themselves only as aliens and foes 
one to the other, for the unity of God, signed by the 
circle, and the triunity, the oneness in variety, of 
God, signed by the triangle and the trefoil, were 
truths known to no one religion alone, shared by all 
great religions in the same stage of evolution." 

R3366 : page 149 

The beliefs of men, though seemingly wide apart, 
Dr. Newton finds to be substantially one: 

"All great religions pass through one general 
course of evolution. In the same stages of development, 
all alike will bring forth, as the same institutions 
and worships, so also the same beliefs. Arrange 
these different religions synchronously, in respect to 
their evolution, and the same ideas will be found in 
all, more or less modified. As they grow, they grow 
together; over all differences of environment and 



heredity, the forces of the common life of man asserting 
the oneness which exists under black skins and 
yellow, red skins and white. In their higher reaches 
they strain toward each other. The flowering of all 
beliefs is in one faith— all religions seeding down one 
religion. So, beneath the variant and discordant beliefs 
of the present the germs of the future universal 
religion can even now be traced. 

Coming to the contrast of the Christian's life 
with the life of the heathen, Doctor Newton says: 

"Goodness knows no native soil. Virtue is at 
home in every land. The Ten Commandments form 
the law of Egypt and of Persia as of Christendom. 
The Golden Rule proves the rule of Hindu and Chinaman, 
as the Christian. It waited not for Jesus to reveal 
it. The spirit of the Christ had already revealed 
it through Jewish Hillel and Chinese Confucius, and 
great spirits of well nigh every land. The Beatitudes 
exigently call upon the Buddhist as upon the Christian, 
'Sursum corda.' Saints are of blood kin the world 
over. There is nothing alien to the truly devout 
Christian in the devoutness of the Hindu Guru, or of 
the yellow-robed saint of Japan or of the mystic 
worshiper among the Iranian Mountains. When the 
soul of man fronts the infinite and eternal Spirit, beneath 
the bo-tree of India or amid the rugged fastnesses 
of Tibet or in the cloisters of the Christian 
abbey, it is one and the same God who is seen. Wherever 
we overhear the communings of a soul with God, 
we hear in our own tongue. In the presence of the 
man of the spirit, be his name what it may, we know 
that he is of our family and household of God." 

Could evidence be more clear than the foregoing 
to prove that the Doctor does not know what constitutes 
a Christian— that he does not know that, according 
to Christianity as taught in the Bible, acceptance of 
God rests not upon perfection of life, for "there is 
none righteous, no not one"? (Rom. 3:10.) Its 
teaching is not, either, that none are justified by 
doing the best they can, but that none are justified except 
by faith in the Son of God— "faith in his blood" 
—our ransom-sacrifice. If these, justified by their 
faith, do the best they can, such obediences and efforts 
are acceptable to God as though they were perfect.— 
Phil. 3:9; Rom. 4:7,8; 8:4. 



R3366 : page 149 

VOLUNTEER WORK, 1904. 

THE Free Volunteer Tract Distribution reached 
larger proportions last year than ever before: 
more friends than ever engaged in the service 
and the quantity circulated was greater. This year 



bids fair to see the work carried forward with the 
same zeal and possibly to a still greater extent— 
though at some points seemingly no more would be 
possible. For instance, in Allegheny, Pittsburg and 
suburbs 1 12,000 tracts were placed in as many houses 
—practically every house was reached. 

We urge cooperation,— that each little church 
unitedly take charge of its own district, elect a Captain 
for supervision and Lieutenants for sub-districts, 
and that all who can shall volunteer and serve under 
such beneficial regulations. A few of the Captains sent 
us reports at the close of last year's campaign, in November, 
showing the number of tracts distributed and 
giving the names of all participating. We request 
that all Captains follow this course this year. 

As for the method this year: We urge that the 
careful house-distribution be continued, except in 
neighborhoods where there are many foreigners or 
Catholics, where it would best be done near (but not 
at) the churches, as their congregations are dismissed. 
The house-to-house circulation has reached 
some who do not attend public worship. Many good, 
moral people are becoming so confused on religious 
subjects that they attend no services. 



R3366 : page 149 

"CHOOSE YE THIS DAY." 

-MARK 15:1-15.~JUNE5.~ 

Golden Text:— "Then said Pilate to the chief priests and 
to the people, I find no fault in this man."— Luke 23:4. 

HOW MUCH depends upon our proper decision of 

the questions of life as they come before us day 

by day is well illustrated in this lesson. When 

our Lord and the eleven apostles left the upper room 

for the garden of Gethsemane, Judas— who earlier in the 

evening had reached a decision— had left their company 

to conspire with the chief priests, etc., and to guide 

their followers and servants to where Jesus could be 

apprehended quietly in the night, without the knowledge 

of the multitude in the city at that time for the 

Passover occasion. For the friends of Jesus, it was anticipated, 

might arouse a commotion amongst the throng 

of people, which might make the religious rulers of the 

Jews appear to be seditious, the Romans always being 

very much alert at such times for the suppression of 

any indications of revolt against the Roman authority. 

Judas doubtless had already conferred with the chief 

priests, and was probably present at the Passover Supper, 

R3366 : page 150 



partly for the purpose of learning the direction 
which Jesus and the others would take after the Supper. 
Our Lord's words to him, "What thou doest do quickly," 
seemed to imply that the matter was already arranged, 
and that Jesus by supernatural power was aware of it. 
That was the moment of final decision for Judas. He 
was a money lover, and decided to sell his Lord for 
money. Perhaps indeed he surmised that Jesus could 
deliver himself, and possibly he thought to gain the 
money without our Lord being injured; but in any 
event it shows a baseness of character and willingness 
to do evil for selfish reasons that remind us very much 
of the Prophet Balaam, who so greatly desired Balek's 
rewards of iniquity. 

BARTERING THE TRUTH FOR POTTAGE. 

This matter of selling the Lord for money cannot 
be practised today in the same manner in which Judas 
practised it, yet we believe there is somewhat of the 
same ignoble spirit manifested by some in our day. It 
perhaps does not go to the same extent, but it is of the 
same kind, and who knows but that under favorable 
conditions it might be willing to go to the same length? 
We refer to some who are willing to sell the Truth for 
financial profit, for social advantage, for money; and 
others willing to sell the members of the Lord's body as 
Judas sold the Head, for earthly advantage, to deliver 
one another up to evil, to assist in bringing evil, tribulation, 
adversity, reproaches, etc., upon the members of 
the body of Christ. Yet with each of these, as with 
Judas, there was a time when they were perfectly innocent 

R3367 : page 150 

of such base ingratitude and wicked designs; 
there was a time when neither self-love, nor money 
love, nor any other consideration would have moved 
them to do injury to members of the anointed body. 
Let us beware of the little things which, like a switch 
upon a railway, turn a train into an entirely different 
track, and may let us off far from the goal we at first 
desired to reach. We cannot be too careful in the way 
we meet the trials and testings of character which come 
to us daily, and whose determination means so much to 
us respecting the present and the future life. 

Our Lord, as he went with his disciples from the 
upper room and crossed the brook Cedron to the Mount 
of Olives, to the garden of Gethsemane, was likewise 
entering— a trial. His trial was from the opposite 
standpoint to that of Judas; his hour was fully determined, 
his consecration was completed, he wavered not 
in respect to the work he had come into the world to 
accomplish, he had no thought of anything else than 
dying for our sins. But as he stood upon the brink of 



death and realized that in a few hours the whole matter 
of his consecration, his "baptism into death," would 
be "finished," two matters presented themselves forcefully 
to his attention. One was that he perceived clearly 
that his arraignment would take place before the Roman 
tribunal— that his death would be according to the 
Roman form, by crucifixion— that, in order to secure 
his condemnation by the Roman government, the chief 
priests and scribes, his enemies, would misrepresent his 
character and teachings, and that his record before the 
world would stand as that of a blasphemer against God 
and an evil worker amongst men. 

We have no doubt that there are characters in the 
world who would measurably gloat over an opportunity 
to suffer as outlaws and desperadoes; they would feel 
themselves more or less heroes, and would be regarded 
more or less as heroes amongst their own class, similarly 
depraved in mind. But for those of more refined 
temperament— for the upright and honorable and pure 
in design— to pass through the same experiences would 
be a terrible ordeal. We may well imagine that our dear 
Redeemer, perfect, and with sentiments not in the 
slightest degree degraded, would feel the shame and ignominy 
of his position in such circumstances more than 
any of us could do. It was this shame, this reproach 
of being executed as a blasphemer against God and an 
injurious person amongst men, that we believe our Lord 
referred to as the cup which he prayed might, if possible, 
pass from him, saying at the same time, "Nevertheless, 
not my will but thine be done." 

"OF THE PEOPLE THERE WAS NONE WITH HIM." 

That sad hour in Gethsemane's garden, his disciples 
asleep, unable to appreciate the situation as he 
did, was the most trying hour of our dear Redeemer's 
experience. Added to the cup of grief and shame and 
ignominy came the thought that it is written in the 
Law, "Cursed is every one who hangeth on a tree," and 
thus he would be held up and marked amongst all 
the people of God as being accursed. A further thought 
was: "Is it possible that I have failed to meet the entire 
demand of the Law perfectly? Is it possible that I 
have failed in some little particular, and that thus the 
curse of the Law of God is to rest upon me, and that 
I shall lose life entirely after having striven to do the 
will of the Father and the fulfilment of perfect manhood 
under the divine Law?" 

The strain upon the nervous system became so intense 
as to produce a bloody sweat, a form of illness 
very rare indeed and yet not unknown to medical men. 
This was the greatest agony of all. If he had failed in 
the slightest degree he had no future, but all of his 
bright prospects of returning to the Father's love and 
favor and heavenly conditions by a resurrection would 
all be vitiated. The Apostle refers to this saying, how 



in the days of his flesh he offered up strong cryings and 
prayers unto him who was able to save him from [out of] 
death, and who was heard in that he feared. (Heb. 5:7.) 
He was heard in respect to that he feared: he was delivered 
from death by a resurrection. More than that, 
he was delivered from the fear of death, from all doubt 

R3367 :page 151 

as respected his faithfulness to the Father's will and his 
acceptance of the Father down to that very moment. 
An angel, a heavenly messenger, appeared and strengthened 
him, comforting him and assuring him of the Father's 
love and care, and that he was well pleasing in his 
sight. Such an assurance to the loyal heart of Jesus 
was all that was necessary. He could go through any 
experience courageously while confident that the Father 
was well pleased with his course, and that the result 
would be his reattainment of the glories he had left 
when he came into the world to be our Redeemer, and 
the attainment also of all the other joys set before him 
in the Father's promises. Here was a trial upon a great 
heart that resulted in great blessing to himself as well 
as to others. The result of his trial was the peace, joy 
and confidence which, during that night and the next 
day, kept him the most calm of all, even to his dying 
moment, and which, as the Apostle declares, led to his 
glorification in the resurrection, and which eventually 
shall bring blessings to every member of the human 
family in the lifting of the curse, the right to lift which 
was secured by his faithfulness even unto death. 

BETRAYED BY A PROFESSED FRIEND. 

Presently Judas arrived on the scene with a company 
of the high priest's servants— not followers in the 
ordinary sense of the term, but court followers, resembling 
more the police of the present time. Some of them 
carried swords and some carried clubs, as our Lord's 
language to them indicates. Peter and another of the 
apostles had swords with them— a not unusual matter 
in those times, though unusual for the apostles, as the 
context shows. They doubtless had the swords with 
them to demonstrate that our Lord was not taken contrary 
to his own will. He had with him eleven able-bodied 
men, willing to lay down their lives at his command 
in his defence. One of these, Peter, drew his 
sword and smote off the ear of the high priest's servant, 
and doubtless the defence would have been carried on 
vigorously if our Lord had said the word, or rather had 
he not interfered by intimating to Peter that what he 
had done was enough. He bade him put up his sword 
—he was not to battle for his Lord with carnal weapons 
—and meantime healed the wounded ear. Our Lord, 
in surrendering himself, stipulated that his apostles 
were not included in the arrest. 



Thus awakened, surprised, dismissed by the Lord, 
his disciples saw him taken from them, and were bewildered 
and confounded, notwithstanding our Lord's 
words to them on several occasions previously, intimating 
that some such calamity might be expected. It was 
a trial to them at the time, as the Master had already 
intimated, saying, "Watch and pray, lest ye enter into 
temptation." They had not sufficiently appreciated 
his words, had slept while the trial hour was coming on, 
and were, therefore, the less prepared for it. 

Our Lord, his hands bound, was led away to Annas 
and Caiaphas. Although it was night time, about one 
o'clock, some of the chief officers of the Jews and the 
Sanhedrin had gathered, being informed that the arrest 
would take place that night, that one of his disciples 
would pilot the officers to take him, and the matter was 
urgent, so that his death could take place as quickly as 
possible on the next day, before the people in general 
learned about the matter and before the Passover week 
would begin. It was not lawful to try a man for any 
capital offence between sundown and sunrise, and hence 
this trial was in one sense an informal one— it would 
be required to be ratified by the Sanhedrin after sunrise. 
They were willing, however, to come as near as 
possible to breaking the Law that thus they might accomplish 
their purposes. 

THE VILE CHARGE OF BLASPHEMY. 

As he stood before the high priest, and as his enemies 
brought witnesses and the trial progressed, our 
Lord may be said to have made no defence; it would 
have been useless anyway, as they were intent on finding 
a charge of some kind— they had murder in their 
hearts. The charge they sought to establish was blasphemy, 
one of the few charges the penalty of which 
under the Law was death, and it was his death they 
wanted. The blasphemy against God was declared to 
be proven in that he claimed to be the son of God, and 
blasphemy against the Temple was claimed to be proven 
in that some had heard him say that if the Temple were 
destroyed he could rear it again in three days. A decision 
was reached, but nothing could be done until day 
light. Meantime the petty officers of the court spat 
upon the Lord, blindfolded him, and struck him, saying, 
"Prophesy, now, who is he that smote thee?" and 
thus the weary hours passed till daybreak. The Jews 
thought it a trial of the Lord, but his trial was all in 
the past. It was the trial of their high priests, of the 
court officers and of the members of the Sanhedrin and 
of the Jewish nation. It was a trial of whether they 
loved truth or a falsehood, righteousness or unrighteousness. 
They decided for unrighteousness. 

Meantime the Apostle Peter was having a great 
trial, too. He had gained access to the outer room of 
the court and could probably hear or see something 



from where he stood and warmed himself at the fire. 

The first instinct of nature, self-preservation, overpowered 

him. It flashed upon him that if he were recognized 

as one of Jesus' subordinates he might be treated 

in the same manner as the Master, and in his desire to 

avoid the troubles that had come upon Jesus he denied 

that he knew him, and on a second occasion of the 

same kind he even swore that he did not know him. 

Poor Peter! It was a time of severe trial, and, alas 

he failed. How he might have gloried afterwards if he 

had suffered something for Christ's sake and for his 

R3367 : page 152 

acknowledgment of being his follower! But had he done 
so, all of the Lord's followers since would have lost a 
very valuable lesson conveyed to us in Peter's 
experiences. 

Peter's weakness on this occasion, afterwards so 
bitterly lamented and acknowledged and forgiven, has 
in some respects been a great blessing to all of the 

R3368 : page 152 

Lord's followers as they found that they, too, had weaknesses, 

and that sometimes they were overtaken in a 

fault as was Peter. They have learned from Peter to 

weep bitterly for these shortcomings, and have not been 

utterly cast down when they have found that Peter was 

received again by the Lord and heartily forgiven, and 

that the lesson thus learned made a deep impression on 

his life and resulted evidently in his favor. It is related 

of Peter that ever after this he arose every morning at 

cock crowing, made a fresh remembrance before the 

Lord of his weakness on that occasion, and accepted 

divine forgiveness. It was a testing time to Peter, and 

so similarly testing times come to all of us. Let us see 

to it that under no circumstances shall we ever deny 

our Lord. More than this, let us remember that the 

Lord places himself and his Word and his brethren on 

a par, and assures us that those who deny his Truth 

deny him, and those who deny his Word of prophecy 

are thus denying him. 

TREASON AGAINST ROME. 

With sunrise the Sanhedrin met officially, and, 
accepting the testimony of the high priest, that he had 
examined witnesses and that it had been proven that 
Jesus had blasphemed God and the Temple, the verdict 
was reached that he should die. Then, as related in our 
lesson, they held a private consultation respecting how 
they should present the matter before Pilate, the Roman 
governor. They well knew that he would pay no attention 
whatever to their charges of blasphemy and would 
tell them that was not a crime under the Roman law. 



They determined that the charge against our Lord before 

Pilate should be treason against the Roman government. 

In support of this charge of treason they said 

that he declared there was another king besides Caesar, 

namely, himself, the Messiah; and to seemingly corroborate 

this they declared falsely that he had forbidden 

to pay taxes to Caesar's government, whereas when they 

tried to catch him on this very subject two days before 

he had answered to the contrary, "Render to Caesar the 

things that are Caesar's, and to God the things that are 

God's." Moreover, he had paid taxes himself, Peter being 

sent for the fish to pay the tax for them both. But 

this false allegation would seemingly prove the truth 

of the original charge of treason. 

Now Pilate's time had come for trial. He stood as 
judge, and the principles of right and wrong, truth and 
untruth, righteousness and unrighteousness, in this case 
were for him to determine. What a wonderful chance 
he had! Suppose he had refused to connive at the malice 
of the high priest when he recognized that it was "for 
envy they had delivered him." Suppose that Pilate had 
dismissed the high priest and Sanhedrin and the multitude 
and had set Jesus free, and had cautioned them 
that if any of them did him injury they would be answerable 
with their lives! What a noble picture it would 
have been before the eyes of history! But, instead, his 
course and reputation have been anything but commendable 
and admirable. Nevertheless, while recognizing that 
he thus had a test and that he failed to take the noble 
part, we are far from sharing with the majority in their 
very ignominious view of this governor. 

We are to remember that Pilate was neither a Jew 
nor a Christian, but a heathen man— without God and 
having no hope in the world. We are to remember that 
he did not believe in the Jews' religion, whatever he may 
have believed. He did not believe in Jesus, nor had he 
any respect for the Messianic promises. He was filling 
the office of governor as the representative of Caesar's 
government at Rome. He had his own pleasures and 
self-gratifications distinct from the Jews and their festivals, 
etc., for which he cared nothing. He was amenable 
not to our God, for he knew him not, but merely to 
Caesar, and Caesar expected nothing of him except that 
he would preserve the peace and quiet of the city and 
maintain the dignity and authority of Rome. Rome 
cared not if one or ten or hundreds of innocent persons 
were put to death, if only the peace of the country were 
maintained. It was, therefore, Pilate's first duty as 
Roman governor to keep the peace in Jerusalem. 

ART THOU THE KING OF THE JEWS? 

From this standpoint we can say that Pilate's 
course was noble and just— though not the noble and 
just one which we would have preferred for him. Pilate 
did not readily accept the charges of the Pharisees: he 



knew them to be hypocritical, and really we may here say 
that the worst wickedness in the world at any time, at 
every time, in its history has been that form of wickedness 
which parades under the cloak of religion, which 
does evil in the name of that which is right, true, good. 
Pilate asked for specifications respecting the treason, and 
this seems to have surprised the chief priests, who presumed 
that their word would be taken on that subject 
without proof. If they thought a Jew had been worthy of 
death for treason then Pilate should certainly so suspect 
and so believe, for they were not supposed to wish the 
destruction of any fellow-Jew on such a charge. Pilate 
looked at Jesus and saw in him no criminal appearance, 
saw that he did not look at all like one who would 
become a leader of sedition; that, instead, meekness, 
gentleness, patience, long suffering, love, were marks of 
his features. Pilate inquired of Jesus respecting this 
charge, "Art thou the king of the Jews?" Our Lord's 
answer was not quite equivalent to yes, and yet it intimated 

R3368 : page 153 

that he did not wish to dispute the charge. To 
have attempted to explain the Kingdom of God under 
such circumstances would have been improper, for none 
there were prepared to hear and appreciate or understand; 
to have done so would have been in conflict with 
our Lord's own instruction on the subject, not to cast 
pearls before swine. Those present were not prepared 
to understand that the Kingdom would come a spirit 
Kingdom, that it would have earthly representatives, 
etc. 

Meantime the chief priests accused him fiercely, 
Jesus saying nothing— "He was led as a lamb to the 
slaughter, and as a sheep before her shearer is dumb, so 
he opened not his mouth." He was not there to defend 
himself, nor to protest against his execution. On the 
contrary, he was there to sacrifice his life, to lay it down, 
to permit it to be taken from him without resistance. 
Pilate himself marveled that anyone could be so indifferent 
to the results of his trial. All this, however, 
proved the more conclusively that there was nothing 
dangerous to the interests of Rome in connection with 
our Lord's life or teachings: it all disproved what the 
chief priests were charging, and demonstrated that they 
had some ulterior malevolent spirit of opposition to 
Jesus. 

PREFERRING BARABBAS TO JESUS. 

There had been a real sedition, a genuine movement 
against the authority of Rome, at a previous 
time, and Barabbas and others had been made prisoners 
on account of it. Some one in the crowd started a 
call on the governor to do as was his custom every year 
at this time— to release some prisoner as a matter of 



clemency and favor. Soon the whole mob took it up, 
and Pilate inquired, "Shall I then release unto you the 
king of the Jews?"— Jesus. His thought evidently was 
to arouse in them to some extent an enthusiasm in favor 
of his liberation of Jesus, for we read that he perceived 
that it was the chief priests and not the multitudes 
that were against Jesus. He hoped to turn the 
rabble to the side of Jesus and to release him on their 
request. But the chief priests, who had accused Jesus, 
stirred up the multitude to request the release of Barabbas, 
the seditionist, the rioter. One wonders that 
they were not ashamed in the presence of even a heathen 
governor to manifest their perfidy in this manner 
—to accuse Jesus of being a traitor to Rome and asking 
to have him crucified and in the same breath to urge 
the release of one about whose rioting there was no 
question. 

Pilate evidently heard something said about Jesus' 
work being largely done in Galilee, and thought to be 
rid of the matter by turning the case over to Herod, 
the ruler of Galilee, who was present in Jerusalem at the 
time. He therefore sent Jesus bound to Herod, with 
the explanation that, as he was a Galilean, Pilate was 
pleased to acknowledge Herod and to submit the case to 
his adjudication. Really he was glad to be rid of the 
case, for he preferred not to put to death an innocent 
man, yet he perceived that the chief priests could make 
very violent charges against him if he refused to put to 
death one whom they charged with treason against the 
Roman government. At Rome such conduct would 
have the appearance of favoring rebellion; and if Pilate 
should reply that there was no danger of rebellion, that 
the man was merely a quiet, innocent man, they would 
have probably responded that he was entirely too particular 
anyway, that he should be prompt in the execution 
of anybody and everybody charged with the slightest 
degree with rebellion in word or act against the 
Roman power. Thus, no doubt, he would have lost 
his position and would have been degraded for the 
remainder of life. Pilate was in a very trying position. 

HEROD'S OPPORTUNITY AND FAILURE. 

The coming of Jesus to Herod meant a trial for 
Herod. How would he receive Jesus? What would be 
his conduct toward righteousness and truth and justice 
and purity and goodness? This is the same Herod who 
about a year and a half before had beheaded John the 
Baptist, and who, hearing of Jesus, had suggested that 
he might be a reincarnation of John. Herod, we are told, 
was glad to see Jesus and hoped to see him perform 
some miracle of which he had heard so much; but the 
Lord was absolutely silent before him, not a word had 
he to say before such a man. Such a course was probably 
the most striking rebuke he could have administered 
to Herod, and was entirely in line with the whole 



conduct of our Lord— his determination to do nothing 
that would hinder the accomplishment of that which he 
knew to be the divine purpose— his death that very 
day. 

Finding that Jesus would not even reply for him, 
nor perform any miracles for his entertainment, Herod 

R3369 : page 153 

suggested to his men of war that they robe him as a 
king and have some sport with him, as it seems was a 
custom of that time in respect to criminals— the soldiers 
were granted opportunity to give them mock homage 
and then to buffet them, etc., before they were executed. 
This done to Jesus he was returned to Pilate, Herod in 
turn expressing his appreciation of Pilate's course, but 
declining to interfere in Pilate's territory. From that 
time Pilate and Herod were friends, though previously 
they had been adversaries. 

"DO NOTHING AGAINST THIS JUST MAN." 

The case returning to Pilate, and the chief priests 
evidently fearing some slip of their plans, were very persistent 
in demanding the death of Jesus and in inciting 
the multitude to clamor for it. Some six times in all 
Pilate declared the innocence of Jesus, yet under the 
circumstances already narrated he hesitated to absolutely 
refuse the demand of the Jewish priests and multitude: 

R3369 : page 154 

especially did he feel the point of the argument 
made by the priests, "If thou let this man go, thou art 
not Caesar's friend," which meant, You are an enemy to 
Caesar and to the government of Rome. Pilate realized 
that such a course would not be understood by his superiors, 
and hence he tried every method to get the Jews 
satisfied in the matter. One step in this proceeding was 
to order that Jesus should be scourged. He hoped that 
the scourging would satisfy his adversaries' thirst for 
blood. Meantime Pilate's wife sent a message to him 
urging that he do nothing against this man, for that she 
had had a dream in the night to this effect. Under the 
circumstances Pilate evidently did everything that could 
be expected of a worldly man in the times and under 
the conditions in which he lived. The only exception 
to such a procedure that we could expect would be on 
the part of a Christian, or of some one who under Christian 
influence had gained a much more than ordinary 
love for justice, and willingness to sacrifice every interest 
in its behalf. 

It was in connection with his endeavor to free 
Jesus from those who sought his life that Pilate stood 
Jesus forth so that they might see him, exclaiming, 
"Behold the man!" The impression we get is that 



Pilate himself was struck with the quiet dignity of our 
Lord in his facial expression, in his composure under 
trying conditions. His words seem to mean, Look at 
the man you are talking about crucifying! Why, Jews, 
you have not such a man in all your land. I doubt if 
there is any man his equal anywhere! But it was all of 
no avail; the multitude had become excited and were 
clamoring for our Lord's blood. In the expressive symbolic 
language of the time, Pilate, before delivering 
Jesus for crucifixion, indicated that he was averse to the 
sentence they were compelling him to pronounce, and 
that wherever the responsibility lay he was not the 
guilty party. He did this by washing his hands with 
water in the presence of the people, exclaiming, "I am 
innocent of the blood of this just person."— Matt. 27:24. 

THE RESULT OF THESE TRIALS-RETRIBUTION. 

What a number of trials, testings and provings we 
have found in this lesson— and now let us briefly glance 
at the results. Judas, as a result of failure in his trial, 
died soon by his own hand. Pilate, the unwilling instrument 
of the condemnation and not one hundredth 
part as guilty as the Jews, shortly afterwards lost his 
commission as governor and in despondency committed 
suicide. Annas, the high priest, was subsequently 
dragged through the streets, scourged and murdered. 
The multitude who cried out, "Crucify him!" and who 
in answer to Pilate's declaration that he was innocent 
of the blood of Jesus, declared, "His blood be upon us 
and upon our children," experienced a baptism of blood 
not many years after when the entire city of Jerusalem 
was a scene of most horrible atrocities, which culminated 
in the utter destruction of their city with great loss 
of life, in the overflow of the entire Jewish polity in Palestine, 
and the scattering of the survivors amongst all 
nations and peoples. The curse they thus brought upon 
themselves still remains to some extent; his blood is 
still upon them, and from that day until the present 
time the Jews have suffered greatly; and although the 
divine disfavor has been passing from them as a nation 
since 1878, it will continue in some measure until nearly 
or quite 1914. The curse will be remitted because of 
its being forgiven through the grace of God in Christ. 

On the other hand, note the blessings which came 
to those whose testings were received in the proper 
manner, demonstrating their loyalty to the Lord. Our 
Lord Jesus was highly exalted, far above angels, principalities 
and powers and every name that is named— 
because faithful unto death, even the death of the cross. 
Peter the Apostle, although partially overtaken in a 
fault, nevertheless through repentance and bitter tears 
was accepted back again to the Lord's favor, profited 
by his sad experience, and became one of the noblest of 
the apostles, one of the most honored, and is yet to be 
honored in the Kingdom as joint-heir with his 



Redeemer. 

THINK NOT STRANGE YOUR FIERY TRIALS. 

We are not to expect similar trials, in all respects 
like those of our lesson, but we are to expect fiery trials, 
and we are to note that the results will be in accord 
with the manner in which we meet them. The lesson 
to us is that we should follow in the footsteps of Jesus 
and resolve to be faithful to our heavenly Father, to 
do his will at any cost, at any sacrifice of earthly interests 
—not grudgingly, but, as expressed prophetically of 
our Lord, "I delight to do thy will, O my God; thy 
Law is written in my heart." Another lesson is that if 
temporarily we should stumble in following the Master 
we must not be discouraged, but turn the failure and 
stumbling into a blessing by permitting it to bring us 
into closer relationship to the Lord and to make us 
more and more careful and more faithful in our walk 
with the Lord henceforth. 

Some one has said: "This scene has often been alleged 
as a self-condemnation of democracy. Vox populi, 
vox Dei (The voice of the people is the voice of God), 
its flatterers have said; but look yonder. When the 
multitude has to choose between Jesus and Barabbas, 
it chooses Barabbas. If this be so, the scene is equally 
decisive against aristocracy. Did the priests, scribes 
and nobles behave any better than the mob? It was 
by their advice that the mob chose Barabbas." This 
is a very wise and a very truthful suggestion. The 
voice of the people can be relied upon in some matters, 
and, on the whole, the republican form of government 
is probably the best of any in the world for civilized 
peoples under present conditions; but as respects religious 

R3369 : page 155 

things the voice of the people is far from being 
the voice of God. On the contrary, the Apostle declared, 
"The world by wisdom knows not God." It 
must not, therefore, prejudice our judgments to find 
the popular voice against us. What we seek for and 
listen for is the voice of the Lord through his Word. 
With this let us be satisfied as was our Redeemer, content 
whatever lot we see since it is our God who leadeth 
us. It is possible that the closing scenes of the 
Church's experience may in some respects resemble 
that of our dear Redeemer; it is possible that some of 
the Lord's people may be branded as blasphemers and 
hailed before governments on the charges of preaching 
Christ as another King. Should it ever come to such 
a pass, we should have no doubt whatever respecting 
our position. It should be that of full confidence in 
the Lord, and through faithfulness to him, to his Word, 
and to all the brethren. Let us leave the outcome of 
these trials and testings in the hands of the Lord, assured 



by his Word that he will make these afflictions to 
work out for us a far more exceeding and eternal weight 
of glory. 



R3369 : page 155 

HOW AND WHY CHRIST WAS CRUCIFIED. 

--MARK 15:22-39.-JUNE 12.- 

Golden Text:— "Christ died for our sins 
according to the Scriptures."— I Cor. 15:3. 

VICTOR HUGO wrote, "Waterloo is the change of 

form of the universe." Another amends the 

statement thus, "Calvary is the change of form 

of the universe." The story of our Lord's crucifixion 

is related with a pathos which stirs our souls with sympathy, 

and begets in us a responsive love from the moment 

we truly recognize the purport of our Golden 

Text. Others have died just as cruelly, and a few have 

gone to death voluntarily and composedly. The Lord's 

death, however, was the first one in which the victim 

was entirely innocent, entirely unworthy of the death 

sentence,— the only one, therefore, in whose case the 

matter of dying was wholly voluntary, the only one 

who needed not to die had he not so willed. 

CROSS-BEARING EXEMPLIFIED. 

The evangelists relate the incidents of the crucifixion 
with very slight variations, and the whole matter is 
before us when we group together the various statements, 
each of which is true. From Pilate's Judgment 
Hall, after the governor had consented to Jesus' death 
because unable to stem the tide of Jewish prejudice 
and vociferous demands, the centurion, with three Roman 
soldiers, took Jesus to Calvary to crucify him. As 
was the custom, the culprit— in this case the victim- 
bore his own cross, which must necessarily have been a 
terrible task. Our Lord apparently was overcome by 
the weight of the cross, when a countryman named 
Simon coming along was forced to assist him. The 
statement of Luke 23:26 implies that Simon did not 
carry the cross entirely, but merely assisted Jesus, carrying 
the hinder part of it, which usually dragged. 

We have often wondered, Where were Peter and 
John and James that they did not see the Master's burden 

R3370 : page 155 

and run to proffer assistance? If disposed to envy 
Simon his privilege of assisting the Master in the bearing 
of the cross, let us reflect that many of the Lord's 



brethren are daily bearing symbolic crosses, and that it 
is our privilege to assist them, and that the Lord agrees 
to reckon any service done to his faithful followers as 
though it were rendered to his own person. Yet if no 
brother sees the privilege of giving a helping hand let 
not the burdened ones lose heart. The Lord knoweth 
the need and will send the aid necessary, even though 
it be impressed, and that because of the sympathy of 
the worldly— as in Jesus' case, when the soldiers provided 
the aid. As the wooden cross was not our Lord's 
heaviest burden, so, too, his followers have crosses which 
the world sees not, but which the "brethren" should 
understand. "Bear ye one another's burdens and thus 
fulfil the law of Christ." 

Sympathetic Jewish women walked near, weeping. 
Quite probably these included Mary, our Lord's mother, 
Martha and Mary of Bethany, and Mary Magdalene. 
The particulars are not given us, but the sympathy of 
woman is markedly testified to. Our Lord was full of 
composure, though weak and fainting, not only because 
of the expenditure of his vitality previously in the healing 
of the sick, etc., but additionally because he had been 
under a most terrible nervous strain throughout the 
entire night, without sleep or food. It was now nine 
o'clock of the day of his crucifixion, and he had wearily 
borne a share of the weight of his cross for about three-quarters 
of a mile, from Pilate's Judgment Hall to Calvary. 
Golgotha, the name usually given to this place 
by the people of the vicinity, signified "the place of a 
skull," because that particular slope of the hill very 
closely resembled a skull in shape and in color, dark 
crevices in the face of the rock corresponding to the 
eye sockets, nose cavity, etc. 

The offering of wine mingled with bitter myrrh, 
otherwise styled gall, was not an indignity as is usually 
supposed, but an act of kindness. A Women's Society 
for the Relief of the Suffering furnished sour wine with 
bitter narcotics with a view to deadening the sensibility 
to pain, and it was customary to provide this draught 
for all the poor unfortunates to reduce their terrible 
sufferings to a minimum. Our Lord tasted the wine, 
Matthew informs us, doing so probably to assure himself 

R3370 : page 156 

of what it was, or as a token of his appreciation of 
the kindness expressed by it. But he refused to drink 
of it, evidently preferring to experience the full measure 
of the pain and suffering which the Father's wisdom 
and love and justice had prepared for him— had permitted 
to come upon him as a test of the full measure of 
his loyalty and obedience. 

The crucifixion must have been a terrible ordeal. 
The cross was laid upon the ground and the victim 
stretched upon it, while the nails were driven through 
the feet and hands; and if possible a still more trying 



moment came when the cross, lifted by sturdy men, 

was allowed to drop into the socket prepared for it in 

the rock. Very properly the evangelist did not stop 

to detail or comment upon the extreme suffering experienced 

by the Lord, and very properly we may similarly 

leave the matter. Nevertheless, our hearts can 

but ache still when we think of what this part of the 

redemption price paid for our sins cost the One who 

bought us with his precious blood. He who grasps the 

situation clearly will be the more willing to suffer something 

for the Lord's sake and for his cause' sake— thus 

to testify in return his love and his appreciation of the 

great things done for him by the Son of God. Indeed 

we should esteem it a deprivation if not permitted to 

"suffer with him," for otherwise we could not hope to 

"reign with him." 

TWO PROPHECIES FULFILLED. 

It was the custom to count the personal property 
of an executed person the perquisites of the soldiers 
performing the execution, and in Jesus' case we read 
that, having divided his garments amongst them, his 
outer robe, his head dress, sandals and girdle— enough 
to give one piece to each— they assigned by lot "what 
each man should take." One piece remained, namely, 
his tunic or under garment, reaching from the neck to 
the feet, "woven throughout and seamless." This they 
could not divide advantageously, and hence "for his 
vesture they did cast lots."— Psa. 22:18; 
John 19:23,24. 

The crucifixion took place at the third hour, Jewish 
reckoning, or nine o'clock, our reckoning. Over his 
head was his accusation written in three languages— 
the Latin, the official or governmental language of 
Rome; in Greek, the classical language of that period; 
in Hebrew, the language of the Jews. The charge was 
that upon which the chief priests had laid special stress 
in their arraignment of Jesus, that he claimed to be the 
king of the Jews. Elsewhere we are informed that the 
prominent Jews objected to Pilate's inscription and 
endeavored to have it altered, but he refused, saying, 
"What I have written, I have written." The Jews 
would have written, "This is an impostor claiming to 
be the king of the Jews," but in the Lord's providences 
the true title was put above his head, "Jesus, the King 
of the Jews." Those of us who are not Jews have reason 
to rejoice that he is more than this— that by God's 
providence he is heir of the world and is surely to be 
the King of the world, and is already King of saints. 

How it happened that two robbers were awaiting 
execution at the same time is not stated in the account. 
We may presume, however, that they had been in custody 
for some time under sentence, and that the chief 
priests may have suggested their execution at the same 
time. Their thought may have been to detract from the 



injustice of their own course and to throw a measure of 

justice into the proceedings as a whole, or their object 

may have been to demean Jesus in making him a companion 

of outlaws. But whatever the circumstances 

the matter was foreseen by the Lord and foretold by 

the Prophet— "He was numbered with the transgressors." 

-Isa. 53:12. 

"WE DID ESTEEM HIM STRICKEN, SMITTEN OF GOD." 

Near the cross stood the Apostle John and Jesus' 
mother and others who loved him, and whose hearts 
were breaking with sympathy as they beheld his ignominy 
and suffering and were unable to fully appreciate 
the necessity for this, as we shall shortly see it. Some 
few idlers were standing by probably, while travelers 
were coming and going, because Golgotha was on a frequented 
route. Apparently many of these, who had 
heard much about Jesus and his miracles, were now satisfied 
that his claims were false, and that probably his 
miracles were deceptions wrought, as the Pharisees said, 
by the power of Beelzebub, the prince of devils. These 
reasoned from analogy that if the Lord had done the 
works ascribed to him by the power of God, as he 
claimed, he would not need to be at the mercy of his 
enemies, for it never occurred to them that any one 
would voluntarily lay down his life for his friend- 
neither did they have the slightest conception of the 
necessity or object of the Lord's death. 

A similar mistake is made by the world in respect 
to the Lord's followers. Those who have sorrows and 
trials and persecutions and poverty they esteem to be 
under divine disfavor. Thus it was prophesied of our 
Lord, but is true of his Church, his body as a whole— 
"We did esteem him stricken, smitten of God and 
afflicted," and we were ashamed of him. The world 
cannot discern, as we do, that God's favor toward the 
elect is manifested in letting them have those experiences 
necessary to their preparation for Kingdom 
honors. 

"NONE OF THE WICKED SHALL UNDERSTAND." 

Our Lord's statement of a few days before was remembered 
by some, but either misunderstood or deliberately 
falsified in their raillery. He had not spoken of 
destroying their Temple, but had said that if they destroyed 
the Temple it would be reared again within 
three days (an ti typical). The Temple construction had 

R3370 : page 157 

required about forty years, and our Lord's declaration 
they considered bombastic, and said, It will be much 
easier for him to show his power by coming down from 
the cross. The fact that he did not do so was esteemed 



an evidence of the falsity of all that he had previously 

said and done. To a sensitive mind, like that of our 

Lord, we can readily suppose that such a charge of falsification 

and misrepresentation would be a severe burden 

upon his heart; yet he bore it patiently. O, we are so 

glad that Jesus did not come down from the cross, and 

thus leave us in our sins— the whole world unredeemed! 

The chief priests and scribes pursued their victim 
to the cross— neglecting, doubtless, important matters 
in their eagerness to make sure that he did not escape 
them. They were more blameworthy than the common 
people, yet they sought to justify their course in the 
same manner. Strangely enough, they admitted that 
"he saved others;" and the fact that he did not save 
himself out of their grasp seems to have been to them 
conclusive evidence of the falsity of all of his claims 
as respected relationship to Jehovah God. They were 
satisfied that his blood should be upon them and upon 
their children. Poor men! they thought themselves 
wise, yet, as the Apostle Peter pointed out a few days 
subsequently, the whole matter was done in ignorance. 
Peter's words are, "I wot, brethren, that ye did it in 
ignorance, as did also your rulers." It is fortunate for 
these— yea, for the great majority of mankind— that the 
Lord our God is not the resentful One he is represented 
to be; that on the contrary he is "long suffering and 
of plenteous mercy." In full accord with this is the 
glorious prophecy that eventually those who crucified 
the Lord shall look upon him whom they pierced and 
mourn because of him, and that "the Lord will pour 
upon them the spirit of prayer and supplication and 
they shall mourn for him." 

WHEN REVILED HE REVILED NOT IN RETURN. 

The Apostle points out our Lord's patience under 
this reviling as an example to us. When he was reviled 
he reviled not in return. How many cutting things our 
Lord might truthfully have thrown back at his persecutors. 
The secret of his patience was expressed in his 

R3371 :page 157 

words to Pilate: "Thou couldst have no power over me 
at all except it were given thee of my Father." The 
same thought is expressed in the words: "The cup that 
my Father hath poured for me, shall I not drink it?" 
Likewise our ability to take reviling and persecution 
patiently and unresentfully will be in proportion as our 
consecration to the Lord is full and complete, and in 
proportion as we realize that "All the steps of the righteous 
are ordered of the Lord." 

One of those crucified with Jesus reviled him also— 
perhaps both, but probably only one— the other for a 
time keeping silent, but afterward speaking in defence of 
Jesus, as is related in another Gospel. The morning, 



which had opened very bright, became very cloudy, and 
the darkness from the sixth hour (12 o'clock noon) 
until the ninth hour (3 o'clock), when Jesus died, was 
quite noticeable. 

It was at the close of his experiences, at 3 P.M., 
that Jesus cried aloud with a strong voice, indicating 
considerable vitality still. His cry was, "My God, my 
God, why hast thou forsaken me?" Throughout the 
entire experience of the night and the morning, from 
the time he had the assurance, in the Garden of Gethsemane, 
that he was pleasing to the Father, our Lord 
was most cool and tranquil of mind. Why was it, then, 
that at the very close of his experiences he should have 
so dark a cloud, a shadow, between his heart and 
the Father? Why should the Father permit any cloud 
to come between on an occasion when his dear Son, well 
beloved, so much needed more than any other time the 
comfort and strength and sustenance of a clear appreciation 
of his love and favor? This we must answer later, 
when considering why our Lord was crucified. 

It was at this time that our Lord had said, "I 
thirst," and that a sponge fastened to a hyssop stock 
and saturated with sour wine (Jno. 19:29) was lifted to 
his lips. From it he sucked some refreshing moisture, 
for by this time under such conditions his wounds must 
have developed a raging fever in his blood. Then Jesus 
cried aloud again. What he said is not recorded in 
Mark's account, but Luke gives it as, "Father, into thy 
hands I commit my spirit"— my life. This indicated 
that his faith in the Lord was absolute and that the 
thing he chiefly thought of was life. He was laying 
down his life most loyally, most nobly, in accord with 
the Father's arrangement. The Father had promised 
him as a reward to raise him up from the dead: he 
trusted in this promise, and now in his dying breath he 
expressed his faith. 

"IT IS FINISHED." 

Various things are recorded as taking place at the 
moment of our Lord's death— an earthquake shook the 
ground in the neighborhood of the cross, and in the 
Temple at Jerusalem the great vail which separated between 
the Holy and Most Holy was torn, not from the 
bottom toward the top, as would be the expectation if 
it were the result of wear, but from the top to the bottom, 
as indicating that it was a manifestation of divine 
power. The vail or curtain is described as being sixty 
feet long and thirty feet wide, and its thickness about 
four inches. Josephus describes it as "of Babylonish 
texture, a wonderful stretch of white, scarlet and purple." 
The rending of this curtain represented symbolically 
the opening of the way between heaven itself 
and the heavenly condition of those in the world. 
Christ has opened to us a new and living way through 
the vail— that is to say, through the sacrifice of his 



flesh. True believers are represented as being now 

R3371 :page 158 

associated with Jesus as priests in the Holy, or outer 
apartment of the two. Here we have fellowship with 
God through the light of the golden candlestick, 
through the bread of the golden table, and through 
the incense that we are permitted to offer on the 
golden altar, and from this standpoint we can now 
by faith see beyond the vail— catch glimpses at least of 
the heavenly estate which God hath in reservation for 
them who love him, for the called ones according to his 
purpose, for the Christ, Head and body. 

WHY JESUS WAS CRUCIFIED. 

One of the most puzzling matters connected with 
Christianity in all minds, including the hypercritical of 
the Lord's professed followers, is why the sufferings and 
death of our Lord at Calvary were necessary. We answer 
that they were necessary because God made them 
necessary— because he so arranged his plan that they 
would be indispensable. That he could have devised 
another plan of salvation is beyond question, for the 
whole matter was in his hands, but that he did 
choose the best plan is equally indisputable. Whoever 
attempts to solve this question in his own mind or with 
the human philosophies of the natural mind will be sure 
to err. The only safe, proper course is to give heed to 
the wisdom that cometh from above respecting this 
matter. 

Hearkening to the voice of the Lord, we perceive 
that he knew the end from the beginning, and that his 
plan is designed to be a lesson respecting his attributes 
of justice, wisdom, love and power, not only to men but 
to angels, not only to the unholy, but to the holy. 
When the divine plan shall have been fully accomplished, 
all shall see the lengths and breadths and 
heights and depths of wisdom and love and justice and 
power exemplified in the divine arrangement. At the 
present time, however, only a few may see: "The secret 
of the Lord is with them that fear him; he has 
covenanted to show it unto them."— Psalm 25:14. 

With full knowledge that he could not retract his 
own sentence, God pronounced death to be the penalty 
for sin— knowing at the time that Adam would sin and 
that he and his entire family would come under the 
death sentence. To Adam and to all who understood 
the matter the case must have appeared hopeless, since, 
first, God could not revoke his sentence; and, second, 
the sentence deprived man of everything in depriving 
him of his life. It would not occur to man that God 
might have in his purpose a substitute: and even if it 
had occurred to him, looking about amongst his fellow 
men he could have found no one capable of serving as 



a substitute for Adam, because all were sinners through 
their inherited share in the results of the fall. It surely 
never would have occurred to man that God, looking 
down upon the fallen race of Adam, would have such 
pity for the transgressors of the law as to provide for 
them a way of escape from the penalty at such cost as 
was entailed. For God to provide a substitute for 
Adam meant the creation of another man, his equal 
in every particular, or the transfer of some holy being 
to a condition in nature similar to that of Adam before 
he fell. It would not have been supposable to man 
that Almighty God would be so considerate of the interests 
of his human creatures. Furthermore, they 
might have reasoned that for God to have created a 
man similar to Adam would have been merely to have 
duplicated the transgression; while for him to have 
transferred some glorious spirit being to human conditions 
would have appeared but a violation of justice— a 
punishment of a holy and obedient creature in the interest 
of unholy and sinful ones. 

But behold the wisdom of God, as well as his love 
and justice, manifested in the course arranged for. He 
would provide a ransom for Adam and thus for his race; 
he would provide a perfect man to be the Redeemer of 
the fallen one and those who lost life in him, yet he 
would do no injustice to any. Rather he would so arrange 
the plan that the one who should become man's 
redemption would himself be greatly advantaged by 
the sufferings and deprivations incidental to the work. 
No doubt had God offered the proposition in a general 
way to all of the heavenly hosts there would have been 
many ready and willing to render joyful obedience and 
to trust for whatever reward and blessing the Father 
might think best to give them; but he did not make 
the offer general— it was made to but one. 

"LO, I COME-TO DO THY WILL, O MY GOD." 

Amongst the heavenly hosts was the only begotten 
of the Father, he who in the beginning was called the 
Word and who was with the Father, and who himself 
was a God or a Mighty One, and who had been used of 
the Father as his instrument in the creation of all the 
angelic and human beings. To this one, highest of 
all, the Father would first make the proposition of the 
great sacrifice, the great test of faith in the Father's 
love and the Father's power— that he would restore him 
again when the work was finished, and that with added 
glory. True, the Only Begotten might have declined, 
and, so far as we know, without prejudice, in which 
event the offer or opportunity would have been given 
probably to the one next in honor and glory and power 
amongst the angels. But the Only Begotten did not 
decline, but joyfully accepted the offer of being a 
co-laborer with the Father on behalf of mankind. 
He carried out the project; he left the heavenly courts, 



laid aside the heavenly conditions, spirit body, etc., 
was transferred to the womb of Mary, and in due time 
was born a man amongst men, "the man Christ Jesus." 

At thirty years, the proper period under the Law, 
he made his full consecration unto death and symbolized 
it in baptism. For three and a half years the 

R3371 :page 159 

death was being accomplished by him, until at Calvary 

he cried, "It is finished." Thus his first great humbling 

of himself in becoming a man was a preparatory 

step, while his giving of himself as a sacrifice, as a substitute 

for Adam, covered a period of three and a half 

years, ending in his death on the cross. He finished 

there the work which the Father had given him to do 

so far as redeeming the world was concerned. His life 

was the ransom price for Adam's; and since the world 

had lost life through Adam, because inheriting his 

weaknesses, his imperfections, therefore justly, legally, 

actually, Christ's death not only redeemed Adam, but 

redeemed the world of mankind. It was because Adam 

as a sinner was cut off from fellowship with God that 

our dear Redeemer, as his substitute, was obliged to 

have a similar experience for a little season before he 

died. It was his hardest moment and called forth the 

cry, "My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken 

me?" 

In due time the Father's promise toward him was 
fulfilled in his resurrection from the dead, a spirit being; 

R3372 : page 159 

in due time he ascended up on high to appear in the 
presence of God on our behalf— to apply to each believer 
a share in the merit of his sacrifice. This work 
has progressed throughout this Gospel age, and every 
consecrated believer has been accepted in Christ; and, 
being accepted in him as a member of his body, these 
believers in turn have been privileged to present their 
bodies living sacrifices and thus to fill up the measure 
of Christ's sufferings. Soon the entire Atonement Day 
sacrificing will be finished, soon it will be accomplished, 
soon the promise will be fulfilled, "If we suffer with him 
we shall also reign with him: if we be dead with him we 
shall also live with him." From that time onward the 
redemptive work takes on a larger scope. As soon as 
the last members of the body of Christ shall have suffered 
with him he will apply the full payment to Justice 
on behalf of all the remainder of mankind not believers, 
and the penalty, the curse against the world, 
will thus be cancelled— not through faith, not merely 
for those who shall have exercised faith, but regardless 
of faith. 

THE RESULTS-THE GRACIOUS EFFECTS. 



Then will begin the work of uplifting the world— 
those who have not yet gone into the tomb, and gradually 
those who already have gone down into the prison-house 
of death. The prison doors shall be opened, all 
the prisoners shall show themselves; as the Prophet 
declared, they will all come forth to trial. (Isa. 61:1.) 
Not to a new trial on account of the first offence by 
Adam, neither to a trial on account of things done 
while more or less affected by the penalty upon Adam, 
but to a new trial for life on their own responsibility. 
The responsibility of each shall be according to the 
measure of character and strength which he possesses,— 
it will be a righteous judgment that will make full allowance 
for every inherited imperfection and weakness, 
and that will expect from the world only that which 
mankind will be able to render. 

The result will be an uplift of the world of mankind, 
an opportunity for each to come back gradually 
to all that was lost in Eden by Father Adam's disobedience, 
—including Paradise restored. The obedient of 
heart shall then be accounted worthy of the blessing of 
the Lord, to continue with them eternally. They shall 
have everlasting life, all contrary minded being cut off 
in the Second Death. 

Thus seen the death of our Lord Jesus was necessary 
for man's release from the death sentence. Christ 
died for our sins, as our Golden Text expresses it. He 
died in order that, by paying our penalty of death, God 
might be just and yet the justifier of him that believeth 
in Jesus, and release him from the death sentence. 
Our Lord's death was necessary for another reason also, 
as the Apostle explains: it is expedient that he who 
shall judge the world during the Millennial age shall 
have full ability to sympathize with the world of mankind 
who will then be on trial— one able and willing 
to succor those beset by sin and weakness and to have 
compassion on them, having been tempted in all points 
like as we are, yet without sin. Thus not only the 
Lord Jesus, the great King and Judge of that time, but 
also the Church— his joint-heirs in the judgeship and 
in the Royal Priesthood— will be able to sympathize 
with those whom they will be judging and trying, sustaining, 
assisting and uplifting. 

We perceive, then, that the plan which God adopted 
is in the broadest sense of the word the wisest and 
best imaginable, and that under this plan nothing else 
than death was possible in order to man's redemption 
from the sentence of death, and that nothing else than 
severe trials were appropriate for the one who would 
be intrusted with so high a dignity, honor, responsibility, 
as that which the Father had apportioned to the 
Christ. We see also that it behooved the Father, in 
bringing the Church to glory and subsequently testing 
the world, to prove the Captain of the salvation perfect 
through suffering; that he who was chief of the 



universe next to the Father, and whom he purposed to 
make so much greater still as to give him a participation 
in the divine nature, glory and honor— he might 
reasonably be expected to demonstrate before every 
creature his absolute loyalty to the Father; and this he 
did in the days of his flesh when he suffered the just 
for the unjust that he might bring us to God. As a 
consequence "him hath God highly exalted and given 
him a name above every name; that at the name of 
Jesus every knee should bow and every tongue confess 
to the glory of the Father"— during the Millennial 
age. 



page 161 

SEMI-MONTHLY 
VOL. XXV. JUNE 1, 1904. No. 11. 

CONTENTS 

Views from the Watch Tower 163 

Denominational Union is the Cry 163 

A Moderator Awakening Late 164 

The Jonah Story Corroborated 164 

"Preach the Word." 165 

The Trend of Socialism 165 

En Route to Los Angeles 165 

Enoch, Elijah and the Sentence 166 

Importance of Jesus' Resurrection 167 

"What of the Night?" (Poem) 173 

The Life of Christ in Review 173 

Cheering Words from Australia 174 

page 162 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-24 EVERSHOLT ST., LONDON, N.W. 
GERMAN BRANCH-MIRKER STR., 45, ELBERFELD. 
AUSTRALIAN BRANCH-32 JOHNSTON ST., FITZROY, MELBOURNE. 

PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE, 5c (2-l/2d.) A COPY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity 
or adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER, will be supplied FREE, if 
they send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting 
the paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our 
list continually. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE 



THIS JOURNAL IS PUBLISHED IN THE 

FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, DANISH AND ITALIAN LANGUAGES. 

SAMPLE COPIES AND TERMS FREE. 



OUR MOTTO STOCK EXHAUSTED. 



We are unable to supply more mottoes until our stock 
is replenished. We are ordering a new lot from Great 
Britain, which will be in place about November. Hold 
your orders until further announcement. 

SUNDAY DISCOURSES IN PITTSBURGH GAZETTE. 

It is to permit a general use of these reports that we 
have arranged for quantities of them at the low rates quoted 
in our recent issue, which for the convenience of all we 
here repeat. We can supply you the Pittsburgh Gazette 
daily (except Sunday) for: 

A year (313 issues) postpaid, for $2.25 

Six months (156 issues) postpaid, for 1.15 

Three months (78 issues) postpaid, for 60 

Anyone thus a regular subscriber for the daily Gazette 
is privileged to receive extra copies of Pastor C. T. Russell's 
weekly sermons at the following rates:— 

Seven copies every Monday for 10 weeks, $1.00 

Fifteen ' 10 " 2.00 

Fifty ' 10 " 5.00 

For 20 or 30 or 40 weeks, or for 100 or 200 or 500 
copies at proportionate rates. 



R3372 : page 163 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 
DENOMINATIONAL UNION IS THE CRY. 



THE following from the Toronto (Canada) News 

well illustrates the trend of public opinion 

throughout Protestant Christendom. The spirit 

of union, or confederacy, is in the very air, as foretold 

by the prophet, who says: "Say ye not, A confederacy, 

to all them to whom this people shall say, 

A confederacy; neither fear ye their fear, nor be 

afraid."— Isa. 8:12. 

Fear, a realization of weakness, is at the bottom 
of this desire for union at the expense of the Truth. 
A union would give prestige to doctrines which cannot 
be sustained either by reason or Scripture. A 
union would give greater political power, and lead 
ultimately to the suppression of the Truth as unsettling 
and antagonistic to the peace of error and errorists. But 
the Truth has naught to fear, and the Truth people 
see clearly that only the Truth can produce that real 
heart-union which the Lord referred to in his prayer 
for his people— "that they all may be one." Another 
part of our Lord's petition was, "Sanctify them 
through thy Truth." Wherever the sanctifying of 
the Truth goes, there true union goes, proportionately. 



Not worldly union, however; not denominational 

union, for the Truth separates from the 

world and from denominationalism and unites all developed 

children of the Truth to each other, by uniting 

each to the Head— our Lord. Such are taught 

of God; such hear their Head; such are thus made 

one in Him and in his Truth. 

We quote the popular and erroneous view of 
the question, as follows:— 

"One of the most encouraging features of the 
present religious condition of the world is the increasing 
prevalence of a desire for Christian union. The 
arguments in favor of union are numerous and 
weighty. But the most powerful of them all— the 
consideration that should be kept in the forefront of 
the whole discussion— is that the object aimed at is 
very dear to the heart of Christ himself. 

"The union that most Christians desire is not a 
vague, unsubstantial thing, but a solid, practical reality 
—not a mere spiritual unity of aim and motive, 
but an external, visible union, which will remove the 
reproach of unseemly rivalry that Protestant Christianity 
has too long been compelled to bear. Such an 
organic union constitutes the only real answer to the 
great intercessory prayer of our blessed Lord— the 
solemnly suggestive petition offered up amid the 
deepening shadows of the last night of his earthly 
ministry: 'That they all may be one, as thou, 
Father, art in me and I in thee; that they also may 
be one in us; that the world may believe that thou 
hast sent me.' How much conviction of the divine 
mission of Christ is likely to be aroused in the heart 
of the world by the sight of the scores of rival sects 
into which the Church of Christ has been split up? 

"Of course, the situation is improving. In our 
own country, nearly thirty years ago, Presbyterians 
led the way in the matter of closing up their denominational 
ranks, and consolidating their forces for the 
performance of their common work; and the example 
thus set was followed a few years later by the Methodists. 
The last quarter of a century has witnessed, 
too, a most gratifying advance in inter-denominational 
fellowship. Ancient asperities are being softened; 
denominational bigotry is slowly disappearing; 
in Christian utterances the irenic is being substituted 
for the polemic; mutual misunderstandings and recriminations 
are giving place to mutual appreciations 
and commendations, and from almost every branch of 
the divided Church of Christ many a 'God speed 
you' is heard, addressed to Christian brethren of 
other communions. All this the world can see, and 
the force of all this the world can hardly fail to feel. 

"But how immeasurably more impressive would be 
the spectacle of one magnificent united Church! How 
irresistible would be the appeal to the world's conscience, 
if all the scattered companies of the Lord's 



R3372 : page 164 

army were united in one grand battalion, 'endeavoring 
to keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of 
peace!' 

"In so far as the Congregational, Methodist and 
Presbyterian Churches are concerned, this desirable 
consummation seems to be within measurable distance, 
the question of their corporate union having now 
come to be a question of practical church politics." 



Sentiment in the United States is similar, as 
voiced by the New York Independent, as follows: 

"Federation is one of the crying needs of our 
Protestant Churches. Some of our denominations in 
their national meetings have pronounced in favor of 
it. It would maintain the separate entity of denominations 
that are not ready to consolidate, and yet 
would be an evidence to the world of their essential 
and spiritual unity. We understand that it ought to 

R3373 : page 164 

be the business of such an organization as the National 

Federation of Churches to seek such a federation of 

denominations. It might be invidious for any one 

denomination to take the lead in inviting a conference 

for federation, for we have in this country no one 

confessedly preeminent denomination, as they have 

in England. But this Federation of Churches, which 

has hitherto labored to secure fellowship in labor in 

cities and towns, might well send a proposal to the 

national body of every Protestant denomination in 

the country, asking it to appoint representatives to 

meet in Washington in 1906— which will give time— 

with a view to the establishment of a federate union 

of the entire body of churches. If this existing Federation 

of Churches does not thus present the matter 

generally, why should not the various national conferences, 

conventions, assemblies, synods and councils 

independently make the proposition and appoint committees? 

We commend this proposition to those of 

every denomination who are interested in the visible 

unity of the Christian Church." 

A MODERATOR AWAKENING LATE. 



"New York, May 4.— 'Look at Andover! What 
honest man can look at that institution and not be 
ashamed?' said Rev. Dr. Robert Russell Booth, moderator 
of the Presbyterian General Assembly and 



pastor emeritus of Rutger's Presbyterian Church, 
speaking at the Bible League in the Marble Collegiate 
Course to-day. He was participating in a discussion 
'On the Practical Consequences of the Attack on the 
Bible.' 

'"What honest man can see endowments saved by 
the toil of the believing and the earnest used in the 
propaganda of those who say that what is recorded in 
the Bible is untrue?' continued Dr. Booth, and there 
were cries of 'amen' from the pews. 

'"For nineteen centuries the Christian Church 
has been the Church persecuted and the Church militant,' 
declared the speaker. 'Now we must fight 
treason in our very midst. Men are using their positions 
in our pulpits and chairs of learning to disseminate 
treason. Church collections, salaries, endowments 
are being used to support those who talk Higher 
Criticism and to spread heresies. 

'"A minister in this city, as prominent as there is 
in the land, reads the Apostles' creed: 'Jesus Christ, 
who, they say, was born of the Virgin Mary. 

'"Jesus, who, they say, was raised after the third 
day.' 

'"No wonder men find excuse for easy virtue 
when ministers, ordained of God, insert "they say" in 
the Apostles' creed. We are living in a time of financial 
immorality according to old fashioned men. There 
has come a change over our ministers which makes people 
suspicious of their honesty. 

"If this continues, if the Word of God as given 
to our fathers is whittled away by the ministers of 
our Protestant denominations, the time must come 
when to those always faithful to God there will be 
but one refuge and that will be the Roman Catholic 
Church, which, whatever it has added to the Word, 
has taken nothing from it. 

'"We of this league expect that Archbishop 
Farley and Bishop Potter will join in this movement, 
if not by enrollment, in heart and spirit. 

"It is an imaginative and fictitious concensus of 
opinion, for which the journalists are to blame, that 
scholarship is all on the side of the critics. I say that 
the ablest scholars will line up on our side, five to 
one.'" 



The Moderator of the Presbyterian General Assembly 
is just awakening to the fact that the Higher 
Critics have possession of the so-called religious colleges 
and seminaries. The gentleman will ere long 
discover that the "prominent" religious people have 
almost unanimously forsaken the Bible as an inspired 
work and now use it merely as a text-book, useful 
because of its influence with the "common people" 
—but not inspired. Now is the time for us to find 



those not yet contaminated and assist them to the 

Truth, which alone will show the Bible to be both inspired 

and reasonable. 

THE JONAH STORY CORROBORATED. 



The progress of the pulpit above that of the pew 
—away from the Bible and into infidelity— is well illustrated 
by articles recently published side by side in a 
secular journal. One of the articles quoted one of the 
most prominent and venerable ministers of our day- 
Rev. Lyman Abbott, D.D.— as denying the Bible story 
of Jonah, quoted as fact by our Lord. (Luke 1 1:30.) 
Dr. Abbott said: "I do not believe that the great 
fish swallowed Jonah, because there is nothing to attest 
the story," etc. 

The reverse side of the question is an account of 
a Bible class teacher's discussion of the same subject 
with his large class of adults. The teacher, a prominent 
business man of Pittsburgh, Mr. James I. 
Buchanan, averred his faith in the Jonah story. He 
said: "The Bible is sufficient evidence for me, but 
occasionally I get interested in comparing the miracles 
with modern phenomena which remain unexplained." 

R3373 : page 165 

Then he drew the attention of his class to 
the account of a seaman's similar experience during a 
whaling voyage, reported in the public press about 
eight years ago and referred to in these columns. 

The published account told how the whale's nose 
broke the small boat to splinters, and how one of its 
occupants was swallowed. Subsequently the whale was 
killed and the man found unconscious in its stomach. 
Later he told that he could breathe there, but found 
it intolerably hot. His skin was very red, probably 
the result of the action of the acids of the whale's 
stomach. In other words he was in process of 
digestion. 

The story is so similar to that of Jonah as to be 
well worth remembering, and we were specially interested 
in some verifications which Mr. Buchanan related 
to the reporter. He said: 

"Not long after that George Jarvie, a cousin, 
and a Scotch sailing master, happened to be a visitor at 
my home. One day I mentioned the New Zealand 
whale story. 

"He said he had read the story, had heard it 
among the seamen of the islands, and the story was 
generally believed and vouched for among the seafaring 
men. He explained to me how the sailors of 
that region considered the fish story. His version 
tallied with that of the newspaper clipping, which Mr. 



Jarvie had never read. 

"The fish prepared for Jonah's residence was apparently 
not common in Jonah's time, because no 
name is given for the fish. Almost a thousand years 
later someone conceived it was a whale that had swallowed 
Jonah." 

"Mr. Buchanan said that his sister, who had visited 
the New Zealand islands, had also been told the 
modern whale story, as she had heard it from people 
who claimed to know the sailor who had been swallowed 
by the whale and men who had served on the 
ship at that time." 

"PREACH THE WORD." 



"The true pastor, being a messenger of Jehovah 
of Hosts, and not a messenger of Byron, Milton or 
Shakespeare, is bound by the most solemn of all his 
obligations to preach 'Jesus Christ, and Him crucified.' 
The gospel preacher is a minister of the New 
Testament, which became of force on the death of the 
testator, our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. In this 
Testament is recorded the following statement of our 
Savior: 'The words that I speak unto you, they are 
spirit, and they are life.' This cannot be truthfully 
said of science, or of popular literature, or of the 
writings of the wisest men not inspired of God. In 
His command to His disciples to teach all nations, 
Christ's language is specific: 'Teaching them to 
observe all things whatsoever I have commanded 
you.' No mention is made of human doctrines, and 
no authority given for teaching them. 'The prophet 
that hath a dream, let him tell a dream; and he that 
hath My Word, let him speak My Word faithfully. 
What is the chaff to the wheat? saith the Lord. Is 
not My Word like as a fire? saith the Lord; and like 
a hammer that breaketh the rock in pieces?' The 
Word of God is 'the sword of the Spirit' One armed 
with this sword for destroying evil is required to use 
it. A sword needs no stronger proof of what it is 
than the effects of its use. No learned argument is 
necessary to prove that a hammer is a hammer. Use 
it, and it proves itself. Fire proves its own character 
when applied. God's Word is 'like as fire.' It 
cleanses away evil. 'Preach the Word.' A pastor 
who substitutes anything else for the faithful preaching 
of God's Word— and this is all he is authorized 
by Christ to preach— is trifling with the eternal destinies 
of men, and bringing guilt upon himself. The 
writer has in recent months heard much chaff in sermons, 
and noticed a conspicuous absence of the 'one 
thing needful.' It is the holy Spirit who commands, 
'Preach the Word.'"— The Interior. 



It is not often that such an item as the above can 
be clipped from the "Religious Press." We rejoice to 
find it and to commend it. 

THE TREND OF SOCIALISM. 



"We openly war against God, because he is the 
greatest evil in the world."— Schall, German Socialist 
leader. 

"It is our duty as socialists to root out the faith 
in God with all our might, nor is anyone worthy of 
the name who does not consecrate himself to the 
spread of atheism."— Liebknecht, German Socialist 
leader. 

"We have simply done with God."— Engels, 
German Socialist leader. 

Bebel, another prominent socialist, perhaps the 
greatest living authority on the subject, leaves "heaven 
to the angels and the sparrows." The same 
authority confessed that "Christianity and socialism 
stand toward each other as fire and water." 

"Modern socialism is without religion and its 
tendency is atheistic."— Henry George.— Houston 
Chronicle. 



R3374 : page 165 

EN ROUTE TO LOS ANGELES. 

ABOUT twenty of the Bible House family accompanied 
us to the Pittsburgh depot on our 
departure on April 28 for the Los Angeles 
Convention. As announced, we left in time to make 
four stops with the friends in Texas. We reached Dallas, 
Texas, on Saturday evening, and had a pleasant 
social gathering with the friends and a good rest before 
the Sunday, May 1st, services. 

The morning service was well attended— friends 
being present from many surrounding cities and villages. 
The first hour was devoted to praise and testimony 
and was very profitable, showing great progress 
since our last visit. One Brother testified that he was 
the only one at his place at the time of our last visit 
and that now thirteen were in attendance and rejoicing 
in the Truth. 

R3374 : page 166 

The Testimony meeting was followed by a fine discourse 
on Baptism by Brother Barton, and later several 



symbolized their consecration by water immersion. 

The principal session of the day was at 3 P.M., 
addressed by the Editor— the topic being, "To Hell 
and Back!— Who are There?— Hope for the Recovery 
of Many of Them," as published in the Gazette of 
May 2. The attendance was large. The house was 
crowded to the doors, about 700 being present, and 
about 500 were unable to gain admittance. There 
was close attention and a great demand for free literature 
at the close. 

The evening service was held in a smaller hall 
and was not advertised, but kept for the interested 
friends. Brother Russell spoke at that session from 
the words, "The Lord your God doth prove you, 
whether ye do love the Lord your God or no." 

Early on Monday, May 2d, we started for Austin, 
where we arrived at 6.30 P.M., and, after a good supper, 
met a very intelligent audience, one of whom reported 
that he had come 68 miles by wagon and then 
100 more by rail to attend the meeting and grasp the 
hand of the author of MILLENNIAL DAWN. The audience 
gave excellent attention, and we trust that some 
have been stimulated to a more earnest endeavor to 
follow the Lord and to study the divine plan. The 
friends of the Truth remained for a later meeting and 
some accompanied us to the train. 

Next morning found us at Houston, where we 
had a hearty welcome from the local Church and visiting 
friends from various quarters. The morning session 
was a Rally and Testimony meeting, while the 
afternoon service, addressed by the Editor, was composed 
chiefly of believers. The discourse was from 
the words, "Cast not away therefore your confidence, 
which hath great recompense of reward." 

The evening session was for the public and was 
well attended— about 1200 being present. The subject, 
"The Oath-Bound Covenant," received the closest 
attention. The literature was in great demand 
and the friends hope that the Truth has received a fresh 
impetus. We left by night train for San Antonio. 

Wednesday, May 4th, was devoted to a One-Day 
Convention at San Antonio. The morning session 
was addressed by Bro. Currie. The afternoon meeting, 
also for the Church, was addressed by Bro. Russell. 
We had some very enjoyable interchanges with 
the dear friends here also: our hearts flowed together 
as we communed one with another respecting our experiences 
and prospects. 

The evening session, for the public, was held in 
Beethoven Music Hall. It numbered about 1200 very 
intelligent people, who gave great attention and in 
various ways manifested deep interest. Our hope is 
that the Colporteurs there may find many grains of 
ripe "wheat." It is our experience that careful study 
of the literature is necessary to development. Talking 
and preaching are good to awaken interest, but 



reading is essential to development. 

We are writing while en route to Los Angeles, 
where we hope for a splendid season of fellowship with 
the household of faith. 



R3377 : page 166 

ENOCH, ELIJAH AND THE SENTENCE. 

THE answer to the following query may interest 
others than the inquirer:— 

"Since 'death passed upon all men,' because 
of Adam's sin; and since all had to be redeemed before 
they could escape from that death sentence, how 
came it that Enoch and Elijah escaped from it before 
the redemption-price was paid? 

We answer, that they did not escape, but were 
still under the sentence of death until the ransom was 
paid. The execution of the sentence was deferred in 
their cases, and their lives prolonged; but they would 
eventually have died had they not been redeemed. 
After Father Adam was sentenced he lived nearly a 
thousand years, but under his particular sentence he 
could not have lived more than a thousand years; because 
the sentence read, "In the day that thou eatest 
thereof, dying thou shalt die." And since "a day 
with the Lord is as a thousand years" (2 Pet. 3:8), 
his death was fixed to take place within that "day." 
But God left the way open to make types of Enoch and 

R3378 : page 166 

Elijah, and hence, so far as they and the remainder of 
the human family were concerned, no limit of time for 
the execution of the sentence was fixed. If, therefore, 
it pleased God to have it so, they might have continued 
to live for thousands of years, under the death 
sentence, without dying. In Elijah's case, although 
he was translated, it is not said that he did not die 
afterward. His translation made a type, as we have 
seen (MILLENNIAL DAWN, Vol. II, Chapter viii.), 
and he may have died and been buried afterward, unknown 
to men, as was Moses.— Deut. 34:6. 

But with Enoch the case was different, as we are 
expressly told that he did not die. In his case, therefore, 
it is evident that the execution of the sentence 
was deferred, but there is no evidence that it was annulled. 
He, therefore, remained under that sentence 
of death until he was ransomed by our Lord's death. 
As a member of the fallen race, he was an imperfect 
man, and although redeemed, and although a restitution 
to human perfection is provided for him in the 
divine plan, we are not certain that he is yet a perfect 



R3378 : page 167 

man. For the Apostle seems to teach that none of 

those whose faithfulness was attested before the Gospel 

call was made will be made perfect until after Christ 

and his bride are made perfect. He says (Heb. 1 1:39,40), 

after enumerating many of the ancient worthies, 

Enoch included, verse 5, "These all, having obtained 

witness through faith, received not the promise [everlasting 

life, etc.], God having provided some better 

thing [priority of time as well as of honor and position] 

for us [the Gospel Church], that they [the 

ancient worthies] without us [apart from us] should 

not be MADE PERFECT." And since the Church, the 

body of Christ, has not yet been perfected in glory, 

it is but a reasonable inference that wherever Enoch is 

and however happy and comfortable he may be, he is 

not yet made a perfect man, and will not be until all 

the members of the body of Christ have first been 

made perfect in the divine nature. 

As to where God took Enoch, we may not know, 
since God has not revealed that. Should we speculate 
as to whether God took him to some other world, and 
for what purpose, it would be but an idle speculation. 
We may not be wise above what is written. We may 
be certain, however, that Enoch did not go to heaven 
—the spiritual state or condition— for such is the record: 
"No man hath ascended up to heaven but he 
that came down from heaven— even the Son of man." 
(John 3:13.) Elijah is said to have ascended to heaven; 
but, from our Lord's statement above quoted, that 
must be understood to refer to the air— as, when it is 
said that "the fowl fly in the midst of heaven" it 
certainly cannot refer to the heavenly condition, which 
flesh and blood cannot enter nor even see without a 
change of nature, which change has been promised 
only to the Gospel Church. 

Understanding, as above shown, that Enoch was 
preserved from actual dissolution in death— although, 
already under that sentence, legally dead (Rom. 5:12; 
Matt. 8:22) until the ransom-price for all was paid by 
our Lord's death— we can see that there will now be 
no necessity for his dissolution, but that when the due 
time shall have come he may be fully and completely 
restored from even the measure of human imperfection 
he had inherited to full, perfect manhood. 

So, too, it will be with those of the world who will 
be living when the "times of restitution" are fully ushered 
in: it will not be necessary for them to go into 
the tomb. For although they are already legally dead, 
in that condemnation (or sentence) to "death passed 
upon all men," yet their penalty has also been legally 
met by another, Christ. He now holds the judgment 
against all, but graciously offers to cancel it entirely 
for each one who will accept restitution to life and 
perfection on the conditions of the New Covenant. 



R3374 : page 167 

IMPORTANCE OF JESUS' RESURRECTION. 

-MATT. 28:1-15. -JUNE 19.- 

Golden Text: "Now is Christ risen from the dead, and 
become the first-fruits of them that slept."— I Cor. 15:20. 

FEW seem to realize the importance of our Lord's resurrection 

—its bearing upon the entire Gospel message. 

The Apostle indicates how much depended 

upon it when he wrote, "If Christ be not risen, then is 

our preaching vain, and your faith is also vain.... 

They also who are fallen asleep in Christ are perished." 

(I Cor. 15:14,18.) The numbers of the Lord's professed 

followers, clergy and laity, who fail to appreciate the resurrection 

—who really do not believe in it— is very large. 

The number who really do believe in it is very small. The 

majority, under the teachings which have come down to 

us from the dark ages, fail entirely to realize that death 

means a cessation of life, and, as the Scriptures declare, 

"In that very day their thoughts perish." On the contrary, 

the masses of Christendom have come to believe 

that there is no death, that the dead are more alive than 

they ever were before they died. Applying this thought 

to our Lord, as well as to others, they do not appreciate 

the Scriptural declaration that "Christ died for our sins 

and rose again on the third day." They think of him as 

being alive during that time, and that it was merely his 

fleshly body that was inanimate in the tomb, and that the 

resurrection which occurred on the third day was not his 

resurrection to life, but merely the reanimation of his 

dead body. 

ERROR LEADS TO CONFUSION. 

Confused thus by the errors of medieval times, which 
were adopted by the reformers and are engrafted upon 
the minds of the civilized world today, the majority of 
Christian people cannot appreciate the Scriptural declarations 
respecting the importance of the resurrection of our 
Lord. Instead of believing the Apostle we have just 
quoted, to the effect that our faith is vain, our preaching 
vain, if Jesus did not rise from the dead, the majority of 
Christendom would be inclined to say just the reverse of 
this: "What difference would it make to our dead loved 
ones, what difference would it make to our preaching, 
what difference would it make to our faith, if Jesus' body 
had been left in the tomb?" Hence, only those who realize 
that the dead are dead— that they can have no conscious 
existence until awakened from the sleep of death- 
can really appreciate the importance of the resurrection. 



If Jesus had not been raised up from the dead, we 
have no basis for the preaching of the Gospel— for the 
Gospel message is that, by the grace of God, Jesus' death 

R3374 : page 168 

was the ransom price for father Adam and his posterity, 
and that because Jesus has thus paid the penalty for the 
whole race and redeemed all from the sentence of death 
by his own death, therefore, in due time, in God's appointed 
time, Adam and all of his posterity are to be released 
from the death sentence, and Christ as the great 
King is to establish his Kingdom in the world, and 
through it lift from mankind the burden, the penalty of 
death, and that then all who are in their graves shall hear 
the voice of the Son of man and come forth to the glorious 
opportunities of the Millennial Kingdom— opportunities 
for reconciliation with God, and release from all the 
imperfections of the fall. To preach such a Gospel, with 
the fact before us that Jesus had died and without any 
proof of his resurrection, would be vain preaching, foolish 
preaching, deceiving the people. To believe such a Gospel, 
under such circumstances, would be to brand ourselves 
as foolish simpletons; and to have any hope that 
our dead friends could ever be benefited by a dead Christ 
would be absurd. 

Seeing, then, the importance of the Lord's resurrection, 
and how every feature of the Gospel is dependent 
upon this great fact, we understand why it was that the 
apostles, preaching forgiveness of sins and a future blessing, 
based everything upon the fact that Jesus not only 
died for our sins as our ransom price, but that he rose 
again for our justification, for our deliverance from the 
sentence, the guilt, the penalty, that is upon us as a human 
family— the death penalty. No wonder, then, that 
our heavenly Father arranged that we should have so explicit 
an account, so detailed a statement of everything 
pertaining to our Lord's resurrection; no wonder that the 
evangelists recorded matters with such minuteness, no wonder 
that in all the preaching of the apostles this great fundamental 
truth, which was the basis of their own faith toward 
God, was set before the Church as being all important. From 
this standpoint the present lesson must be of deep interest 
to all of the Lord's people for all time— until the outward 
manifestations of the Kingdom shall attest the things 
which the household of faith must now accept by faith 
built upon this testimony. 

HE AROSE ON THE THIRD DAY. 

We concur with the generally accepted— and, we believe, 
well-attested— view, that our Lord's crucifixion on the 
14th of Nisan, Jewish time, corresponded to the sixth day 
of the week, which we now call Friday. According to 
the records, our Lord died at three o'clock in the afternoon. 
Calvary was but a short distance from the gate of 



Jerusalem, the Temple and Pilate's residence. Hence, 

Nicodemus and Joseph, members of the Sanhedrin, evidently 

friendly to Jesus, but not sufficiently convinced of 

the truthfulness of his claims, or else not sufficiently courageous 

to lay down their lives with him, had not far to go 

after noting his death to secure consent for his burial; and 

the tomb in which it is supposed he was buried is within a 

stone's throw of the supposed location of the cross. It has 

been presumed, therefore, that our Lord was buried about 

four o'clock on the afternoon of that day, corresponding 

to our Friday. The next day, which we call Saturday, 

and which the Jews called the seventh day or Sabbath, 

began— Jewish time— Friday evening at sundown and 

ended on what we call Saturday at sundown, and our 

R3375 : page 168 

Lord's resurrection took place early in the morning of the 
first day of the week, which we now designate Sunday. 

Thus our Lord arose from the dead on the "third 
day." He was in death from three o'clock until six on 
Friday, all of the night following, all of the next day, 
Saturday, all of the next night, which, according to Jewish 
reckoning, was the forepart of the first day of the week. 
This would not make three days and three nights full, 
complete— seventy-two hours— but we believe it did 
constitute what the Lord meant when he declared that he 
would rise from the dead on the third day. Some, desirous 
of counting full three days and three nights, have 
been led to claim that our Lord was crucified on Thursday; 
but neither would this make three days and three 
nights— seventy-two hours. In order to have three full 
days and three full nights we would be obliged to suppose 
that the Lord was crucified on Wednesday. But all the 
testimony is against such a supposition and the weight of 
it decidedly in favor of Friday, and the counting of a part 
each of three days and nights as being what our Lord referred 
to. But if any one have a different view from ours 
on this subject, we will not contend with him: it is a 
trifling matter, of no importance whatever. Nothing was 
dependent upon the length of time our Lord would be 
dead. The important items were that he should actually 
die, that he should be dead long enough for it to be positively 
known that he was dead, and that he should rise 
from the dead. 

DESTROYING THE TEMPLE AND RAISING IT UP. 

When our Lord spoke in advance, saying, "Destroy 
this Temple and in three days I will raise it up"— "he 
spake of the Temple of his body." (John 2:21.) But 
of which body did he speak— of the flesh?— of the body 
which he took in order that he might be the sacrifice for 
sin, of the body which he consecrated to death? Was it 
that body that he meant would be raised on the third 
day? We answer that that body was not his temple, but 



merely his tabernacle. Our Lord's resurrection body was 
not the one which the Jews destroyed, but a spiritual body 
which they had never seen, but which was revealed to the 
Apostle Paul as "one born out of due time" when, on 
his way to Damascus, Jesus appeared unto him "shining 
above the brightness of the sun at noonday." 

It is much more reasonable to suppose that our Lord 
spoke of his body which is the Church and of which he 
was and is the Head. The Jews destroyed the Head, and 
all down through the Gospel age the various members of 
the body of Christ have been called upon "to suffer with 
him," "to be dead with him," "to lay down their lives 
for the brethren." The body has been in process of destruction 

R3375 : page 169 

from Jesus' day until now, and very soon, we 

believe, the last member will have proven himself "faithful 

unto death." Now, let us see how the Lord will raise 

up this Temple of which he was the great foundation 

stone, and of which the Apostle Peter declares, each of 

his faithful disciples is a living stone. (I Pet. 2:4) Considering 

the time from the Lord's standpoint— "A day with 

the Lord is as a thousand years"— our Lord died in the 

year of the world 4161— after four days had passed and 

the fifth day had begun. 

The destruction of the Temple of God, which is the 
Church, began there in the destruction of the chief corner 
stone and has progressed since— during the remainder of 
the fifth day, all of the sixth day, and we are now in the beginning 
of the seventh day— "very early in the morning." 
And the promise of the Lord is that the Lord's resurrection 
shall be completed about this time— "The Lord shall 
help her early in the morning." (Psa. 46:5.) Thus we 
view the matter, that the Lord was a part of the three 
days dead and rose on the third day, early in the morning, 
and that likewise the First Resurrection will be completed— 
the entire body of Christ will be raised on the third day, 
early in the morning. 

Evidently the matter of the resurrection was beyond 
the mental grasp of the apostles themselves at the time it 
occurred. Jesus had foretold that he would rise again on 
the third day, but they had not comprehended the 
meaning of his words: None of them for a moment 
thought of his resurrection, but merely of what they could 
do in the way of embalming his body, and showing to it, 
as his remains, the same sympathy and love which they 
would have shown to the remains of any dear friend or 
brother or sister. Thus it was that being hindered from 
coming to the sepulcher on the Sabbath day by the Jewish 
Law, which forbade labor of any kind on that day, the 
Lord's friends began to gather at the sepulcher, probably 
by previous appointment, about daybreak, after the Sabbath, 
—on the first day of the week. There were a number 
from Galilee, and probably they were lodged with 
other friends in different parts of the city, and possibly 



with some at Bethany; hence they went by different routes. 
The accounts vary, and are yet in perfect accord and all 
true. They are told from the different standpoints of each 
writer, and are all the more conclusive to us as evidences 
in that they show that there was no collusion between the 
writers of the Gospels— no endeavor to state the matters 
in exactly the same terms, as there surely would have been 
had the account been a manufactured one, a concocted 
story. 

ARGUMENTS AGAINST THE TRUTH ARE WEAK. 

Before the arrival of any of the disciples, while the 
Roman guard was still on duty at the tomb, an angel of 
the Lord appeared on the scene and a shock like that of 
an earthquake was experienced, and the guard, or "watch," 
became as dead men— almost swooned or fainted— but, recovering, 
hastened from the spot to make their report to the 
chief priests, at whose instance they had been appointed to 
this service. The chief priests induced them to circulate the 
report that the body had been stolen by his disciples while 
they slept, and this report was evidently current for quite 
a time subsequently, as we read, "the saying is commonly 
reported among the Jews until this day"— up to the date 
of writing Matthew's Gospel, which is supposed to have 
been written some nine years after the event. Like all 
arguments against the truth, it was a weak one, but the 
best they could do. How foolish would be the testimony 
of men who would say what took place while they were 
asleep ! A bribe was given to the guard as the price of 
this false statement, and they had the assurance of protection, 
security against the ordinary penalty for a Roman 
soldier sleeping while on duty; but then they were not on 
duty for the Roman government; they were merely a complimentary 
guard furnished in the interests of the priests 
and at their solicitation. 

Meantime, while the guard was on its way to the 
priests to report matters, the Lord's friends began to 
gather, with their love and spices, etc. The women of the 
company arrived first, and in so doing attested for all time 
the love and sympathy of their hearts, and honored, yea 
glorified, their sex in so doing. The three mentioned in 
our lesson have since had noble mention by the poets 
of all nations. One has written:— 

"Three women crept at break of day, 

Agrope along the shadowy way, 
Where Joseph's tomb and garden lay. 

"Each in her throbbing bosom bore 
A burden of such fragrant store 
As never there had lain before. 

"Myrrh-bearers still, at home, abroad— 
What paths have holy women trod, 
Burdened with votive gifts to God! 



"Rare gifts whose chiefest worth was priced 

By this one thought, that all sufficed: 
Their spices had been bruised for Christ." 

During the forty days which began that morning, and 
which ended with our Lord's ascension, he appeared at 
most eleven times, sometimes to one and sometimes to 
another, and on one occasion to above five hundred brethren 
at once. It is quite probable that instead of eleven 
times there were only seven, and that the other four records 
were merely differences of description of four of the 
seven manifestations. 

"HE SHOWED HIMSELF BY INFALLIBLE PROOFS." 

Our Lord's first appearance was to Mary Magdalene, 
she out of whom he had cast seven demons and who, from 
thenceforth, became one of our Lord's most earnest followers. 
She had much forgiven her; she loved much, 
and her love had brought her early to the sepulcher. Apparently, 
Mary Magdalene was the first of the women to 
arrive at the sepulcher, and immediately on finding that 
Jesus was not in the tomb, she hastened to announce the 
fact to John and Peter. Returning to the sepulcher, later 

R3375 : page 170 

she apparently reached it after the other women had been 
there and had gone their way, and it was while she was 
still near the tomb that Jesus appeared to her first of all, as 
described by John-20: 11-18. 

Subsequently the Lord met the other women as they 
were en route to make known the news to the household of 
faith. He addressed them, "All hail!" which in the 
Greek was the usual salutation, practically signifying, Rejoice! 
They fell before him, worshipping him and grasping 
him by the feet, and appeared afraid that anything 
henceforth should separate them from him. Our Lord, 
however, reminded them of their duty toward the brethren 
—that they should spread the good tidings of his resurrection. 
The same lesson comes to us, that after we 
have found the Lord, have come to realize the Truth, we 
have a great privilege in being permitted to serve it, and 
a great duty toward the brethren who as yet know not 
what has caused our hearts to rejoice. We are not to assume 
that we are to merely hug the Truth to our own 
hearts, but are to remember that it is also for others, and 
to take pleasure in dispensing it to them. He who thus 
serves the Lord and the household of faith is sure to have 
the greater blessing in the end. 

Our Lord's message was to tell the disciples that he 
would meet them again in Galilee. Thus it was that, after 

R3376 : page 170 



five or six appearances in the vicinity of Jerusalem, our 
Lord abstained from further appearing to his followers, 
and they returned to their home country, Galilee, where 
he met them, as he had engaged to do. We must remember 
that the most of our Lord's ministry was spent in 
Galilee and that the majority of the believers were Galileans. 
It was to be expected that all of the household of 
faith should have some opportunity for witnessing to our 
Lord's resurrection, and so the Apostle Paul tells us that 
in one of these later manifestations in Galilee, "Our 
Lord was seen by above five hundred brethren at one 
time; of whom the greater part remain unto this present 
[the time the Apostle was writing], though some are fallen 
asleep."— I Cor. 15:6. 

It is necessary that we should note carefully the two 
objects our Lord had in view in the various manifestations 
he gave his followers of the fact that he had risen from 
the dead. The first of these was a demonstration that he 
was no longer confined to earthly conditions, as they had 
known him to be during the previous years of acquaintance, 
but was now, like all spirit beings, able to go and 
come like the wind— invisibly, secretly. Like all spirit 
beings he was now glorious. The Apostle explains the 
resurrection of the overcomers of the Church in I Cor. 15:51,52, 
and the Scriptural assurance is that in our resurrection 
we shall be like the Lord, see him as he is and 
share his glory. The Scriptures also assure us that our 
resurrection is really a part of his resurrection, a part of 
the First Resurrection,— that Jesus the Head of the glorious 
Christ was raised from the power of death, was glorified 
on the third day after his death, and that early in the 
morning of the new dispensation the Church will come 
forth from death in his likeness, sharers in his resurrection. 
-Phil. 3:10. 

OUR LORD'S RESURRECTION CHANGE. 

This being true, we know that the time when our 
Lord received his spirit body was at his resurrection and 
not subsequently; as the Apostle declares, "He was put 
to death in the flesh, but quickened [made alive] in spirit." 
Speaking of our Lord's humiliation and his subsequent 
exaltation at his resurrection, the Apostle assures us that 
our Lord left the glory which he had with the Father and 
humbled himself to become a man, and that in due time 
he humbled himself unto death, even the death of the 
cross— "wherefore God hath highly exalted him and 
given him a name that is above every name." The exaltation 
came to him in his resurrection change. It was 
true of him then, as it will be true of all the members of 
his body in due time, that he was sown in weakness, raised 
in power, sown a natural [animal, human] body, raised a 
spiritual body. 

This spiritual body of our Lord was just as glorious 
in the moment of his resurrection as it was at any time 
afterward or is now. It had all the powers properly granted 



to spirit beings in harmony with the Lord. He was not, 
as previously, merely the man Christ Jesus, but was now 
the Lord of glory. As such he was able to associate himself 
with his disciples, either visibly or invisibly, or to appear 
as a flame of fire in the burning bush, or as a wayfaring 
man, as he appeared with others to Abraham, or in 
any manner he might see fit. He was the same glorious 
being who subsequently appeared to Saul of Tarsus, shining 
as the lightning, much as the angel appeared when the 
Roman guard was overcome and fled. 

Some, then, may inquire, Why did he not appear to 
the women and apostles in the same glorious manner, with 
shining features? We answer that to have so done would 
have been to hinder the very object he had in view. How 
could his followers, who were not then begotten of the 
holy Spirit and consequently were unable to understand 
spiritual things (I Cor. 2:14)— how could they have understood 
that a being shining like an angel was the Lord 
Jesus they had seen crucified three days before? And even 
if they could have associated the two in some manner, 
what evidence would there have been for others since? 
The removal of the remains of our Lord Jesus from the 
tomb was an essential to the faith of the disciples of that 
day, and of all who would believe on him since through 
their word, and manifestations of his being alive from the 
dead were necessary also to all these. The instructions 
which our Lord gave, and his expositions of the prophecies, 
and his application of these to himself, given at that 
particular time, were necessary as a firm foundation for 
faith. None of these objects could have been so well 
served in any other manner as the manner in which they 
were performed. Our Lord's first appearance to Mary was 
as a gardener. She recognized him not; neither his 
clothing nor his features were the same as those she had 

R3376 :page 171 

previously seen, as those she had previously recognized. 
His clothing was divided amongst the Roman soldiers, his 
grave clothes were still in the tomb, the body which she 
saw was a special body and the clothing which he wore 
was special clothing prepared and used for this special 
occasion. She knew not her Lord until he adopted a tone 
of voice which she recognized. 

It was the same with the two on the way to Emmaus, 
later on the same day. Jesus walked with them, but they 
knew him not; his clothing was different, his features 
were different, they saw no prints of nails in his hands 
or in his feet. They asked him, "Art thou a stranger 
in these parts?" He improved the opportunity for discussing 
with them calmly, deliberately, carefully, the 
prophecies relating to himself, expounding these to them 
so forcefully, so clearly, that their hearts burned within 
them as they thought of the possibility that the story 
which they had heard from the women might have been 
really true— that Jesus was to rise from the dead. Our 



Lord did not reveal his identity until he was ready to vanish 
from their sight. When he vanished, his flesh and 
his clothing vanished, too. The same evening he appeared 
to the company in the upper room at Jerusalem, the doors 
being shut. They were doubtless talking about the events 
of the day and of the preceding day, when, suddenly, 
Jesus appeared in their midst. He materialized— that is 
to say, he, a spirit being, came into their midst and there 
assumed flesh, bone, a complete body clothed. Does some 
one ask, How could he do this? We cannot answer, but 
whoever can understand the miracle of the change of the 
water into wine can as easily understand our Lord's appearance 
in the upper room, the doors being shut; and 
how, after the interview, he just as mysteriously vanished 
from their sight, flesh, bone, clothing, all— the doors still 
being shut and doubtless carefully barred for fear of the 
Jews, in anticipation that the hatred which had pursued 
the Lord to death would fasten itself upon his followers. 

BE NOT FAITHLESS, BUT BELIEVING. 

A later appearance was in the same upper room 
probably a week later— again on the first day of the week. 
Thomas was present: he had been absent on the previous 
occasion and he could not believe the testimony of the 
others. Thomas had expressed his doubts most forcefully 
and had insisted that the others were too easily convinced, 
but he was satisfied finally when Jesus, appearing to him 
with the others, requested him to put his finger in the 
prints of the nails. Did Thomas really see and put his 
finger into the nail prints of that body of our Lord which 
three days before had hung upon the cross. We answer 
No; that body of flesh and bones could not have come 
through the door while it was shut. The body which appeared 
in the upper room was a materialization— actual 
flesh and actual bones as our Lord said to them, "Handle 
me: a spirit hath not flesh and bones as ye see me have." 
What they saw was not the spirit body, what they saw was 
the actual flesh and bones. He, the spirit being, was 
hidden from their sight; he assumed this body of flesh and 
bones in their midst— created it there and created the 
clothing also. 

Whoever disputes the power of the Lord to create 
flesh and bones has an equal difficulty in accounting for 
the clothing; for who will say that it would be more difficult 
to create the body than to create the clothing inside 
that room, the doors being shut? Who will say that it 
would be easier to make clothing vanish into thin air than 
to make flesh and bones vanish into thin air? The power 
to do these things is not natural to us, nor can we fully 
comprehend the matter. Now we see through a glass obscurely, 
by and by we shall understand how our Lord can 
do the wonderful things that he is continually doing. For 
do we not see miracles all about us in nature, in the transpirings 
of every day? The kernel of wheat— how is it 
possible that out of that little grain should come a stem, a 



sprout, a stock and a head full of grain? It is a miracle 
—something wholly beyond our power to accomplish and 
beyond our power to even understand. We could make 
a grain of wheat, we could combine the various elements 
necessary to it, and could shape them as a grain of wheat 
is shaped; but our grain, while analyzing the same as 
that which nature would put forth, would not send out 
shoots, would have no stock, would bear no grain. 

"HIS FLESH SAW NOT CORRUPTION." 

It is not for us to say what became of the natural 
body of Jesus— the one that was pierced. God has not 
revealed particulars respecting it, except that it did not 
corrupt. Where then is it? We know not; but he who 
hid the body of Moses so that none could find it, was 
likewise able to hide the body of Jesus. (Deut. 34:5,6.) 
Who can tell but that the uncorrupted body of Jesus is 
yet to be produced by the Lord as an evidence or 
testimony of the truth of this whole transaction for the 
world in all future time. We do remember that the manna 
with which Israel was fed was wont to corrupt on the second 
day, except on the Sabbath; but we remember also 
that a golden pot of this manna was preserved in the Ark 
incorruptible, as a witness or memorial of the great miracle 
of the desert. What shall we say, then, respecting this 
bread which came down from heaven, which is also likened 
to manna? Is not the Lord equally able to preserve the 
body of Jesus as a witness, and, although other bodies of 
flesh are wont to corrupt, may not this one be preserved 
incorruptible? There is a certain statement in the Scriptures 
which seems to imply that this same body, spear-marked 
and nail-marked, is somewhere kept for future 
exhibit— as it is written, "They shall look upon him 
whom they have pierced."— Zech. 12:10. 

The first five of the Lord's appearances apparently 
took place during the first eight of the forty days' presence. 
Thus there was a long wait in which there was no manifestation, 
and the apostles had abundance of time to think 
over and discuss the situation. As the majority of them 
were from Galilee, they probably did not remain in 

R3377 : page 172 

vicinity of Jerusalem more than two weeks after our 
Lord's last appearance on the eighth day, but betook 
themselves to their homes, wondering whether or not they 
would ever see the Master again, whether or not he might 
appear to them again on their homeward journey or in 
some other upper room when assembling in Galilee. Perhaps, 
too, they remembered the message sent to them by 
the women, that he would go before them into Galilee and 
meet them there. 

A little longer waiting in the vicinity of the old 
haunts, visited frequently by our Lord and themselves, and 
the practical affairs of life began to press upon them. 



Simon Peter was the first to declare his intention of re-entering 
the fishing business, and others of the apostles, 
accustomed to the same craft formerly, joined him, and 
practically the old partnership arrangement was revived 
as it existed two years or so before, when Jesus 
called them to apostleship. This was the very condition 
of things which our Lord foresaw, and we believe that his 
tarrying forty days after his resurrection before he ascended 
was in great measure for the purpose of giving the very 
lessons which now were called forth. He knew just how 
discouraged they would feel; that all the hopes and prospects 
of the Kingdom, as they had previously viewed it, 
would seem vague and indistinct under the new conditions, 
and how his followers would not be prepared to go out in 
the work he intended without further instruction. He 
was present with them, but invisible, a spirit being, during 
all these weeks; he heard and noted their queries and 
explanations, suggestions and conclusions, and was ready 
to apply the proper lessons at the proper moment. 

"LOVEST THOU ME MORE THAN THESE?" 

The Lord permitted the partnership in the fishing 
business to progress and a fresh start to be made. They 
toiled all that night and caught nothing, and doubtless 
were still further discouraged, concluding that failure was 
attending them in temporal matters as well as in spiritual. 
The opportune moment had come, and Jesus— standing on 
the shore in another form, in a body of flesh and with 
clothing, though not his own flesh and not his usual clothing, 
but specially prepared flesh and clothing— called to 
the apostles inquiring if they had fish; they shouted back 
that they had been toiling all night and had found nothing. 
He suggested the casting of the net on the other 
side of the boat, although it must have seemed to them 
foolish, because it would be but a few feet away from where 
it had already been, and indeed the boat itself was continually 
turning. Nevertheless something about the stranger 
on the shore impressed them and they did cast their net 
on the other side, and immediately the net was filled with 
great fish. So far as Peter was concerned the lesson was 
learned already. He remembered a very similar experience 
they had had at the time the Lord called them to 
apostleship, and quickly he perceived that the one on 
shore was the Lord— in another manifestation. Without 
waiting for the boats, the net or the fish, Peter sprang 
into the water and swam ashore in his anxiety to be soon 
with the Lord, and in his realization that this manifestation 
like the others might terminate suddenly. Besides, 
Peter was anxious to manifest his love and faithfulness, remembering 
how not a great while before he had denied 
his Lord. 

It was in connection with this manifestation that Jesus 
specially directed his words to Peter: "Simon, son of 
Jonas, lovest thou me more than these?"— these boats, nets, 
etc. The question addressed to Peter was applicable to all, 



but of special weight and force to Peter as the elder and 
leader of all, and the one who had particularly said but a 
short time previously, "Though all forsake thee, yet will 
not I." Peter declared his love for the Lord, and was told 
to feed the sheep and to feed the lambs. The lesson was 
a timely one and never needed to be repeated. Peter and 
the other apostles, so far as we know, never subsequently 
doubted the importance of their mission as apostles, but 
gave their entire time and energy to the feeding of the sheep 
and lambs. The miracle witnessed convinced them of the 
Lord's power either to bless or hinder them in temporal 
matters, and that equally he will provide for their every 
interest as his apostles and representatives. The lesson was 
given at exactly the right moment. Had it been given 
earlier in their experience it doubtless would have had 
much less weight: it was the part of wisdom to permit 
them to become perplexed and to decide on the fishing 
business, and then on the very first day of their experience 
to give them this forceful lesson. It was a lesson respecting 
the resurrection of our Lord and also demonstrated the 
fact of his change, that he was no longer the man Christ 
Jesus, no longer subject to human conditions. Again he 
vanished out of their sight, but made an appointment for 
the meeting of all at a certain place. 

This meeting by appointment was doubtless the one 
mentioned by the Apostle Paul— the one in which about 
five hundred brethren witnessed a materialization and manifestation 
of the Lord. We know not the full tenor of the 
various lessons taught, but incline to think that the lessons 
were more of the practical kind than in words— that these 
manifestations were for the purpose of convincing them of 
the Lord's resurrection and of his change from earthly to 
spiritual conditions. 

HE THAT DESCENDED IS THE SAME THAT 
ASCENDED. 

The next appearance probably was the one on the 
Mount of Olives at the time of our Lord's ascension. 
Apparently all of the apostles and perhaps others returned 
to Jerusalem and to the Mount of Olives, their instruction 
being to tarry at Jerusalem until they should be endued 
with power from on high. It was while they were present 
with him receiving final instructions that he was parted 
from them; the form that they beheld gradually receding 
into the clouds was received out of their sight. In this 
arrangement the Lord did the best thing possible to be 
done for those who had not yet been begotten of the 

R3377 : page 173 

Spirit and who, therefore, could not understand spiritual 
things. He represented in the flesh the things which really 
transpired in the spirit. Then the apostles could understand 
after they had been begotten of the Spirit, and 
it is from the standpoint of the begetting and not from 



the standpoint of the natural man that their records come 
down to us. 

The essence of this lesson is as expressed in our 
Golden Text, "Now is Christ risen from the dead, and 
become the first fruits of them that slept." Others have 
been awakened from the sleep of death temporarily merely 
to relapse into it again subsequently, but our Lord Jesus 
was the first "born from the dead," the "first-fruits of 
them that slept"— as the Apostle declares, "He was the 
first that should rise from the dead." His resurrection was 
the life resurrection— to perfection on the spirit plane. In 
that he was the first-fruits of them that slept, the implication 
is that the others slept similarly and are to come 
forth in the resurrection as spirit beings after the same manner. 
To be the first-fruits implies that the others will be 
of the same kind, for although our Lord was the first-fruits 
of all that slept in the sense that his resurrection preceded 
all other resurrections, in another sense he is the first-fruits 
of the Church, which is his body. It is in a still 
larger sense that the Christ, Head and body, is the first-fruits 
brought up to life of the whole world; as the Apostle 
James expresses the matter, "Of his own will begat he 
us with the Word of Truth, that we should be a kind of 
first-fruits of his creatures."— Jas. 1:18. 

Thus we see a first-fruits in two senses of the word: 
as, for instance, we see that strawberries are the first-fruits 
in the largest sense of the word in that they come 
before other fruits in the spring— so the expression that 
the Church is the first-fruits unto God of his creatures does 
not imply that all will have the same nature. Then again 
we may speak of the first ripe strawberries as the first-fruits 
of the strawberries. It was in this latter sense that our 
Lord Jesus was the first-fruits of the Church; and since 
the Church is the first-fruits of the whole creation, it follows 
that Christ keeps this place of primacy, not only in 
the Church, but in respect to all who will ever be raised 
up fully out of death into the fulness and perfection of life. 



R3378 : page 173 

"WHAT OF THE NIGHT?" 

"Watchman! watchman! what of the night?" 
"Shadows and darkness encircle me quite; 
Earth is enshrouded in midnight gloom, 
Black as the pall that envelopes the tomb; 
Watchers are few, and mockers are bold— 
The heavens are starless— the night-air is cold. 
I am weary; O would that this night were gone. 
I will watch for the day till the morning dawn." 

"Watchman! watchman! what of the night?" 
"In the east appeareth a glimmering light; 
Faint it gleams— but 'tis rising now, 



And streaming afar— 'tis the morning's brow. 
Shadows are passing— the Day Star is out, 
The glory is flashing and leaping about, 
And the golden tints that are poured o'er the earth 
Foretell of the bursting morning's birth." 

"Watchman! watchman! what of the night?" 
"Day rushes onward all cloudless and bright. 
And warmth, and light, and beauty are driven 
To the farthest bond of the far-off heaven. 
Flashing flames from the throne of God 
Are bathing the world in a golden flood. 
Seraph and cherub are crowding it on, 
And the pure in their rapture are skyward gone." 

"Watchman! watchman! what of the night?" 
"Bursts on my vision a ravishing sight: 
The Lord is in sight with his shining ones, 
And the splendors of twice ten thousand suns. 
He has come! Lo, the night-watch of sorrow is o'er, 
And the mantle of midnight shall shroud me no more. 
Pilgrim and stranger, haste to thy home, 
For the morning, the beautiful morning, has come!" 
— D. T. Taylor. 



R3378 : page 173 

THE LIFE OF CHRIST IN REVIEW. 

-JUNE 29.- 

Golden Text: "Wherefore God also hath highly exalted him, 
and given him a name which is above every name."— Phil. 2:9. 

THIS lesson is appointed, in the International Series, 

as a review of the Bible studies for the preceding 

six months— all of which have related to our Lord 

Jesus' birth, life and experiences from boyhood to his resurrection. 

We trust that our readers have followed the 

studies connectedly, and we can only wish that they have 

received as much benefit as we from this course of studies. 

We will not again go into details, but will suggest 

that it may be profitable for each reader to review this 

series of lessons, and to seek to have and to hold well in 

mind the main thoughts therein developed. 

Our Golden Text is a very precious one. It assures 
us that our dear Redeemer, whose faithfulness to the 
Father's will and whose sympathy for the dying race, led 
him to endure the cross, despising the shame, was not permitted 
of the Lord to suffer a permanent loss through his 
generosity and obedience. If there were no other text of 
Scripture pertinent to the subject in the Bible, this one 
alone would be convincing to us that our Lord Jesus is no 
longer a man. Man, we are to remember, was created 



very good, an image of God— but an image on a lower 

plane than angels, and on a very much lower plane, therefore, 

than our dear Redeemer before he humbled himself 

to take the human nature. "What is man that thou art 

mindful of him?. ..Thou madest him a little lower 

than the angels, thou crownedst him with glory and 

R3378 : page 174 

honor"— in his Edenic perfection. Our Lord as a perfect 
man would be grand and far above men, but as a perfect 
angel he would be a still grander being, still farther above 
man. Hence, if our Lord were a mighty angel now, it 
would still mean that he had suffered a great loss as a result 
of his atonement work for man; and if he were a perfect 
man, it would mean still greater loss on our behalf. 
But this was not necessary, not purposed, and is not the 
fact. He left the glory, humbled himself, came down 
and accomplished the work necessary, paid the price— a 
man's life for a man's life— and our Golden Text gives 
the result: "Wherefore God also hath highly exalted 
him, and given him a name which is above every 
name." 

Another Scripture, speaking of our Lord's present 
exaltation, declares that he is exalted "far above angels, 
principalities and powers, and every name that is named." 
(Eph. 1:21.) We believe these Scriptures, and in harmony 
with them we believe that God's character for justice 
and benevolence is demonstrated by this high exaltation 
of him who was faithful unto death as the man Christ Jesus. 
He is now a partaker of the divine nature, a spirit being 
of the very highest order— of the same order with the 
Father himself. This thought of our dear Redeemer not 
losing eventually by the great sacrifices he endured for us 
must be gratifying to all who are truly his and who love 
him. But, additionally, we have another source of satisfaction 
in thinking of our Master's glorification, and that 
is that the promise is to us who are faithful to him, that 
we may yet share his nature, share his glory, share his 
name, share his exaltation, share his divine nature. O, 
wonderful wisdom and grace and goodness of our God! 
We call upon our souls with every power within us to 
praise and laud and magnify his great and holy name, honored 
before his people through his great and wonderful 
plan, revealed to his people through his wonderful Word! 



R3379 : page 174 

CHEERING WORDS FROM AUSTRALIA. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

You will be pleased to know that the work of this 
Branch is opening up; not rapidly, as yet, but we are 
hoping the velocity will soon be considerably increased. 



Some of the dear friends here are exercised concerning 
their opportunities in the Colporteur service, and are 
going ahead to make the effort. May the Lord's grace 
be with them! But the field here is very great, and 
there is plenty of room for many more laborers in it; 
besides, the time is short. We shall be most happy, 
therefore, if those in America who contemplate coming 
out will do so without delay. 

Herewith are extracts from interesting letters lately 
received at this office, also further TOWER subscriptions, 
among which are some new names. 

With much Christian love to you and the Allegheny 
co-workers, and asking an interest in your prayers on 
behalf of this corner of the field, I am, 

Yours faithfully in Christ, 

E. C. HENNINGES, 

Manager Australian Branch. 



DEAR BROTHER:- 

Your letter duly to hand. We were very pleased 
to hear from you, and can imagine how thankful you 
are to be comfortably settled. I wish I could run down 
to see you and help in the grand but difficult task you 
have undertaken. We have just returned from a holiday 
in the country. Spent a good time with Brother 
L., a TOWER subscriber, who, I am sorry to say, is having 
a hard time of it. He has been a great worker in 
the Methodist Church (local preacher, etc., etc.), and, of 
course, a "good fellow," as we say; but having given 
this all up, it is different now. Still, we expect this, 
and rejoice with all those who walk the narrow way. 

I shall soon be wanting a fresh supply of DAWNS, 
so let me know when you receive your big consignment. 
This looks like business, and no doubt it is the right 
thing to do; there is nothing like having plenty of faith. 
It is wonderful the amount of matter Bro. Russell and 
his staff are sending out; God bless them! We are 
anxious to get No. 6 DAWN, feeling sure there is a treat 
for us, though I still read the others with the same 
interest. 

Hoping you will soon get a company of sincere lovers 
of the Truth around you, and that the work of the 
WATCH TOWER office will make great progress in all the 
colonies, and that God will bless you with his presence 
and guidance, I remain, 

Yours in Christian love, in which my wife joins, 
., New South Wales. 

DEAR BROTHER:- 

Many thanks for your kind letters and enclosures. 
My husband and I will make an attempt, with the help 
of the Lord, for a few weeks, to secure orders for MILLENNIAL 
DAWN. We pray we may succeed. Hitherto 
we have given away, instead of selling, but we shall try 



your plan, and hope to send you cheerful news. Enclosed 
is P.O.O. for three subscriptions and an order 
for cloth-bound DAWNS. We trust, dear Brother, we may 
be able still further to help on so good a work and so 
glorious a gospel. We are grateful to be vessels for 
use in His service. 
Yours faithfully in Christ. 

., New South Wales. 

DEAR SIRS:- 

I received the parcels of DAWNS, Bible, etc., and 
thank you very much for them. I have been reading 
them, and there is not the least doubt about their being 
correct. I have not the time for continual study, but 
intend acquiring all the Bible knowledge I can; it is 
better to get it late than never. I am only sorry I did 
not get these works before; they are clearing up all my 
doubts on Christianity as clergymen could never do. 

I have handed some of the tracts to friends, and 
two or three of them are very much interested. I think 
it will not be long before they withdraw from Babylon. 
One of them wants the DAWNS in cloth, and a Bible the 
same as you sent me, and I wish to ask whether you 
will send him the same for the same money, or whether 
mine was sent for the same price because it was all I 
remitted? You see, the Bible is such a splendid one 
that I am almost afraid to tell him the amount it cost, 

R3379 : page 175 

for fear when he sends he will have to pay more. [The 
brother's fears are not surprising, for Bibles are very 
expensive everywhere in Australia, except at our Depot. 
For example, we have the Holman No. 8836 with 
patent thumb index, for 10s. 10d.; in the Sunday School 
Union Depot in Melbourne the same Bible is priced 
21s.6d.-E.C.H.] 

I intend doing my best to spread the Truth around 
here, though do not expect to make much headway, as 
most people are bound to their various creeds, and 
are "full." However, what time I have to spare I 
intend to use studying the glorious Truths, and helping 
others to the same knowledge. I remain, 

A co-worker for Christ, 

., New South Wales. 

DEAR FRIEND :- 

Yours of 10th inst. duly to hand. My time has 
been so much taken up since receiving your first communication, 
about a month ago, that I have not had 

sufficient at my disposal to give your letter that consideration 
it deserves, and to answer it as promptly as I 
otherwise would. 

Business pressure upon me is very great, and absorbs 
most of my time, but you can rely upon me to 
do all I can for the sale of MILLENNIAL DAWN as time 



will allow. Have received orders today for six volumes, 
which please send. Enclosed is remittance. 
Yours faithfully, ., South Australia. 

DEAR BROTHER:- 

I received your kind letter of the 10th, intimating 
that a Branch of the Society had been opened in 
Melbourne. Was glad to hear of it, and trust it will 
prove of great service to the dear brethren throughout 
Australia. I, for one, have felt considerable drawbacks 
at having to wait three months for an answer 
from America. 

For several years I have been trying to help Christian 
brethren by lending them volumes of MILLENNIAL 
DAWN, but have as yet met with no hearty response 
from any one (one dear brother excepted), the majority 
of those I have tried to reach being very indifferent, 
and a few quite hostile. Years before hearing of Mr. 
Russell's books I was deeply interested in the themes 
of which he so ably treats, and since reading them have 
continued to be so, praying and wishing from my heart 
that others might be led to receive their heavenly teachings, 
but, sad to say, without success, so far as I know, 
with the above exception. Still, I do not despair, nor 
wish to allow myself to get discouraged, remembering 
whose work it is, and the many precious promises he 
has given us in his holy Word. 

I shall be glad to receive some tracts for distribution, 
also full information regarding the Colporteur service. 
I may be able to devote one or two hours daily 
to this kind of work, later on. 

Sincerely yours in Christ Jesus, 

., Tasmania. 

DEAR BROTHER IN CHRIST:- 

Tracts to hand; many thanks. I have given quite 
a number to those who I think will be interested, and 
have already received some interesting accounts from 
those who have gotten them. But I think it will take 
some time before they enter fully into the depths of 
the truths therein contained. My wife has become interested 
in reading "The Plan of the Ages." Please forward 
the six volumes in cloth, which I will lend to 
friends. 

Yours in the Lord, ., Victoria. 

DEAR BROTHER:- 

I was very pleased to receive your letter, and to 
know that you are established. I trust that God's richest 
blessings may rest with you in your labors, so that 
it will be a permanent Branch, and that you may long 
be spared to labor in the Harvest work. 

I have been in this colony only three years this 
month. I nearly entered into Present Truth prior to 
leaving England, while you were in charge of the British 
Branch, through some one giving me a WATCH TOWER 



in Canning Town one Sunday morning. As it was, it 
was left over until I arrived in W.A., and at that time 
there were only two or three here who knew anything 
about it. About a fortnight after my arrival, I happened 
to go to Fremantle on a Saturday night and 
heard some one speaking in the open air. I went up to 
listen, but, being hard of hearing, I hardly caught anything, 
though I managed to hear something about 1914. 
I stopped till the brother finished, and then went up to 
ask him where he got his 1914, and that is how I was 
led into Present Truth. Shortly after, I was shown a 
WATCH TOWER. Well, I said, I had one similar to that 
given me in England!... 
With kindest wishes, believe me to be, 
Yours in the Lord's service, 

., Western Australia. 

DEAR BROTHER:- 

Yours of the 10th to hand. We were very pleased 
to hear from you and to know that you were getting 
settled in your new home. The Lord sustain you by 
bringing you in contact with true brethren and congenial 
friends ! 

There is little to tell you of our affairs. We have 
meetings twice a week for Bible study and prayer in 
which we always remember you. We could wish the 
Lord had left you with us, but we humbly submit to 
his will in this as in all other matters. I should be glad 

R3380 : page 175 

of any word of instruction or exhortation from you. 

Please deliver one set of DAWNS in cloth to the address 
of the enclosed note, which will recommend you to 
my friends in Melbourne, where I hope you will find many 
who love the Lord and are hungering for the Truth. 
Give my love to all of like mind in the Lord, and let us 
"work, for the night is coming." 

Your brother in Christ, 

., Western Australia. 

DEAR BROTHER:- 

Yours came to hand in due time, and I was glad to 
receive news of you and your welfare. I am pleased 
with the choice of position for headquarters, so far as 
the Australian States are concerned. I should have 
written you sooner, but have been very much engaged 
of late; you both and the work under your care are not 
forgotten, the same being remembered by me in prayer. 

Our meeting at Fremantle was very profitable to 
me; I was glad to be there. Though I had to make a 
sacrifice to do it, I was indeed glad to meet you, and 
sorry to leave you, but the Lord's will had to be done. 
I shall be pleased to hear of the progress of the work 
with you later. The Lord bless and prosper you as it 
pleaseth him, and in due time he will exalt you. 



Yours in His service, 

., Western Australia. 



page 177 

SEMI-MONTHLY 
VOL. XXV. JUNE 15, 1904. No. 12. 



CONTENTS 

Views from the Watch Tower 179 

The Outcome of the War 179 

Zionists Encouraged 179 

Church Must Do Some Fighting 180 

Rev. Dr. Burt on Romanism 180 

Denominational Union 181 

Immortality in the Early Church 182 

Some Modern Views 183 

The Los Angeles Convention 184 

Studies in the Old Testament 186 

Selfish Expediency Misled Them 188 

Interesting Questions Answered 190 

page 178 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-24 EVERSHOLT ST., LONDON, N.W. 
GERMAN BRANCH-MIRKER STR., 45, ELBERFELD. 
AUSTRALIAN BRANCH-32 JOHNSTON ST., FITZROY, MELBOURNE. 

PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE, 5c (2-l/2d.) A COPY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity 
or adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER, will be supplied FREE, if 
they send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting 
the paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our 
list continually. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE 



THIS JOURNAL IS PUBLISHED IN THE 



FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, DANISH AND ITALIAN LANGUAGES. 
SAMPLE COPIES AND TERMS FREE. 



MISSIONARY LETTER PAPER we no longer furnish. 
The Missionary Envelopes (25c per hundred) seem to us 
quite sufficient. 

R3382 : page 178 

A SPECIAL WORD TO AUSTRALIAN FRIENDS 



We trust that the opening of our Australian Branch 
office noted above will prove a great convenience to the 
friends of Present Truth there. We have stocked it well 
with DAWNS, Booklets, Tracts, Bibles, etc., for their accommodation 
and for cooperation with them and for the 
further spread of the "good tidings of great joy." Avail 
yourselves of these advantages: join with us in seeing to 
what extent ripe "wheat" may be expected in that quarter 
of the field. 

page 178 

INSTEAD OF FOREIGN TRACTS, hereafter use Foreign 
TOWERS. Orders all the sample copies you can use judiciously, 
FREE. 

The Pittsburg Gazette publishes one of Pastor C. T. Russell's 
sermons each week. See terms in our last issue. 



R3380 : page 179 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 
THE OUTCOME OF THE WAR. 



VARIOUS are the speculations on the outcome of 

the present war in the far East. Russia's 

prime minister has surprised Europe by declaring 

that Russia will neither accept any mediations 

for peace, nor be willing at the close of the war, should 

it end in her favor, to allow other nations to have 

any say in regard to the terms of peace. The 

journals of the world generally agree that this is 

an early boast, and that when the end of the war 

comes, even if Russia win, she will be so weakened 

by the struggle as to be in poor condition to resist the 

will of the Great Powers, all of whom are deeply concerned 



in the future of China and Japan. 

The Japanese, pardonably intoxicated by their 
success over one of the greatest nations of Europe, 
are speculating on what they will do when the war 
ends favorably to them, as they expect it will. Some 
of their leading papers counsel moderation, but others 
picture Japan as the head and leader of all Mongolia 
—of China, Korea, etc., some even thinking of Siberia 
as ultimately a part of Greater Japan. 

Russia includes numerous subjected peoples- 
Finns, Poles, etc., all of whom have been treated 
with great harshness, which they have been powerless 
to resist. The failure of Russian ships and armies in 
the present war emboldens these peoples to hope that 
some kind of relief for them may be part of the outcome 
of the war,— either through open rebellion or 
through the change of the general government of 
Russia from a despotism to a more liberal government 
in which they would have some share. We quote 
from one of their journals, as follows:— 

"The roar of the bombs shattering the Russian 
vessels at Port Arthur must resound with a double 
echo in the heart of every Pole. It proclaims to us 
not only the defeat of our foe, the executioner of our 
fatherland, who for a century and a quarter has been 
torturing so many millions of our countrymen, but it 
announces something else. Out there in the Far East 
wedges are being driven into the granite, into the apparently 
indestructible might of Russia. There, 
amid the whizz of the balls and the groans of the dying, 
conditions are forming by means of which all 
upon whom Russia has laid her heavy hand may derive 
advantage. The name of these sufferers is 
legion. There is perhaps no corner of the Russian empire 
in which feelings of hatred have not thus accumulated, 
in which there does not seethe in the hearts 
of the people the desire for liberation, for the final 
removal of the cause of so much misery and of so 
many wrongs. ...Rendered especially audacious in 
recent times by her diplomatic successes, convinced 
that her external foes would not dare attack her and 
that her internal foes would be subdued the more easily 
the more severity she displayed in oppressing 
them, Russia discarded all restraints. She created 
one enemy after another. After the workingmen and 
the students came the turn of the peasants. Next the 
Jews learned the meaning of Russian rule. After the 
Jews, Russia laid her iron hand upon the proverbially 
loyal Finns. Finally came the turn of Armenia, which 
only recently was turning a yearning eye to Russia, the 
deliverer from Turkish chains. Of the Poles there is 
no need to speak. With the exception of the conciliationists, 
there is no one who does not long to cast 
off the hated yoke. Any action having that object in 
view would certainly meet with the approval of the 
Poles." 



In any event the war means a wakening of the 
nations— a preparation for the general and awful anarchy 
which the Scriptures forewarn us will wind up 
the present Gospel age and be the forerunner of the 
Millennial age. During the next ten years many of 
the great nations will become similarly weakened. 

ZIONISTS ENCOURAGED. 



Whatever price for Jewish liberty in Palestine 
might be acceptable to the Sultan of Turkey, its actual 

R3380 :page 180 

ruler, the matter would require the acquiescence 
of Great Britain and Russia, and Germany might like 
to be consulted. Negotiations between Dr. Herzl of 
the Zionists and the Sultan of Turkey were reported 
satisfactory some time ago, but nothing could be done 
without Russia's consent— Great Britain and Germany 
being understood to have been favorable all along. 

Now, under date of May 26, press dispatches report 
that just as the Zionist Congress at Hamburg, 
Germany, was closing, the announcement was made 
by Dr. Klee that the Russian government had replied 
favorably to the request of the Zionists that it would 
use its influence with the Sultan of Turkey in favor 
of Jewish colonization of Palestine. 

CHURCH MUST DO SOME FIGHTING. 



At the City Ministers' Union meeting yesterday, 
Dr. Charles A. Eaton spoke on "The Relation between 
Churches and Men." He said in part:— 

"Seven million young men in this country are 
alienated from the Christian churches, according to 
Dr. Cressey. To this number a vast army of older 
men must be added. I do not attribute this condition 
to the preacher; nor do I attribute it to the innate 
depravity of these 7,000,000 and more men. 

"We can refer this alienation to a deeper cause. 
Biological science, for one thing, is at the root of the 
evil. We eliminate the supernatural revelation. We 
burrow ourselves in nature. Each man becomes his 
own god. The idealistic philosophy, as taught today, 
is that God and man are one. That's the plain English 
of Monism." 

Following another detail of this line of thought, 
Dr. Eaton said: "I don't believe the world today 
could produce Jesus; I don't believe the United 
States could produce Jesus; I don't believe the city 
of Cleveland could produce Jesus; not even the 



Church— could it, Dr. Jackson?" 

"We'd crucify him, probably, if he came among 
us," shouted Dr. Jackson. 

"Yes," Dr. Eaton went on; "we'd find him the 
most inconvenient member of our Church, and the 
hardest to get along with. His doctrines would stagger 
us. 

"We have failed to use our scientific heritage, 
but we are better off than we were ten years ago. 
We have had our scientific deluge. We have discovered 
that a man can have a thorough knowledge of 
science, and yet die of a broken heart. We have discovered 
that science is not infallible. 

"We're beginning now to feel hungry for some 
meat and some milk, something that will sit well on 
the stomach. We have tried all the isms, all the new 
things, and now we are about ready to turn to the 
truth."— Cleveland Plain Dealer. 



How strange such confessions sound to the well-nurtured 
children of God. While realizing that science, 
falsely so called, has done great harm— has 
destroyed the faith of many— Dr. Eaton is seemingly 
oblivious to the fact that his own faith is undermined. 
Otherwise how could he talk about our day being unable 
to produce a man the equal of Jesus. Evidently 
Dr. Eaton believes that our Lord Jesus was a mere 
man, a sinner, "born in sin and shapen in iniquity," 
even as others. Evidently he rejects the Biblical 
teaching that our Lord had a preexistence, and that 
his life was transferred, and so peculiarly born that he 
was "holy, harmless, separate from sinners." And 
yet this gentleman has accepted and avowed a creed 
which declares that Jesus was Jehovah. Alas, such 
inconsistency! Is it any wonder that the "world" is 
gradually seeing through such theological deceptions 
and double dealings? How hard theologians sometimes 
seem to struggle in their endeavor to be honest 
with themselves and their hearers. Years of systematic 

R3381 :page 180 

dishonesty with their own consciences has put 
them now at great disadvantage in any attempt they 
may make to grasp or to tell the Truth. 

REV. DR. BURT ON ROMANISM. 



A DESCRIPTIVE VIEW OF CONDITIONS IN ITALY. 

The following is from the Geneva Daily Times:— 
"Rev. Dr. William Burt of Rome, Italy, spoke 



to a large audience in the First Methodist Church last 
evening. So closely did he hold the attention of the 
people that when the fire alarm sounded only the firemen 
present withdrew. 

"Dr. Burt gave a concise review of the history of 
Italy, leading up to the events of 1870, when the Romish 
Church lost its temporal power. He showed 
that the growth of education and of liberal thought, 
as represented by Protestantism, had resulted in the 
fall of the temporal power of Papacy. He gave an 
eloquent portrayal of the work of Garibaldi in establishing 
freedom and uniting the petty states of Italy 
into one strong kingdom. 

"Mr. Burt contended that the Papacy of Italy 
is essentially pagan; that its influence upon personal 
character is pagan; that it places responsibility not 
upon the individual but upon the Church; that it 
teaches that salvation depends not upon faith in Jesus 
Christ but upon some external ceremony. He declared 
that the rank and file of the Italian priests are 
ignorant and helpless, so far as practical notions of 
life are concerned; that many of them are anxious to 
escape from their positions as they come into contact 
with the liberal ideas of Protestantism. 

"There are two great classes in Italy— the poor, 
ignorant people, who are idolatrous and superstitious 
followers of the Papal Church, and the educated class, 
who are agnostics and infidels. The young men of 
Italy, he said, are bitter and intense in their hatred 
of the Romish system. The popular estimate of the 
Papal hierarchy is that the names of cardinal, bishop, 
priest, are synonyms for deceit, hypocrisy, lust, avarice 
and intolerance. The press of Italy deals constantly 
in charges of corruption and lust against the 
clergy, such as would be considered too indecent for 
public utterance in America. 

"Dr. Burt declared that the present pope is considered 

R3381 :page 181 

only a figurehead by the authorities at Rome; 
that within the Vatican there is a representative of 
the Associated Press, whose business it is to see to it 
that the world gets a favorable impression of the 
pope, while the Jesuitical powers that elected him 
are really guiding the policy of the Church. The 
pope turns one face to France, another to Austria, 
another to Italy and another to America. 

"Mr. Burt closed with an earnest appeal to Americans 
to be more on the alert against the encroachments 
of Romanism in politics and their interference in our 
schools. He said, If you want to know what Romanism 
really is, look at Mexico, look at Spain, look at 
South America, look at Porto Rico! Look at them!' 

"One of the most surprising statements of the 
speaker was, that much of the detailed description of 



the imposing scenes connected with the burial of Pope 
Leo XIII, was prepared and sent out from Rome two 
weeks before the pope died." 

BIBLE STUDY. 



Chancellor MacCracken, of the New York University, 
at the recent opening of that institution, complained 
of the gross ignorance of the Bible on the part 
of students. He spoke as an educationist, looking to 
the production of noble and effective manhood and 
womanhood. Ignorance of the Bible is to all a great 
loss; in Jews it is a disgrace. If the clubs and 
classes formed for the study of Browning and Shakespeare 
are evidences of culture, what shall be said of 
those who neglect the study of the Bible? 

It is not inopportune to present some reasons for 
the study of the Bible: 

1. It is the charter of our religion. 

2. It is the storehouse of its principles. 

3. It has essentially moulded our civilization. 

4. It is an ancient classic. 

5. It is the inspired Word of God. 

6. It is the history of our people. 

7. Its language is worthy of study. 

8. Its characters are striking and original. 

9. Its principles are exemplary and most 
powerful. 

10. It is an ethical force. 

1 1 . It unveils an ancient civilization to the world. 

12. Its fundamental ideals are yet far from realized 
and its declarations unexhausted mines, yielding 
ever fresh treasures. 

13. Its facts and principles and characters pervade 
all literature, which is unintelligible to those ignorant 
of its contents. ("The Bible in Shakespeare," "The 
Bible in Browning," are two recent books.) 

14. It is the battle-ground of a great science. 

15. It is the basis of three great religions. 

16. It is culture-building. 

17. Ignorance of it is gross stupidity. 

18. Knowledge of it is presupposed in every educated 
man and woman. 

19. It enables men to reach and move the heart 
of all. 

20. It is faith-giving. 

2 1 . A great comfort in time of sorrow. 

22. An ever-present help in temptation. 

23. A great stimulus to noble living. 

24. Its view encompasses heaven and earth, opens 

a path in this life to walk in, and a hope for the future. 
—Jewish Exponent. 

REFORMED PRESBYTERIANS DECRY THE SPECTACULAR. 



Holding fast to the "faith of the fathers," a 
movement has been inaugurated by the Philadelphia 
Presbytery of the Reformed Presbyterian Church for 
concerted interdenominational action to "correct 
abuses in the forms of worship" among Protestant 
churches. The first steps in the movement were taken 
this week at a meeting of the Presbytery, and 
arrangements are under way for a joint meeting of 
representatives of several denominations in the near 
future. 

The resolutions, among other declarations, state 
as follows:— 

"Churches in general, in the present day, have 
departed far from the apostolic system and method of 
divine worship. 

"The existing tendency is to lower and degrade 
the holy and solemn service of God's house to a sensuous 
and spectacular entertainment. 

"The preaching of the Word of God has been 
quite generally reduced to soul-starving brevity. 

"The churches, by will-worship, are endangering 
their religious inheritance won in the great Reformation 
at the cost of much precious blood. 

"Let all bear testimony against the presumption 
of men who attempt to improve upon God's own plan 
and system of divine service. The law of God relating 
to the matter and manner of worship, as revealed 
in his Word is, in our judgment, a foundation stone 
of primal importance in a basis of union for all the 
churches of Christian faith." 

WANT TO CLASP HANDS. 



At the closing session of the recent Baltimore 
(Md.) conference of the Methodist Episcopal Church 
the following resolutions pertaining to the unification 
of the Methodist Episcopal and Methodist Protestant 
churches of the country were adopted:— 

"Whereas, Providence evidently plans the union 
of Methodism, and negotiations are now progressing 
between the Methodist Protestant and other communions; 
therefore be it 

"Resolved, That the Baltimore annual conference 
of the Methodist Episcopal Church invite the Maryland 
annual conference of the Methodist Protestant 
Church to join with us in requesting their delegations 
to their respective general conferences to memorialize 
to appoint commissioners to confer upon the terms of 
union." 

PRESBYTERIANS FAVOR UNION. 



Buffalo, N.Y., May 27. --The General Assembly 
of the Presbyterian Church in the United States, by 
an overwhelming vote, today adopted the report of 
the committee on union with the Cumberland Presbyterian 
Church. The resolutions adopted included 
not only favorable action on the report but recommends 
certain other steps to be taken to secure the 
union of the churches and to make plain the position 
of the Church. 

The question of proposed basis of union will now 

R3381 :page 182 

go to the presbyteries of the General Assembly. If it 
be approved by two-thirds of them, the necessary steps 
will be taken at the next General Assembly to effect 
the union. The announcement of the result was received 
with great cheering. 

METHODISTS FAVOR UNION. 



Washington, May 27.— The Methodist Protestant 
Conference today completely cleared the way for 
union between itself and every one of the four denominations 
with which negotiations are pending, by the 
adoption of a supplemental report from its committee 
on union. 

The report provides: First, that the annual conferences 
of the denomination should vote on the 
proposition of union with the Primitive Methodist 
denomination. Should a two-thirds vote for union be 
recorded— the same action being taken by the Primitive 
Methodists— the union will have been consummated. 
Second, the memorial from the Baltimore 
Conference of the Methodist Episcopal Church was 
received "in a most heartily reciprocating spirit." 



R3382 : page 182 

IMMORTALITY IN THE EARLY CHURCH. 

IT is not our practice to quote the "early fathers" 

on any subject, but all the more some of our 

readers may be interested in what Rev. J. Agar 

Beet, D.D., Professor in a Methodist college in England, 

has found on Immortality. We quote liberally, 

as follows:— 

"In chapter 1 we saw that Plato taught that the 
soul of man is immortal, i.e., that for good or ill, immortality 



is its inalienable attribute; in contrast, as 

we saw in chapter 2, to Christ and his apostles, who 

taught that incorruptibility— i.e., a state without decay 

—and eternal life are the reward awaiting the 

righteous, whereas destruction awaits the wicked. 

We shall now consider what the early Christian writers, 

living in an intellectual environment greatly influenced 

by the teaching of Plato, said about the immortality 

of the soul and about the eternal life promised 

by Christ to the righteous. 

"The earliest Christian writers reproduce the 
thought, and in large measure the language, of the 
New Testament, and say nothing about, or reject, the 
immortality of the soul. Clement of Rome, in his epistle 
to the Corinthians, chapter 35, speaks of 'life in 
immortality' as a gift of God to the righteous. So 
Ignatius to Polycarp, chapter 2: 'Be sober, as God's 
athlete; the prize is incorruptibility and life eternal.' 
He writes to the Magnesians, chapter 20, about 'the 
medicine of immortality, an antidote so as not to die, 
but to live eternally in Jesus Christ always.'... 

"Theophilus to Autolycus, book ii. 27, writes: 
'But some will say to us, Was man by nature mortal? 
Certainly not. Was he then immortal? Neither do 
we affirm this. But one will say, Was he then nothing? 
Not even this hits the mark. He was by nature 
neither mortal nor immortal. For, if he had made 
him immortal from the beginning, he would have 
made him God. Again, if he had made him mortal, 
God would seem to be the cause of his death. Neither 
then immortal nor yet mortal did he make him, but, 
as we have said above, capable of both; so that if he 
should incline to the things of immortality, keeping 
the commandment of God, he should receive as reward 
from him immortality, and should become God; 
but if, on the other hand, he should turn to the things 
of death, disobeying God, he should himself be the 
cause of death to himself. For God made man free, 
with power over himself. That, then, which man 
brought upon himself through carelessness and disobedience, 
this now God bestows upon him as a gift, 
through his own kindness and pity when men obey 
him. For as man, disobeying, drew death upon himself, 
so, obeying the will of God, he who desires is 
able to gain for himself life eternal. For God has 
given us a law and holy commandments; and every 
one who keeps these can be saved, and, obtaining the 
resurrection, can inherit incorruptibility.' 

"Somewhat later Irenaeus writes, in book ii, 34, 
3, that 'the Father of all imparts continuance forever 
and ever on those who are saved. For life does not 
arise from us nor from our own nature, but is bestowed 
according to the grace of God. And therefore he who 
shall preserve the life bestowed upon him and give 
thanks to him that imparted it, shall receive also 
length of days forever and ever. But he who shall 



reject it and prove himself ungrateful to his Maker, 
inasmuch as he has been created and has not recognized 
him who bestowed the gift upon him, deprives 
himself of the privilege of continuance forever and 
ever. And for this reason the Lord declared to those 
who showed themselves ungrateful to him, If ye have 
not been faithful in that which is little, who shall 
give you that which is great? indicating that those 
who, in this brief temporal life, have shown themselves 
ungrateful to him who bestowed it, shall justly 
not receive from him length of days forever and 
ever.' 

"On the other hand, in book v. 4. 1 (cf. ch.7.I), 
Irenaeus speaks of the soul as one of the things 'which 
are by nature immortal, and to which it belongs by 
their own nature to live.' This apparent contradiction 
reveals the influence of two contradictory lines of 
thought. 

"At the close of the second century Clement of 
Alexandria writes: 'Let us observe God's commandments 
and follow his counsels: they are the short and 
direct way that leads to eternity,' i.e., to eternal 
existence; and again, 'When baptized, we become 
enlightened; enlightened, we become sons; as sons 
we become perfect and immortal.' See Paed. 1.3,6. 

"Up to this time, so far as I know, except the 
passing references in Irenaeus just quoted, and two 
writers now to be mentioned, no Christian writer 
speaks of the soul of man as immortal, or as continuing 
in endless existence, or of immortality as other 
than a reward of righteousness. 

"In the middle of the second century Tatian 
writes, in his 'Address to the Greeks,' ch. 13: 'The soul 
is not in itself immortal, O Greeks, but mortal. Yet 
it is possible for it not to die. If indeed it knows not 

R3382 : page 183 

the truth, it dies and is dissolved with the body, but 
rises again at last at the end of the world with the 
body, receiving death by punishment in immortality.' 
About the demons he says in chapter 14: That which 
is now their chief distinction, that they do not die like 
men, they will retain when about to suffer punishment: 
they will not partake of everlasting life so as 
to receive this, instead of death, in a blessed immortality. 
And as we, to whom it now easily happens 
to die, afterwards receive the immortal with enjoyment, 
or the painful with immortality, so the demons 
who abuse the present life to purposes of wrong 
doing, dying continually even while they live, 
will have hereafter the same immortality, like that 
which they had during the life they lived, but in its 
nature like that of men, who actually performed what 
the demons ascribed to them during their lifetime.' 
The phrases 'punishment with immortality' and the 



'painful with immortality' deviate from the phraseology 
of the New Testament. For there the terms 
immortality and its equivalents, incorruptibility and 
eternal life, are used only to describe a state of blessing. 
Thus Tatian approaches the language of Plato, 
with whose writings he was familiar...." 

After referring to Athenagoras, a philosopher of 
Athens who accepted Christianity, to Tertullian and 
to Origen as advocates of the Platonic teaching concerning 
the immortality of the soul, Dr. Beet 
says:— 

"To sum up: The phrase, the soul immortal, so 
frequent and conspicuous in the writings of Plato, we 
have not found in pre-Christian literature outside the 
influence of Greek philosophy; nor have we found it 
in Christian literature until the latter part of the second 
century. We have noticed that all the earliest 
Christian writers who use this phrase were familiar 
with the teaching of Plato; that one of these, Tertullian, 
expressly refers both phrase and doctrine to 
him; and that the early Christian writers never support 
this doctrine by appeals to the Bible, but only 
by arguments similar to those of Plato. We have 
learnt that by this phrase Plato and the earliest Christian 
writers who use it asserted the endless and essential 
permanence of all human souls, and appealed to 
this doctrine in proof of retribution beyond the grave. 
But we have failed to find any trace of this doctrine 
in the Bible. On the other hand, Christ and his 
apostles teach clearly and frequently retribution beyond 
death, and eternal life with God for all who put 
faith in Christ. The hope of immortality, however, 
rests in the New Testament, not on the nature of the 
soul, but on the 'promise of life in Christ Jesus.' 

"The doctrine of the immortality of the soul differs 
further from the immortality promised in the New 
Testament in that this last is not for the body only, 
as Plato taught, but for the whole man, body and 
soul. 

"Doubtless the doctrine before us was welcome 
in the early Church, as in a still earlier day to some 
devout Jews, because of the support it renders to the 
all-important doctrine of retribution beyond the grave. 
But, as we have seen, it is altogether alien, both in 
phrase and thought, to the teaching of Christ and his 
apostles." 

EPISCOPALIAN TESTIMONY. 



It is sometimes argued that the immortality of 
the soul is a truth so generally accepted that any 
direct statement of it in Holy Scripture was unnecessary; 
and a parallel to this silence is thought to have 
been found in the fact that none of the sacred writers 



have felt obliged explicitly to state the proposition. 
There is a God. 

But notice the wide difference between these two 
cases. The existence of a God, even if it be not distinctly 
asserted, is yet on almost every page of Scripture 
as plainly implied as it possibly can be. Everywhere 
the Almighty confronts us. Take his name 
and presence out of the Bible and the book shrivels 
into nothingness in a moment. Can any such thing 
be said of the doctrine of the natural immortality of 
the soul? Where is it taken for granted? In what 
single sentence is it necessarily implied?— W. R. 
Huntington, D.D. Sermon, "The Hypothesis of Conditional 
Immortality." 

R3383 : page 183 

NEW VIEWS OF THE AUTHOR OF "IN HIS STEPS." 



I have come to believe myself in the probable 
annihilation of those who never respond to God's offer 
of forgiveness, those who never believe in Christ and 
take him as their Savior. It seems probable that the 
Bible teaches that the word "death," as applied to 
the soul that always refuses to repent, is a death that 
means total extinction. I cannot interpret the use of 
such a text as we have today, to mean anything less 
than that "the wages of sin is death." What do 
these words mean, if not plainly what they say?— the 
extinction of life, the utter going out of the flame 
that was meant to ascend higher and brighter and 
purer on the alter of man's worship of his Creator 
and Redeemer.— Chas. M. Sheldon, in Sermon reported 
in "The Christian Herald." 

HENRY WARD BEECHER'S VIEWS. 



He that lives to the flesh shall of the flesh reap 
corruption— shall. It is sure to come. What shall it 
be? Future torment? No, I do not mean that; I 
mean that he that cultivates his lower nature, mere 
animal nature, with the animal perishes. ...It is 
to my mind a relief that if a man never rises any 
higher than the animal life, the universe will never 
see a God enthroned that looks down upon the infinite 
and prolonged torments of an unconceived number of 
men shut up simply for the purpose of suffering. If 
there be anything more infidel than that I do not 
know what it is, or anything which more effectually 
blots out the possibility of respecting and loving any 
God than this— continuing to create men with some 
foresight of their perpetual suffering.— From Sermon 



on Gal. 6:7-9. 

FROM DR. LEONARD BACON. 



"Let it be fairly understood, on all hands, that the 
doctrine of future existence as conditional upon the 
act of God, is not incompatible with any of the theories 
of the future life current in modern Christendom 
—with Universalism, Restorationism, with the 
opinions called orthodox, or even with the wretched 

R3383 : page 184 

despair of those who know no life to come at all. 
The one thesis to which, if I were a disputant on the 
subject, I should try to stick and to compel all my 
diverse antagonists to stick, until it was decided one 
way or the other, is this: That whatever future existence 
men shall have after death, be it blissful or 
miserable, be it unending or transient, be it the lot of 
all souls or only of a part, they will have it as being 
conferred by the act of God who raises from the dead, 
and not by the soul's intrinsic tenacity of life." 



R3383 : page 184 

THE LOS ANGELES CONVENTION. 

OUR greeting on arrival at Los Angeles depot was 

most cordial. Probably thirty of the dear 

friends awaited us, though the train was many 

hours late and it was Saturday night— May 7th. 

Words are not adequate to describe our mutual joys 

as we realized that our long-looked-for pleasure of 

meeting was at last fulfilled. It made us think of the 

waited-for "General Assembly of the Church of the 

First-born" in the Kingdom glory. Indeed it was in 

many respects a foretaste of it. We were made glad 

when we learned that the opening sessions of the Convention 

had been joyous and profitable, and by midnight 

we were safely abed at the home of our dear 

Brother and Sister Sherman, with a "Rest" motto at 

the head of the bed and others on the walls, and all 

wrapped in the perfume of roses. We gave hearty 

thanks to the Lord for his care and bounty and slept 

refreshingly after our tedious two-days' journey 

through the desert. 

Sunday was the principal day of the Convention. 
Its morning hours were for all— a Testimony and 
Praise Meeting. It was good to be there. Many of 
the testimonies were remarkable as tributes of praise 
and thanksgiving to the Heavenly Father for the 



"meat in due season" received in various ways, often 
peculiar and unexpected. After this session we were 
privileged to shake the hands of the dear friends of 
the Los Angeles Church and about as many more- 
visitors from abroad, far and near— the total being 
about 250. The writer greatly enjoyed this, and the 
words and tones and looks and hearty hand-grasps 
assured us that many had their cups of joy full to the 
brim. 

The afternoon discourse was specially for the public, 
from a platform covered with flowers— surely a 
thousand of them— on the topic, "Salvation— from 
what are we saved and to what are we saved?" We 
had a house full, estimated 750, who gave very careful 
attention. A full report of the discourse appeared in 
the Gazette, which so many of our readers now receive 
regularly. 

The Sunday evening meeting was designed to 
have been a Question Meeting, but as we decided to 
remain over an extra day we spoke on "Cast not away 
therefore your confidence." 

The sessions of Monday forenoon from 10 to 
12 o'clock were occupied by Pilgrims Draper and 
Van Amburgh, who spoke ably to attentive listeners. 
Monday afternoon the discourse was on "Baptism 
and its import." This was followed by the symbolic 
burial in water of twenty-two, who witnessed a good 
confession of their faith, devotion and obedience. 

The evening service was, as per our program, a 
"Love Feast." After a few remarks explanatory- 
showing that there is no relationship between such 
"breaking of bread" and the Memorial Supper— we 
made brief reference to the blessings which by the 
Lord's providence the Convention had brought to us 
all, and exhortations that we each strive diligently to 
make our calling and election sure so as to be participants 
in the joys of the great Convention in glory— 
"the General Assembly of the Church of the Firstborn, 
whose names are written in heaven." Then 
with the Elder of the local Church, Brother Sherman, 
and Pilgrim Draper at one end and Pilgrim Van Amburgh 
and the writer at the other end, and intermediately 
elders of other churches and colporteurs (about 
25 in all), we bade good-bye to the dear brethren and 
sisters, greeting each with a hearty hand-shake. The 
first-named four each had on a plate a loaf of bread 
cut into strips, that the passing friends might break 
bread with each as representatives of all present, and 
indirectly, in the writer's loaf, with all absent members 
of the Society— who also were remembered in 
our prayers. Thus the Convention proper closed. 

However, further pleasures and privileges were 
open to those who could and did remain over. Tuesday 
morning we had a most interesting gathering of 
colporteurs and those meditating engaging in that 
fruitful and blessed service. In the afternoon we 



addressed many of the Convention friends and others 
in a suburban village in a Presbyterian Church on the 
occasion of the funeral of a dear sister who for weeks 
had been hoping to see us in the flesh, and whose 
death occurred just in season to gratify another wish 
of her heart,— that her neighbors should hear from 
our lips respecting the hopes built upon God's Word, 
common to us both. 

In the evening we met in the W.C.T.U. rooms 
and had the postponed Question Meeting, about 150 
being present. Some very interesting queries were 
propounded and answered. Then final greetings and 
partings and hopes for the future, when we shall be 
forever with the Lord and all who are his. A goodly 

R3383 : page 185 

company, however, was on hand at the depot as we left 
next day for San Francisco. 

SAN FRANCISCO, PORTLAND, SEATTLE, ST. PAUL 
AND MILWAUKEE ONE-DAY 
CONVENTIONS. 



Each of these precious gatherings had its own 
special and peculiar features of interest; but we must 
not detail them all lest we weary you, for however 
distinctive they each were to us and to those met at 
the different points, the accounts must needs be in 
similar language. 

At San Francisco dear brethren awaited us at the 
depot and saw to our comfort and refreshment. Two 
meetings were held, dear friends being present from 
various quarters and introducing themselves— Brother 

A from B ville, Sister C from D ville, etc. 

Some said they had come 60 miles, some 100, some 
more and some less. And their radiant faces and 
hearty grasp told the same story as their lips: that 
the occasion was one of the grandest experiences of 
their lives— long to be remembered as an encouragement 
in the "narrow way." May it be so: we all 
need each other's help, sympathy and prayers. Attendance 
about 150. 

Saturday night (May 14) we reached Portland, 
Oregon, and were greeted at the depot by about twenty 
of the dear friends most enthusiastically, and you may 
be sure we reciprocated the joy. We were most comfortably 
entertained at the home of "Grandmother" 
Baker and the Sunday convention began and ended 
most enjoy ably. 

The morning session was devoted to general testimony, 
interspersed with praise and prayer. It was 
good to be there— to hear the thanksgiving of many 
overflowing hearts acknowledging God's goodness in 



"so great salvation," and for the knowledge of his 
grace coming to us now as "Present Truth." About 
125 were present. 

The afternoon session for the public was on "The 
Oath-bound Covenant." About 300 attended, some 
of whom were obliged to stand throughout. Our 
hope is that some good was done— some glory brought 
to our God and Savior, and some blessing and refreshment 
to his hungry flock. The evening discourse on 
"A night of weeping and a morning of joy" appeared 
in the Pittsburgh Gazette of the following day and thus 

R3384:page 185 

many of you already have it in full. After this service 
we took the train for our next appointment at 

Seattle, Washington, which we reached next 
morning, Monday, May 16. A group of seven brethren 
awaited our arrival at the depot, giving us a most 
cordial welcome and greeting. An afternoon and an 
evening session were held, and from the latter quite a 
group accompanied us to the 10.30 East-bound Express, 
on the N. Pac. R.R. Their earnest expressions 
of good wishes, requests for our prayers and 
hopes for our return will long be remembered. 

Spokane, Wash., we reached on Tuesday (May 
17). We deeply regret our inability to spend a few 
hours with the loyal little band of "fellow-soldiers of 
the cross" at this place. But as the train stopped 
here for five minutes we had opportunity for greetings 
and found seventeen of the dear friends awaiting our 
arrival at the depot. The love and enthusiasm and 
zeal manifested everywhere by those who know and 
love Present Truth is very encouraging indeed. With 
the Apostle we thanked God and took courage, accepting 
a bouquet of flowers as a love token. Most 
of the dear friends here were no longer young, but all 
had the bright, joyous look so general among the 
"Truth people." 

Constant riding day and night brought us on 
Thursday to the dear ones at St. Paul and Minneapolis, 
whom we had met before, but who were none the less 
beloved on that account. True love, begotten of the 
Spirit through the word of grace never grows cold 
but goes on increasing. 

We were met at the train by Brothers Thori and 
Dickinson, who conducted us to the meeting place, 
where the friends were already assembled. We had 
time for personal greetings before the advertised 
meeting hour and enjoyed the privilege greatly. 
Some of the dear friends had come considerable distances, 
and fully one-half we had never met before. 
They had the family likeness, namely earnestness and 
fulness of the Truth, and beaming faces. The afternoon 
discourse was chiefly for the interested, and in 
the evening, to which the public was invited, the 



topic was "The Oath-bound Covenant." At the 

close of the meeting we bade all adieu, being accompanied 

to our train by nine of the friends. 

Milwaukee, Wis., was reached the next forenoon, 
and there we were cordially welcomed and entertained 
by Bro. Page and his family. Our time permitted of 
but one meeting here; it was not publicly advertised, 
but afforded a most enjoyable opportunity for meeting 
eighty dear friends of the Truth— about half of whom 
had come from other points in Wisconsin and thirteen 
from Chicago. Our text was, "Cast not away therefore 
your confidence, which hath great recompense of reward." 
-Heb. 10:35. 

We reached Chicago the same evening and had 
an hour and a half before train-time to spend with a 
surprise party of seventeen of the Chicago Church 
who met us in the depot and with whom we had supper 
near by. The love for the Truth, manifested here 
as everywhere, was most refreshing. How often the 
Lord has thus comforted us, and how such comfort 

R3384 : page 186 

offsets the adverse conditions incident to the present 
pilgrim-way! As the Apostle expresses it:— 

"Blessed be God, even the Father of our Lord 
Jesus Christ, the Father of mercies, and the God of 
all comfort; who comforteth us in all our tribulation, 
that we may be able to comfort them which are in any 
trouble, by the comfort by which we ourselves are 
comforted of God. For as the sufferings of Christ 
abound in us, so our consolation [comfort] also aboundeth 
by Christ. And whether we be afflicted it is for 
your consolation [comfort] and salvation, which is effectual 
in the enduring of the same sufferings which we 
also suffer: or whether we be comforted, it is for your 
consolation [comfort] and salvation."— 2 Cor. 1:3-6. 

We reached Allegheny safely the next morning, 
where two of the Bible House family met us at the 
depot and escorted us to the sitting room, in which 
were gathered the office helpers— about 30. We 
united our hearts and voices in praise and then in 
prayer, when on behalf of the whole a few words of 
greeting and welcome-home were expressed by one of 
the brethren. We responded that though greatly 
pleased and refreshed by recent meetings with the 
dear friends in various places, nevertheless none could 
have a warmer or a closer place in our heart than the 
dear fellow-laborers of the WATCH TOWER office. 



R3384 : page 186 

STUDIES IN THE OLD TESTAMENT. 



--I KINGS 12:20-JULY 3.- 

Golden Text:— "Pride goeth before destruction and 
a haughty spirit before a fall."— Prov. 16:18. 

THE International Sunday School lesson course 
changes again to the Old Testament. Six months 
ago we concluded a study of Israel's experiences 
down to Solomon's time: today we consider the conditions 
which followed the death of the wise king. And, 
by the way, while crediting King Solomon with great 
wisdom, we should not ignore the fact that his life in 
many respects was a contradiction of his wise utterances. 
Under the Lord's blessing his rule brought great prosperity 
to the nation of Israel. Peace ruled within its borders 
during his lifetime, and those borders were extended 
so that they included adjoining nations. 

The fact that discontent was rife throughout a considerable 
portion of Solomon's kingdom, so that it was all 
ready to break out in open rebellion at his death, does 
not necessarily prove that his subjects were badly governed 
—oppressed. We find today that many of the best 
governed and most prosperous peoples are discontented, 
while many of the badly governed and less prosperous are 
contented. Thus in our own nation the blessings and 
privileges of liberty are not appreciated by all. There is 
perhaps more complaining under the wisest and best governments 
in the world today than under the more despotic 
ones. It may have been the same in respect to Israel. 
Indeed it would appear to have been the same in some 
degree, because we find that Israel never prospered to the 
same extent subsequently. After their rebellion against 
what they considered tyranny and oppression, they seemed 
to be less prosperous than under that which they considered 
to be oppression. 

Solomon's son who succeeded him in the kingdom 
was Rehoboam. The twelve tribes, while uniting under 
David and subsequently supporting Solomon, nevertheless 
preserved tribal liberties and called a council of all the 
tribes except the one to which the royal family belonged 
(Judah— Benjamin being a small tribe attached to Judah). 
This gathering of the ten tribes was in the capital city of 
the principal one, Ephraim, in the city of Shechem. The 
representatives of the ten tribes made no secret of the fact 
that they wished assurances from the new king that there 
would be an abatement of the royal demands in the nature 
of levies of men for public labor, of taxes, liberties, etc., 
and that their loyalty to him as their king was more or 
less in the balance. The king was invited to attend this 
meeting. 

WHAT BETTER COULD BE EXPECTED? 

The king was really a better man in some respects 
than might have been expected when we call to mind that 
his mother was a heathen woman, and that to please her 



Solomon had erected a sanctuary to Moloch on Mount 
Olivet. With such a mother and a royal father whose time 
was necessarily largely occupied in other ways, it would have 
been a wonder if Rehoboam had been more godly than he 
was. The older councillors advised that he yield to the 
demands of the tribes as gracefully as possible, but the 
young men expressed the thought that to yield a little 
would mean a pressure to yield more and would show 
weakness. They advised that he speak out boldly and 
bully his subjects into loyalty. He followed their advice 
and sent as his reply, "My father made your yoke heavy, 
but I will add to it: my father chastised you with whips, 
but I will chastise you with scorpions (whips with metal 
lumps on the strands)." The answer was a foolish one 
and precipitated the separation of the ten tribes from the 
two. That separation lasted for centuries: the only healing 
of it that ever took place was that, after the captivity in 
Babylon, so many as desired of all the tribes gathered back 
again into Canaan and were henceforth one little nation. 
We are to view the affairs of nations and the affairs of 
individuals as separate and distinct, though the individuals 
make up the nations. Things may be working advantageously 
to the individuals, but disadvantageously as respects 
the nations, or vice versa. The Lord's people are 
to learn to trust him in the guidance of the great affairs of 

R3384 : page 187 

life— that he is overruling in the affairs of nations in the 
interests of his loyal servants. This was so in respect to 
Israel's affairs. The split in that nation must have seemed 
to many of the people a woful disaster, reducing them as a 
nation from a high place as one of the principal nations of 
earth to a much lower level. To some it may seem even to 
intimate a failure of the divine purposes— that God never 
wished the nation to be divided, but wished the Jewish people 
to become great, mighty, powerful, so that he might accomplish 
through them the promise that in the seed of Abraham 
all the families of the earth should be blessed. But 
those who took such a view erred. God wished the nation 
to be divided— he wished to humble them, to weaken them. 
This is distinctly stated in the lesson, as we read the cause 
was from the Lord, that he might establish his word 

R3385 : page 187 

through the prophet Ahijah. Some time before the Lord 
had sent a message through this prophet to Jereboam to 
the effect that the latter should become king of the ten 
tribes, and now the answer of Rehoboam paved the way 
to the accomplishment of that prophecy. 

PROPER VIEWS OF ISRAEL'S EXPERIENCES. 

As in the lessons of the next six months we shall 
study the history of Israel, let us view it from this standpoint. 



Let us not think of the matter as being wholly the 
result of unwisdom on the part of kings and rulers, but as 
being a matter entirely overruled by the Lord with a special 
object in view. 

The object in view— indeed the entire object of the 
Jewish dispensation— was the purifying of Abraham's descendants, 
so that the Lord might find in that people the 
most holy, the most devoted, the most obedient, to the 
intent that when the time should come for the presentation 
of Messiah, the nation should be represented by its 
very best people under the most favorable conditions. 
This was attained. In the time of our Lord, notwithstanding 
the fact that many of that nation who heard him were 
called hypocrites and many others were professedly publicans 
and sinners, nevertheless the moral and religious conditions 
of the nation were never better. This is evidenced, 
we think, by the fact that, in addition to the disciples and 
the five hundred brethren who received our Lord during 
his ministry, there were several thousand ready to receive 
him on the day of Pentecost, and more thousands subsequently. 
It is doubtful if as many thousands of "Israelites 
indeed, in whom there was no guile," could have 
been found in any other period of Israel's history. The 
finding of them at that time was by no means accidental, 
but was the result of divine providences in their 
national experience. 

The Lord sifted the nation time after time to take out 
of it the classes possessing less faith and to bring more closely 
together those possessing more faith, until the best results 
were eventually found, as we have shown. The experiences 
narrated in our lesson were the beginnings of a sifting 
process. The nation of Israel was more or less honeycombed 
with idolatry, though still the religion of Abraham, 
Isaac and Jacob was their national faith. The Temple 
at Jerusalem was the center of this faith, and the tribe 
of Judah— through which the Lord had foretold Messiah 
should come, and in which, therefore, the kingly authority 
was vested— became on this account the most religious of 
all the tribes, because thus closely identified with this hope 
and its fulfilment, and because in their king Messiah's 
kingdom was typified, as in their sacrifices his sufferings 
were typified. Both the sufferings and the royal glories, 
therefore, were more vividly and specially impressed upon 
the people of Judah than upon those of the ten tribes, 
whose territory was more or less remote from the capital 
city, the Temple, etc.— especially in a time when there 
was no rapid means of communication. 

During the period of the union of the tribes under 
David and Solomon, some of the most devoted people of 
all the tribes had removed to Jerusalem, partly through 
their religious convictions and for the privilege of prayer 
in the Temple, and for more frequent association in the 
religious festivities. With the political rupture came the 
tendency to cast off all faith in the promises made to the 
fathers to the effect that a deliverer should rise out of Zion 
and that this great king should be of the tribe of Judah. 



Patriotism on the part of the ten tribes would naturally 
tend to alienate them from these religious promises. They 
must have remembered that the Lord had said that his law-giver 
would not depart from Judah until Shiloh should come 
—until the Messiah. In harmony with this we shall find, as 
we progress during this series of lessons, that idolatry began 
to come into the ten tribes more and more after their separation 
from Judah, and that likewise those who respected the 
Lord and his promises and were dissatisfied with idolatry, 
were disposed to leave their own tribes and to emigrate to 
the land of Judah. This division of the tribes, therefore, 
tended to sift the Israelites indeed out of all the tribes into 
the land of Judah. 

SITTINGS OF SPIRITUAL ISRAEL. 

Spiritual Israelites studying this lesson should take 
special note of this feature— should notice that the Lord 
overruled in all the affairs of the typical people for the 
welfare of the true-hearted. Applying this lesson to spiritual 
Israel, we learn not to feel disappointed at what to 
others might appear to be unfavorable turns in national or 
temporal affairs, realizing that the Lord is wisely directing, 
not according to man's wisdom but according to his own 
plan and in the interest of his own cause, which means 
also in the interests of his own people. From this standpoint 
the Lord's consecrated people may seem less patriotic 
than others, but they may continually have joy and 
peace in all the vicissitudes of life, knowing that all things 
are cooperating for good to them that love the Lord. 

Verse 16 briefly tells that the ten tribes revolted from 
Rehoboam in a quiet and peaceful manner, advising the 
king that he must look to his own tribe for support. 
Verse 17 refers to the Israelites from all these tribes which 
dwelt in the cities of Judah, and who from religious or 

R3385 : page 188 

other considerations were not moved to join with their 
tribes in rebellion, but preferred affiliation with the tribe 
of Judah, in which God through the prophet had declared 
that his blessing should come, and the worship divinely 
instituted at the Temple, built under divine direction. 
The king, uncertain to what extent the dissatisfied 
ones would carry their threat, sent to them Adoram, the 
Secretary of the Treasury, the one having charge over the 
assessments, etc., the same mentioned in I Kings 4:6, 
called Adoniram, who presided over the forced labor. He 
was probably commissioned to do as previously, call for 
levies of laborers to serve the king as troops and for general 
national services. The people promptly resented it, 
and after the manner of their time the king's messenger 
was stoned. At this, the king realized that the people 
were not only sullen but angry and determined, that a rebellion 
was not only threatened but accomplished, and 
that his own life would probably be in danger unless he 



got back into the boundaries of Judah. The ten tribes 
chose Jereboam for their king and supported a separate 
government. King Rehoboam, loath to lose so large a 
part of his empire, at first thought to compel the union by 
putting down the rebellion, but the Lord warned him to 
the contrary— this also being in accordance with what we 
have heretofore seen, that it was part of the divine plan 
that the nations should be divided, and that, as we have 
seen, for the greater blessing of the Israelites indeed. 

THE LORD ABHORRETH THE PROUD. 

Our Golden Text fits well to the king. He had evidently 
overlooked, as many others have done, his father's 
words of wisdom, "Pride goeth before destruction, and a 
haughty spirit before a fall." We will not claim that if 
the king had taken a less haughty course he would not 
ultimately have lost the ten tribes from his kingdom; on 
the contrary, we believe that would have been the result 
anyway. Nevertheless, the Lord has a peculiar way of 
causing fore-intended events to come to pass in accordance 
with natural laws, etc. 

The force of the proverb is still greater to us who are 
spiritual Israelites than to any others in the world at any 
time, for by the grace of God we who have received the 
high calling have reached a position, a standing, never 
previously granted to any, and the higher the standing the 
more serious would be the fall, and the greater the blessing 
the more serious would be the loss by destruction. Let 
us, dear brethren, as those who have tasted of divine favor, 
as those who have been made recipients of so great blessings, 
let us walk humbly with the Lord; let him that 
thinketh he standeth take heed lest he fall. Let us remember 
that pride leads to destruction; that a haughty spirit, 
a domineering, self-satisfied disposition, tends to undermine 
the character, and ultimately to precipitate the 
haughty one from his vantage position into degradation— 
in some cases into death, the Second Death. 



R3385 : page 188 

SELFISH EXPEDIENCY MISLED THEM 

-I KINGS 12:25-33. -JULY 10.- 

Golden Text:— "Keep yourselves from idols."— I John 5:21. 

JEROBOAM, by divine arrangement the king of the 

ten-tribe kingdom of Israel, trusted not in the 

Lord. To some extent he must have recognized 

that God had given him the kingdom; nevertheless he 

proceeded to establish himself in it, leaving the will and 

power of God out of his consideration. He was a worldly-wise 

man: expediency was the law which governed his 



course. He concluded that to make the separation between 
the ten tribes and the two tribes lasting, and thus 
to insure his own throne, the religious arrangements of the 
people must be changed. By divine order Jerusalem was the 
center of religious service, and all the people, individually 
or representatively, were expected to be at Jerusalem three 

R3386 : page 188 

times a year— at the feast of Passover in April, feast of 
Pentecost in June, and the feast of Tabernacles in October. 
Jeroboam feared that this recognition of Jerusalem 
as the center of the religious interests might ultimately 
lead the ten tribes to long for union with Judah; hence 
one of his first arrangements was to break the religious 
tie. 

This was done by the establishment of two religious 
centers favorably located in the ten-tribe kingdom— one at 
Dan, in the most northern part, where an altar had long 
been maintained contrary to divine arrangement, where 
certain descendants of Moses had long officiated and continued 
to officiate under Jeroboam's arrangement. The 
other sacred place established was Bethel, the place where 
Jacob had his dream and saw the ladder with angels ascending 
and descending. This place on this account had 
always been somewhat sacred in the minds of the children 
of Israel. Jeroboam thus showed worldly wisdom in selecting 
places for the new religious movement that were 
already sacred to his people. 

EVIL GARBS ITSELF AS ANGEL OF LIGHT. 

Thus error and everything pertaining to it is always 
crafty, insidious. Temptations to wrong doing are rarely 
presented in an open, blunt manner— usually they come 
clothed in the garments of light and associating themselves 
with something sacred, claiming to be for spiritual advancement. 
So Jeroboam claimed that the ten tribes 
had long enough gone to the farther part of the country, 
to Jerusalem, to worship; that it was time that Israelites 
should recognize that their God was accessible from other 
quarters as well. It was time that they should feel a kind 
of national pride and patriotism in connection with their religion. 
Craftily he did not tell them his real reason, that he 
feared ultimately his own rejection and was merely strengthening 
his power over them and feathering his own nest. 

R3386 : page 189 

The two bulls or calves of gold were probably made 
of wood overlaid with gold; as we would say, they were 
golden calves. One was located at each of the sacred cities 
appointed, and at each a house was built dedicated to 
the worship of God, and the golden bull installed as God's 
representative— as representative of him who brought Israel 
out of Egypt. We are not to think that Jeroboam 



and the people turned quickly to worship the bull as a 

god: they surely would have indignantly denied anything 

of the sort, just as today the Roman Catholics and Greek 

Catholics deny that they worship images, pictures, crucifixes, 

etc., and for the same reason. The claim is that 

these things represent spiritual truths and help the mind. 

We find to the contrary, however, that the scriptural declaration 

alone should be followed, and that any other course 

is sure to lead to idolatry; and so in this lesson it is stated 

that, "This thing became a sin" unto the people. It was 

not only a sin in that it was contrary to the divine arrangement 

to have any other place for a general convocation 

for worship except at Jerusalem, but it became a sin 

in that it led them gradually into idolatry. God was forgotten, 

and the worship attached more and more to the 

image. 

TO RESIST EVIL IS PROFITABLE. 

Not content with changing the arrangement, the king 
changed the priesthood also. The priests and Levites 
lived in various countries of Palestine, yet had certain 
seasons of the year at which they went to Jerusalem to 
take part in the services there, thus unifying the people 
and the religious sentiment and continually keeping it 
fresh. It is probable, though not so stated, that the Levites 
refused to join with the king, refused to cooperate in 
the establishment of these unauthorized religious services 
mixed with idolatry. If so, it was to their credit. But the 
king would have no difficulty in finding others willing to take 
the services, and quite probably to these would go the 
tithes of the people. This in turn would mean temporal 
deprivation to the Levites as a reward for their fidelity to 
the Lord and the Truth. As a consequence many of them 
removed to the kingdom of Judah. Thus, as we suggested 
in our last lesson, the sifting of the noblest, truest and 
best people from the ten tribes was gathered into the nation 
of Judah, and was evidently a part of the divine program 
for preparing that people for the reception of Messiah in 
due time. 

Jeroboam's scheme was far-reaching. In addition to 
changing the place of gathering and the priesthood, he 
changed also the date for one of the gatherings, which, 
instead of being held on the seventh month, he appointed 
for the eighth. However, craftily he perceived that by 
taking the high priest's position to himself and being both 
priest and king he would attach to his own person more 
of the reverence of the people. This was the very matter 
which God had stipulated for the Israelites as being more 
favorable to their liberties, as putting less power into the 
hands of their rulers, as keeping their religion on a separate 
basis from their politics. But Jeroboam's plan evidently 
was to take the very step that would forward his personal 
ambitions. Similarly the emperors of Rome took to themselves 
the priestly office, in order that they might the 
more effectually bind the people to them and appear to be 



not only great military heroes, but the representatives of 
the gods. 

LESSONS WE MAY DRAW FROM THIS. 

Let us apply to our own hearts the lessons that evil is 
insidious, and that every parting of the ways, every leaving 
of the divine path, signifies a separation from righteousness 
to a degree we are unable to estimate at the beginning. 
Let us learn that the only safe course to pursue is 
to trust in the Lord and to be glad to have whatever his 
providences may mark out for us, and to refuse to have 
anything contrary to his will, however desirable it might 
be, however gratifying to human ambition. Let us learn 
the lesson that ambition is a dangerous thing— especially 
in our present imperfect condition, where our judgments 
are more or less warped from the fall, where our knowledge 
is imperfect and where Satan is sure to put light for 
darkness and darkness for light. Our ambitions must be 
curbed, yea, every thought must be brought into subjection 
to the will of God in Christ, if we would be on safe 
ground as New Creatures in Christ Jesus. 

MAMMON WORSHIP IS IDOLATRY. 

Let us not too quickly suppose that we are not in 
danger along the lines of Jeroboam's fall. Let us note carefully 
the Golden Text applied by the Apostle, under divine 
guidance, to the New Creatures of this Gospel dispensation, 
"Keep yourselves from idols." On every hand policy 
suggests the setting up of idols— that we love or respect 
or serve some one or some thing or some system in 
an improper spirit or degree, and allowing such to take 
the place in our hearts which properly belongs to the Lord 
only. Some have their chief temptation from one quarter 
and others from another quarter. Some are disposed to 
idolize husband or wife or child, and really, in their affection 
and interest and devotion, give these a place superior 
to that accorded to the Lord. Others are inclined to 
idolize wealth and to devote themselves to it, continually 
serving it, seeking it as though it were the most important 
thing in the world. Others are disposed to worship 
fame, desiring to be thought some great one either in the 
Church or in the world, to attain a position, a pre-eminence; 
they hunger and thirst more after the pre-eminence 
than after righteousness— they worship it, it becomes their 
idol; in their hearts and time and affections it takes to a 
considerable extent the place belonging to God, whose 
will and service is correspondingly neglected. Others set 
up selfishness pure and simple as their idol; they serve 
self, minister to self, comfort self, please self, etc., instead 
of God. In many respects this idol of self is the most 
horrible one of all— the meanest looking. Others, disdaining 
personal ambition and selfish consolations, take 
on in some respects a nobler thought, yet are deceived by 



R3386 : page 190 

the Adversary in worshiping a sect, a party, a faction. To 
it they will sacrifice, to it they will yield their lives, for it 
they would yield their reputations, and the while— like the 
Apostle, before his name was changed from Saul to Paul 
—they would verily think that they did God service. 
Let us, dear brethren and sisters, keep ourselves from all 
idols, and, as the Apostle exhorts, sanctify the Lord God in 
our hearts. "The Lord your God will prove you, to know 
whether ye love the Lord your God with all your heart 
and with all your soul.— Deut. 13:3." 



R3386 : page 190 

INTERESTING QUESTIONS ANSWERED 
IN THE SAME BODY. 



Question.— When our Lord appeared to the eleven 
apostles in the upper room and invited Thomas to 
thrust his hand into his side and put his finger into 
the nail prints, was it the same body that was buried 
in Joseph's tomb a few days before? If not, was it a 
deception practised upon Thomas? 

Answer.— No: it was neither the same body nor 
was there a deception. Our Lord's body, buried in 
Joseph's tomb, was composed of flesh and bones, and 
could not have passed through the door into the room 
in which the disciples were met— "the doors being 
shut." To have dissolved it into gases, and to have 
thus brought it into the room and reorganized it there, 
would have been to destroy one body and to make 
another. Nothing of this kind was necessary, and 
we have some reason for supposing that the body 
which lay in the tomb is hidden away by the Lord as 

R3387 : page 190 

was the body of Moses, though for a different purpose. 
Possibly it is preserved incorruptible as a great object 
lesson for the future, that men may actually look 
upon him whom they have pierced, actually see the 
remains of him who died for them. The man Christ 
Jesus gave himself a sacrifice for our sins completely 
and forever; and that sacrifice was never taken back. 
To have taken it back would have meant the cancellation 
of our redemption. Instead, the heavenly 
Father gave to our Lord Jesus a spiritual body, glorious, 
honorable and immortal. Thus, as the Apostle 
declares, the Father exalted him far above angels, 
principalities and powers, and every name that is 



named. As we have already shown (MILLENNIAL 
DAWN, Vol. II., p. 123), there was a special reason 
why our Lord appeared at all to his disciples after his 
resurrection. 

As a spirit being he would, of course, be invisible 
to them, and a miracle was performed every time they 
saw him;— he appeared to them at different times, in 
different places and in different bodies, forms and appearances. 
As the writers declare, he "showed" himself. 
At any other time than when he thus showed 
himself he was hidden from human sight, as are other 
spirit beings. One of these manifestations was to the 
disciples in the upper room. Thomas, not being present, 
was informed, and inquired of the others whether 
or not they had noticed the nail prints or seen the 
wounded side. Apparently they had not, and Thomas 
declared his incredulity, saying that they might believe 
if they chose that Jesus was risen from the dead, 
but he would not believe unless he saw the nail-prints 
and the spear-mark. 

When our Lord appeared in the upper room, the 
doors being shut, and Thomas present, the body in 
which he appeared must have been created or materialized 
inside the room; and when he subsequently 
vanished out of their sight it was merely a dissolution 
of the body. Not only so, but the clothing must also 
have been created or materialized in that room. Our 
contention with spiritualists is not that there is absolutely 
no foundation to their claim of materialization, 
for we believe that their seances are not all fraudulent; 
but our contention is that the materializations 
which they show are deceptions, in that they appear 
like deceased friends while in reality they are the 
fallen angels, the "demons" of the Scriptures. The 
Scriptures show clearly that the dead could not thus 
materialize, for they know not anything and will not 
know anything until the awakening on the resurrection 
morn.— Eccles. 9:5. 

In our Lord's case the matter was different. "He 
was put to death in the flesh, but revived a quickening 
spirit," and it was quite within his ability as well 
as his rights to appear in any manner he might choose 
for the purpose of instructing his disciples,— teaching 
them that he was no longer deceased, but alive; and 
no longer man, but a spirit being— "Now the Lord is 
that spirit." Before he became a man he appeared to 
Moses in a flame of fire, in what appeared to be a 
burning bush, yet there was no deception in it; and 
he appeared unto Abraham as a man on the way to 
Sodom. So after he had again became a spirit being 
by resurrection he appeared to Mary as the gardener, 
and to the two on the way to Emmaus as a traveler, 
and in the upper room to Thomas and others in a body 
similar to the one in which he had been buried. 

LIFE AND EVERLASTING LIFE. 



Question.— Is there any difference between life in 
its perfection, as Adam enjoyed it before he sinned, 
and everlasting life, which the Lord purposes to give 
eventually to the worthy of mankind, and as expressed 
to the sheep in Matt. 25:46, "These shall go 
away into everlasting life"? 

Answer.— Death is the opposite, or antithesis of 
life. Man was created a living soul, a living creature, 

R3387 :page 191 

and death had no power upon him until after he 
sinned: then he came under its power, as the divine 
sentence expressed it, Dying thou shalt die. Where 
the dying began life in its perfection ceased. From 
this standpoint not a soul of humanity has life— neither 
perfect life nor a right to perfect life. All rights 
have been forfeited and death is reigning over all. 

Adam before he sinned possessed everlasting life, 
a life which would have lasted forever had he remained 
obedient to God. As is well known to our readers, 
the word "everlasting" in our English language has a 
stronger meaning than any word either in the Hebrew 
or the Greek language: the strongest Greek or Hebrew 
word would properly be translated lasting. 
Adam had the lasting life and lost it; Jesus has redeemed 
for mankind that which was lost by Adam, 
and the Millennial age is to be the time of restoration 
—restitution. What men will get eventually through 
Christ's redemptive work and their acceptance of it 
and obedience to its terms will be the same lasting 
life which father Adam lost— human life, unimpaired 
either by sentence or by disease. 

This Gospel age is the anti-typical Day of Atonement, 
in which the Church, typified by the goat, fills 
up or participates in the work of sacrifice with her 
Lord Jesus, who in the type was represented by the 
bullock. The entire Gospel age is devoted to the sacrificing 
of these— Christ Jesus, the Head, and the 
Church, the members of his body, who "fill up that 
which is behind of the afflictions of Christ." With 
the close of this Gospel age the Atonement Day will 
be ended, and, as expressed in the type, an atonement 
will have been accomplished for the sins of the whole 
world, and forthwith the forgiveness of all sins under 
the original curse will be decreed for men. As the 
Apostle expresses the matter,— As by the offence of 
one [Adam], judgment [sentence] came upon all men 
to condemnation, even so by the righteousness of one 
the free gift will come upon all men to justification of 
life. For as by one man's disobedience the many 
were made sinners, "even so through the obedience 
of one shall the many be made righteous"— that as 



sin has reigned unto death, even so might grace reign 
through righteousness unto eternal life, through Jesus 
Christ our Lord. 

With the completion of the "better sacrifices" 
(Heb. 9:23) the Atonement will be complete and the 
sentence will be removed from mankind. Thenceforth 
no man will be under sentence of death for 
Adam's transgression, but whosoever then shall die 
will die for his own sins. The Life-giver, the merit 
of whose sacrifice accomplished all this, will be present 
with his associated Church, his Bride, as the great 
Physician, to heal and to bless and to uplift all who 
will to be blest. 

From the moment the sentence of death shall be 
lifted the dying processes will cease to reign, and the 
living processes will begin to reign in mankind. 
More and more throughout the thousand years life 
will reign, will become ascendant in mankind, and 
more and more the weaknesses and imperfections 
resulting from the death sentence will abate, until 
at the close of the Millennial age life in its perfection 
will be attained by mankind— any unwilling to 
progress, by obedience to the great Prophet, having 
been cut off from amongst the people from time to 
time. (Acts 3:23.) Thus righteousness will be 
reigning— unto life— during the Millennial age, as 
sin has reigned— unto death— during the past 6,000 
years, under the curse. 

Thus seen, life will begin in mankind in a small 
way, but will be in the ascendancy: all will live, except 
as they shall wilfully reject the provisions of life. 
Thus every man will get lasting life at the hands of 
his Redeemer at his awakening, and the measure will 
increase according to his obedience until he shall have 
attained it in its fullest measure at the close of the 
Millennium, and then standing trial to see whether or 
not his heart is fully loyal to the Lord. If determined 
that he is in full loyalty his testings will be at an end, 
and the same life will be his in perpetuity— so long 
as he remains in accord with the spirit and laws of 
his Creator. 

Thus seen, our confidence that the future life 
will be an everlasting one, is not based upon any immortal 
quality which mankind possesses, or will ever 
possess, but based upon the principles of the divine 
arrangement revealed to us in the Word, namely, 
that God was pleased to create and is pleased to continue 
everlastingly those of his creatures in harmony with 
himself— that there is no penalty nor suggestion of 
death to any intelligent creature of God, except upon 
condition of sin— the soul that sinneth, it shall die. 

IT WAS "FINISHED" AT CALVARY. 



Question.— One of the preaching brethren suggested 
in my hearing that our Lord's sacrifice was not 
finished until he ascended up on high and appeared in 
the presence of the Father, and that the evidence of 
its being finished was the sending of the holy Spirit 
at Pentecost. Is this the correct thought? 

Answer.— No. The correct thought is that the 
Lord's sacrifice was completed at Calvary, where he 
cried, "It is finished!" Possibly you misunderstood 
the conversation referred to, and the speaker may 
have said, or probably intended to say, that satisfaction 
for our sins was not accomplished at the cross, 
but when our Lord Jesus appeared in the Father's 
presence and offered the merit of his sacrifice on our 
behalf— appropriating to believers their share in his 
Atonement work. That the Atonement work at Calvary 
was satisfactory to the Father was demonstrated 
by our Lord's resurrection from the dead. That he 
had offered the merit of the sacrifice as a covering for 
the sins of believers, and that it was so accepted of 
the Father, was witnessed by the holy Spirit at 
Pentecost. 



page 193 

SEMI-MONTHLY 
VOL. XXV. JULY 1, 1904. No. 13. 



CONTENTS. 

Views from the Watch Tower 195 

Arguments for Christian Unity 195 

The Judgments of the Lord 196 

Effect of the Eastern War 196 

The Hamilton Convention 197 

Universal Anarchy— Just Before 

or After October, 1914 197 

The Atonement for Sin— A Scientist's 

View 199 

Praying for Help in Time of War 202 

A Good King's Error 205 

Report of British Convention 207 

page 194 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-24 EVERSHOLT ST., LONDON, N.W. 
GERMAN BRANCH-MIRKER STR., 45, ELBERFELD. 
AUSTRALIAN BRANCH-32 JOHNSTON ST., FITZROY, MELBOURNE 

PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE, 5c (2-l/2d.) A COPY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity 
or adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER, will be supplied FREE, if 
they send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting 
the paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our 
list continually. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE 



THIS JOURNAL IS PUBLISHED IN THE 

FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, DANISH AND ITALIAN LANGUAGES. 

SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



PASTOR RUSSELL'S DISCOURSES EVERY MONDAY. 



By a special arrangement with The Pittsburgh Gazette a stenographic 
report of Pastor C. T. Russell's discourses will be printed 
on Mondays. We will send you "The Pittsburgh Gazette" 
(daily) and ZION'S WATCH TOWER twice a month for a period 
of 12 months for $3.25, which is about the price of The Gazette 
alone. The subscriptions must be paid in advance and sent to us. 
For terms for extra copies of the Monday Gazette, see our issue of January 
15th. 

NOTICE.— Where Gazette agencies are established the issues 
desired can be readily obtained through them. The Gazette refuses 
to mail papers to towns where they would interfere with 
the agents already located. 

MARKED NEW TESTAMENTS. 



We have a good stock of these on hand— cloth binding, 
red edges, minion type. Convenient for the pocket. 
The special feature is the marking in red and black of the 
passages which refer to salvation through Christ. Price, 
15c; 2 for 25c, postpaid. They are not our publication, 
nor marked exactly as we should have preferred. 



R3388 : page 195 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 
ARGUMENTS FOR CHRISTIAN UNITY. 



RECENTLY at a Protestant Ministers' Meeting 

in the Y.M.C.A. building, St. Louis, Mo., 

the following argument was presented by 

Rev. Gilbert Dobbs, of the Coliseum Place Baptist 

Church:— 

"The churches of Jesus Christ are confronted by 
a gigantic problem. Nineteen centuries have passed 
since our Lord came in the flesh, and taught and 
wrought and died; nineteen centuries since he arose 
from the dead and said, 'Go, disciple all nations,' and 
yet the nations are still stumbling on the dark mountains. 
Only the apex of the great pyramid of humanity 
has thus far been brightened and transformed by the 
Gospel light, a diamond point flashing in the sun. But 
what about the great pyramidal base, the black carbon 
of ignorance and superstition and sin and all the marks 
of a lost and benighted race? 

"Nineteen centuries, and only 390,000,000 nominal 



Christians in all the world, and only 116,000,000 of these 
belonging to all Protestant denominations. That leaves 
more than one billion souls absolutely destitute of the 
bread of life. What a sad commentary on the sloth 
and strife of Christendom! This is the problem: How 
shall the great black pyramid be transformed by light? 
What concentrated energy and fervency must be displayed 
before the black can be burned out, and the 
huge mass become, as it were, a colossal kohinoor of 
divine splendor and glory? 

"You remember the part of that remarkable prayer 
of Jesus recorded by the Evangelist John, where he 
prays: That they all may be one, as Thou, Father, art 
in me, and I in thee; that they also may be one in 
us; that the world may believe that thou hast sent me,' 
and again he repeats it, 'that the world may believe 
that thou hast sent me and hast loved them as thou hast 
loved me.' The great utilitarian purpose of Christian 
unity is, therefore, that the world may believe.... 

"We must get closer together. We must cease 
looking at our denominational difficulties through the 
magnifying microscope of bigotry and prejudice, and at 
our essential agreement through the inverted telescope 
of indifference and selfishness. Of course Christian 
unity does not mean uniformity. The latter is perhaps 
not desirable; and at present it is certainly not feasible. 
It is not one form that we need, but one spirit, a spirit 
of brotherly kindness and a broad Christian charity. 
All arbitrary and coercive methods of attaining uniform 
religious observances are anti-Christian. God's children 
are freemen, and their service must be rational and voluntary. 
There is nothing more uniform than penitentiary 
life. The same shaven face, the same cropped 
pates, the same stripes, the same dull, slavish tasks. It 
is not the unity of the prison that we covet, but the 
unity of the family, where each preserves his individuality, 
and yet where all dwell together in love, sharing 
a common life and hope and purpose. 

"And just as there cannot be any uniform ritual, 
so there cannot reasonably be any uniform creed. Of 
course, we all admit that God's Word is our all-sufficient 
guide in matters of faith and practice, an infallible 
and inerrant standard by which we must be led; 
but as each man must interpret that Word as his mind 
and conscience shall direct, we cannot expect that all 
will see alike. The domain of God's truth is so wide, 
and the various paths of interpretation are so numerous 
and intricate, and the human understanding is such 
a complex matter, that all of us may not be expected 
to traverse the same paths. Perhaps God has so ordained 
it that every part of his divine truth shall have 
due emphasis by raising up different schools of 
interpreters. 

"You know the parable of the blind men and the 
elephant. In describing the elephant one felt his leg and 
said, 'He is like a tree.' Another felt his trunk and 



said: 'He is like a huge snake.' Another his ear: 'He 

is like a blanket.' And still another said: 'He is like a 

rope,' as he felt his tail. They were all right and all 

wrong. The part is never equal to the whole. Let us 

not suppose that our distinctive views are of more importance 

than the sum total of accumulated knowledge 

which the whole body of Christian theology sets forth. 

I think, however, that an occasional ecumenical council 

for the purpose of discussing in a brotherly manner our 

doctrinal differences with a view of arriving at a clearer 

conception of the truth, and the bringing of the various 

R3388 : page 196 

denominations into a closer sympathy and affiliation, 
would have an admirable effect... 

"The most inspiring utterance on the subject of 
Christian unity, aside from the beautiful prayer of our 
Savior, to which we have made reference, is from Paul. 
Writing to the saints at Ephesus, he says: 'I, therefore, 
the prisoner of the Lord, beseech you to walk worthy 
of the vocation wherewith ye are called, with all lowliness 
and meekness, with long-suffering, forbearing one 
another in love, endeavoring to keep the unity of the 
spirit in the bond of peace. There is one body and one 
spirit, even as ye are called in one hope of your calling; 
one Lord, one faith, one baptism, one God and Father 
of all, who is above all, and through all, and in you all.' 

"The argument is this: As the body of Christ is 
one, and all of God's people are members of that body, 
made members by the divine Spirit, whose sovereign 
call they have heard and obeyed; as they all have the 
selfsame hope of eternal life and the glad expectation 
of entering into the joys of their Lord, whom they love 
and serve in common; as they acknowledge but one 
Lord and master, Jesus Christ, and have exercised the 
same saving faith in him, and have been brought into his 
Church through baptism, the one symbol of their renewed 
nature; as there is but one God who rules over all, everywhere 
guiding and directing his people by his loving providence, 
and who has made his habitation in every renewed 
heart; then ought not all his people endeavor to recognize 
and preserve this spiritual unity, and live and labor 
together in peace? 

"The Indians speak of friendship as a golden chain. 
So may all God's people be linked together in the closest 
ties of fraternal love, and by keeping the golden 
chain forever bright, we will the best be able to bring a 
captive world in loving servitude to the feet of our God 
and Savior."— Times-Democrat. 



The above shows how easy it is to have "a form 
of godliness and deny the power thereof;" how easy 
it is to have a form of sound doctrine, but to misapply 



it! 

Neither our Lord nor the Apostle Paul referred 
to a union of denominations. They preached an individual 
union with Christ, and a consequent relationship 
of all justified and consecrated believers to each 
other in the one Lord, one faith and one baptism. 

This union already exists, except to the extent 
that denominational creed-fences and social usages 
separate the Lord's sheep. Wherever and whenever 
the Lord's sheep meet they may and do quickly identify 
themselves to each other, and the heart union and 
fellowship and joy in the Lord they experience cannot 
even be imitated by creedal bonds. 

The union of the Church to which our Lord referred 
in his prayer, "That they all may be one," 
was this union of heart already and always experienced 
by the true members of the "one body,"— and 
additionally he referred to the actual union of all such 
with himself by the resurrection "change" from flesh 
and blood to spirit being— to be with him and like 
him and to share his glory and power and great work 
for the world, which he mentions just following, viz.: 
"that the world [during the Millennium] may 
believe." 

THE JUDGMENTS OF THE LORD. 



The Scriptures declare that "when the judgments 
of the Lord are abroad in the earth the inhabitants of 
the world will learn righteousness" (Isa. 26:9), and 
the coming Millennial age is pointed out to us as the 
world's Judgment Day; and our Lord tells us that 
the dead world will be awakened from the death-sleep 
—"come forth" unto a resurrection [anastasis, an uplifting 
out of sin and death] by judgments. ~ 
John 5:28,29. 

Now we have an illustration well authenticated 
by the Chicago journals, showing one kind of judgments 
which will prevail during the world's Judgment 
Day, as follows:— 

Julian Renfro, 21 years old, while engaged with 
three chums at a game of cards, declared his unbelief 
in a God. He was a "higher critic" of the Ingersoll 
school and said: "Fellows, if God would demonstrate 
himself to me in some way— for instance, if he would 
strike me deaf and dumb, or blind— I might admit 
his existence." One of the young men was about to 
reply to the argument when he noticed Renfro turn 
pale. The next moment the skeptic threw his arms 
out before him as if warding off a blow, then he 
convulsively placed his hands before his face. An 
instant later he fell forward off his chair, and on to 
the floor. Since that time he has been unable to 
speak or hear. In writing he afterward expressed 



faith in the Lord and declares his intention to 
study the Scriptures, and if the Lord should grant a 
recovery he hopes yet to preach Christ. 

When the time shall come that the Lord's judgments 
of rewards and punishments will be promptly 
meted out, and in no uncertain manner, the whole 
world will be speedily converted and, like this young 
man, be glad to preach the One once blasphemed. 
But we must wait for this to become general until 
the Kingdom class shall be completed and the general 
"Judgment day" or age fully inaugurated. 

THE EFFECT OF THE EASTERN WAR. 



The London Spectator, commenting on the recent 
successes of Japan, in the battle on the Yalu river, 
says:— 

"It is the moral effect upon the world at large 
which is, and will be, so tremendous as to modify, possibly 
for all time, the relation of Europe to Asia. Until 
that battle had been fought the white race, though 
deeply impressed with the capacity of the Japanese and 
the devoted courage of Japanese sailors, was still unconvinced 
that a Japanese army could rival or defeat a 
European force of anything like adequate dimensions. 
The pride of the white continent had for three centuries 

R3389 : page 197 

seemed to be justified by history, and it created, 
consciously or unconsciously, a mass of belief which was 
perhaps the cause of many of its victories, and certainly 
of much of its daring. The struggle on the Yalu provides 
precisely the concrete evidence needed to dissipate 
this confidence. A Japanese army has crossed a mighty 
river in the teeth of European defenders, and then has 
marched upon those Europeans entrenched in a splendid 
hilly position; has driven them out by the close 
fighting which we still call fighting with the bayonet; 
has overwhelmed the European fire by the superior 
weight of cannon and shells made in Japan itself; 
has captured whole batteries of European guns; has 
driven European artillerymen in what seems to have 
been headlong rout: and— most notable fact of all- 
has taken hundreds of European prisoners, who have 
surrendered, not by a capitulation, but while fighting 
on the field. In other words, an Asiatic Power has 
arisen which, besides defeating a European war-fleet, 
is proving itself able to use three great armies of invasion, 
each sixty thousand strong, with the careful provision, 
the strategic skill, and the clenching courage of 
armies directed by the great masters of European 
warfare." 



R3389 : page 197 

THE HAMILTON CONVENTION. 

THE One-Day Convention held at Hamilton, Canada, 
was quite a success in its way. Delegations 
were present from every quarter of Ontario— 
sixty-seven from Toronto, thirteen from Buffalo, about 
the same number from Brantford, and ones, twos and 
threes from many points. 

The morning session was for the interested only 
and was not advertised. The attendance was about 400. 
A praise and testimony meeting for 45 minutes was 
followed by a discourse on the divine promise,— "No 
weapon that is formed against thee shall prosper, and 
every tongue that shall rise against thee in judgment 
thou shalt condemn. This is the heritage of the people 
of the Lord, and their righteousness is of me, saith 
the Lord." (Isa. 54:17.) A full report of this discourse 
appeared in the Pittsburgh Gazette of the day 
following, and many of our readers thus have it. We 
still have a few copies of the Gazette and will be 
pleased to send a sample on request. 

The afternoon session at 3 o'clock brought out a 
closely packed house, chairs being crowded in the 
aisles and probably fifty persons were seated on the 
platform behind the speaker. The friends estimated 
that at least 1,100 were present. Profound attention 
was given to our discourse on "God's Oath-bound 
Covenant to Abraham and His Seed." (Heb. 6:17-20.) 
This discourse appeared in full in the Hamilton Times 
of the next day, and thus reached many more than 
were able to hear it. 

The "Truth" people all looked and felt joyful in 
the Lord, and, as our train pulled away from the station, 
about fifty of us joined in singing, "God be with 
you till we meet again." 



R3389 : page 197 

UNIVERSAL ANARCHY-JUST BEFORE OR AFTER OCTOBER, 1914 A.D. 

WHAT seems at first glance the veriest trifle and 
wholly unrelated to the matter, has changed 
our conviction respecting the time when 
universal anarchy may be expected in accord with the 
prophetic numbers. We now expect that the anarchistic 
culmination of the great time of trouble which 
will precede the Millennial blessings will be after October, 
1914 A.D. —very speedily thereafter, in our opinion 
—"in one hour," "suddenly." 
Our readers familiar with the presentation of the 



subject given in MILLENNIAL DAWN, will recall that the 
date, October, 1914 A.D., is very sharply defined by two 
lines of evidence: (1) The Times of the Gentiles— 2,520 
years from the overthrow of the government of Zedekiah, 
the last typical king of the Jews, in 606 B.C.; and 
(2) the Parallels, both the length and various features 
of the Jewish and Gospel ages. We have found no 
flaw in either of these prophetic testimonies, nor do 
we believe that fault can be found with them along 
Scriptural lines by anybody. The matter that has 
just come to our attention is that in counting the 
forty years' harvest of the Jewish age, from October, 
A.D. 29, to October, A.D. 69, where the year 70 in 
Jewish reckoning began, we spoke of that harvest 
time as ending A.D. 70. This is a correct enough 
statement, because the full end of 69 A.D. is up to 
the beginning of 70 A.D. We pointed out that the 
parallels of time in the harvest of this Gospel age 
began October, 1874, and will end October, 1914— 
at the beginning of 1915, Jewish time. 

All these matters stand just as they were— we 
have nothing to fault or to alter. But in a recent 
examination of the closing of the Jewish harvest, 
with a view to closer scrutiny as to what might be 
expected in the end of the present harvest of Christendom, 
we noticed that the actual fall of the Jewish 
polity was not at the beginning of A.D. 70, but towards 
its close, and at once we perceived that the 
forty-year harvest ending 69 A.D. closed before the 
destruction in its fullest sense came upon the typical 
people. Instantly we thought of the parallel here 
and perceived, as above stated, that our forty years' 
harvest, ending October, 1914 A.D., should not be 
expected to include the awful period of anarchy 
which the Scriptures point out to be the fate of Christendom. 
The matter seems so plain and simple now 
that we wonder that we or our many critical readers 
did not notice it long ago. The only plausible explanation 
is that in the divine will our eyes were 
holden for the time respecting this matter— possibly 

R3389 : page 198 

with a view to our expectations that the harvesting 
opportunities would sooner close, causing our consequent 
greater zeal in the service. 

Looking back to the prophetic testimony respecting 
the Times of the Gentiles, we perceive that, although 
the Lord did not give to worldly governments 
a definite lease of power until 1914, nevertheless our 
Lord's words, "Jerusalem shall be trodden down of 
the Gentiles until the times of the Gentiles be filled 
full," gives the intimation broadly enough that the 
determined times or years in which the empire of 
earth would be in the hands of Gentile governments 
was a fixed one from the divine standpoint. And if, 



as we believe the Scriptures to teach, Gentile domination 

was provided for up to October, 1914, it would 

seem but a reasonable interpretation that divine power 

for the overthrow of the kingdoms of this world would 

not be exercised to their dethronement until after 

the time allotted for their reign had ended— October, 

1914. 

True, it was to be in the times of these kings 
that the God of heaven would take from the mountain, 
without hands [not by human power], the little 
stone which should eventually smite the image in its 
feet. True, also, it was to be in the days of these 
last kings— represented in the toes of the image- 
that the God of heaven should set up his Kingdom, 
which should break in pieces and consume all; but 
the setting up of that Kingdom we understand has 
been in progress throughout this harvest time, especially 
since 1878, since which time we believe that all 
the overcomers of the Church who die faithful are 
changed "in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye," 
and are immediately constituted members of the set-up 
Kingdom on the other side the veil. Quite probably 
this setting up will consume nearly or quite all of the 
forty years of harvest time apportioned to it; but in any 
event, the time for the smiting of the image in its feet 
will not come until October, 1914 A.D., however much 
trouble and distress of nations may result from the 
prior awakening of their peoples under the enlightening 
influences of the dawning of the Millennial morning. 
Already such distress or perplexity is felt in 
quarters national, financial and religious. 

Our previous expectation was that the anarchistic 
period would last some three or four years, and in our 
mental calculations of the opportunities for harvest 
work, we naturally cut off those years, and the time 
thus appeared shorter to us. Now, however, we see 
clearly that for some of the Church there probably 
remain fully ten years of experience, opportunities, 
testings, victories, joys and sorrows. Each year, 
however, we may expect that the signs of the times 
will more and more demonstrate the accuracy of our 
expectations both for the Church and for the world. 
As already pointed out, the harvest dates shown us 
in the Scriptures are October, 1874, as the beginning 
of the harvest; April, 1878, as the parallel to our 
Lord's death; October, 1881, as the parallel to the 
termination of the special favor to natural Israelites 
in the sending of the Gospel to the Gentiles, Cornelius 
being the first; and October, 1914 A.D., as the 
end of the forty years' harvest. Any other dates 
than these are purely speculative. We have never set 
forth any other dates as being presented by the Scriptures. 
We did indeed call attention to the date suggested 
by one of the measurements through the upper 
step of the Great Pyramid's "Grand Gallery," but in 
conjunction with the suggestion we particularly intimated 



that it was merely speculative. 
R3390 : page 198 

Our estimate of what may be reasonably looked 
for as the order of events in the next ten years is, of 
course, based upon what the Scriptures indicate to be 
coming, and is the result of our endeavor to put together 
these coming events in their seemingly logical 
order or sequence. We have already pointed out that 
the "symbolical image of the beast" began 1846.* 
We are now anxiously looking for the vitalizing of 
that image as foretold in Rev. 13:15. Our expectation 
is that this causing of the image to have life, 
speech and power will have its fulfilment in some 
pact or union or agreement amongst so-called Protestant 
denominations, with a sympathetic alliance and 
cooperation with the Church of Rome. Our expectation 
is that the spark of life to the organic union begun 
in the Evangelical Alliance will come from the Episcopal 
Church, which claims divine authority through 
apostolic succession— a claim which other Protestant 
denominations would be glad to be able to make. 
The Episcopal Church is quite ready to confer the 
spark of authority and vitality, and we opine that 
three or four more years will so greatly increase the 
tendency toward union and toward power amongst 
Protestants that they will be willing in some form to 
accept the so-called apostolic ordination and authority. 
If this be not accomplished by 1910, or evidently 
be very near to accomplishment at that time, we 
shall feel a measure of disappointment. 

Meantime Socialism (which, although not so intended 
by its best and ablest leaders, is incipient anarchy, 
because even its best propositions would prove 
unworkable under present selfish conditions) will be 
making strong headway throughout Christendom, 
and will be causing more and more perplexity to the 
great, the rich, the mighty, the wise, the influential, 
according to the course of this world. The quickened 
"image" will be closely related to the chief captains 



*See Millennial Dawn, Vol. III., p. 119. 

R3390 : page 199 

of industry, finance and politics, and the dread of 
Socialism and irreligion and anarchy will draw them 
more and more closely together and make each the 
more energetic in support of the other. 

As a result of these conditions we may expect an 
increasing disregard of the rights and constitutional 
prerogatives of all who are not directly active supporters 
of the powers that be, political, financial and religious. 



The freedom of speech and freedom to circulate 
literature will be greatly abridged, under the plea 
that such abridgment is necessary for the public welfare, 
which in some respects will be the truth. Anything 
not fully in line with the rulers of that time 
will be reckoned as in opposition; and notwithstanding 
our disposition for peace, and our good will toward 
all men of all classes and stations, the WATCH 
TOWER publications will probably come under the 
ban with those of Socialism— though their teachings 
be as opposite as the poles. The period following 
will seemingly be the time when the door will be closing 
—and opportunities for service will be increasingly 
diminished, though opportunities for suffering for the 
Truth's sake may increase. 

The lesson to us each and all seems to be that 
during the next five or six years we should labor 
with intensified zeal, because we know that the night 
is coming wherein no man can labor. How glad we 
are that in divine providence our lot has fallen in the 
present time! How glad we are that our eyes have 
seen and our ears heard the precious messages peculiar 
to this time! How glad we are that we are permitted 
even at this "eleventh hour" to engage in the 
harvest work! How glad we are for the prospect of 
continued opportunities for service— a little longer 
than we had previously supposed! How glad we are 
that, no matter how infinitesimal our talents and opportunities 
may be, the great Reaper deigns to use us 
still as his co-laborers, and has provided various instruments 
by which even the smallest, the weakest, 
the humblest, may through tracts or books or otherwise 
engage in the wonderful opportunities of the 
harvest of this age. 

In answer to many inquiries respecting the progress 
of the work, we take this opportunity of assuring 
the dear co-laborers that it is progressing greatly. 
The Volunteers are very energetic and we are continually 
noting favorable results: some of the Lord's 
truth-hungry sheep are being found and revived; the 
Colporteurs are finding more and more a readiness to 
hear as the people awaken to the fact that their theological 
professors and ministers and many of the membership 
of the various denominations are drifting farther 
and farther from faith in God and in his Book. 
As the chasm between faith and unbelief widens and 
deepens, as the higher critics become more and more 
bold, and the evolutionists more and more assertive, 
the true sheep are getting to listen more and more 
attentively for the Shepherd's voice, and to realize 
that they have been following to some extent false 
guides and have been too careless of the voice of the 
Shepherd. Now is the time for reaching these hungry 
sheep, who if not speedily nourished with the 
Truth will fall into the evolution theories and the 
higher critical pit of infidelity. 



R3390 : page 199 

THE ATONEMENT FOR SIN. 

-A SCIENTIST'S VIEW.- 

SIR OLIVER LODGE, F.R.S., D.Sc, of Birmingham 
University, England, has recently 
expressed his views on the above fundamental 
feature of the Christian religion. Such gentlemen in 
the past have kept their unbelief somewhat secret, but 
now they are encouraged, emboldened, by the temerity 
of the "higher critic" infidels in pulpits and seminaries, 
and are speaking their minds more freely. 
This man learned in worldly lore, and the trusted 
educator of many good people's sons, expresses his 
unbelief in the first proposition in his published article, 
thus:— 

"In the days when the vicariousness of sin could 
be accepted, and when an original fall of Adam could 
be held as imputed to the race, it was natural to admit 
the possibility of a vicarious punishment and to 
accept an imputed righteousness. In the days when 
God could be thought of as an angry Jehovah who 
sent pestilences until he was propitiated by the smell 
of a burnt-offering, it was possible to imagine that the 
just anger of an offended God could be met by the sacrifice 
of an innocent victim.... 

"As a matter of fact, the higher man of today is 
not worrying about his sins at all, still less about their 
punishment. His mission, if he is good for anything, 
is to be up and doing, and in so far as he acts wrongly 
or unwisely he expects to suffer. He may unconsciously 
plead for mitigation on the ground of good 
intentions, but never either consciously or unconsciously 
will any one but a cur ask for the punishment 
to fall on some one else, nor rejoice if told that it has 
already so fallen. 

"As for 'original sin' or 'birth sin' or other notion 
of that kind, by which is partly meant the sins of 
his parents, that sits absolutely lightly on him. As a 
matter of fact, it is non-existent, and no one but a 
monk could have invented it. Whatever it be, it is 
not a business for which we are responsible. We did 
not make the world; and an attempt to punish us for 
our animal origin and ancestry would be simply comic, 
if any one could be found who was willing to take it 
seriously. 

R3390 : page 200 

"Here we are; we have risen, as to our bodies, 
from the beasts; as a race the struggle has been 



severe, and there have been both rises and falls. We 
have been helped now and again by bright and shining 
individual examples— true incarnations of diviner 
spirits than our own— notably by one supremely bright 
Spirit who blazed out nineteen hundred years ago, 
and was speedily murdered by the representatives of 
that class whose mission it appears to be to wage war 
against the prophets, and to do their worst to exterminate 
new ideas and kinds of goodness to which they 
are not accustomed. Fortunately for the race, they 
are only able to kill the body; the soul, the inspiration, 
the germ of a new and higher faith seems forever 
beyond their grasp." 



Here we see the wretched effect of false doctrine: 
we see a noble mind poisoned against the Bible and its 
grand plan of redemption through the death of Christ. 
The time will come when grand men like this one will 
be relieved of their blindness. "All the blind eyes 
shall be opened and all the deaf ears shall be unstopped." 
Thank God! Now we cannot hope to influence 
such: we cannot hope to antidote the poison of 
error in those already poisoned, but we do hope to 
forewarn and forearm and put on guard those not already 
prejudiced and poisoned. This is our constant 
aim in this "evil day." 

Sir Oliver Lodge will not deny that "pestilences" 
and other forms of disease— death— have reigned over 
the world for centuries. He may deny that there is 
any personal God, and call Nature his God, and thus 
charge to irresponsible Nature all the evils that afflict 
men: but so surely as he admits a personal and intelligent 
Almighty God he must also admit that this Almighty 
being causes "pestilences," diseases, death, or 
else that knowing of these he is careless or indifferent 
to the interests of his creatures. This issue cannot be 
honestly dodged. The answer is one of the keys to 
the argument. 

The spiteful animosity against the Biblical teaching 
of vicarious atonement by Jesus for the sin of 
Adam is undoubtedly engendered by the labyrinth of 
hateful and unscriptural errors which ever since "the 
dark ages" has been associated with the doctrine of the 
vicarious atonement in all the creeds of Christendom. 

This wrong view (which has misled many honest 
minds into opposition to the true view) is briefly stated 
thus: God became enraged at Adam and Eve for their 
disobedience and damned them to an eternity of torture, 
and, still not satisfied, he included all their children 

R3391 : page 200 

that should ever be born. Later on Jesus, by 

his sufferings, caused a cancellation of part of the sentence 



so far as part of the people were concerned. Or, 
as some view it, God declared that he would never recede 
from his anger, would never forgive any, but let 
all roast forever unless Jesus would suffer for some 
and release them. No wonder every true man would 
reject such a conception of God, or if he accepted it 
would refuse to worship him or to regard him as even 
an equal with honest manhood. This is not the view 
of "vicarious atonement" which we defend, nor the 
one which the Bible presents. 

HOW DIFFERENT AND HOW REASONABLE IS THE BIBLE 
VIEW OF THE MATTER! 

The divine decree is, that absolute obedience to 
the divine commands shall be required of all and for 
the good of all. Because all unrighteousness is sin, 
therefore the decree, "The wages of sin is death"— 
to the intent that sin and its attendant misery may 
not be eternal— to the intent that perfection in holiness, 
perfection in life and perfection in happiness 
may forever be indissolubly connected. 

With such a righteous indignation against sin, 
with such a just and holy desire that it might not be 
perpetual, God made his law and explained it to 
Adam, and, when the latter had violated that law, 
pronounced the sentence, and has for six thousand 
years backed up the forces of nature which executed 
that decree, "Dying thou shalt die." 

Who can find fault with the sentence for original 
sin as it is expressed in the Bible— a death sentence. 
No reasonable man could deny that God has the right 
as well as the power to destroy in death any creature 
who will not conform to his just and wise law. This 
is the case as stated in the Bible, exactly. "The 
sting of death [the sting, or virus, which produces 
death and all its attendant sufferings] is sin; and the 
power of sin [to thus sting to death] is the Law,"— 
"The wages of sin is death."— I Cor. 15:56; 
Rom. 6:23. 

The dying processes affected the first perfect pair 
in every way— mentally, morally and physically. Degeneracy 
began at once, and once, and of course affected their 
offspring according to the laws of nature. Nothing 
can be charged to the dishonor or injustice of the Creator. 
In every particular he was well within the 
rights of his position— yea, he was in duty bound to 
make the condition such that the sinful and imperfect 
would not live on forever. And so it was that father 
Adam died "in the day" (the thousand year day— 
2 Pet. 3:8) in which he became a sinner, and none of 
his posterity ever lived more than 969 years. 

Now, let us not complicate the question by theological 
"smoke" from the "dark ages," but standing 
by the simple narrative of the Scriptures,— that "by 
one man's disobedience sin entered into the world, 



and death by [as a result of] sin, and so [thus] death 
passed upon all men, because all are sinners" (Rom. 5:12), 
let us inquire respecting the vicarious atonement 

R3391 : page 201 

and its necessity under the conditions set forth in the 
Scriptures as above. 

Granted that God did pronounce a just sentence 
of death upon Adam, the question is, How could he 
get rid of that sentence so as to ever grant mankind a 
resurrection from death to life, and all that was lost 
by the disobedience under its sentence? God is "unchangeable,' 
he assures us; hence this sentence of the 
great Supreme Court of the Universe is unalterable, 
unless it can be shown to be unjust or unwise. Neither 
of these could be acknowledged and hence the 
sentence is unalterable. 

But could not God devise some method for the 
rescue of Adam if he so desired? Although human 
wisdom could see no way, could not divine wisdom and 
love aid and find a way out of the dilemma? The 
Scriptures say, Yes; and proceed to tell us that it was 
in order "that God might be just and the justifier of 
them that believe in Jesus" that God provided a vicarious 
atonement (blood atonement) for Adam's sin. 
Blood-atonement means atonement by the sacrifice of 
a life to pay for the condemned life. 

Now, Professor Lodge acknowledges Jesus to 
have lived and to have died— there is no dispute as to 
the facts. The question at issue then is, Did the fact 
that Jesus died for Adam's sin make his death any 
the more severe or unjust or improper? 

We concede at once that God could not have 
justly demanded that his Son become a man, and then 
as a man die for the sins of the one man, who had been 
sentenced to extinction because of sin, and whose race 
in his loins at the time of his transgression shared his 
penalty and would equally share anything done for 
his relief. However desirable such a result, or however 
impossible to reach that result otherwise, Justice 
would forbid such an exaction. 

But the case is otherwise stated in the Scriptures, 
—and their testimony respecting the divine program 
must be taken as a whole. The Bible account shows 
that, so far from compelling the great sacrifice, God 
induced it: he offered the Only Begotten Son a great 
reward as compensation for the faithful performance 
of the service. The statement is, that "for the joy 
that was set before him [Jesus] endured the cross, 
despising the shame." Read carefully the context 
also.-Heb. 12. 

As to what the reward or "joy" consisted of, we 
may draw from the Scriptures very satisfactory conclusions. 
(1) "Lo, I come to do thy will, O my God. 
Thy law [will] is written in my heart." This undoubtedly 



would be the first moving impulse. (2) "He 
was moved with compassion for the multitude," and 
said, "The good Shepherd giveth his life for the 
sheep." "I lay down my life of myself,— no man 
taketh it from me." (3) At his resurrection the Father 
gave him a still higher form of life than he had ever 
previously enjoyed— life on a higher plane— "far 
above angels, principalities and powers;"— although 
he had always been the first and highest of all the 
heavenly sons of God— "the First-begotten," "the 
beginning of the creation of God," and who in all things 
had always had preeminence over others and been 
next to the Father. Henceforth, as a reward for his 
obedience, love and zeal, he was made a "partaker of 
the divine nature" with "life in himself"— a life inextinguishable 
and needing no supply or sustenance 
—immortality, in the strictest meaning of that word. 
What fault can be found with such a substitution, 
with such a vicarious atonement for the sinner? 
Had Jesus been compelled to "suffer for us, the just 
for the unjust," we might plead injustice. Had he 
even willingly died for us, but never been raised from 
the dead, we might have murmured that he was more 
obedient than the Father was kind. Had he been 
raised from the dead a man, and not as the Apostle 
declares, "a life-giving spirit," it would have meant 
the taking back of the "price," and would have implied 
also his perpetual degradation to a lower plane 
of being, because of his obedience to the Father's will. 
But, as the matter is outlined in the Scriptures, neither 
of these objections can be urged, for our Lord was 
raised from death "to die no more— death hath no 
more dominion over him." He could not die now because 
made possessor of immortality, "the divine nature," 
which cannot die, being death proof. 

SUFFERING FOR UNWISDOM ONLY? 

If it were only the foolish and the wicked that 
suffered now the Professor's logic would be more apparent: 
but if a man should expect to suffer for wrong 
and unwisdom should he not expect to prosper for 
well doing? But we all know that the wicked often 
prosper most, and that the good and the pure and 
the wise frequently suffer; witness the cases of the 
prophets of old and of our Lord and his apostles, and 
of all his faithful followers, of whom it is written: 
"All that will live godly in this life shall suffer persecution." 
(2 Tim. 3:12.) Indeed, is not almost all 
of the wickedness of the world practised at the expense 
of the innocent? 

How about the pains and death of infants, who 
constitute nearly one-half of our race: are they suffering 
for their wrong-doing? If not, for whose error do 
they suffer? Who gives a better answer to this query 
than the Bible gives— that they die because they have 



inherited the weaknesses and blemishes of Adam? 
The fact is that sin and death are upon our race, and 
that we are born to their influences. 

R3391 : page 202 

Men who think have indeed, as the Professor declares, 
ceased to concern themselves about "original 
sin" or "birth sin," but not because a monk invented 
the thought. They know that they were "born in 
sin," "prone to sin," and that its bonds are fast upon 
their every power. They know, if they will but think, 
that Moses, who first told of original sin, was not a 
monk. Neither was our Lord, who declared that he 
"came to seek and to save [recover] that which was 
lost." Neither were the apostles monks: least of all 
that logical man the Apostle Paul, whose words we 
have quoted foregoing. 

EVOLUTION THEORY THE PROFESSOR'S SNARE. 

The Professor's difficulty and how he fell into it 
are clear from the paragraph last above quoted. 
He was too logical to be held long by false conceptions 
of the atonement as a means of rescue from eternal 
torture, and in discarding that he discarded the 
Bible which he believed so taught. Next he was ensnared 
by human speculation and science, falsely so-called, 
into the Evolution theory. This is shown by 
his words, "Here we are. We have risen, as to our 
bodies, from the beasts." 

Illogically and without evidence the Professor is 
led into Theosophy— into the belief that each man is 
the incarnation of a previously unknown spirit being. 
This is evident from the words "true incarnations of 
diviner spirits than our own." Alas! how liable all 
of us would be to fall into confusion of thought if we 
were to reject the divine Word of revelation. How 
quickly such folly manifests itself, no matter how 
learned or brilliant the individual! 

R3392 : page 202 

The Professor's closing reference to "the germ 
of a new and higher FAITH" seems peculiar in view 
of the fact that he appears to have no faith in the Bible, 
very little confidence in a God of Nature. We 
are forced to the conclusion that the Professor's 
"germ of a new and higher faith" is self-faith or self-confidence 
respecting "reincarnations," and a gradual 
evolution from microbes to beasts and from beasts to 
men and from men to gods. Those who can be satisfied 
with such faiths are welcome to them. As for us, 
we prefer "the faith once delivered to the saints;" 
but we want it pure— free from traditions of the 
dark ages, which dishonor God and insult reason and 



lead on to such darkness of worldly wisdom as we are 
here criticising. 



R3392 : page 202 

PRAYING FOR HELP IN TIME OF WAR. 

--2 CHRONICLES 14:1-12.-JULY 17.- 

Golden Text:— "Help us, O Lord 
our God, for we rest on thee." 

OUR lesson relates to the two tribe kingdom of Judah 
under its good king Asa, the great grandson of 
Solomon. We have already noticed the tendency 
to idolatry stimulated by Solomon's marrying heathen 
women, and then, to please them, introducing their heathen 
religions. We have seen how only a small portion of the 
kingdom was left in the hands of Solomon's son Rehoboam, 
and that true religion for a time was stimulated by 
the adversities of the government. Nevertheless, idolatry 
flourished, not only in Israel under Jeroboam, but also in 
Judah under Rehoboam, and also under the reign of his 
son Abijah, mentioned in the opening verses of our lesson. 

CONFLICT BETWEEN LIGHT AND DARKNESS. 

Under all the circumstances one is inclined to wonder 
whence Asa received his aspirations for righteousness 
and loyalty to God. We are to remember, however, that the 
gathering to Judah of many of the religious people of the 
ten tribes and the Levitical tribe gave true religion a strong 
foundation in Judah. The heathen religions were fascinating 
to the people, not only because they were showy, 
but because they contained a large element of licentiousness, 
and it is a weakness of the fallen human nature 
to want to be right and yet to be wrong at the same time 
—to pretend to be doing good and serving righteousness 
and exercising the religious elements of human nature, 
while at the same time gratifying the lower and baser instincts. 
The entire human family is weak in this direction, 
as is evident by all the heathen religions of the 
world. The religion of the Bible is the only one that lifts 
its standard far above all baseness, and which demands of 
its followers the highest ideals, as represented in our text 
for the year,— "Brethren, whatsoever things are true, 
whatsoever things are honest, whatsoever things are just, 
whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever things are lovely, 
whatsoever things are reputable, if there be any virtue, or 
any praise, think on these things."— Phil. 4:8. 

Our Lord, in telling us to let our light shine before 
men, informs us that the darkness will hate the light, 
that there will be continually a conflict between the two, 
and that this will cause the "children of the light" continually 



to walk in the narrow and difficult way. Nevertheless 

the light reproves the darkness wherever it shines. 

We may be sure that some such conditions prevailed in 

the kingdom of Judah when the best people of the whole 

twelve tribes had gathered in Judah and were letting the 

light of their faith in God shine before their fellows. The 

influence of the Truth took hold upon the heart of Asa, 

and upon his reaching the throne, at the death of his 

father Abijah, he promptly availed himself of the opportunity 

to strike a blow at idolatry— to take his stand on 

the side of the Lord and his Law, which the nation centuries 

R3392 : page 203 

before had accepted as the basis of their government 
with God through Moses. 

ASA'S COURSE NOT A PATTERN. 

The work of reform consisted in the destruction of 
the altars erected on various hilltops, at which the orgies 
of heathendom were practised. These altars were surrounded 
by groves for the worship of Baal and Ashtaroth by those 
who affected to be in a large sense worshipers of nature, 
and groves of trees on hilltops were their temples. Asa 
not only destroyed these unlawful accessories to a false 
worship, but he caused a proclamation to be made throughout 
the kingdom calling the attention of the people to the 
true God Jehovah, the God of their fathers, and to his 
Law and all the commandments connected therewith. 

Such action on the part of Asa has been misunderstood 
by many well-meaning Christian people to imply that 
other kings and rulers in other countries should similarly 
take active measures for the destruction of all false religion 
and for the establishment of what they conceive to be 
the true religion. This has meant religious persecution 
throughout the past. For instance, in Great Britain, 
Germany, France, etc., time and again Roman Catholics 
coming into power have overthrown Protestant worship 
and persecuted Protestant worshipers, and, reversely, 
Protestants coming into power have endeavored similarly 
to persecute Catholics. Sometimes the persecution has 
been between various sects of Protestants, sometimes between 
Mohammedans and Christians, etc. Of late years 
a more tolerant spirit has disposed intelligent people to 
let each other worship different gods or the same God according 
to the dictates of the conscience of each. Nevertheless 
there are many today, who, if they had the power, 
would feel it to be their duty to emulate the example of 
Asa, and destroy any and every religion disapproved by 
their consciences. 

Such misapprehensions of proprieties are built upon 
misunderstanding of the course of Asa and others of his 
time, who had God's approval in their course of opposing 
false worships. In order to grasp the situation thoroughly 
and to see the principles underlying it, we should remember 



that no nation in the world today occupies the same 
position toward God that Israel occupied in its day. God 
chose Israel— the natural descendants of Abraham and 
Isaac and Jacob— to be his peculiar people, to be his nation. 
They were thus separated from all other nations of 
the world, which were accounted heathen. In this his 
chosen nation God established his Law, and made a covenant 
with that people by which they were to be obedient 
to certain directions and to receive from him certain blessings, 
protection, guidance, etc. It was in harmony with 
this special arrangement that Asa was properly doing his 
duty in destroying any and every religious system in his 
nation contrary to the divine Law and Covenant. 

"YE ARE A HOLY NATION." 

However, Israel has ceased to be God's people since 
the time of their rejection of Messiah, and God has not 
adopted any other nation of earth to be his nation instead 
of Israel, and he is no longer in covenant relationship 
with any other nation. Believers in the Lord Jesus, consecrated 
followers in his steps, are, from the Lord's standpoint, 
his "holy nation," his "Royal Priesthood"— spiritual 
Israel. But these do not constitute a nation from the 
worldly standpoint. They are the embryo members of the 
coming nation, the Kingdom of God's dear Son, which 
will be established in power and great glory at the second 
coming of the Lord and the establishment of his Kingdom. 
For this reason it would be entirely improper to 
any king or governor or president or emperor of earth today 
to attempt to use any such power as that exercised by 
Asa with divine approval. During this Gospel age the 
Lord's plan is that his people shall be as lights in the 
world in the midst of the darkness of sin and error, and 
that the light which they let shine shall reprove the world 
of sin, not nationally but individually, so that those who 
experience conviction of sin and who go on to repentance 
may become associated with the light-bearers, the Lord's 
people, and while still in the world and still of the world, 
according to the flesh, and still bound to it by certain 
obligations and laws of men, nevertheless as our Lord expressed 
it, such, from the time they become members of 
the Royal Priesthood, the holy nation, are not of the 
world even as Jesus was not of the world, because he has 
chosen them out of the world. 

King Asa built fortress cities in the highways connecting 
the land of Judah with the outside world, as a 
protection against attack from Egypt on the south and 
west, from Syria on the north and east, and from the 
ten-tribe kingdom on the immediate north. He organized 
also a militia army subject to call. These preparations 
for war had the divine approval, but in no sense of 
the word indicated that we, the antitypical Israelites, 
should take a similar course. On the contrary, as the 
Apostle points out, we are to have on the armor of God, 
the armor of righteousness; we are to fortify our hearts 



against the attack of spiritual enemies in every direction; 
we are to note the quarter from which the enemies are 
to be expected— the world, the flesh, the Adversary. The 
battles of typical Israel represented or prefigured and 
illustrated the battles in which we spiritual Israelites are 
to engage and the victories which we are to win on a higher 
plane, for we contend not with flesh and blood, but with 
principalities and powers and wicked spirits in places of 
influence. 

The ten years of quiet mentioned in verses 1,5 and 6, 
in which Asa instituted reforms amongst the people 
and equipped them for defence, were evidently all needed 
for the struggle recorded in verse 9. Zerah, the Ethiopian, 
with an army of 1,000,000 men, is supposed by some 
to have been Osorkon II. of Egypt, who was of Ethiopian 
descent. Others suppose that Zerah was the general of 
this king. In the days of Rehoboam the king of Egypt 

R3393 : page 204 

had invaded Judah and conquered it, and had taken away 
from it an immense treasure in gold accumulated by King 
Solomon, including the solid gold shields which Solomon 
had hanging from the pillars of the Temple. It is assumed 
that Judah became practically a vassal nation to Egypt as a 
result of this war, and that Asa's organization of the nation 
on a military basis and the erecting of fortifications meant a 
declaration of independence and a refusal to pay tribute 
to Egypt, and that Zerah's army was sent to punish 
him, to bring away more spoil and to reduce the nation 
again to the condition of a vassal. 

KING ASA'S PRAYER FOR VICTORY. 

Asa called into requisition his army, which numbered 
only about one-half that of the invading foe, but his confidence 
was in the Lord, and he cried unto him in prayer 
for help that the war might result favorably to the Lord's 
people, the Jews. His recorded prayer is beautiful for its 
simplicity of faith:— 

"Asa cried unto the Lord his God, and said, Lord, 
there is none beside thee to help between the mighty and 
him that hath no strength: help us, O Lord our God; 
for we rely on thee, and in thy name are we come against 
this multitude. O Lord, thou art our God; let not man 
prevail against thee." 

The Lord blessed the forces of the Jews. The enemy 
was discomfited, scattered, routed, and pursued through 
the land of the Philistines, who evidently were in league 
with them as enemies of the Jews. This was one of the 
most remarkable victories ever achieved by the Jews over 
any foreign nation. 

Following the custom of Asa and David and Moses, 
and others of bygone times in Israel, it is the habit of 
Christian peoples of our day to offer up prayers for success 
in war. We recall well the prayers that were offered for 



the armies during the civil war of this country; we remember 
the accounts given of the prayers of the British and 
Boers during the recent British war; we remember in the 
Spanish war the prayers of the Catholics of Spain and of 
Italy for the success of the Spanish forces, and how the 
Pope's blessing was given to the Spanish war vessels. We 
have heard lately of how the Czar of Russia, on learning 
of the outbreak of the war, repaired to the Cathedral for 
prayer to God, and how the leading Russian generals have 
similarly gone to confession and to prayer and for other 
public recognitions of the Almighty and appeals to him 
for success to the Russian arms in the present war with 
Japan. We have seen pictures in the public press of how 
the regimental standards, flags, are blessed by the Czar 
and assisting priests, and the telegraphic reports declare 
that an image of the Virgin Mary, which was taken with 
the army in wars of long ago that were successfully waged, 
is to be taken to the far East as a kind of talisman to give 
good luck to the Russian side of the warfare. How shall 
we view these appeals? Shall we view them as others do 
as being on a parity with the appeal of Asa in our lesson? 
Shall we consider that they are equally appropriate in 
God's sight and that they are bringing a blessing and victory? 
We answer, No. The prayers offered for the success 
of the Confederate armies did not bring them victory; 
the prayers and blessings upon the Spanish forces and vessels 
brought them no victory; the prayers of the Boers 
brought them no victory; the prayers of the French in 
their war with Germany brought the former no victory; 
the prayers of the Russians have in no sense of the word 
stayed or turned the tide of battle as yet. 

GOD'S INTEREST AND CARE AND OURS. 

We would not be understood as declaring or even implying 
that God has no interest in the affairs of the world, 
and that he does not in any measure take a hand in the 
results of the wars of our time. Quite the contrary. We 
believe that the Lord's power, especially in this day, especially 
in this time of "harvest," is supervising and shaping 
the affairs of the nations with a view to bringing about 
the grand consummation of the age so long foretold in the 
Scriptures, which will result in a great time of trouble 
through a social, political and financial upheaval which 
will prepare the way for the Kingdom of God's dear Son 
in its due time. But we deny the propriety of Christians 
attempting to pray or otherwise direct the Lord in connection 
with these matters, and the outworking of the 
divine program, which we cannot fully and clearly comprehend. 
No nation in the world today is God's nation 
in the sense that Israel was his people. With no nation 
in the world today has God made a covenant such as that 
which subsisted between himself and Israel for the centuries 
between the giving of the Law at Sinai and the rejection 
of the Lord at the time of his crucifixion. No 
nation or kingdom in the world can claim divine authority 



or right or backing. The title, "Christian nations," is 
entirely a misnomer, unauthorized by anything in God's 
Word. All these nations, from the Scriptural standpoint, 
are "kingdoms of this world," Gentile kingdoms. The 
Lord acknowledges none of them, but describes them 
unitedly as great Babylon, which in due time would fall 
and give place to the glorious kingdom which the Lord 
has promised— the antitype of the Jewish kingdom under 
a still more favorable covenant, under a still better Mediator, 
under a still more grand and glorious king than 
David or Solomon or any other. 

The proper attitude, therefore, for the Lord's consecrated 
people to occupy is that of neutrals. "Ye are not 
of this world, even as I am not of this world; for I have 
chosen you out of the world, and ordained you, that you 
should go and bring forth fruit, and that your fruit should 
remain." The fruit which the Lord's people are to 
bear is not strife and enmity and vain glory, but 
love, joy and peace in the holy Spirit. This does 
not mean either that we are to quarrel with the world 
and seek to bring all mankind to the same position that 
we occupy. On the contrary, we are to realize that the 

R3393 : page 205 

world is of one nature and the Lord's consecrated and accepted 
ones are of a new nature; that the Lord has 
not given to the world the same law that he has given to 
his consecrated ones, and that he is not expecting of the 
world the same course of conduct that he is expecting of 
the house of sons begotten of his Spirit, adopted into his 
family and guided by his Spirit and his Word. 

Let the world fight its fight: the Lord will supervise 
and the results will be glorious eventually. Let us who 
belong to the new nation, to the new Kingdom that is not 
of this world, who use no carnal weapons, but the sword 
of the Spirit— let us fight the good fight of faith, lay hold 
upon the glorious things set before us, and not only stand 
ourselves, but help all those begotten of the same Spirit 
and members of the same heavenly army corps to stand, 
complete in him who is the Head of the body, the Captain 
of our salvation. By and by God's loving care over 
all his creatures will be manifested in the glorious Kingdom 
of his dear Son, which shall bless and rule, instruct 
and uplift mankind in general. "The groaning creation" 
will then be delivered from the bondage of corruption 
into the glorious liberty of the sons of God— so many of 
them as will then accept the blessing. Then all will see 
that God so loved the world as to give his Son to die 
for us and to thus open the way for his Kingdom 
blessings. 



R3393 : page 205 



A GOOD KING'S ERROR. 

-2 CHRONICLES 19:1-1 1.--JULY 24.- 

Golden Text:— "Deal courageously, 
and the Lord shall be with the good." 

JEHOSHAPHAT is noted as one of the best kings in 

the history of Judah. He was the son of Asa, of 

our last lesson. He had been reigning twenty 

years at the time of the events narrated in this lesson. He 

was a still more vigorous reformer than his father Asa, his 

record being that he utterly destroyed all the groves 

where idolatry was practised, the implication being that 

his father had permitted some of them to remain. Additionally 

he established the true religion throughout his 

kingdom, and evidently was zealous for righteousness in 

every sense of the word. The record certainly shows his 

reign in the most favorable light. 

He got into error through ambition. He made a 
marriage alliance for his son with the daughter of Ahab 
and Jezebel of the ten-tribe kingdom— Israel. Doubtless 
his ambition was that ultimately through this union the 
two nations might become again united as one under his 
son. Alas! how many good men and good women have 
been injured by ambition and expediency. How many 
parents think more of the earthly prospects of their children 
than of their real happiness and spiritual prosperity. 
However good and noble and well intentioned such parents 
may be, their course in such matters indicates 
lack of faith in God or lack of submission to his will, 
without the realization that his arrangements faithfully carried 
out will mean greater blessing than any other. 

ALLIANCES WITH EVIL DANGEROUS. 

The ambition which led to the intermarrying with 
the royal family of Israel led also to fellowship and sociability 
between the two royal families, and the effect, as 
might have been expected, was an evil one. "Evil communications 
corrupt good manners," says the Apostle. 
A son once asked his mother why she did not permit him 
to play with certain boys of the neighborhood. She replied 

R3394 : page 205 

that she feared their influence over him would be for 
evil. He inquired why she should not expect that his 
good example would influence these neighbor boys rather 
than that their example would influence him unfavorably. 
By way of illustrating her thought, she requested her son to 
bring her a tumbler full of clean water and a bottle of ink 
and a pen. When he had brought these she asked him to 
put a drop of the ink into the tumbler of water. He did 
so, and she asked him to notice the clouded effect that 
even a drop of the ink produced; and then suggested that 



he put one drop of the water into the ink bottle and note 
how little change would be manifested. The lesson is a 
good one: there is a corrupting power in evil, a downward 
tendency to which nothing in righteousness corresponds, 
and reversely. 

The lesson to us is that we need to "keep ourselves 
unspotted from the world," and, more than this, to seek 
divine aid in so doing— to appropriate to ourselves the 
instructions and encouragements, the reproofs and exhortations 
of God's Word. A little leaven of sin can affect a 
whole community; it has a power of self-development in 
fallen human nature that righteousness does not possess. 
The more we realize this the more we are led to look to the 
Lord for the great relief that the world needs, and the 
more we are inclined to pray as well as to labor that the 
Lord's Kingdom may come, and that through it righteousness 
may be established in the world, and the divine 
will be done eventually on earth as it is done in heaven. 

The sociability between the king of Judah and the 
king of Israel led the former to visit the latter, and on 
such an occasion the host proposed that he would attempt 
to retake from the king of Syria a certain city that had 
once belonged to Israel. He requested his guest, the king 
of Judah, to accompany him to the battle, which was evidently 
expected to be a victory. Out of courtesy, and 
from his desire to cultivate the friendship of Ahab, Jehoshaphat 
yielded and accompanied him, the result being a 
disastrous battle from which the king of Judah barely escaped. 
The Lord, through the prophet Jehu, sent him a 
message on his return from the battle, saying, "Shouldst 

R3394 : page 206 

thou help the ungodly and love them that hate the Lord? 
therefore is wrath upon thee"— indicated by his ignominious 
return without any evidence of divine favor especially 
promised to the kings of Judah so long as they were in 
harmony with God. 

BE YE SEPARATE, SAITH THE LORD. 

This whole matter teaches an important lesson for 
the Lord's people: it is for us to seek first the Lord's will 
in every matter and to leave to him the direction of our 
affairs and interests. We should be specially on guard 
against associations with the ungodly— against fellowships, 
matrimonial alliances, etc., as between them and ourselves 
and families. We are not to wonder so much that one of 
the best kings of Judah should commit such an error, but 
we do wonder that members of the Royal Priesthood, begotten 
of the holy Spirit, could ever be so negligent of 
their relationship to the Lord and responsibility to him 
and to their children, that they should to any extent follow 
the course of Jehoshaphat; and yet we well know that 
those who thus attempt to take the guidance of their own 
affairs and the affairs of their children into their own 



hands, and hence to ignore the Lord in the matter, are a 
considerable number. As we grow in grace and in knowledge, 
and sometimes profit by our mistakes, we should be 
more and more free from them and therefore more and 
more pleasing to the Lord. 

The Lord's instruction to the new creation is that 
we should not only love righteousness, but hate iniquity; 
we should not only love and fellowship with all who are 
the Lord's people, but we should strictly avoid the fellowship 
of those who are not his people, who are enemies of 
righteousness. This does not mean that we are to hate 
the wicked, but that, hating the wickedness, we will avoid 
any fellowship with those who are in sympathy with it, realizing 
that they are either blinded to the right or ensnared 
and influenced by the Adversary. What fellowship hath 
light with darkness, truth with error, righteousness with 
sin? Let all who love righteousness depart from iniquity: 
"Be ye clean that bear the vessels of the Lord's house." 

While thus reproving Jehoshaphat, the Lord graciously 
mentioned his approval of his course in destroying the 
idolatrous arrangements and the tendency of the king's 
heart to seek the Lord. Evidently the experience was a 
profitable one and led Jehoshaphat to still greater zeal for 
righteousness, for he went out amongst the people, either 
personally or through heralds and representatives, and 
effected a religious revival, bringing the people back to a 
higher appreciation of the Lord and observance of his 
statutes. Evidently the king had a very high sense of justice 
and honor, as indicated by his judicial appointments 
in all the cities of his kingdom. His message to the 
judges, "Take heed what ye do: for ye judge not for 
man, but for the Lord, who is with you in the judgment. 
Wherefore, let the fear of the Lord be upon you; take 
heed and do it: for there is no iniquity with the Lord 
our God, nor respect of persons nor taking of gifts." 
These are grand sentiments, worthy of a saint of this Gospel 
age! Surely such a king would be a blessing to any 
people because of his approximation to the divine ideal of 
righteousness. What may the world hope for when the 
great king Immanuel— whose right the kingdom is, and 
who shortly will take it in the name of Jehovah— shall 
exercise the powers of the kingdom, and with superhuman 
knowledge and wisdom shall order the affairs of the world 
in the highest interests of every creature, in accord with 
the principles of righteousness. 

JUSTICE IS THE FOUNDATION OF GOD'S THRONE. 

Very evidently the majority of people— even Christians, 
"saints"— have not sufficiently high ideals respecting 
justice. The more we realize what a detestable thing 
injustice is in the sight of the Lord, the more must we 
strive to exercise ourselves continually along this line. 
Justice is not so high an attribute in some respects as love, 
but it is of primary importance, for the adage is a true one 
that we should be just before we are generous. The Lord's 



people should make sure that they render to no man in 
any respect less than is due him in business transactions, 
in social affairs, in private conversation, in every way. 
The saint is to go beyond this, and not only be just but 
generous— to render nothing less than justice to any, and 
to be willing to accept from others less than he might 
justly demand if they seemed not so highly to appreciate 
the principles of Justice. 

We are to remember the wide difference that exists 
between the Lord's people and the world, and are not to 
measure ourselves with others in this respect. The majority 
of the world have not been in the same school as we— 
the school of Christ— as it is written of the Lord's people, 
"They shall all be taught of God." As we have been 
learning in the highest school from the best of teachers for 
years, it would be strange indeed if we did not have a 
higher standard both of justice and of love than that which 
generally prevails amongst men. Let us learn to cultivate 
justice, let us be diligent students in the school of Christ, 
that we may be fitted for the graduation tests and thus be 
accounted worthy to be associated with our Lord as teachers 
in the great Millennial age school, in which the whole 
world of mankind shall receive instruction along these 
lines. 

The officers of the court were largely selected from 
amongst the Levites— the tribe specially consecrated to 
the Lord's service. Apparently the king could not have 
acted more wisely in all these matters; nevertheless we are 
not to expect the kings of Christendom to follow his example 
and select only consecrated men forjudges, court 
officers, police duty, etc. The kingdoms of this world 
will by and by become the kingdom of our Lord and of 
his Anointed, and then undoubtedly during that Millennial 
period only the consecrated will be granted positions 
of power, authority or responsibility in connection with 

R3394 : page 207 

the government of the world. At present, however, the 
"god of this world," the "prince of this world," Satan, 
has largely to do with all the politics of the world, and 
sees to it that the majority in places of influence and 
power are faithful to himself. 

True, there is today outwardly a good moral tone 
and a general desire on the part of the public not to be 
abused or defrauded by those in ruling positions, and a 
certain amount of decency and order must be maintained 
and a high standard must be claimed. Nevertheless, we 
are all witness to the fact that there are various standards 
of honesty, and that the majority of people both in and 
out of office have standards that are too low. It is not for 
us to specially pry into the present condition of things, 
which rather seems to us to be as good as we could expect, 
better than we could have hoped, all things considered. 
We rejoice, nevertheless, that the time is coming when 
absolute perfection will be secured in the conduct of the 



world's affairs. God is now selecting his Royal Priests to 
be his kings and ministers in the administration of the 
affairs of the Kingdom of his dear Son. Let us be faithful, 
and learn well the lessons of the present time, that 
we may be counted worthy a share in this honor. 

"JUDGE RIGHTEOUS JUDGMENT." 

Jehoshaphat's charge to the Levites who constituted 
this superior court at Jerusalem is grand also. "Thus 
shall ye do in the fear of the Lord, faithfully, with a perfect 
heart. And whensoever any controversy shall come 
to you from any brethren that dwell in their cities, between 
blood and blood, between law and commandment, 
statutes and judgments, ye shall even warn them that they 
trespass not against the Lord, and so wrath come upon 
you and upon your brethren." The judging between 
blood and blood would signify the decision as to the degree 
of culpability in the event of a murder— to determine, 

R3395 : page 207 

as we do today, whether or not the death were manslaughter, 
accidental killing, or in the second degree— murder 
unpremeditated or incited by anger or fear— or, third, if 
it were murder in the first degree, intended, premeditated. 
Similarly they were to discern which offences were against 
the common law, which against the divine law, and which 
against the usages of society, and were to see that justice 
would be meted out to all. As we think over those conditions 
of olden time, we wonder how such matters as these— 
such evidences that people of thousands of years ago were 
just, noble, thoughtful, reverential— are regarded by 
our Evolutionist friends. They seem inclined to think 
that at that time mankind must have been near the 
monkey scale of intelligence, but the facts are against them. 
Here was a king in whose empire justice was no doubt dispensed 
equally as well as it is with us today in this most 
favored land at this most favored period. 

The closing words of the lesson constitute our Golden 
Text— "Deal courageously, and the Lord shall be with 
the good." We commend these words to the Lord's 
faithful people. Whoever has a duty to perform let him 
not fear, and while seeking to do unpleasant tasks in a 
kindly manner, both justly and lovingly, let us fear not 
man, but rather fear the Lord and be intent on pleasing 
him. May the words of our mouths as well as the meditations 
of our hearts be acceptable in thy sight, O Lord, 
our strength and our Redeemer! 



R3395 : page 207 

REPORT OF THE BRITISH CONVENTION. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

Our first British General Convention has come 
and gone! It brought us much joy in the Lord, and 
left us with a greater desire to "spend and be spent" 
in the Master's service. With general consent it is 
acknowledged that the meetings have been the best 
we have had in this country. But this was according 
to expectation, for the convention brought together a 
larger number of friends than has hitherto been the 
case, and because all should have more of the holy 
Spirit now than ever before. The predominant feeling 
was the love of the brethren for each and all, and 
with it was the appreciation of the grace of God 
which produced such a grand result. Each of the 
meetings added its quota to the good derived from the 
Convention: the Praise and Testimony, and the Colporteurs' 
and Workers' meetings being specially helpful. 
Already we have heard of fresh or renewed 
efforts as a result of these talks with each other. On 
the Monday morning forty-three brothers and sisters 
signified by immersion their consecration to the Lord, 
and their desire to be accounted worthy to suffer with 
him. It was a most impressive time as we reviewed 
with each other our privilege of suffering with the 
Lord, as well as believing on him. And we rejoiced in 
anticipation of the "glory to follow." 

All the meetings were well attended, and there 
was the usual eagerness to get as much as possible 
of the food the Lord provided. The largest contingent 
of friends came from Glasgow, the most distant 
place represented. Ireland was represented by Bro. 
Walker, while England was represented by friends 
from all parts. We were glad to have Bro. Koetitz 
with us. It was hard to part, but we all realized that 
the Lord had given a work to our charge, and that 
the King's message demanded haste. A good proportion 
of the Colporteurs were with us also, and to these 
we bade "God-speed," commending them to the grace 
of God. We felt the shortness of the time, and the 
coming of the Kingdom for which we work and wait 
and there was a greater determination to do all possible 
for the accomplishment of the work committed to 
the hands of those who know the Lord. 

You and your work were specially remembered. 
We would have been glad to have had you with us, but 
we shall hope that, in the Lord's providence, you may 
be permitted and we may be privileged to have you 
with us in our next convention. The friends desired 
me to express on their behalf the gratitude they felt 
towards the Society. 

Your brother in the Lord, J. HEMERY. 



page 209 



SEMI-MONTHLY. 
VOL. XXV. JULY 15, 1904. No. 14. 



CONTENTS. 

Views from the Watch Tower 211 

Japan a Christian Nation 21 1 

Toward Church Unity 212 

Effect of Present War 

Far-Reaching 212 

The Bible and Criticism 213 

Heathens in Heaven 215 

The Downward Course of Sin 217 

"He Careth for You" 218 

Courageous and Timid Servants 

of God 220 

Letters 222 

page 210 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-24 EVERSHOLT ST., LONDON, N.W. 
GERMAN BRANCH-MIRKER STR., 45, ELBERFELD. 
AUSTRALIAN BRANCH-32 JOHNSTON ST., FITZROY, MELBOURNE 

PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE, 5c (2-l/2d.) A COPY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity 
or adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER, will be supplied FREE, if 
they send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting 
the paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our 
list continually. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE 



THIS JOURNAL IS PUBLISHED IN THE 

FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, DANISH AND ITALIAN LANGUAGES. 

SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



R3398 : page 210 



A HELPFUL SERVICE. 



Realizing that bereavement prepares the mind for 
the Truth, some dear friends watch the death notices of 
their city papers and send tracts which thus reach the relatives 
of the deceased— sometimes opportunely. In our 
judgment the best tracts for such service would be two, 
No. 54, "A Dark Cloud with a Silver Lining," and No. 
49, "Which is the True Gospel?" We commend the 
plan to you all. Confer together; and in large cities take 
weekly or monthly turns at it. If the names are written 
the "long way" on wrappers 6-1/2 x 7-1/2 inches, they may 
be mailed to us and we will wrap the tracts and paste 
them. 

"MILLENNIAL DAWN READERS MEET," ETC. 



The Cleveland friends inform us that in their announcements 
of meetings in the daily papers they have 
long been in doubt as to how to mention their meetings. 
Lately they have adopted the above style with good 
results. 

We can see the advantages in it. (1) Those who 
have read the DAWNS will know at once what it means. 
(2) Some who have the DAWNS but have neglected reading 
them may be aroused to investigate them. People like 
to go where others are going and to read what others are 
reading. 



R3395 : page 211 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 
JAPAN A CHRISTIAN NATION. 



THE Japanese are such valiant fighters on sea and 
land that few any longer doubt that they must 
be "Christians'^?). They are very desirous of 
ranking with Europeans and Americans, and feel that 
to the prowess they have shown in war they now 
merely need to avow themselves a "Christian nation" 
in order to be all that any "Christian nation" 
could be expected to be. 

The Japs are a very practical people in this as in 
other respects. They are quite right; they are a 
"Christian nation" as truly as is any other nation, 
for there are no "Christian nations" in the proper 
use of that term. The "holy nation" is only in 



embryo, only being formed, and will not assume its 
power and place as God's Kingdom under the whole 
heavens until the number of the "very elect" is 
completed and glorified. The best of earthly kingdoms 
are only "kingdoms of this world," as the 
Scriptures designate them. 

The Emperor of Japan is expected to make his 
nation Christian by proclamation, and as a preparation 
to this end public meetings have been held in 
Japan to arouse public sentiment on the subject, and 
in these great enthusiasm was developed. We must 
not sneer at the Japanese misconception of the subject: 
rather we must remember that some very prominent 
people in these United States have for years been petitioning 
Congress that the constitution be changed so 
as to have in it somehow the name of God, and thus 
to imply at least that this is a "Christian nation." 
The whole matter shows how gross is the blindness 
prevalent even among the civilized. 

Let no one get the idea that the Japanese are 
converted to Christ: they are merely bent on getting 
a good name among the nations; for patriotism is the 
chief "religion" of the Japs. Various religious journals 
are commenting on the situation. The Methodist 
Protestant Conference received a report on the subject 
from its Board of Foreign Missions, which said: 
"The opinion held by some that Japan has become 
a Christian nation is far from correct. Idolatry, superstition 
and atheism largely prevail. The great mass of 
the population has not become impressed with Christian 
teaching." 

The Globe, New York, says:— 

"Travelers, listing the peculiarities of the Sunrise 
Kingdom, have often noted that the Japanese 
were not so much irreligious as non-religious. The 
habit of personal devotion, as we understand that 
state, seems almost altogether absent. The Shintoism 
and Buddhism which exist are secular rather than 
sacred. Hence it is that the Christian missionaries, 
although the Government and the people are tolerant, 
have made little progress, the number of converts being 
pitifully small. Hence it also is (religion being 
deemed a public rather than a private thing and one 
form being thought about as good as another) that 
the majority of the population would probably loyally 
obey the edict if the Emperor, for secular or other 
reasons, should proclaim Christianity as the state religion. 
The clew to the Japanese character is patriotism. 
To the demands, or supposed demands, of 
this everything else is subordinate." 

The Boston Watchman (Baptist) says editorially: 

"Of course, there is no spiritual element in this 
movement. It does not indicate an adoption of the 
Christian life, or even an intellectual acceptance of 
the truths of Christianity. What is proposed is merely 
a formal adoption of the Christian name, so that Japan 



may be called a Christian nation and rank with England, 
Germany and the United States. The Japanese 
hate the name pagan; they have now no national religion, 
and there would be nothing strange in their adopting 
the name Christian; but how much it would really 
advance the interests of pure and personal faith in 
Christ is doubtful." 

R3395 : page 212 

TOWARD CHURCH UNITY. 



"With the Methodist Protestant church conference 
enthusiastic for union with the United Brethren and 
Congregationalist denominations and gravely considering 
amalgamation with the Methodist Episcopal; 
with the Methodist Episcopal, south, discussing consolidation 
with the same denomination, north; with 
the Presbyterian assembly considering absorption of 
the United and Cumberland Presbyterians, and with 
a movement toward the adoption of rituals, one may 
well believe the churches have caught the spirit of 
combination so marked in the industrial world. It is 
no less true of the churches than of the commercial 
corporations that in union there is strength and in 
combination there is economy of operation.... 

"Universal church union has been broached by 
bold theologians. The time is not ripe for that. It 
may never come. But the tendency is yearly toward 
greater tolerance and closer fraternal relations. The 
time is favorable for wiping out minor distinctions 
and organizing upon broader lines. The signs are 
altogether favorable for larger conceptions of religious 
duty and for more concentrated effort in spreading 
the gospel. The war of the creeds is a 

R3396 : page 212 

waste of energy that might better be devoted to the 
conversion of the heathen at home and abroad."— 
Pittsburg Gazette. 



The above editorial fairly represents the usual 
worldlywise view of this question— the view entertained 
by the majority of church members. All are 
dissatisfied with their creeds, made in or shortly after 
the "dark ages." All, or nearly all, regard their creeds 
as fair expositions of the Bible's teachings— and in 
thus dropping these creeds as no longer serviceable in 
this twentieth century they are also practically discarding 
the Bible. The Lord, foretelling their present discomfiture 
and disgust with what were once their spiritual 



delicacies, says, "All their tables are full of vomit" 
—full of matters and doctrines they have rejected. 
-Isa. 28:8. 

How different is the condition of those whom the 
Lord is now specially feeding with "meat in due season," 
"things new and old." Of this our table it is 
written, "My table thou hast furnished [supplied] in 
the presence [sight] of mine enemies." They see our 
bounties and feel jealous, but refuse to accept the 
good things we would so freely share with them.— 
Psalm 23. 

Well, soon we will have their "union" or "Confederacy" 
(Isa. 8:12), and the bitter fruits of Union 
in error will speedily manifest themselves in tyranny, 
as during the "dark ages,"— though perhaps affairs 
will never grow quite so black as then. 

FRANCE AND GERMANY IN OPPOSITE COURSES. 



It seems peculiar that France and Germany are 
doing opposite things for the same reason. In France 
the government realizes that the Roman Catholic 
religious orders (Jesuits and others) are the active 
agents of the monarchists, who seek the overthrow 
of the French Republic and the restoration 
of the Empire. For this reason— to secure the stability 
of the Republic— the religious orders are forbidden 
longer to teach in French schools, and, cut off 
from this revenue, many of the monks and nuns are 
expected to seek other homes. The strain between 
the Government and the Papacy is seriously increased, 
and the threat is made that about the beginning of 
next year the Government will cease to be Roman 
Catholic— will cease to pay salaries to Romish priests 
and leave to the people the support or non-support of 
their clerical advisers, as is the uniform custom in 
these United States. 

Germany, on the other hand, for similar reasons 
banished the Jesuits and other orders in A.D., 1872; 
in 1 894 some orders were permitted to return, but not 
the Jesuits. This action was forced upon the German 
government in its endeavor to secure votes for naval 
extensions— the price of the Catholic party's vote. 

Now the Emperor makes the final concession- 
permitting the return of the Jesuits— in the following 
terms:— 

"We, William, by the grace of God, Emperor of 
Germany and King of Prussia, order in the name of 
the Empire and in accordance with the decision of the 
Bundesrath and of the Reichstag, as follows: 'Paragraph 
2 of the law of the 4th of July, 1872, concerning 
the order of the Society of Jesus, is abolished.' Given 
at the Palace of Berlin the 8th of March, 1904." 

Why this concession, do we ask? It is wrung 



from the Protestant government of Germany as the 
price of the aid of the Catholic party in legislation. 
Furthermore, the Jesuits will be expected to work 
secretly against the Socialists and in favor of the 
Emperor. The Socialist gains in late years have been 
enormous, and their ultimate control of the German 
Parliament is feared. 

EFFECTS OF PRESENT WAR FAR REACHING. 



"A dispatch from India a few days ago said that 
the people of India are taking a keen interest in the 
Russo-Japanese war and that the victories of the Japanese 
are hailed with delight simply because they are 
Asiatics and the Russians are Europeans. This suggests 
the possibility that the day may come when the 
people of India will try to throw off the British yoke. 
In this connection it is interesting to learn that for 
eight years past, the Hindus have taken great interest 
in the development of Japan. Since the wonderful 
victory of the Japanese over the Chinese in 1894, some 
of the Hindu papers have maintained correspondents 
in Japan. 

"The London correspondent of the Novoe Vremya, 
St. Petersburg, says that the people of India were 

R3396 : page 213 

further interested in the Japanese by the hundred-tongued 

rumor that in the operations against the Boxers 

the Japanese army proved superior in courage and 

in humane treatment of the conquered to all the European 

armies. From this time on,' says the correspondent, 

'the whole Hindu mass began to be fascinated 

by Japan and to place upon her hopes of deliverance. 

Hindus began to travel in Japan, to reside 

in Japan and to study in her schools. At present the 

fashion among well-to-do Hindus is to send their boys 

to Japan, where they formerly sent them to England. 

On the other hand the Japanese began to travel 

through India and to stay months and even years in 

its cities. The English observed and rejoiced at the 

sympathy of the Hindus for the opponents of her 

rival in Asia. The Japs they thought would serve 

them in good capacity for the estrangement of the 

people of India from sympathizing with Russia. But 

recently the English were thunderstruck by some sufficiently 

eloquent facts. An article on Japan, written 

by an Englishman returning from travels there, 

evoked a whole mailbag of letters to him from editors 

of other gazettes, nabobs, rajahs, etc. They had 

taken him for a Japanese and expressed their delight 

that at least one of the future liberators of their country 

had arrived. Some even sent presents, and offered 



subscriptions for the prosecution of the secret propaganda. 
The whole correspondence fell into the hands 
of the Anglo-Indian government, which could not 
contain itself in its astonishment. Lord Curzon 
viewed the affair seriously, but smothered it in order 
to prevent its dissemination. But there is a plan afoot 
to prohibit Hindus from attending Japanese schools, 
and principally the University of Tokyo."— 
Exchange. 

THE GERMAN WAR IN SOUTH-WEST AFRICA. 



Germany has on hand a small war with some of 
her dependent and subject peoples in South -West 
Africa, in a territory twice the size of her home country 
in Europe. She already has soldiers on the spot 
who are unable to hold their own, and they are to be 
reinforced by 2000 soldiers and 2400 horses, which are 
expected to arrive at the scene of action about the 
middle of July. 

A visitor from another planet might suppose the 
white race most noble, most generous, to impose upon 
itself "the white man's burden" of ruling the darker 
races. Doubtless the results will bring valuable lessons 
to all concerned, and prepare the way for Messiah's 
Kingdom, which will bless the world with an unselfish 
reign of righteousness, which shall "bless all 
the families of the earth." "The desire of all nations 
shall come." 

ORIENTAL VIEWS OF MODERN CHURCHIANITY. 



WEALTHY JAPANESE ON A TOUR OF INSPECTION. 

Associated Press dispatch.— "A party of wealthy 
Japanese have arrived to visit the principal centers 
of the United States, inspect rolling mills and factories 
of all kinds, look into the condition of the poor, 
examine the practical working of the laws, and ascertain, 
if possible, whether religion enters to any appreciable 
extent into the actual daily life of the people. 

"One of the party, a graduate of Tokyo University, 
said that after most careful examination, absolutely 
unprejudiced and free of preconception, the Japanese 
had unanimously and unhesitatingly rejected 
the religion of the Europeans as something they did 
not want and did not need." 

AUSTRIA-HUNGARY PREPARES FOR WAR. 



Without claiming to anticipate any war near at 
hand, but evidently determined to be better prepared 
for war should it come than was Russia, Austria has 
decided that she should devote $75,000,000 (seventy-five 
million dollars) to war preparations— chiefly for 
naval reinforcement. As the Scriptures say, "Let all 
the men of war draw near. Wake up the mighty 
men." (Joel 3:9.) Anyway, it will increase the demand 
for labor— skilled and unskilled. 



R3396 : page 213 

THE BIBLE AND CRITICISM: IS THE BATTLE ENDED? 

-THE PRESENT STATE OF THE QUESTION. - 

MUCH is said at the present time of the overthrow 

of traditional beliefs, and of the necessity 

under which every intelligent man 

now lies of adapting himself to the new condition 

of things. But has criticism already and finally 

won the battle, and has the time really come 

to divide the spoil? That is a question which 

should not fail to be asked by those who are seeking 

to adjust their theological bearings. If the last word 

has indeed been spoken, and if that word has confirmed 

the critical verdict, the outlook is one which we 

can hardly contemplate with a light heart. The Bible 

has made our country. The best manhood and womanhood 

in it have been awed, warmed, changed and 

cheered by its words. It has repressed what we 

thought was baser in us, and strengthened what we 

thought was nobler. It has humanized us. It has 

laid upon us the bands of brotherhood. It has done 

all this because it was received as God's Book, and 

because we felt that conviction of its sacred character 

deepened the more we studied its pages. If it is to be 

to our children all that it has been to us and to our 

ancestors, we may count upon the same national 

strength and honor, the same quiet reserve of power, 

the same hatred of wrong, the same endurance for 

right. But, if that belief in the Bible is to pass away 

like a dream, there is little to reassure us in the usual 

lofty talk. The ancient world had its philosophies 

and its culture. But the multitude was dropped as a 

weight which no philosophy or culture was able to 

carry; and the best efforts could not save the cultured 

classes themselves from sinking down into pollution 

which placed the civilization of the time infinitely 

beneath its barbarism. 

R3397 : page 214 

I am quite aware that truth has its sacrifices, and 



that no regard for consequences can make us keep on 

believing that two and two make five. But regard for 

consequences has its place. It enforces caution. It 

commends sobriety and earnestness in judgment. Is 

it really true that science has discredited Scripture? 

I know that this is confidently asserted, and that it is 

oftener assumed as being as much beyond argument 

as the Copernican theory. But I happen, also, to know 

that the science which is supposed to have discredited 

the Bible is the science of sixty years ago. I know 

that its indictment of the Creation history in Genesis 

cannot be sustained by the science of to-day; that authoritative 

geology has recently brought back the 

Flood and finds in it the great dividing line between 

paleolithic and neolithic man; that, in the brighter 

light shed by recent research, supposed differences between 

Scripture and science have disappeared, and 

left an agreement apparent which is one of the marvels 

of our time. The man who begins to settle his 

theological bearings under the belief that science has 

hopelessly discredited the Bible will, therefore, settle 

them under an unhappy delusion. 

The higher criticism has worked along its own 
lines and has had its conclusions summarized for the 
reading public in a Bible Dictionary, in a couple of 
Encyclopaedias, and in the Polychrome Bible. In this 
last, which is also the most important of the critical 
publications, we are presented, not with the results of 
a discussion, but with the demands of a revolutionary 
junta. This thing of many colors and shreds and 
patches, which is really the reductio ad absurdum of 
critical methods, is the only Bible which is now to be 
left to the churches, the Sunday-schools, the educational 
institutions, and the homes of our country. And 
this is no empty threat. This "Bible in Tatters" is 
being handed to ministers and teachers all over the 
land as the new critical Revelation. It is being presented 
and accepted as "the truth about the Bible." 
It has even entered the mission field. It is easy enough 
to calculate the results of this movement. When the 
teacher's place is taken, and the pulpit is filled, by 
honest men who have no longer faith in a God-given 
Bible, how long will that faith linger among the 
people? 

An important decision is consequently forced 
upon us as a nation. What is to be our attitude toward 
the new propaganda? Is it to be tame submission 
or strict inquiry? It may be asked, however, 
whether a choice is possible? Have not these questions 
been threshed out by scholars in every way competent 
to deal with them? Is not the discussion 
closed, and does not the Polychrome Bible simply 
gather up the now unchallenged results of a prolonged 
controversy? No representation could be more misleading 
than that. There has been, properly speaking, 
no controversy. The critics have evaded discussion. 



There are works of undoubted scholarship 

which have traversed their findings, exposed their unproved 

assumptions, and triumphantly vindicated the 

universal convictions of the Christian Church with regard 

to the Bible. But the critics have not replied to 

these assailants; they have ignored them. What need 

is there for argument when you can quench opposition 

by applying the extinguisher of authority? 

The lay mind knows something of the Shakespeare 
controversy, and has a lively sense of its inherent 
absurdity. But ridicule has not killed that craze. 
It has increased in boldness, and now questions the 
reality of "William Shakespeare." "There is no 
such historical man," says one, "no individual known 
who bore that name." It is quite within the limits 
of possibility that this craze may become fashionable, 
and that the tradition of the Shakespearian authorship 
may be given to the winds. There is an infectious 
exhilaration in paradox; and this is not without a respectable 
show of literary research and seemingly forcible 
arguments. Let us suppose that one professor of 
English literature after another is won over to the new 
views; that by well-directed influence those chairs are 
all gradually captured; that the literary class is impregnated 
with the new notions, and that by editors and 
reviewers the question is regarded as closed. History 
would then have repeated itself. For such has been 
the story of the critical movement. It has won its 
supposed triumph, not by scholarship or argument, 
but by sheer audacity and adroit manoeuvering. 

Yet a temporary success of that kind is not a victory. 
If the views maintained rest upon solid fact, 
then the triumph, however achieved, may be expected 
to endure; but if its basis is only empty theory and 
mere assumption, the triumph is but the illusion of a 
moment. How much the imagined victors of today 
have to fear the future the following pages will reveal 
even to the lay mind. 

THE LIMITS OF CRITICAL ABILITY. 

The critics assume that they are able to dissect with 
accuracy manuscripts which are made up of the work of 
various writers. This is, in fact, their professed business; 
and it is in the exercise of it that they expect 
to benefit mankind. They are so conscious of their 
power in this matter that they assume the name of 
"experts." By attention to the subtleties of style, 
and to the peculiarities which distinguish the writing 
of one age and of one author from that of another, 
they tell us that they are able to say where the words 
which flowed from the pen of one writer stopped, and 
where the words of another writer began. It is this 
power which has enabled them, they say, to separate 
Isaiah, not merely into two, but into many portions; 
to break up the book of Genesis— the first of their 



achievements, and to partition the book of Revelation 
—among their last. In short, they fully confess that, 
without this power of what I may call literary divination, 
their work would never have been done, and 
the higher criticism could never have claimed the 
name of a science. 

To see how unquestioningly they believe in this 
ability of theirs, we have only to open their "Polychrome 
Bible," Bacon's "Genesis of Genesis," or Addis 
on "The Documents of the Hexateuch." Here 
are some of the results gathered in this fierce light 
which beats upon the Bible. In a single page of 
"Joshua," by Prof. Bennett, besides the main divisions, 
I find the following instances of penetrating insight. 
The words: "And all Israel stoned him" 
(Joshua 7:25) are separated from the text, and are 
given to a writer who is supposed to have lived about 
500 B.C. These three words, "Then Jehovah relented" 

R3397 : page 215 

(ver. 26) are similarly selected, and are said 
to be the work of an author who lived about fifty 
years earlier. This, it will be confessed, is delicate 
work; but it is only an illustration of the sharp decisiveness 
and the firm— I might call it the sublime- 
assurance which marks all the productions of this 
"expert" school. Bacon's work is equally astonishing. 
The passage, "In the day that the Lord— God 
made the earth and the heavens, (see Genesis 2:4) is 
dissected as follows. A stop is made after the word 
Lord, thus dividing the divine name in two. The 
words, "In the day that the Lord"— are assigned to 
a writer of 800 B.C. Those which precede are said 
to have been written three hundred and fifty years 
later; and those which follow, including the word 
"God," the second part of the amputated divine 
name, are alleged to be due to a third writer, an editor, 
about whose exact date there is still some difference 
of opinion among the "experts." 

But to stop even here would give the general 
public no adequate conception of critical self-confidence. 
They are not only able to judge of what they 
see, but they can with equal imaginary infallibility 
divine what they cannot see. We used to be told that, 
when the Genesis narrative was separated, the critical 
analysis justified itself in every unbiased mind. The 
two accounts were said to be so beautifully complete! 
That superstition still lingers in many quarters; but 
everybody has not read Bacon's Genesis. It needs 
some painful but pretty patching to make up "the 
two narratives." There we find that "The Judean 
Prophetic Narrative" opens thus: "When as yet 
there was neither earth nor heaven but only the limitless 
abyss, Yahweh set fast the foundations of the 
earth, and raised up its pillars in the midst of the 



waters. And over its surface he spread out the dome 
of the heaven, establishing there the courses of the 
sun and the moon and the stars; but upon the surface 
of the earth beneath there was neither motion 
nor life: all was yet a solitude." 

The reader rubs his eyes. He thought he knew 
the opening chapters of Genesis. He casts his eye 
down to the foot of the page and finds that the above 
is a critical make-up ! Here is the note which meets 
his glance: "Conjecturally restored from indications 
in the earlier literature... and by comparison with 
the Babylonian cosmogonic myths." One is able to 
comment upon many things. This is beyond me. It 
must be left in its naked effrontery. Let "CONJECTURALLY 
RESTORED" be its only inscription and its 
epitaph. 

It will be clear, however, that everything is based 
upon the assumed possession of this marvelous power 
to say where one writer's work ends and another's begins. 
Without this there would have been no discrimination 
of "sources;" no partition of documents, 
and, in a word, no higher criticism. Let this supposed 
ability be successfully questioned, and the painfully-piled-up 
edifice is not merely shaken to its foundations 
—it lies in irremediable ruin. But it is already 
demonstrated that there are, and can be, no "experts" 
of this sort. The assumed possession of this 

R3398 : page 215 

power has been put to test again and again, and the 
results have made these pretensions utterly incredible. 

There exists, for example, a confessedly composite 
work in Finnish literature. Dr. Lonnrot, the collector 
of the Finnic Folk -poetry, formed a great epic, 
the Kalevala— by fusing together a large collection of 
those ancient songs. He bequeathed his manuscripts 
to the Society of Finnish Literature, so 
that what he borrowed and what he added are 
made perfectly clear. This work afforded too good 
a test of this imaginary critical power to be left 
unused. The critics were set to work; and with 
lamentable results. "While ignorant of the actual 
facts of the surviving songs," says Andrew Lang, 
"critical ingenuity could only give us, at many hands 
and from many sides, its usual widely discrepant results." 
And he adds: "We cannot trust it when 
the tests of facts, of documents, cannot be applied." 

Not very long ago, an enthusiastic admirer of 
Thackeray (every characteristic and trick of whose pen 
he believed he knew) engaged in a search for papers 
which had not been embraced in that writer's collected 
works. He at last discovered a number in some early 
volumes of Punch. He had no doubt whatever as to 
the authorship. The mark of the master hand was 
everywhere; and he was certain that, to any man 



who knew Thackeray's style, doubt was impossible. 

Arrangements were made for the re-issue of the newly-discovered 

writings in a leading literary organ in 

America. Some of the papers had already appeared, 

when a communication was received from the Punch 

office, saying that the treasurer's books made it plain 

that the articles were not Thackeray's. The re-publication 

was immediately stopped, and the editor retired 

from an ignominious position with as much grace 

as the circumstances permitted. The history of literature 

abounds with such facts. Critics, who can be 

trusted to divine the authorship of documents, have 

never existed. They do not exist now: and a "science" 

built upon that assumption rests upon what is 

considerably less substantial than air. I say nothing 

of the professed ability to furnish verbatim copies of 

manuscripts which no man has ever seen. I believe 

that the records of the higher criticism contain the 

only example of such a pretension outside the annals 

of a lunatic asylum.— Rev. John Urquhart, Scotland. 



R3398 : page 215 

HEATHENS IN HEAVEN. 

AT Chester Heights camp meeting Dr. Johnson 
[Methodist, of Philadelphia] on Thursday 
preached a notable sermon, in which he said: 
"There will be all denominations and kinds of people 
in heaven— even the heathen! All that is necessary 
to be done is to follow the true light." 

We call the attention of our esteemed contemporaries 
to the fact that the above is true Pauline doctrine, 
readily provable by his epistle to the Romans. If that 
was sound doctrine for the Jews and converts at Rome it 
ought to be good, practical doctrine for us Americans 
of the present time. If the heathen has within himself 
a law of righteousness, revealed from the Creator, 
whereby they accuse and excuse one another, and so 

R3398 : page 216 

living up to their truest light are admissible to heaven, 
why may not a man of this age, living up to the light 
of the gospel revealed in the life of Jesus have an 
equal chance for salvation and eternal life?— Atlanta 
Constitution. 



It is remarkable that so many people of ordinary 
mental discernment so completely misunderstand the 
Apostle Paul's argument above referred to.— 
Romans 2:15. 



What is the gist of the Apostle's logic? He was 
arguing with Jews who claimed that because God 
made a Law Covenant with their nation only, therefore 
they were acceptable to God and other peoples 
were not. The Apostle seeks to break up all such 
self-assurance, and to convince them that a Jew needs 
God's mercy in Christ the same as other nationalities. 
His argument is that their being the recipients of the 
Law Covenant could bring them no blessing (no hope 
for everlasting life) unless they could keep that Law 
Covenant perfectly. This they did not claim to be 
able to do. As the Apostle again declares, "By the 
deeds of the Law (Covenant) shall no flesh be justified 
before God." 

The Apostle pursues the argument, and supposes 
that they would claim that, while none could keep the 
Law perfectly, they kept it much more nearly, much 
more fully than the heathen. 

The Apostle challenges that claim, and argues 
that some heathen people could properly claim to be 
doing the best they knew how and a Jew could claim 
no more. He shows that this is the case by saying 
that the heathen sometimes try to excuse themselves 
(thus acknowledging wrong-doing) and sometimes to 
accuse themselves (again acknowledging wrong-doing). 
What does this prove? asks the Apostle. It proves 
that while the Jew had considerable light of conscience 
and the written Law, the heathen, though not 
having the latter, had the former. 

The Apostle nowhere in the argument claims that 
the Jews were justified by the Law, nor that the 
heathen were justified by their light of conscience. 
All were imperfect, and hence unworthy of everlasting 
life under the divine arrangement. The heathen, with 
his light of conscience ONLY, could not dispute this. The 
Jew, with his additional light from the written Law, 
having all the more enlightenment should all the more 
realize his condemnation. 

The Apostle's argument with the Jews then resolves 
itself into this statement: You are not justified 
to life because God gave you the Law any more than 
are the heathen to whom he never gave any special 
favors. Mark the continuation of the argument 
(Rom. 3:9), "What then, Are we [Jews] better than 
they [the heathen]? No; in no wise: for we have 
before proved both Jews and Gentiles, that they are all 
under sin. As it is written, "There is none righteous, 
no not one," etc. 

After quoting the Scriptural summing up of the 
general depravity of mankind down to verse 18, the 
Apostle adds:— 

"Now we know that what things soever the Law 
saith it saith to them that are under the Law: that 
EVERY MOUTH MAY BE STOPPED and all the world 
may become [or realize that they are] GUILTY before 
God. Therefore by the deeds of the Law shall no 



flesh be justified in his sight: for by the Law is the 
knowledge of sin."— Vss. 19,20. 

Thus the Apostle proves to his Jewish hearers 
that all are sinners (Jews and Gentiles), and that all 
need salvation, which can be procured only through 
Jesus,— "through faith in his blood"— faith in his 
atonement sacrifice. Where, then, is the argument 
for the fitness of the heathen for heaven? Where 
does the logical Apostle Paul so teach? When we remember 
that the Apostle Peter declared that David 
the prophet, one of the most prominent Jews, did not 
go to heaven (Acts 2:34), it would, indeed, have astonished 
us if we had found the Apostle Paul teaching 
that the heathen had passports. We have only to remember 
our Lord's words to the effect that up to his 
time "no man hath ascended up to heaven."— 
John 3:13. 

What a peculiar place some people must fancy 
heaven to be, anyway: full of infants, idiots and 
heathens, with an occasional "saint" from civilized 
lands. Thank God for the light upon his Word 
which frees us from such absurdities. 

Well, where are the heathen, idiots, etc., if not 
in heaven? Should they be in torment because ignorant 
or non compos mentis? By no means. They are 
under the curse or sentence of death,— they are dead, 
in the great prison-house, the tomb,— in sheol,— in 

R3399 : page 216 

hades— the very place in which Peter declared David to 
be. But Christ has died for all of Adam's race, and the 
blessing of an opportunity or trial for life shall yet be 
granted to all— by Jesus as King on account of his redemptive 
work, his death for our sins. 

The present work, the work of this Gospel age, is 
to gather from among men "a Royal Priesthood, a 
holy nation, a people for a purpose." This offer went 
first to natural Israel, but after a time was thrown 
open to Gentiles as well,— "the middle wall of partition 
being broken down." It was this that the Jews denied 
—that after God's favors had been to their nation 
only for over 1600 years outsiders were granted just 
the same privilege as they to become "Abraham's 
seed and heirs according to the promise." (Gal. 3:29.) 

R3399 : page 217 

It was this that the Apostle combated, and 
showed that Jew and Gentile could become sons of 
God and joint-heirs with Christ— not by the Law 
Covenant, nor by heathen ignorance, but by faith in 
the only name given under heaven and among men 
whereby we must be saved.— Acts 4:12. 



R3399 : page 217 

THE DOWNWARD COURSE OF SIN. 

--I KINGS 16:23-33. -JULY 31.- 

Golden Text:— "Righteousness exalteth a nation, 
but sin is a reproach to any people."— Prov. 14-34. 

A PREVIOUS lesson showed us the start of the ten-tribe 
kingdom of Israel under Jeroboam as a 
split-off from the king of Judah. We noted 
Jeroboam's changes of the religious customs, so as the 
more effectually to separate the two peoples and thus to 
establish himself in power. We notice that although at 
first the holy places he established and the images he set 
up were to represent the true God, nevertheless these symbols 
led the people more and more to the general idolatry 
of the surrounding heathen nations. Jeroboam reigned 
twenty-two years, and was succeeded by his son Nadab, 
who reigned only two years and was assassinated. The 
assassin, a general named Baasha, became king and reigned 
twenty -four years, continuing in the course of Jeroboam 
and warring with the king of Judah. He was succeeded 
by his son Elah, who in turn was assassinated, after two 
years' reign, by Zimri, one of his generals. The latter 
ruled for only a week and suicided, chagrined that he did 
not have the support of his army. A civil war ensued, as 
the result of which Omri came to the throne, as stated in 
the first verse of our lesson. 

Omri was evidently a shrewd king, and unscrupulous 
respecting the divine will and the covenant obligations of 
the nation to Jehovah. He followed the course of Jeroboam 
in seeking to alienate the people from the true religion, 
and went still further in the matter of introducing 
idolatry and licentious practices connected therewith. He 
was, nevertheless, what would be termed a successful king 
from the worldly standpoint: he strengthened his hold 
upon the people by the building of a new capital city, 
Samaria, and was generally reputed amongst the outside 
nations as a powerful king. Had his executive abilities 
been combined with reverence for the Lord and a consecration 
to do his will, Omri would have been a great ruler 
in the true sense of the word. But, instead, he led Israel 
into what our lesson terms displeasing "vanities"— vain 
religious ceremonies, that not only amounted to nothing 
good, but on the contrary were provocative of greater 
evils. 

"HE SLEPT WITH HIS FATHERS." 

Omri died after eight years' reign, the record being 
that "he slept with his fathers." This was the common 
form of expression in noting the death of all prominent 
people, whether good or bad. The Grecian theory, that 



when people die they become more alive than ever before, 

had not yet been introduced. The Israelites held the matter 

in its true and simple form— that death is a cessation 

of being, but that God had intimated a future re-living by 

a resurrection. In view of this hope those who died were 

figuratively spoken of as falling asleep— to await the resurrection 

morning. Abraham slept with his fathers as 

did Omri; and so the Scriptures teach that, when the 

awakening time shall come at the Second Advent of the 

Redeemer, all that are in their graves shall hear the voice 

of the Son of Man and shall come forth— those approved 

of God and those disapproved of him, the just and the 

unjust. Omri will evidently be amongst the latter class, 

of whom the Prophet declares that they shall come forth 

to "shame and lasting contempt." (Dan. 12:2.) Abraham 

as evidently belongs to the former class, and will be 

amongst those who will come forth unto the resurrection 

of life. 

Abraham's trial is past, and we have the testimony that 
he pleased God. Omri, on the contrary, has the record that 
God was not pleased with him; but since Christ has redeemed 
all, Omri is to have a full and impartial knowledge 
of God's grace that he may thereby be tested and 
proven— whether, with a clear knowledge of the divine 
character and will, he will accept the opportunity and 
come into harmony with the Lord, and during the Millennial 
age will by obedience gain life everlasting or whether 
he will, with full light, still choose an evil way. If so, 
"the end of that way is death"— the Second Death— extinction. 
The measure of Omri's knowledge of right and 
his perversion of that knowledge will proportionately 
measure disadvantage to him when he comes to trial during 
the Millennial age; and so it is with every human being. 
In proportion as right and conscience are obeyed, character 
for good is formed that some day will be helpful; and 
in proportion as sin and wilfulness in wrong doing have 
control, in that same proportion will character be undermined 
and the course of repentance and reformation in 
the future be difficult. 

JEZEBEL AND HER HUSBAND. 

Omri was succeeded in his kingdom by his son Ahab, 
the notorious. He also was an able man, skilled in state-craft 
and unscrupulous. He was helped along in the downward 
way of his father and predecessors by marrying the 
daughter of the king of Tyre, Jezebel, who in the Scriptures 
is noted as a desperate character, and in the book of 
Revelation is used to symbolize the great mystery of iniquity 
which persecuted spiritual Israel during the dark 
ages. Jezebel's father was a priest of Baal, who murdered 
his father, the king of Tyre, and then succeeded him. 

R3399 : page 218 

Thus Jezebel inherited in a natural way her perverse and 



idolatrous disposition, and in marrying her Ahab secured 
an able accomplice in evil. Indeed, the woman may be 
said to have been the prime mover and instigator of much 
of the evil later developed in that kingdom. 

Ahab built a temple to Baal at Samaria, and established 
in it an altar where sacrificing was done. Four hundred 
and fifty priests of Baal attended the altar and services, 
clothed in special priestly vestments. Thus was the true 
Temple at Jerusalem, the true altar of God, and the true 
priesthood appointed of God in connection with the 
same, counterfeited by Ahab at the instigation of Jezebel. 
Similarly we have in nominal Spiritual Israel a great 
counterfeit system misrepresenting the true on a gorgeous 
scale. We shall say more along this line in succeeding 
lessons. 

The Golden Text is the pith of this lesson, illustrated 
on all the pages of history. The kingdoms of this world 
are not the kingdoms of our Lord— he is not their ruler; 
nevertheless the general principle expressed in the Golden 
Text prevails. In proportion as any nation conforms to 
principles of righteousness, justice, in that same proportion 
the nation is exalted; while in proportion to the 
prevalence of sin in any nation will be its tendency to 
downwardness in every respect. 

When we look about us in the world and perceive 
that national policies are shaped by absolute selfishness, and 
that the rulers amongst men are very generally consecrated 
to doing their own wills so far as possible, we may well be 
astonished to see to what extent the influence of the 
righteous, the salt of the earth, exercises a preservative 
effect upon them. So far from wondering why the kings 
of earth are not better than they are, we are inclined to 
wonder that the laws and regulations of Christendom are 
anything like as good as they are. Undoubtedly there is 
in the great majority of the human family, at the bottom 
of their hearts, a respect for righteousness and truth and 
goodness; and were it not that this is overbalanced at the 
present time by prevalent selfishness and evil influence 
from every quarter, we might have hope for such reforms 
as many seem to expect, but which the Scriptures do not 
warrant us in expecting. Our hope, on the contrary, is 
that the Lord, according to promise, will establish his own 
Kingdom in power, superhuman power; that the great 
King Immanuel will subdue all things unto himself; that 
thus released from present bonds of selfishness, evil surroundings 
and Satanic deceptions, the great majority of 
mankind will choose righteousness— choose obedience to 
the Lord— that their experiences under the blessings of 
the Kingdom shall, in the majority of cases, fix character 
in accord with the principles of righteousness. 

All of the Lord's people, in proportion as they see 
the downward and degrading influence of sin, become 
more and more strong in their determination to uphold 
righteousness in their every thought, word and act, and 
to throw their influence upon that side of every question 
in every appropriate manner. In so doing they will be 



seeking first, primarily, the Kingdom of God and its 
righteousness, and be in process of training for the great 
privileges of the Kingdom time, that they may be associated 
with the Lord in the bestowment of the blessings of 
that Millennial Kingdom upon all the families of the earth. 



R3400 : page 218 

"HE CARETH FOR YOU." 

--I KINGS 17:1-16.-AUG. 7- 

DURING the period of Ahab's prosperity in his 

wicked course, leading the people of Israel 

further than ever into idolatry, the Lord sent 

him and the whole nation a rebuke and chastisement 

through Elijah the prophet. In order to thoroughly 

appreciate the Lord's interposition in the affairs of 

Israel— the sending of famines, etc.— we must remember 

that he entered into a special covenant with that 

nation at Mount Sinai when the Law was given them. 

According to that covenant, the obedience of the nation 

to the Lord guaranteed it earthly blessing and prosperity, 

while disobedience, idolatry, etc., insured it tribulation, 

chastisement, famine, etc. It is necessary to remember 

this special relationship of Israel to God, that we 

be not confused in supposing that every famine in the 

world's history, every pestilence, every war, etc., has been 

similarly of special divine imposition in chastisement, etc. 

God's relationship to that one nation was peculiar, as expressed 

by the Prophet, "You only have I known [recognized] 

of all the families of the earth."— Amos 3:2. 

THE DROUTH PROPHESIED 

Elijah went to the capital city, Samaria, and presented 
himself in the presence of the king as the Lord's mouthpiece, 
as expressed in the first verse of our lesson by the 
words, "before whom I stand"— or whose representative 
I am. The announcement was respecting the dearth of 
rain, which, to people in that part of the world, meant 
famine and death; and this dearth of rain and dew was to 
last for years. The Lord might have withheld rain without 
using Elijah as his mouthpiece in the matter, but in that 
event the lesson would have been measurably lost upon 
the people. By sending the message in advance of the 
drouth it would be evident to Ahab and to all who should 
ever come to know of the circumstances that the drouth 
was a judgment from the Lord, a punishment for sin. The 
drouth and the consequent famine lasted three and a half 
years, and it is difficult to imagine how the people could 
have subsisted for that length of time had no rain whatever 
fallen, as would seem to be implied by the language 
of the Prophet. However, it is remarked that of the four 



R3400 : page 219 

Hebrew words used to represent rain, the one here used 
is the one which is generally understood and translated to 
mean the early rain, the principal rain, which usually came 
in the fall of the year. 

After the delivery of his message the Lord directed his 
Prophet to go eastward beyond the river Jordan to a brook 
which cannot now be accurately located. The Prophet 
was to hide himself— to keep his identity secret, his 
whereabouts unknown to the king. This was probably 
for two reasons: (1) To preserve him from special persecution 
as the one who had brought the trouble, and the one 
who, if he would, could remove it. (2) The inability of 
the king to find the Prophet, whose word alone could, 
under the Lord's arrangement, revoke the drouth and 
famine, should cause the king and the people to appreciate 
the matter as a judgment of the Lord and lead them to 
look to the Lord for relief from their chastisements. 

RAVENS GOD'S MESSENGERS. 

It is estimated that the Prophet spent about a year in 
the vicinity of the brook Cherith— miraculously supplied 
with food by ravens and with water from the brook until 
it dried up. There have been various speculations respecting 
these "ravens"— whether or not the word raven is 
here used in a figurative sense to represent various assistances, 
or whether ravens literally fed the Prophet. It is 
a matter of fact that the highland country to the east of 
the Jordan is just such a place as the ravens usually inhabit, 
and that bird is noted as "the most highly developed 
of all birds, quick-sighted, sagacious and bold." In 
defence of the thought that the Prophet was supplied by 
ravens, just as the account reads, the following stories are 
told as illustrating not only the sagacity of this bird and 
its natural disposition, but also as illustrating the Lord's 
providences in respect to other persons than Elijah. 

A missionary writes to the S.S. Times respecting 
ravens that they had frequently snatched food from his 
children while they were eating. He tells the following 
story: "Our nurse one day prepared a fowl to be grilled, 
and, standing in the doorway, plate in hand, called the 
cook to come for the fowl. When the man came the 
nurse discovered that her plate was empty. A kite or 
crow had carried away the fowl without her knowledge." 
The same journal relates a story of an English nobleman, 
imprisoned and nearly starved, fed by a cat which "appeared 
at the window grating every day with a pigeon 
from a neighboring dovecote, and dropped it there for his 
benefit; this act was repeated day by day during his imprisonment.' 
Stanley's History of Birds tells of an injured 
Newfoundland dog which was visited at his kennel 
constantly by a pet raven that brought him bones. 

The child of God will have no difficulty whatever in 



accepting the fact that our heavenly Father was quite able 

to use the ravens in supplying the needs of his servant. 

The lesson to the Lord's people in this connection is expressed 

in the inspired words, "He careth for you" 

(I Pet. 5:7), "My God shall supply all your needs." 

(Phil. 4:19.) The Lord did not supply Elijah with luxuries, 

but with the absolute necessities. And so it may be 

at times with us. We may not have the superfluity and 

delicacies of the king upon our tables nor in our wardrobes, 

yet it may be well with us because of our relationship 

with the Lord, our realization that we are his servants 

and that he careth for us, and is making trials and disciplines 

of present experiences to work out for us much advantage 

every way for the future, as well as rest and peace 

of heart for the present. Let us remember in this connection 

the words of the Apostle, "Be content with such 

things as ye have." (Heb. 13:5.) We would not be understood 

as meaning that we should not note and avail 

ourselves of any providential doors that the Lord might 

open before us for a betterment of our condition, but we 

would impress the thought that contentment with godliness 

is great gain, and should always be the portion of the 

Lord's faithful people, as expressed by the poet, "Content 

whatever lot I see, since 'tis my God that leadeth 

me." 

HEATHEN FAITH HONORED. 

Those who neglect thus to look for the Lord's leading 
and guidance in their affairs are not only missing a 
blessing to their hearts in the present time, but are failing 
to be prepared for the glorious things which the Lord has 
in reservation for his people in the future. The Lord could 
have continued the miracle wrought in Elijah's case— supplying 
the water and the food indefinitely had he so chosen 
—but in due time he permitted the drying up of the brook 
and sent his servant elsewhere, and the facts show and the 
words of our Lord Jesus prove that he was specially sent 
to the other location in the interest of a poor widow. This 
widow lived at Zarephath near the sea coast, in about the 
same locality as the Syrophenician woman whose daughter 
our Lord healed. Zarephath was outside the kingdom of 
Israel, and the widow was evidently not an Israelite, but 
a godly Gentile— like the Syrophenician woman, of 
greater faith than many in Israel. Our Lord's miracle, giving 
some of the crumbs of divine favor to the "dogs," 
Gentiles, indicates to us the Lord's appreciation of well-intentioned 
people outside of Israel, although under his 
covenant with that nation they were considered strangers, 
aliens, foreigners from God and not heirs of the promise 
made to the children of Abraham. 

The widow to whom Elijah was sent had a little son, 
and the famine, which was heavy upon the land of Israel, 
naturally extended also to the land of Sidon, which lay 
along the Mediterranean seacoast. Doubtless the wealthy, 
both in the land of Israel and in the land of Sidon, could 



procure the necessities of life, and the burden doubtless 
fell specially upon the very poor. The widow in question 
was gathering some firewood when the Prophet met her 
and requested a little water. The streams of that vicinity 
from the mountains of Lebanon had evidently not completely 

R3400 : page 220 

dried up, as had the brook from which the Prophet 
had just come, and the widow was able to supply him refreshment; 
but when he asked her for bread she was compelled 
to tell him the truth, that she was nearly as poor as 
himself— that the earthen pot in which she kept her store 
of meal (called in our text a barrel) was nearly empty, and 
that she was just preparing to cook the last of it, expecting 
thereafter that herself and her child would die of famine. 
The Prophet suggested that she first of all make a 
little cake for him, and that afterward he would guarantee 
as a Prophet of the Lord that her meal should not decrease 
nor her bottle of oil diminish until the Lord would send 
rain upon the earth, which would break the famine. It required 
great faith on the woman's part to accept this statement 
and give to the Prophet of her little store of food. 
No wonder the Lord was pleased to bless such an one- 
pleased to send his servant to her, though in going to her 
he passed by many widows in Israel, as our Lord indicates. 
No wonder her faith is mentioned as a memorial of 
her. 

THE LORD LOVETH THE CHEERFUL GIVER. 

There are several lessons in this connection for the 
Lord's people: First, the spirit of generosity— readiness 
to give to those who are worthy and are in need. We are 
not attempting to hold up the case as one having a parallel 
every day. We are to remember, on the contrary, the 
famine stress of the times, for, had it been otherwise, quite 
probably the woman would have been justified in asking 
the Prophet why he did not labor for his own food instead 
of asking to share her bite. It was, however, a time 
of distress, of general lack of employment, etc., and the 
woman showed forth a noble sentiment of heart. Neither 
would we advise that the word of every stranger be taken 
so implicitly as this widow accepted the Prophet's word. 
Nevertheless, faith in humanity and faith in God and generosity 

R3401 : page 220 

of heart— willingness to divide our little all with 
those whom we believe to be the Lord's people and in 
need— will surely today as then bring a divine blessing, 
and we hold that it is better to err on the generous side 
than the reverse. Our heavenly Father is generous, giving 
continually of his substance to us all, and we are exhorted 
to be like unto our Father in heaven— kind even 
to the unthankful— generous to those who are not generous 



to us. Whoever cultivates this spirit cultivates the 
God-like quality, and thus is drawn nearer to the Lord 
and closely into fellowship with him, and is prepared for 
greater blessings to come. 

It is estimated that Elijah's stay at the home of the 
widow, and their mutual participation in her little store 
of meal and oil, lasted about two to two and a half years. 
The Lord continually worked a miracle for their sustenance, 
and he is equally able to work such a miracle today 
in our interest if in his judgment it were necessary. 
But such miracles are unnecessary today and under present 
conditions, and should not be expected. Rather the hearts 
of the Lord's people should look for divine interposition 
in their interests as New Creatures in Christ Jesus. How 
often has the Lord used figurative ravens and wolves to 
bring to his children needed spiritual nourishment! How 
often have the trials and difficulties and persecutions of 
the evil one and his blinded followers been overruled of 
the Lord for good to those who trust in his name. This 
thought is expressed by the Psalmist in that beautiful 
twenty-third psalm, in which he represents the Lord's 
consecrated ones as his sheep, led by green pastures and 
still waters: then changing the figure he says: "Thou 
preparest for me a table in the presence of mine enemies 
—my cup [of joy, spiritual refreshment] runneth over." 

The Prophet's experience at Zarephath also represents 
spiritual experiences of the Lord's people today. How 
often has the Lord provided his people with spiritual refreshments, 
encouragements, etc., through those who are 
not his children! As such experiences bring blessings to 
the Lord's people, they also bring blessings to those who 
are used to minister them, and thus the same lessons of 
experience today are continually ours as they were those 
of the Prophet twenty-five centuries ago. The lesson for 
us is the Lord's care and the propriety of confidence in 
him, and the realization that he is able to use any means 
he may desire in sending us his favors. 



R3401 : page 220 

COURAGEOUS AND TIMID SERVANTS OF GOD. 

-I KINGS 18:1-16.-AUGUST 14.- 

"I thy servant fear the Lord from my youth." 

IN the third year of Elijah's sojourn at Zarephath— the 
fourth year without rain— really three and a half 
years after Elijah's pronouncement to King Ahab 
(Luke 4:25; James 5:17)— the Lord sent his Prophet back 
into the land of Israel to Ahab. A less courageous man 
than Elijah might have hesitated, for he doubtless had 
knowledge of the fact that the king had instituted a search 
for him in every direction, probably with the intention of 



securing his revocation respecting the cessation of rain— of 
having him break the spell upon the weather and bringing 
rain— or to put him to death in the event he did not do 
so, or both. Elijah seems to have been a most courageous 
servant of the Lord in executing whatever commands he 
received from the great King, and in the present instance 
he would be encouraged with the thought that his mission 
to Ahab would be a most acceptable one, since the Lord 
had assured him that the due time had come for the sending 
of rain. Doubtless the Prophet, too, as a lover of humanity 
and particularly of his nation, would have both a 
humane and appropriate sentiment that he would be 
pleased to serve in such a manner. 
The famine, which was over all the land of Israel, was 

R3401 : page 221 

keenly felt at the capital city, Samaria. The king was 
finally aroused to an appreciation of the fact that something 
must be done or soon all the cattle would die of 
thirst. Apparently he was more solicitous for his beasts 
than for the poor of the people. The dying of his herds 
and the dying of his horses and mules would impair his 
power and dignity as a king as well as his wealth. Hence 
the proposition to seek for springs or brooks not yet dried 
up, where water could be found for the king's beasts. He 
sent the chief servant of his palace, one in whom he had 
absolute confidence, in one direction, while he himself, 
probably with a good retinue of servants, etc., went in 
another direction. 

OBADIAH, THE TIMID SERVANT. 

Obadiah, who was intrusted with this service, we are 
informed, was a true worshiper of the Lord— not only so, 
but one who at the risk of his own life had protected 
the lives of a hundred of the prophets of the Lord on an 
occasion when the Queen, Jezebel, had ordered the slaughter 
of all such. Obadiah, therefore, should be reckoned 
not only as a true and noble, but also as a courageous servant 
of God in some respects, and yet we note a wide difference 
between his disposition and courage and that of 
Elijah. That he maintained his position in the king's 
family not only implies that his loyalty to the Lord made 
him a trusted and useful man in the king's service, but it 
implies also that in a household so given up to idolatry, 
he must have in large measure put his light under a bushel 
and avoided the advocacy of the Truth, else he never 
would have been acceptable and retained his position. 
We may be sure that the king, and specially the queen, 
never knew that their chief servant had negatived the 
commanded death of one hundred prophets. 

Comparing the characters of these two servants of 
the Lord, Elijah and Obadiah, we can find items to commend 
in both, but especially in Elijah. It is not for 
us to condemn Obadiah, and, indeed, we have no doubt 



that the Lord gave him in his life-time a blessing or 

reward for his service to his cause, and that he will 

give him a still further blessing and reward in the future. 

But if we would have before our minds the proper example 

to be followed, the proper courage to be exercised, our 

pattern would be Elijah, whose loyalty to God was so 

thoroughly attested on every possible occasion. There 

are Christians of both of these types today, but Elijah 

stands for or represents the little flock with whom the Lord 

is specially pleased and who will with the Redeemer constitute 

the Kingdom class by and by. We rejoice also 

with the believers, the partially consecrated ones, represented 

by Obadiah, yet we could sincerely wish for them 

the blessing of greater zeal in the Lord's service— less care 

for the friendship of those who are God's enemies and 

greater boldness in the advocacy of the Lord's cause and 

in proclaiming themselves in every proper manner his servants. 

We fear for such that being ashamed of the Lord 

to some extent, preferring advantages as respects the present 

life— to be in a prominent position, in good society, 

and surrounded by luxury maintained at the expense of a 

failure to properly confess the Lord— will mean to such 

eventually the loss of the great prize for which we are 

called to run in this present life. As already intimated, 

our expectation would be that such a class would eventually 

get a blessing from the Lord and a good position; but 

such a class surely, unless they turn about and become 

more courageous, will lose the great prize for which we 

have been called to run— join t-heirship with God's dear 

Son in the Kingdom. 

ELIJAH, THE COURAGEOUS. 

While en route in quest of the springs, etc., Obadiah 
met Elijah and at once recognized him as the special servant 
of the Lord and prostrated himself at his feet, saying, 
"Is it thou, my lord, Elijah?" and he answered, "It is I. 
Go tell thy lord Ahab that I am here." Immediately 
Obadiah's fear and caution came upon him as he 
thought of how Ahab would be anxious to find Elijah, and 
he surmised that Elijah would in some manner disappear 
during his absence and that in consequence the king's 
anger would be against his servant Obadiah, believing that 
he had deceived him in the matter or because he had not 
insisted on bringing Elijah as a captive to the king, knowing 
that he was searching for him. He feared that Elijah 
was thus inclined to do him injury, and related to the 
prophet that he was a servant of the true God and not an 
idolater, and that he had protected one hundred young 
men of the school of the prophets, delivering them from 
death because of reverence for the Lord. Elijah assured 
him that this was not his intention, and that he would 
without question meet Ahab. His word was believed and 
the meeting of the king and the Prophet resulted. 

When the king arrived where Elijah was he saluted 
the latter in a bold manner, implying that all the trouble 



that had come upon the nation was properly chargeable to 
him, and that he should feel guilty of it. The king ignored 
the Lord's hand in the matter and ignored his own 
responsibility. He was a very different type of man 
from either of the others discussed in this lesson. Elijah 
was courageous for the Lord and for the Truth; Obadiah 
was less courageous and in some respects weak-kneed- 
lacking many of the qualities approved of the Lord; but 
Ahab was bold and defiant of the Lord and his Prophet, 
and after all the experiences through which himself and 
his nation had passed for three and a half years, his salutation 
to Elijah was, "Art thou he that troubleth Israel?" 
Elijah met him on his own ground exactly and replied, No, 
it was the king who troubled Israel through the institution 
of idolatry. The king's boldness appears to have wilted in 
the presence of the Prophet's lance-like thrust of the Truth, 
and the latter, assuming the place of command as the Lord's 
representative, ordered the gathering of the chiefest of the 
people of Israel from every quarter and with them all of 
the prophets of Baal, to meet at Mount Carmel. This evidently 
was a challenge as between the forces of Baal, represented 

R3402 : page 222 

by the king and government and all the heads of 

the ten tribes and all the prophets of Baal, and the one 

Prophet representing Jehovah. 

Evidently King Ahab was considerably humbled by 
the experiences through which he had passed, and was now 
hopeful that at last the difficulties were to reach a conclusion. 
Doubtless the Prophet had told him that this was 
his mission, to bring blessings and refreshment through 
rain. At all events, there seems to have been no parley on 
the king's part, but a prompt compliance with the Prophet's 
demands. 

The principal lesson we see in this narrative is that of 
character and positiveness on the part of those who profess 
to be the Lord's people. It is not sufficient that we should 
not sympathize with Ahab's course of violence and opposition 
to the Lord and subserviency to his wife Jezebel, 
the head and leader of the idolatrous worship. It is not 
sufficient for us, either, to copy after Obadiah's course 
and to serve and fear the Lord in secret, even though in 
secret also we strive to do good to some of the Lord's 
people. Obadiah's course is very much more honorable 
than that of Ahab, but still it is not sufficient. We all 
want to copy the general courage and loyalty of Elijah, 
and in a subsequent lesson we shall see that he is particularly 
a type of all the Lord's favored ones of this Gospel 
age. 



R3402 : page 222 
ENCOURAGING WORDS FROM FAITHFUL WORKERS. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL: 

I write to tell you an incident which lately took 
place and which shows the DAWNS are exercising more 
influence than appears on the surface. At one of our 
meetings a short time ago a lady came who had never 
before been amongst us. She told us she was a member 
of a missionary society in connection with the Baptist 
Church. At a recent meeting she had asked the 
opinion of the other ladies present as to the future state 
of the heathen who had died without believing in Christ. 
All admitted that they had at one time believed they 
were lost, but now believed that in some way God would 
give them a future opportunity. On inquiring further 
as to what had caused them to change their opinions 
they said it was through reading Volume I, MILLENNIAL 
DAWN. There were seventeen ladies present. 

Yours in the one Faith, W. HOPE HAY, Pilgrim. 



DEAR BRETHREN: 

I received "The New Creation" a short time ago 
and have read it over half through now. It is very 
precious indeed. I am sure it is just what I need, as 
well as all who "see eye to eye" in Zion. It has answered 
and settled a number of questions for me that 
I have been bothered about. I thank God for the rich 
spiritual food he is giving me and others in the present 
time, and that the world's supply is coming soon. It 
is my desire, and I believe the Lord's will, that I 
should enter the Colporteur work. 

Your brother in Christ, 

JOHN W. TREMAIN, JR.-Washington. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL: 

You will doubtless have so many letters of thankful 
appreciation for Vol. 6 that my poor words will not 
be needed. Nevertheless, I want to thank you for it. 
Surely the Lord's hand directed the pen that wrote it, 
for it is truly "meat in due season," not only to individuals 
but also to the Churches of God. It will help many of 
the separated brethren in different communities to see 
more nearly "eye to eye," I believe, and thus we shall 
all be more closely knit together in the "unity of the 
faith in the bonds of peace." The book will also enable 
you to use more time for further study of the divine 
Word, and less in replying to perplexing questions from 
the brethren. 

I finished the reading Sunday evening about eight 
o'clock. Oh, for that blessed day when with our resurrection 
bodies we can love and praise him as we ought! 
With much Christian love to yourself and all the other 
dear friends at the Bible House, I remain as ever, 



Yours in the hope of "the First Resurrection," 

GERTRUDE W. SEIBERT,-Pennsylvania. 



DEAR BRO. RUSSELL: 

I am sending you five dollars for the Tract Fund— 
the money that I received for a pair of gold bracelets. 
I don't think that I could use it in a better way than 
to give it to the dear Lord, to be used in his service. 

I am studying his plan and I want to know more 
and more day by day of his precious Truth. I can fully 
appreciate what he has done for me, and all I am and 
have is consecrated to him. I am only twelve years 
old, but I know that he will take me under his care. 

This small offering may help some in the Pilgrim 
service. With love, 

Your little sister in the Lord, 

A.V.B.,— New Jersey. 



DEAR MR. RUSSELL: 

Have great pleasure in thanking you for sending 
along the things asked for, especially the favor of receiving 
the 6th volume, "The New Creation." I have 
read it right through while most round here are hanging 
their tongues out, as it were, to get a taste, and the 
privilege is still in anticipation. 

If commendation is allowable, should say that this 
your last labor of love will prove a most effective thirst 
quencher. The tenth chapter particularly interested 
me and think that you have dealt beautifully with the 
subjects in the entire book. God bless and keep you 
and all workers in Allegheny for the strengthening of 
the brethren is my earnest prayer. 

Yours very sincerely, ALEX. MILES,— England. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL: 

To the glory of God and his dear Son be it known 
to the participators in this harvest work for their encouragement 
that also here, far north in Norway, we 
have received the illuminating beams from the Sun of 
Righteousness through his Word by the instrumentality 
of the books MILLENNIAL DAWN. We have now indeed 
tasted the sweet influence of a pure doctrine in Christ. 
Heartily and intelligently five of us (seven were present) 
partook of the emblems representing our Lord's 
broken body and considered the cost with our privileges 

R3402 : page 223 

as members to suffer with him and for each other. 
Receive this as an expression of our praise to the 



Lord that we have received fruits from your ardent labor, 

love and defense for pure doctrine, in this evil 

day. 

THE CONGREGATION IN T , Norway. 



DEAR SIR AND BRO.: 

The sequel to the Eaton-Russell Debates, which you 
so kindly sent me, is carefully read, and has indeed 
proved "meat in due season" to me. Having been an 
active worker in Church and Sunday-school work, a 
sample copy of the WATCH TOWER, February edition, 
1901, was handed me for examination, which I read in 
part and then threw away as poisonous stuff, contrary 
to Christian principles and detrimental to the Church. 
But thinking myself cowardly not to read it, I picked it 
up again and read it carefully, determined to give my 
decision when through. The themes being backed by 
so many Bible quotations, present phenomena and my 
own Christian experience, with so many blighted hopes 
for the future— eternity appearing at times synonymous 
with misery and woe to the majority— my decision was 
slow in coming, and the opposite of what I thought. I 

handed the same copy to Prof. W and told him of 

my experience with it. He approved of its Scriptural 
and logical reasoning. Brighter hopes began to animate 
my soul. I subscribed and my "poison" became 
a "light to my feet." But it cost me dearly. Naturally 
I told the "good news" to the most conscientious 
of the brethren. They "knew it all," and, of course, 
my sails were turned against the current. My church 
standing was threatened; they pitied me and denounced 
you. Finally I was considered on the verge of infidelity, 
and by some declared a free thinker. I pitied 
them, for I could appreciate their fears, but they could 
not or would not understand me. Feeling that I could 
do no good in the Church, I left it. I am persuaded 
that some are meditating, and I would be obliged if 
you would send me more copies of the Sequel and any 
other literature you deem fit. 

Fraternally yours, G. S.,— Pennsylvania. 



PASTOR C. T. RUSSELL: 

Dear Sir,— I read your sermons weekly; that is, I 
cut them out and read them carefully. Often it takes 
me two or three days to read and meditate on them. 
I am and always have been a Bible reader. Am middle 
aged. Always have been in business, taking up all 
my evenings and Sundays. Never having the pleasure 
of hearing you or seeing you. ..I have felt it my 
duty to tell you how much your sermons have done for 
me, in giving me great spiritual light, bringing me nearer 
to my Maker and Master. I could never tell you 



how much inward joy and gladness a spiritual truth 
brings to my whole being, and I find so many in your 
discourses on any subject. 

Your explanations of the Scriptures are delightful 
to my heart and mind. I feel it would be almost theft 
to receive so much from you and not tell you or acknowledge 
to you with heartfelt thankfulness how much 
spiritual food I am receiving daily from you. With the 
spirit of prayer and supplication I pray our Father and 
his dear Son to perfect you in all things. 

Pray the Father that he will give me more and 
more light, that I may love him and his dear Son more 
and more. Pray for me. The Father and Son will 
know whom you are praying for. , Pittsburgh, Pa. 



DEAR UNCLE: 

I know that you will be glad to learn that I have 
consecrated my all to the Lord on my twenty-fourth 
birthday, June 12th. Believing on him as my Savior, 
having faith in his promises, knowing his grace will be 
sufficient in all times of trials, and truly repenting of 
my sins, I made my covenant with him and now wish 
to do only that which is his pleasure. I feel that he has 
already strengthened me and I rejoice to have been 
privileged to come and join in the grand forming of the 
"little stone" out of the mountain. I have almost finished 
the first volume of DAWN, and it is so grand! I 
think I will go over it again before taking up the 
second. 

I feel that the Convention here was such a help to 
me, and I praise the Lord that he has led me to a knowledge 
of my need of a Savior, and I will by his grace 
spend the remaining years of life for him. 

I would ask an interest in your prayers and in those 
of all the Bible House friends, that I may grow in grace 
and patience and love. I am glad to say that I have 
received much contentment of heart already and I rejoice 
to be one of the brothers. 

May the Lord abundantly bless and comfort you is 
my prayer. 

With love, your nephew, 

JOS. R. LAND,-California. 



DEAR FRIENDS: 

I greatly desire again to join in the blessed work of 
distributing tracts from house to house this summer. I 
believe this service has been the channel of bringing quite 
a few into the light of Present Truth. 

We heard a few days ago of some results of our last 
year's service, in which a tract placed under a door was the 
means of leading a man and his wife to send to the TOWER 
office for five volumes of DAWN. And the fact that they 



were interested came to us in a very peculiar way. 

One day last week a neighbor of ours— a woman of the 
world— asked Sister C. for some of the tracts that we give 
away. Sr. C. inquired for what purpose she wished them. 
She replied that she was going out calling, and desired to 
take some to a friend. Sr. C. then inquired if her friend 
was religiously inclined, and learning that she and her 
husband were both religious people, gave the neighbor 
three or four tracts for them. 

When the tracts were handed the lady she said: "Why, 
we have five volumes of MILLENNIAL DAWN, and there 

R3403 : page 223 

are no books in the world like them! They are just what 
we need!" This so surprised and delighted our neighbor 
—to think that she had found some who held to our 
belief— that she could hardly wait until she reached home 
to tell us about it. "Why," she said, "I invited them 
right over to your house, and told them that a man (meaning 
Bro. Samson) was to be at your house, and that they 
should come out to the meetings." 

This incident has encouraged us that our labors are 
not in vain in the Lord; and another thing it has demonstrated 
to me— that the Lord uses various agents in gathering 
together his elect. 

I have been myself greatly blessed giving out the 
healthful food. May the dear Lord grant us grace to continue 
in his service to the end. 

JOS. COOCH,-Indiana. 



page 225 

SEMI-MONTHLY 
VOL. XXV. AUGUST 1, 1904. No. 15. 



CONTENTS 

Views from the Watch Tower 227 

Mixing Worldliness and Godliness 227 

The Vanishing Sense of Sin 227 

Chinese View of Christian 
Civilization 228 

Russian Peoples in Ferment 229 

Fear Not, O Zion! 229 

"Go, Ye Swift Messengers!" 230 

"If the Lord be God, Follow Him" 232 

Out of Babylon the Great (poem) 235 

"Faint Not Because of Evil Doers" 235 

Interesting Questions Answered 238 

page 226 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-24 EVERSHOLT ST., LONDON, N.W. 
GERMAN BRANCH-MIRKER STR., 45, ELBERFELD. 
AUSTRALIAN BRANCH-32 JOHNSTON ST., FITZROY, MELBOURNE. 

PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE, 5c (2-l/2d.) A COPY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity 
or adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER, will be supplied FREE, if 
they send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting 
the paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our 
list continually. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



THIS JOURNAL IS PUBLISHED IN THE 

FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, DANISH AND ITALIAN LANGUAGES. 

SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



"MILLENNIAL DAWN READERS MEET," ETC. 



The Cleveland friends inform us that in their announcements 
of meetings in the daily papers they have 
long been in doubt as to how to mention their meetings. 
Lately they have adopted the above style with good 
results. 

We can see the advantages in it. (1) Those who 
have read the DAWNS will know at once what it means. 
(2) Some who have the DAWNS but have neglected reading 
them may be aroused to investigate them. People like 
to go where others are going and to read what others are 
reading. 

ZION'S GLAD SONGS. 



We have this booklet of spiritual songs in large supply 
again, and orders can be filled promptly. While it is not 
expected that the "Songs" shall take the place of the noble 
hymns in the book POEMS AND HYMNS OF DAWN, they 
will be found appropriate for social meetings and praise 
services. The price is 5c each, postpaid; 60c per doz. 



R3403 : page 227 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 
MIXING WORLDLINESS AND GODLINESS. 



THE secular press informs the world that recently 
The Pastime Club of Knightsville, Ind., was 
opened by prayer by the pastor of the Methodist 
Church of that place— as a compromise with the young 
folks who were members of his church and also of the 
club. The pastor and older members attended the 
dance to see that the "fun" did not go too far, and 
to stop it if it did. "There was no interruption." 

Three days later, in the basement of St. Paul's 
Episcopal Church, Toledo, Ohio, a different kind of 
"fun" was witnessed. The press account says:— 

"The participants were Clark Crawford and Edward 
Gendon, two local boxers of some note, and the 
affair was given under the direction of the Young 
Men's Club of the church. William Parker acted as 
referee and declared the fight a draw at the end of 
the third round, but it was in fact "a fight to a finish," 
as neither one of the fighters would have been 
able to have finished the bout. While the authorities 



of the church had given their consent to an athletic 
entertainment, they were surprised this afternoon to 
learn that the fight had been the fiercest ever held in 
Toledo. Another six round bout was given, aside 
from two wrestling matches." 



We mention these matters, not by way of intimating 
that no godly people remain in these churches, 
nor in the denominations which they represent, but 
as illustrations of the misconception of what a church 
is and what its mission in the world is. 

Under the impression that eternal torment is the 
future portion of all not in some manner connected 
with "some church," goodness of heart, benevolence, 
constantly suggests greater and greater compromises 
to secure the interest and attendance of young men 
and women. To get the unconverted interested at all 
requires worldly attractions, and hence every concession 
is made that conscience will allow, and some that 
it does not approve but "winks at." 

The lack of a knowledge of God's great plan for 
the world's salvation, and of his separate and distinct 
plan for the selection and salvation of the "little 
flock," the Church, first, has warped all judgment, 
and is rapidly devitalizing all the denominations of 
Christendom. Should we labor to combat these 
worldly tendencies? No, it would be useless: it is 
the logical result of the errors of doctrine. The 
whole system— "Christendom"— is full of worldlings: 
many of them very moral and respectable, but 
thoroughly unregenerate, unconverted,— ignorant of 
the principles of Christianity and inclined to regard 
the few "saints" as fanatics. 

The divine plan is the one we should follow— the 
one with which we should cooperate. God declares 
that "Christendom," "Babylon," is rejected and now 
calls on all who are Israelites indeed, "Come out of 
her, my people, that ye be not partakers of her sins 
and receive not of her plagues."— Rev. 18:3. 

THE VANISHING SENSE OF SIN. 



Evolution doctrines and "higher criticism" of 
the Bible have for years been gradually impressing 
upon the people that there was no original sin in 
Eden— no fall from righteousness into the horrible 
pit and miry clay of sin. Their teaching is that men 
were at first close akin to monkeys and have been 
grandly climbing upward. This seed is bringing forth 
fruitage throughout Christendom, and especially 
amongst the more intelligent. Let us quote the words 
of Rev. R. F. Coyle at the General Assembly of the 



Presbyterian Church, recently held in Buffalo, N.Y. 
He said:— 
"Not only are they largely alienated from the 

R3403 : page 228 

Church, but from alienation they have passed to animosity. 

Next to this, one can but note the drift of 

the people in general away from lofty ideals. It 

is something that should give us pause when conservative 

journals and conservative public men are 

constrained to characterize this as an 'age of graft.' 

Warnings have recently sounded out from both pulpit 

and bench against the money madness of our 

times. The President of the United States, in view 

of the public land frauds and postal peculations, has 

been forced to say, '"Government of the people, by 

the people, and for the people" will perish from the 

earth if bribery is tolerated.' A distinguished prelate 

of the Roman Catholic Church declares that of all our 

sins as a people that of dishonesty is most pronounced. 

"Linked to this (the fading out of conviction), 
its fruitage indeed is the vanishing sense of sin. It is 
winked at and glossed over and condoned. There are 
no sinners any longer, and especially in the high 
places of respectability. If there are any lost people, 
they are down in the slums." 



Another matter which assists in the causing of a 
realization of sin to vanish from the public conscience 
is the fact that the creeds unscripturally uphold the 
thought that the wages of sin is eternal torment. 
And since the meanest specimens of humanity are instinctively 
recognized as too good for such a fate, the 
only rational course left is to depict as sin only the 
most brutal conduct. 

Thus does error act and react injuriously, lowering 
the moral standard, universally and increasingly. 
Only the Truth sanctifies. "Sanctify them through 
thy Truth," was our Master's prayer. 

THE DIFFERENCE AND THE REASON FOR IT. 



Four Protestant ministers— D.D.'s— recently 
participated in the dedication of a Jewish synagogue 
at Columbus, Ohio. All of them made felicitous remarks. 
One of them, Dr. Lewis, amongst other 
things, said: "He believed that all creeds should 
strive together for the abolition of atheism and idolatry. 
The combination would be invincible. In the 
past the Jewish creed was strong for the right; in the 
future it would be strong for right in union with the 



religions that were followers of Jesus Christ." 

Such utter blindness to the fundamentals of 
Christianity is truly lamentable. The essence of this 
statement is that any kind of a religion will do except 
idolatry. 

And yet every one of these gentlemen would oppose 
the real gospel message of the Bible, whose foundation 
is the "ransom for all" and an opportunity 
for every child of Adam to learn of the only name 
given under heaven and among men whereby we must 
be saved. Every one of them would denounce MILLENNIAL 
DAWN. Why? Because they are blinded by 
error; because "the darkness hateth the light." 

A CHINESE VIEW OF CHRISTIAN CIVILIZATION. 



"A remarkably keen and trenchantly written 
characterization of Western civilization from an Oriental 
point of view has been published in a little book 
entitled, Letters from a Chinese Official' (McClure, 
Phillips). While originally written for an English 
hearing, the significance of these letters (the anonymous 
author believes) 'should appeal with a peculiar 
force to Americans.' Their interest, he says, and 
justly, depends, 'not upon topical allusions, but upon 
the whole contrast suggested between Eastern and 
Western ideals. And America, in a preeminent degree, 
is representative of the West... What is at 
stake in the development of the American republic is 
nothing less than the success or failure of Western 
civilization.' 

"It is not flattering to Occidentals, the comparison 
drawn between the two civilizations by this Chinaman, 
who contends that Eastern 'profound mistrust 
and dislike' of Western ideals are based upon 
reason. The antiquity of Asiatic civilization, he says, 
has given a stability to its institutions not found in 
the West,— it 'embodies a moral order, while in 
yours we detect only an economic chaos.' 'You profess 
Christianity, but your civilization has never been 
Christian; whereas ours is Confucian through and 
through.. ..Among you, no one is contented, no 
one has leisure to live, so intent are all on increasing 
the means of living.... We of the East measure the 
degree of civilization, not by accumulation of the 
means of living, but by the character and value of the 
life lived.... And we would not if we could rival 
you in your wealth, your sciences and your arts if we 
must do so at the cost of imitating your institutions. 

R3404 : page 228 

...While we recognize the greatness of your practical 
and scientific achievements, yet we find it impossible 



unreservedly to admire a civilization which 
has produced manners so coarse, morals so low and an 
appearance so unlovely as those with which we are 
constantly confronted in your great cities.' 

"Irony of ironies— it is the nations of Christendom 
that have come to teach us by fire and sword that 
Right in this world is powerless unless it be supported 
by Might! Oh, do not doubt that we shall learn the 
lesson! And woe to Europe when we have acquired 
it! You are arming a nation of four hundred millions! 
—a nation which, until you came, had no better 
wish than to live at peace with themselves and all the 
world. In the name of Christ, you have sounded the 
call to arms! In the name of Confucius, we respond!" 
—Review of Reviews. 

AN UNFORTUNATE GERMAN. 



We clip the following from the daily press:— 
"A sharp watch over the tongue is necessary in 
Germany nowadays, where a careless remark easily 
brings the speaker under the heavy hand of the law. 
A workman attending his father's funeral not long 
ago was overcome with grief as he turned away from 
the grave and sobbed out: 'Farewell! We shall never 
meet again!' His words were reported to a magistrate, 
who summoned the workman for an outrage 
against public morals by denying the immortality of 

R3404 : page 229 

the soul and sentenced him to fifteen days' 
imprisonment." 



The above does not surprise us. Indeed it would 
not surprise us if similar conditions should yet prevail 
in these United States. The trend is in that direction, 
and once the federation of churches is more positively 
effected, much more arbitrary proceedings may be 
looked for. 

RUSSIAN PEOPLES IN A FERMENT. 



News of internal conditions in Russia are difficult 
to obtain because of the rigid censorship by the Government. 
Some things leak out, however, which indicate 
that the great empire composed of various peoples, 
all more or less oppressed and maltreated, are 
greatly disaffected and hoping that Russian reverses 
in the far East may somehow result in their greater 



liberty— either through a general insurrection or 
through compelling a more liberal government. The 
London Standard says:— 

"There is a general similarity in the intelligence 
from all parts concerning the exceptional activity of 
the secret police, and the frequent disappearances of 
persons presumably suspected of implication in political 
plots. In Kronstadt, where an attempt is reported to 
have been made to injure the forts, there have also 
been executions under military law. In Moscow recently 
an eye witness reports that eighty coffins, under 
military escort, were taken out of the town at dead of 
night by an unfrequented road which was picketed with 
soldiers, and buried, presumably in the woods, where 
soldiers had previously been observed maintaining an 
inviolable cordon. There is a nervous feeling in the 
very air, and even the most sober-minded are drawing 
ominous conclusions from the significant fact that the 
regiments stationed in European Russia are being 
retained in their places, and only the reservists called 
up under the mobilization orders are being forwarded 
to the front." 

A SOCIALIST BISHOP. 



Addressing a big congregation of men at Blackburn 
yesterday on social delusions, Bishop Thornton, 
vicar of Blackburn, and formerly Bishop of Ballarat, 
referring to the submerged masses said it was inconceivable 
that God sent men into the world to exist 
under such conditions. 

A great shaking of the social system was impending, 
but no remedy would last which divorced sacred 
from secular things. No wise man could possibly 
help being both a socialist and a Christian. 

He wanted the possession of land and money 
treated as a trust, the gradual taxation of wealth for 
the common good, and municipal life slowly and 
wisely extended, particularly in regard to intemperance 
and the housing of the people.— Daily Express, 
London. 



R3405 : page 229 

FEAR NOT, O ZION! 

IN a recent issue we showed that the universal anarchy 
should not be expected before October, 
1914 A.D. We have recently heard of two dear 
brethren who, not grasping the subject very clearly, 
got the impression that we in that article were declaring, 
"My Lord delayeth his coming." Other new 



readers, not well informed, may possibly need a further 
word to show them that neither the time of the 
coming of our Lord, nor of the establishment of his 
Kingdom, are in any degree involved in the date of 
the final anarchy. 

Our Lord's presence, as shown in MILLENNIAL 
DAWN, Vol. II., dates from October, 1874, where the 
forty years' harvest began, of which he is the great 
Chief Reaper. The date for the final anarchy in 
no sense affects it. April, 1878, marks the date of 
the establishment of the Kingdom, as shown in the 
same volume. At that date was due the resurrection 
of the sleeping saints who died "overcomers." Thus 
the establishment of the Kingdom commenced: it has 
since progressed as one after another of the same class 
have since died and been "changed" in the moment 
of death. The Kingdom will be fully established or 
"set up" by October, A.D. 1914, as already pointed 
out; for that date closes the forty years of "harvest" 
and accomplishes its design— the gathering of all the 
wheat into the garner of the heavenly condition. 

The separating of the "tares" is now in progress 
while the "wheat" is being garnered, but the symbolical 
burning of the "tares" should not be expected 
until the wheat is all safe in the "garner." Our 
Lord, addressing the wheat class, says,— "Watch ye 
that ye may be accounted worthy to escape all those 
things coming upon the world [including the "tares"] 
and to stand before the Son of Man."— Luke 21:36. 

But while the "wheat" class may thus expect to 
escape the world's trouble, it will have its own trouble 
before; for "judgment must begin with the house 
of God." (I Pet. 4:17.) And speaking of this, the 
Church's judgment, the Apostle declares: "Every 
man's work shall be tried so as by fire," etc. (I Cor. 3:13.) 
From some of the presentations of Revelation 
we are inclined to the belief that when Church-federation 
shall have enabled it to considerably control 
politicians it may again be the privilege of some of 
the "members" to again suffer violent deaths for their 
loyalty to the Truth. But this will not be severe experience 
for those who, like the apostles, rejoiced that 
they were counted worthy to suffer for the name and 
cause of our Lord. "Rejoice and be exceeding glad, 

R3405 : page 230 

for so persecuted they the prophets before you," are 
our Master's words. 

So then, dear friends, it is evident that the coming 
of universal anarchy after the "harvest," after 
October 1914 A.D., has nothing whatever to do with 
either the presence of the Reaper or the setting up of 
his Kingdom. Indeed, the guidance and overruling 
of that anarchy will be under the control of the glorified 
Church— the Christ. Thus those days of anarchy 



will be shortened and not permitted to go on to 

their reasonable end— a general strife, "every man's 

hand against his brother"— which would in the end 

mean "no flesh saved." On the contrary, the glorified 

Christ will permit the trouble to go only so far as 

to teach the world a great lesson: that its rule of selfishness 

means in the end destruction— to be devoured 

one of another. It too will teach the foolishness of 

human boastings in re present wisdom, civilization, 

etc. 

Just another word on this subject. We find that 
some have concluded that because anarchy destroyed 
the Jewish nation in the one year following their 
"harvest," therefore we should expect that the one 
year, from October 1914 to October 1915, following 
the Gospel age "harvest," would measure the period 
of universal anarchy coming. We cannot agree 
to this conclusion, because the type or parallel goes 

R3406 : page 230 

no further than the end of the forty years' "harvest" 
in both cases— October 69, where the year A.D. 70 began, 
and October 1914, where the year 1915 A.D. will 
begin (Jewish reckoning). The anarchy period lies 
entirely outside of any dates or reckonings furnished 
us. It may be one year or more. The "elect" are 
not to be in it, and as for their interest in friends who 
may experience its sorrows we now know our Father's 
character and plan so well that we dare trust our 
friends as well as ourselves to his loving care, assured 
that God's provisions will be the wisest and best. 



R3404 : page 230 

"GO, YE SWIFT MESSENGERS!" 

SEVERAL inquiries and suggestions have been 
sent to us lately respecting the interpretation 
of Isaiah 1 8th chapter. One of these, from 
our dear Pilgrim-Brother Barton, seems remarkable 
in several respects. The below interpretation is his, 
elaborated a little. It will be interesting to all of our 
readers, and if flaws or objections occur to any of you, 
we will be pleased to have them called to our attention. 
We are anxious to set before the Lord's family 
all that the Master provides as "meat in due season," 
yet we hesitate specially when the interpretation 
seems to bring into prominence the work of our Society. 
We must not, however, shun to declare the 
whole counsel of God. We submit the following as 
the most reasonable interpretation known to us of the 
chapter in question. 
The latter part of the chapter— verses 3 to 7— 



seem to apply to our day only, thus justifying a similar 
application of verses 1 and 2. In other words, it is 
evidently proper for us to expect a fulfilment of this 
prophecy at the present time. Whatever it refers to, 
we should be able to discern now or soon, as applicable 
to events now transpiring. 

The first word of the chapter, "Woe," should 
more properly be translated "Ho!" Thus Prof. 
Young's translation reads, "Ho! to the land shadowed 
with wings." This is by many supposed to refer to 
the United States of America, and the wings are supposed 
by some to represent the eagle wings so conspicuous 
on its coins, seals, bank-notes, etc., in its emblem 
of liberty. To us, however, the wings would more 
particularly symbolize divine providence caring for 
this land. Bible students will remember that God 
frequently uses the eagle and its wings as symbolical 
of divine care and protection. True, the promise 
"He shall cover thee with his feathers and under his 
wings shalt thou trust" (Psa. 91:4), is not made to 
the United States nor to any earthly nation, but to the 
Church, the "holy nation": nevertheless, in a sense 
the affairs of earthly nations are supervised in the interest 
of the "peculiar people" whom God is now 
gathering out of all nations, peoples, kindreds and 
tongues to be the Bride of Christ. 

Glance briefly at the facts. This favored land 
was unknown to civilization, kept hidden, as it were, 
until the due time— until it was needed as a home, an 
outlet for the rapidly overcrowding masses of Europe. 
More than this, it opened at a time when the Reformation 
movement was agitating "Christendom" so 
called, when the study of the Bible was awakening 
conscience and character and Christian common sense. 
The awakened class was not generally the rich or the 
titled or the very comfortable, neither was it the very 
degraded and ignorant and helplessly poor, but the 
middle class of European society. These did the 
thinking and the protesting, and in turn endured the 
suffering under the persecution engendered. And 
these were the ones who needed an asylum and who 
found one in this land shadowed, cared for, by the 
"wings" of divine providence. 

What has been true of the "Pilgrim fathers" 
and their reasons for settlement here has been true 
also of others. Of course all have not fled from religious 
persecution. On the contrary, the majority 

R3404: page 231 

have sought a new home for the betterment of their 
temporal interests. But were not even these seeking 
escape from social and financial oppressions more or 
less burdensome? Although many feared the influx 
of so many of the middle and lower classes, 
yet natural laws and legislation have hindered the 



coming of the most degraded; and under divine providence 
the assimilating process has kept pace with 
the immigration, so that the vast improvement in the 
manners and appearance is phenomenal, and suggests 
to us what may be expected on a still broader and deeper 
scale under the blessed "times of restitution of all 
things which God hath spoken by the mouth of all 
the holy prophets since the world began."— 
Acts 3:19-21. 

Look, too, at the history of this nation. We 
are far from claiming that it is perfect: we can see 
much room for improvement in every direction, and 
are willing to admit that Americans can still learn 
some things from other parts of the world— particularly 
from Great Britain; nevertheless no other nation 
on earth has such a history. We, as Christians, 
are opposed to war on general principles, and yet we 
must acknowledge that some causes of war are more 
just than others, and of this more just class the wars 
of the United States seem to have been. True, selfishness 
has its firm hold upon all the people, and no 
doubt certain ignoble aims have actuated some of the 
people in connection with these wars, yet in general, 
as wars go, they have been, so far as the masses were 
concerned, just wars— wars having some apparent 
necessity and not undertaken purely for conquest. 
In every instance the victory has been with this favored 
nation, and in no instance has she treated the 
vanquished ignobly. On the contrary, millions of 
money were paid to Mexico and Spain when it need 
not have been paid, but large indemnities might have 
been forced. 

The prosperity of this land is so phenomenal as 
to be the constant surprise of the world. The poor 
from all nations have become the wealthiest nation 
on earth. And, whatever may yet become true, under 
the changing conditions by which the trusts are 

R3405 : page 23 1 

obtaining so great a control, this land hitherto has 
certainly been well illustrated by the statue of "Liberty 
Enlightening the World" in the harbor of New 
York City— the gift of that clear-sighted Frenchman, 
Bartholdi. The great truth thus symbolized is appreciated 
by but few, however. Few see that the influence 
of liberty in the United States has been a potent 
factor in breaking the shackles of serfdom throughout 
the world. The practical illustration of people governing 
themselves so successfully, so prosperously, 
excited the admiration and the envy of their relatives 
and friends in every part of Europe, and led to the 
concession of greater liberties everywhere. Great 
Britain long gave partial suffrage to her people, but 
only recently, under that influence of Liberty enlightening 
the world, she gave universal suffrage. The 



same was the lesson and its results in Germany, Belgium, 

Italy, Austria and elsewhere in Europe. Even 

Russia liberated her serfs and will yet be forced by 

the increasing light to give her people the ballot. On 

the whole, then, dear friends, we say that no other 

land could so well lay claim to being shadowed or protected 

by the wings of divine providence as can these 

United States— including Canada, really the same 

people in character, in interest, in freedom, in prosperity, 

and in divine favor. 

"BEYOND THE RIVERS OF ETHIOPIA." 

This is the second statement of the prophecy. In 
ancient times little was known of the world's size, 
etc., and Ethiopia was called "the ends of the earth." 
As for instance, the Queen of Sheba came from Ethiopia, 
"from the ends of the earth," to hear the wisdom 
of Solomon. Interpreting the text from this 
standpoint it would mean: "beyond the waters of 
the ends of the earth"— a very fitting manner in which 
to describe America, as yet unknown and not intended 
to be pointed out particularly at that time. We have, 
then, the prophecy thus: "Ho! to the land shadowed 
by wings [divine providences], which is beyond the 
waters of the ends of the earth." And the next declaration 
is,— "That sendeth ambassadors by the sea, 
even upon the waters, 

IN VESSELS OF BULRUSHES." 

No one ever heard of a vessel of "bulrushes," or 
rather (literally) of "papyrus" or paper as the Revised 
Version renders the word. Are we to expect 
the fulfilment of this prophecy in the future— that 
the steamships of the future will be built of paper? 
We think not. The tendency is rather toward greater 
strength, so that wooden vessels are rapidly giving 
place to those built of steel. Rather we should interpret 
the language as symbolical— as representing 
books and tracts going out in every direction bearing 
messages as God's ambassadors to all who have an 
ear to hear their message. By these paper-messages, 
these divine embassies, all inhabitants of the earth 
who can see and hear are called upon to note the 
Lord's ensign about to be set up in his Kingdom, and 
the trumpet of Jubilee now sounding and to grow 
more and more distinct as the Jubilee morning ushers 
in. See verse 3. 

"GO, YE SWIFT MESSENGERS." 

This language is much more reasonable when 
R3405 : page 232 



applied to God's message going forth in literature 
than to worldly ambassadors in paper boats, surely. 
It is astonishing to those who have any knowledge of 
the facts how the WATCH TOWER literature, OLD 
THEOLOGY TRACTS, MILLENNIAL DAWN, etc., are 
going out as "swift messengers" to all parts of the 
earth and in many languages. These originate in 
the land shadowed by the wings of divine providence. 
Indeed, it is certain that from no other land could 
they so well be sent: and tolerably certain, too, that 
had it not been for "Liberty enlightening the world" 
other nations would not permit the publication of so 
glorious a "gospel of good tidings of great joy which 
shall be unto all people." 

"TO A NATION SCATTERED AND PEELED." 

To what nation does the message go? We answer, 
it goes to the "Holy Nation," the Royal Priesthood. 
(I Pet. 2:9.) Many people of various nations 
may handle and read these messages, but they are 
only for the one; and it is doubtful if others will be 
able to fully understand their message in the present 
time. Besides, the description fits no other nation. 
It is "a nation scattered and polished [R.V. "smooth"] 
—to a people terrible [in their experiences] hitherto; 
a nation meted out [whose course and experiences in 
life the Lord has measured out for them for their 
highest welfare] and trodden down [as a part of their 
necessary experience] whose land the rivers divide 
[R.V.]." The reference to the rivers may be taken 
either as suggesting that the river of death separates 
this "Holy Nation" from its inheritance on the other 
side of Jordan; or as in Psalm 46:4. 

The swift messengers [or "light messengers"— 
Young] have a message of special comfort and consolation, 
of interest to every member of this "holy nation" 
of terrible experiences hitherto; a message that 
the time of Zion's travail is nearly ended— that soon 
the birth of the "New Creation" in the "first resurrection" 
will be complete and that forthwith all the 
nations of earth will see the Lord's standard and hear 
the trumpet of Jubilee. This "holy nation" shall 
"at that time" be brought as a present unto the Lord 
[Jehovah] of hosts"— to Mount Zion, the Heavenly 
Kingdom.— Verse 7. 

Let us show the Lord more and more our zeal, 
our love for himself and his wonderful message by our 
cooperation in the sending forth of his swift paper 
messengers. "Go, ye swift messengers!" Every 
year adds to the number who by word and deed say, 
"Go!" and also adds to the number of these messengers 
sent forth. God speed them to the accomplishment 
of his glorious service— present and future— and 
God bless also the dear Colporteurs and Volunteers 
engaged with us as his ambassadors in this ministry! 



R3406 : page 232 

"IF THE LORD BE GOD, FOLLOW HIM." 

-I KINGS 18:21,30-46.-AUGUST 21.- 

ELIJAH'S requirement of King Ahab, that the principal 

representatives of the ten tribes should gather 

at Mount Carmel, and with them the 450 priests 

of Baal, was promptly complied with. Ahab seemed to 

lose his bravado, and to realize that he was, in a general 

sense at least, subject to Elijah as the Lord's representative, 

and that the claim of the latter that the three and a 

half years of drouth was the penalty for idolatry seemed 

reasonable. He evidently understood that the test of the 

two religions was about to be made; but since Elijah was 

only one in contrast with so many priests of Baal, with 

the heads of all the tribes, and with the king and his 

courtiers, and since this seemed the only course open to 

secure the coveted rain, the king seems to have offered no 

objection. 

The top of Mount Carmel, the place of meeting, was 
about seventeen miles from the palace at Jezreel. It was 
an ideal place for just such a spectacle as occurred there. 
It was probably a few days before the invited persons assembled, 
but when they were come together Elijah, in 
the audience of the people, proposed to the 450 priests of 
Baal a test to demonstrate whether Baal or Jehovah was 
God. Under the circumstances these men could evidently 
do nothing else than assent to the test, and it was an especially 
appropriate one, too; for Baal was noted for being 
preeminently the sun god, the god of nature, fertility, 
etc. The three and a half years of drouth already testified 
against Baal's power to bless the fields and flocks of his 
devotees with fertility and fruitfulness, and now, additionally, 
Elijah proposed that the god who would answer by 
fire should be esteemed the real one. The priests of Baal 
made ready an altar and laid upon it the sacrifice in the 
morning; then, after their custom, they prayed and importuned, 
sometimes in a loud voice and sometimes softly, 
that Baal would answer and demonstrate his power by fire 
from heaven consuming the sacrifice. 

CALL LOUDLY ON BAAL. OUR GOD "HEARETH IN SECRET. 

As the noon-day sun shone out scorchingly in that 
climate, not only the stones of their altar became hot, but 
the fat of the slain sacrifice must have been sizzling with 
heat, and it would have seemed to require very little to 
have accomplished their object. Tradition says that, 
after the manner of many of the deceptions of heathen religions, 
a man was placed inside of the altar with a view 
to his setting on fire the wood under the sacrifice at the 



appropriate moment; but the legend declares that he was 
subsequently found suffocated. At all events, according 
to the Scriptural account, as the day advanced beyond the 
time of noon, the priests of Baal became more and more 
desperate, calling, O Baal, hear us! hear us! As they 
cried aloud, Elijah made the scene still more impressive 

R3406 : page 233 

upon the minds of the elders of Israel by ironical remarks, 

suggesting that their god, Baal, was perhaps on a journey 

or perhaps asleep or what not, and he exhorted them to 

call still louder upon him. Chagrined, frenzied by their 

defeat, they called still more wildly, and ran about the 

altar after the manner of heathen priests in some parts until 

this day, yelling and cutting themselves, claiming that 

they had committed sins, that they would chastise themselves 

for these sins, and that Baal should thus be propitiated 

and hear and answer them. This continued 

until three o'clock in the afternoon, when Elijah proposed 

that in the cool of the evening he would make his 

test, assuring the people that Jehovah, who had withheld 

the rain, would demonstrate his power by sending the fire 

to burn the sacrifice offered in his name. 

Elijah built an altar in the name of the Lord— that is, 
consecrated by prayer to the Lord. Presumably he had 
all the help necessary in its construction, and he added to 
it a feature not common to altars, namely, that it had a 
trench round about which he caused to be filled with 
water from a never-failing spring which is to be found on 
the slope of Mount Carmel. Four earthen jars (misnamed 
in the text barrels) were filled and emptied three times, 
until the whole altar, wood and sacrifice were saturated 
and surrounded by water. This would be a demonstration 
to the heads of the nations that the miracle to be performed 
would be genuine. Then Elijah prayed to God, 
"O Lord God of Abraham, Isaac and of Israel, let it be 
known this day that thou art God in Israel, and that I am 
thy servant, and that I have done all these things at thy 
word. Hear me, O Lord, hear me, that this people may 
know that thou art the Lord God, and that thou hast 
turned their heart back again." 

The prayer is beautiful in its simplicity, manifesting 
that the Prophet had no boastful spirit in connection with 
his mission, but that humbly he recognized that he was 
merely a servant of the Lord. It showed, too, that his 
desire was not personal display of power, but the blessing 
of his nation and the drawing of their hearts to the Lord. 
The Lord responded, and fire from heaven came down 
in the sight of the people and consumed the sacrifice, the 
wood, the stones and the earth with which the altar had 
been constructed, used as mortar, licking up the water in 
the trench. The people were convinced and gladly 
acknowledged the Lord Jehovah, thereby correspondingly 
denying Baal. It was a great victory for the cause of 
right, and would carry through the leaders of all the tribes 



full information to every quarter of the kingdom. 
ELIJAH'S COURSE NOT OURS. 

At Elijah's command the 450 prophets of Baal were 
caught ("Let not one of them escape") and at Elijah's 
direction they were executed at the foot of the mountain 
—at the brook whence the water had been brought for the 
sacrifice. Infidels have been inclined to comment upon 
this slaughter of the priests of Baal as representing persecution 
and religious fanaticism. We are to remember, however, 
what we have already called attention to, namely, 
that God had peculiar dealings with this nation of Israel, 
and that Elijah, as the divine mouthpiece of the occasion, 
was fully commissioned to carry out the divine execution 
against these men, who had been exercising so baneful an 
influence among his people, leading them from light to 
darkness, from the worship of God to idolatry. This 
would give no right or authority to anybody at the present 
time to execute fellow creatures because of difference of 
religious belief, because the world in general today is not 
under an arrangement such as that which prevailed in 
Elijah's day between God and the one nation of Israel. 
Today civilization frames laws and has courts of justice 
which decide on penalties for violations of those laws— 
the death penalty being usually reserved for murder or 
treason. We are to remember that in the peculiar relationship 
between God and Israel, under their covenant 
made at Sinai, God himself was the King, the ruler of 
that nation; consequently these priests of Baal were traitors 
against him, and, according to the laws of our time, from 
this standpoint would be worthy of death. 

However, there is a higher law than ours which we 
must recognize. It must be admitted that God is the 
proper judge of the whole world: that it is with him to 
say who may live and who may not. Were the world living 
today under the direct government of the Lord, and 
were there today a properly certified Prophet of the Lord 
whom, as the mouthpiece of God, we had no reason to 
doubt, it certainly would be entirely proper for us to hear 
the word of the Lord and execute his sentences on any 
and every subject to the fullest extent. But during this 
Gospel age— from the time God gave up the fleshly house 
of Israel and began the establishment of spiritual Israel- 
he has not claimed or exercised kingly authority in the 
world. On the contrary, he tells us that present governments, 
although they call themselves Christendom, are 
really "kingdoms of this world." He tells us to look 
forward to the future, to the second coming of Christ in 
power and great glory as the time for the establishment of 
the Kingdom of God under the whole heavens. He tells 
us that the Kingdom thus established will be the antitypical 
kingdom, and assures us that when that time shall 
come a great blessing will come to the whole world— a 
blessing of knowledge of the Truth and of opportunity to 
serve it; and that whosoever will not heed the message at 



that time, whosoever will not avail himself of the glorious 
opportunities of that time, will be "cut off from amongst 
the people" in the Second Death.— Acts 3:22,23. 

SIN SHOULD BE ACKNOWLEDGED. 

It was customary in olden times that when a general 
sacrifice was offered it should be followed by a feast, and 
apparently while the sacrificing was in progress throughout 
the day a feast also had been prepared on the mountain 
top, and it is in reference to this that Elijah said to 

R3407 : page 234 

the king, "Get thee up, eat and drink, for I hear the sound 

of an abundance of rain." The Prophet may have been 

speaking figuratively, or possibly his words might be understood 

better, "I hear from the Lord the message of an 

abundance of rain coming." Ahab and his associates 

might much better have spent the time in fasting and 

prayer for divine forgiveness for the idolatry which 

had brought upon them the drouth, and which now had 

led to the execution of the priests of Baal. Nevertheless 

the Lord, through the Prophet, did not urge upon them 

any avowals of sorrow that they did not volunteer themselves. 

Herein is one of the distinct differences between 

those who are at heart the Lord's people and others. Imperfections 

and failures each one finds in himself continually, 

but those who are the Lord's true people feel so 

aggrieved at their failures that they are promptly led to 

the throne of grace that they may obtain mercy and 

find grace to help in future time of need, but others take 

their failures lightly and fail to profit by them 

accordingly. 

As for the Lord's people, some of them can testify 
that their failures have really resulted in great blessing to 
their own souls and great advancement in overcoming 
weaknesses. The sentiment of the consecrated is well 
expressed by the poet, who says: 
"O! may no earth-born cloud arise 
To hide thee from thy servant's eyes." 

While the king and the heads of the tribes were feasting 
Elijah was praying for the rain and waiting for it. 
Seven times in all he sent his servant to look in the direction 
from which the rain storms usually came, to see 
whether or not anything in the nature of a cloud was visible 
in the clear sky, and only at the last did he get the 
favorable report that his servant saw a cloud about the size 
of a man's hand rising in the west. Here we see beautifully 
blended the part of God and the part of man in respect 
to prayer. Elijah did not pray for rain until he understood 
that the Lord's time had come to send rain: 
then he prayed with all earnestness and expectancy— with 
confidence; for we cannot doubt that the one who built 
the altar and flooded it with water and expected and witnessed 
the consuming of the sacrifice by fire from heaven 



would be full of confidence respecting the sending of rain, 
for which, nevertheless, he prayed. Just so it is with the 
Lord's people today in the matter of prayer. God has 
definitely promised us certain things, and these we may as 
positively expect and may appropriately request; other 
things, however, not promised, we are not to expect. 

WHERE CHRIST IS HIS WORD IS STUDIED. 

This is the key to our Master's words, "If ye abide 
in me and my Word abide in you, ye shall ask what ye 
will and it shall be done unto you." For us to have the 
ear of the Lord it is requisite that we shall abide in Christ 
—as members of his body, and through him children of 
the Father. It is necessary also that his Word abide in 
us— that we study the Lord's promise, that we know what 
he has promised, so that we may ask only those things 
which he has already declared to us he is pleased to grant. 
Just another suggestion respecting what we may ask and 
what we may not request in prayer, leaving the fuller examination 
of the subject to another time. We may not 
ask the conversion of our friends, because the Lord has 
not told us thus to pray. He set us no such example, 
neither did the apostles, and the entire teaching of the 
Scriptures is to the contrary. We may, however, with 
propriety pray for wisdom and grace upon our hearts and 
upon our lips, that we may know how to present the 
Lord's message clearly and forcefully and convincingly to 
those we love and desire to see brought under the influence 
of the Truth. The Lord's arrangement is, "Ye shall 
know the Truth, and the Truth shall make you free." 

God's arrangement is, further, that the Truth shall 
not be injected into our minds in some miraculous manner 
when this is unnecessary, but that it shall be proclaimed 
by those who already have learned it. Hence the preaching 
of the Gospel is the Lord's means by which he is 
pleased to grant the blessing of his Truth and through his 
Truth his grace, during this Gospel age, to those who are 
in a proper attitude of heart to receive the same. Take 
another illustration: We are not taught to pray for money 
or luxuries, but we may labor and ask the Lord's blessing 
upon our labors, and such guidance of them as would be 
best, with a heart ready to receive with thankfulness much 
or little as the Lord may see best for us. Our only request 
may be for the absolute necessities as expressed in 
our Lord's prayer, "Give us this day our daily bread." 
We may also pray with propriety, "Thy Kingdom come; 
thy will be done on earth as it is done in heaven," and 
may be sure that in the Lord's due time this petition, 
which has gone up for eighteen centuries to the throne of 
grace, shall be answered, and showers of blessing shall 
come from the presence of the Lord during the second 
presence of our King, flooding the world with times of 
restitution of all things. 

When the little cloud was seen and reported to 
Elijah, a message was at once sent to the king to 



hasten his return to the palace before the great downpour 

of rain should come. The king evidently believed 

Elijah implicitly and made haste homeward. Elijah, 

apparently endued with supernatural power, ran 

ahead of the king's horses as an act of courtesy, and as 

showing that he as a servant of the Lord nevertheless recognized 

Ahab as the king of the nation. Thus to some 

extent the shame and confusion of the king's position 

throughout the day was offset on his return home. 

BE OF GOOD COURAGE. 

A general lesson may be drawn from these incidents 
by the Lord's people of the New Creation today. The 
Elijah-like class have the lessons of courage and faithfulness 
and trust. Let us be strong in the Lord and in the 

R3407 : page 235 

power of his might; let us speak his word plainly and 
show forth on every suitable occasion and by every proper 
means the glories of him who hath called us from darkness 
to light. It is not for us to vanquish the enemies of the 
Truth and put them to death as did Elijah, but it is for us 
to slay and utterly expose the errors and follies which are 
deceiving the people. The Lord's little ones, as the Scriptures 
declare, may be mighty through his power to the 
pulling down of the strongholds of error and to the turning 
back of the tide of deception and sin from those who 
are in the reasonable attitude of mind to receive the Truth 
—those who are merely deceived into error and not willingly 
and wilfully its followers and beneficiaries. 

There is a great lesson here, too, for those who are 
today more or less bound by error, and confused and 
thereby led to render worship to that which is false. Infidelity 
in our day is calling upon many to worship the 
god of nature; and, through higher criticism and evolution 
theories, the priests of error are misleading and deceiving 
many in spiritual Israel who really desire to know 
the Truth. The Lord is making an exhibit today as between 
Truth and Error, which is in many respects as astonishing 
and miraculous as the demonstration made at Elijah's 
hands. The Truth today is shining out clearly, the sacrifice 
of the Lord's people is being accepted, demonstrations 
of the Truth and of the servants of the Truth are everywhere 
being manifested. It is time for all who have been 
in any measure of darkness on the subject to scrutinize 
the evidences carefully and to decide as did the 
representatives of Israel, "The Lord he is God"— and 
to decline henceforth to recognize the errors of Babylon 
and the messages of her prophets, which are being demonstrated 
to be false. It is time for all to come to a decision 
whether they are for the Lord or whether they prefer to 
worship false systems and errors. In the language of our 
Golden Text, If the Lord be God let us follow him— 
thoroughly, completely. Let us not only be sincere, but 



earnest in our religion. Let it take hold upon all the 
affairs of our lives, and, as the Apostle expressed it, not 
only let it direct our conduct and words, but back of this, 
our very thoughts. To use his language, "Let us bring even 
our thoughts into captivity to the will of God in Christ." 



R3409 : page 235 

OUT OF BABYLON THE GREAT. 

A sinner, lost, and in my guilt I lay,— 
Although a son, devoted son of Rome; 

But Jesus in his love pass'd by that way, 
And now I am a child of God become. 

My soul was famish'd, till I found my God: 
Rome gave me nothing to supply my need. 

But since I've known the merits of Christ's blood, 
My soul is with the richest dainties fed. 

Confession to a priest ne'er gave me peace, 
But lull'd my soul to sleep in carnal ease, 

Till God awoke me, in his sovereign grace, 
And taught me not myself but him to please. 

And, now, my peace doth like a river flow, 

Since I have known redemption, through that blood 

Which makes the sinner whiter than the snow, 
And constitutes him, now, a priest with God. 

The rock on which my peace with God is built 
Is Christ, who is God's righteousness for me; 

His precious blood, for sin, on Calvary spilt, 
Is all my trust, and my security. 

Lord Jesus! Thou the mighty work hast done!— 
Hast vanquish'd death and hell and set me free:— 

Hast glorified thy Father, and art gone 
A place, in heaven, to prepare for me. 

Thou art my only Mediator there, 

The one High Priest,— by God thou wast ordain'd, 
Nor Mary— mother of our Lord— may share 

That office, which by Thee alone is claim'd. 

My prayers and praises I present through thee, 
My only Priest! my only Saviour Thou! 

From Romish bondage Thou hast set me free, 
Nor need I fear her maledictions now. 

My Lord will soon his injur'd name defend, 
And all corruptors of his word shall find, 

When he in clouds of glory shall descend, 

That they have been blind leaders of the blind. 



Oh! give me grace to praise thee more and more, 
That light e'er shone on my benighted soul; 

Thee, only, would I love, and Thee adore, 

And pray that light may shine from pole to pole. 

Lord! bring Thine own from 'neath her blinding power, 
Her superstitions, and her priestly thrall; 

Ere Thou on her thine indignation pour, 

From earth sweep Babylon— both great and small. 
—London Times. 



R3407 : page 235 

"FAINT NOT BECAUSE OF EVIL DOERS. 
FOR IN DUE TIME THEY SHALL BE CUT OFF."-PSA. 37: 1,2. 

-I KINGS 19: 1-8. -AUGUST 28.- 

Golden Text:— "In my distress I cried 
unto the Lord, and he heard me." 

ELIJAH, flushed at the victory over the priests of Baal, 
was not thereby made haughty or boastful toward 
the king, though evidently he anticipated 
that the drouth and now finally its abatement, with abundant 
rain and with the attendant manifestation of divine 
power, would work a reformation in Israel. King Ahab 
and the rulers of Israel were evidently converted, at 
least temporarily, from Baal to Jehovah,— as evidenced 

R3408 : page 236 

by their willingness to permit the execution of the 450 
priests of Baal. There was one person, however, on 
whose condition of heart Elijah had not counted, and 
that was Jezebel the queen, who really was at the bottom 
of the false religious system in which, as we have seen, her 
father had been at one time a chief priest in Zidon. 

When the queen heard the result of the day's procedure 
she was angry— angry with God, angry with the 
Prophet Elijah for having shown up the falsity of Baal, 
angry with her husband the king for having permitted the 
demonstration to proceed to the disadvantage of Baal, and 
for permitting his priests to be executed. She was furious, 
and sent a message to Elijah— according to the customary 
form of those times— declaring that he would be as dead 
as the priests of Baal within twenty-four hours. Canon 
Farrar thus graphically pictures the queen, her message, 
etc. He says: "We can imagine the bitter objurgations 
which she poured upon her cowering husband for having 
stood quietly by while her prophets and Baal's prophets 
were being massacred by this dark fanatic, aided by a 
rebellious people. Had she been there all should have 



been otherwise!... The oath shows the intensity of her 
rage— like that of the forty Jews who bound themselves by 
the oath that they would not eat or drink until they had 
slain Paul— and the fixity of her purpose, as when Richard 
III declared that he would not dine until the head of 
Buckingham had fallen on the block. She presents the 
spectacle so often reproduced in history and reflected in 
literature, of a strong woman completely dominating a 
feebler consort." 

GOD'S REPRESENTATIVE INTIMIDATED. 

The message sent to Elijah was evidently a boast and 
threat designed to intimidate him and to cause him to 
flee the country, the very effect it did produce. Jezebel 
was quite probably at heart afraid to have an encounter 
with the man who, as God's representative, was able to 
produce the results testified to by her husband and by the 
rain: she was too shrewd to risk a defeat, and her course 
prospered. Poor Elijah, so courageous previously, so 
ready to risk his life, was now panic stricken and fled to 
Beersheba, the farther part of Judea. Even then he did 
not feel himself safe, because Jehoshaphat, the king of 
Judah, was a close friend to Ahab, king of Israel; so leaving 
there his boy servant, who is supposed to have been the 
son of the widow of Zarephath, he continued his flight 
southward through the wilderness to Mount Sinai— Horeb. 

It is useless for us to speculate how Elijah might have 
done otherwise than he did— how he might have boldly 
stood up for the Lord, denounced the Queen, rallied the 
heads of the tribes of Israel and carried forward to a general 
completion the reform movement which he began. 
We are to remember that Elijah was a type, and hence 
that his doings as well as his words were in a particular 
sense and degree ordered of the Lord— beyond any knowledge 
or motives of his own. It is only when we view this 
entire narrative of Elijah and Ahab and Jezebel from the 
standpoint of a type of more wonderful things coming 
afterward on a larger scale— only then can we grasp in any 
measure the force and meaning of the lessons taught 
through these types. 

ANTITYPICAL FEATURES. 

Although we have already noticed this matter, we 
cannot pass the story now without brief reference to the 
antitypes. We see in John the Baptist the repetition of 
the type, he being a fresh type corresponding to Elijah, 
as Herod corresponded to Ahab, and Herodias was an advanced 
type of Jezebel. Similarly John the Baptist, like 
Elijah, sought to effect a reformation in Israel, and similarly 
he failed. Let us glance very hastily at the antitype 
of these things portrayed in the book of Revelation. 
There the antitypical Jezebel is distinctly pointed out, 
and, in harmony with commentators since the Reformation 
time, we understand the antitype to be the apostate 



Church, the Papacy,— the civil government of the Roman 

empire in its decisions corresponding to King Ahab, consequently 

the agent of the antitypical Jezebel in accomplishing 

her desires, in propagating her system and destroying 

the prophets of the Lord. As had been predicted, 

so it was fulfilled: "She wore out the saints of the 

most high God," and "was drunken with the blood of the 

saints. "-Rev. 17:6; 18:24. 

In the antitype, if Papacy represents the woman Jezebel, 
and if the civil power was the antitype of Ahab, 
where is Elijah? We answer that the antitypical Elijah 
all through this Gospel age has been made up of the 
Lord's faithful people, the saints— a body of many members, 
yet in all a "little flock." We have already shown 
that the antitypical Elijah, who must first come and do 
his work before the second advent of Christ in the glory 
of his Kingdom, is the true Church of Christ in the flesh 
—of which Jesus was the Head, of which the Apostles 
were prominent members, and to which number all the 
true saints of the Lord from then to the end of the Gospel 
age, while in the flesh, must belong. This Elijah class 
was invisible during a large portion of this long period of 
nearly nineteen centuries. As Elijah the Prophet disappeared 
just prior to the drouth and was not seen and could 
not be found during the drouth, so with the antitypical 
Elijah class. As a class they disappeared about the year 
300 and were not seen for about three and a half symbolic 
years, namely until the time of the Reformation, about 
1550, even as Elijah disappeared after announcing the 
drouth and did not reappear until nearly the conclusion 
of that period of three and a half literal years. The 
drouth really began about 539 A.D. and the copious showers 
of refreshing came three and a half symbolic years later 
in 1799 A.D. 

This period of three and a half years, equaling forty-two 
months of 1260 days, is particularly mentioned in all 
three of these different forms in Revelation. (12:6,14; 13:5) 

R3408 : page 237 

The whole world is witness to the great drouth 

that prevailed throughout Christendom from the year 300 

until the time of the Reformation. It is particularly 

known as the period of the "Dark Ages." With the reappearance 

of the Elijah class prominently before the 

world, represented in the reformers of Luther's time, we 

have some measure of reassertion of the proper worship of 

God. The Reformation work up to the year 1799 was 

preparatory, just as the work of Elijah on Mount Carmel 

and with the priests of Baal was preparatory. Then followed 

the great shower of blessing, scattering the Word of 

God throughout the whole world in every language under 

heaven. Nearly all of the present Bible Societies were 

organized between 1803 and 1815. There has been a 

great and refreshing shower of Grace and Truth come to 

the world. The antitype of Ahab, civil government, has 



to a considerable extent recognized the general truth of 
the matter, but they are more or less closely affiliated with 
and under the influence of the Jezebel system, and alas! 
as Revelation clearly points out, Jezebel today has daughters 
—systems termed Protestant— which, nevertheless, copy 
largely the mother's spirit. It is through the influence 
of the daughters that the an ti typical Elijah may expect 
future persecutions, instigated by the mother, accomplished 
through the daughters, as typically represented in the 
case of John the Baptist, beheaded by Herod at the instance 
of Salome, but at the instigation of Herodias— Jezebel. 
This, however, is looking down to a period in the 
future. 

ELIJAH IN THE SLOUGH OF DESPOND. 

Elijah under the juniper tree, praying God that he 
might die because he had been no more successful than 
his fathers had been in the mission of restoring Israel to 
the true worship, is almost amusing when we think of the 
fact that the Prophet had fled panic stricken a few days 
before to escape Jezebel's threat against his life. Why 
thus flee from death and yet pray the Lord for death? 
The Prophet's experiences and conduct are but an illustration 
of what frequently occurs. Amongst the Lord's 
people some of strong faith at times become discouraged, 
panic stricken, fearful. For the moment they seem to forget 
whose servants they are, and the almighty power that 
is behind them, able and willing to make all things work 
together for good to his faithful ones. 

The fact of the matter is that all of the Lord's consecrated 
servants devoted their lives to sacrifice when they 
became followers of the Lamb, and if they could but 
realize their consecration continually, they would be ready 
for the consummation at any moment at the Lord's pleasure 
and by whatever means or channel his providences 
may permit. The Lord's consecrated ones of the Elijah 
class are to remember that not a hair of their heads could 
fall without their Father's knowledge and permission, and 
the attitude of their hearts should be that expressed by 
our dear Redeemer— the Head of the Elijah body— "The 
cup which the Father hath poured for me, shall I not drink 
it?" The language of their hearts should be that expressed 
by the poet: 

"Content whatever lot I see, 
Since 'tis my God that leadeth me." 

Doubtless the Prophet's discouragement of heart was 
but a natural consequence of the tension under which he 
had been for some time laboring in his zeal for the Truth 
and the exciting conditions attending his fear and flight. 
He slept under the juniper tree, but was awakened that he 
might partake of specially provided refreshments: further 
rest and further supplies of food brought him strength for 
a farther journey. We may take from this two lessons: 
First, a natural one, that however earnest and zealous the 
Lord's people may be, they need rest and food, and these 



cannot be neglected with impunity if we would be strong 
and courageous in mind and heart. Second, the feastings 
and fastings of the typical Elijah may well represent special 
blessings and refreshments of the Truth in the experiences 
of the Church during the past centuries, and 
also represent certain fastings. Elijah's reaching Horeb, 
the Mount of God, would seem to typify the Kingdom in 
its incipient establishment in the end of this age— which 
various Scriptures teach us was reached in 1878. There 
certain lessons, refreshments, etc., were evidently due to 
come to the Elijah class, and so we have found it. Of this 
we will learn more in our next lesson. 

The Golden Text suggests a personal application of 
Elijah's experiences to all of the Lord's people at any 
time. Whatever our distresses, whatever our discouragements, 
whatever may be our Ahabs and Jezebels, we may 
find consolation by carrying our every trial and difficulty 
to the Lord in prayer. No affair of life that comes to the 

R3409 : page 237 

Lord's people, sorrow or anguish or distress of mind in 
any sense, is too small to bring to the Lord. "Cast all 
your care upon the Lord, for he careth for you," is a very 
consoling and very encouraging suggestion from the Word. 
However, the Lord's people are to learn more and more 
distinctly, as their years of membership in God's family 
and tutelage in the school of Christ go on, that they are 
not to ask the Lord to guide their efforts according to 
their wisdom, that they are not to request that their wills 
shall be done either on earth or in heaven, but rather, telling 
the Lord their burdens, great and small, they are to 
realize and appropriate to themselves his sympathy and 
love, and to apply to their own hearts as a balm the consoling 
assurances of his Word, that he is both able and 
willing to make all of their experiences profitable to them 
if they abide in him with confidence and trust. His grace 
is sufficient for us, his strength is made perfect in our 
weakness. 



R3409 : page 238 

INTERESTING QUESTIONS ANSWERED. 
THE LENGTH AND BREADTH OF RESTITUTION. 



Question.— Is it proper to say that Restitution 
will bring to the obedient of the world a higher condition 
than that in which Adam existed before he fell? 
In other words, Will the development resulting from 
an experience with evil be something beyond a restoration 
of Adam's position? 



Answer.— The word Restitution fixes the answer 
to this question; no man could be restored to a condition 
not previously enjoyed. Adam was the representative 
of his race, and the privileges and rights and 
opportunities granted to him belonged to his posterity 
as well. Through Adam's sin all of these rights, 
privileges and blessings were forfeited— for himself 
and for all of his posterity— death being the sentence 
covering the loss. 

Restitution will mean the recovery of all these 
things that were lost. The "Restitution Times" are 
clearly shown to be the thousand years of Christ's 
reign. The Restitution work is most evidently the 
bringing back from both sin and death, degradation 
and depravity, from "the curse," of Adam and his 
children and all that he possessed before the curse 
came. Properly enough, this will be accomplished 
with each individual in a full, free and understood 
offer, such as every member of the human family must 
ultimately have. If, with a clear understanding of 
right and wrong, they wilfully and intelligently reject 
the right and choose the wrong, their condemnation 
to the Second Death will be wholly a matter of their 
own responsibility, and not because of Adam's transgression, 
nor because of any failure on the Lord's part 
to proffer them the Restitution he has provided, 
through Jesus, for every man. 

Undoubtedly the world will attain to lengths and 
breadths and heights and depths of knowledge of God 
and his plan, and of his love and of his wisdom and of 
his power, such as Father Adam never enjoyed. But 
such attainments will be no part of Restitution, for 
they never were lost. However, we are to remember 
that had Father Adam remained obedient to the Lord 
all of these things would have been his privilege, 
pleasure and opportunity; and hence, while not directly 
a part of Restitution work, they are indirectly 
associated with it: as the privileges of these things 
were lost, so the privileges of returning to them are 
to be granted. 



WERE ADAM AND CHRIST REPRESENTATIVES OF THE 
RACE? 



Question.— Were Adam and Christ in any sense 
representatives of the race? 

Answer.— Adam, as the federal head of his family, 
was its representative in Eden. This is demonstrated 
by the fact that we, as his posterity, are involved in 
every matter affecting him. Thus the sentence or 
curse of death coming upon Adam affected and impaired 
as a curse every member of his offspring. 



Christ was not a representative in this same sense. 
He was Adam's substitute— his Redeemer— the one 
who paid for Adam the penalty demanded by divine 
law, thus releasing Adam from the original sentence 
of death. Since Adam was our representative, therefore 
we have a participation or share with him in the 
benefits accruing to him through his redemption by 
Jesus, his substitute. Thus Christ's death is efficacious 
to the cancelling of all of its effects upon all of 
his posterity. As we have already seen, the opportunity 
for return to divine favor, which is to come to 
every member of Adam's family, is his release from 
the curse. So far as the sentence is concerned, this 
will be accomplished at the very beginning of the 
Restitution work; but the blotting out of all of the 
effects of the curse will be another matter. The effects 
of the curse have become very extended and are 
represented in the impairments of mankind, mentally, 
morally and physically. After the curse shall have 
been legally cancelled it will require long years under 
the Lord's arrangement for the wiping out, or blotting 
out of Sin's records in the human mind and body. 
Thus the lifting of the curse and the blotting out of 
its effects will be seen to be two different matters: 
the first was accomplished for all mankind by the 
death of Christ; the second he proposes to accomplish 
for as many as will be obedient to his voice during 
the Millennial age. 



HOW TO REPLY TO UNIVERSALISTS. 



Question.— What answer should be made to Universalists, 
who claim that Christ's death purchased 
everlasting life for all who lost it through Adam's 

R3410 : page 238 

transgression, and therefore guaranteed a restoration 
to perfect and everlasting life to every man? 

Answer.— Very few Universalists of this kind are 
to be found. Generally, they either directly or indirectly 
deny the Ransom— deny that Christ's death 
purchased everlasting life for anybody. Their theory 
generally rests upon the assumption that there was no 
divine sentence to be met; that divine mercy could 
exercise itself without meeting the demands of divine 
justice; that our Lord Jesus died, not to purchase us, 
not to pay the ransom price, not to redeem us, not as 
a substitute for Adam, but merely, they say, as an 
example to us of full obedience to righteousness, even 
at the cost of life. 

To such we answer that if Jesus was merely our 



R3411 : page 239 

example, and not our Redeemer, then our only hope 
would be to keep his example to such an extent that 
we would be individually pleasing to the Father as 
he was; and this would mean that we must keep the 
whole law blameless as he did. Those who understand 
this proposition must see clearly that, if that be 
true, there is no hope for any of us, for, as the Apostle 
declares, "By the deeds of the law shall no flesh 
be justified in God's sight." Christ was justified by 
the deeds of the law, but perfect deeds were possible 
to him, because he was born holy, harmless, undefiled, 
separate from sinners. Perfect deeds, perfect fulfilment 
of the divine requirements, are absolutely impossible 
for us who were born in sin, shapen in 
iniquity. If, therefore, Jesus be merely our pattern, 
our exemplar, and not also our Redeemer, we are of 
all men most miserable, for seeing salvation we shall 
be wholly unable to attain it. Our whole hope is in 
the declaration of the Lord's Word that the righteousness 
of Christ is imputed to us, that his death was to 
meet the penalty against us as a race— for Adam's 
sins and ours. Our hope is that, being covered by 
faith with the robe of his righteousness, our imperfect 
attempts to follow his example in obedience to the 
Father's will will be accounted as though they were 
perfect— "through the merit of him who loved us 
and bought us with his own precious blood." 

But if there be Universalists who take the position 
implied in this question, our answer would be as 
heretofore, that Christ's death did purchase lasting 
life for all who lost it through Adam's transgression, 
and that God has guaranteed a full restoration of all 
that was lost "to every soul of man that believeth" 
—in the Scriptural sense of obedient believing. Nothing 
in this implies that they will get all these things 
at the moment of their awakening from the tomb. At 
that time they will get a beginning of perfect life if 
they are obedient to the voice of the great Physician, 
which will eventuate in their absolute perfection in 
the close of that Millennial day. Our Lord, describing 
the matter in John 5:29, declares that the dead 
will come forth unto a resurrection by judgment. They 
will come forth from the tomb, from oblivion, to physical 
conditions somewhat similar to those enjoyed before 
they died, with surroundings in every way much 
more advantageous; with Satan bound that he can deceive 
them no more; with the good influences of righteousness 
and Truth let loose in the world to such an 
extent that ultimately the knowledge of the Lord 
shall fill the whole earth; with judges and law givers 
under the supervision of the Royal Priesthood to 
look after their best interests, to reprove and correct 
and chastise their failures, and to encourage, reward 



and bless their endeavors, and thus, by judgments, of 
rewards and punishments, they would be gradually 
brought up step by step, up, up, up to the highway 
of holiness, to the absolute perfection at the farther 
end, which the Lord is pleased to grant to all who will 
have it upon these his terms, obedience to his Son. 
"But it shall come to pass that the soul that will not 
hear [to obey] that Prophet shall be cut off"— in the 
Second Death, from which there will be no redemption 
and no recovery. 



THE SPIRIT AND BRIDE SAY COME. 



Question.— When will the Spirit and the Bride 
say, Come?— Rev. 22:17. 

Answer.— This will be fulfilled in the future for 
several reasons: 

(1) There is no "Bride" now. The Church, 

the "little flock," is now the "chaste virgin" "espoused" 
to the Lord. She will be the Bride at marriage, 
and for long centuries she has been looking 
forward to that great event at the close of this Gospel 
age. 

(2) The context refers to the river of the water 

of life of verses 1 and 2 of the same chapter. There 

is no such river now, nor will there be until the establishment 

of the Kingdom; for this is the picture: the 

New Jerusalem (the Church in glory, the Kingdom) 

comes down from God out of heaven, adorned "as a 

Bride" and then from its throne will proceed the 

"river of the water of life" of which all may drink 

freely, and to which the Spirit and the Bride will invite 

all. Now the prospective members of the Bride 

class have the Lord's Spirit in them, "a well of water 

springing up unto everlasting life."— John 4:14. 

By and by these well-springs brought together 
in glory with the Lord shall constitute the source of 
the great river of life which shall bless and heal all 
nations. "In thy Seed shall all the families of the 
earth be blessed." (Gal. 3:29.) By and by the 
prophecy will be fulfilled: "He that believeth in me, 
out of his belly shall flow rivers of living water." 

(3) Now the call is a different one and is not 
open to mankind. Our Lord declared, "No man can 
come unto me except the Father which sent me draw 
him." The Apostle declares that now many are 
blinded by the Adversary and hence could not see 
even if there were a river of life flowing, and could not 
hear even if there were a Bride to say, Come. 



HE SHALL "POUR OUT HIS SPIRIT UPON ALL FLESH." 



Question.— Does Joel's prophecy concerning the 
pouring out of the Lord's "spirit upon all flesh," 
apply to the present or to the future age? 

Answer.— It applies to the coming age— the Millennium. 
God is now pouring out his spirit only upon 
the Church— "his servants and handmaidens." See 
MILLENNIAL DAWN, Vol. v., p. 179. 



page 241 

SEMI-MONTHLY 
VOL. XXV. AUGUST 15, 1904. No. 16. 



CONTENTS 

Views from the Watch Tower 243 

Disbelief in Future Life 
Dangerous 243 

Church and State in France 244 

Antagonism Against Socialism 244 

The Stability of Zionism 245 

A Word to our Dear Colporteurs 246 

Elijah Instructed and Encouraged 248 

The Harvest and Gentile Times 250 

Elijah Taken in a Whirlwind 251 

Justified and Called 255 

page 242 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-24 EVERSHOLT ST., LONDON, N.W. 
GERMAN BRANCH-MIRKER STR., 45, ELBERFELD. 
AUSTRALIAN BRANCH-32 JOHNSTON ST., FITZROY, MELBOURNE. 

PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE, 5c (2-l/2d.) A COPY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity 
or adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER, will be supplied FREE, if 
they send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting 
the paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our 
list continually. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



THIS JOURNAL IS PUBLISHED IN THE 

FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, DANISH AND ITALIAN LANGUAGES. 

SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



GENERAL CONVENTION, BOSTON, MASS., AUG. 19,20,21 



FOR PARTICULARS REGARDING CONVENTION ARRANGEMENTS, 
SEE LAST PAGE, THIS ISSUE. 

NOTE THE DATES BELOW. 

This Convention takes place in connection with the 
G.A.R. Encampment, for which the railroads have made 
very low excursion rates. For rates and routes inquire 
of your nearest Railroad agents. Tickets will be on sale 
as follows:— 

In "Central Passenger Association" territory— west of 
Pittsburg, Buffalo, Parkersburg and Wheeling, to Chicago 
and St. Louis, etc.— from Aug. 12 to 14. 

In "Trunk Line Passenger Association" territory— east 
of Pittsburg, Buffalo, etc., to New York City, Albany, 
etc.— from Aug. 13 to 15. 

In "New England Passenger Association" territory- 
east of Albany, New York City, etc.— from Aug. 13 to 16, 
except from points within 150 miles of Boston; from the 
latter places the purchasing dates are Aug. 15 to 18. 

In each case journey must begin before midnight of last 
date named. 

Anyone residing within the "New England Passenger 
Association's" territory unable to take the "G.A.R. Excursion" 
above mentioned at the dates named, should ask 
for an "Excursion Certificate to the Watch Tower Bible and 
Tract Society's Convention at Boston, Mass." He will 
pay full (one way) fare for the certificate but will be entitled 
to a return ticket at a reduction, provided 100 such 
tickets can be shown. So, then, get the cheaper "G.A.R. 
Excursion" tickets if possible; but otherwise get the "Certificate" 
mentioned, and thus help others as well as yourself 
to lower rates than regular fare. 

UNUSED "WATCH TOWER BIBLES." 



Any of our readers having copies of the Linear Bibles 



with wide margins containing references to DAWNS and 
TOWERS, in good condition and not being used, which 
they desire to sell, will please advise us. There were only 
5,000 of these Bibles published and since then many new 
readers have become interested in the "Berean Bible Studies, 
mentioned in the front part of those Bibles who 
would be glad to have the helps which those Bibles afford. 
We have constant requests and would have more if it were 
known that the Bibles were obtainable. The printing 
of a small new edition would be too expensive to be 
considered, and we doubt if there would be sufficient 
demand for another edition of 5,000. 

VOLUNTEER AMMUNITION. 



The Volunteer distribution of tracts this year has been 
immense, and only now have we succeeded in filling all 
your orders. We have a reserve in stock now: if any of 
you find yourselves short, order all you can judiciously use. 



R3410 : page 243 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 
DISBELIEF IN A FUTURE LIFE DANGEROUS. 



PROFESSOR GOLDWIN SMITH notes the 
fact that the tendency of our times is to 
destroy faith in a future life, or, as the 
Professor states it, faith in immortality. (We need 
not quarrel over terms, especially when the Professor's 
use of the word immortality, though less exact 
than our own, is the usual, the customary one in 
our day. In his use of this word, he is in accord 
with the teachings of the Scripture,— that God has 
provided a future life, through a resurrection, for 
every member of Adam's race.) We give extracts 
from his article, which was published in The North 
American Review, as follows:— 

"It would seem that we have come practically to 
a point at which— evolution and the higher criticism 
having between them done the work of demolition, 
and the work of reconstruction, if it is ever to be 
done, being still in the future— no small part of educated 
mankind has renounced or is gradually renouncing 
the hope of a future life and acting on the belief 
that death ends all. 

"A general contraction of views to the man's 
own life must apparently be the consequence of the 
conviction that this life is all. A man of sense will 



probably be inclined to let reforms alone, and to consider 

how he may best go through the brief journey 

of life with comfort, if possible with enjoyment to 

himself and in pleasant intercourse with his fellowmen. 

High social or political aspirations, or high aspirations 

of any kind, will hardly survive the 

disillusion. 

"We have an interest in our own children. But 
otherwise what interest have we in the generations 
that are to come after us on which a religion of humanity 
can be founded? It is not a very lively interest 
that we feel even in the remoter members of the 
human race, to say nothing of those in the next 
street. Yet these exist; and of their existence we are 
conscious, and are reminded by the electric cable. Of 
the existence of future generations, supposing there 
is no future life, we shall not be conscious, and, therefore, 
for us they will not exist. We cannot even say 
with absolute certainty that they will exist at all. 
The end of man's dwelling-place and, therefore, of 
all human progress, science tells us, will be a physical 
catastrophe; and there are even those who seem to 
think that this catastrophe may be forestalled by a 
recurrence of the glacial era. Natural law, which 
science bids us venerate, departs, it must be remembered, 
with the lawgiver. Nothing remains but physical 
forces without a guiding mind, the play of which 
it is impossible to forecast. As to posthumous fame, 
it would be an arrant delusion, even if one man in a 
million could hope to obtain it. 

"Whatever conduces to the enjoyment and prolongation 
of this life will probably be sought more 
energetically than before. Material progress, therefore, 
may quicken its pace. Nor is it likely that men 
will be quite so ready as they are now to throw away 
their lives in war. At present the soldier in facing 

R3411 : page 243 

death is probably sustained by a notion, however dim 
and vague, of a reward for the performance of his 
duty. 

"It can hardly be doubted that hope of compensation 
in a future state, for a short measure of happiness 
here, though it may have been somewhat dim, 
has materially helped to reconcile the less favored 
members of the community to the inequalities of the 
existing order of things. The vanishing of that hope 
can scarcely fail to be followed in the future by an 
increased impatience of inequality, and a growing determination 
not to put off the indemnity to another 
world. In fact, this is already visible in the spirit 
and language of labor agitation. Serious problems of 
this kind seem to wait the coming generation. 

"It would not be surprising if in this dissolution 
of the ancient faith and failure of familiar supports, 



there were to be a partial reaction in favor of churches 
which, like the Roman Catholic or the Eastern 
Church, can pretend to offer the assurance of authority 
and to still the disquieting voice of reason while 
they lap the disturbed soul in the soothing element of 

R3411 : page 244 

religious esthetics. A tendency of this kind is already 
seen in ritualism, which bids the doubting take refuge 
in the sacerdotalism and sacramentalism of the 
Middle Ages. But such a back-stream of opinion and 
sentiment would, of course, not be lasting." 

He concludes, "After all, great is our ignorance, 
and there may be something yet behind the veil." 



The Professor is an astute thinker and reasoner. 
He sees the trend of our times; he sees the advancing 
wave of unbelief which as a flood is even now increasingly 
sweeping over Christendom. 

The Lord's Word has forewarned us of present 
conditions (Isa. 28:14-20; 29:9-16; Psa. 91:7) and 
has cautioned us to "put on the whole armor of God 
that we may be able to stand in this evil day" (Eph. 6:11); 
and now, as predicted, the "fire" of this day 
is trying every man's work. (I Cor. 3:13.) Alas! how 
many have been building up in themselves and others 
faith in human traditions and creeds which now are 
"wood, hay and stubble" in the devouring flame of 
"higher criticism." Alas! how few have built up 
their own faith and that of others with the "gold, 
silver and precious stones" of divine Truth. 

However, in this also "we sorrow not as others 
who have no hope." As we behold many falling away 
from a position they occupied only nominally anyway, 
and from a faith that was never more than superficial, 
and from a worship in which they drew near the 
Lord in lip service without the heart, we rejoice that 
for such the present "shaking" (Heb. 12:26) means 
not eternal torment nor even "Second Death," but 
an awful experience in this life which, under divine 
Providence, may work out for them a blessing during 
the Millennium. 

Prof. Smith sees what the Scriptures so clearly 
show,— that the loss of faith at the end of this age 
will have much to do with the precipitation of the 
great time of trouble and anarchy with which this 
age is to finish. He sees this selfishness already manifesting 
itself as the Scriptures foretold it would do.— 
I Tim. 3:1-5. 

CHURCH AND STATE IN FRANCE. 



Under the "Concordat," of long standing between 
the French government and the Papacy, France out 
of revenues and taxes has paid salaries to the Roman 
Catholic priests, bishops, etc. It is generally conceded 
that this arrangement will be dissolved about the first 
of next year. If so the support of religion will probably 
depend on voluntary contributions, as in this 
country. Roman Catholics assume that this will be 
a great blow to religious institutions: they seem to 
have little confidence in voluntary religion. 

Nor are the Roman Catholics alone in their fears 
for the future; for as Protestants and Jews received 
like treatment in France the cancelation of the Papal 
"Concordat" is expected to mean a similar cutting off 
of Jews and Protestants from financial support. The 
twelve Jewish consistories of France and Algeria receive 
220,000 francs ($44,000), or from 1800 to 5000 
francs to each rabbi or minister. The Hebrews are, 
of course, somewhat agitated respecting this loss, and 
as to how fully it would be compensated for in voluntary 
donations. 

The various Protestant ministers are perturbed 
even more than the rabbis and are calling for some 
kind of federative union among themselves, and the 
"Fraternal Committee" has been appealed to— to see 
that the interests of the Reformed churches be taken 
care of in the parliamentary action on the proposed 
separation. France has been paying annually to Protestant 
ministers 1,500,000 francs ($300,000). 

A few Protestants seem to take the proper view 
of the matter— that such support from the world is 
contrary to the best interests of true religion. Thus, 
gradually, France is getting ready for the great wave 
of "trouble such as was not since there was a 
nation." 

THE ANTAGONISM BETWEEN CHRISTIANITY AND 
SOCIALISM. 



"M. Anatole Le Roy-Beaulieu, in a recent lecture 
delivered at Harvard, one of a series dealing with religion 
and democracy, commented on the antagonism 
between Christianity and socialism. Socialism, he 
admitted, is founded upon a love of humanity, and 
many of its elements are to be found in Christianity. 
Their ideals have much in common. 'The aspiration 
of the socialist is the renovation of society: that is 
also the Christian ideal. Montesquieu, in the eighteenth 
century, marveled at the fact that Christianity, 
preoccupied as it is with the affairs of the other 
world, has contributed so evidently and so much to 
the improvement of the life upon earth.' Yet, in spite 
of these analogies, M. Leroy-Beaulieu discovers differences 



so radical between the spirit of Christianity 

and the spirit of socialism that he believes their conflict 

to be vital. On this subject he said further, according 

to the report of his lecture in the Boston 

Evening Transcript:— 

'"Christians and religious men in general have 
as their object the improvement of conditions. Communist 
ideas are indeed found in the Church— as we 
have seen in an earlier lecture. But until the present 
collectivist ideas have succeeded in the Church only 
in monasteries, in convents, in sects which are founded 
upon contempt for the world. So Saint Francis of 
Assisi, for example, might be cited as a kind of socialist 
or democrat. But what was his ideal? The 
conquest of riches? On the contrary, poverty was the 
first article of his profession and the virtue that he 
chiefly preached. This is far indeed from the idea 
of modern socialism. What the socialist of to-day 

R3411 : page 245 

wants— if not for himself, then to divide among others 
—is the world's money. 

'"Again, there is a vast difference in the methods 
as well as in the ideas of socialism and Christianity. 
We mean, of course, the general spirit of 
Christianity. We do not include all Christians in our 
generalization. The spirit of Christianity's method 
is one of love toward God and man. Charity is the 
great idea— did not some one say the only innovation? 
—of Christianity. Christ's words were, 'Peace be 
with you.' This was no working formula, no catch-word. 
It was genuine. Christ toiled for peace. Not 
so the modern socialist. Peace may be their ultimate 
object, but it is a peace which can be attained only by 
means of war. In the modern socialist's conception 
of the word, Napoleon himself fought for peace. None 
of the socialists tend to any other method. French, 
Italians, Germans, Russians— so they be socialists- 
are unanimous that the only way to establish the 
peace they aim at is through a war of classes. M. 
Jaures, the poet-politician, is a type of the class. 

"It follows that socialists as a body oppose the 
doctrines of love and of long suffering that characterize 
men of religion. The calming of class strife, the 
appeasing of civic tempests by the oil of charity does 
not appeal to them. Religion, according to Jaures, is 
'une vieille chanson'— the cradle song that lulled the 
restlessness of old. It is not the martial music which 
is needed for the battles civilization has to fight 
today. 

"Far deeper than appears at first sight lies the 
gulf that separates Christianity and socialism. The 
socialist has his religion, but it is neither Judaism 
nor Christianity. These faiths place their ideal in 
another world— to turn men's eyes to the treasures in 



heaven was the object of their teaching. Socialism— 

the religion of positivism and materialism— pins its 

faith to the treasures of earth. It is not hard to appreciate 

the reasons why a man who regards his life 

on earth as a brief trial is willing to submit with 

patience to injustice. For the socialist it is different; 

for him this world is everything. It is manifestly incumbent 

upon the socialist leaders, then, to snatch 

from the masses every semblance of belief in a world 

to come. There is but one expedient for them: if 

they are to remove the hope of a heavenly paradise, 

they must compensate, they must offer an earthly paradise 

in its place.' 

"The religious plan, the lecturer continued, is 
to develop not war, but love among men, and by 
means of that love for the fraternity, which is the proposed 
aim of the socialists themselves. 'Christianity, 
then, has the better methods for attaining the socialistic 
ideals; and thus, after all, socialism, if it means 
what it professes, makes a serious mistake in its warfare 
upon Christianity."— Literary Digest. 

THE CONFLICT BETWEEN CATHOLICISM AND SOCIALISM. 



"It is an indubitable fact that, notwithstanding 
appearances to the contrary, Europe is now decatholicizing 
herself. One might even go further with safety 
and say that she is dechristianizing herself. Slowly 
but surely, with the irresistible movement of a geological 
subsidence, faith is waning among the industrial 
workers, and even among the peasants. In Belgium, 

R3412 : page 245 

in France, in Germany, the workmen who follow no 
particular creed number hundreds of thousands— yes, 
millions— and as their hopes of any heavenly kingdom 
dissolve other hopes assert themselves with a 
growing intensity. Wherever free thought penetrates 
Socialism enters also. 

"Frightened by the socio-industrial consequences 
of free thought, an increasing section of the rich class 
leans toward the church, and especially toward the 
Roman Catholic Church, which is regarded by all as the 
strongest bulwark of the capitalists' interest. The apparent 
clerical reaction is thus shown to be in fact a corollary 
of the decline of faith amongst the masses. But 
it is nevertheless true that the alliance of priest and 
capitalist, the coalition of spiritual and temporal 
power, against Socialism and free thought, furnishes 
the conservative and reactionary parties with formidable 
means of action and constitutes the most redoubtable 
threat against the immediate future of European 
civilization. It is a contest between the Black International 



and the Red International. On the one hand 

are all those who hold that authority should descend 

from above, and who find in the Roman Catholic 

Church the most perfect expression of their ideal, the 

most inflexible guardian of their class privileges; on 

the other hand are those who insist that authority shall 

come from the people, and who, by the logic of circumstances, 

can found their hopes on nothing but Social 

Democracy."— New York Independent. 

THE STABILITY OF ZIONISM. 



The death of Dr. T. Herzl, the principal leader 
of the "Zionist" movement among the Jews, is seemingly 
a serious loss— calculated to hinder the progress 
of the movement for the reestablishment in Palestine 
of a Jewish State under the protection or suzerainty 
of Turkey or the great powers of the world. However, 
from another standpoint it may do good— teaching 
those interested that they must trust not in man 
but in God. The time for regathering of faithful 
Jews to Palestine is due, according to the Scriptures, 
and it will not be long until the "door" of opportunity 
opens to them. The Lord is the real leader of the 
movement and he will guide in his own way. It is 
understood that Dr. Herzl looked with considerable 
favor upon the British Government's offer of all that 
the Jews at present desire, in a location far south of 
Palestine, in Africa. Dr. Herzl's continuance at the 
head of the movement might have proved inimical to 
the interests of the divine arrangement centered in 
Palestine. "Behold I will gather them out of all 
countries whither I have driven them.... Like as 
I have brought all this great evil upon this people, so 
will I bring upon them all the good that I have promised 
them."-Jer. 32:37-42; 31:27-40. 



R3412 : page 246 

A WORD TO OUR DEAR COLPORTEURS. 

WE want you each and all to realize that you are continually, 

daily, in our thoughts and prayers. 

We know exactly what your general experiences 

are, and are anxious to assist you in every possible manner. 

Firms that prosper in the subscription book business 

—in expensive books yielding large profits— drill their 

new agents for about a week on just the words to say and just 

the tone and emphasis to give them to make the best impression. 

We regret that this is impossible with us; but 

neither is it as necessary as with "book agents." Our 

Colporteurs are in the work "for the love of it"— for the 



love of the Truth— and the animation and emphasis of 
their presentation are not "put on," but are the spontaneous 
utterances of their hearts. Over three hundred are 
now actively engaged in this blessed service in this country 
alone, and not one of them follows it as a businessm- 
an recognize it as a ministry of the Truth and themselves 
as "ambassadors for God" to his true children. 

But zeal requires knowledge to make it the more effective. 
Knowledge on the subject of colporteuring comes 
from experience, and our experience covers years and is 
world wide. Hence it is both our duty and our pleasure 
to assist the dear devoted Brethren and Sisters engaged in 
the Colporteur service. 

We perceive that some full of zeal and enthusiasm on 
entering the work soon become discouraged from lack of 
success, while others, who start timidly and fearfully, do 
well. The reason for these peculiar conditions evidently 
is that the latter give the more careful heed to the printed 
instructions, while the former, too self-reliant, fail to profit 
by the experiences of others thus supplied. None should 
attempt a "method of his own" until he has been in the 
work at least three months, using one of the successful 
methods presented in Hints to Colporteurs. 

We have found that some Colporteurs get poorer results 
with larger experience; and we have learned to attribute 
such a retrogression to a gradual change of "method" 
to a poorer one, often unconsciously. All these 
reasons lead us to present below four of the most successful 
methods now in use amongst our dear Colporteurs. 
They are all alike in that they are brief, and do not discuss 
or even mention the doctrines, nor attempt to prove 
or argue Scripture. Many of the dear friends err in not 
observing this point. To attempt to tell the plan of God 
in a few words is to spoil matters and neither you nor 
your auditors have time for a lengthy discussion. The 
six volumes of DAWN treat the plan in the proper order 
and as briefly, we believe, as it can be clearly expressed. 

Make note of the interested ones and call back to see 
them after they have had time to read. Then you can 
talk as far as they have read, but if "wise as a serpent," 
you will not talk much beyond that point, but deepen 
their interest in their reading by continually referring 
their questions to the books which they then will have. 

When referring to the price, usually say, "Only thirty-five 
cents;" in contrasting say that "books on such topics 
usually sell for a dollar and a half each." But when referring 
to the price of a set say "only two and a quarter," 
making no mention of "dollars" this time because, unconsciously 
to the person, the price appears more trifling 
than if the word "dollars" be used. 

The fourth method mentioned below is intended specially 
for use in a new edition of these books which will 
have the general title, "Studies in the Scriptures." instead 
of "MILLENNIAL DAWN." Some sets of these will 
be ready (for trial by Colporteurs to test whether or not 
the new name will help in effecting sales) about October 



1st. Whether or not the new name will later 

be abandoned, or ultimately supersede MILLENNIAL 

DAWN we leave to the Lord's providence to determine. 

METHOD A. 

Good morning ! I am doing a little Christian work 
in this neighborhood; may I have a moment of your time? 
[If an opportunity is given enter the house.] 

The Bible and Tract Society of Allegheny, Pa., which 
I am representing has prepared some systematic studies of 
the Bible, which have been a great blessing to many of 
the Lord's people, and we are endeavoring to place them in 
the hands of all who will appreciate them. I have a copy of 
the book, which I would like to show you. [Show book, 
preferably in your own hands.] It is a "Helping Hand" 
for Bible students, entitled, "The Divine Plan of the 
Ages." 

This, the first volume of the work, takes up sixteen 
very interesting studies, all "meat in due season" for 
thinking Christians. The object of the work is to teach 
the study of the Bible systematically. All know that in 
studying the Bible a great many things are found that are 
hard to understand; this work takes up those difficult 
parts. For instance [pointing to the seventh chapter], 
"The Permission of Evil." We all have often wondered 
and asked why God permits evil, sin, sickness, suffering, 
death, and these awful and terrible disasters, etc., and 
why he does not prevent them when he has the power to 
do so. All this is beautifully explained and answered from 
the Scriptures, in this seventh chapter. It shows just 
why God has permitted sin and evil for now six thousand 
years, since the fall of our first parents in the Garden of 
Eden. It also points out God's promises for the final 
overthrow of evil in his own due time; when Satan will 
be bound, and the knowledge of the Lord will fill the earth 
as the waters cover the great deep. 

The sixth chapter treats of our Lord's return, and 
shows the object of his second coming— his work at that 
time,— that it will be a restoring of all that was lost in the 
Garden of Eden. In proof of this it gives the testimony 
of "all the holy prophets since the world began." 

[I do not always bring in the next paragraph.] 

The fifteenth chapter treats on "The Day of Jehovah" 
—the time in which we are living, and shows that 
the ever-growing conflict between Capital and Labor is 
clearly foretold in the Scriptures, and what the final outcome 
will be. 

Chapters two and three I must tell you about; they 
are so helpful, especially if you have young friends inclined 
to be skeptical. The one gives evidences, aside 
from the Bible, that there is an all-wise Creator; the 
other thoroughly answers "higher criticism" and infidelity 
by the internal proofs that the Bible is inspired. These 
chapters alone are worth many times the cost of the entire 
set of books. As one reader has well said, "These helping 



hands to Bible study are worth more dollars than they cost 
in cents." 

We have six volumes of this work, beautifully bound 
in cloth, similar to this first volume I am showing you, 
but averaging 500 pages. We sell them all for the very 
low price of $2.25, the usual price of one volume on such 
a topic. The title of the second volume is, "The Time 
is at Hand;" the third, "Thy Kingdom Come;" the 
fourth, "The Day of Vengeance;" the fifth, "The Atonement 
Between God and Man;" the sixth, "The New 
Creation." 

I am only taking orders today, and will deliver 
next Monday [or whatever day you decide on]. 

[If this does not secure the order, give a brief outline 
of the Chart; and refer them to the Apostle's statement 
(2 Tim. 2:15), "Study to show thyself approved unto 
God, a workman that needeth not to be ashamed, rightly 

R3413 : page 247 

dividing the Word of truth." Show them from the Chart 
how to apply and rightly divide the Word of truth:—] 

This Chart shows the past dealings of God as related 
in the Scriptures, and also the future development of his 
plan; and it shows us just where we are on the stream of 
time. It is fully explained in the twelfth chapter. 

[If an order for the set of six volumes cannot be obtained, 
urge that the first volume at least be taken and 
read— over a million and a quarter of them already issued.] 

METHOD B. 

Pardon me. I represent the Bible and Tract Society. 
I thought you might be interested in the "Plan of the 
Ages." It explains why evil is permitted— sickness, wars, 
crimes, etc.,— something we are all interested in, and want 
to know more about. It shows that the Bible, when rightly 
understood, is in perfect harmony with itself and with 
reason, from Genesis to Revelation. More than a million 
copies of this book are now in circulation. It is unsectarian. 
The book is extremely interesting and makes plain 
so many points that have troubled us all our lives. It is 
truly wonderful how it opens up the Scriptures ! 

Aside from this it treats satisfactorily the important 
subjects and questions of the day, such as, What is the 
world coming to, into what are we drifting, religiously and 
socially. 

This Chart is fully explained in the book, and shows 
how to "rightly divide" the Scriptures, in order to have 
perfect harmony from first to last. It awakens an absorbing 
interest in the Bible, and develops reverence and love 
for the Creator. Every presentation is abundantly substantiated 
by Scripture. I am sure you will enjoy reading 
it. The type is large, the chapters short. It has good 
paper and contains 380 pages. A cloth-bound book for 
thirty five cents! Think of it! Such books usually sell 



for a dollar and twenty-five cents. 

If you prefer the entire set of six volumes, the cost is 
just two twenty-five for the lot. I am merely taking orders 

today; my delivery will be on day. You can pay 

then. Let me see— What are the initials? How do you 
spell your last name? Now,— Shall I bring you the complete 
set; six volumes for two twenty-five? Very well. 
I thank you, and you will thank me. I bid you good day. 

METHOD C. 

Good morning! Excuse me, please, for troubling you. 
I am representing the Bible and Tract Society of Allegheny, 
Pa., and think you will be interested in our work. 
This Society sends us out to call the attention of Christian 
people to the MILLENNIAL DAWN, or PLAN OF THE AGES. 
Perhaps you have heard of it. There are already over a 
million in circulation, and the exceedingly low price of 
thirty-five cents per volume places it within the reach of 
all. The object of this book is to teach us to study the 
Bible systematically, so that we can understand it. No doubt 
you have noticed in studying the Bible that you often come 
to passages you cannot understand. This has been my 
experience, and I have often felt discouraged in trying to 
study the Bible without a system. However, I have found 
a great blessing through carefully studying the Bible in 
connection with this book. The author takes up matters 
that have never before been satisfactorily explained or understood; 
for instance, "THE PERMISSION OF EVIL AND ITS 
RELATION TO GOD'S PLAN." We have all wondered why 
God permits evil— sickness, death, calamities, murders, 
wars, etc. This book explains why these things are permitted, 
and does it from the Bible standpoint. The book 
also explains "THE OBJECT OF OUR LORD'S RETURN," "THE 
RESTITUTION OF ALL THINGS," and "THE DAY OF JUDGMENT, 
subjects in which we are all interested, but which 
very few understand to their satisfaction. In this work 
the Scripture texts are given, so that you can refer to 
them as you read, and all can understand if they will. 

There are in this volume sixteen chapters on the most 
interesting and important subjects in the world;— 380 
pages; nice paper; large, clear type; ALL FOR THIRTY-FIVE 
CENTS ! There are six volumes of the work, averaging 
500 pages each, all for $2.25, about the usual price of 
one volume on such subjects. I am merely taking orders 

today, for delivery next day. May I enter your name 

for a set? 

[If purchase is declined proceed to show Chart.] 

This Chart gives an outline of the whole plan of God, 
as revealed in the Bible, from Genesis to Revelation. Beginning 
with the creation of man, it shows us just where 
we stand on the stream of time, and the progressive steps 
each one must take to become like our Lord. It gives 
the Divine Plan in order, and makes the Bible so plain 
that even a child can understand it. [Have memorandum 
book ready, with pencil in hand.] I am only taking orders 



today, and will deliver next day; you pay for 

the book when delivered. [Whether the other volumes 
should be further mentioned or not, depends upon interest 
and circumstances.] 

Vol. II., "The Time is at Hand," treats of the manner 
of our Lord's SECOND ADVENT; it also gives a complete 
Bible chronology, which is very important in order to help 
us to understand something of the times in which we are 
now living. It has a long chapter on The Anti-Christ. 

Vol. III., "Thy Kingdom Come," treats on various 
important themes also. It has one long chapter on The 
Great Pyramid in Egypt, with seven full-page illustrations 
of it. It shows that it is mentioned in the Bible, and is 
truly called "The Stone Bible." 

Vol. IV., "The Day of Vengeance," takes up the affairs 
of the Church and the world in general; shows us 
the meaning of all the trouble and confusion around us, 
as explained in the Bible,— that the times we live in are a 
fulfilment of the Word of God. It shows what the outcome 
of the impending trouble will be, and also gives the only 
remedy, set forth IN THE SCRIPTURES! One chapter is an 
itemized explanation of our Lord's great prophecy, in the 
twenty-fourth chapter of Matthew, and is worth more than 
the price of the set of books. 

Vol. V., "The At-one-ment Between God and Man," 
explains everything connected with the ransom— why it 
was necessary; how it was accomplished; the separate 
and related works of the Father, Son and holy Spirit in 
connection with our salvation— with the Scriptures bearing 
upon these interesting themes. One chapter on "The 
Undefiled One" deserves special mention. It shows how 
Jesus was born of a woman without partaking of her sins 
or weaknesses as a member of the fallen race. 

Vol. VI., "The New Creation," deals with everything 
pertaining to life and godliness affecting the Lord's consecrated 
people from start to finish— Church duties, home 
duties, family duties— everything. It has also one chapter 
on the natural creation, showing the harmony of the 
Genesis accounts with the facts of nature. 

It is the most wonderful work that has ever been published 
on these subjects, and you get the complete work— 
SIX VOLUMES— for only two twenty-five, the usual price 
of one such volume. These six volumes are a whole 
Christian library in themselves, and all for only $2.25, 
payable on delivery. May I take your order? This 
is the noblest cause in the world, and we all want to have 
a share in it. 

R3413 : page 247 

METHOD D. 

Pardon me if I intrude. May I ask, Is this a Catholic 
or a Protestant home? [After answer proceed.] Very 
well then. I am doing a little Christian work, in which 
I believe you will be interested. 



Christian people are becoming more and more awake 
to the fact that a great tidal wave of unbelief is sweeping 
over Christendom;— not the blasphemous atheism 
voiced by Thomas Paine and Robert Ingersoll, but the 
cultured kind represented in the scholarship of our 
day, which makes the danger all the more insidious. 

Not only are the great Colleges and Seminaries 
undermining the faith of the better educated, but the 
Common School books, and especially those used in 
the High Schools, are similarly inculcating a distrust 
in the Scriptures, a contradiction of its teachings. For a 
college graduate of to-day to declare his faith in the 
inspiration of the Scriptures would bring upon him the 
scorn of his companions— a scorn which few would 
court, or could endure. At very best, a few will be 
found to claim that they believe that Jesus and his 
Apostles were sincere, though they blundered in quoting 
from the Old Testament as inspired. 

Such a belief in Jesus and his Apostles is no belief 
at all; for if present-day "higher critics" are wise 
enough to know when and where our Lord and his 
Apostles erred in their quotations from the Old Testament, 
then these wise men of our day are our proper 
guides,— more inspired than Jesus and his Apostles. 

Our Society, realizing the need, is seeking to do all 
in its power to stem the tide and lift up the Lord's 
"standard for the people." It has prepared six sets 
of Scripture Studies (of which this volume is one) for 
the Lord's people of all denominations to use in lending 
a helping hand to all perplexed inquirers with whom 
they may, by God's providence, come in contact. 
These are supplied at bare cost, and can be had direct 
from the Society's warerooms or of its colporteurs, 
who are gradually reaching forth these helping hands 
far and near. These valuable "studies" are supplied 
at little more than two cents each;— 16 of them well 

R3414 : page 248 

bound in a cloth case, embossed in silver, for 35 cents. 

The thought is this: As a Christian man or woman 
you have children or relatives or neighbors or friends 
open to your influence— perhaps, indeed, seeking your 
counsel— asking, "How do we know that there is a 
God?" or, "What proofs have we that the Holy Scriptures 
are inspired?" It is no longer wise to call these 
silly questions, nor to ask, "Are you an infidel?" 

However competent you might be to prepare answers 
to these and a score of other questions, you may 
not have the needed time and opportunity to do so. 
How convenient then to step to your book-case, take 
down the proper study on the subject, and to say to 
the inquirer, Sit down and read that short study, 
and the whole matter of your question will be fully 
and satisfactorily settled; and if your doubts ever 
again arise come over and read the same again. 



Possibly you may be a member of an Epworth 
League or Christian Endeavor Society, or of a Baptist 
Young People's Union, and may be called on for an 
essay on some Scripture topic. How convenient to 
select one among these numerous studies (covering 
almost every topic) and to find therein the appropriate 
Scriptures cited. Ministers use them thus when composing 
special sermons and addresses. 

Ministers who have large libraries touching every 
conceivable religious topic— many volumes costing $6 
to $8 per volume— may not feel their need of these 
"Scripture Studies" but to others they are almost indispensable. 
Indeed, in addition to the price feature, which 
brings them within the reach of everybody— six volumes 
of over 3,000 pages for $2.25— the usual price 
of one such volume— they are written in pure, but 
simple English, whereas the "scholarly works" are 
replete with technical terms and only for the few. 

We invite Christian people of all denominations to 
join us in our work of extending these "helping hands" 
to the rising generation. A single friend or relative 
helped— rescued from doubt or unbelief— would repay 
the cost of these studies a thousand times. 

[Note.— Catholics seem to prefer the term Scriptures to 
Bible.! 



R3414 : page 248 

ELIJAH INSTRUCTED AND ENCOURAGED. 

-I KINGS 19:9-18. -SEPTEMBER 4.- 

Golden Text:— "Fear thou not, 
for I am with thee."— Gen. 26:24. 

ON Mount Horeb, Mount Sinai, is a cave called 
the cave of Moses, and it was toward this apparently 
that Elijah bent his steps, still heart-sore 
and discouraged, as he fled from Jezebel. It was 
here that the Lord appeared to him inquiring why he 
was there. His answer was that he was there because 
of his zeal for the Lord, because he was discouraged 
that the true worship in Israel had been set aside, that 
his reformation work had apparently been a failure, 
and, after all the miracles that the Lord had wrought 
through him, the people were seeking his life. In 
answer the Lord gave him illustrations of different 
ways of accomplishing results: First he caused a fierce 
wind to tear the mountains and break the rocks, but 
Elijah recognized that the wind was not the Lord but 
a manifestation of his power. Then an earthquake 
came, shaking the foundations of the mountains; but 
similarly the earthquake was not the Lord but merely 
a part of his power. Then came a fire; but the fire 



was not the Lord. Then a still small voice, and this 
voice, when Elijah heard it, he recognized as being 
the Lord, and in humility and fear he covered his 
face. 

"NOT BY MIGHT NOR BY POWER, BUT BY MY SPIRIT. 

The antitypical Elijah, the saints, as they look 
about them and see the world in general in idolatry, 
and even the Lord's professed people largely given up 

R3414 : page 249 

to the worship of fashion and the idolatry of wealth 

and fame, are very apt to feel discouraged— to feel as 

Elijah did, that they are quite alone. They are very 

apt to wonder why God seems so indifferent to the 

matter which so greatly concerns them. Why does 

he not overthrow all the altars of Baal? Why does 

he not overthrow Mammon? Why does he not bring 

in by his supreme power the great Kingdom of righteousness, 

which he has taught us as his people to expect? 

Why should we be more jealous for the Lord 

than he seems to be for his own name and cause? 

We need a lesson such as Elijah got, and we are getting 

that lesson. 

We are learning that while God could have spoken 
to the world with force and power, as represented 
by the wind and earthquake and the fire, yet all of 
these would not have expressed to the world the Lord's 
real character. To know the Lord they must be permitted 
to hear the still small voice— the voice of truth, 
the voice of love, the voice of wisdom. Moreover, 
we see that the Lord is about to bring upon the world 
of mankind just such experiences as might be symbolized 
by these matters displayed to Elijah. The strong 
winds of war are to be let loose upon the world— indeed 
quite probably they are already being let loose. 
The effect will be the rending and tearing of earth, 
society, the nations. Then will follow a great earthquake, 
symbolical— a revolution— referred to in Revelation 
as so mighty an earthquake as had never before 
been known amongst men. (Rev. 16:18.) It will 
be a revolution which will affect all the governments 
of the world, socially, politically, financially and 
ecclesiastically. Following this will come the fire- 
symbolical fire that will symbolically consume the 
earth, consume society. "The elements [society] 
shall melt with fervent heat, the earth [society] also 
and the works that are therein shall be burned up." 
Such is the symbolical description given by the Apostle 
Peter. 

The same symbol of fire is used by the Prophet 
Zephaniah and is located at the end of this age in the 
words, "Wait ye upon me, saith the Lord, until the 
day that I rise up to the prey; for my determination 



is to gather the nations, that I may assemble the 
kingdoms, that I may pour upon them my indignation, 
even my fierce anger: for the earth shall be 
devoured with the fire of my jealousy." The very 
next sentence shows us that the fire of God's jealousy 
is a symbolical fire, and other Scriptures show us that 
it is anarchy that is thus figuratively brought to our 
attention; for it is to be followed by a time of blessing 
as the Prophet says, "Then [following the fire 
—the anarchy] will I turn unto the people a pure 
language, and they shall all call upon the name of the 
Lord, to serve him with one consent."— Zeph. 3:9. 
This "pure language" or pure message of God's 
Word, which the Prophet shows as following the fire 
of anarchy, is the still small voice of our lesson. Elijah 
recognized this to be the power of God for bringing 
blessings and fulfilling his promises to the seed of 
Abraham, and through it to all the families of the 
earth in due time. And so the Lord's people today, 
as the antitypical Elijah class, are learning that God 
will do his great work through the still small voice of 
the Truth in due time, and that the due time for it 
will not be until the storm, the earthquake and the 
fire shall have passed. "When the judgments of the 
Lord are abroad in the earth, the inhabitants of the 
world will learn righteousness."— Isa. 26:9. 

"BE STILL AND KNOW THAT I AM GOD." 

These same thoughts are brought to our attention 
in the 46th Psalm, in which the Lord, through 
the Prophet David, sets forth a picture of the time of 
trouble which belongs to the day of the Lord into 
which we have already entered— the day of trouble 
which will prepare the world for the great day of 
blessing, the Millennial day. In this Psalm the Lord 
represents the earth being moved, the mountains being 
carried to the midst of the sea, its waters roaring, 
its mountains shaking, etc. These things picture the 
commotions that are about to take place in the social, 
political and religious systems of the world. The 
Lord's people, the Elijah class, are represented in the 
Psalm as not fearing these things, because they constitute 
the Lord's holy city or holy Kingdom. Then 
in verses 6 to 10 the Lord gives an interpretation of 
the shaking and melting mountains, etc., as signifying 
the raging of the people, anarchy, the unsettling 
of the kingdoms, the melting or disintegration of society. 
As a result there will be great desolations in 
the earth: as another result all wars are to cease unto 
the ends of the earth, and then (vs. 10) comes the 
message which will be enforced throughout the Millennial 
age, "Be still and know that I am God: I 
will be exalted among the nations, I will be exalted 
in the earth." 

This command, Be still, corresponds to the still 



small voice which Elijah heard— to what we as the 
an ti typical Elijah are now hearing from the Word of 
God, namely, that not by earthly might nor by earthly 
power will the Lord establish his rule, but that in the 
coming time his King shall reign in Zion and execute 
judgments in the earth, rewarding the righteous and 
punishing the evil doer, with the result that all shall 
come to a knowledge of the Lord from the least to the 
greatest; that the knowledge of the Lord shall fill 
the whole earth as the waters cover the sea; and with 
the further result that the Spirit of the Lord shall be 

R3415 : page 250 

poured upon all flesh, as the mouth of the Lord has 
promised. This is the glorious message which the 
Prophet declares results from the great atonement 
sacrifice made by our Lord; his statement is that 
the Lord gave himself a ransom for all— "to be testified 
in due time."— I Tim. 2:6. 

After Elijah learned this lesson respecting the 
Lord's methods of bringing about the blessing, he was 
quite ready to follow the divine direction and to return 
to the land of Israel to make ready for (1) his own 
departure; (2) to appoint Elisha his successor as 
prophet and to instruct him for the service; (3) to 
outline the changes soon to come in the governments 
of Israel and Syria. He was further consoled and 
doubtless surprised by the Lord's declaration that he 
had yet 7,000 in Israel who had not bowed the knee 
to Baal nor kissed the image— which was the custom. 
Similarly the Elijah class has been encouraged of the 
Lord by an unfolding of the divine Word, that the 
blessings and reformation of the world will all come 
about in God's due time and manner— through the 
establishment of the Millennial Kingdom. Similarly 
the Elijah class has come to understand that there is 
an important work yet to be accomplished by it in the 
world: that there are thousands in the nominal systems 
who are not in sympathy with the errors there 
taught, who are merely confused and blinded by the 
misrepresentation of the divine character. 

"BE OF GOOD COURAGE." 

Elijah returned to the land of Israel, and apparently 
paid no attention whatever thereafter to Jezebel 
and her threats, but prosecuted a work of arousing 
true faith in the true God and obedience to his Law. 
He not only called Elisha, as directed of the Lord, 
but following out further directions or the spirit of 
the directions, he re-established what were called 
"schools of the prophets"— gatherings of young men 
desirous of studying the Law and appreciating the 
divine will. Thus we see that the awakening at 
Mount Carmel, witnessed by the heads of all the ten 



tribes of Israel, bore its fruit— that idolatry was at a 
discount thereafter, that Jezebel and Ahab evidently 
did not have it in their power to oppose or destroy 
these schools of the prophets, and, in general, the 
reformation work which Elijah was prosecuting. 
He is supposed to have continued this reformation 
work for some ten years or more after his return from 
Mount Sinai before he was taken up in the 
whirlwind. 

The Golden Text of the lesson fits well to the 
antitypical Elijah class. These should realize that 
one with the Lord is a majority, and should not fear 
the words nor the deeds of humanity so long as they 
can realize themselves the Lord's servants, cooperating, 
serving, active in the line of his direction. The 
message to these is, "Fear not their fear, nor be 
afraid;" "Let not your hearts be troubled; ye believe 
in God, believe also in Christ"— the Head of the 
body— and trust to his guidance and overruling according 
to his promise, which assures us that all 
things shall work together for good to them that 
love him. Why should we fear? What should we 
fear? "If God be for us who can prevail against us?" 
True, evil doers do seem to prevail at times— do 
really prevail against us— as, for instance, the Jewish 
Sanhedrin prevailed against our Lord to his crucifixion; 
but such prevailing is only seemingly against 
us. In reality, as the Apostle declares, it is working 
out for us a far more exceeding and eternal weight 
of glory. We are to view matters from this standpoint, 
and to rejoice in whatever tribulation divine 
wisdom may see fit to permit to come against us, 
anxious only that our union and relationship with 
the Lord may be maintained. 



R3415 : page 250 

THE HARVEST AND GENTILE TIMES. 

QUESTION.-If the "Times of the Gentiles" 

can be changed as suggested in the July 

TOWER, so that the anarchy will follow 

1914 A.D., instead of preceding it, might not similar 

changes be made in respect to all the various lines of 

prophetic time-proof set forth in MILLENNIAL DAWN, 

Vols. II. and III? 

Answer.— You are entirely in error. Not a 
figure, not a date, not a prophecy is in any sense or 
degree affected by the article to which you refer. Indeed 
the harmony and unity of the whole is the more 
fully demonstrated. Read again the article you refer 
to, "Universal Anarchy, etc." (July 1 issue), and 
you surely will see this. If it is not apparent to you 
upon a further study let us know the particular point 



of your difficulty and we will endeavor to make it 
plain. 

The harmony of the prophetic periods is one of 
the strongest proofs of the correctness of our Bible 
chronology. They fit together like the cog-wheels of 
a perfect machine. To change the chronology even 
one year would destroy all this harmony,— so accurately 
are the various proofs drawn together in the 
parallels between the Jewish and Gospel ages. It 
would affect the ending of the Jubilee Cycles, the 1335 
days, the 2300 days and the Times of the Gentiles, 
throwing out of gear all the wonderful harmonies of 
these in the "Parallel Dispensations." 

R3415 : page 251 

We commend to you a fresh and careful study of 
the presentations of DAWNS, Vols. II. and III., on 
these points. Evidently the time features of Present 
Truth all stand or all fall together, and we see no 
weakness or signs of their falling: on the contrary 
everything throughout the world is confirmatory of 
them. 

And while it is true that the great mass of Present 
Truth is in many respects entirely independent of 
our "times and seasons," nevertheless they are so related 
that the latter are almost necessary to explain 
the former. For instance, without recognizing that 
we are now living in the "harvest" of the Gospel 
Age and in the parousia of the Son of Man, how 
could we account for our great increase in knowledge 
respecting the various features of the divine plan? 

The easiest and best explanation of the "feast" 
now spread before us as the Lord's "household of 
faith" (indeed the only reasonable one) is that the 
Lord is now fulfilling his promise recorded in Luke 12:37: 
"Blessed are those servants, whom the Lord 
when he cometh shall find watching: verily I say 
unto you, that he shall gird himself [as their servant] 
and make them to sit down to meat, and will come 
forth and serve them." While these "things new and 
old" are handed from one servant to another and to 
the entire household, can any of us doubt that the 
Master himself is dispensing the delicious viands 
which so refresh us? 

And if this be so it is a proof that we are in the 
"harvest" or end of this age just as surely as similar 
blessings marked the "harvest" of the Jewish age. 
And the times when these blessings have reached us 
corroborate the prophetic testimonies respecting when 
the harvest began (Oct., 1874 A.D.) and when it will 
end (Oct., 1914 A.D.), a period of 40 years, just as 
was the Jewish harvest. Unlike error, these things 
stand investigation and the more searching the investigation 
the more satisfactory will the results be, we believe, 
to those who are in the right attitude of heart 



—to those who seek not to cavil, but to know the 
mind of the Lord. To the "Israelites indeed" it is 
now "given to know" these things which are still 
mysteries to the world. Only "the pure in heart," 
the thoroughly sincere, the honest, are in the position 
to have the "ear to hear" this "knock" of the 
heavenly One (Rev. 3:20); only those who have the 
eyes of their understanding opened can discern the 
presence of our King; only those who hunger and 
thirst for the Truth can properly relish things new 
and old, now so bountifully provided. These privileges 
are now restricted to the "meek and lowly of 
heart," and these conditions must be maintained or 
else this special hearing, sight and taste will be lost. 
Such loss in the Scriptures is styled "outer darkness" 
—the darkness and confusion in which we see 
the whole world now to be; but from which, thank 
God, there will be a rescue "in the morning"— when 
the Sun of Righteousness shall shine clearly forth, 
turning the outer-darkness into outer-light. But for 
such, meantime, there is necessarily a great "shaking" 
and "horror of great darkness" and trouble. 



R3415 : page 251 

ELIJAH TAKEN IN A WHIRLWIND. 

-2 KINGS 2:1-11. -SEPT. 11.- 

Golden Text:— "He was not, 
for God took him."— Gen. 5:24. 

THE words, "When the Lord would take up Elijah," 
suggest that Elijah had a specially protected 
life— that it was not subject to the power 
of his enemies— that he was wholly under divine control. 
And this is true also of the an ti typical Elijah 
class of this Gospel age. It was true, we remember, 
of the great Head of this class, Jesus in the flesh. 
The scribes and Pharisees made many attempts at his 
life before the successful one, but could not harm him 
previously because "his hour was not yet come." So 
with every member of his body in the flesh, every 
member of the Elijah class— not even a hair of their 
heads could fall without divine notice and permission. 
These are not to esteem that any of their affairs are 
accidental, for being fully consecrated to the Lord 
and fully accepted by him, all of their affairs, great 
and small, are under divine supervision— their health 
or sickness, their rights or privileges, their joys or 
sorrows. 

We are not in this wishing to intimate fatalism, 
but rather a divine supervision. If trials and disciplines 
and corrections, either of poverty or sorrow or 



ill health, be necessary for the correction of these they 
will surely have them; and some or all of these may 

R3416 : page 251 

come to them even though not as chastisements, but 
as lessons of experience necessary for their development 
for places in the Kingdom or for their usefulness 
in the Lord's service in the present time— as was 
the case with our Lord. Those who are of the Elijah 
class, fully consecrated to the Lord, will be glad to 
have this divine supervision of their affairs and will 
rejoice in it. This, however, would not mean that 
they may not and should not do whatever would appeal 
to them as being wise and reasonable for the 
maintenance of their health or its recovery, for the 
satisfying of their hunger or thirst, or for the betterment 
of their temporal interests. But while using 
what to them may appear to be reasonable means, 

R3416 : page 252 

they will consider that these also are all in the hands 

of the Lord, and, if successful, that they are his provision, 

to be accepted with thankfulness; while, if unsuccessful, 

they will be willing to accept the results 

without murmuring— with full assurance of faith that 

God is able to make all things work together for their 

good. 

AT THE SCHOOLS OF THE PROPHETS. 

Elijah and Elisha were at Gilgal, one of the cities 
at which was located a "school of the prophets," 
where piously inclined young men sought instruction 
respecting the divine Law under the supervision of 
those who were recognized as prophets, and with a 
view to become doctors or expounders of the Law of 
God in the various cities in which they lived. Elijah 
and Elisha had been at this place for some time, and 
now Elijah proposed a journey, suggesting that Elisha 
go not with him. The latter, however, would 
not forsake the older prophet, whom he styled 
his master, and toward whom he performed the duties 
of a body-servant. So they went together to Bethel, 
at which was located another "school of the prophets." 
We are not told how long was the stay at Bethel, nor 
what the prophets did or said at the school, but we do 
know that the pupils, known as the sons of the prophets, 
came privately to Elisha and in confidential whispers 
asked him if he was aware that the Lord was 
about to take from him his master Elijah. 

Elisha's answer was that he did know it, but did 
not wish to discuss the matter. Evidently he was 
filled with sorrow at the thought of the loss he was 
about to sustain, for everything indicates that 



during the ten years or more that he had been 
Elijah's servant and co-laborer in the prophetic office, 
a deep personal attachment had sprang up between 
the two men, who in some respects were very dissimilar. 
Again Elijah suggested that Elisha should tarry 
while he would go on to the city of Jericho; but again, 
with strong vociferations of his earnestness, Elisha 
declined to leave his master. When they arrived at 
Jericho Elisha had a similar experience, the sons of 
the prophets again asking him whether or not he had 
heard of the Lord's intention to take up the prophet, 
and again he refused to discuss the matter. For the 
third time Elijah suggested to him that he tarry while 
he would go farther under the Lord's direction, not 
to a city but to the river Jordan, but Elisha would 
not tarry and they went on. 

These visits to the schools of the prophets before 
Elijah was taken away doubtless had a beneficial 
effect upon these students of the Lord's Word, who well 
knew the aged prophet and his allegiance to God and 
God's power manifested through him. This last visit 
would be impressed upon their minds and go with 
them to the various cities of Israel in due time. Meanwhile 
the revelation which had been made to them, 
that God intended to take Elijah by a whirlwind, 
would prepare them for this final miracle and attestation 
of him as a servant of the Almighty. Apparently 
the prophets of this last school, fifty in number, while 
modestly refraining from following with Elijah and 
Elisha, nevertheless were deeply interested in the 
event they knew was about to take place. They went 
to a prominent point near Jericho, high above the 
river Jordan and overlooking it, and there witnessed 
what transpired. In the distance they beheld Elijah 
take off his mantle and roll it into the form of a club, 
and therewith smite the waters of the river Jordan, 
dividing them so that the two passed over as the Israelites 
had previously done by the miracle which the 
Lord wrought through Joshua at very nearly the 
same point. On the prophets went, up the steep hillside 
beyond Jordan— quite possible Mount Nebo, 
where Moses died.-Deut. 32:49,50. 

HARVEST SITTINGS TYPIFIED. 

There has been considerable speculation respecting 
this account of the three times and places at which 
Elijah invited Elisha to part company with him: 
that Elijah was too modest to desire many witnesses 
of the final manifestation of God's favor toward him, 
or that he wished to spare Elisha the sadness of the 
later parting; but these suggestions are not satisfactory 
to us. To our mind these were a feature of 
the type whose antitype must be expected in this 
present time. As Elijah represented the consecrated 
ones who will as overcomers constitute the 



body of Christ and become participants with our Lord 
in the glories of the Kingdom in the first resurrection, 
so apparently Elisha would represent a consecrated 
class of this time, in some respects inferior. These 
will have an acquaintance with the Elijah class, will 
minister to them in various ways, yet not be identified 
with them as members of the same death-devoted 
company. 

In harmony with this illustration or type we shall 
expect that, as the present age draws to its close 
and the Elijah class passes away entirely, there will 
come various sittings or testings to this class of 
inferior consecration to separate them from the company 
and fellowship of the Elijah class. Whoever 
will fall away in this sifting will cease to belong to 
the Elisha class. Those who endure the sittings and 
testings will thus maintain their position in the Elisha 
class, and some will thus continue according to the type 
down to the very close of Elisha's experience, and 
will then in consequence of this faithfulness receive a 
great blessing— a double portion of the Elijah spirit. 

As the two prophets went on Elijah said to Elisha, 

R3416 : page 252 

Make request what I shall give thee, as I go from 
thee shortly. Elisha's request for a double portion 
of the spirit of Elijah is not to be understood as meaning 
twice as much of God's power as Elijah possessed, 
for this would have constituted Elisha a prophet of 
double the power of Elijah. Besides, how unreasonable 
a request would it have been for him to make- 
that Elijah should give more than he himself possessed. 
We must understand him, therefore, to mean 
that if Elijah's spirit or power would in any wise be 
remaining with any prophets in the earth who would 
represent the Lord, that Elisha desired that he might 
have twice as much as any other one— not selfishly, 
we may assume, but that he appreciated Elijah's disposition 
and position as a servant of God, and desired 
that as far as possible he might enter into a similar 
work of service. His request was granted conditionally, 
but he was told that it would be dependent upon 
his own watchfulness. 

The lesson which we draw from this request of 
Elisha and the conditions of its fulfilment is that the 
consecrated class whom he represents in the end of 
this age will need to be on the alert if they would discern 
the passing away of the Elijah class, and that 
only in proportion as they do discern the completion 
of the Elijah class and its passing into glory will they 
become the recipients of a proportionately large measure 
of the spirit and zeal of the Elijah class. From 
the Scriptures we get the thought that after the Elijah 
class shall have been completed, tested, proven 
and glorified, there will still remain a period of time 



before the full ending of the "present evil world" or 
dispensation— before the full inauguration of the Millennial 
glories. During that period the class which 
we believe Elisha represented— namely, a consecrated 
class, but lacking in some measure the full spirit of 
devotion exhibited by the Elijah class— will be quickened 
and energised by the change of dispensation and 
the evidences of the fulfilling of the divine plan, so 
that thereafter they will be practically as devoted and 
self-sacrificing and zealous every way as the Elijah 
class had been. 

The receiving by Elisha of power from the departed 
Elijah seems to correspond in considerable 
measure to the "foolish virgins" getting their oil and 
being able to trim their lamps after the "wise virgins" 
have gone in to the wedding and the door is shut. 
As the foolish virgins were not evil but good— "virgins" 
—so Elisha was not an evil man but a good man 
and a prophet: as the foolish virgins lacked something 
that the wise virgins possessed, so Elisha lacked 
something of what Elijah possessed, and that lack, 
which was supplied to the foolish virgins in the oil, is 
represented in Elisha's case in the mantle and blessing. 

As the Parable of the Virgins does not go on to 
show what happened to the foolish virgins except that 
they failed to enter into the marriage because the door 
was shut, so the Elisha picture merely shows that Elisha 
did not accompany Elijah, but on receiving his benediction 
and power he continued for a while the work 
that Elijah had been doing. So it is our thought 
that during the great time of trouble there will be a 
consecrated class who had not a sufficiency of zeal in 
self-sacrifice to be counted of the Lord as members of 
the Elijah class or body of Christ, who nevertheless 
will experience a great time of refreshing and become 
thoroughly devoted after they realize that the Church 
has been glorified— after they begin to see also the 
fulfilment of various Scriptures respecting Babylon. 
This class, whom we understand to be represented in 
the Scriptures as the "great company," whose number 
no man knows, who wash their robes and make 
them white in the blood of the Lamb, and eventually 
come up to spirit conditions, though not to be of the 
Royal Priesthood in the throne (Rev. 7:9-17)— 
these are represented as recognizing by and by that 
the little flock, the Bride class, the Elijah class, have 

R3417 : page 253 

passed beyond the vail and they are shown to rejoice 
accordingly, saying, "Let us be glad and rejoice and 
give glory to God, for the marriage of the Lamb is 
come and his wife hath made herself ready!" This 
class in turn, though not worthy to be the Bride, the 
wife, is invited to participate in the great marriage 
feast which is to take place shortly after the glorification 



of the Church.-Rev. 19:7-9. 

ELISHA, IF A TYPE, A DOUBLE ONE. 

We might here remark that although we are treating 
Elisha as a part of the type as well as Elijah, yet 
there is nothing in the Scriptures that positively intimates 
that this is the case— it is a mere inference. 
In Elijah's case, as we have already pointed out in a 
previous lesson, there is no doubt; beyond peradventure 
Elijah was a type of the elect Church in the flesh. 
But if Elisha was a type, we believe that we are justified 
in considering him a type of two classes. First, 
of the class already suggested, who are with the Elijah 
class and who maintain relationship to the close 
of Elijah's period and who then become partakers of 
his spirit. And this type would seem to extend as far 
as Elisha's re-crossing the Jordan, smiting it with the 
mantle of Elijah. If the crossing of Jordan into the 
land of Canaan be taken to represent death, then the 
picture should be read as indicating that this "great 
company" will all pass through death, which is just 
what the Scriptures elsewhere seem clearly to show- 
that in order to be on the spirit plane at all it will be 
necessary for them to "all die as men." 

In this view of the matter we assume that Elisha, 

R3417 : page 254 

after crossing the Jordan and entering Canaan, would 
represent another, a different class, namely, the earthly 
phase of the Kingdom— Abraham, Isaac and Jacob 
and all the prophets, the beginning of the restitution 
class. Elisha's work after crossing Jordan was restitution 
work in many respects, and in this particular 
would well correspond to what we may expect of the 
earthly phase of the Kingdom after its establishment 
—after the great time of trouble. But again we remind 
the reader that the typical character of Elisha is 
not beyond question, as it is nowhere affirmed in the 
Scriptures, but merely inferred by us because of his 
association with Elijah. 

CHARIOTS OF FIRE AND HORSES OF FIRE. 

The record is that Elijah and Elisha were separated 
by chariots of fire, but that Elijah was taken up 
not by these but by a whirlwind into heaven (margin). 
We might draw different inferences from this, but feel 
safer to adhere closely to the wording of the text. 
The fiery chariots and horses we infer to be a part of 
the type, and shall not be at all surprised to find the 
fulfilment in severe persecutions which will come 
upon the last members of the Elijah class— persecutions 
unto death possibly. If this be the correct interpretation 
of the type there would be a special significance 



attaching to Elisha's seeing the departure of 

Elijah. It would seem to signify close personal friendship 

and loyalty between them down to the very close, 

and that the effect of these fiery trials would be to 

energize those who had previously been less energetic 

in the carrying out of their consecration. 

The whirlwind in the type should be interpreted, 
in harmony with general Scripture usage, as signifying 
a fierce trouble— a trouble, too, which would agitate the 
heavens or ecclesiastical powers as an earthquake 
would represent disturbances of the social conditions. 
Thus read in advance of the fulfilment 
the type seems to imply that the end of the 
Elijah class will occur amidst great ecclesiastical commotions, 
accompanied by fiery trials— thus we think 
probably the change will come to the last members 
of the elect "body." 

"HE WAS NOT, FOR GOD TOOK HIM." 

Our Golden Text relates to Enoch, but is not 
inappropriately applied by the Lesson Committee to 
Elijah, for what was true of one was apparently true 
of the other also. Enoch, the faithful prophet of old, 
whose only prophecy recorded is his announcement 
of the second coming of the Lord to execute righteousness 
in the earth and to convince the gainsayers 
(Jude 14,15), suddenly disappeared from amongst 
men, and the inspired record is that he was not found 
because God had taken him; and so likewise Elijah, 
having served his mission, disappeared from amongst 
men for God took him. True, the sons of the prophets 
suggested to Elisha afterward that perhaps the 
Spirit of the Lord, which had taken him up, would 
drop him down to some other portion of the world, 
but there is nothing to confirm such a supposition. 
"He was not found, for God took him." 

The question arises, Where did God take these 
two prophets of old? and there is no answer to the 
question. True, in Elijah's case it is stated that the 
whirlwind took him up into heaven, but the word heaven 
here is used to represent the sky, the circumambient 
air, and has no reference whatever to the heaven which 
is God's dwelling place. That neither of these prophets 
went to the latter place we have the very best evidence 
in our Lord's words, "No man has ascended 
into heaven save he which came down from heaven, 
even the Son of man."— John 3:13. 

We can only conjecture respecting these two 
prophets, and our conjecture is that they were not 
only taken away in order that their disappearance 
from the earth might be typical, but that possibly the 
Lord has taken them to some other suitable habitation, 
perhaps some other world, that in due time he might 
bring them back to earth and possibly thereby impress 
upon mankind some lessons which could not otherwise 



be so forcefully taught. For instance, he 
might thereby give the lesson of his abundant ability 
to fulfil any and every promise ever made to mankind. 
We have no thought, however, that Elijah has ever 
yet returned to this earth— we have no thought that 
he was present on the Mount of Transfiguration with 
the Lord and the apostles as already shown; we accept 
the Lord's testimony respecting the spectacle on 
the Mount— that it was a vision merely.— See our 
issue of April 1, 1904. 

"DEATH PASSED UPON ALL MEN." 

Some may be inclined to argue that Enoch and 
Elijah must have died, because the penalty of death 
was against them as well as against all the other members 
of our race, and because the Apostle reiterates 
this penalty, saying, "By one man's disobedience sin 
entered the world and death by sin, and so death 
passed upon all for all are sinners." (Rom. 5:12.) 
We reply that nothing in our view, in our judgment, 
is in discord with this sentiment of the Apostle. The 
death sentence passed against Enoch and against 
Elijah as well as against the remainder of Adam's 
children, and wherever they are they must still be 
under that death sentence; they cannot be released 
from it until the full close of the antitypical atonement 
day— which will close synchronously with this 
Gospel age, which is its antitype. Wherever these 
two venerable prophets may be they are not perfected 

R3417 : page 255 

because, as the Apostle points out (Heb. 1 1:38,40), 
God has provided for us— the Gospel Church, the 
body of Christ,— some better thing than he provided 
for any of the ancient worthies, and they without us 
shall not be made perfect. We are confident, therefore, 
that Enoch and Elijah, wherever they may be, 
are not yet made perfect— they have not yet escaped 
from the bondage of corruption. They are still under 
the sentence of death and will be until that "curse" 
shall be lifted in the dawn of the new dispensation. 

From the divine standpoint every one is dead 
who is either under the sentence or whose life to any 
extent has been impaired as a result of the curse. 
The whole world in this sense of the word is dead, 
and Enoch or Elijah can only be thought of or spoken 
of as alive from the standpoint of faith, even as we 
speak of ourselves who are accepted of the Lord as 
members of the body of Christ and as having passed 
from death unto life— namely, by faith, by hope. As 
we speak of ourselves and each other as alive toward 
God through faith in Christ, so we may speak of 
Enoch and Elijah as alive through the merit of the 
great sacrifice at Calvary, of which they shall partake 



actually in due time, becoming actually alive and being 
made actually perfect. 

"CHANGED IN A MOMENT, IN THE TWINKLING OF AN 
EYE." 

As for the change of the Church, the Elijah class 
in the flesh— precursors or forerunners thus of the 
anointed body in the Spirit— the change of these members 
at this time the Scriptures clearly indicate to be 
one which the world will not recognize. As the 
Scriptures declare, although we are sons of God, sons 
of the Highest, nevertheless we must die like men— 
we must go down like the great Prince, Jesus, into 
death, and must be raised to the newness of life, to 
spirit conditions, to the divine nature. The Apostle 
assures us that those living in the end of this age, 
during the parousia of the Son of man, will not need 
to sleep— to tarry in the death condition— for the moment 
of their death will be the moment of their change 
to glory, honor and immortality, the divine nature. 



R3417 : page 255 

JUSTIFIED AND CALLED. 

QUESTION.— Can any one be justified and yet 
not be called? or are all the justified ones 
called? 

Answer.— It is possible for one to be justified and 
yet not be called. All justified persons are not called. 

Abraham and others of the past were "justified 
by faith," but living before the ransom was given, before 
the Captain had been perfected, before the Gospel 
age "call" began, before the new and living way 
(or new way of life) had been opened up, those grand 

R3418 : page 255 

ancient worthies were not called to be members of the 
Bride class. 

"Justification by faith" throughout this Gospel 
age is merely the first step in the ways of the Lord, 
now opened to whosoever hath an ear to hear. The 
second step is consecration, a full surrender of our all 
to the Lord. We may safely conclude that all who 
took the first step were welcome to take the second 
one, and that it would appear the "reasonable service" 
to all sincere ones who properly appreciated God's 
mercy in forgiving their sins. Those not thus influenced 
usually found their faith grow as cold and lifeless 
as their love, and thus losing their faith were without 
justification again— part of the unjustified world. 

Whoever of the justified were of the right spirit 



and made consecration of their all during the period of 
the call, were of the "called ones" mentioned by the 
Apostle and urged to make their calling and election 
sure by obedience to their covenant. This same class 
now, since the end of the "call," are not thus called, 
but are in a waiting attitude. Knowing from the 
Scriptures that "many are called but few chosen," 
they are waiting for an opportunity to take places 
amongst the "called" as substitutes for some not found 
worthy. 

It would not be unreasonable to suppose that 
there are hundreds in just such a waiting condition, 
although the present-day preaching is not very favorable 
to either justification or consecration: justification 
through faith in the ransom-sacrifice of Jesus, 
the only kind, is little understood or taught. 

On the other hand there are doubtless thousands 
in all the denominations of Christendom who have 
taken both steps (justification and consecration) who 
are overcharged with cares of this life and whose periods 
of opportunity gradually expiring leave places for 
those who seek and pray and hunger to enter into the 
favor of the "called" class. We have no positive 
means of knowing who are thus accepted as substitutes, 
but we think it reasonable to consider three 
conditions as indicative of such acceptance. (1) A 
growth in the fruits of the spirit. (2) Activity in 
serving the Truth to the extent of talents and opportunities. 
(3) An ability to grasp prominent features 
of the Truth with considerable clearness. 

The question then arises, What about justified 
believers who have consecrated and who may never 
find a chance as substitutes? We incline to consider 
these to be few,— that the Lord will give the hearing 
ear to comparatively few except as there may be an 
opening for them. However, if any of said class do 
fail of an opportunity to become substitutes we would 
be sure that divine love and care would be over them 
just as surely, and that failing a place in the elect 
Church through no fault of theirs, these would be 
given some good portion which would much more 
than reward and satisfy them. 



page 257 

SEMI-MONTHLY. 
VOL. XXV. SEPTEMBER 1, 1904. No. 17. 



CONTENTS. 

Views from the Watch Tower 259 

Bishop Potter and the Saloon 259 

Danger from Higher Criticism 260 

Leaguing Against Higher Critics 260 

Politics in Religion 261 

"Oppositions of Science Falsely 

So-Called" 261 

A Doctor's Examination of Christian 

Science 266 

"Seek the Lord and Ye Shall Live" 267 

Quarterly Review 270 

Interesting Letters 270 

page 258 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-24 EVERSHOLT ST., LONDON, N.W. 
GERMAN BRANCH-MIRKER STR., 45, ELBERFELD. 
AUSTRALIAN BRANCH-32 JOHNSTON ST., FITZROY, MELBOURNE. 

PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE, 5c (2-l/2d.) A COPY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity 
or adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER, will be supplied FREE, if 
they send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting 
the paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our 
list continually. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



THIS JOURNAL IS PUBLISHED IN THE 

FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, DANISH AND ITALIAN LANGUAGES. 

SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



FOR RAILWAY INFORMATION, RATES, TICKETS, ETC. 
CONCERNING BOSTON CONVENTION, SEE OUR 
LAST ISSUE. 



INTAGLIO SCRIPTURE TEXT CARDS, ETC. 



This year we determined to lay in a large stock of the 
newest motto and text cards earlier than usual. Four 
large orders have already come to hand and the fifth is 
en route. Some of the older styles cannot be surpassed 
and these we have re-ordered; but the line of new styles 
of new texts this year is so large that we can send you all 
new ones, if you so request when ordering. Our facilities for 
importing these from London (their principal market) is 
unsurpassed, and our prices are about one-half those usually 
charged; namely, from lc to 25c each— according to size, 
etc. For your convenience we will put these up in packages 
assorted for $1.00 and $2.00, including postage;— 
from 15c downward in the $1.00 packages and from 25c 
down in the $2.00 packages. We will also make up some 
packages containing mottoes at 10c and downward, for 
50c, including postage. 

These beautiful cards should be in all the rooms of all 
of our homes. The help, comfort and rest thus brought 
to our hearts continually from the Master's Word are of 
inestimable value as aids and stimulants in the "narrow 
way" we seek to walk. The texts are admirably selected 
—about one-half of them for the consecrated, some suitable 
to any one, and a few suggestive of the Lord's willingness 
to bless all who, hearing his voice, come unto him. 
Some are on dark cards stamped in silver, others on light 
cards in colors. All are very tasteful,— fit for any wall. 

SCRIPTURE STUDIES IN LEATHER BINDING. 



Many of the friends desire copies of "The Divine Plan 
of the Ages" (Vol. I.) for holiday presentations, so we give 
timely notice that we are now preparing a special leather-bound 
edition, with gilt edges, under the general title, 
"Studies in the Scriptures" instead of "Millennial Dawn." 
These will be ready November 1st and will cost WATCH 
TOWER subscribers 65 cents each, including postage,— to 
any address. 



R3419 : page 258 

POLISH TRACTS can now be supplied to all who have 
special opportunities for using them. They are published 



by our Society, although our name and address does not 
appear on them, because of prejudice of Catholics against 
everything like Bible Societies. 



ITALIAN DAWN, VOL. I., and sample TOWERS have now 
arrived. Send us your orders. 



GERMAN AND SWEDISH TOWERS can now be supplied 
regularly. 



R3418 : page 259 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 
BISHOP POTTER AND THE SALOON. 



BISHOP POTTER, of the Episcopal Diocese of 

New York, has created quite a commotion 

in all circles by giving his sanction to a newly-opened 

"tavern" in New York City. The saloon and 

cafe are described as having fine appointments: in one 

end is a soda fountain at which beer is sold for the 

accommodation especially of ladies, who are not admitted 

to the saloon proper, at the bar of which 

liquors of all kinds are dispensed with free lunch at 

noon. Of the enterprise, the New York Sun, after 

recounting Bishop Potter's address and his leading in 

the singing of the doxology to the tune of "Old 

Hundred," says: "The idea of the tavern originated 

in the mind of Joseph Johnson, Jr., the Great Oak of 

the Order of Acorns. Mr. Johnson has always believed 

that rum is a curse, but he holds that the evils 

of intemperance must be combated by practical men 

and not theorists. If there must be saloons he wants 

them to be as ethical as possible. So he organized the 

Subway Tavern Company with a capital of $10,000— 

subscribed by prominent men whose names are given. 

The managers of the company have decided that not 

more than five per cent, shall be paid as dividends on 

the stock, whatever the profits may be; the surplus 

is to be used in starting other similar taverns." 

We have no doubt that the gentlemen connected 
with this innovation have benevolent intentions: 
Their thought evidently is to fight fire with fire; to 
fight the doggerel saloon with a better one, to furnish 
purer liquors and better surroundings. We believe 
that they are making a great mistake. Nevertheless, 
the affair shows the extremity to which well-intentioned 



people are driven by present conditions, that 
the Apostle calls "the present distress." How evident 
to the instructed Christian that the one thing 
needful is the establishment of the Kingdom of God, 
for which we pray, "Thy Kingdom come, thy will 
be done on earth as it is done in heaven." Nothing 
short of this heavenly power can cope with the present 
downward tendencies that afflict the whole human 
family, the "groaning creation." 

These gentlemen in New York City are copying 
a plan adopted a few years ago in Great Britain by 
some of the Episcopal clergy there. These established 
taverns where liquors of all kinds were obtainable, as 
well as "soft drinks," the latter being given the preference 
in that the bartender is paid a commission on 
the soft drinks, making nothing on the intoxicating 
liquors. The effect has been good in Great Britain, 
it is claimed. Nevertheless we have no such expectations 
in respect to the introduction of this system into 
this country. Conditions here are totally different. 
Here the majority are opposed to liquor drinking, and 
the business and all things associated with it are more 
or less tabooed, and thus many are protected from the 
degrading influences. We fear that the tendency will 
be to break down this barrier and to make drinking 
more general and more fashionable, and thus to increase 
the evil effects of this most terribly degrading 
practice. 

Bishop Potter's course has brought upon him 
very severe criticism from many quarters: yet it will 
make him popular with a certain very respectable 
class. The chief difficulty seems to lie in the fact 
that the true Church is not understood and its rules 
do not fit when applied to the world and its wisdom. 
Recognizing the Church as the "little flock" of 
"saints" fully consecrated to the Lord, we do not 
suppose for one moment that Bishop Potter would 
claim to be a member of it nor to be bound by its precepts 
and ideals. But many others, who take the same 
unsanctified stand, and who patronize saloons of the 

R3418 : page 260 

worst class, are chiding the Bishop, rebuking him, 
because they think of him as one of the "saints," 
and perceive that his course is not up to the ideals of 
the New Testament for such. 

The sooner the world realizes the truth on this 
subject the better it will be for all concerned: that 
fully ninety-nine per cent, of the nominal Church 
(preachers included) are merely well-intentioned 
worldlings, who have never consecrated their wills, 
never been begotten of the Spirit and have not, therefore, 
"the mind [Spirit] of Christ." 

DANGER FROM "HIGHER CRITICISM." 



Dr. David J. Burrell, pastor of the Marble Collegiate 
Church, Fifth avenue, New York, says:— 

"It is indeed true that there is sore danger from 
this critical movement, but it is not the Bible that 
stands so much in danger— it can take care of itself— 
as it is the dictionary that is assailed. 

"Words that have a specific and clear meaning 
to us, used by the exponents of the critical propaganda, 
have a different meaning entirely. It is one 
of the calamitous consequences of this criticism. It 
means a complete overturning of definitions as we 
understand them. And to coin a spurious word is 
worse than to issue a spurious coin. 

"Men preach from the pulpit and talk with you 
and me about the inspiration. Their terms to them 
have not the dictionary definition which they know 
you put on them. I won't mince words, for I know 
friends of mine who do this. It's not honest. We 
are fighting for Webster's and Worcester's dictionaries, 
just as we are fighting for God Almighty in this 
contest. 

"There are men preaching the gospel of Christ 
who do not know what the little word "is" means, 
using it instead in the most outre and outlandish way. 
I know a man who will say 'The Bible is the Word 
of God,' yet he doesn't mean what people think him 
to mean. Is' to him means 'is not.' 

"In days of old, when the gods of the Pantheon 
had lost their powers, the priests laughed to themselves 
before the altar as they went through the ceremonies. 
That is an effect, too, on the Christian ministry 
of the higher criticism. 

"I make no charge against any man, and I say it 
with a deal of charity and lamentation, but some men 
in some pulpits are smiling at the words they have to 
preach. 

"I walked with a man from a church one day- 
he being a friend of mine, though he is one of the 
critical ones— at the close of a sermon he had preached 
on the incarnation. He had hardly gone a hundred 
steps from his pulpit when he turned to me and said 

R3419 : page 260 

with a smile: "It isn't of any great difference to me 
whether Christ was the son of Joseph or was conceived 
by the holy Spirit.' The fine edge of honesty was 
worn off there, as it is elsewhere. But the mass of 
people in the pews, notwithstanding the teachings they 
hear, are honest to the Word of God. 

"People won't go to church to hear hypotheses. 
There is more good in a Sunday newspaper than there 
is in a man who preaches the vagaries of the 'higher 



criticism from the pulpit.' 



True, but not strongly enough stated. The 
harm done by the "higher critics" exceeds all other 
sources of harm, including infidel publications and 
dime novels, because it breaks down all true faith and 
confidence toward God and sets at nought "the only 
name given under heaven and amongst men whereby 
we must be saved." It makes the "blood of the 
covenant a common thing."— Heb. 10:29. 

LEAGUING AGAINST "HIGHER CRITICISM." 



"The American Bible League" held its first convention 
lately in New York City. It has our best 
wishes, but we fear it will find far less sympathy and 
support amongst ministers and laymen than it should 
naturally expect. The fact is that the entire body of 
Christendom has been thoroughly inoculated with 
this poisonous infidelity of the refined Sadduceeic sort. 
For years the colleges have been turning the stream 
at its head waters. Today the studies and school-literature 
of the public high schools are completely under 
this same influence. We have no thought, therefore, 
that the American Bible League will meet with 
any degree of success. We do, however, hope that 
its course may have the effect of arousing some 
true believers and separating them from nominalism 
and thus preparing them to search for and to find 
"the old paths"— the old theology— "the faith once 
delivered to the saints." 

Unless we greatly err the "League" will find 
even among its own members some who are half poisoned 
on this subject by evolutionary ideas. We quote 
extracts from several of the speakers and from commentaries 
on the first session. Mr. William Phillips 
Hall, the president of the "League," said:— 

"That the Bible is now being subjected to a 
scholastic assault of unparalleled danger; that the 
practical consequences of this assault are in evidence 
in the demoralization of conduct and education, and 
in evil influences on the ministry and missions; that 
the assault is based upon groundless claims of a false 
scholarship, and that the methods proposed by the 
league will fully meet the imperative needs of the situation 
and lead to a recovery of faith in the Bible as 
the Word of God and to the enthronement of our 
Lord Jesus Christ in the hearts of men. 

"Fascinated by a strange scholarship, multitudes 
among the leaders in the Christian ministry and educational 
work have turned aside in large part from the 
faith which was once for all delivered unto the saints, 



to worship at the shrine of a destructive criticism that 
destroys individual faith in the divine origin, integrity, 
inspiration and authority of the Scriptures of 
the Old and New Testaments, and that sooner or 
later, logically, and inevitably, leads to the denial of 

R3419 : page 261 

the incarnation, omniscience, atonement and supreme 
authority of our Lord Jesus Christ." 

Dr. Francis L. Patton, president of Princeton 
Theological Seminary, said, respecting the views of 
"higher critics:"— 

"To them there was no primeval innocence, no 
fall, no redemption, no incarnation. They hold these 
things not to be doctrines, but pretty teachings, making 
up what is really nothing more than a metaphysic 
philosophy. Ask them straightforward questions and 
they begin to dodge the issue. Ask them, 'Did Jesus 
Christ have a preexistence? Did he rise from the 
dead? Was he ever really dead? Was he God of 
very God?' They begin to shift. They begin right 
away to talk sentimentalism and say, 'We want the 
moralities.' 

'"All right, we'll talk morals;' but they don't. 
They dodge them, too. 

"It all comes around to the question of judgment 
of fact and value. If you can discard the former and 
retain the latter, what is the good of Christianity? 
You can then preach just as good a sermon from 
Aesop's fables as from Holy Scripture." 

Dr. Daniel Gregory, General Secretary of the 
League, is reported to have said:— 

"The league believes this to be one of the most 
serious crises in the history of Christian faith, and 
has taken up its task with a twofold object: it takes 
its stand for the Bible and the old view, and yet with 
open vision for any new light, and it challenges these 
claims of radical criticism, the baselessness of which it 
purposes to show. We have no fault to find with real 
criticism. We do not challenge the new views because 
they are scientific, but because they are unscientific. 

"The second object of this league is to help the 
people to see the Bible as it is and to find out what is 
in it." 

The New York Sun editorially notes that the 
League describes the present as a "crisis" in the history 
of Christianity. The Sun agrees that the term 
"crisis" is none too strong and adds:— 

"If this subversive and destructive criticism was 
confined to avowed opponents of religion and the 
Church, as it was formerly, it might not be an enemy 
dangerous enough to require the formation of a Christian 
league against it; but now it has affected profoundly 
the thought and radically changed the view 
of a large part of Christendom itself. It has entered 



into theological seminaries to a very great extent, and 
is influencing the sentiment and modifying the points 
of view in many pulpits of even the most nominally 
orthodox churches." 

Most of the prominent journals that comment at 
all treat the League respectfully, but clearly imply 
their "higher critic" predilections, and imply that 
the most the League will do will be to sow discord 
and rancor and controversy. Thus the "wise" always 
deprecate any battle with Satan. 

POLITICS IN RELIGION. 



"People with old-fashioned ideas concerning the 
relations between the churches and the Deity, whose 
cause they are presumed to set forth here on earth, 
are often somewhat dismayed at the very practical 
way in which the machinery of the churches work. 
The present quadrennial conference of the Methodist 
Church at Los Angeles has been styled by some members 
of the faith the biggest political event of the 
year of presidential nominations. 

"Questions of creed, of the form of Church government 
and the selection of Church officials are settled 
in all Church assemblages in a highly practical and 
thoroughly human manner. Church politics differs 
from the ordinary kind most in subject matter. 

"The methods are the same, very largely because 
in not a few instances they are employed by the same 
kind of men, but most of all doubtless because they 
represent the working out of divine purpose in other 
fields. In the Presbyterian and Episcopalian and 
other general religious gatherings, the men whose influence 
counts for most are not infrequently those 
who stand high in political and business circles. 

"It shocks people who believe that the churches 
are exclusively divinely guided to see so little difference 
in ecclesiastical strategy from those which prevail 
in more worldly gatherings. Yet there should be 
no dismay or surprise even. For while we all know 
that the churches are under divine guidance we are 
wholly wrong in supposing that other of the vast concerns 
of men are not equally under the same influence 
and direction. 

"Creeds and churches are all man-made out of 
material furnished him by his Maker, but expressions 
of man's recognition of his obligations and opportunities 
lies in the spiritual plane. Though inspired by the 
Creator since they are not universal, they are all 
manifestly imperfect, and so doubtless because transmitted 
through erring man. Creed and Church discipline 
and law have no more foundation of authority 
or guarantee of stability than do political platform 
declarations. They are all always subject to revision 



as men progress in religious understanding and to 
meet new contingencies of moral perversion as they 
arise.— Toledo Sunday Times-Bee. 



This editor sees only a part of what he points 
out. God has given his Church explicit directions, 
but the plans, schemes and traditions of men ignore 
the Word, the counsel of God, and hence the similarity 
of political manipulations. 



R3420 : page 261 

"OPPOSITIONS OF SCIENCE FALSELY SO-CALLED." 

AND so it seems that even in Paul's day science 

was a name to conjure with. The 

aged Apostle had to exhort his "son Timothy" 

to stand guard over the truth of God 

that had been committed to him, especially by 

avoiding "oppositions of science falsely so-called." 

The danger to faith arose not from real science, 

but from that baseless and pernicious gnosis, unworthy 

R3420 : page 262 

the name of science, that was already on 

the way to its full fruitage in the Gnosticism of Marcion 

and Valentinus that at a later day so cursed the 

early Church. 

Nor is this juggling with "science" yet over, 
as a recent experience convinced the writer. The 
colloquy was with— or rather the "setting down" 
came from— a product of the "New Thinking." He 
had been made at Harvard, and had entered upon the 
study of divinity there, but finding no definite basis 
for his "divinity," he had given up the ministry as 
a bad job. A respectful word about the Bible was 
what precipitated the explosion: "You don't pretend 
to say that you believe the Bible to be anything 
but a mass of Jewish myths and legends? In these 
days no one but a mossback ever thinks of it as a revelation 
from God! Why, it has been so completely 
discredited by science in every form and from every 
point of view, that no self-respecting man of culture 
can afford to give it even a moment's attention!" 

What could one say when dazed by such an outburst? 
How could one help feeling that science embodied 
had finished the business, and that it was useless 
to gainsay its authority? As for reasoning with 
such a reckless asserter, that was out of the question. 
He was beyond the reach of reason. For a moment 
the poor "mossback" felt as one might imagine the 



old-fashioned tallow candle of seventy-five years ago 
felt when the great "extinguisher" was brought down 
upon it. But recovery came in due time, aided by 
some knowledge of real science gained at the feet of 
the masters; and the conclusion ultimately reached 
shape in Paul's phrase, "oppositions of science falsely 
so-called." This man was monumentally ignorant 
of real science. Indeed, he was merely conjuring with 
a name of the contents of which he knew nothing 
except at second hand; and even that second-hand 
knowledge was "science falsely so-called," in other 
words, pseudo-science. 

Has science really discredited the Bible as the 
Word of God, so that there is nothing left of it on 
which one can depend? We answer, By no manner of 
means. The assumption that it has done so is the 
supreme Satanic lie of this age, originating in the 
consummate conceit which is the very essence of the 
Zeitgeist, and made use of by the Devil for the overthrow 
of the religion of Christ. True science has 
never contradicted the Bible; has never touched it 
but to confirm. The same God made both the world 
and the Word, so that there can be no contradiction. 
It is only false science that has seemed— or been made 
to appear— in conflict with Christianity. 

To make this clear beyond possibility of gainsaying, 
one needs only to inquire what science is, what 
constitutes a scientist, what the scientific method is, 
what the scientific processes are; and then to test by 
these the claims of the so-called science that has pretentiously 
arrayed itself against the Bible. 

That is the question at bottom, "What is 
science?" The mischief has come from its having 
been answered superficially. The jaunty "New Thinking" 
hesitates to go beneath the surface. That might 
wear out the soul, if it be only matter in brain form! 
It will never do to overwork it! 

Science has been defined to be "knowledge gained 
and verified by exact observation and correct thinking, 
especially such knowledge when methodically formulated 
and arranged in a rational system,"— systematic 
construction being thus a principal factor in 
science in the largest sense. 

There are properly two distinct scientific methods, 
the inductive and the deductive. The former is 
applicable to matters of fact only; the latter to truths 
or relations of ideas only. The former proceeds from 
facts to general principles which embrace and group 
them; the latter from general truths or principles to 
particulars embraced under them. 

Science, as we have to do with it in connection 
with Christianity, deals with matters of fact,— God, 
the soul, sin, redemption, all the great essential things 
found in the Bible and in our religion, are matters of 
fact. The science that deals with them, in order to 
be true science, must, therefore, conform to the principles 



or processes of the inductive method. As it departs 
from these, or fails to come up to them, it ceases 
to be science. 

What are these principles or processes? There 
is, first, exact observation, by which one is to learn 
what the facts in the case really are. The principle 
of exact observation is all-important at the foundation. 
Sir William Hamilton sets forth the three laws that 
govern it: The law of parcimony requires that no fact 
be assumed that is not a fact; the law of integrity, 
that all of the essential facts be embraced in the observation; 
the law of harmony, that if inferences from 
fact are admitted they must be legitimate deductions 
from the facts and used in subordination to them. 

So from this point of view the science may be 
vitiated by ignoring facts, misrepresenting or misinterpreting 
facts, adding alleged facts to or substituting 
them for the real facts, using the facts as mere points 
of departure in wild speculation. Alfred Wallace's 
recent fascinating book, on the question whether there 
are other inhabited worlds, is an example in point. 
The book is a book in which, in consequence of the 
absence of actual and universal observation, assumptions 
and speculations are made to take the place of 
facts. Possibly there is more reason for concluding 
that there are no other worlds that are possibly habitable, 
than for concluding that the man in the moon is 
made of green cheese. 

The use of the second principle, that of correct 
scientific interpretation, must follow the observation, 
in order that the scientific investigator may know precisely 
what the observed facts mean. Before they can 
be wrought into science, the individual facts must be 
understood, in themselves and in their relations to one 
another and to their causes. Hence, the three laws 
that govern the process of interpretation. The first 
requires that the investigator shall determine the exact 
content of each of the facts; the second that he 
shall properly generalize and classify his facts and ascertain 
the laws governing them; the third that he 
shall trace back the facts and laws to the appropriate 
and adequate causes that account for and explain 
them. Causation is thus the fundamental principle 
that makes science possible, and to which all true 
science must conform itself. 

So from this point of view science may be wholly 
vitiated by a superficial knowledge of the facts, by 

R3420 : page 263 

false generalizations from them, by irrational and unwarranted 
explanations of them, or by failure to make 
proper application of the principle of causation in 
dealing with them. Of this order are the defects that 
destroy the scientific quality of the thinking of such 
men as John Stuart Mill, Charles Darwin and Herbert 



Spencer. It is vain to talk to them of facts. 

They are able to laugh at facts as a ghost would at a 

musket. 

The first two principles of induction lead up to 
the third, the principle of scientific construction, which 
must be conducted with a view to the grasping, 
grouping and presentation of the facts in their entirety, 
by proper coordination and correlation, and making 
the thought system match the natural system to 
which it attempts to give expression. Science in the 
highest sense is something far beyond incoherent facts 
or bits and scraps, however accurately observed and 
interpreted, beyond classes and strings of generalizations, 
however logical they may be made; it consists 
of facts and generalizations and causes, and all the 
rest, wrought into a rational system, and so constituting 
a connected and constructed thought-system 
that expresses and matches some region of reality, in 
the soul, in nature or elsewhere. In order to reach 
such science, all the great facts, as observed and interpreted, 
with all the laws and principles, must be 
taken into the system, none added and none omitted; 
these must be set forth in their logical relations of 
succession and interdependence; and the system so 
constructed must be shown to agree with the natural 
system which it represents. 

So at this point science may become false by the 
narrowness that fails to take in all the range of facts 
involved, and thus leaves it incomplete; or by the 
incoherency that shows itself incapable of grouping 
facts into unity, and thus results in merely a disjointed 
mass; or by reason of a weak or lawless imagination 
that cannot grasp the whole range of facts 
in rational scientific system, thereby falling below 
science in its highest and broadest sense. 

Such knowledge, resulting from exact observations, 
correct interpretation and scientific construction, 
and such alone, is science in any strict and proper 
sense. It is whole diameters removed from opinion, 
guesswork, imagination, speculation, assumption, assertion 
and all the other easy going processes. 

The scientist is one who, in his observations, investigations, 
conclusions and constructions, conforms 
to these principles of scientific method. He is one 
who seeks, obtains and verifies knowledge in any department 
by these processes, which alone are properly 
called scientific. His special task may, of course, require 
him to devote himself chiefly to the investigation 
and verification of facts; or he may give himself 
to applying the inductive method to facts; or he 
may be employed chiefly in combining all his established 
facts and reasoned conclusions in any department 
of knowledge into a scientific system that shall 
embody and set forth a whole region of reality in its 

R3421 : page 263 



unity and totality. But whatever may be the particular 

department to which his attention is given, his 

work therein must be done conformably to the principles 

of scientific method that have just been 

outlined. 

In the region of physical science, from which the 
main objections to the veracity of the Bible have been 
brought, the exact scientist is the man who reduces 
his scientific conclusions to mathematical formulae, 
thereby taking them entirely out of the range of the 
speculation and conjecture to which so much of the 
popular so-called science is devoted. It is the portion 
of the field of physical science that has been reduced 
to this form of mathematical thought that constitutes 
the settled and permanent science,— the other so-called 
science of this region being in state of constant 
flux. 

Against all comers the Christian may safely make 
the claim that no true science, no knowledge that can 
stand these rational, scientific tests, has ever been 
shown to be in conflict with the revelations of God's 
Word. It is only science falsely so-called that has 
ever been made to appear to discredit the Word of 
God,— Positivism, Darwinism, Spencerism, et id omne 
genus. 

Modern science, as embodied in August Comte, 
is said to have blotted a personal God out of existence. 
There is nothing new in that. "The fool" of the 
Psalmist did as much long ages ago. It is written in 
Psalm 14:1, "The fool hath said in his heart, there is 
no God." As one has remarked, it is evident that no 
one but a fool would have said it; that is, a man 
afflicted with mental weakness and moral obliquity. 
Even "the fool" says it to himself, as it were, or in 
his heart; it is not the conclusion of reason, but an 
expression of a wish. He is anxious to get rid of 
God, in order that he may freely exploit his folly. 

Modern science, under the lead of Comte, has 
taken the same method of sweeping God out of existence; 
only he claims to have done it by the scientific 
method. But how did he do it? Where is the science 
of it? It is simply assumption and assertion with 
which he lays the basis. "There is nothing in the 
universe of which we can have scientific knowledge 
except bare, dead facts. There is no spirit, finite or 
infinite, no cause, no God." Now this so-called 
science violates every principle of induction, ignoring 
all the chief facts of the universe, and those that are 
best known. How do I at all know material things, 
forces, science, etc.? It is only as I am a mind, acting 
in thought, that I am able to find and interpret 
any thought in the material universe. It is only as I 
am a will, acting with power, that I am able to find 
and investigate any of the forces of the universe with 
which science deals. This presentation of the case by 



Comte, by which such stimulus has been given to 
modern loose thinking, has not a particle of science 
in it. 

In the name of science, Charles Darwin, under 
the inspiration of Comte, has swept God and religion 
out of existence in these later times. How much of 
science is there in his system, so far as it antagonizes 
the teachings of the Bible? Take a single passage 
from one of the earlier editions of his "Descent of 
Man," a passage that sums up his argument from the 
beginning of that belauded and epoch-making work: 

"The early progenitors of man were, no doubt, covered 
with hair, both sexes having beards. Their ears were 
pointed and capable of movement, and their bodies were 
provided with a tail. ...The foot.. .was prehensile 

R3421 : page 264 

and our progenitors, no doubt, were arboreal in their 
habits, frequenting some warm, forest-clad land.... At 
an earlier period the progenitors of man must have been 
aquatic in their habits." 

Although, because of its absurdity having been 
exposed, this paragraph was dropped or modified in a 
later edition of the same work, the "scientific" 
presentation of the book, of which this is an accurate 
summary, was not changed. 

When men laud this as "advanced science," we 
have to say that it is simply a double "no doubt" 
and a "must have been," resting on a hypothesis 
which is conceivable, but has not a fact to support it. 
There is no science about it, and, indeed, no basis for 
science. We protest, in the name of sound thinking, 
against the almighty must be-ity with which the system 
is constructed; and we do it for the same reason 
that we protest against the equally potent must-be-ity 
and per-se-ity of the speculative philosophers and theologians. 
This is sham science, not true science. A 
system built up in that way violates every principle 
of the inductive scientific method. It is absurd to 
claim that the teaching of the Bible, that God created 
man in his own image, is to be set aside for such baseless 
speculation masquerading in the garb of science. 
It may be well to remember that even Professor Huxley, 
who was so much of an agnostic regarding religion 
that he invented the name agnostic to express 
his negative creed, always protested against the fundamental 
principles of Darwinism. It is now being generally 
admitted, especially in Germany, that Darwinism 
is dead. Notwithstanding the false science the 
Bible still lives. 

Following up the same trend of thought, the late 
Herbert Spencer constructed his vast system for the 
unification of all knowledge, pushing God out of 
sight. The postulates of Mr. Spencer, in reaching 
his conclusion that evolution is the universal science, 



contain all the basal errors of agnosticism, positivism, 

sensationalism, with Spencerism added. Neither science 

nor common sense will permit of the acceptance 

of his conclusions. There is no exact science about 

it. The men of breadth and depth, who are masters 

of the scientific process, and who push out their investigations 

into the regions beyond, are the authorities 

in science; and almost to a man they have opposed 

the scientific pretensions of Spencerian evolution. 

Louis Agassiz, Joseph Henry, Sir John William 

Dawson and Arnold Guyot, in this country, pronounced 

the doctrine of evolution unscientific and 

false. Exact science on the other side of the waters 

has protested with equal weight of authority against 

confounding evolution with science. Mivart, the most 

accomplished naturalist in Great Britain, pronounced 

it a "puerile hypothesis;" Lionel Beale, the authority 

in biology, rejects it entirely, declaring that "correlation, 

its assumed principle, is the 'abracadabra' of 

mechanical biology." 

The late Professor Virchow, "the foremost chemist 
on the globe," a man, in the phrase of The London 
Times, "opposed to every species of orthodoxy, and 
altogether innocent of faith," affirmed that "Since its 
announcement, all real scientific knowledge has proceeded 
in the opposite direction;" and styles the 
circles of materialistic evolutionists, "bubble companies." 
Prof. Tait declared that evolutionists are 
"not in the slightest degree entitled to rank as physicists," 
i.e, they are excluded from the ranks of exact 
science. Lord Kelvin, by his investigations in mathematical 
physics, has taken away from the evolutionist 
the ages upon ages absolutely essential to the 
maintenance of his hypothesis. These are the characteristic 
views of the scientific authorities abroad, the 
men who have a right to say something on this 
subject. 

When we turn from scientific authorities to facts, 
we find that Mr. Spencer violates all the principles of 
the inductive method. His scheme has no solid basis of 
carefully observed facts. It does not correctly interpret 
the facts it adduces. He constantly applies the 
a priori or deductive method to such facts as he may 
select as suited to his purpose. As a so-called scientific 
system it is not the product of the consistent logical 
embodiment of the results of observation and rational 
explanation of facts. In other words, it is not 
science. The late DuBois Reymond showed that there 
are at least seven chasms impassable to the evolutionist. 
Not to enumerate these, it is enough to say that 
not a fact has ever been observed in all the universe in 
favor of the essential postulates of evolution— spontaneous 
generation and transmutation of species. 

Why, then, do men accept such things as science? 
Perhaps it is because they are overwhelmed, as Malcolm 
Guthrie has suggested, by the immensity of the 



system, making one feel as if in the presence of omnipotence. 

Or is it because they are dazed and made 

incapable of thinking by the dreamy use of grand 

words, by means of which many of the essential statements 

are so presented that even ordinarily accurate 

thinkers are sometimes surprised into the acceptance 

of what they do not understand? One has characterized 

Mr. Spencer's definition of the law of evolution 

as his most pompous and sublime employment of such 

language: 

"Evolution is a change from an indefinite, incoherent 
homogeneity, to a definite, coherent heterogeneity, 
through continuous differentiations and integrations." 

This, as one has translated it into simple English, 
reads: 

"Evolution is a change from a no howish, untalkaboutable 
all-likeness to a some-howish and in-general-talkaboutable 
not-all-likeness, by continuous something-elsifications 
and stick-togetherations." 

Now such words as differentiation and integration 
have in mathematical science distinct and precise 
meanings, which are impossible in this definition. 

To one who knows the origin of the evolutionary 
scheme, and has tested its scientific pretensions by the 
principles of induction, it seems incredible that men of 
sense should feel compelled, for no better reason than 
that, to give up the plain teaching of the Bible, that 
it is a revelation from God, and substitute for that the 
view that it is a natural evolution. It is science 
falsely so-called, again, that has been made to discredit 
the Bible. 

The same thing might be shown to be true of the 
claims that the sciences of geology, astronomy, etc., 
all through the range of physical sciences have discredited 
the Bible. It is only as the so called scientists 

R3422 : page 265 

have contradicted the fundamental principles of 
inductive science that these sciences have been made 
even to seem to be in conflict with the Bible. 

The writer well recalls the impression made upon 
him just after he had entered upon the work of the 
ministry, by the geologist Lyell's book on "The Antiquity 
of Man," a book which in the name of science 
was full as possible of violations of scientific principles. 
Fortunately, he had the privilege of taking it 
to his old teacher and friend, Arnold Guyot, who let 
the light shine in upon the dark places, showing how 
utterly unscientific were the claims based upon the 
imperfectly observed and investigated facts and causes 
connected with the delta of the Mississippi and with 
the recession of Niagara Falls. 

One typical case will show the quality of much of 
the science involved in such matters. About 1854 
some excavators brought up some burnt brick and 



pottery from the depth of sixty and seventy-two feet, 

in the valley of the Nile. Assuming that they were 

found where they were made, and that the alluvium 

had been deposited upon them at the rate at which 

the Nile now makes its deposit, and that this was the 

only cause at work, it was calculated mathematically 

that the relics must be from 12,000 to 60,000 years 

old. One causal element omitted was the weight of 

the brickbats, in connection with the fact (also causal) 

that all the region is a vast quagmire during the 

inundation which covers it with water for a large part 

of the year. Sir Robert Stephenson afterwards found 

in the Delta, near Damietta, at a far greater depth, 

a brick bearing the stamp of Mohammed Ali (1808). 

Some one said satirically that the main question in 

the first case should have been, not "How long will 

it take for the Nile to deposit sixty or seventy-two 

feet of alluvium?" but "How long will it take a brick 

to sink seventy-two feet in a quagmire?" And we 

are expected to believe that this kind of science has 

discredited the Bible teaching concerning the comparatively 

modern date of the creation of man and the 

origin of the human race! It is science falsely 

so-called. 

One of the latest agents in this work of discrediting 
the Bible as the Word of God— of which the utmost 
possible has been made by the secular press, and, 
we might add, by the religious press, too— is the so-called 
science of Assyriology. The case of Professor 
Delitzsch, with his "Babel and Bible," is still fresh 
in the minds of all. His utterances were put forth in 
the name of science, and the Professor took himself 
seriously as a scientist. A week after his utterances, 
he said to a correspondent of the American press: 

"From a scientific point of view, I am glad that my 
lecture made such an impression. I am glad that the 
teachings of the Church relating to the Old Testament 
have been given up; among other questions, the theory 
that the Covenant on Mount Sinai was a personal revelation 
of God to Moses." 

The correspondent cabled that "The Emperor 
undoubtedly felt that it would never do for the head 
of the Prussian Church to endorse a scientist who denies 
the theory of revelation." And the great secular 
journals flung out as headlines: "The Bible in the 
Furnace of Science;" "The Bible Fails to Stand the 
Test of Science;" and the whole world seemed to be 
turned upside down over this juggling with the terms 
"science" and "scientific." 

The editor of The Open Court wrote of it: "The 
dogmas of Christianity are formulations of the truth 
as interpreted by our forefathers. Let not Athanasius 
with his limited knowledge bind the conscience 
of a Delitzsch!" 

And so, in the name of science, Professor Delitzsch 
becomes infallible! Meanwhile, the poor old 



Bible is demonstrated to be fallible, and, as made up 
of myths and legends, it goes up in smoke from the 
"crucible of science"; and lo, Babylon is wheeled into 
the place of Jerusalem! 

But what about the science of all this? How do 
the claims of Professor Delitzsch stand the test of the 
principles that govern scientific observation, interpretation 
and construction? 

Both of the Professor's lectures are taken up, perhaps 
necessarily, not with the presentation of established 
facts, but with the dogmatic assertion of what 
he regards as scientifically established facts. Blank 
assertion takes the place of science. Four things 
doubtless lent abnormal importance to the Professor's 
pronouncements: the fact that he was confounded 
with his father, the late Dr. Franz Delitzsch, the 
great theologian, commentator and Hebraist, a man of 
quite another order from the son; his connection with 
the German Emperor; his attractive rhetorical presentation 
of the commonplaces of Biblical knowledge; 
and the outrageousness of some of the utterances 
themselves. 

The statement of M. Halevy, the French Orientalist, 
to whom Assyriologists would probably accord 
the leading place— the French having unquestionably 
distanced the Germans in this department, as witness 
their discovery of the Code of Hammurabi— may be 
taken as representative. After praising the general 
character of the lecture, so far as it deals with commonplaces, 
he is constrained to add: 

"Sincerity, nevertheless, compels me to point out 
certain inapt, inaccurate and redundant statements which 
disfigure the otherwise beautiful lecture." 

And after pointing out some of these things he 
further remarks: 

"The same predisposition to rest content with superficial 
appearances shows itself in the interpretation which 
is put upon the figure assumed to represent the chariot of 
Ezekiel, but it has no points of resemblance with it." 

Other archaeological specialists showed the unscientific 
character of the claim of Delitzsch that the Biblical 
Sabbath had its origin in Babylon, as also the 
doctrine that Jehovah is God; these "scientific" conclusions 
being based upon the merest etymological 
guess-work. 

It is after presenting all this matter, to much of 
which all the authorities object as baseless or irrelevant, 
that Professor Delitzsch, speaking from his top-lofty 
pedestal of science, concludes: 

"These are facts which, from the point of view of 
science, are as immutable as rock, however stubbornly people 
on both sides of the Atlantic may close their eyes to 
them." 

"Heaven save the science!" one is almost ready 
to exclaim. Do "facts" and "science" mean anything 



R3422 : page 266 

in this age to the average exploiter of the latest 
speculations? And are we to believe that the sane 
and exalted statements of the Bible are to give way 
before such pseudo science? 

Manifestly Professor Delitzsch has a very slender 
conception of what is meant by science— extraordinary 
as are the claims he makes in its name. The time has 
not yet come for constructing the department of Assyriology, 
either in itself or in its relations to 
the Biblical records, into a consistent scientific system. 
That will require a grasp of approximately all 
the established facts, and verified, reasoned conclusions, 
covering the whole region, when the whole region 
has been investigated. The establishment of the 
correct hypothesis of the relation of Babel and the 
Bible, so that it shall become scientific theory, may be 
realized in the future; but in the meantime while the 
critics speculate, let it not be forgotten that, in the 
court of sound logic and reason, the Bible view of the 
origin of religion by divine revelation to Adam, Noah, 
Abraham, and the line of Israel, has the presumption 
in its favor as against all comers.— The Bible Student. 



R3422 : page 266 

A DOCTOR'S EXAMINATION OF CHRISTIAN SCIENCE. 

DR. JOHN W. CHURCHMAN, of the Johns 

Hopkins Hospital, Baltimore, contributes to 

The Atlantic Monthly (April) a searching 

analysis of Christian Science. His article, while in 

course of preparation, was submitted to the criticism 

of some of the foremost authorities both in philosophy 

and medical science that the country contains, 

and it is regarded by the Boston Transcript as "perhaps 

the most thorough and reliable examination 

which has yet been made of the basis of Christian 

Science." 

The fundamental propositions upon which Christian 
Science may be wrought into a system, and at 
which any criticism of that system must be directed, 
are stated, at the outset of the article, in these 
terms:— 

"1. God, the Ego, is All in All, the only Life, 
Substance and Soul, the only Intelligence of the Universe. 
He is Mind, and fills all space. 

"2. Man is the true image of God; he has no 
consciousness of material life or death; his material 
body is a mortal belief; he was, is, and ever shall be 
perfect. 

"3. Knowledge. Knowledge gained from the material 
senses is a tree whose fruits are sin, sickness 



and death. The evidence of the senses is not to be 
accepted in the case of sickness any more than it is in 
the case of sin. The physical senses are simply beliefs 
of mortal mind. 

"4. Matter cannot be actual. God being all, 
matter is nothing. 

"5. Evil, (a) Sin. Error is unreal. All that 
God made is good; hence there is no evil, (b) Sickness. 
Health is not a condition of matter. Human 

R3423 : page 266 

mind produces organic disease as certainly as it produces 
hysteria, (c) Death is an illusion, (d) Cure. 
The cure for sin, sickness and death— since all are illusions 
—is the destruction of the illusion. 

"Christianity is a demonstration of divine principle 
casting out error and healing the sick. Soul cannot 
sin nor being be lost. Scripture must be interpreted 
spiritually." 

Four great highways of evidence, according to 
Dr. Churchman's view, lead to a demonstration of the 
"essential unsoundness" of Christian Science. In the 
first place, he says, it defies the canons of history, 
when it comes to us claiming a revealed origin. "Men 
who have read history have learned to suspect such 
claims. They know that thousands like it have been 
made before." Moreover:— 

"Only in rare instances has any new Truth been 
brought to light by a flash; the rule that history 
teaches is— a slow stumbling in the dark until the 
light is reached. The presumptive evidence, as 
the great laws of life working themselves out in history 
have made it of value to us, is against Christian 
Science. The system fails to align itself with the 
past. It fails emphatically to exhibit the premonitory 
symptoms of truth. And, apart from all other 
considerations, these are strong counts against it." 

Dr. Churchman proceeds to a consideration of 
Christian Science as a system of philosophy:— 

"The uncompromising idealism which Mrs. Eddy 
offers us. ..poses as an explanation, and is in reality 
a total evasion. To deny that matter exists, and 
assert that it is an illusion, is only another way of asserting 
its existence; you are freed by your suggestion 
from explaining the fact, but forced by it to explain 
the illusion. ..I smell a rose, and that night 
I dream of what I have done. Both acts, says Mrs. 
Eddy, are dreams. Then, I answer, how do you account 
for my recognition of the two activities as different 
in kind? If all psychic phenomena are dreams, 
why do I recognize only certain psychic phenomena 
as dreams? To equate illusion and sensation is to 
balance inches with pounds; and it explains neither. 
The great ideal philosophers recognized this inadequacy; 
though it was Berkeley's weakness that he 



failed to recognize it clearly. Kant, Leibnitz, Fichte 

and Hegel were idealists with a qualification; and 

this qualification was their salvation. But Mrs. Eddy 

has strengthened her position in no such way. For 

the testimony of the senses is, to her, absolutely unacceptable: 

not because it fails to be final, but because 

it is, essentially false. She quite ignores the fact that 

while, so long as we have no extrinsic standard, it 

may be impossible to demonstrate the reliability of 

the senses' reports, it is equally, and for the same reason, 

impossible to prove their unreliability." 

If Christian Science is unconvincing as philosophy, 
it is even more so, declares Dr. Churchman, as 
science. He writes on this point:— 

"To deplorable inaccuracy is added a looseness 
of statement and of argument that is simply laughable. 

R3423 : page 267 

'Longevity is increasing,' Mrs. Eddy tells us, 
'for the world feels the alternative effect of truth.' Is 
this guessing or statistics? Does she seriously mean 
to tell us that since 1865, or thereabouts, the slight 
hold that Christian Science has had on the world has 
really lengthened life? Could statistics culled in a 
period covering only thirty-eight years really prove 
anything as to longevity and its cause? Has she any 
scientific understanding of the meaning of statistics 
and of the tremendous periods they must cover in order 
to be of any value?... 

"Again, notice the absurd explanation of the action 
of drugs. 'When the sick recover,' we are told, 
'by the use of drugs, it is the law of general belief, 
culminating in individual faith, which heals; even if 
you take away the individual confidence in a drug 
...the chemist.. .the doctor and the nurse equip 
the medicine with their faith, and the majority of beliefs 
rules.' Acetanilid, then, reduces temperature, 
by action on the heat-coordinating nerve-centre, because 
the majority of men, or the patient himself, believes 
this to be the case. Well, the fact is that the 
majority of men have never heard of acetanilid, or the 
heat-centre... and that its action, so far from being 
dependent on the patient's belief, is observed in 
animals, which may reasonably be assumed to have 
no belief on the subject whatever!" 

The last item in the indictment is that Christian 
Science is "fundamentally unchristian:"— 

"Mrs. Eddy's philosophy is more blasphemous 
than her exegetical mutilation. The Bible has little 
or nothing to say as to the origin of evil; for the account 
of the fall is, after all, not an explanation, but 
a description. But it has a great deal to say on man's 
attitude toward the problem. ...From Genesis to 
Revelation the word is, Endure; and Christ himself 
never attempted to treat as anything less than fact 



the sorrow of the world, before his share of which 

even his own bravery almost flinched. There is nowhere 

the slightest Scriptural warrant for expecting 

immunity from pain. No rosy picture is anywhere 

drawn. The only solution of the problem from first 

to last is the old-fashioned trust of intelligent resignation. 

But for Christian Science the opposite is the 

truth. With a flare of bravery that is nothing more 

than bravado, a foolish claim of certainty is substituted 

for a majestic and triumphant faith. Suffering 

is no longer a mystery, and trust is impossible. The 

grim philosophy of Job, which has seldom failed in 

history to lead to the sturdy faith that makes men, is 

swept away at a blow; and in its place we have the 

effeminate bravery of a vulgar creed of certainty. Essentially 

it lacks nobility. If it had been regarded as 

truth from the first, history would have lost its chapter 

of heroes. It stands condemned by rational philosophy 

and shamed by Christian faith; and by its fundamental 

opposition to the Scriptural theory of the 

solution of the problem of evil, it brands itself as 

criminally inconsistent. It is nothing less than blasphemy 

—and blasphemy of the most insidious kind— 

to distort the plain philosophy of the Bible, until it 

offers men the pathetic delusion that they are to escape 

completely the suffering, without a relatively 

large share of which no human being has been known 

to pass his three score and ten. The essential unsoundness 

of practical Christian Science lies here; 

that a philosophy is proposed which assumes man 

made purposely for perfect happiness in this dispensation, 

—an assumption at once gratuitous if observation 

base philosophy, and groundless if Holy Writ be 

the standard."— Literary Digest. 



R3422 : page 267 

"SEEK THE LORD AND YE SHALL LIVE." 

-AMOS 5:4-15. -SEPTEMBER 18.- 

OUR lesson has to do with the prophecy of Amos, 
who is noted as being one of the earliest prophets 
to write down the message which he delivered. 
True, Moses was a prophet, and his teachings we have in 
written form— and David was a prophet, and we have his 
in the Psalms; but Moses' prophecies were chiefly through 
the types which, under divine direction, he instituted, 
and David's prophecies were in poetic form, which were 
not discerned to be prophecies until our Lord and the 
apostles so pointed them out. Samuel, the Prophet, seems 
not to have written any of his inspired messages, neither 
did Elijah, nor Elisha, nor others of their time. Amos 
belongs to a period about a century after Elijah and nearly 



a century before Isaiah, and about two centuries before 
Jeremiah, Ezekiel and Daniel. Amos declared himself to 
have been of humble birth; his parents were not illustrious, 
neither was he educated amongst the sons of the prophets. 
Like David he was a sheep tender, a farmer, upon whom 
the Lord poured his spirit with mighty power, sending 
him to proclaim the disasters sure to come upon Israel 
unless a change of course should turn aside the deserved 
punishment for their iniquities. 

The brunt of the Prophet's message fell against the 
ten-tribe kingdom of Israel, but the divine method of presenting 
the matter is noteworthy. The Prophet's message 
began with the adjoining nations: (1) Damascus, the capital 
of Syria on the north, is mentioned as being in line 
with the divine retributions; (2) the Philistines on the 
west; (3) the nation of Tyre to the northwest; (4) the 
Edomites to the south; (5) the Ammonites nearly on the 
east; (6) the Moabites to the south; (7) Judah to the 
south; lastly, the center of the Prophet's message, Israel 
—the ten-tribe Kingdom. We can fancy the attention 
which would be given to his message by the people of Israel 
as they would hear fall from his lips words descriptive 
of the troubles coming upon surrounding nations which were 
their enemies; but as the circle grew narrower and narrower, 
and the weight of the Prophet's testimony was 
found to be specially against themselves, we may be sure 
that there was intense indignation. If they at first shouted, 

R3424 : page 268 

"A true prophet!" they probably subsequently gnashed 
on him with their teeth. This denunciation of Israel 
occurs chiefly in chapters 3-6 and in chapter 7:9-17. 
When the Prophet had gone so far as to tell openly of the 
fall of the reigning dynasty, Amaziah, the prince of Bethel, 
interfered, bidding Amos return to his own country. But 
under the special power of the holy Spirit, using him to 
deliver a particular message, Amos refused to return home 
until he had accomplished his errand, and added to the 
retribution of Israel some prophecies respecting the prince's 
own household. 

CHANGED CONDITIONS-CHANGED METHODS. 

In drawing a lesson from these experiences of Amos 
applicable to ourselves of today, we must remember that 
the Lord no longer sends his messages after this manner. 
Conditions have changed, circumstances have changed, 
and prophecies of the kind inspired by the Lord in early 
days are no longer his method. Respecting these prophecies, 
the Apostle Peter tells us, "Prophecy came not in 
olden times by the will of man: but holy men of God spake 
as they were moved by the holy Spirit" (2 Pet. 1:21), 
"Unto whom it was revealed that not unto themselves, 
but unto us they did minister the things which are now 
reported unto you by them that have preached the Gospel 



unto you with the holy Spirit sent down from heaven."— 
I Pet. 1:12. 

In view of the changed conditions and difference of 
operation of the divine power, it is for us to preach the 
Word to whomsoever hath an ear to hear, to call attention 
to the application of the prophecies and testimonies of 
ancient times, and thus to make known the divine plan 
as it becomes due to be understood by those for whom 
it is intended— the Israelites indeed in whom there is no 
guile. For any one to undertake at the present time to 
copy either Elijah or Amos or others of the ancient prophets 
would indicate a total misapprehension on his part 
respecting the divine will and message— it might even be 
surmised to indicate a mental unbalance. As the Apostle 
declares, we speak the things that we know and testify to 
the things spoken aforetime for our admonition. There is 
a good lesson for us, nevertheless, in the method which the 
Lord guided the Prophet to take in delivering his message. 

Our Lord leaves to us of this Gospel dispensation 
considerable latitude in the choice of means for serving 
his cause, exhorting us, however, to be wise as serpents 
and harmless as doves, and promising us rewards in proportion 
as we exercise such carefulness in his service as he 
can specially bless and use. Those who use wisely the 
talents and pounds intrusted to them are to have proportionate 
rewards when the Kingdom shall be set up. Let 
us then, in the exercise of our liberty and in accord with 
the Master's injunction to be wise as serpents, notice how 
the Prophet's message respecting unpleasant and direful 
things, all true, began in such a manner as to rivet the attention 
of his hearers. The Apostle Paul practiced this same 
wisdom, and mentioned it subsequently to some whom he 
had brought to a knowledge of the Lord; he said, "Being 
crafty, I took you by guile"— that is, I presented the matter 
to you in the form that would be most attractive to 
your hearts. He presented nothing untrue, however. 
Truth can be stated in a more or less palatable or unpalatable 
form. 

"NOT ALL THAT SAY LORD, LORD." 

Another lesson in connection with Amos' message is 
that his opponents rose up from amongst those who were 
professedly religious— the priests; and so it was with our 
Lord and the apostles. The priests and religious teachers 
of their day were the chief opponents of the Gospel in its 
truth and purity, and we must expect the same in our day. 
The Truth, in proportion as it has been declared in its 
purity, has always aroused opposition, and has always 
found its chief opposers amongst those who have a "form 
of godliness"— but generally amongst those who lack its 
power. 

Our lesson is a part of the Prophet's pleading with 
the Israelites that they return to harmony with God and 
avert the calamities which must otherwise be expected. 
The history of the time shows us that it was a very prosperous 



period, not only for Judah but also for the ten-tribe 

kingdom. The prosperity was of the earthly kind. 

Riches were accumulated, but these were in the hands of 

the rich and the great, and the Prophet proceeds to warn 

the rich that the poor are being unjustly dealt with, and 

he intimates that it would be from this source that the 

trouble would ultimately come— the only terms upon 

which they could hope to live as a nation would be by 

seeking the Lord. It would be in vain for them to seek 

help at Bethel or in Gilgal or in Beersheba, the centers 

of their religious institutions, which were corrupt. These 

religious institutions would all go down in the trouble 

which the Prophet predicted. The Lord himself must be 

sought with an honest heart else he would cause destruction 

to break out like a fire to devour the house of Joseph. 

The ten-tribe kingdom is here called the house of Joseph, 

because the tribes of Ephraim and Manasseh were of preponderating 

influence in the nation, and these two tribes 

sprung from Joseph; hence the fire breaking out in the 

house of Joseph meant destruction which would come 

upon the ten-tribe kingdom unless they repented. 

The Prophet proceeds to particularize some of the 
wrongs on account of which they were in danger: Justice 
was not rendered in their courts. Instead of the sweets of 
Justice, those who appealed to their courts, if they were 
poor, got wormwood— that is, bitterness, disappointment. 
The Prophet declares that they cast down righteousness 
to the earth; equity was not a matter of primary consideration; 
but, as he proceeds to point out, bribery was rife, 
and wealth and power and influence could accomplish almost 
anything. There must be a turning from this condition, 
and relief could only come from turning to the 

R3424 : page 269 

Lord. The Prophet refers to divine power in somewhat 
similar language to that used by Job (9:9; 30:31). Pointing 
his hearers to the group Pleiades in the constellation 
Taurus, and to Orion, he would have them see that the 
one whose assistance they needed was the one who was 
able to create the earth and the heavens also— the one who 
was able not only to gather the waters into the seas, but 
able also to call the waters back from the seas to the clouds, 
and to pour it down again upon the earth in its seasons. 
This great God was the one that they needed, and all others 
assisting them would be powerless against him. 

THE LORD CARETH FOR THE POOR AND NEEDY. 

In verse 9 he intimates that God's power would be 
with the poor and oppressed for their deliverance, and 
that this would mean destruction against the strong and 
powerful, those that hate reproof and abhor the upright, 
that are in opposition to any who reprove unrighteousness. 

Verses 11 and 12 specify and particularize the nature 
of the injustice practised and which needs to be renounced 



and discontinued. Verse 13 implies that there were 
amongst the Israelites some who did not approve of the 
general course, but being helpless and in the minority 
they kept silence from prudential reasons, because the 
time was an evil one, and to have espoused the cause of 
the oppressed would have brought them trouble without 
bringing relief to the oppressed. But Amos was specially 
commissioned of the Lord to give this very reproof, and 
hence he must not keep silence because of prudence or for 
any other consideration, but must speak his message with 
boldness. Similarly, it is not the duty of every one of the 
Lord's people today to take the place of Amos and become 
public reprovers of public officials, etc., even though they may 
see unrighteousness practised. Prudence, wisdom, is to be 
used in connection with whatever we do. Our commission 
today is not that of reproving nations, but that of 
letting our lights so shine that others may see our good 
works and glorify the Father which is in heaven. Our 
Lord declares that he will rebuke the nations, he will 
humble their pride, he will cast down the mighty from 
their positions, he will exalt the humble in due time; and 
to his people he says, "Wait ye upon me, saith the Lord, 
until the day that I rise up to the prey."— Zeph. 3:8. 

The lesson closes with an exhortation from the Prophet 
that his hearers should make a thorough reformation- 
seek good and not evil, love righteousness and hate sin. If 
they would do these things then indeed they might apply 
to themselves the promises of God, as they were already 
disposed to do, claiming that they were his people. Such 
claims would be appropriate enough if they would conform 
to the divine requirements, but not otherwise; the 
Lord would be gracious to them if they would come into 
line as a people with his regulations and requirements, but 
otherwise they must expect the chastisements and punishments 
already foretold. 

Remembering that the Israelites were a typical 
nation, we properly enough scan the text and context 
to see whether anything connected with Amos' 
prophecy was of larger application than it appeared to him 
and the people of his day. We are justified in expecting 
this from the words of the Apostle Peter already cited, 
and from other examples in the prophecies. For instance, 
in David's prophecies how little the utterer of the words, 
"not a bone of him shall be broken," understood of the 
real fulfilment of his declaration. Again when he said, 
"Thou wilt not leave my soul in sheol, neither wilt thou 
suffer thine holy One to see corruption," how little David 
or the people of Israel understood the import of those 
words— that David was a prophet, and in this language 
was unwittingly speaking of Christ and his resurrection 
from the dead— from sheol. So while realizing the appropriateness 
of Amos' words to the people to whom they 
were particularly addressed, we find certain items in connection 
with this prophecy which imply a still larger fulfilment 
of his predictions upon nominal Israel in the end 
of this age. 



GIANTS IN THE EARTH FOREBODE EVIL. 

It is not for us to claim that today Justice is fallen in 
the streets and Righteousness cannot enter; it is not for 
us to claim that the poor are inordinately taxed or crushed 

R3425 : page 269 

or robbed. On the contrary, we freely state that there is 
a great deal of righteousness meted out in the courts of 
"Christendom." We have sometimes wondered how 
natural men have ever brought together so many wise, just 
and reasonable laws and regulations. Nevertheless there 
is a sense in which injustice, inequity, is now operating, 
not so much through any individual evil as through the 
changed conditions under which we are living. The blessings 
of the new dispensation, coming to us under social 
conditions which are based upon individual selfishness, are 
tending to make a few very rich, and before very long we 
fear will be found to so operate as to make many very poor. 

The appropriating of the advantages of our day, while 
legally done, under laws that at one time were equitable, 
is bound apparently to work a great hardship— putting the 
power and financial control of the world in the hands of 
comparatively a few. True, those few giants are as yet 
very moderate in their requirements and dealings, some of 
them even generous; but the Scriptures seem to clearly 
imply that it will not be very long until their power, willingly 
or unwillingly, will be so exercised as to bring 
great distress upon the mass of humanity, grinding them 
as between two millstones. From this standpoint the 
Prophet's words might well be appropriated by Christendom; 
but we may be sure that those in power and position 
are not disposed to hearken to Amos or to any one 
else, and hence we must expect what the Scriptures everywhere 
point out, that the overthrow of Christendom will 
come suddenly, in a time of trouble such as was not since 
there was a nation; and that in this conflict the Lord, 
who made Pleiades and Orion, will be he that will strengthen 

R3425 : page 270 

the spoiled against the strong, so that the spoiled ones 
shall rise against the strong ones in anarchy— Verse 9. 

The close of Amos' prophecy tells of the recovery of 
Israel and the blessing of the Lord that will be upon all 
mankind, including the Gentiles, at that time. It is this 
prophecy that the Apostle James quoted in the Council at 
Jerusalem, saying, "After this I will return and will build 
again the tabernacle of David, which is fallen down; and 
I will build again the ruins thereof, and I will set it up; 
that the residue of men might seek after the Lord, and all 
the Gentiles, upon whom my name is called, saith the 
Lord, who doeth all these things." (Acts 15:16,17.) We 
are living at the time when this prophecy is about to be 



fulfilled. The recovery of natural Israel is about to take 
place under the reestablishment of God's Kingdom in the 
world— the one that was once typically represented in 
King David, but which is to be actually established in the 
greater David— the "Beloved One." Under that Kingdom, 
reestablished under more favorable conditions, a 
heavenly Kingdom, the residue of men will be given an 
opportunity to seek the Lord, for the knowledge of the 
Lord shall fill the whole earth. 



R3425 : page 270 

REVIEW.— SEPT. 25. 

Golden Text— "The Lord is 
merciful and gracious."— Psa. 103:8. 

TRULY the Lord's mercy and grace are in the International 
Lessons of the quarter which closes with 
this review. With great patience and long suffering 
the Lord had mercy upon the typical people, the house of 
servants, called to constitute and to make types illustrating 
his gracious purposes for the house of sons which would 
follow it, and, incidentally, to prepare the "Israelites 
without guile" for the spiritual blessings to result from 
their transfer to the "house of sons." And not only preparing 
this remnant, but also all those who were faithful 
as members of the "house of servants," attesting their 
loyalty to the Lord, whose reward is to be the privilege of 
representing the heavenly Kingdom as its human agents on 
the earth. But while this is true, how much greater is God's 
mercy as seen and experienced by us who are of the house 
of sons, accepted in the Beloved One! How merciful is 
the Lord toward all those who are seeking to walk in the 
footsteps of the Captain of their salvation! How bountiful 
are the provisions made, not only for their ultimate 
reward, but also for their encouragement during the sojourn 
toward the heavenly city, with provision also for the 
passing over, the covering and the ultimate blotting out of 
their weaknesses by and through him who loved us and 
bought us with his own precious blood. 



R3425 : page 270 
ENCOURAGING WORDS FROM FAITHFUL WORKERS. 

BELOVED FRIENDS :- 

Since writing you last I have enjoyed a number of 
days in happy service of the Truth. An incident somewhat 
unusual in the general colporteur experience you 
will perhaps be glad to hear. In soliciting orders for 
our glad tidings in the town of B some days ago I 



was addressing a merchant when he turned and said, 

"Brother L , what do you think of this book?" (I 

have since learned that this Bro. L is one of Southern 

Arkansas' most prominent Baptist ministers.) In reply 

he said, "Buy it and read, and if you don't like it I 

will pay your money back," and before I left he sold 

several books for me. One of the gentlemen present 

said, "Stranger, why can't you preach for us here?" 

I replied I would be pleased to do so, if house and congregation 

could be had, whereupon this dear old Bro. 

L proffered me the use of the Baptist Church. Their 

pulpit was occupied at 1 1 a.m. and 8 p.m., so they gave 
me 3 p.m. At their 1 1 o'clock service the minister announced 
the afternoon service, and his words were about 
as follows: "The subject this evening will be 'God's 
plan of saving man.' The man who is to preach is selling 
one of the most wonderful books of the nineteenth 
century and if you haven't got one I insist that you do 
so at once and read it carefully and prayerfully. The 
book will teach you more in one week than you have 
known in all your life about the Bible." 

The Society had sent this dear Baptist brother a 
"Plan of the Ages" in TOWER form. Think of what 
this five cent investment has done in mightily arousing 
one of God's sleeping ones yet in Babylon; next in selling 
four or five volumes, which doubtless will spread; 
next it led to our three o'clock service, which I learned 
later put two to reading— and so the good work goes 
on, and, hallelujah! we know it will be completed to 
the glory of the Father and the good of his creatures. 

Yours faithfully in Christ, 

E. Z. JOHNSON.-Colporteur. 



DEAR BRETHREN:- 

Enclosed find my report covering some very precious 
seasons of fellowship and service with friends by 
the way, and also marking some very bitter antagonism 
to the Truth. The hardest conditions that I have met 
since beginning the work I think I found at N 



The feeling there is quite bitter. We had a very quiet 
meeting in the hall the first night, but on the second 
night the Episcopal Church people had a garden 
party (whatever this means) about a block from our 
meeting place. That of course brought to the village 
many from the surrounding country. The spirit of 
hilarity contingent upon the gathering of a crowd, together 
with expressions of contempt or disapproval of 
our faith by those in authority, I presume, led some of 
the "baser sort" to show by acts bordering on violence 
the contempt which others were content to express in 
words. During our service a large stone was hurled 
into the midst of the hall. Other stones were thrown 
against the house, showing the animus of the community. 
We continued the service to the end of the discourse 



R3425 : page 271 

and rejoiced that we were counted worthy to suffer 
such things for the Truth's sake. 

With Christian love and greetings to all, I am as 
ever, Sincerely yours in the faith, 

JOHN HARRISON,-Pilgrim. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL,- 

I have long since felt it my duty to write you and 
say that I have laid aside the terrors that I have heretofore 
held in my heart for the MILLENNIAL DAWN literature 
(for terror it was before I knew it for myself). 
I only knew that the very best of our Church members 
were being lured away from the Church by reading your 
literature. I once bought the first DAWN from a Colporteur 
without knowing what it was. When it was 
delivered I said, "I have the money for you, but I want 
you to understand that I will not read the book; it is 
different to what I thought it was. I will pay you for 
it, but the book will go in the stove. I will burn it." 
How could I read a book the influence of which would 
lure me from the Church in whose cradle I had been 
rocked, and in whose cradle I had lulled my children 
to sleep. Now I have no such dread or fear, but am 
willing to give up not only my Church but loved ones 

R3426 : page 271 

also and flee into the wilderness for the Truth's sake. 

I am anxious to withdraw from the Church, and 
would also like some tracts suitable for Methodist 
people. Your sister in Christ, 

SARAH E. CASE, -Illinois. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

I received your last letter and appreciate the kind 
greetings. My receiving two extra blessings close upon 
one another prompted me to write these few lines that 
you may share them with me. Yesterday morning 
while "delivering," I met a lady to whom I had delivered 
Vol. I. some weeks ago, in the back of which I had 
inserted a tract on "What is the Soul?" She told me 
she had read both, and said she had read quite a good 
deal of Biblical literature on the soul question, but out 
of it all, nothing gave her the satisfaction afforded by 
the tract. She has already loaned the volume to an 
old gentleman, who also has read it and is much interested. 
I received orders for Vols. II. and III. from the 
lady and she desires to get the whole set. 

The other case is also that of a lady to whom I had 



delivered Vol. I. At the time I received her order I 
noticed that she was more than ordinarily interested in 
Bible topics; so I put a mark beside her name in my 
order book, with the purpose of calling some time, which 
I did. On inquiring how she liked the book she said, 
"Just grand, and I want the next one! Before you 
leave call and receive my order for a number of the first 
volume, to be used as Christmas gifts." She informed 
me that she had been thinking on the subjects contained 
in detail in the "Plan of the Ages" for a number of 
years past, and indeed she seemed happy for having 
received the book. 

I thank God for being permitted to receive such 
privileges and pray that I may become more and more 
a faithful "steward." With Christian love, I remain, 

Your brother and servant in Christ, 

CARL F. HAMMERLE,-Colporteur. 



MY DEAR BROTHER, PASTOR RUSSELL:- 

I am writing to you to express my deeply-felt gratitude 
to God and to you his servant, that through reading 
your books and studying the Word of God in connection 
with what you have written I have been brought 
into the clearer sunshine of his blessed revelation, and 
rejoice to see it from what I firmly believe is God's 
standpoint. God has indeed been good to me in guiding 
me into the Present Truth. I was very much prejudiced 
at first, as I had wrong notions concerning your 
teaching. The idea of the millennium starting from the 
year 1874 was a stumbling block to me until it was explained, 
and I tore up the tracts which had been handed 
to me and refused to read them. I had never heard 
of MILLENNIAL DAWN until about nine months ago, 
when my attention was called to the WATCH TOWER by 
a dear saint, a patient slowly dying of cancer, and my 
first idea about it was a glorification of so-called Christendom, 
because it placed the dawn of the millennium 
at the present time. Thinking it could easily be refuted 
by the Word of God, and with a desire to help others 
to ward off error, I promised to read one of the 
tracts, "The Hope of Immortality." I was simply 
amazed with the reasonableness, the wisdom, of it. It 
never occurred to me before that the all-wise God would 
certainly not have committed the silly blunder of making 
man an imperishable being, an "immortal soul," 
knowing beforehand how he would fall. I read through 
the tract, praying to God to guard me against being 
influenced by error. When I finished it I tore off on 
my bicycle at once to get "The Plan of the Ages" and 
"What Say the Scriptures About Hell?" I was so impatient 
that I did not like waiting a moment and eagerly 
devoured the books when I got them. 

I have now read carefully and thoughtfully all the 
DAWN volumes several times and each time I learn 



more. Soon after beginning to read them we had a 
month's mission in Liverpool held by Messrs. Torrey 
and Alexander. Dr. Torrey was very much opposed to 
the DAWNS and warned the people against them. He 
advised the people to "take the tracts; By all means 
take them, and take them home and burn them." This 
seemed to me like the R.C. priests who say, "By all 
means take the Bible given to you and then burn it." 
His sermon on "Hell" was simply awful for its bitterness 
and nightmare misery, and he defined eternal punishment 
as "every second suffering infinite agonies 
throughout unending billions of years." One poor woman 
who knew I was reading the DAWNS said to me 
after one of the meetings, "Oh, Dr. Hughes, do burn 
those books, do burn those books!" and I was told that 
I would be done for if I read "those awful books!" So 
you see that it has been in the teeth of prejudice all 
along, and if it had not been that God had given me 
"Truth hunger" I should have neglected this glorious 
opportunity and lost the great blessing. 

At a mission Sunday School in connection with the 
Presbyterian Church I joined some years ago I have a 
Bible Class for working men on Sunday afternoon for 
the last four months. I have been giving them MILLENNIAL 
DAWN teaching, and one or two of the young 
men have spoken about bringing the matter of my 
teaching before the minister. Some of them listen very 
attentively and seem to be greatly blessed. 

Believe me to be, dear brother, yours very lovingly 
in our glorious and risen Savior, 

E. LUCAS HUGHES,-England. 



page 273 

SEMI-MONTHLY. 
VOL. XXV. SEPTEMBER 15, 1904. No. 18. 



CONTENTS. 

Views from the Watch Tower 275 

Arguing Against Denominational 

Union 275 

Bishop Foster Too Old Fogy 276 

Misleading Young to Hate God 277 

Defied God and Died 278 

Elisha the Prophet 278 

The Boston Convention 281 

According to thy Faith 281 

Hospitality and Faith Rewarded 284 

Interesting Questions Answered 286 

page 274 



LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-24 EVERSHOLT ST., LONDON, N.W. 
GERMAN BRANCH-MIRKER STR., 45, ELBERFELD. 
AUSTRALIAN BRANCH-32 JOHNSTON ST., FITZROY, MELBOURNE. 

PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE, 5c (2-l/2d.) A COPY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity 
or adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER, will be supplied FREE, if 
they send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting 
the paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our 
list continually. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



THIS JOURNAL IS PUBLISHED IN THE 

FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, DANISH AND ITALIAN LANGUAGES. 

SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



R3428 : page 274 

TRACTS FOR COUNTRY FAIRS. 



Country Fair Time is upon us. These fairs furnish 
favorable opportunities for reaching the farming communities 
with morsels of spiritual food;— a class more difficult 
to reach than city folk;— a thoughtful, reading class, 
too. We will be glad to supply the tracts freely, but urge 
that judgment be used in distribution— wherever possible. 

THE TITLE OF THE DAWNS. 



It is not our thought to abandon the now so well-known 
title, MILLENNIAL DAWN. But since many of its 
enemies have misrepresented it in public and in private the 
new title is proposed to save colporteurs (in some quarters) 
the time and trouble of explaining away the lies— of showing 
that it not only is not "an infidel book," against the 



Bible, but the very reverse, a Bible Key or Studies in the 
Scriptures. The books under the new title will not be 
ready for some time, but meantime colporteurs preferring 
this edition may order it and get the old edition until we 
get caught up. 



R3426 : page 275 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 
ARGUING FOR DENOMINATIONAL UNION. 



AT a meeting held in Washington City not long 
since, to favor the union of Methodist Protestants, 
Congregationalists and United 
Brethren, one of the speakers said:— 

"Lutherans are divided into 16 different bodies, 
Baptists into 13, Presbyterians into 20 and Methodists 
into 17. Who is wise enough to show us how and to 
what extent the Kingdom of God is being profited by 
all these divisions? Does Presbyterianism have 20 
and Methodism 17 different messages to the world? 
How ridiculous the thought of having 16 varieties of 
Lutherans and 16 Baptists in the same town or mission 
field. The fact is we are over-organized. Our 
machinery is too ponderous and complex. It requires 
so much energy and money to keep it going that we 
have but little to use beyond the machinery itself. 
Just think of the missionary and church extension organizations, 
of the publishing plants, colleges, theological 
seminaries and the great number and variety 
of other benevolent institutions which are fairly piled 
upon each other! No wonder there is friction and 
great waste. Nor need we be surprised that level-headed 
laymen are getting tired of seeing their money 
wasted and are beginning to seek a remedy. 

"Away with the delusion that the God of all 
wisdom and grace has planned for the continued existence 
of these ecclesiastical divisions and sub-divisions, 
with 100 more that might be named, whose 
presence cannot be explained on any rational grounds 
or in harmony with the spirit of the gospel. 

"Mere federation will not accomplish what we 
want. We must go further. The call of God at this 
hour to husband our resources and to unify our forces, 
to the end that we may conquer and win, is loud and 
clear. 

"How humiliating the thought that very much 
of the money raised in this country ostensibly to save 
the heathen is spent in keeping up ecclesiastical distinctions 
and consequently the most shameful rivalries. 
Why should a town of only a few hundred 



people be burdened with a half dozen churches, when 
two at most would answer every purpose? Yet we 
have scores and hundreds of such over churched 
towns. Christian work, so called, degenerates into a 
mere scramble for existence. 

"In concentration we will find a solution of 
many of the problems which confront and annoy us; 
and this centralization is impossible where a multiplicity 
of similar organizations exist. It is a sin to waste 
God's money in duplicating agencies, and yet this is 
being done all the time." 



It seems remarkable that some of the most earnest 
and intelligent Christian people in all denominations 
are so misled by the present cry of denominational 
union. The majority seem to be entirely blind to the 
real issues: they are all carried off their feet mentally 
with enthusiasm for a united Church. They fail to 
see that such a union must be disadvantageous along 
the lines proposed, namely, the ignoring of doctrine, 
the ignoring of conscience, the ignoring of truth. In 
the union of Christendom which prevailed for over a 
thousand years before the Reformation, the basis of 
union was false doctrine supported by tyranny and 
force, persecution and fire. The Reformation movement 
was a breaking up of those evil influences, and 
practically every denomination into which Christendom 
split represented further endeavor to get to the 
truths taught in the Lord's Word. The union or 
federation of all denominations now proposed is to be 
one in which not only false doctrines will be considerably 
ignored, but also the true doctrines of the Lord's 
Word. Among those to be retained as fundamental 
will be some of the gross errors that dominated Papacy 
during the Dark Ages, and much of the Reformation 
blessing will be entirely lost. 

The union of the true Church is amply provided 
for in the Scriptures without any outside patent fastenings, 
bolts, rivets, cords, etc. The Scriptural proposition 
is that the Lord's people, instead of being 
united to him by sects and parties called "branches," 

R3426 : page 276 

should be united to him individually— as individual 

branches. As he declares in his Word, "I am the 

true vine, ye [individually] are the branches." As 

the Reformation led to the splitting off from Papacy 

and its errors various large composite branches or denominations, 

so we need still further reformation that 

will split every sect up into individual units, so that 

each individual Christian will have his own individual 

faith and his own personal relationship to the Lord as 

a "branch." Union of denominations, instead of 



favoring this proper condition which the Lord designed 

for his people, will be in opposition to it. But 

the true people of God will gradually be guided of 

him and separated from the Babylonian bundles, leaving 

therein only the tares. Thus the separation of 

this harvest time is progressing. 

The tare element in the nominal Church sees 
matters only from the worldly natural standpoint and 
hence, influenced by pride, etc., favors size and bulk 
rather than truth. The Lord is taking advantage of 
their worldly spirit and favoring their organization, 
that the gulf between the tares and wheat may daily, 
monthly, yearly become more marked. Meantime 
through the Truth and its various mouthpieces and 
ministers the Lord is calling the attention of the true 
saints to the bright shining of his glorious plan, now 
visible as never before; and as they perceive it and 
compare it with their surroundings in Babylon, it becomes 
to them the voice of God saying to them, 
"Come out of her, my people, that ye be not partakers 

R3427 : page 276 

of her sins and receive not of her plagues." 

More and more, as the present "harvest" draws 
to its close, the uniting of the tares will progress and 
the liberty of the wheat will likewise progress: 
"Whom the Son makes free is free indeed." The 
wheat will more and more give heed to the words of 
the Apostle, "Stand fast, therefore, in the liberty 
wherewith Christ hath made us free, and be not entangled 
again with the yoke of bondage." 

But while the wheat class are to be thus free, are 
not to be bundled like the tares, there will be, nevertheless, 
among them a union, not of bondage and 

creeds and disciplines, etc., but a union of hearts, accomplished 
by and through the Truth. Each one of 
this class, being united as a branch to the vine, will 
thus have a relationship to every other branch in the 
vine. This is the true union which the Lord desires 
amongst his people— union in Christ. Those thus 
united to the Head are his members or branches, and 
as they come to realize this relationship they will discern 
that they are not Lutherans, nor Calvinists, nor 
Russellites, nor Wesleyans, nor Campbellites, but are 
all one in Christ Jesus. 

The secret of this individual liberty, individual 
faith, individual responsibility toward the Lord, yet 
complete union with all who are his, is found in the 
fact that these are all "taught of God," taught of his 
Word, guided by his Spirit. We do not by this mean 
that the teaching element in the Church is to be ignored, 
of which the Apostle declares, "He that is of 
God heareth us," and again, God hath set in the 
body the various members as it has pleased him, pastors, 
teachers, evangelists, etc. The point to be kept 



in mind is that evangelists, teachers, apostles are not 
to be given in our minds the place that belongs to the 
Lord, but at very most are to be esteemed as his 
servants and mouthpieces, and as such are to be critically 
examined by each believer to see that the teachings 
are in harmony with those of the Lord and 
the Apostles— "If they speak not according to this 
Word, it is because there is no light in them." Thus 
the true saints are all to be taught of God in that they 
will lovingly and critically examine every teaching 
and every teacher in the light of the divine message. 
This is the union which the saints should desire and 
which the Lord is gradually accomplishing amongst 
his people, the wheat, while outward union is being 
favored by him as a means of separating the tares 
from the wheat. 

BISHOP FOSTER TOO OLD FOGY. 



Bishop Foster of the Methodist Episcopal Church 
has been dropped from the lists— superannuated. The 
gentleman took a too pessimistic view of Methodist 
progress. His views are lightly dismissed as childish 
and old fogy. Our readers can judge of these matters 
for themselves and form their own opinions. The 
Bishop's views, as expressed by himself and published 
in the Methodist Journal, are as follows:— 

The Church of God is to-day courting the 
world. Its members are trying to bring it down to 
the level of the ungodly. The ball, the theatre, nude 
and lewd art, social luxuries, with all their loose 
moralities, are making inroads into the sacred enclosure 
of the Church; and as a satisfaction for all this 
worldliness, Christians are making a great deal of Lent 
and Easter and Good Friday and Church ornamentations. 
It is the old trick of Satan. The Jewish 
Church struck on that rock, the Romish Church was 
wrecked on the same, and the Protestant Church is 
fast reaching the same doom. 

Our great dangers, as we see them, are assimilation 
to the world, neglect of the poor, substitution 
of the form for the fact of godliness, abandonment of 
discipline, a hireling ministry, an impure gospel, 
which, summed up, is a fashionable church. That 
Methodists should be liable to such an outcome, and 
that there should be signs of it in a hundred years 
from the "sail loft," seems almost the miracle of history; 
but who that looks about him to-day can fail to 
see the fact? 

Do not Methodists, in violation of God's Word 

R3427 : page 277 

and their own discipline, dress as extravagantly and 



as fashionably as any other class? Do not the ladies, 
and often the wives and daughters of the ministry, 
put on "gold and pearls and costly array?" Would not 
the plain dress insisted upon by John Wesley, Bishop 
Asbury and worn by Hester Ann Rogers, Lady Huntingdon 
and many others equally distinguished, be now 
regarded in Methodist circles as fanaticism? Can any 
one going into the Methodist Church in any of our 
chief cities distinguish the attire of the communicants 
from that of the theatre and ball-goers? Is not worldliness 
seen in the music? Elaborately dressed and 
ornamented choirs, who in many cases make no profession 
of religion and are often sneering skeptics, 
go through a cold, artistic or operatic performance, 
which is as much in harmony with spiritual worship 
as an opera or theater. Under such worldly performance 
spirituality is frozen to death. 

Formerly every Methodist attended class and 
gave testimony of experimental religion. Now the 
class meeting is attended by very few, and is in 
many churches abandoned. Seldom the stewards, trustees 
and leaders of the church attend class. Formerly 
nearly every Methodist prayed, testified or exhorted 
in prayer-meeting. Now but very few are heard. 
Formerly shouts and praises were heard; now such 
demonstrations of holy enthusiasm and joy are regarded 
as fanaticism. 

Worldly socials, fairs, festivals, concerts and such 
like have taken the place of the religious gatherings, 
revival meetings, class and prayer meetings of earlier 
days. 

How true that the Methodist discipline is a dead 
letter. Its rules forbid the wearing of gold or pearls 
or costly array; yet no one ever thinks of disciplining 
its members for violating them. They forbid the reading 
of such books and the taking of such diversions as 
do not minister to godliness, yet the church itself 
goes to shows and frolics and festivals and fairs, which 
destroy the spiritual life of the young as well as of the 
old. The extent to which this is now carried on is 
appalling. The spiritual death it carries in its train 
will only be known when the millions it has swept 
into hell stand before the judgment. 

The early Methodist ministers went forth to sacrifice 
and suffer for Christ. They sought not places 
of ease and affluence, but of privation and suffering. 
They gloried not in their big salaries, fine parsonages 
and refined congregations, but in the souls that had 
been won for Jesus. Oh, how changed! A hireling 
ministry will be a feeble, a timid, a truckling, a time-serving 
ministry, without faith, endurance and holy 
power. Methodism formerly dealt in the great central 
truth. Now the pulpits deal largely in generalities 
and in popular lectures. The glorious doctrine of 
entire sanctification is rarely heard and seldom witnessed 
in the pulpits." 



As respects the Methodist Church, past and present, 
we are inclined to concede much of what the 
Bishop presents as truth and not as childishness. We 
are inclined to think that higher criticism and evolution 
theories, etc., have turned the minds of the Methodist 
leaders as well as of the leaders in other denominations, 
so that they take a more worldly view of all 
affairs of life than was customary in the past. We 
are not by this meaning to say that Methodists and 
others are less moral or less benevolent than in former 
times, but we do incline to say that they and others of 
our day have less faith in God, less faith in his Word, 
less faith in Jesus and the merit of his precious blood 
for the forgiveness of sins, and less consecration to 
his service than in times past. 

The great sifting, the separating work of this 
harvest time, is in progress: the tare class of nominal 
Christians are being separated from the sincere and 
consecrated wheat class. The latter will be found 
largely in the minority and will be considered "old 
fogy," and their faith and hopes will be greatly at a 
discount in the nominal system, but at a premium in 
the Lord's estimation. The Lord is gathering out his 
jewels and will leave none of them in Babylon. 
"Come out of her, my people, that ye be not partakers 
of her sins and receive not of her plagues." 

The Bride of Christ, the true members of the 
great High Priest, are not falling away in this time of 
general worldliness, unbelief, skepticism and forms of 
godliness without the power, but are growing in 
grace, growing in knowledge, growing in love and in 
the fruits of the Spirit. The difficulty with the world 
is that they see the nominal Christians and see not the 
true Church: "The world knoweth us not because it 
knew him not." 

MISLEADING THE YOUNG TO HATE GOD. 



Before us is an advertisement of "Books for 
Children and Young Persons-Book 10, THE SIGHT OF 
HELL," by Rev. J. Furniss, C.S.S.R., published 
by J. Duffy & Co., Dublin, Ireland. The advertisement 
gives two extracts which we reproduce below 
with a deep sense of shame that in this twentieth century 
and under the British flag there should be people 
to publish and others to buy and circulate such terrible, 
blasphemous misrepresentations of divine providence. 
How we long for the binding of Satan and 
the opening of the eyes of human understanding 
promised in the Millennium. Surely, when some of 
the poor, deluded ones come forth from the tomb they 



will rejoice to know the true God and to participate 
in his glorious plan of salvation at present understood 
by so few. The extract from page 19 reads thus:— 

THE RED HOT FLOOR. 

"Look into this room. What a dreadful place it 
is! The roof is red-hot, the walls are red-hot, the 
floor is like a thick sheet of red-hot iron. See, on the 
middle of that red-hot floor stands a girl! She looks 
about sixteen years old. Her feet are bare. She has 
neither shoes nor stockings on her feet; her bare feet 
stand on the red-hot burning floor. The door of this 

R3428 : page 278 

room has never been opened since she first set 
her foot on the red-hot floor. Now she sees that the 
door is opening. She rushes forward. She has gone 
down on her knees on the red-hot floor. Listen! she 
speaks. She says: 'I have been standing with my 
bare feet on this red-hot floor for years. Day and 
night my only standing place has been this red-hot 
floor. Sleep never came on me for a moment that I 
might forget the horrible burning floor. Look, 
she says, at my burnt and bleeding feet! Let 
me go off this burning floor for one single moment, 
only for one single, short moment! Oh, 
that in this endless eternity of years I might forget 
the pain only for a single moment!' 

"The devil answers her question: 'Do you ask,' 
he says, 'for a moment; for one moment to forget 
your pain? No, not for one single moment during 
the never-ending eternity of years shall you ever leave 
this red-hot floor!' 

'"Is it so,' the girl says with a sigh that seems 
to break her heart, 'Then, at least let somebody go to 
my little brothers and sisters who are alive and tell 
them not to do the bad things which I did, so they 
will never have to come and stand on the red-hot 
floor.' 

"The devil answers her again: 'Your little 
brothers and sisters have the priests to tell them 
these things. If they will not listen to the priests, 
neither would they listen even if somebody should go 
to them from the dead.' 

"Oh, that you could hear the horrible, the fearful 
scream of that girl when she saw the door shutting, 
never to be opened any more. The history of this 
girl is short. Her feet first led her into sin, so it is 
her feet most of all which are tormented. While yet 
a very little child she began to go into bad company. 
The more she grew up, the more she went into bad 
company, against the bidding of her parents. She 
used to walk about the streets at night and do very 
wicked things. She died early. Her death was 



brought on by the bad life she led." 

THE RED-HOT OVEN. 

"See! it is a pitiful sight. The little child is in 
this red-hot oven. Hear how it screams to come out! 
See how it turns and twists itself about in the fire! It 
beats its head against the roof of the oven. It stamps 
its little feet on the floor of the oven. You can see 
on the face of this little child what you can see on the 
faces of all in hell— despair, desperate and horrible! 
...God was very good to this child." (!!!) 



To know that such things are believed and taught 
today helps us to comprehend that once they were almost 
the exclusive teachings of Europe;— helps us, 
too, to understand that people who held such erroneous 
ideas of God's arrangements could and did prepare 
similarly diabolical tortures for those who differed 
with them, and might do the same again if circumstances 
favored it. It is difficult for humanity to 
rise in conduct above its conception of God and his 
conduct. 

DEFIED GOD AND FELL DEAD. 



Baltimore, Aug. 20.— Consternation reigns in the little 
town of Allen, in Southern Maryland, over the strange 
death of Walter H. Whitney, a pronounced atheist, but one 
of the most popular residents of the place. On Sunday 
night Whitney was conversing with some friends, when he 
suddenly exclaimed: "I defy the Almighty to strike me 
dead!" Instantly Whitney fell to the floor, and when 
those about him picked him up he was dead. 



Not long since we called attention to the case of a young 
man whose challenge that if there be a God he might be 
assured of it by being stricken deaf and dumb. He was 
stricken instantly and is reported to have recovered about 
a month later. The above is on the same line. The clipping 
was handed us during the Boston Convention, and we 
read it to the large audience as an illustration of divine 
judgments in execution, and the awe and obedience they 
would quickly inspire throughout the world. 

Imagine the Millennial reign inaugurated, with its prompt 
rewards for right doing and prompt and just punishments 
for wilful sins, and we can see that a wonderful change in 
the morals of the world would speedily be effected. Such 
will be the judgments of that thousand year judgment day. 
"When the judgments of the Lord are abroad in the 



earth the inhabitants of the world will learn 
righteousness." 

Of course, the death of the young man mentioned in 
this dispatch is not to be considered lasting death or Second 
Death, because he was really ignorant and showed it. 
Undoubtedly he will be awakened during the Millennial 
day of judgments, and be granted a clear knowledge of 
the Lord before he could be liable to the final penalty— 
the extreme penalty— "The soul that sinneth, it shall die" 
—the Second Death, from which there is no hope of 
recovery. 



R3428 : page 278 

ELISHA THE PROPHET. 

-2 KINGS 2:12-24.-OCTOBER 2.- 

Golden Text:— "Let a double portion of 
thy spirit be upon me."— 2 Kings 2:9. 

THAT Elisha was the son of a wealthy Israelite is 

evidenced by the fact that his father's farming 

was done on a large scale. At the time that 

Elijah, under divine direction, first approached him 

and indicated his call to special service by symbolically 

laying his mantle upon Elisha's shoulders, the 

latter was plowing his father's fields with twelve separate 

yoke of oxen under servants, he accompanying 

the twelfth. That he was of a religious family not 

affected by the idolatry introduced by Jeroboam is 

evidenced by the name his parents gave him, Elisha 

signifying "God is deliverer." His call through Elijah 

was not to a place of honor and distinction 

but to become a servant of the Prophet, 

but he entered upon the service joyfully, esteeming 

it as done unto the Lord. He was thus 

with Elijah for more than ten years, until the 

latter was separated from him by the chariot of 

R3428 : page 279 

fire and was taken up by the whirlwind. His relationship 
was really that of a serving son, and between 
the two a deep affection had evidently sprung up, for 
he seemed not only to reverence Elijah as the Prophet 
of the Lord but also to love him as a father. 

It is at this point that our lesson opens. Elijah 
had asked Elisha what blessing he would most desire 
at his hand before their separation, and in the language 
of our Golden Text the latter had requested a double 
portion of Elijah's spirit. This does not signify his 
desire to have twice as much as Elijah enjoyed, but 
rather was the familiar way of expressing an elder 



son's portion— a double portion as compared with 

other members of the family. Elisha aspired to have 

of the Lord a recognition as the Lord's special representative 

instead of Elijah when the latter was gone. 

The answer was that his request would be granted if 

he should see Elijah at the time of his taking: this 

seemed to imply that circumstances or conditions 

would tend to separate the two, and if they were separated 

from any cause Elisha would fail of the blessing 

desired. We remember that after this promise, 

when the Lord would take up Elijah, he led him by a 

circuitous route, and at the various stopping-places 

suggested that Elisha tarry; but to have suffered anything 

to have separated him from Elijah would have 

excluded him from the desired blessing, and we recall 

that Elisha clung closely to the Prophet, allowing 

nothing to detain him or hinder his being with him to 

the very last. 

Doubtless there is a typical significance in this, 
for although the Scriptures do not conclusively show 
that Elisha was a type, we have definite, positive assurance 
of this kind respecting Elijah; and, again, 
the lesson through both these prophets seemed to be 
typical so far as the Gospel Church is concerned. It 
was not until after their day that the Lord provided 
for the written prophecies, such as those of Isaiah, 

R3429 : page 279 

Amos, Malachi, etc., which have come down to us 
with important teachings applicable to spiritual Israel. 

When Elijah was taken up in the chariot Elisha 
did recognize the fact and shouted, "My father, my 
father, the chariots of Israel and the horsemen thereof." 
This was his good by salutation, and indicated 
that he fully recognized that the God of Israel had 
taken his servant by his own mighty power. As a 
prophet he probably expressed more than he himself 
understood. We have already seen that the translation 
of Elijah taught in a typical or pantomimic way 
the change of the last living members of this Gospel 
Church, the antitypical Elijah.* The taking of Elijah 
was the matter of a moment, but the change of the 
living members of the Church, which is the body of 
Christ and the antitype of Elijah, is a work of years, 
already in progress since 1878. Since that time we 
understand the Scriptures to teach that the overcomers 
of the Church in dying do not sleep, but are 
changed in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye, to 
the heavenly glory, the spiritual conditions of the 
first resurrection. Ours is the real deliverance by 
chariots of victory and divine power from death, from 
weakness, from imperfection, to glory, honor and immortality. 
Elijah's experiences were merely typical. 
He was not changed to the spiritual or divine nature, 
for he was not an heir of the heavenly promises, living 



before the time of their promulgation; but he was 
an honored servant, and used of the Lord for the setting 
forth of a typical lesson representing the experiences 
of the Church of the First-born down to the 
very end of its journey, including its change. 

Elijah's mantle, symbolical of his authority and 
dignity, did fall to Elisha, as was prophetically implied 
ten years before when he was invited to become 
Elijah's servant. Elisha took off his own outer garment 
or mantle and tore it in two parts, an act in that 
day symbolical of grief, sorrow, mourning, and then 
instead of his own he appropriated Elijah's mantle. 

These incidents took place "on the other side 
Jordan"— on the eastern side, presumably not far from 
the river, possibly on Mount Pisgah, or in the neighborhood 
of the place where Moses took his last view 
of the promised land. Elisha, calling upon the name 
of the Lord, returned by the same route which they had 
come, arriving at Jordan, and used Elijah's mantle as 
a rod to smite the waters of Jordan, knowing that if 
the power of God was with him, as it previously was 
with Elijah, then the same results would follow in his 
case and the waters would divide at his command as 
they previously had done at Elijah's. His faith was 
undoubtedly made stronger by the manifestation of 
divine favor in connection with the separation of the 
waters, while he passed across to the western side of 
Jordan where the "sons of the prophets" awaited him. 

As already stated, nothing in the Scriptures positively 
assures us that Elisha was a type; but if his 
experiences from the time Elijah was taken away were 
typical, it would appear to us that they were in some 
sense double— that he represented two classes. 

(1) He would seem in the first part of his experience, 
accompanying Elijah and serving him and yet 
being separate from him, to represent what we designate 
as the second company, the class that in Revelation 7:9-14 
is described as a great multitude whose 
number no man knoweth, who are— not the Royal 
Priesthood but the antitypical Levites— consecrated 
to service but not going on to share in the Priesthood 
by sacrificing all the interests of this present life. If 
Elisha be a type of this class, it would appear that 
there should be a close affinity of heart, of spirit, between 
these and the sacrificing Royal Priesthood, so 
that nothing will shake their devotion nor hinder them 
from fellowshiping with and serving the Elijah class 
down to the time of their change. The spirit of devotion 



*See MILLENNIAL DAWN, Vol. II., Chap. viii. 
R3429 : page 280 
previously manifested by the little flock would 



thereafter be manifested by those who had hesitated 
and refrained from a consecration of themselves and 
all their interests in the fullest degree. This would 
imply that the remainder of their lives would be of 
the same character as that of the little flock, although 
it would then be too late to gain a part and place in 
the Elijah class, or a share in the glory, honor and 
immortality which the Lord has prepared for them. 
With this view, Elisha's recrossing Jordan might be 
understood as representing their faithfulness, their 
testimony, and their passing over the Jordan of death 
without being overwhelmed by the waters— that is to 
say, that the death of this Elisha class would be a 
passing over without "sleep," a change from human 
to spirit conditions, though not to the conditions to 
which the Elijah class will attain. 

From this standpoint we would be inclined to 
view the remaining experiences of Elisha after he had 
crossed Jordan as typifying still another class— a restitution 
class amongst men under the restitution conditions 
which we believe will begin to obtain from 
October, 1914 A.D., and onward, represented probably 
in the ancient worthies, who will then, as the earthly 
representatives of the heavenly Kingdom, begin to 
exercise a guiding and controlling influence in the affairs 
of mankind. 

The suggestion of the sons of the prophets that 
messengers be sent to see whether or not Elijah had 
been dropped down somewhere on the mountains, 
would, from this standpoint, represent an expectancy 
on the part of the well-meaning but uninstructed people 
of the time that the Gospel Church would be reinstituted. 
It would indicate on their part a slowness 
of perception of the change to the new order of 
things, in which the ancient worthies (represented in 
Elisha) would have the guidance and direction of 
earthly affairs and through whom blessings must thereafter 
be expected. The wait and search for Elijah 
may represent a period of three years, in which the 
world may fail to receive the blessings it might enjoy 
by reason of a failure to exercise faith in the new institutions 
of that time. 

As soon as Elisha was recognized as beyond all 
question the successor of Elijah, his work— totally 
different from anything Elijah had done— began. It 
was in many respects a restitution work— and a judgment 
work. An illustration of both these phases of 
his ministry are furnished in the present lesson. 

Jericho was quite a prosperous city and favorably 
located, except that it had a poor water supply. The 
spring of water which supplied the city, and from 
which apparently the surrounding country was irrigated, 
was brackish— contained some mineral property 
that had the effect of causing the products of the 
land to drop off before they reached maturity, so that 
the land brought no fruit to perfection. The word 



Jericho signifies "his moon" or "month," and this in 

turn reminds us that the moon was a symbol of Israel, 

as the sun in the Scriptures is the symbol of the 

Gospel Church. There is this bare hint that the people 

of Jericho perhaps in this picture represented natural 

Israel, and the fact that they will be the first to 

recognize the restitution class and to look for relief 

to those ancient worthies who will then be in control 

under the guidance of the glorified Church, the 

heavenly Kingdom. From this standpoint we can see 

that natural Israel, for now over eighteen hundred 

years, has been striving to bring forth fruitage, but 

has been unable to do so. That people indeed have 

clung to the promise of God and have attempted to 

bring forth the fruits of obedience, worship, reverence, 

etc., but they have brought forth no fruit to 

perfection because by the deeds of the Law can no 

flesh be justified in God's sight. The Law, represented 

in the symbolical picture by the brackish water, 

was in itself just, perfect, good, yet it lacked 

something necessary to make it a blessing to that 

people. That something was the work of Christ in 

fulfilling the Law and thus removing its curse or condemnation 

from those who were dependent upon it. 

From this standpoint the appeal of the men of 
Jericho to the restitution Elisha would represent the 
appeal of the Jews to the ancient worthies to know 
why the blight had been upon them so long as a people, 
and what would be necessary to the correction of 
their difficulty that they might have the full blessing 
of the Lord. As the request of the people of Jericho 
was granted, so the request of Israel will be granted, 
for the ancient worthies (the restitution Elisha) will 
take a new earthen vessel with salt therein— representing 
the new institutions, the new conditions, the 
new views respecting Christ and the glorified spiritual 
Israel ("Ye are the salt of the earth"). And this 
construction placed upon Israel's Law, this application 
and instruction and showing of its true import 
and fulfilment, etc., will mean to those who desire 
that knowledge and blessing the healing of their 
stream, and henceforth to Israel the Law will have a 
new meaning and bring forth in their hearts fruitage 
acceptable to the Lord, the righteousness of the Law 
being reckoned to those who accept the Redeemer 
who recognize him in connection with the Law and 
seek to obey his voice. 

It was following this that Elisha on the way to 
Bethel was disdained and insulted by a mob of young 
lads [Leeser] who shouted after him, "Go up, thou 
bald head," etc. It is claimed by some that this expression, 
"bald head," was a particularly opprobrious 
epithet at that time, and that the lads were from 
the city whose waters had been healed; and if the 
matter be typical it would seem to indicate that 
amongst the people of natural Israel will be some who 



would appreciate the new condition of things while 
others would despise it. Elisha looked behind him 
and declared them "evil in the name of Jehovah" 
[Young's translation], and forthwith two she bears 
attacked them and more or less scratched or tore 
forty-two of them. So far as the literal incident was 
concerned, it served to teach a lesson of respect for 
the Lord through his representatives, not only to the 
boys but also to their parents, who had failed of their 
duty either by misinstructing them or failing to instruct 
them. If viewed prophetically, symbolically, 
it would typify the judgments of the future upon 
any who will disregard the instructions of the earthly 
representatives of the Kingdom, or fail to render to 
them a proper appreciation of the dignity of their office 
as chosen agents of the heavenly Kingdom. 
These two incidents illustrate well the conditions 

R3430 : page 281 

which will prevail throughout the whole world during 

the Millennial age. Those desiring a blessing will 

be granted it, and those despising the Lord's arrangements 

and violating proprieties will receive judgments 

or punishments. Thus we read that when the judgments 

of the Lord are abroad in the earth the inhabitants 

of the world will learn righteousness. 

We can readily see that when God shall thus interpose 
his power to reward every good deed and to 
punish every transgression it would not take the world 
a great while to learn the difference between right and 
wrong, and very speedily the majority surely would 
be prompted to render obedience to the right and to 
abstain from the wrong. At first this might only be 
an outward obedience and loyalty to the Lord and to 
the principles of righteousness; but as years and centuries 
roll around and the benefits and blessings of 
righteousness are manifested and the evils and punishments 
of unrighteousness are seen, the lessons 
would touch the hearts of all such as the Lord purposes 
may have eternal life, so that at the great harvesting 
at the end of the Millennial age all who love 
righteousness and hate iniquity in their hearts would 
be able to stand all the testings of that time, and thus 
would be accounted worthy of the eternal life and 
blessedness beyond the Millennium throughout eternity; 
while the others, demonstrating that they had 
refrained from evil merely because of the fear of punishment, 
would in the Lord's judgment have had a 
sufficient experience with his mercies and would be 
cut off in the second death— as unworthy of any further 
opportunity or blessing. 



R3430 : page 281 



THE BOSTON CONVENTION. 

THE friends everywhere will be glad to learn that 
the Boston Convention was a most excellent 
one. The Lord greatly blessed the systematic 
efforts put forth by the dear brethren of the Boston 
Church in connection with the various arrangements 
made— the arrangements effected for lodging the visiting 
friends, the commodious and well located auditorium 
for the Convention meetings, etc. We cannot 
think how the dear friends could possibly have done 
better than they did do. All the arrangements passed 
off smoothly, happily. The Convention was a great 
success, not only in number, but specially in spirit, 
earnestness, love, fellowship. 

Some previous Conventions probably had as large 
a number of visiting brethren and sisters in attendance, 
but none that we recall have passed off more 
satisfactorily, more profitably. The limitations of the 
railroad people touching the date of purchase of tickets 
was rather disadvantageous, and doubtless hindered 
some from attending who would otherwise have 
been with us. As it was, the number of visiting brethren 
and sisters was estimated at 600, and the attendance, 
including the public, at the public service of the 
session was estimated at 2,400. Of course, New England 
contributed by far the largest proportion of the 
visitors, some coming from Ontario, Nova Scotia, 
New York, Pennsylvania, New Jersey, Delaware, 
Virginia, District of Columbia, Florida, Georgia, Ohio, 
and one, at least, from as far off as the Pacific coast. 
It is needless to say that, although many had never met 
before, they were not strangers. The bond of Christian 
love bound all our hearts together, and it required a remarkably 
short time to become thoroughly acquainted. 

The programme was carried out, and apparently 
to the pleasure and profit of all in attendance. Various 
of the brethren led the praise and testimony meetings, 
and the regular services were addressed by 
Brothers J. D. Wright, J. Harrison, H. Samson, 
R. E. Streeter, A. E. Williamson and the Editor. 
Sixty two professed a full consecration— immersion 
into Christ's death— and symbolized the same by water 
immersion, the average of age being about 40 years. 

We feel sure that while met in Convention we had 
with us the love and prayers and interest of thousands 
of the Lord's dear people in every direction. We also 
remembered all the absent ones, and especially such 
as would have loved to be with us had their matters 
and interests so favored. We have no doubt that the 
blessings received by those in attendance were shared 
also by those whose hearts were with us; such surely 
was our petition on your behalf. We trust that not 
only those present received a great blessing, but that 
they have carried it to their homes and that thus it 



has spread abroad, filling many hearts after the manner 
of the widow's cruse of oil, which continually 
poured forth until every empty vessel had been filled. 

We look forward to a still larger attendance at 
the St. Louis Convention, though we cannot hope for 
a more successful session, nor to have a greater blessing 
from the Lord. St. Louis is centrally located, has 
a large population, and the World's Fair excursion 
rates will favor us there considerably. 



R3430 : page 281 

ACCORDING TO THY FAITH. 

-2 KINGS 4: 1-7. -OCTOBER 9.- 

Golden Text:— "Trust in the Lord and do good: so shalt thou 
dwell in the land and verily thou shalt be fed."— Psa. 37:3. 

ELISHA, recognized as Elijah's successor, and 

thus as a special prophet of the Lord, was 

naturally looked to by all the "schools of 

the prophets" as their leader and chancellor. Just 

the exact nature of these "schools of the prophets" 

we may not clearly discern. Apparently they were 

started in the time of the Prophet Samuel, and undoubtedly 

their members were Israelites who had a 

firm trust in God, and who, as the nation went more 

and more into idolatry, felt the need of fellowship one 

with another and of holding up a divine standard in 

their nation. It is quite probable that their gatherings 

were after the manner of what we to-day call 

summer schools— at times which did not conflict with 

their farming, husbandry, etc. From the fact that 

the principal actor in our lesson was the widow of 

R3430 : page 282 

a member of the school of the prophets indicates 

that they were not a monastic order, but rather, 

as we have intimated, that they attended ordinarily 

to the duties of life and had certain periods for assembling 

for religious study and worship. 

The widow found herself distressed by her 
husband's debt and naturally appealed to Elisha for 
advice and assistance, as he might deem proper. She 
recited her case— that her husband had been a member 
of the school of the prophets; that he died, leaving 
her with two children; but so far from having 
left an estate, her husband had bequeathed a 
debt, and according to the customs of the Jews, in 
common with all other nations of the time, the families 
of the debtor could be called upon to render service 
equal to the debt, and that thus she was threatened 



with the loss of her two sons. Some have wondered 
that the divine law given at the hand of Moses 
should have sanctioned servitude for debt, which is 
esteemed to have been partial slavery. We reply that 
God's dealings with Israel contained many lessons 
beyond what they fully comprehended. For instance, 
such an indebtedness represents how, as the Apostle 
expresses it, the whole world of Adam's family was 
sold under sin and obligated to pay the wages of sin, 
death, as the offspring of Adam. This permission of 
an attachment of persons and possessions for debt 
gave ground also for the arrangement of the Jubilee 
year of emancipation, freedom from all debt and release 
of all property— illustrating the glorious times 
of restitution coming, when, by the grace of God 
through Jesus Christ our Lord, the great Atonement 
Day ending the grand year of Jubilee (the Millennial 
age) will be ushered in and witness the freedom of 
every creature from every liability and restraint now 
resting upon the world through the disobedience of 
Adam. 

Josephus claims that this woman was the widow 
of Obadiah, Ahab's steward, and that the borrowed 
money mentioned in the text was that which he had 
expended in supporting the hundred prophets whom 
he hid from the wrath of Jezebel as he related to 
Elijah. (I Kings 18:4.) We know not by what tradition 
Josephus was guided in this statement, but nothing 
in the Scriptures connects the two incidents except 
the fact that the woman described her husband 
in much the same language as is used respecting Obadiah's 
faithfulness to the Lord. He said of himself, 
"I thy servant fear the Lord from my youth:" that 
is to say, he reverenced, worshipped and sought to 
serve the Lord and to live true to the Lord in all the 
conduct of life, and the widow gave just such an account 
of her deceased husband. 

Elisha upon hearing the story took immediate 
steps for the widow's relief, and inquired what she 
still had in her possession. The reply that she had 
nothing but olive oil shows clearly that this was a 
genuine case of distress— that the woman, loyal to 
principle, had not appealed for aid until it was absolutely 
necessary. Undoubtedly this had something to 
do with the case— with the miracle which was wrought 
for her relief. Had she asked while she still had the 
wherewith to pay the debt, we might doubt that her 
petition would have been responded to as it was. 
There is a lesson here for the Lord's people: we 
should do with our might what our hands find to do, 

R3431 : page 282 

and having done all in our power and being in extremity 
should consider that the proper time to appeal 
to the Lord, either directly or through his servants 



and representatives. Human necessities seem to be 
the occasion for divine aid. It was so with our Lord's 
miracles also, and we believe that this same rule still 
holds good. 

The Apostle speaks of some whose prayers were 
not answered, saying, "Ye ask and receive not because 
ye ask amiss, that ye may consume it upon 
your desires." (James 4:3.) Our hearts should be so 
full of appreciation, thankfulness and gratitude for 
blessings already received at the Lord's hands, 
temporal and spiritual, that we would hesitate to ask 
more than his wisdom has seen fit to provide— hesitate 
to ask more than the bare necessities, "daily 
bread." If, in the Lord's providence, we are permitted 
to come into straits, into actual want, we 
should cry unto the Lord without stipulating what 
help or what kind or degree of assistance we should 
have. We must learn to trust the Lord's wisdom as 
superior to our own, and if we were to be granted 
wealth or even competence it might not be the best 
thing for us. Our petition, therefore, to the Lord 
should be, Give what is best! And faith should firmly 
trust him, come what may. 

This is in full accord with our Golden Text, 
"Trust in the Lord and do good; so shalt thou dwell 
in the land, and verily thou shalt be fed." Luxuries 
and dainties are not included in the promise, though 
these may be granted to us according to divine wisdom. 
We are not to set our hearts upon them nor to 
expect them, but, rather, to be content with such 
things as we have, and very thankful and specially 
zealous to do good— to use time, strength, energy and 
every blessing and opportunity in the service of the 
Lord and the household of faith, and in doing good 
to all men as we have opportunity. 

A pot of olive oil would be an unusual thing in 
the home of a poor family of today amongst us, but 
it was different in Palestine, where oil was one of the 
indispensables, not only for light and for cooking, but 

R3431 : page 283 

frequently used also after the manner in which we use 
butter. The immense quantities of oil produced in 
Palestine in those days is well illustrated by the fact 
that King Solomon sent as a present to Hiram, king 
of Tyre, about 200,000 gallons every year during the 
period of the building of the Temple. (I Kings 5:11.) 
It was to the people of Palestine a household necessity 
and an article of ready sale. 

Under the Prophet's direction the widow sent her 
sons in every direction amongst her neighbors to borrow 
vessels that would hold oil, and was instructed to 
secure many of them. The fact that she was able to 
borrow from her neighbors implies a good reputation 
among them for honesty, for they must have known 



that she was poor. When the vessels had been gathered 
under the Prophet's direction she and her two 
sons went into an inner room and shut the door and 
began pouring oil from her pot of oil into all those 
vessels, the sons assisting her; and the supply of oil 
miraculously increased until every vessel was full. 
The fact that there was sufficient oil to pay the debt 
and to leave a comfortable sum of money for her 
further aid, implies that the woman's faith was great 
and the vessels she borrowed were indeed "not a 
few." 

It is proper that we should notice the great difference 
between the miracles of Scripture and those of 
fiction, such as are recited in "Arabian Nights," etc. 
The miracles of Scripture are not merely frolics and 
freaks but useful and full of meaning. Whether we 
take the miracles of our Lord and the apostles or this 
miracle of Elisha and others of Old Testament times, 
they had a reasonable and proper purpose and illustrate 
as well a great truth. 

In the case under consideration we can see that 
the woman was helped and blessed by the processes of 
this miracle. Her faith in the Lord was called out by 
the extreme condition in which she found herself— in 
poverty and threatened with the loss of her sons. Her 
cry to the Prophet of the Lord was a cry to the Lord 
himself, and the answer through the Prophet was undoubtedly 
accepted as a direct answer from the Lord 
himself. Her faith was tested and developed by the 
Prophet's requirement that she and her sons should 
cooperate in the borrowing of vessels. Again her 
faith and that of her sons was tested in respect to the 
pouring of the oil into the vessels beyond the closed 
door, without even the Prophet's presence with them. 
The lesson so learned we may be sure was a great 
blessing both to the widow and her sons for the remainder 
of life, and it has been a blessing to many a 
widow and orphan since as they have remembered that 
the same God, who was able and willing to help the 
poor in olden times, is still willing to hear the cry of 
those who have confidence in him and entreat his 
favor in times of like distress. 

The Lord uses olive oil in the Scriptures as a 
symbol of the holy Spirit, the source both of spiritual 
nourishment and enlightenment to his people. The 
anointing which we receive of him comes down from 
our Head and Master and Redeemer, our Lord Jesus. 
The pot of oil and the pouring out into all the vessels 
that could be secured remind us of the Lord's testimony 
through the Prophet Joel that while in these 
days— during the Gospel age— the holy Spirit is 
poured out only upon the Lord's servants and hand-maidens, 
only upon the specially favored ones, nevertheless 
by and by, during the Millennial age, his 
Spirit shall be poured out upon all flesh, every vessel 
fitted for its reception shall be filled with the Spirit to 



its full— the whole world shall be brought under the 
influence of the Spirit of God, the spirit of holiness, 
the spirit of righteousness, the spirit of Truth. And 
under the influence of that Spirit, and under the 
teachings of the great glorified Teacher and his 
earthly representatives, the ancient worthies, a blessing 
of release shall come to the whole human family, 
releasing from the sin-and-death conditions which 
have prevailed during the six great thousand-year 
days of evil. 

As we thus think of the Lord's goodness promised 
to the world in general in his own due time, in the 
sweet by and by, and as we look back also and see 
his gracious care over those of ancient times who 
trusted him, what shall we say respecting ourselves 
of this Gospel age, who have much advantage every 
way over those of olden times as well as over those of 
the age to come, in that we have the special favor and 
blessing of the Lord in the knowledge of his gracious 
plan and an adoption into his family? Shall we not 
reckon that he who was careful in the past, who will 
delight in giving blessings in the future, is now ready 
and willing to pour out to each of us as his children 
blessings, specially spiritual, to the extent of our 
willingness and faith to receive? If while we were 
yet sinners God loved us so as to redeem us, much 
more now that we are forgiven and accepted into his 
family, and adopted and made joint-heirs with our 
Lord Jesus prospectively, may we not expect of the 
Lord continually, day by day, the blessings and favors 
which he assures us he is well pleased to bestow upon 
us. Surely faith can trust him, come what may. 
While the Lord is now pouring out of his Spirit upon 
his servants and handmaidens, it is for them to see 
that they are emptied vessels— empty that he may fill 
them— enlarged more and more that they may be more 

R3431 : page 283 

and more filled with the Spirit of God. The poet has 
beautifully said:— 

"Pour forth the oil, pour boldly forth; it will not fail until 
Thou failest vessels to provide, which it may freely fill. 

"Dig channels for the streams of love, where they may broadly 
run; 
And love has overflowing streams, to fill them every one. 

"But if at any time thou cease such channels to provide, 
The very streams of love, for thee, will soon be parched and 
dried. 

"For we must share if we would keep that good thing from 
above: 
Failing to give, we cease to have— such is the law of 



Love. 

R3431 : page 284 

HOSPITALITY AND FAITH REWARDED. 

-2 KINGS 4:25-37.-OCT. 16.- 

Golden Text:— "The gift of God is eternal life 
through Jesus Christ our Lord."— Rom. 6:23. 

ELISHA'S ministry as a prophet covered many 

years. Apparently his home was at Mount 

Carmel, but from thence he probably made 

visits to the various schools of the prophets and to the 

city of Samaria, the capital of Israel. The route by 

which he traveled led him near to the village of Shunem, 

where lived a woman described in the Scriptures 

as "great." She was evidently widely known as 

a good and wise woman, and probably, judging 

from the records, she possessed a large estate, 

which may have been of her birthright rather 

than her husband's. In those days there were 

no hotels, nor even what are now known as 

khans, in those parts— stopping-places at which 

travelers might rest, but usually without any arrangements 

for refreshments. This Shunemite woman, 

whose name is not given, but the story of whose hospitality 

and faith in the Lord have reached and 

blessed many of his people in many ages, noted the 

passing of the Prophet and urged upon him the hospitality 

of their home, desiring that Elisha and his 

R3432 : page 284 

servant Gehazi should stop and eat bread with them 
as he passed them in his journeys. Apparently this 
hospitality was partaken of on several occasions, and 
the woman's next step was to propose to her husband 
the building of a small guest chamber for the use of 
the Prophet and his servant, located upon the roof of 
their house, accessible from the outside stairway and 
furnished with a bed, a table, a stool and lamp. It 
was thus arranged, and thereafter the Prophet apparently 
made it one of his stopping-places in his journeys 
to and fro. 

The Scriptures everywhere commend hospitality 
as exemplifying a condition of heart pleasing to the 
Lord. Thus in the New Testament the Apostle urges 
that those esteemed worthy of serving the Church as 
elders shall be given to hospitality, and again urges 
all, saying, "Be not forgetful to entertain strangers, 
for thereby some have entertained angels unawares," 
referring, doubtless, to Abraham's experience in this 



line. Our Lord also remarks that he that receiveth a 
prophet in the name of a prophet shall receive a 
prophet's reward. (Matt. 10:40,42; Rom. 12:13; 
I Tim. 3:2; Heb. 13:2.) Present-day arrangements 
for public hotels, lodgings, etc., are calculated to hinder 
the development of the spirit of hospitality: few 
would think to-day of entertaining strangers, nor 
would it be generally wise so to do. But the people 
of Israel were in a particular sense one family, much 
after the same manner that all who are the Lord's 
people to day are one in Christ Jesus. It is toward 
these brethren of Christ that we should be particularly 
careful to exercise hospitality, even though they be 
strangers to us, if we recognize in them the Master's 
likeness, his Spirit. No service or kindness rendered 
to one of the least of these will fail of his notice and 
appreciation and reward. Nevertheless the hospitably 
inclined may find it necessary to exercise prudence 
in their hospitality according to the natural disposition 
of the person entertained, as we have already suggested 
in DAWN, Vol. VI., Chapter xiv. 

In the present case the woman recognized Elisha, 
not only as a brother Israelite, but specially as a consecrated 
man of God. She perceived, doubtless, that 
his life was given to the Lord's service, and hence 
whatever she attempted to do for him was done as 
unto the Lord. Her wisdom, too, was exemplified in 
the moderation and simplicity of the arrangements 
provided— they were comfortable, but not extravagant. 
It was during one of these visits that the 
Prophet sent his servant Gehazi to speak to their hostess 
and inquire whether or not he could render her 
some kindness in return— mentioning her favorably to 
the King or to the chief of the army if she had any 
favors to request from either quarter, but she had 
none. Elisha then queried his servant as to what they 
could do for the woman that would show their appreciation, 
and the latter remarked that he had noticed 
that the home was childless and that the husband was 
in advanced years, intimating that, in harmony with 
the general views of the East, there could be no 
greater blessing come to the woman than to have a 

R3432 : page 285 

son; that otherwise her home was like the city of Jericho, 
beautiful for situation, but, nevertheless, having 
a great dearth or lack. 

Elisha grasped the thought instantly, and sending 
for the Shunemite assured her that within a year she 
would clasp a son to her bosom. She could scarcely 
believe it, even though she had full confidence in the 
Prophet, but in due time the promise was fulfilled. It 
was years after this, the Prophet still using the guest 
chamber provided, that the son was with his father 
and the servants in the harvest field, and apparently 



had a sunstroke and was sent home in the care of a 
servant. Shortly after he died, and the mother, making 
known the fact to no one, laid him upon the 
Prophet's bed in the guest chamber and hastened to 
the Prophet's home on Mount Carmel. The boy was 
not really dead from her standpoint, for she had faith 
in God and in his Prophet Elisha. She reasoned that 
he who was able to give her the son was able now to 
restore him to her again, but she would communicate 
only with the Prophet. Avoiding the questions of his 
servant, she fell at Elisha's feet, her heart full of her 
sorrow, which, nevertheless, was well mixed with 
faith. Her inquiry was, "Did I desire a son of my 
Lord? Did I not say, Do not deceive me?" 

The Prophet understood that her son was ailing 
or dead, and sent his own staff by the hand of his servant 
to lay it upon the child's face— much after the 
same style that the Apostle Paul sent napkins and 
handkerchiefs to the sick. But the woman would not 
leave the Prophet, not having full confidence in the 
results of the servant's doings, possibly realizing that 
the servant was not such a man as his master in any 
sense of the word, as later on was manifest in his conduct. 
The woman's faith had its reward; the Prophet 
went with her. 

We are not of those who claim that sickness and 
pain, sorrow, suffering and dying, are indispensable 
or in any sense of the word blessings. On the contrary 
we hold that all of these things are parts of the 
"curse," which affect more or less every member of 
the human family; but we do hold that the Lord frequently 
gives experiences of this kind, sickness, pain, 
sorrow, death, to those of his people who trust him,— 
as agents by which to develop meekness, patience, 
faith. Apparently it was so in the case of the Shunemite. 
Had her son not taken sick, had he not died, 
she would have lacked that chapter in life's experiences 
which we doubt not proved to her a great blessing, 
which developed in her more and more of faith 
in the Lord and appreciation of his favors. While 
deeply agitated at heart, her faith in the Lord's goodness 
through his Prophet preserved her from excessive 
grief, and apparently from all outward manifestations 
such as tears, and thus the Apostle exhorts us 
who are of the household of faith in this Gospel dispensation, 
saying, that we should sorrow not as those 
who have no hope. 

This woman had faith and hope that the Lord 
through the Prophet would restore her son. We well 
may have stronger and better hope that our dear 
ones going down to the tomb will in due time be recovered 
from it, because from our standpoint we perceive 
that Jesus died for our sins according to the 
Scriptures, and a redemption has been accomplished 
for the sins of the whole world; and that it is the purpose 
of God, the plan of God, that in due time those 



who sleep in Jesus will be brought by him and through 
him from the tomb, from the prison-house of death. 
The Shunemite's faith in the Prophet corresponds very 
well to our faith in the Lord Jesus, as God's power 
and instrumentality for our relief. And so we read 
that in answer to the prayer of the Prophet and the 
instrumentalities he used in harmony therewith, the 
child was restored to life and to its mother. 

The fact of this miracle does not prove that it is 
the will of God to grant a miracle of recovery in every 
case. In Elisha's long experience this is the only 
case of the kind. We may even suppose that this 
woman's husband died shortly after this without any 
interposition of divine providence on his behalf, for 
we find the Prophet instructing the woman that there 
would be a seven-years' famine in the land of Israel 
and advising her to sojourn for the time in another 
country. On her return seven years later with her 
son she found her property in the possession of others, 
and called upon the king to repossess her of it, and 
her husband is not mentioned in connection with the 
going or the return. It was at this time that the 
blessing of the Lord through Elisha served her a secondary 
reward for her hospitality and her faith, because 
the king had just been talking with Elisha's 
servant respecting the mighty works which his master 
had performed in the name of the Lord, and when 
the woman cried to the king, the servant immediately 
informed him that this was the mother of the boy 
whom Elisha restored to life. Thus her case was 
brought directly to the king's notice and she received 
again the possession of her property. 

Hospitality and faith may not always be thus 
promptly rewarded in the present time; the Lord's 
people may even suffer evil for good and be persecuted 
and hated by those whom they seek to serve and 
benefit. But a blessing, nevertheless, is sure to be 
theirs— not only a blessing at the Lord's hand in the 
future for what they did or endeavored to do, that 
will more than compensate them, but even in this 
present life they receive a blessing with the persecutions 

R3432 : page 286 

in that their own hearts are enriched and refreshed, 
made more Christ-like, and they are thereby 
better prepared for the heavenly Kingdom and glorious 
things which the Lord has in reservation for all 
who shall be copies of his Son. 

Our Golden Text in connection with this lesson 
gives us the suggestion that while the heavenly Father 
may not be pleased to grant us either for ourselves or 
for our children immunity from pain, suffering and 
death, nevertheless he has made a still grander and 
more glorious provision for us through our Lord Jesus 
Christ— a provision for our eternal life. But this gift 



is reserved for those who either now or in the future 
shall cultivate and exemplify hospitality, generosity, 
faith, love toward God and man. Blessed are we 
whose eyes and ears of understanding are now open 
to know the grace of God, to appreciate the same,— 
we who are now in the school of Christ to develop the 
fruits and graces of his Spirit, the likeness of our 
Lord. For such is the Kingdom, the joint-heirship 
and blessings and privileges not only of eternal life, 
but of joint-heirship with Christ. As for the world 
in general, it will be required of them during the Millennial 
age that they also shall develop the fruits and 
graces of the Lord's Spirit if they would be accounted 
worthy of his gift of eternal life. Sonship implies 
likeness, and none are to have eternal life except those 
acceptable as sons. 



R3433 : page 286 

INTERESTING QUESTIONS ANSWERED. 
THE APPLICATION OF JOHN 5:25 AND REV. 20: 12. 



Question.— If lasting life (on conditions) is accorded 
to all the world at the moment of awakening, 
in what sense are we to understand the expressions: 
John 5:25 and Rev. 20:12. 

Answer.— John 5:25 reads, " Verily, verily, I say 
unto you, the hour is coming and now is when the 
dead shall hear the voice of the Son of man, and they 
that hear shall live." 

This verse is applicable both to the present time 
and to the future age. Now we who were dead in 
trespasses and sins and who have been justified freely 
by God's grace, through faith in the redemptive 
blood, and who have made a consecration of ourselves 
to the Lord, are counted as "alive unto God"— 
alive from the dead. He that believeth on the Son 
hath everlasting life. The life which is to last forever 
has begun in him as a New Creature, and will be perfected, 
or completed, in the First Resurrection change 
to glory, honor and immortality. As the Apostle explains 
respecting this overcoming class who now have 
the treasure of the new nature in the earthen vessel- 
imperfect, ignoble, corruptible:— he says, "It is 
sown in corruption, it is raised in incorruption; it is 
sown in weakness, raised in power; it is sown an animal 
body, raised a spiritual body." 

With this fulfilment of the Lord's words and our 
own experiences before us we are guided to an understanding 
of that fulfilment which will belong to the 
world in general in the Millennial age. First will 



come the awakening; second, the voice of the Son of 
man; the message declaring the terms on which the 
life enjoyed may be continued everlastingly will be 
declared throughout the world, that every creature 
may hear and clearly understand; the knowledge of 
the Lord's grace and abundant provisions shall fill 
the whole earth. Some may refuse to hear— refuse 
to obey. Such will receive chastisements and stripes; 
and if they still refuse to obey, the declaration through 
the prophet is very explicit, that the sinner shall die 
an hundred years old. At an hundred years old he 
shall be cut off, and yet he shall die as it were in childhood, 
because under the favorable conditions then 
proposed each might by obedience live at least to the 
end of the Millennial age— then to be tested respecting 
his worthiness or unworthiness of heart to go further. 
After the Millennial Kingdom shall have expired 
the world will be directly answerable to God the 
Father. To those who will hear, obey, the voice of the 
Lord, the great Teacher, the voice of the Bridegroom 
and the voice of the Bride, say Come; and whosoever 
will say, Come, and take of the water of life freely— 
these will progress step by step to the attainment of 
all that was lost, and beyond this to the attainment of 
those things which God had in reservation for Father 
Adam, and to which he might have attained had he 
remained in obedience to God. 

Rev. 20:12 reads, "And I saw the dead, the great 
and the small, stand before the throne, and the books 
were opened: and another book of life was opened, 
and the dead were judged out of those things which 
were written in the books according to their works." 

This is a brief description of the work of the Millennial 
age. The whole world will be on trial before 
the throne— the Millennial throne— the throne of 
Christ. Our common version says, stood before God, 
but this is not in agreement with the reading of the 
oldest manuscripts, from which we have quoted above. 
The world will be standing on judgment before the 
throne of Christ throughout the Millennial age in the 
same sense that the Church has been standing on 
judgment during this Gospel age. A picture of the 

R3433 : page 287 

world's judgment is given us in Matt. 25, where the 
two classes that will be found amongst men are to be 
separated into sheep and goats, and the division between 
them is to be the work of the Millennial age- 
to separate the true sheep, who will be accounted 
worthy of divine favor everlastingly, from those of 
the goat nature, who, refusing to come into subjection 
to the Lord's will, shall be estimated unworthy of any 
favors beyond the Millennial age, and will be destroyed 
with Satan, as described in Rev. 20:9,10. 
The judgment, or trial, of these will not be along 



some new lines, but along the same lines that God 
has already made known to us through his Word. 
The Bible is now a sealed book to the world, understood 
only by those who are his, and by them because 
revealed to them through his Spirit. "The secret of 
the Lord is with them that fear him; he has covenanted 
to show it unto them." During the Millennial 
age these books of the Bible— Genesis, Exodus, 
Matthew, Mark, Luke, etc., will be opened to the 
whole world, will be understood fully, clearly, and 
the great lessons therein taught will be emphasized; 
and, as our Lord declared to the Jews, so it will be— 
my Word shall judge him in the last day— the Millennial 
day. 

In the present time the Church is judged, not 
according to her works, but according to faith, and 
works are required merely as a test of the sincerity of 
the faith; but when the world's judgment, or trial 
time, shall come it will not be so. The things now 
mysterious and dark and hidden will be made plain 
and simple and easily understood, and the rewards 
now offered for faith will no longer be given, for faith 
will in large measure have turned to knowledge,— 
"the knowledge of the Lord shall fill the whole 
earth." Moreover, Satan being bound and all the 
conditions favorable, it is proper that the Lord, the 
King of that day, should require of each human being 
who receives the knowledge such works as he is able 
to render— "they shall be judged according to their 
works." Advancing experience, increasing knowledge 
and increasing strength, under the blessing of the 
Lord's Kingdom, will make possible increasing good 
works of obedience, and these good works will measure 
the progress of each individual, mentally, morally 
and physically. Under the judgment rewards of that 
time the faithful in good works will attain to the full 
perfection of life, while those who do not come into 
hearty obedience will be judged unworthy to retain 
the life that was within their grasp and will be condemned 
to the Second Death. 

From the very beginning of their blessing and 
hearing of the voice of the Son of man their new life 
will be, so to speak, in their own hands, either to 
strangle it or to increase it under the Lord's blessing 
and direction. The other book of life then to be 
opened is in contrast with the book of life now open. 
The book of life opened during this Gospel age is the 
one in which the names of the Church are written, 
and from which the Lord will not blot out our names, 
if we continue faithful to our covenants. This book 
of life will be complete and no additions made to it 
after the close of this age, but another book of life 
will be opened for the world; and whosoever resolves, 
by the grace of God, to make use of the lasting life 
which the Redeemer will put within his grasp at the 
beginning of the Restitution times may never have it 



blotted out, but by obedience to the voice and judgment 
of the great King he may attain to all of the 
blessings of restitution and perfection. 

EXPLANATION OF ROMANS 9:22. 



Question.— Please explain Rom. 9:22. 

Answer.— God is not averse to manifesting his 
wrath, his indignation, against sin and sinners, after 
the manner he has indicated in his law, the penalty of 
which is death (not eternal torment). Nevertheless, 
while having this willingness to execute his law, he 
has endured or permitted a continuance of sin and 
sinners in apparent contradiction to his law, thus 
manifesting much long-suffering toward those who 
were properly subjects of destruction. The Lord has 
done this at various times, but particularly in connection 
with the nation of Israel, which came under the 
Law Covenant at Sinai, and which proved itself unworthy 
of continued favors by repeated falling into 
idolatry. But he kept that nation together, the evil 
as well as the good, the sham Israelites as well as the 
"Israelites indeed," up to a certain time— the time 
when, according to his purpose, the true Israelites 
would be called out from the chaffy ones, to be the 
nucleus of the Gospel Church. These were the vessels 
of mercy, upon whom the Pentecostal blessings 
came, and who were accepted of the Lord out of the 
house of servants into the house of sons. (John 1:11,12.) 
Forthwith, as soon as all of the worthy 
had been selected, destruction came upon Israel's polity; 
as the Apostle expresses it, "Wrath to the uttermost 
against this people;" and the vessels fitted for 
destruction met with their destruction— the chaff was 
consumed in that fire. (Mat. 3:10-12.) Not all of the 
individuals were destroyed, but their existence as a 
nation was blotted out. Henceforth divine mercy, 
ignoring the natural Israelites who were not Israelites 
indeed, has been blessing with mercy those whom the 
Lord is calling out— Gentiles as well as Jews. 



page 289 

SEMI-MONTHLY 
VOL. XXV. OCTOBER 1, 1904. No. 19. 



CONTENTS 

Sons and Daughters of 

Consolation— Comfort 291 

Comfort and Comforting Needful 292 

Comforted and Taught to be 

Comforters 293 

The Time of Harvest 296 

"Where is the Promise of His 

Presence?" 297 

"O the Blessedness— the 1335 

Days" 298 

Naaman Healed, Gehazi Smitten 299 

Our Unseen Guardians 302 

page 290 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-24 EVERSHOLT ST., LONDON, N.W. 
GERMAN BRANCH-MIRKER STR., 45, ELBERFELD. 
AUSTRALIAN BRANCH-32 JOHNSTON ST., FITZROY, MELBOURNE. 

PRICE $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE, 5c (2-l/2d.) A COPY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity 
or adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER, will be supplied FREE, if 
they send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting 
the paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our 
list continually. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



THIS JOURNAL IS PUBLISHED IN THE 

FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, DANISH AND ITALIAN LANGUAGES. 

SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



INTAGLIO SCRIPTURE TEXT CARDS, ETC. 



This year we determined to lay in a large stock of the 
newest motto and text cards earlier than usual. Four 
large orders have already come to hand and the fifth is 
en route. Some of the older styles cannot be surpassed 
and these we have re-ordered; but the line of new styles 
of new texts this year is so large that we can send you all 
new ones, if you so request when ordering. Our facilities for 
importing these from London (their principal market) is 
unsurpassed, and our prices are about one-half those usually 
charged; namely, from lc to 25c each— according to size, 
etc. For your convenience we will put these up in packages 
assorted for $1.00 and $2.00, including postage;— 
from 15c downward in the $1.00 packages and from 25c 
down in the $2.00 packages. We will also make up some 
packages containing mottoes at 10c and downward, for 
50c, including postage. 



GERMAN AND SWEDISH TOWERS can now be supplied 
regularly. 



R3434: page 291 

SONS AND DAUGHTERS OF CONSOLATION— COMFORT. 

"Joses, by the Apostles, was surnamed Barnabas; which is, 
being interpreted, the son of consolation [comfort]"— Acts 4:36. 

COMFORT! Consolation! What rest and refreshment 
and peace and joy these words imply! 
That the name, "son of consolation," 
or comfort, should be given to any one of mature 
years tells a whole volume in itself respecting the 
general character of the person. We know little about 
Barnabas, but if this one sentence of holy writ comprised 
the sum of our knowledge we could not fail to 
love and appreciate him. 

In one sense of the word the Church is spoken of 
as a mother, Zion, and all the true people of God are 
thus represented as her children— sons and daughters. 
Some of these are sons of comfort and daughters of 
comfort, while others are sons and daughters of pain, 
continually causing more or less of distress and discomfort 
to others and to themselves. We want to see 
this subject in its true light, in order that we may 
each act accordingly;— that a larger and an increasing 
number of the children of Zion shall be sons and 
daughters of comfort to all with whom they come in 
contact, and thus in a general way comforters to the 



Church as a whole. Some may be inclined to query, 

Does the true Church need comfort? Are not the majority 

too comfortable already? Do they not rather 

need to be stirred up, to be reminded of their sins, to 

be chided and made generally as uncomfortable as possible, 

to the intent that they may thus be helped onward 

and upward? 

We would not ignore the fact that there are occasions 
when reproofs and corrections in righteousness 
are proper, as the Apostle advised. But we have no 
sympathy at all with the thought so common with 
some good people; viz., that they should always be 
feeling miserable with themselves and making other 
people miserable, by continually nagging and faultfinding 
upbraiding and terrorizing. We believe that 
such well meant but mistaken efforts have done much 
harm, have driven away from the family circle of 
Zion many who could not, without hypocrisy, claim 
that they were the vilest of sinners, nor properly appreciate 
prayers in which they were represented as 
saying, "Lord, be merciful unto us, miserable sinners!" 
when they realized divine favor and forgiveness- 
justification from all things. 

Those needing reproof, rebuke, etc., are such as 
are walking after the flesh and not after the Spirit- 
in violation of their covenant. Those who should be 
warned to flee from the wrath to come are such as have 
never yet fled for refuge to the hope set before them 
in the Gospel,— such as are without God, and have no 
hope in the world— no relationship to Christ, through 
faith and obedience. But the true "wheat," the true 
members of the body of Christ, the consecrated, are, 
however imperfectly, continually seeking to walk after 
the Spirit; though they are well aware that because 
of imperfections of the flesh they do not and cannot 
walk up to the spirit. These, instead of needing reproofs 
and rebukes and smitings and upbraidings for 
their shortcomings, which they admit and deplore and 
strive against, need sympathy, assistance, comfort. 

Few probably have noticed to what extent the 
Scriptures administer this very "balm of Gilead" to 
the true children of Zion; but the Scriptures are full 
of comfort, and there is great need that all who are 
truly the Lord's people should see to it that they are 
more and more sons and daughters of comfort in the 
Church, administering to one another the helpfulness 
and encouragement and refreshment which the Lord 
intended. Our Lord spoke of the holy Spirit as the 
Comforter, and he mentions himself also as a Comforter, 
saying, "I will pray the Father, and he shall 
give you another Comforter." (John 14:16.) To what 

R3434 : page 292 

extent our Lord Jesus was a Comforter we may judge 
as we look back to the three and a half years of his 



ministry, and at its close hear him say to his faithful 
ones, "I will not leave you comfortless"— orphans, 
bereaved of a caretaker. And as respects his care 
over the apostles while with them, we have a suggestion 
from his prayer to the Father, "Of those whom 
thou has given me I have lost none save the son of 
perdition," as the Scriptures foretold.— John 17:12. 

It had been foretold of our Lord in advance 
through the prophets, that he would be a Comforter, 
as we read, "The Spirit of the Lord God is upon me; 
because Jehovah hath anointed me to preach good 
tidings unto the meek; he hath sent me to bind up 
the broken-hearted;. ..to comfort all that mourn; 
to appoint unto them that mourn in Zion, to give 
them beauty for ashes, the oil of joy for mourning, 
the garment of praise for the spirit of heaviness."— 
Isa. 61:1-3. 

All this means that our Lord Jesus was a Comforter 
in Zion above and beyond all other comforters. 
He entered into sympathy with the meek and lowly 
and right-intentioned in all of their weaknesses and 
trials and difficulties; and this is the hold that the 
character and words of Jesus have to-day upon our 
hearts, and also upon the hearts of many who are not 
his people in the full consecrated sense. It was not 
by continually chiding the apostles, and accusing 
them, but because, instead, our Lord sympathized 
with them, assisted them, and interpreted their heart-intentions 
liberally, generously, that they became 
more and more his faithful followers, even unto death. 
Note the case of the woman taken in sin, and our 
Lord's failure to make any pharisaical tirade against 
her. Mark his reproof to those who stood by: "He 
that is without sin, let him cast the first stone." Mark 
how, when they were all thus convicted of imperfection 
in some particular themselves, our Lord said to 
the woman, "Neither do I condemn thee; go and sin 
no more." (John 8:3-11.) Notice his dealing with 
the Apostle Peter, after he had denied him, cursing 
and swearing. Many of the Lord's followers, if in 
his stead, would have felt it their bounden duty to rebuke 
Peter publicly before all the apostles, and to 
have required public confession and some sort of penance; 
and on every possible occasion afterward to 
have thrown in his face his weakness and disloyalty. 
Such have not rightly interpreted and copied the 
Lord's spirit, and hence are not sons and daughters 
of consolation in the Church. They are, on the contrary, 
strife-breeders, vexatious hinderers of the work 
they desire to forward. They should hear the Master's 
voice, "Take my yoke upon you and learn of me." 
In proportion as we learn of the Lord we become, not 
mouthpieces for the Law merely, but mouthpieces 
specially for mercy and love and helpfulness and 
comfort. 

So far as the record shows, our Lord did not once 



mention to Peter either his profanity or his disloyalty. 
Peter knew about these without being told; he had 
already wept over them; a mere word from the Lord 
in chiding, reproof, might have discouraged him,— 
perhaps hopelessly. The nearest thing to a reproof in 
our Lord's conduct and language was the inquiry, 
"Lovest thou me?" Let all who would be true sons 
and daughters of consolation in Zion learn this lesson 
from the great Teacher— not to strive to punish and 
correct and reprove and rebuke; but to avoid these so 
far as possible, and to inquire, not so much about the 
past as about the present— What is the offender's 
present attitude toward the Lord and toward his flock? 

COMFORT AND COMFORTING NEEDFUL. 

It was with the full appreciation of the fact that 
the Church would need comfort rather than chiding 
and reproof that our Lord said, "If I go not away 
the Comforter [the holy Spirit] cannot come." The 
ransom must be paid, must be presented in the "Most 
Holy," to the heavenly Father, before his blessing 
could be bestowed. That blessing would yield the 
comfort of the begetting of the Spirit and the comfort 
of the exceeding great and precious promises to those 
who had accepted Jesus,— and to those who would believe 
on him through their word. True, our Lord 
spoke of the holy Spirit as reproving— but not as reproving 
the Church; he said, "He shall reprove the 
world of sin, of righteousness, and of a coming judgment." 
The nearest suggestion to reproof in respect 
to the holy Spirit's dealing with the Church is that 
given by the Apostle, when he says, "Grieve not 
the holy Spirit of God, whereby ye are sealed unto 
the day of redemption." And again he says, 
"Quench not the Spirit "-Eph. 4:30; I Thess. 5:19. 

The grand provision made for the comfort of the 
Lord's people clearly indicates a necessity for such 
comfort; nor is this necessity difficult to find. The 
Lord's people are beset on every hand with adverse 
conditions— the world, the flesh, the adversary— seeking 
to intimidate or discourage or entrap the new 
creature, so as to hinder its development in grace, 
knowledge and love, and ultimately to hinder it from 
the attainment of the perfection and glory to follow, 
which God has promised to the faithful only. What 
we need, in order to make us sons and daughters of 
consolation in the Church, is a larger measure of love 
and sympathy in our hearts. In proportion as sympathy 
and love come in, they will crowd out the spirit of 
strife and contention and judging and fault-finding; 
even as they crowded out at first the spirit of the flesh, 
—anger, malice, hatred, strife, vain-glory. 

As a rule (there probably are exceptions to all 

R3435 : page 293 



rales) those who have the spirit of helpfulness, of 
comfort, of consolation, and who are able to pour this 
balm into the wounded hearts of others most liberally, 
are those who themselves have passed through severe 
trials, difficulties, disciplines, and who have thus been 
touched with a feeling of the infirmities of our race, 
and, more than this, have been touched with a feeling 
of sympathy for the weaknesses and oppositions which 
assail the "brethren" in their endeavor to walk after 
the Spirit— not after the flesh. Those who have not 
"bowels of compassion," who have little of sympathy, 
little of desire to lend a helping hand to the weak or 
the stumbling or those who are out of the way, have 
much yet to learn respecting the real meaning of the 
word love, in its higher senses— perfect love, love for 
the brethren, yea, love that extends to all mankind, 
even to enemies, as it has opportunity, but "especially 
to the household of faith." 

The holy Spirit comforts the Church in various 
ways. (1) It comforts us by enabling us to come into 
such unity with the Truth and with the Lord that we 
can to a considerable extent see matters not only from 
the divine standpoint but also can appreciate and feel 
from the same standpoint. For although the spirit of 
the Truth is in the Word of Truth, there is, nevertheless, 
a necessity that the eyes of our understanding 
should be opened, that we may be enabled to comprehend 
the Word of Truth; and this double comfort is 
ours through the possession of the holy Spirit,— in 
proportion as it abounds and is shed abroad in our 
hearts. It, of course, abounds and is shed abroad in 
the Word, but this is not sufficient. It must also be 
in our hearts a living power. Thus we read of 
the early Church, "Walking in the fear [reverence] 
of the Lord, and in the comfort of the holy Spirit."— 
Acts 9:31. 

(2) It comforts us through the Scriptures, and 
through the promises of God, the Truth— for is it not 
the spirit of the Truth? The Word of God, as the 
channel of the Truth, is to comfort us in proportion 
as the holy Spirit guides us into an understanding of 
it; as we read, "Whatsoever things were written 
aforetime were written for our learning [instruction], 
that we through patience and comfort of the Scriptures 
might have hope."— Rom. 15:4. 

(3) The Church, the brethren, in proportion as 

they become imbued with the holy Spirit and with the 
knowledge of the Truth, which it brings to their appreciation 
and comprehension, thereby become representatives 
of the holy Spirit in the Church— comforters. 
This is the thought of the Apostle when he 
says, "Now the God of patience and consolation [comfort] 
grant you to be like-minded one toward another, 
according to Christ Jesus."— Rom. 15:5. 



COMFORTED AND TAUGHT TO BE COMFORTERS. 

Reversing the foregoing order, and considering 
the way in which the brethren are to comfort the 
Church, we note that it is as the channels of the holy 
Spirit, and as the mouthpieces of the Word of God. No 
one is competent to be a comforter unless he already 
has received comfort from God. So to speak, the Lord's 
people begin receiving their comfort from the time 
they accept the assurances of God's Word respecting 
his love and mercy, as exhibited in Christ Jesus, in 
that he died for our sins. In their appropriation of 
this divine favor to themselves by faith, they had their 
first taste of comfort— peace, joy, blessing. As they 
then proceeded and learned the way of the Lord more 
perfectly, the door of access into a still further grace 
was opened unto them— the grace of invitation to 
joint-heirship with Christ in the Kingdom, and its 
glorious work of comforting and uplifting mankind 
in general. (Rom. 5:2.) And as this door of favor 
was entered, additional comfort, additional joy, additional 
peace and blessing were added and understood 
and appreciated. And then, as the favored ones progressed 
under the ministries of the Truth, supplied 
by the holy Spirit, and became more and more able to 
rightly divide the Word of Truth, and to appreciate 
the different features of it, in the same proportion 
their faith grew stronger, and their comforts and joys 
multiplied through increasing and deepening knowledge 
of the Lord and of his plan. 

Furthermore, as they behold in the glass of the 
divine Word the glory of the Lord, the reflected light 
of his glorious character illuminating their hearts and 
enabling them to comprehend with all saints the 
lengths and breadths and heights and depths of the 
divine love, it brings still increasing confidence and 
comfort. And every one of these steps of progress, 
rightly received, and every additional element of 
character developed prepares the favored one for the 
exercise of his privilege of being a comforter to others. 
True, it was his duty and privilege to begin to comfort 
others as soon as he received the first elements of comfort 
himself, and to continue distributing the comforts 
as they came to him. Indeed, we know both from experience 
and from the Word that unless he thus made 
use of the favors and blessings, and showed his appreciation 
of the grace of God by shining it forth 
upon others, his light thus being obscured would grow 
dim and eventually be extinguished. But the point we 
wish to impress is that ability to be a comforter depends 
upon growth in grace and knowledge, for none 
but those who themselves are comforted can dispense 
this grace to others. 

Notice the Apostle's exhortation on this subject, 
and along the lines just marked out. In his second 



R3435 : page 294 

letter to the Corinthians (1:3-7), he says, "Blessed be 
God, even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, the 
Father of mercies, and the God of all comfort; who 
comforteth us in all our tribulations, that we may be 
able to comfort them which are in any trouble by the 
comfort wherewith we ourselves are comforted of God. 
For as the sufferings of Christ abound in us, so our 
consolation [comfort] also aboundeth by Christ. And 
whether we be afflicted it is for your consolation [comfort] 
and salvation, which is effectual in the enduring 
of the same sufferings which we also suffer: or 
whether we be comforted, it is for your consolation 
[comfort] and salvation. And our hope of you is steadfast, 
knowing that as ye are partakers of the sufferings 
so shall ye be also of the consolation [comfort]." 

Ten times in these verses does the Apostle use 
this word "comfort." He evidently had a keen appreciation 
of how much the Church needed such consolation, 
and how much the God of all comfort wished 
to have his faithful ones comforted, and how even the 
strongest in the Church, the apostles, needed comfort. 
What better evidence could we ask than that the spirit 
of comfort and of consolation, which the heavenly 
Father manifested, which the Lord Jesus manifested, 
which the apostles manifested and which all the faithful 
in Christ Jesus are called upon to exercise, is indeed 
the very Spirit of the Truth, the holy Spirit! Consequently, 
those who are making greatest progress in 
this direction, as comforters in Zion, are growing most 
in grace; and so we may be sure will be best able to 
grow also in knowledge, and to be helpful to the 
Church in every sense of the word, and to be used of 
the Lord as mouthpieces in the ministry of his Truth. 

A little further along in the same epistle (7:4-13), 
the Apostle uses this word, "comfort," seven times, 
saying, "I am filled with comfort; I am exceedingly 
joyful in all our tribulation. For when we came into 
Macedonia our flesh had no rest, but we were troubled 
on every side; without were fightings, within were 
fears. Nevertheless, God that comforteth those that 
are cast down, comforted us by the coming of Titus; 
and not by his coming only, but by the consolation 
[comfort] wherewith he was comforted of you, when he 
told us your earnest desire, your mourning, your fervent 
mind toward me; so that I rejoice the more.... 
Therefore, we were comforted in your comfort." Here 
we see illustrated, in the Apostle's language, the 
mutual helpfulness of the Church in this matter of 
comfort. Titus had a part in it, Paul had a part in 
it, the Church at Corinth had a part in it— every member 
possessing the holy Spirit and exercised by it had 
a share; and the Apostle declares that all this comfort 
was of God. And he expresses it as though this were 
God's general disposition, in every such circumstance 



of his people, when he speaks of him as "the God of 
all comfort," and "the God that comforteth them that 
are cast down." We may safely understand, therefore, 
that wherever we find one of the Lord's followers, 
however great his weakness, however much cast 
down, we have in his case presented to us an opportunity 
of serving the Lord, of being channels of his 
mercy, and carrying to the downcast one something of 
comfort and consolation and helpfulness. 

Speaking respecting his own course, the Apostle, 
in his first letter to the Thessalonians (2:1 1), gives us 
a little insight to his methods, and shows us that he 
neither domineered nor tyrannized over the Church, 
nor continually harassed, threatened and upbraided 
them. On the contrary, he says, "Ye know how 
we exhorted and comforted and charged every one 
of you as a [proper] father doth his children." This 
familiar spirit in the apostles, which enabled them as 
fathers and as brethren in the Church to comfort and 
assist, should be a guide now to all who would be 
servants of the Lord and helpful children of comfort- 
sons of consolation. 

It is those who enter into this real Spirit of God, 
the real spirit of his Truth, who are thereby proportionately 
prepared to comprehend the meaning of the 
prophecies and revelations of the Lord which are hidden 
to the worldly wise,— hidden to all who have not 
the spirit of Christ, the spirit of consolation, of helpfulness, 
of sympathy, of love. Possibly this is one 
reason why so few of the professed expounders of the 
Word of God meet with any success in interpreting 
it; probably this is one reason why so many are in 
darkness. They have not received the spirit of comfort 
and love, and therefore cannot appreciate the loving, 
gracious plan which the Word of God upholds. It 
probably was not by accident that the Apostle, when 
stating that we are to "grow in grace and in knowledge," 
put the grace first. 

We have seen what it is to have the comfort of 
the brethren through the holy Spirit; let us inquire 
now what it is to have "the comfort of the Scriptures," 
which we are enabled to comprehend by the possession 
of the holy spirit of comfort. We note again the 
prophetic statement of Isaiah (61:1), and that while 

R3436 : page 294 

this applied primarily to our Lord, the Head of the 
body, it must, therefore, necessarily also apply to 
every member of the body of the anointed. The Spirit 
of the Lord God is upon all the members, coming down 
to them from the Head, upon whom the holy oil of 
anointing was poured; and it must be true of every 
member as of the Head,— "The Spirit of the Lord 
God is upon me, because he hath anointed me to 
preach the good tidings; to bind up the broken-hearted 



[not to break hearts, but to heal the broken 
ones]; to comfort all that mourn; to appoint unto 
them that mourn in Zion, to give them beauty for 

R3436 : page 295 

ashes, the oil of joy for mourning, the garment of 
praise for the spirit of heaviness." 

As it is not our commission to break men's hearts, 
even the worldly, hard-hearted ones, but to leave them 
for the Lord to break through various disciplines and 
judgments; so likewise it is not appointed unto us to 
comfort those who do not mourn; nor is it our commission 
to specially cause mourning that we may comfort 
it. Our commission is to seek out the meek and 
the mourning ones, who have appreciated their own 
shortcomings and weaknesses, and who are looking 
for refuge and deliverance. It is part of our commission 
to point them to the Lamb of God, who taketh 
away the sin of the world, to point them to the beauty 
of the resurrection for the ashes of death, and the 
glories which the Lord has promised by and by to 
take the place of the spirit of heaviness and disappointment 
and sorrow and trouble of this present time. It 
is our commission to tell such that "Joy cometh in the 
morning," and to assist them to arise and at once put 
on the garments of praise, and begin to walk in newness 
of life, with "a new song in their mouths— even 
the loving kindness of our God." 

It is the wrong thought which some good people 
get, that the Lord's children in this present time should 
be gloomy, morose, sad,— mourners for sin. Whoever 
has heard the Gospel message has cause for rejoicing. 
When the Lord said, "Blessed are they that mourn, for 
they shall be comforted," he said it in the Jewish age 
—under the Law which condemned all imperfection, 
on account of which, therefore, all who were hungering 
and thirsting after righteousness and seeking to 
walk uprightly were necessarily in mourning for their 
sins, because of their inability to come up to the grand 
standard of the perfect law of God, and hence their inability 
to gain everlasting life under the conditions of 
that Law. The Apostle represented not only himself 
but all sincere Israelites, groaning under the Law, when 
he cried out, "O wretched man that I am! Who shall 
deliver me from this dead body?" (Rom. 7:24.) He 
was mourning, and the Lord appointed that all the 
mourners in Zion should be comforted— comforted with 
the assurance that, while they were sinners and imperfect 
and could never justify themselves before God 
under the Law, nevertheless, God himself had found 
a ransom, had redeemed his people. It is in view of 
this comforting assurance of the Gospel that the 
Apostle, after representing himself as the Jew, under 
the Law, groaning and travailing, and crying for deliverance, 
in the next breath represents himself as 



the Christian who has found the deliverance, and exclaims, 
"Thanks be unto God, who giveth us the victory 
through our Lord Jesus Christ!" Shall the victors 
mourn, even though the victory be not entirely their 
own, but primarily bought with the precious blood of 
Christ? Nay, verily. We neither sorrow nor mourn, 
as do others, because of the good hope which is as an 
anchor to our souls, sure and steadfast— the hope of 
the mercy of God through our Lord Jesus Christ. 

The Lord's people, having embraced the Truth, 
find themselves beset on every hand with oppositions 
from the Evil One and his servants; and were it not 
that they have the comfort and consolation of the 
Scriptures, and the joy and peace which the world can 
neither give nor take away, theirs would be a sad lot 
indeed. But under conditions, as the Lord has arranged 
them, it is their privilege, even while suffering the loss 
of earthly things for righteousness' sake, to rejoice in 
tribulation, and in everything give thanks. 

What is the secret of this rejoicing in tribulation? 
Whence comes so great a comfort as this? We answer, 
it comes through the comfort of the Scriptures, made 
luminous by the holy Spirit. For instance, take the 
inspired prophecy respecting Rachel weeping for her 
children, refusing to be comforted, because they are 
not,— because they are dead. (Jer. 31:15-17.) The 
Lord's message of comfort to Rachel, and thus to all 
who have suffered loss through the great penalty of 
death, is, "Refrain thy voice from weeping, and thine 
eyes from tears; for thy little ones shall come again 
from the land of the enemy." Does this speak peace 
and comfort to the wounded heart of the parent, thinking 
of his child that is dead? Yes, verily; it brings 
a consolation, a comfort, with which no error can compare. 
There are, indeed, various delusive fancies which 
picture themselves before the minds of the bereaved, 
in which they fain would trust and hope; but they are 
weak, they are intangible, they have no foundation 
in the Word of God. Hence they cannot give real rest 
or peace in such a time of trial. 

But when we hear the voice of the Lord assuring 
us of the resurrection, assuring us that the grave is 
indeed the land of the enemy, assuring us,— not that 
our little ones are more alive than ever, but that, having 
gone to the land of the enemy, they are secure, 
because Jesus has prevailed, has bought the world 
with his own precious blood. Jesus has "the keys of 
death and of the grave," as he declares (Rev. 1:18), 
and will shortly open and bring forth all the captive 
prisoners of death from the prison-house, the tomb. 
There is a comfort, a consolation, in this message, 
which can be applied with profit to every heart bleeding 
under such wounds. 

All "the comfort of the Scriptures" is along this 
line. They show us that the present reign of sin and 
death is not to be an everlasting one; that a new dispensation 



is to be ushered in as the result of the great 
Redeemer's sacrifice, and that in this new dispensation 
a blessing shall come to all the families of the earth, 
and a special blessing to the Church. Favored now 

R3436 : page 296 

with a knowledge of the Lord, the faithful of this time 
shall be made heirs with Jesus in the great Kingdom 
work of blessing the world. Unquestionably this is a 
comforting assurance, not only for those who are 
striving to attain to the great prize of our high calling, 
but also for them in respect to those— their friends 
and neighbors— who shall be lifted up and blessed under 
that Millennial Kingdom. 

It is of this deliverance that the Apostle speaks, 
saying, that the Lord's people should not sorrow as 
others who have no hope, because if we believe that 
Jesus died and rose again, let us believe also the record 
of the Scriptures, that his death was a sacrifice on 
our behalf, and on behalf of the sins of the whole 
world,— so that them which sleep in Jesus will God 
bring from the dead by and through him. (I Thess. 4:13,14.) 
What a blessed, comforting thought it is 
that the whole world of mankind, which went down 
into death in Adam, has been bought, so that the death 
penalty shall be repealed, and thus their death be 
turned into a sleep, from which all shall be awakened 
in the Millennial morning, to have an opportunity to 
learn of the goodness of God, and, if they will, to accept 
of his favor unto eternal life, by obedience. 

Finally, we notice that the Apostle implies, in 
some of his statements, that the comfort and peace of 
the Church are dependent largely upon unity of the 
Spirit of the Lord in the various members: and that 
we from experience should note that this is the case. 
He says, "Finally, brethren, farewell. Be perfect, 
be of good comfort, be of one mind, live in peace; and 
the God of love and peace shall be with you." (2 Cor. 13:11.) 
And again (Phil. 2:1,2), "If there be any 
consolation [comfort] in Christ, if any comfort of love, 
if any fellowship of spirit, if any bowels and mercies, 
fulfil ye my joy, that ye be likeminded, having the 
same love, being of one accord, of one mind." What 
exhortations these are to unity, peace, brotherly kindness ! 
How they suggest to us patience, forbearance, 
gentleness, helpfulness and comfort one toward another 
in the Church; that thus the Spirit of the Lord may 
abound in all, that each may make the greatest possible 
progress in the right way. Dear brethren and 
sisters, let us more and more be worthy of the name 
Barnabas— Comforter of the brethren. Let us have 
the holy Spirit abounding in us more and more, for 
this is the Lord's good pleasure; that with it dwelling 
in us richly we may be all sons and daughters of comfort 
in Zion, representatives of our Father, and channels 



of the holy Spirit, as well as of the Truth. 



R3436 : page 296 

THE TIME OF HARVEST. 

AUTHOR of MILLENNIAL DAWN and Editor of 
ZION'S WATCH TOWER:- 

Dear Sir,— Since you have changed 
your views respecting Gentile Times let me suggest 
the possibility of still another error. You count 
the seventy years Babylonian captivity of the Jews 
as beginning with the overthrow of Zedekiah, 
Judah's last king, but I notice that "Bishop Usher's 
Chronology," given in the margins of our 
Common Version Bibles and based on "Ptolemy's 
Canon," begins that seventy-year period nineteen 
years earlier— namely, in the first year of Nebuchadnezzar, 
when he took captive Daniel and other prominent 
Jews and laid the Jews' country under tribute. 
Now if this, the common reckoning, be correct, 
it would make the Times of the Gentiles to begin 
nineteen years later than you estimate, namely, in 
B.C. 587, instead of B.C. 606;~and this in turn 
would make those times end nineteen years later than 
you have reckoned,— in October, A.D. 1933, instead 
of October, 1914. What do you say to this? Are you 
humble enough to acknowledge that I have struck 
some new light, and that you and all DAWN readers 
have been "all wrong," walking in darkness? 



R3437 : page 296 

We reply that there are too many ifs in the proposition, 
and that they are all abundantly contradicted 
by facts and Scripture, and are therefore not worthy 
the slightest consideration. 

(1) The brother errs in supposing that we have 
changed our view of "Gentile Times." Those "times" 
or years are 2520, with a definite beginning in B.C. 
606, and a definite ending, A.D. 1914. We know of 
no reason for changing a figure: to do so would spoil 
the harmonies and parallels so conspicuous between 
the Jewish and Gospel ages. The only "change" in 
view is that the anarchy to follow the ending of those 
"times" will not shorten them; and that the forty 
years "harvest" of the Church will be complete and 
not be interfered with by the world-wide anarchy to 
follow it. This, as we have shown, makes the parallel 
with the Jewish age still more accurate; for the 
Jewish harvest of forty years ended in A.D. 69— prior 
to the complete anarchy amongst the Jews which came 



the year following. 

The brother seems to further misunderstand us to 
teach that no great trouble will come before October, 
1914 A.D. This is incorrect: we expect the great 
trouble of Rev. 13:15-17 before that date; but it will 
not be the world's trouble, the anarchy which will 
cause the "earth," society, to melt with fervent heat. 
It will be a trouble peculiar to the Lord's consecrated 
ones. In the past these two distinctly separate troubles 
were less clearly discerned than now. And this is 
just what we should expect— that the light shining 
more and more unto the perfect day would not be contradictory, 
but establish and clarify the truths already 
shown us, including the times and seasons.— Dan. 12:4,10; 
IThes. 5:1-4. 

THE ERROR LONG SINCE EXPOSED. 

(2) In MILLENNIAL DAWN, Vol. II., pp. 36,37, 
we were careful to note the unreliability of all ancient 
histories, and, after quoting various authorities conceding 
this, we added, last paragraph:— 

"The Bible, our God-provided history of the 
first three thousand years, is the only work in the 

R3437 : page 297 

world which— beginning with Adam, the first man 
mentioned in history, monument or inscription, whose 
name, the time of whose creation and death, are recorded, 
and from whom his descendants can be traced 
by name and age in successive links for nearly four 
thousand years— furnishes us a clear and connected 
history down to a period where secular history is well 
authenticated. As we shall see, the Bible record extends 
to the first year of Cyrus, B.C. 536, a well-established 
and generally accepted date. There the 
thread of Bible chronology is dropped— at a point 
where secular history is reliable. God has thus provided 
for his children a clear and connected record 
down to the present time. ...The Bible, therefore, 
is the chart of all history. Without it, as has been 
truly said, history would be like rivers flowing from 
unknown sources to unknown seas." 

On page 52 of the same volume we said: "Usher 
dates the seventy years' desolation eighteen years 
earlier than is shown above— that is, before the dethronement 
of Zedekiah, Judah's last king— because 
the king of Babylon took many of the people captive 
at that time. (2 Chron. 36:9,10,21; 2 Kings 24:8-16.) 
He evidently makes the not uncommon mistake of regarding 
those seventy years as the period of captivity, 
whereas the Lord expressly declares them to be seventy 
years of desolation of the land, that the land 
should lie 'desolate, without an inhabitant' (Dan. 9:2; 
Jer. 26:9.) Such was not the case prior to Zedekiah's 



dethronement. (2 Kings 24: 14.) But the desolation 
which followed Zedekiah's overthrow was complete; 
for, though some of the poor of the land were 
left to be vine dressers and husbandmen (2 Kings 25:12), 
shortly even these— 'all people, both small and 
great'— fled to Egypt for fear of the Chaldees. (Verse 26.) 
There can be no doubt here; and therefore in 
reckoning the time to the desolation of the land, all 
periods up to the close of Zedekiah's reign should be 
counted in, as we have done." 

From the foregoing it is evident that at the time 
of writing DAWN II. we were fully aware that "Ptolemy's 
Canon" and "Usher's Chronology" cut short 
the "seventy years" "desolation of the land," and 
counted them as but fifty-one years, Usher endeavoring 
to make the Bible account agree with "Ptolemy's 
Canon." We, however, have followed the Bible record 
exactly and persistently, and took secular history 
only where Bible history ended. We cannot make 
seventy years' desolation of the land into fifty-one years' 
desolation for the sake of harmony with Ptolemy. 
(Dan. 9:2; 2 Chron. 36:21.) Indeed we reject all of 
Ptolemy's Canon back of the first year of Cyrus, 536 
A.D.— the farther back it goes, the greater its errors. 

"WHERE IS THE PROMISE OF HIS PRESENCE?" 
(2 PETER 3:4.) 

(3) Note the confusion that would result all along 
the line from the one change above suggested. It 
would extend the Jubilee antitype nineteen years, 
making the Lord's presence and "times of restitution" 
not due in any sense until A.D. 1874 plus 19—1893 
A.D. On the contrary, it would shorten the Jewish 
age nineteen years, and thus, according to the parallels 
(MILLENNIAL DAWN, Vol. II., Chap, vii.), 
would shorten the Gospel age also, and show the 
harvest as due (19 plus 19) 38 years before October, 
1874,— that is to say, it would involve the idea of the 
Gospel "harvest" beginning 1836 A.D. and ending 
40 years later, in 1876 A.D. And this would involve 
the thought of the Lord's presence in A.D. 1836, instead 
of 1874, the gathering of the sleeping saints in 
1840, instead of 1878, and the end of the harvesting 
of the "wheat" in 1876, instead of 1914 A.D., as 
the time when the burning of the "tares" in the 
world's "time of trouble" would have been due. 

All this confusion would result from an abandonment 
of the Bible narrative in favor of Ptolemy's 
Canon. Let those who want the darkness take it. 
Let those of us who have had our eyes of understanding 
opened rejoice in the true light more and more. 
As we have already seen, the "harvest" is a time for 
winnowing the "wheat"— a sifting, a separating time, 
and it is for each of us to prove our characters: "Having 
done all, stand!" 



The tests of this "harvest" must be like those of 
the Jewish or typical "harvest". One of them is the 
cross, another is the presence of Christ, another is humility, 
another is love. The Jews were reproved because 
they "knew not the time of their visitation." 
(Luke 19:44.) The matter is doubly distressing 
for those who have once seen the light of 
present Truth, and afterward go into the "outer 
darkness" of the world. It implies unfaithfulness. 
"If the light that is in thee be(come) darkness, how 
great is that darkness."— Matt. 6:23. 

Remember, dear brother, our Lord's words in 
the context: "If thine eye be evil, thy whole body 
shall be full of darkness." An "evil eye" represents 
a mind perverted by anger, malice, hatred, envy, strife, 
ambition, etc. Such a mind's eye is sure to mislead 
the judgment which seeks to be guided by it. Those 
who have such an "eye" never would be drawn to the 
Truth. But some drawn to the Truth with a true eye 
—a true, honest, guileless heart— may become perverted 
through the cultivation of a wrong spirit, 
through selfishness, ambition or what not, and lose 
the true eye and soon lose the beautiful vision which 
enchanted them previously. The Lord explains the 
philosophy of the thing in the words, "Light was sown 
for the righteous, Truth for the upright in heart." 

HOW TO TEST THESE THINGS. 

First of all, go to the Lord in prayer, desirous of 

R3437 : page 298 

knowing the Truth. Ask for the pure heart, for humility, 
for the wisdom which cometh from above, 
which is first pure, then peaceable, easy to be entreated, 
full of mercy and good fruits, without partiality 
and without hypocrisy. (Jas. 3:17.) Next take 
up your DAWNS— the medium through which God has 
already blessed your study of his Word— with the 
Scriptures, and afresh prove all its teachings. In such 
an attitude of study we feel sure that you will be more 
firmly convinced than ever that the Lord's providence 
has specially guided in the preparation of those books 
for the present time— for the Israelites indeed, in 
whom is no guile. 

Coming to Chapter vii. of Vol. II., on the "The 
Parallel Dispensations," you will find it one of the 
most convincing proofs of the whole presentation. 
This is one of the tenfold cords of evidence which 
your suggested change, or any change whatever, 
would render useless, nonsensical. 

Turn to page 232 of DAWN II. There you will 
see the reckoning showing the period of Israel's history 
from the death of Jacob to the death of Christ to 
be 1845 years. You will perceive that the seventy 



years' desolation are counted in the calculation. But if 
we were to accept "your theory," or rather the common 
theory built upon Ptolemy's and Usher's chronology, 
it would reduce this 19 years, and instead of 70 
make it 5 1 years' desolation. This would reduce the 
result so that the entire length of Israel's history, 
being 1845 years, would be 19 years less, namely, 1826 
years from Jacob's death to Christ's death in A.D. 
32, where their "house" was left desolate, and forty 
days later at Pentecost, when the "house of sons" was 
instituted. 

Now, then, notice that if the Jewish age was a 
type or pattern of the Gospel age the latter would be 
1826 years long (1845 less 19) to the point corresponding 
to Christ's death, the point where Israel's "Mishneh" 
began to count, as pointed out by the Prophet, 
"Even today do I declare I will render double unto 
thee"— that "day" being clearly marked by the 
prophecy of the riding on the ass and the "shout." 
Now count 1826 years since A.D. 32 to find the Gospel 
age parallel. It would be 1858 A.D. What occurred 
then to correspond to the rejection of nominal 
Israel? Nothing! 

Three and a half years prior (1854) would in this 
calculation correspond to or be the parallel to the beginning 
of our Lord's ministry, and should here represent 
the Lord's presence and the harvesting time for 

R3438 : page 298 

gathering the elect "wheat" into the "barn." What 
occurred in 1854 to meet these requirements of the 
parallels? Nothing! 

Forty years from the beginning of our Lord's 
ministry saw the full end of the Jewish harvest in 
A.D. 69— followed by anarchy and destruction in 
A.D. 70. So the parallels demand that forty years 
from the beginning of the harvest and parousia here, 
the Gospel age should be fulfilled and the "wrath" be 
poured upon the nations. This would in this argument 
be 40 years from 1854, namely in 1894 A.D. 
What occurred at or before or since that date that 
would parallel the awful calamities that befel natural 
Israel, and what evidence is there that "the harvest 
is past, the summer ended and we are not saved?" 
None whatever! 

On the contrary, how grandly all the prophetic 
periods agree with these parallels, and how irresistible 
is their "voice" to those who have "ears to hear." 
Frequent restudies of these testimonies of the Lord's 
Word will be profitable to us all; and none is grander, 
more faith-inspiring, more convincing than this Chapter 
vii. of Vol. II. on Parallel Dispensations. At best, 
as the Scriptures declare, we are leaky vessels, and 
the multitudes of cares of this life tend to crowd out 
the "Wonderful Words of Life" to such an extent 



that many on re-reading declare that they received as 
great, if not greater blessing than the first time. The 
DAWNS are merely the Scriptures in rearrangement, 
with connecting comments; and hence it is no wonder 
that some write to us that they have read them as 
much as a dozen times and appreciated their lessons 
more each time. God's Word is new every morning and 
fresh every evening to those whose hearts are attuned 
to it, in the song of Moses and the Lamb. 

"OH, THE BLESSEDNESS--THE 1335 DAYS." 

A move of nineteen years, as the brother suggests 
above— or for that matter a change of even one year- 
would affect all the time prophecies of Vol. III. 
of the DAWN. The 1260 days, the 1290 days, the 1335 
days, the 2300 days of Daniel, would all be thrown out 
of gear, out of the beautiful relationship shown in the 
Parallel Dispensations. 

We all remember how we were thrilled when first 
studying we found that the parallels of dispensation 
showed that our Lord was due to be present in October, 
1874, as the exact parallel of the beginning of his 
ministry and the "harvest" of the Jewish age; and 
how this thrill was intensified when we found the same 
date exactly marked by the Jubilee type; and how we 
almost shouted for joy when we found that Daniel's 
"1335 days" ended at precisely the same date; and, 
finally, how we repeated over and over the Prophet's 
words, "Oh, the blessedness of him that waiteth and 
cometh unto the 1335 days." 

What a blessedness indeed! As the Apostle intimated 
it would be, so we have found it, "Times of refreshing ! " 
Take away these parallels, disjoint this 
testimony by changing any part of the chronology, 
and you have a still mightier work before you;— the 

R3438 : page 299 

work of accounting for the rich spiritual food the 
Lord has been supplying to us since October, 1874— 
since the time of his presence, and in full accord with 
his promise that he would gird himself and become 
the servant of his true ones at his second presence and 
serve them "meat in due season," sending it at the 
hands of his faithful servants. We have dealt with 
this subject at greater length than it may seem to 
deserve, believing that it may stimulate some to follow 
the Apostle's exhortation, "Let us give the 
more earnest heed to the things which we have heard, 
lest we let them slip."— Heb. 2:1. 



R3438 : page 299 



NAAMAN HEALED, GEHAZI SMITTEN. 

-2 KINGS 5:l-14.-OCT. 23.- 

Golden Text:— "Heal me, O Lord, and I shall be 
healed; save me, and I shall be saved."— Jer. 17:14. 

THE KINGDOM of Syria bordered the land of Israel 

on the north and east, and at the time of our lesson 

was quite influential amongst the nations of the earth. 

Sometimes it was in conflict with Israel, while at other 

times these two and other nations combined in their opposition 

to the Assyrian empire, a still more influential 

neighbor farther east. Naaman was the general in chief 

of Syria, noted for his personal ability as a soldier, and 

especially recognized by the King of Syria because at his 

hand the Lord had granted deliverance to Syria and Israel 

in combination against Shalmaneser II. 

Naaman's victory is credited by this verse to Jehovah. 
(Jehovah is the original word wherever "Lord" is spelled in 
small capital letters throughout the common version of the 
Old Testament). We are not to gather from this that God 
has supervision of every war and every battle of earth, and 
that those who win have his favor and those who lose his 
disfavor. The Lord's favors were with the one particular 
nation, Israel, from the time of their adoption as the 
children of Abraham down to the time that, in our Lord's 
words, their house was left unto them desolate— divine 
favor withdrawn from them. The Scriptures, however, 
explain to us that the Lord did interfere with the affairs of 
outside nations to some extent— to use them as servants or 
tools for the accomplishment of his purposes. For instance, 
we are particularly informed in the Scriptures that 
on several occasions the Lord brought nations against 
Israel for the chastisement of his peculiar people, leading 
them captive into foreign lands, etc., as in the Babylonian 
captivity. 

These interferences on the Lord's part were not by 
way of bringing salvation or the Gospel message to the 
heathen lands, but merely part and parcel of his dealings 
with Israel— the preparing of Israel to be his peculiar 
people, to be ready for the coming of Messiah. Again we 
see from the Scriptures that the Lord, while granting a 
certain lease of dominion to the kingdoms of this world, 
in the interim between the overthrow of the typical kingdom 
of Israel and the time for the establishment of the 
antitypical kingdom of spiritual Israel under the headship 
of Christ in Millennial glory, has, nevertheless, had a general 
supervision and figuratively has held operations under 
control— "Thus far shalt thou go but no farther"— the 
remainder will he restrain. When the Lord's time shall 
come for a full interference with the rule of this world, 
for the full putting down of all antagonistic authority and 
for the enforcement of righteousness in the world, it will 
be on a very different scale from anything that has ever 
yet transpired: Messiah, clothed with all power and authority, 



and having associated with him the overcomers of 
this Gospel age, will be the great King who, as Jehovah's 
Vicegerent, shall rule the nations with a rod of iron, laying 
righteousness to the line and justice to the plummet. 

THE LITTLE BOND -MAID. 

On the occasion of one of the conflicts between Syria 
and Israel, the Syrians, being successful, carried away some 
spoil and loot, including young Israelites, who thus became 
bond-servants to the Syrians. One of these, a maid, 
became a servant in the home of Naaman, Syria's greatest 
general. Seeing him afflicted with leprosy— an incurable 
disease then as now— she suggested that in Israel was a 
great Prophet of God, Elisha, of whom she had heard 
wonderful things, miracles, and who she was sure could 
heal her master, Naaman. We are not informed how serious 
Naaman's ailment was, but we do know that lepers, 
even under unfavorable conditions, often live long,— they 
have been known to live as long as forty-five years under 
the affliction. It is a repulsive disease, a wasting away or 
rotting of the part affected, an eating of the flesh, somewhat 
like a cancer, yet it is not generally painful until in 
the latter stages. It was just such a disease as a man of 
ability and activity like Naaman would be specially anxious 
to get rid of. His grasping at the suggestion of a little 
girl was possibly of the Lord's oversight, for ordinarily 
a man of his ability would pay little heed to such a suggestion 
of miraculous power in a neighboring country less 
in extent and influence than his own. Naaman evidently 
brought the matter to the attention of the king, who quite 
enthusiastically grasped the hope for the recovery of his 
favorite general. So a royal letter was written to the king 
of Israel, saying, "Now, when this letter is come unto 
thee, behold, I have herewith sent Naaman my servant to 
thee, that thou mayest recover him of his leprosy." We 
are to remember that the King of Israel, while professedly 
making some acknowledgment of Jehovah, was really an 
idolator, fostering in the kingdom false worship such as 
the Lord had not commanded. We are to remember that 
under these conditions he had no dealings with, and we 
may say scarcely any knowledge of, the Prophet Elisha, 
who made his home in the capital city of Samaria. 

When King Jehoram read the letter he saw that it 
was expected of him that a miracle should be performed, 

R3438 : page 300 

and, rending his garments as an indication of despairing 
trouble, he declared that the King of Syria was merely 
making a pretext of this letter, seeking another occasion 
for war and to invade Jehoram's weaker dominions, to 
carry off more spoils and captives. 

The news of this incident spread throughout the city, 
but possibly aside from this Elisha had a divine revelation 
respecting the status of the matter. Evidently conscious 



of God's power with him for such an emergency— perhaps 
directly instructed to this effect— Elisha sent word to the 
king, Wherefore hast thou rent thy clothing?— wherefore 
be in despair? Let the Syrian stranger come now to me, 
and he shall know that there is a prophet of the Lord in 
Israel. King Jehoram was glad in such an emergency to 
direct General Naaman to the Prophet, and doubtless did 

R3439 : page 300 

so with many assurances that the healing of lepers was not 
in the power of kings or princes or ordinary beings; 
but here was the man the little captive maid had evidently 
referred to, and that he wished for Naaman the best results. 
So General Naaman's cortege of horses and chariots drove 
over to the door of Elisha's house and there received a 
message from the Prophet, "Go and wash in Jordan seven 
times, and thy flesh shall come again to thee, and thou 
shalt be clean of thy leprosy." 

We cannot wonder that Naaman was angry and indignant 
that a person of his rank should thus be lightly dismissed. 
It would be just like any worldly-minded person 
to be indignant under such circumstances: it requires the 
grace of humility to accept slights and indignities without 
appearing to notice them. We feel sure that it would not 
be the Lord's will that we, as his followers, should in any 
sense of the word duplicate or copy the manner Elisha 
displayed on this occasion. On the contrary, the very 
essence of Christian grace is declared to be love, which is 
kind, long suffering, patient, gentle, and which renders 
honor to those to whom honor is due, etc. The better the 
Lord's people can keep this in mind as a rule for daily 
life the larger generally will be their success in serving the 
Truth. Meekness, gentleness, patience, kindness, are all 
elements of Christian character, and must be cultivated 
if we would by present experiences be made fit for the 
heavenly Kingdom. 

We are not in this criticising Elisha and his course, 
for Elisha was not a Christian, having lived several centuries 
before the great Head came, before the redemptive 
work was accomplished, before the new and living way 
was opened up for us to walk in his steps. Elisha, as a 
Prophet, occupied a special position, and we do not know 
but that his conduct in this case was specially directed 
of the Lord and was particularly wise and suited to the 
conditions. Naaman did not comprehend that in calling 
upon Elisha he was really calling upon God, of whom 
Elisha was merely the servant. It was appropriate, therefore, 
that Naaman should learn the lesson, and he probably 
did learn it by the experiences referred to. In fact 
Elisha's course declared, "I am greater than you, because 
while you are the servant of the king of Syria, I am a 
servant of the King of kings, the Almighty; while, therefore, 
in harmony with my King's wishes, I shall grant the 
boon requested, I will do it in such a manner that you 
shall learn the lesson that you receive it as a favor and not, 



as you expect, in exchange for the expensive presents and 
rewards which you have brought with you." 

As a general we might suppose that Naaman 
had considerable combativeness, and it manifested itself 
in his indignation at Elisha's course. To his companions 
and servants he expressed that indignation, declaring that 
he need not have come on a long journey to be told to go 
and wash himself, and that anyway the rivers of Syria were 
superior in sparkling purity to the Jordan. The latter 
was true, for the river Abana is noted for its crystalline, 
pellucid purity. Of its waters a writer says: "The 
Abana is no doubt the modern Barrada, the river to which 
the delightful oasis of Damascus owes its beauty and very 
existence; the Greeks called it the 'Golden Flowing.' 
It has the clearest waters possible, and singularly bright in 
color; in the morning a full, deep, emerald green, in the 
evening a sapphire blue. It was impossible not to think 
of the two jewels, so exactly did it resemble their clear 
gem-like lines at times." 

The offended Naaman offered none of the presents he 
had brought for the Prophet, but indignantly started with 
his chariots homeward. Naaman's servants were able to 
take a calmer and more deliberate view of the situation 
than himself, because not so acutely interested. To them it 
seemed as though the Prophet had indeed exercised a great 
deal of dignity, as though he were the servant of a very 
great king indeed; to them this seemed all the more to 
support his claim of ability to heal the disease. Doubtless 
they reasoned, too, that the Prophet's home was not an 
extravagant one and he evidently was not greedy of filthy 
lucre, and asked no compensation for the receipt given. 
As the chariots rode homeward these matters were discussed, 
and Naaman greatly cooled off and began to take 
the more reasonable view of the situation, and was finally 
persuaded that while they had to pass the river Jordan 
anyway in the homeward journey he would follow the 
Prophet's directions, which could do no harm if they did 
no good. He did this, dipping himself seven times as directed, 
and with the seventh dip his flesh was healed of 
the leprosy, and his flesh and skin not only became healthy 
but fresh as that of a child— better than ever before. He 
was clean, his leprosy was gone. 

LEPROSY A SYMBOL OF SIN. 

Leprosy is used in the Scriptures to symbolize sin, 
and was sometimes inflicted by the Lord as a punishment 
for sin, as, for instance, in the case of Miriam, Moses' 
sister, who was smitten with leprosy because of her improper 
attitude and disrespectful language to and about 
her brother Moses, in answer to whose prayer she was 
healed. Sin is an incurable disease, and therefore well 
represented by leprosy; like leprosy it doth eat like a 
canker and all having it are "unclean." There are many 
suggestions as to how sin can be gotten rid of: there are 
philosophies which deny its existence, others which tell us 



that a moral life atones for sin. But these various philosophies, 
theories, suggestions, resemble the waters of Syria, 
which Naaman well knew could not make him clean, could 
not restore his health. The Word of God has pointed 
out to us the only cure for this malady of sin, the only 
channel through which forgiveness can be had— "There 
is none other name under heaven given amongst men 
whereby we must be saved, but by the name of Jesus." 
However man may philosophize about the matter, sin is 
undeniable and its cure impossible except as the Lord will 
grant relief. 

Another thought in connection with this: the likeness 
of the healing of Naaman's leprosy to the healing of 
sin is that the former required seven dippings into Jordan. 
We may well presume that each time Naaman dipped himself 
he looked for results, to see whether or not the leprosy 
was departing; but we may be sure there were no results 
until the seventh dip, and had he desisted with the fifth 
or sixth, saying, "It is useless, there is no improvement 
manifest," he would have failed of the blessing. The 
seven may well represent to us perfection: not that we 
are to either believe into Jesus seven times, not to be converted 
seven times, nor to consecrate ourselves by baptism 
into death seven times; but that as seven represents perfection, 

R3439 : page 301 

the thought would be that our belief must be perfect 
or complete, our obedience must be perfect or complete, 
our baptism into death in Christ must be perfect or 
complete, otherwise there is no remission of sins, otherwise 
we would fail to get the blessings desired and promised. 
Let us impress this upon our hearts and minds and 
upon all with whom we have influence— that half-hearted 
consecration and obedience are not what the Lord is 
pleased to honor and to bless. 

Several things connected with Naaman's experiences 
show us that the Lord's blessing of healing was conferred 
upon a man of naturally noble traits. First amongst these 
was the fact that his wife's maid, a servant, was interested 
in him and solicitous for his welfare. The love of the 
young, the innocent, the pure, is not always a sure test of 
character; but it should be given its weight when thinking 
of persons of whom we have not the fullest knowledge. 
Secondly, when Naaman found that his disease was gone 
he might have said to himself, "Well, I have received a 
great blessing and I have gotten it cheaply. If the Prophet 
had come down to me in a courteous manner and assured 
me of these results, or proffered to come with me, 
I fully intended that he should have a liberal gift, if not 
all the rich treasures which I have brought with me; but 
now, seeing that he did not put himself about so much as 
to come down to my chariot, I certainly need not put myself 
about to return many miles to Samaria and proffer him 
a gift. Perhaps, indeed, he would refuse it. I will go 
upon my journey and keep the stuff." Such a course would 



have shown us that Naaman was not a noble man, however 
successful he had been in winning the confidence of his 
king, and however much the Lord had used him in delivering 
Syria and Israel from the power of the Assyrians. 
Noble minds are not seeking selfishly to get all they can 
of this present life and give as little as possible to others. 
The truly great take pleasure in being just, yea in being 
generous. We may be sure that a generous heart is appreciated 
in the Lord's sight as well as in the estimation of 
truly noble men and women. In proportion as we see this 
let us each watch his own heart and mind and conduct, that 
each may thus bring himself nearer and nearer to the noble 
standard which the Lord and the best of his children 
approve. 

We remember that during our Lord's ministry ten 
lepers cried to him as he passed, "Have mercy upon us, 
thou Son of David." They by this expression acknowledged 
him as the Messiah, the Root and Offspring 
of David, and they desired of the Lord healing 
from leprosy— very much Naaman's situation, only 
that in the former case most of them were Jews. We 
remember that the Lord sent them on a journey 
during which they were all healed, but that only one of 
them returned to give thanks, to acknowledge his blessing. 
Our Lord commented on the fact and seemed to be deeply 
grieved with the ingratitude of the nine, and even pointed 
out that the one who did return and praise the Lord was 
not a Jew but a Samaritan— not an heir with Israel in the 
promises, but one of those outside the covenant favors of 
the Lord. Similarly Naaman was outside the covenant 
promises, a fact which is mentioned in the New Testament 
also as an evidence of God's mercy. We are told that 
there were many lepers in Israel at the same time that this 
noble Syrian was, by the Lord's favor, healed. 

Let us, dear friends, see to it, being Israelites indeed, 
"heirs according to the promise," and having received 
of the Lord healing, forgiveness and blessing, that 
we are full of thankfulness, full of gratitude, and that we 

R3440 : page 301 

spare no pains to express this, and that we do not seek to 
have it at no cost to ourselves, but rejoice to be able to 
render unto the Lord a fruit of his blessing and mercy and 
thank-offering— even as Naaman desired to do on this occasion, 
returning to Samaria to the Prophet and tendering 
him the gifts that he brought for the purpose. They were 
consecrated beforehand when he was hoping for blessing. 
Would he, after receiving the blessing, withhold any part? 
To have done so would have proven him unworthy of the 
blessing. Similarly the Lord's people, fleeing from sin and 
desiring forgiveness, reconciliation, etc., are generally disposed 
to make full consecration of everything to the Lord; 
but after receiving of his grace, if they attempt to keep 
back any or all of the consecrated earthly things, how 
would their course appear to the Lord and to all who had 



his light and the spirit of Truth. Let us each measure our 
own hearts by this rule. 

The silver and gold taken by Naaman as a present is 
estimated to have been the equivalent of $77,540.00, and 
additionally ten costly or state-occasion robes of considerable 
value. This was not considered too large a gift for 
the object desired and for the station or rank of the giver. 
The gift was proffered to Elisha with the words, "Behold, 
now I know there is no God in all the earth but in Israel: 
now, therefore, I pray thee, take a present of thy servant." 
But Elisha answered, "As the Lord liveth, before whom I 
stand, I will receive none. And he urged him to take it; 
but he refused." Had Elisha accepted the money he 
doubtless could have used it in connection with his mission 
as the Lord's Prophet, or amongst the poor of Israel; 
nevertheless he evidently did better in refusing it. Thus 
also it is with those servants of the Lord who give of their 
time and talents to his service. It cannot be said that it 
would be wrong of them to receive compensation, salary: 
it could not be said that as servants of the Lord they were 
worthy of no compensation; yet we believe that as a rule 
the Lord will be more glorified if those serving him were 
more particular to keep the ministries of the Truth entirely 
separate and distinct from all mercenary considerations. 
The Lord, who owns all the gold and silver and 
the cattle on a thousand hills, is able to provide for his 
work and for all of his servants, and we believe that he is 
more honored in their looking to him and trusting in his 
providences than in accepting anything in the nature of 
pay for the dispensing of his grace. 

Naaman's acknowledgment of the God of Israel as the 
only true God was evidently not merely bombast, for forthwith 
he requested enough of the consecrated soil of Palestine 
for the building of an altar to the Lord, that he thus 
might in Syria present an offering on consecrated earth. 
Moreover, his mind had grasped the situation that now as 
a follower of the Lord, whose understanding had been 
opened, he could no longer with propriety do the things 
formerly done by him in false worship in association with 
his king. He inquired of the Prophet how the Lord would 
regard it if he went with the king of Syria into the Temple 
of Syria's heathen god, Rimmon, the king leaning on his 
shoulder, and he be expected to bow himself with the king; 
—would the Lord pardon such conduct on his part or must 
he take still more decided grounds, utterly refusing to accompany 
the king? 

The intimation seems to be given through the Prophet 
that Naaman would be justified in taking the usual 
course, as formerly, while in his own heart he would be 
serving the Lord and offering worship to him only. The 
point at issue seems to be that Naaman was not in all this 
an Israelite but still a Syrian— still a stranger to the covenant 
and promises of Israel, still without God and having 
no hope in the world. He might, therefore, do things 
with the king that would have been improper for an Israelite 
to have done, because the latter was under special 



R3440 : page 302 

covenant relationship to the Lord. We are here reminded 
of Cornelius, the first Gentile convert, mentioned in Acts 10. 
He was a man who feared God, gave much alms, 
sought to live righteously, soberly, and still— not being a 
Jew— he was an alien and a stranger so far as the covenant 
of Israel was concerned, as he could not be received into 
fellowship with the Lord until after the atonement sacrifice, 
until the end of the "seventy weeks" favor upon Israel, 
and even then only by hearing and believing the "words" 
of life and being begotten of the Spirit: so Naaman the 
Syrian, not living in so favored a time, could not be received 
at all into covenant relationship. 

The noble conduct of this man, his candor, his apparent 
willingness to sacrifice everything for the Lord, puts 
to shame the course of many who by God's grace have become 
"Israelites indeed" and have been adopted into the 
divine family as sons. Many of them have very much less 
conscience on such subjects— many are much less careful 
about sailing under false colors, misrepresenting the Lord 
and the Truth. Many, for the sake of earthly fame or position 
or present prosperity, are willing to sacrifice practically 
everything. Let us, dear readers, see to it that we 
place the Lord first in all our calculations, and that if we 
acknowledge and admire such honesty and sincerity in the 
heathen general, Naaman, much more should we find it in 
our own hearts, in our own conduct, and much more 
should the Lord expect of us in the way of obedience even 
unto death, obedience to right, to principle, to truth, to 
Him. 

GEHAZI'S DUPLICITY PUNISHED. 

On the other hand note the ignoble Gehazi, Elisha's 
servant, who though a witness to God's power through the 
Prophet had not been really and truly blessed by a proper 
character development. His heart was full of selfishness, 
and he grieved that the presents had not been received. 
He hastened after Naaman's chariot, and, by misrepresentations 
and lies in his master's name, received presents of 
considerable value— but he received more. The Prophet 
of the Lord, discerning the entire matter, pronounced 
against him as a penalty for his wrong course the leprosy 
of Naaman. So, we are sorry to say, there are some in 
daily contact with the Truth and with the Lord's consecrated 
servants who do not partake of the spirit of the 
Truth, nor of the spirit of the servants,— in whom selfishness 
is the ruling passion and who will, therefore, eventually 
not only fail to receive the great blessings, such as 
came to Naaman, but additionally will receive the divine 
disfavor, the second death. 

Our Golden Text is not particularly related to the lesson, 
but, nevertheless, is very appropriate in connection 
with some of the inferences we have drawn from it. Those 



afflicted with the moral leprosy, sin, are here represented 
as calling to the Lord for the necessary healing, for the 
necessary salvation. The Lord heard our calling before 
we uttered it. Before we were born, yea, before the 
foundation of the world he had prepared an answer for our 
crying; he had prepared to answer the cry of all those who 
truly seek through him release from sin and its penalty, 
for Christ Jesus our Lord is declared to have been the 
Lamb slain from before the foundation of the world. Our 
salvation begins in the moment of our full acceptance of 
the forgiveness, but it continues through the remainder of 
the present life and will be completed with our participation 
in the glorious resurrection of the Millennial morning. 
Whoever, meantime, goes back voluntarily to sin, 
to "wallowing in the mire," or whoever meantime rejects 
the great Mediator, the only avenue of salvation, loses all 
—for there is no other name given under heaven or amongst 
men whereby we must be saved, no other way than by 
hearkening to his voice, his Word. 



R3440 : page 302 

OUR UNSEEN GUARDIANS. 

-2 KINGS 6:8-23. -OCTOBER 30.- 

Golden Text:— "The angel of the Lord encampeth round 
about them that fear him, and delivereth them."— Psa. 34:7. 

OUR LESSON is based upon a miracle which the 
Lord wrought through Elisha the Prophet. As 
already noted, the kingdom of Syria lay to the 
north and east of the kingdom of Israel, and the two were 
not separated by natural boundaries, such as mountains, 
seas, etc. Consequently wars between the two countries 
were not infrequent. We recall that in one of these raids 
of the Syrians upon the Israelites, Naaman's wife's maid 
was taken captive. We recall that when Naaman came 
to the king of Israel the latter thought his coming merely 
a pretext for another war. Our lesson calls our attention 
to a later determination upon the part of the king of Syria 
to invade Israel, get spoil, etc. Several plans of attack 
were devised to raid one city or another, but each time 
these raids were frustrated, for the Syrian army found the 
cities they attacked freshly prepared for defence. The 
king concluded there was a traitor in his court or camp 
who disclosed his secret plans and arrangements to the 
king of Israel, and instituted a search for the traitor. His 
counsellors, however, had heard of Elisha— perhaps 
through Naaman or those who accompanied him at the 
time of his healing. These explained to the king of Syria 
that a more likely interpretation of the matter was that 
the Prophet Elisha revealed to Israel's king all plots and 
schemes against the interests of the nation. 



Although the king was evidently a man of force, he 
was not wise in his determination to ascertain the location 
of Elisha and to capture him first, and thus to secure a 
free hand in looting the cities of Israel. He might have 
known that if Elisha could inform the king, he could be 
equally well informed in matters respecting himself. But 
thus it is with all who leave the wisdom of God out of 
their calculations. The Apostle sums up the matter for 

R3441 : page 302 

them, saying, The wisdom of man is as foolishness with 
God, for the world by its wisdom knows not God and 
does not take into consideration the boundlessness of his 
wisdom and power. The Christian, on the contrary, recognizing 
divine power and wisdom and coming into accord 
with the same, is thereby blessed. Whatever was the measure 
of his wisdom and prudence as a natural man, this 
would be certainly intensified by his participation in the 
wisdom which cometh from above— "the spirit of a sound 
mind," the Spirit of the Lord. 

As soon as the king learned that Elisha was at the little 
town of Dothan he sent an army, including horses and 
chariots, to surround the city and to make sure of capturing 
the Prophet. The latter doubtless understood in advance, 
but working in harmony with the Lord's arrangement 
he did not flee the city. He was entirely restful in 
mind respecting the matter, but his servant was greatly 
alarmed— he thought of the Prophet and himself being 
carried prisoners to Syria to thenceforth be bondmen, etc. 

R3441 : page 303 

Elisha, however, comforted him with assurances respecting 
the divine power which encompassed them, much greater 
than the power of their enemies. Then, not only as a 
lesson to the servant, but also doubtless intended of the 
Lord as a lesson for his people all the way down through 
the ages, Elisha prayed that the young man's eyes might be 
opened that he might see and realize the true situation. At 
once the servant perceived that all around the city the entire 
hill was amply protected against the surrounding hosts— 
"horses and chariots of fire" around and about Elisha and 
himself. We must assume that the horses and chariots of 
fire were in the nature of a vision granted to the servant 
and to us, as illustrative of the divine power and protection 
given. Thus viewed, what the servant saw was an 
active parable, a picture similar to the symbolic pictures 
of Revelation— serving the intended purpose most thoroughly, 
most completely, and giving to the eyes of his 
understanding a proper conception of the divine power 
present with the Prophet. 

DIVINE PROVIDENCE ALL ABOUT US. 

This is the center of our lesson and is in full accord 



with other Scripture statements, as, for instance, the 
Golden Text, the latter giving a picture, not of horses and 
chariots representing power, but an encampment representing 
a continued and abiding presence of the divine 
representatives, safely guarding all the interests of the 
Lord's faithful ones. The Apostle assures us that the angels 
of God are ministering spirits sent forth to minister unto 
and to serve those who shall be heirs of salvation, the 
saved ones of this Gospel Age— not only the overcomers 
of the little flock, but also the overcomers of the great 
multitude. All of these, because believers in Christ, because 
at heart faithful, because fully consecrated to the 
Lord and begotten of his Spirit, are the special and happy 
objects of his grace, ministered to and served by the invisible 
messengers. Our Lord Jesus sets forth practically the 
same thought in his declaration, "Their angels do always 
behold [have access to] the face of my Father." (Matt. 18:10.) 
The Master's words seem to imply at least one or 
more angels having charge over the consecrated ones, the 
very elect. He uses a still different figure of speech in 
illustrating the matter, as though he would assure us that 
these messengers would not be delayed in caring for our 
interests, would not be hindered by more important 
heavenly business, but would at once have direct access to 
the divine presence and attention, so that our interests 
would have all needed consideration. 

Gathering together these various pictures, we have as 
a whole before our minds something like this: Our great 
all-wise, all-powerful heavenly Father has numberless messengers 
at his command, and has deputized and appointed 
many of these to care for the interests of his cause on 
earth— especially to watch over and minister unto the 
very elect. Nothing can by any means, therefore, harm 
these, except as the heavenly Father sees that the earthly 
injury or disadvantage would prove profitable either to the 
individual new creature or to the Lord's general cause. 
This is in full accord with his general assurance that all 
things shall work together for good to them that love him. 

Such a use of the heavenly messengers by no means 
invalidates the thought that the Lord's earthly children 
are frequently used of him as ministers, servants, the one 
to the other. Indeed we may be assured that the invisible 
messengers or servants, generally if not always, are required 
to act through human instrumentalities— preferably 
through the very elect. Of this kind of service done by 
the brethren one for the other under the supervision of 
divine power and messengers, we have illustrations in the 
harvest work: for instance, supervised by our present 
Lord and his heavenly hosts, yet in the main carried on by 
the members of his body still in the flesh. Again we have 
illustrations of the same in the declaration of Psa. 91:11,12, 
"He shall give his messengers charge over thee to keep 
thee in all thy ways. They shall bear thee up in their 
hands, lest thou dash thy foot against a stone." Doubtless 
the heavenly messengers are connected with this work, yet 
nevertheless the work itself is apparently, we may say 



surely, done through human instrumentalities— the Church 
in the flesh. For instance, the Lord in this present harvest 
time has given his messengers, the leaders of his 
consecrated people, "a charge," a message, a word of 
warning, counsel, advice,— an opening of the Word of 
Truth, an enlightenment of their understandings,— that 
they should bear up all the members of the "feet" class, 
all of the very elect in this time of serious trial, testing and 
stumbling, lest at any time any of this class should stumble 
through the peculiar trials of the present time. How manifestly 
this is fulfilled: the harvest message in its various 
features, bearing on every phase of Truth now due and 
every phase of error now being brought forward, is God's 
keeping power by which, according to his guarantee, we 
know that nothing shall by any means hurt the "feet" 
members of the true "body of Christ." 

It is for us to rejoice in these blessings and favors of 
the Lord and to increase our faith; and the lesson under 
consideration is a help in this connection, as showing us 
how even before the house of sons was organized, the Lord 
had power and exercised it in the house of servants in a 
way that illustrates to us the abundance of that power. 

With the morning light the Syrian soldiers drew near 
to the village of Dothan, making inquiry for the Prophet, 
who, by prayer, brought upon them "blindness." The 
original word, however, does not signify total blindness, 
but rather a visual indistinctness, somewhat akin perhaps 
to mesmeric or hypnotic conditions as they are known 
today. The Prophet proposes to lead them to Elisha and 
his home, the latter being in the city of Samaria and 
thither he led them. When they were within the walls of 
the city and completely, therefore, at the mercy of the 
king of Israel and his warriors, the Prophet dispelled the 
illusion, and, opening the eyes of their understanding, 
made himself known to them and introduced them to the 
king of Israel, etc. The latter inquired of the prophet 
whether he had led them there to be smitten, to be destroyed 
as the enemies of the Lord and of the kingdom, 
but his answer was, No; that he should set a feast before 
them of royal bounties and send them back to their king 
and friends— in a word, that he should figuratively "heap 
coals of fire on their heads." This was done, and the result 
is given us in a few words, "So the bands of Syria 
came no more into the land of Israel." 

The closing incident of our lesson is worthy of appropriation 
by spiritual Israelites. So long as we are the 
Lord's we may have absolute confidence respecting the results 
in all of life's affairs, and this confidence in God 
should tend to make us more generous and kind toward 
our enemies— to all those who would despitefully use us 
or persecute us. So far from seeking to do them injury in 
return or to speak evil of them in return, the admonition 
of the Lord is, "If thine enemy hunger feed him, if he 
thirst give him drink, for in so doing thou shalt heap coals 
of fire on his head." "A soft answer turneth away 
wrath." A return of good for evil may not at once make 



a friend of an enemy, but it will at least bring blessing to 
our own hearts, and is much more likely to bring blessing 
to the enemy than if we should return him evil for evil. 



page 305 

SEMI-MONTHLY. 
VOL. XXV. OCTOBER 15, 1904 No. 20. 



CONTENTS. 

Views from the Watch Tower 307 

Russian Official Prayer for Aid 307 

The St. Louis Convention 310 

Archaeological Verification of Bible 

Records 310 

Christianity vs. Modern Culture 31 1 

The Rank of the Ancient Worthies 312 

The Great Company 313 

Stumbling Stones or Stepping 

Stones (Poem) 314 

Joash, the Boy King 315 

Repairing the Temple 316 

Interesting Letters 316 

page 306 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
--ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-24 EVERSHOLT ST., LONDON, N.W. 
GERMAN BRANCH-MIRKER STR., 45 ELBERFELD. 
AUSTRALIAN BRANCH-32 JOHNSTON ST., FITZROY, MELBOURNE. 

PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE, 5c (2-l/2d.) A COPY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity 
or adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER, will be supplied FREE, if 
they send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting 
the paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our 
list continually. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



THIS JOURNAL IS PUBLISHED IN THE 

FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, DANISH AND ITALIAN LANGUAGES. 

SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



A DESIRABLE GIFT. 



We have prepared a choice edition of "The Divine Plan 
of the Ages," as "Scripture Studies," bound in full Morocco 
with gold edges. Price, $1.00, postage or expressage, 
10c; to WATCH TOWER subscribers at wholesale rate, 
60c, carriage prepaid. We feel sure that many of these 
will be used as Holiday Gifts to friends. The usual price 
of such like books would be at least $2.00. 

THE EDITOR'S ST. LOUIS DISCOURSE OF SUNDAY, OCT. 2. 



This discourse seems to have been quite widely published. 
The World's Fair Commissioners secured copies 
of it and mailed it to journals all over the country, requesting 
that they publish the discourse— or extracts from 
it. The Brethren and Sisters, we feel sure, will be glad 
to help circulate any paper publishing these discourses. 
Reflect, too, that such circulation carries the Truth to 
places and people not to be reached by the tracts and 
TOWERS. Openings of this kind we may accept as part 
of the Lord's providence, and we should accordingly 
make as full use of them as possible. Let each of us, while 
praying for the prosperity of the Lord's cause, watch also 
for opportunities to secure it— no matter how humble. 



R3441 : page 307 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 

THE OFFICIAL PRAYER OF RUSSIA FOR DIVINE AID 
AGAINST JAPAN. 



THE Official Messenger of St. Petersburg, Russia, 
published the following prayer appointed by the 
Holy Synod. 

"By virtue of an imperial ukase to the effect that 
during the present trials of our dear country more 
ardent prayers should be offered for the victory of the 
Russian troops, who are worshipers of Christ, over a 
cruel enemy, full of guile, the Holy Synod pronounces 



the time ripe for special prayers to be offered in all of 
the churches in the empire on Sundays and holydays, 
after mass, beseeching that heavenly aid should be 
sent to the Russian army, which is sacrificing its life 
for its faith, its emperor and its country, for long life 
for the victorious troops and for the repose of the souls 
of the warriors who fall." 
The following prayer has been specially ordained: 
"Although unworthy, we implore thee who art 
strong in battle for aid, and humbly beseech thee to 

R3442 : page 307 

accept our weapons in thy cause, to give thy Christ-loving 

army victory, and to permit it to subdue the 

enemy. 

"Send from on high thy hand and touch the 
hearts of the enemy so that they shall make supplication 
to thee, the God of peace, who loves his 
creatures. 

"Strengthen us with thy might, defender of the 
orthodox faith, send thy arrows to confound the 
enemy. 

"Strike them as with lightning and give them 
into the hands of thy faithful troops. 

"Thou who hearkened to Moses, bless the emperor's 
doings, multiply his glory and confirm his 
empire. By thy almighty hand preserve his army. 
Send thy angel to fortify his troops and give them 
salvation. 

"Send peace upon us. May thy invisible finger 
defend thy servants, show them the right path, forgive 
them their sins, and bestow upon them the crown 
of glory. 

"Grant the emperor peaceful life and well-being, 
the fulfilment of his desires and a conquest of his 
enemies." 

The prayer also appeals to the virgin, and concludes 
by beseeching eternal rest for the dead and for 
all those who have laid down their lives for their faith 
and their country. 

A secular journal editorially comments on the 
prayer thus: 

"Those who remember the horrid barbarities of the 
Russian troops on the way to Pekin will shudder at the 
blasphemous bigotry and assurance which calls the 
Russian army Christ-loving. If they were Christ's they 
would do his works. Moreover, instead of a prayer 
for divine guidance, these mistaken ones call on God 
for reenforcements. They do not ask him to guide 
the Czar aright, but merely to endorse his policies. 
There is one tiny clause, evidently an afterthought, 
which asks that the Russians may be shown the right 
path, but its position, following as it does an appeal 
to the Deity to smite the enemy and to deliver them 
into the hands of the suppliants, shows they don't 



want this asked-for guidance until they have settled 
with the Japanese. They seem to forget that the 
same God made both the Japanese and the Russian." 



Poor, blind priests and people! although nominally 
"Christians" how sadly they need the true eyesalve! 
How glad we are for them and for the whole 
world that God's promise is soon to be fulfilled: "All 
the blind eyes shall be opened"— "the blind shall see 
out of obscurity." 

The Apostle says that "the god of this world 
[Satan] hath blinded the minds of them that believe 
not." We see this illustrated in the present instance. 
False doctrine is blinding the Russians just as it does 
other nominal "Christian nations." 

That false doctrine had its start in the third century, 
when faith in the coming Kingdom of Christ began 
to fade;— when the Millennial Kingdom promises 

R3442 : page 308 

began to be interpreted as signifying the Church's 
control of world power. Under this error the Papal 
hierarchy rose into power until it controlled practically 
every nation in Europe. These nations have 
since broken away from her, except Austria-Hungary, 
but the Popes still claim temporal power, assert that 
they represent Christ and that his Millennial reign 
has been in process of fulfilment in Papacy. 

Russia coalesced with the Greek Catholic Church 
which, through the Holy Synod, recognizes the Czar 
as the head of the one and only true Church of Christ. 
From the Russian standpoint, therefore, the success 
of Russia in conquering China and Japan means the 
prosperity and spread of Christ's Kingdom, which 
ultimately, all-conquering, shall fill the whole earth. 

The same error poisons all the remainder of 
Christendom; for although the casting off of the Papal 
yoke seemed to mean the overthrow of this error 
amongst the masses of Europe it really meant nothing 
of the kind: the error merely took another form. 
At first each sect of Protestants proposed that it was 
the Kingdom of Christ and must prevail and conquer 
the world. But as splits and factions increased the 
number of these spiritual kingdoms of Christ, and 
demonstrated that none of them could conquer the 
world single-handed, a truce was called in 1843, when 
the Evangelical Alliance was formed. Since then the 
theory is that "all the sects as well as their Papal 
mother" constitute the Kingdom of Christ which 
must conquer the world. 

This thought still dominates, and under it every 
civilized government which favors the Church styles 
itself a kingdom of God. The union spirit grows, 



and soon, according to the Scriptures, will bring to 
Protestantism and Catholicism, cooperating, the old-time 
power over secular affairs formerly exercised by 
Papacy during "the dark ages." 

It is time for all of God's true people to discern 
this error, which in various ways has misled, is misleading 
and will yet further mislead all those blinded 
by the Adversary on this subject. 

What is the antidote for this poisonous blinding 
error, do you ask? We reply that the remedy is a 
return to the primitive faith of the Church; namely, a 
recognition that all these man-made institutions are 
pseudo kingdoms— false, deceptive misrepresentations 
of Christ's Kingdom; that Christ himself will be the 
great King in that Millennial Kingdom, and that his 
true saints of the entire Gospel age, after sharing in 
the First Resurrection, will constitute the Holy Synod 
or Royal Priesthood promised. How this truth frees 
us from the blindness which once afflicted us even as 
it still afflicts others! and how it inspires us with true 
ideals and the best and most powerful aspirations ! 
The faithful all down these eighteen centuries have 
waited for God's Son from heaven and for his Kingdom, 
for which we still pray: "Thy Kingdom come, 
thy will be done on earth even as it is done in heaven." 

TOLSTOI'S SERMON ON THE WAR. 



"All over Russia, from the palace to the remotest 
village, the pastors of churches, calling themselves 
Christians, appeal to that God who has enjoined love to 
one's enemies— to the God of Love himself— to help the 
work of the devil to further the slaughter of men.... 
Christian pastors continue to invite men to the greatest 
of crimes, continue to commit sacrilege, praying God to 
help the work of war, and, instead of condemning, they 
justify and praise that pastor who, with the cross in his 
hands on the very scene of murder, encouraged men to 
the crime. The same thing is going on in Japan.... 
Japanese theologians and religious teachers no less than 
the military in the techniques of religious deceit and 
sacrilege, but distort the great Buddhistic teaching by 
not only permitting but justifying that murder which 
Buddha forbade. The Buddhistic scientist Soyen-Shaku, 
ruling over eight hundred monasteries, explains that, 
although Buddha forbade manslaughter, he also said he 
could never be at peace until all beings are united in the 
infinitely loving heart of all things, and that, therefore, 
in order to bring into harmony that which is discordant 
it is necessary to fight and to kill men. 

"It is as if there never had existed the Christian 
and Buddhistic teaching about the unity of the human 
spirit, the brotherhood of men, love, compassion, the 
sacredness of human life. 



"Stupefied by prayers, sermons, exhortations, by 
processions, pictures and newspapers, the cannon's 
flash, hundreds of thousands of men, uniformly dressed, 
carrying divers deadly weapons, leaving their parents, 
wives, children, with hearts of agony, but with artificial 
sprightliness, go where they, risking their own lives, will 
commit the most dreadful act of killing men whom they 
do not know and who have done them no harm. And 
they are followed by doctors and nurses, who somehow 
imagine that at home they cannot serve simple, peaceful, 
suffering people, but can only serve those who are 
engaged in slaughtering each other. Those who remain 
at home are gladdened by news of the murder of men, 
and when they learn that many Japanese have been 
killed they thank some one whom they call God.... 

"The frightful work commenced is continued. Loot, 
violence, murder, hypocrisy, theft and, above all, the 
most frightful fraud— the distortion of religious teachings, 
both Christian and Buddhistic— continue.... 

"This evil which is leading men to inevitable destruction 
has manifested itself with special power in our 
time, because, having lost all rational guidance in life, 
and having directed all efforts to discoveries and improvements, 
principally in the sphere of technical 

knowledge, men of our time have developed in themselves 
enormous power over the forces of nature; but, 
not having any guidance for the rational adaptation of 
this power, they naturally have used it for the satisfaction 
of their lowest and most animal propensities. 

"Bereft of religion, men possessing enormous power 
over the forces of nature, are like children to whom 
powder or explosive gas has been given as a plaything. 

R3442 : page 309 

Considering this power which men of our time possess, 

and the way they use it, one feels that, considering the 

degree of their moral development, men have no right, 

not only to the use of railways, steam, electricity, telephones, 

photography, wireless telegraphs, but even to 

the simple art of manufacturing iron and steel, as all 

these improvements and arts they use only for the satisfaction 

of their lusts, for amusement, dissipation and 

the destruction of each other.... 

"Man has no choice; he must be the slave of the 
most unscrupulous and insolent among slaves, or else 
the servant of God, because for man there is only one 
way of being free— by uniting his will with the will of 
God. People bereft of religion, some repudiating religion 
itself, others recognizing as religion those external, monstrous 
forms which have superseded it, and guided only 

R3443 : page 309 

by their personal lusts, fear, human laws and, above 
all, by mutual hypnotism, cannot cease to be animals 



or slaves, and no external efforts can extricate them 
from this state, for only religion makes a man free. 
And most of the people of our time are deprived 
of it." 

Again he says: "Christian nations are all in one and the 
same condition of having rejected religion; and therefore, 
notwithstanding dissensions among themselves, they are all 
united and form one confederate band of robbers, among 
whom theft, plunder, depravity and murder, individually 
or collectively, go on without causing the least compunction 
of conscience, and even with the greatest self-complacency, 
as occurred the other day in China. Some believe 
in nothing, and are proud of it; others pretend to 
believe in what they for their own advantage hypnotize 
the common folk into accepting as a faith; while others, 
again— the great majority, the common people, as a whole 
—accept as a faith the hypnotic suggestions to which they 
are subjected, and slavishly submit to all that is demanded 
of them by the dominant and unbelieving hypnotizers." 

THE NEW PROTESTANTISM. 



From the following it is apparent that the cleavage 
or split which we have predicted is already under 
way in Germany. Infidelity, masquerading under the 
name of Higher Criticism, has for a time deceived 
many and will continue to appeal to all the "tares" 
and to confuse some of the "wheat"; but the time is 
at hand when the latter must recognize the deception 
and not be bound with the tares in their "bundles" 
or organizations. Alas that the wheatfield is so overgrown 
with "tares" that the "wheat" is but a small 
minority. We quote from the Christian Intelligencer 
(N.Y.) as follows:- 

"That there is a reaction from the rationalistic 
and critical character of the Protestant Church in 
Germany is apparent, not only from the attitude of 
some of the leaders of thought in the empire, but 
from the rapid increase and growing influence of an 
organization known as Association Agitation.' Pastor 
Zeller of Stuttgart describes it as to all intents and 
purposes a pietistic agitation, and directed against the 
type of theology that prevails in the universities and in 
the pulpits. It is a protest of the heart against the 
head, and is accordingly one of the ever-recurring 
reactions that put in their appearance in the ups and 
downs of the Church history. It is not positively 
new, but its earliest beginnings date to the days of 
Professor Christlieb of Bonn, and it has largely been 
influenced by the ideals of the practical Christianity 
of England and America, especially of the latter. It 
is largely a movement of the laity, who find that the 
pastors, with their intellectual university training and 
their views, do not reflect the piety and the positive 



Christian convictions that the 'associations' consider 
as belonging to the essentials of Christianity. The 
prejudice against the Church and its pastors has extended 
so far that in some circles pastors are prohibited 
from membership or participation in the meetings 
of the association. The associations are largely controlled 
by a remarkable religious enthusiasm. The 
agitation is undoubtedly healthful, and betokens the 
vital hold the Bible as an inspired authority has upon 
the common people in the land of Luther. The evil 
and danger of the movement is in the disposition 
apparent in some quarters to cut loose from the 
Church and regard all theological studies as useless, 
if not harmful." 

ST. PAUL MINISTERS DISCUSS PRAYER. 



'"I don't want to make a sensational statement, 
but I will say, and I won't qualify it, that in your 
congregations not more than half the people believe 
in prayer.' 

"Rev. John Copeland, pastor of the East Presbyterian 
Church, was not contradicted when he declared 
this opinion yesterday afternoon at the rooms of the 
Bethel association before two dozen members of the 
St. Paul Ministers' association. Mr. Copeland said 
he knew that people didn't believe in prayer when 
they assumed irreverent attitudes during invocations. 
Only last Sunday he had been obliged to announce 
that no child would be allowed thereafter in a Sunday 
school class unless he would bow his head during 
prayers. 

"Mr. Copeland was commenting upon a paper 
entitled 'The Problem of Prayer.' Rev. R. M. West, 
of the First Baptist Church, who read the paper, 
thought that people that didn't believe in prayer 
didn't have the proper conception of prayer. 'Prayer,' 
he said, 'is not a mere petition, a mere asking 
for something, but it is the spiritual communication 
between man and God. Yet many persons are so 
sure that God's will and that Christ's name is a 
blanket privilege covering everything those people 
happen to want, that they seem to regard God as an 
unthinking being whose chief happiness is to do what 
they'd like to have done. Other persons pray with a 
view to assisting God in the government of the universe. 
That's a bigger burden, I fear, than the average 
supplicant can carry. Sensible Christians will 
remember always the limitations of prayer as fixed by 
the divine order, by the sovereignty of God, and by 
his fatherhood; they will never fail to add, "Thy 
will be done.'"" 

"Rev. David Morgan, of the Bethel, agreed that 
laymen, even ministers, are losing some of their faith 



in prayer. It's a fact,' said he, 'that ministers in 

R3443 : page 310 

this city have said they didn't want any more revivals, 
which were only attended by hired girls and by people 
that didn't pay anything.' Mr. Morgan himself remembered 
the time when he felt himself hanging over 
hell-fire by a hair— 'a hair ready to break any instant,' 
was the way he expressed it. His thought 
used to keep him awake nights, 'but it doesn't disturb 
my rest now,' he said."— St. Paul Globe. 



R3444: page 310 

THE ST. LOUIS CONVENTION. 

BRETHREN and sisters from every State in 

the Union and from Canada gathered in a 

big crowd at St. Louis in answer to the Convention 

Announcement published in these columns. 

All classes and conditions of life were represented, but 

as usual, not many rich, not many great, not many 

wise, according to the course of this world: chiefly 

the poor of this world, rich in faith. It was a joyful 

gathering, a kind of foretaste of the Kingdom, and 

seemed to direct all hearts to the General Assembly 

of the Church of the Firstborn, whose names are written 

in heaven. The general testimony was, "It is 

good to be here." Some said, "If fellowship of kindred 

minds is so precious under present limitations 

and imperfections what will the heavenly fellowship 

be when we all shall have been clothed upon with our 

perfect and complete spirit bodies; when we shall see 

as we are seen of the Lord and know as we are now 

known of him." The thought gives great refreshment 

to the "pure in heart," who, however weak and 

stumbling their flesh and efforts, are at heart desiring 

and seeking the Lord's will in all things. 

The three days allotted to the Convention were 
crowded full of spiritual refreshments with brief intervals 
for temporal food and rest. Various brethren 
from various quarters participated in the social meetings 
in prayer, testimony and singing— as leaders and 
otherwise. The preaching services were conducted 
by the following "Pilgrim Brethren": McPhail, Raymond, 
Draper, Hay, Barton, Johnson, Bundy and 
Van Amburgh. The Editor spoke on two occasions, 
besides conducting a Question Meeting. 

The Monday (Oct. 3) sessions were all held in 
the "Disciple Church," Locust St. Following the 
afternoon discourse on Baptism, 148 symbolized their 
consecration by water immersion. There were adults, 
65 males, 79 females, and 4 minors. 



The Love Feast of that evening closed the Convention, 
and it was surely an inspiring occasion. The 
dominant thought of the hour was the blessed privilege 
of being accounted worthy to suffer with Christ 
now and the glorious prospect of reigning with him 
in the near future, and the necessity for trials and 
tests and faith in him who has promised us grace to 
help in every time of need. 

The Convention was the largest yet held by our 
Society. About ten to twelve hundred "believers" 
were present. The Sunday afternoon service was the 
most largely attended, about 2,000 being present. 
If these gatherings continue to increase in size what 
will we do for accommodations? But who knows?— 
the Lord may permit some "snare of the Adversary" 
to sift and test these, and thus thin out our ranks. 
Who shall be able to stand all the "harvest sittings?" 



R3443 : page 310 

ARCHAEOLOGICAL VERIFICATION OF BIBLE RECORDS. 

CERTAIN findings of the higher criticism are assailed 
in a volume from the pen of the Oxford 
professor, A. H. Sayce, on "Monument 
Facts and Higher Critical Fancies." In this volume 
the author marshals the facts of recent archaeological 
discovery, and points out their bearings upon the 
conclusions of Old Testament critics. So high a 
value does he place upon the character of his evidence 
as to lead him to affirm that "the more archaeological 
and the less philological our evidence is, the greater 
will be its claim to scientific authority." The reason 
for this claim is given as follows: 

"For purposes of history, philology can be only 
accidentally of service, so far as it throws light on the 
meaning of a literary record, or assists in the decipherment 
of an ancient inscription. It is the linguistic 
sense of the record, and not the history it 
embodies or the historical facts to be drawn from it, 
with which alone philology is properly concerned. 
We must not go in for dates or for the history of the 
development of civilization and culture. 

"Still less can we look for help to what has been 
called 'literary tact.' Literary tact' is but another 
name for a purely subjective impression, and the subjective 
impressions of a modern European in regard 
to ancient Oriental history are not likely to be of value. 
It is quite certain that an ancient Oriental author 
would not have written as we should write, or as we 
should have expected him to write; and, consequently, 
the very fact that an ancient Oriental document 
does not conform to our modern canons of criticism is 
an argument in favor of its genuineness. ...So far 



as the historical side of the question is concerned, the 
philologist, pure and simple, is ruled out of court. 

R3443 : page 311 

It is the archaeological evidence of Egyptology and 
Assyriology, and not the philological evidence, which 
can alone be applied to the settlement of historical 
disputes." 

One of the first strongholds of the philological 
critic assailed by archaeologists was the assumption, 
current for more than half a century after the publication 
of Wolf's "Prolegomena," concerning the late 
use of writing for literary purposes. But the clay 
tablets found at Tel-el-Amarna, says Dr. Sayce, establish 
that: 

"The Mosaic age, instead of being an illiterate 
one, was an age of high literary activity and education 
throughout the civilized East. Not only was 
there a widespread literary culture in both Egypt and 
Babylonia which had its roots in a remote past, but 
this culture was shared by Mesopotamia and Asia 
Minor, and more specially by Syria and Palestine." 

Furthermore: 

"Moses not only could have written the Pentateuch, 
but it would have been little short of a miracle 
had he not been a scribe. ...Egypt, where the Israelites 
dwelt so long and from which they fled, was 
a land of writing and literature, and the Canaan which 
they invaded was even more so, for here three literary 
cultures met, as it were, together— the culture and 
script of Egypt, the culture and script of Babylonia, 
and the culture and script of the Philistines from 
Crete." 

Another discovery, that of the Babylonian code 
of Khammurabi, has overruled the denial of the critical 
school that a legal code was possible before the 
period of the Jewish kings. The position which the 
archaeological critic is enabled to take is that "the 
Mosaic code must belong to the age to which tradition 
assigns it, and presupposes the historical conditions 
which the Biblical narrative describes. Not only has 
the code of Khammurabi proved that the legislation 

R3444 : page 3 1 1 

of Moses was possible, it has also shown that the social 
and political circumstances under which it claims 
to have arisen are the only ones under which it could 
have been compiled." 

From the papyri and temples of the Nile valley 
come other corroborative evidence; this evidence, 
Professor Sayce claims, establishes the fact that "the 
story of the Exodus, as it is set before us in the Old 
Testament, must have been derived from contemporaneous 
written documents, and must describe events 



which actually took place." It is no fiction nor myth, 
no legend whose only basis is folklore and unsubstantial 
tradition, but history in the real sense of the word. 
Driven from the first assumption of the late use 
of writing for literary purposes, the "higher critics" 
began to apply the theory of evolution to the religious 
and moral ideas, the political conceptions and theological 
dogmas of the ancients, and then declared that 
they knew "precisely how religious ideas must have 
developed in the past," and could "consequently determine 
the relative age of the various forms in which 
they are presented to us." They decided that "certain 
conceptions of the priesthood or the sanctuary 
are older than others," and, consequently, where 
"there are books or passages which do not conform to 
the critic's ruling," the critic "forced them to do so 
by an alteration of the traditional dates." The fallacy 
of such procedure lies in the inability of the European 
critic to think in common with the Oriental mind.— 
Literary Digest. 



R3444: page 311 

CHRISTIANITY VS. MODERN CULTURE. 

PROFESSOR BOUSSET'S views on the essence 
of religion are thus epitomized by the Digest: 

"Modern culture is worldly. It is 
marked by a decided self-consciousness and a feeling 
of strength and a joy in life. It is positive and aggressive 
and keenly feels its own importance and value. 
Its typical representatives are such characters as 
Goethe and Bismarck. The former has made it clear 
that modern culture, while it involves depth of feeling 
and calls into activity the higher powers of life, is 
rooted in the interests and concerns of this world. 
Bismarck, too, though a model of modern manhood, 
was entirely concerned in the affairs of this earth. 
The dominant ideals of our age are reflected in such 
phrases as "the duty of self-preservation," "self-assertion, 
"the struggle for the control of the world." 
Everywhere we find a strenuous life, a pushing forward, 
a struggle for existence, a contest of the classes. 

"Over against these ideals Christianity in its traditional 
form stands out in decided contrast. Christianity 
is at heart a religion of salvation, and is controlled 
by the idea of a redemption. It proceeds from 
the standpoint that the whole human race has been 
corrupted from Adam onward; that it is sunken in 
the darkness of sin. It centres around the two ideas 
of sin and grace, and came into existence to meet the 
universal longing for salvation. 

"It is clear that these two forces represent opposite 
tendencies of thought. To insist upon the principles 



of traditional Christianity is to rob modern 

culture of its very life; it opposes a pessimism to the 

optimism of modern thought. And yet a reconciliation 

between the two is not absolutely impossible. It 

can take place, however, only as the result of a modification 

of the current view of Christianity. A new 

conception of religion must make itself felt, and this 

change can be readily effected. It must center around 

the person of Jesus and must abandon its dogmatic 

system. In the person and in the preaching of Christ, 

as an historical phenomenon, we have the basis for an 

understanding between Christianity and the culture 

of our day. Jesus himself never accepted the total 

corruption of man as the basis of his preaching. 

Rather it was an ideal of moral perfection that he held 

R3444: page 312 

up to his hearers— of life in God and activity according 

to his will. Such we find to be the kernel of the 

Gospel proclamation. Deliverance from sin and forgiveness 

of sin were indeed emphasized in his preaching; 

but his dominant thought was that of struggle 

toward an ideal moral life. This is the idea that must 

take possession of modern Christianity, if it is to be 

reconciled with modern culture and civilization and 

to win for itself the educated classes. Not as a dogmatic 

system, but as a moral power, based on the 

powerful personality of Jesus, must Christianity be 

proclaimed to the thinking people of our times. 



Thus is illustrated the desire of many to unite 
the Church and the World. They desire to retain 
some faith in Christ and some hold upon him, but at 
any cost must "win the educated classes," and 
must drop every feature of the doctrines of Christ 
that would interfere with "modern culture." Union, 
numbers, honor of men are prized above Truth: and 
the latter is sacrificed— almost to the death— for the 
former, though not without pangs of regret. 

It is of the divine ordering that matters are thus: 
"The Lord would judge his people." He would apply 
to them the very tests which he declared during his 
ministry, saying— "My word shall judge [test] you 
in the last day" [in the dawning of the new Millennial 
Day.] "Ye cannot serve God and Mammon;" 
"Ye are not of the world, even as I am not of the 
world." "If ye were of the world the world would 
love his own, but now ye are not of the world even as 
I am not of the world: therefore the world hateth 
you." "If any man would be my disciple let him 
deny himself and take up his cross and follow me." 

As in the Jewish "harvest" "there was a division 
of the people concerning him," so it must be in this 



Gospel age "harvest." As in that testing time only 
a remnant were found to be "Israelites indeed in 
whom was no guile," so it will be found here— 
the great masses of professed followers of Christ are 
insincere; they love self and the world and its things 
more than they love God and his spiritual favors. 

But is not this a serious charge?— that the masses 
are insincere. Yes, it is serious, but it is also true. 
They show their "guile" by their willingness to sacrifice 
the Truth for almost anything— any mess of 

R3445 : page 312 

pottage. However, "the Lord knoweth them that are 
his," and will keep his own who "love not the world," 
who love the Lord himself supremely, who love the 
Truth, whose consecration is sincere. "They shall 
be mine, saith the Lord, in the day when I come to 
make up my jewels." 

Note, too, how love of the error is willing to 
compromise the Truth, and really blinds itself to it 
to have its own way. In the above Prof. Bousset 
says, "Jesus himself never accepted the total corruption 
of man." We presume this means that Jesus 
never taught the Adamic fall and the consequent depravity 
of the entire race. We reply, that he surely 
did teach that all are so undone that the divine sentence 
rests upon all as unworthy of everlasting life, 
hence as all "lost." Hark to his words: "The Son 
of man came to seek and to save that which was lost." 
And again he indicates that all are under the ban of 
death, saying, "Ye will not come unto me that ye 
might have life." "The Son of man came. ..to 
serve, and to give his life a RANSOM [a corresponding 
price] FOR ALL." "I am come that they might have 
life." "I am the resurrection and the life— no man 
cometh unto the Father but by me." "Without me 
ye can do nothing." If these Scriptures do not teach 
that all men were lost, helpless, undone without the 
great sacrifice for sins which our Lord offered, pray 
then what do they teach? 

Let us, dear friends, lose no opportunity for serving 
the Truth to the brethren, even to the extent of 
laying down our lives for them and it; but let us not 
compromise with the world nor with error to gain 
numbers. Let us rather be co-workers with the Lord, 
and knowing that now is the "harvest" time let us 
expect the very separations which we see taking place. 
We could not frustrate the Lord's plans if we would, 
but we could do injury to our own interests by disloyalty 
to him, his Word and his brethren. 



R3445 : page 312 



THE RANK OF THE ANCIENT WORTHIES. 

IN DAWN, Vol. VI., there appears to some of us 
to be a confusion or contradiction respecting 
the relative order of resurrection and honor 
attaching to the Ancient Worthies and the Great 
Company. The passages in question are found at top 
of page 121, first paragraph on page 129, and at top 
of page 131. Kindly help us over our difficulty. 

We are pleased to show the accord of these statements. 
On page 121, at top, we are discussing the 
natures, and show that the Little Flock, of the divine 
nature, will be above all others; that the Great Company 
will be next, of the spirit nature, not divine; 
and that the Ancient Worthies will be next in grade 
of nature— "a little lower than the angels." 

On page 129, first paragraph, we are endeavoring 
to show the relative ranks of these classes— in dignity, 
in honor of position. Here we rank the Ancient 
Worthies higher than the Great Company. This 
seems to us the logical order, since the Ancient Worthies 
—in their overcoming more particularly— resemble 

R3445 : page 313 

the Little Flock, who voluntarily lay down their 
lives for the Truth. This logical order seems to be 
supported, too, by the Scriptures— not only the type 
of the order of the Levites referred to on page 129, 
but additionally we have the Scriptural declaration 
that these Ancient Worthies are to be "Princes in all 
the earth," which implies a special dignity, or honor of 
position as the earthly phase of the Kingdom. Again, 
in Rev. 20:9, these Ancient Worthies seem to be 
marked as still a special, separate and distinct class in 
the earth, represented by the camp of the saints 
[holy ones], and the beloved city. The fact that at 
that time, at the close of the Millennium, they will 
have reached perfection, and the fact that these Ancient 
Worthies will be still a markedly separate class, 
implies to us a higher honor of rank, over and above 
the perfection of human nature. What the Lord may 
have of special reward for these in the everlasting future, 
beyond the Millennium, we are not told; but as 
we consider the heavens, the work of God's hands, 
and the innumerable worlds therein under preparation 
for inhabitants, we may reasonably suppose that these 
Ancient Worthies, who were faithful during the reign 
of evil, even unto death, will have some further honorable 
service, not only during the Millennial age, 
but subsequently. For various reasons, therefore, we 
rank them higher in honor than the Great Company, 
though of a lower nature. 

On page 131, at the top, we are discussing the 
time order of resurrection for these three classes, and 
present the thought that the Ancient Worthies will 



be perfected in resurrection next after the Little Flock 

—that they will be the first to share in the general 

resurrection. For be it remembered that only the 

Little Flock share in the First Resurrection. "They 

shall be priests of God and of Christ, and shall reign 

with him a thousand years." (Rev. 20:6.) Without 

any positive Scripture to fix this matter, it is our expectation 

that the resurrection of the Ancient Worthies 

will occur about 1914, or shortly thereafter, 

while we understand that the Great Company will not 

be complete for at least a little while after these— 

some of them passing through the great time of trouble, 

of anarchy, following the end of Gentile times. 

We trust a careful examination of the above, and 
with these suggestions, will make the matter clear to all. 



R3445 : page 313 

THE GREAT COMPANY. 

HAVE any members of the "Great Company" 
class existed prior to the harvest period of 
the Gospel Age? If so, how can we apply 
Rev. 7:14 to such? 

We reply: This class is composed of consecrated 
believers who fail to go forward in the narrow way of 
self-sacrifice and who, failing to sacrifice, fail to attain 
joint-heirship with the Lord as members of the Bride 
company: nevertheless, having been sincere in their 
consecration, the Lord in much mercy does not count 
their lack of courage in turning back in the sense of 
denying him, for those who so draw back, the Apostle 
explains, "draw back unto perdition and destruction," 
Second Death. In mercy the Lord brings upon such 
persons trials and difficulties which they uncourageously 
attempt to escape. Since they have consecrated 
unto death and God has accepted their covenant 
and granted them the first-fruits of the Spirit, 
and since they neglected to sacrifice the flesh, the 
only alternative for them is the Lord's providential 
interference in their affairs, leading to the "destruction 
of the flesh," or failing this their portion will be 
the Second Death. 

Why not grant them a share of restitution, do 
you ask? We reply that that which is begotten of 
the Spirit cannot be born flesh; it must be born of the 
Spirit or not at all. 

These conditions which prevail today have prevailed 
in some measure since the beginning of the 
Gospel age. The Apostle speaks of such a one. 
Writing to the Church at Corinth, he says, I, being 
absent in person and present with you in spirit, judge 
such an one, and have delivered him over to Satan 
for the destruction of the flesh, that the spirit may 



be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus.— 
I Cor. 5:3,5. 

It is safe, however, for us to assume that the proportion 
of the consecrated unworthy of a place in the 
Bride Company is greater today than it was in past 
times, because in the past the line of demarcation between 
wheat and tares, between the children of God 
and the children of this world, was much more marked 
than at the present time, when many have a form of 
godliness without its power— many have Christian 
mannerisms who do not claim to have been begotten 
of the Spirit. Today, therefore, it is more difficult 
than ever for the consecrated to see where duty lies 
and to follow its course of self-sacrifice, when so many 
good, noble and moral people are taking the opposite 
course. The narrow way is, therefore, more difficult 
to walk in today than it was some time ago. Hence, 
while the number of consecrations has increased rather 
than diminished, the number who appreciate the real 
meaning of their consecration and who joyfully lay 
down their lives in the service of the Truth is probably 
smaller. It therefore follows that the mass of 

R3445 : page 314 

the "Great Company" belong to the closing end of 
the Gospel age. 

Respecting your last question concerning the proper 
applicability of Rev. 7:14 to this class, if it has 
existed throughout the age, we suggest that the majority 
of the class being here may be spoken of properly 
enough as though it were the whole, since the 
treatment it receives will represent the treatment accorded 
to all others of this class in the past, only in a 
more intensified form. All such have surely been 
called upon to pass through troubles— forced through 
them as it were because they did not freely sacrifice 
and lay down their privileges, interests, etc., in the 
service of the Truth. Similarly in the same chapter 
we have the entire 144,000 of the Little Flock spoken 
of as though it were filled and made up in this present 
time, whereas these also have been in process of development 
throughout the Gospel age. That is to 
say, the original Abrahamic promise descended to the 
twelve tribes of Israel, but those twelve tribes were 

R3446 : page 314 

typical of spiritual Israel. At the first advent spiritual 
Israel was started with those of each tribe who 
were Israelites indeed in whom there was no guile. 
There were not enough of these to fill the elect 
number, 144,000, and hence the Gospel call was 
extended to the Gentiles to bring in from the Gentiles 
a sufficient number to complete 12,000 to each 
tribe. 



This filling up of the tribes from those who were 
by nature Gentiles is similar to reenlistments made in 
the United States to fill up vacancies in military regiments 
in the Philippines. Thus a man from Ohio or 
Illinois might enlist in a New York or Pennsylvania 
regiment and become a regular member of the same, 
though the regiment would still be known by its original 
name. So with our incorporation into the elect 
twelve tribes. We know not to which tribe the Lord 
assigns us when we become his. 

This is the same thought which the Apostle develops 
in Rom. 11, where he speaks of the original 
promise of God made to Abraham as the root of the 
olive tree, and the twelve tribes of Israel the tree itself. 
The branches of this tree are the individuals, 
and the Apostle explains that all except the Israelites 
indeed were broken off when that tree became spiritual 
at our Lord's first advent. He further explains that 
we who were by nature Gentiles are being engrafted 
into membership into this Israelitish tree, and are partaking 
of the richness of its root, the Abrahamic 
promise.— See Galatians 3:29. 



R3446 : page 314 

STUMBLING STONES OR STEPPING STONES. 

I have been sorely tried, dear Lord, been sorely tried today, 
The sun has veiled his brightness and a cloud hangs o'er 

my way. 
Why is my heart so heavy, and the daylight cold and gray? 
I've tried to please thee; I have striven to faithful be and 

true; 
I've sought for heavenly wisdom in the thing that I should 

do, 
Yet I've been "put to grief;" and oh, can I have grieved 

thee, too? 
A fellow pilgrim on the road a wound has given to me, 
Its sting and smart I keenly feel,— its need I cannot see. 
Stumbling stone or stepping stone, O Lord, which shall it 

be? 

A sorrow came to me today— a grief so dense and deep, 
The shades of deepest darkness about my heartstrings creep; 
The tears have flowed unceasing till no power is left to 

weep. 
I bow beneath my weight of woe, speechless and stunned; 

my heart 
Sinks down like lead within my breast; its bitter ache and 

smart 
Seem almost more than I can bear. A sharp and cruel dart 
Has pierced me, and I prostrate lie. O Father, speak to 

me! 
Thy hand lies hard upon me: can this trial come from thee? 



Stepping stone or stumbling stone, which shall this sorrow 
be? 

A blessing came this day to me, a joy surpassing sweet. 
A glad way opens up to me, wherein my willing feet 
Turn joyfully; how blest am I within this dear retreat! 
My way had dark and lonely been for many a weary year; 
My Lord has brought this gift to me when all was sad and 

drear; 
Now, where my path was bleak, the flowers of love and 

bliss appear. 
And yet, dear Lord, this blessing which thy love has given 

to me 
May fill my heart too fully, and may wean my soul from thee. 
Then, stepping stone or stumbling stone, my God, which 

shall it be? 

Momentous question! on its answer my eternal joy 
Hangs trembling; shall I be refined as gold without alloy? 
These woes and blessings potent are to save or to destroy. 
The time flies on! the "harvest" wanes, the glorious end 

is near! 
O, Master, shall I lose e'en now the "prize" I hold so 

dear? 
Shall I be lured by siren song, while strains of heaven 

break 
On ears attuned? Oh, guide me, Lord and keep me still 

awake. 
May I rejoice to walk with thee, and suffer for thy sake. 

But I am weak; O, Master dear, do thou my spirit thrill, 
Grant me thy grace, and strength impart to do thy perfect 

will, 
And in affliction or in joy obey and love thee still. 
Almighty Lord, to thee I fly— no other help I know; 
Oh, aid me in my need, I pray, and make my heart to glow 
With holy fire, and on me, Lord, thy precious love bestow. 
I hear thee speak, I will obey, I stretch my hands to thee, 
In every providence of thine thy changeless love I see, 
And stepping stones to heavenly heights each pain and joy 

shall be. —Alice G. James. 



R3446 : page 315 

JOASH, THE BOY KING. 

-2 KINGS ll:l-16.-NOVEMBER6.- 

Golden Text:— "When the righteous are in 
authority, the people rejoice."— Prov. 29:2. 

THIS LESSON of itself contains very little of the spiritual 
"meat" for the household of faith. Nevertheless 
historical portions of the Scriptures, such 



as used in this lesson, have their special place and render 
service to the general cause. The connections of history 
are as necessary to the Bible as bones are to the living body. 
For this reason let us give special attention to the connecting 
history, that we may have before our minds a general 
view of the conditions in Israel at the time of the incidents 
of this lesson. 

Going back, we remember Elijah's great work as the 
Prophet combating the influence of King Ahab and his 
heathen queen, Jezebel, and the Baal idolatry which they 
introduced. Although Elijah did not succeed in making 
a complete reformation in Israel, he did succeed in turning 
back to a considerable degree the influence of Baalism. 
As we have seen, not only did true religion prosper more 
in the kingdom of Judah but also in the kingdom of Israel, 
and it was respected during the period of Elisha's 
ministry as the Lord's Prophet. Although it was not 
the religion of the court it was the religion of the Israelites 
indeed. The prosperity of the cause of Jehovah in 
Elisha's day is best seen in contrast with the conditions 
which prevailed in the earlier part of Elijah's ministry. 

Meantime the influence of Baalism extended from the 
court of Israel, and especially from the heathen queen, 
to the court of Judah: the son of the king of Judah marrying 
the daughter of the heathen queen, who, in character, 
evidently had a strong resemblance to her mother, Jezebel. 
From the time of her association in the kingdom of Judah 
the idolatrous influences there began to gain strong 
foothold and a Baal temple was built, and under the royal 
protection the licentious worship of Ashteroth found favor 
with many of the people. 

Upon the death of her husband, the king of Judah, 
his queen, Athaliah, daughter of Jezebel, continued her 
influence in the kingdom with her son, who then became 
king, and at his death, contrary to the law and usage of 
the Jews, she determined to make herself sovereign, and, 
to accomplish this, caused all of her grandsons to be put 
to death. That is, she supposed that she had accomplished 
this end; but her daughter, who had become the wife of 
the high priest and was evidently under his influence, saved 
the life of the youngest of the king's sons— her nephew, 
Joash— secreting him with a nurse in one of the apartments 
adjoining the Temple set apart for the use of the priests. 

Our lesson relates to this boy, the heir of the throne 
of Judah, who at seven years of age, under the guidance 
of his uncle-in-law, the high-priest, was anointed and proclaimed 
the king of Judah. The lesson gives the particulars 
of the transaction by which the Temple guard became 
the king's guard— how the king's grandmother, the 
usurping queen, was first attracted to the Temple by the 
commotion amongst the people, and then quickly realizing 
the situation, cried, Treason, Treason, and fled to the 
palace, where she was executed. 

A few years before the incident of this lesson, under the 
Lord's direction, Jehu had been anointed king over the sister 
kingdom of Israel, and although in many respects himself a 



bad man, he served as the sword of the Lord to execute retribution 

R3447 : page 315 

upon King Ahab and Queen Jezebel, who had 

wrought so much injury to the cause of true religion in the 

kingdom of Israel. Now, by the death of the usurping 

queen, Athaliah, the daughter of Jezebel, the same pernicious 

influence was overthrown in Judah: that is to say, 

the reign of Jehu in Israel and of Joash in Judah marked a 

period of backset to Baalism. 

Students of history, not seeing the divine plan of the 
ages, have been perplexed at the prosperity of evil doers 
in individual affairs as well as national, and the perplexity 
of such is increased when they consider the fact that Israel 
and Judah were nations with which God had made a special 
covenant and over which he exercised a certain measure 
of control. If heathen nations were allowed to go as 
they would into idolatry, etc., why was it that evil doers, 
evil practices, false worship, etc., were permitted to prosper 
in the nations over which God claimed oversight, control, 
etc.? 

The answer and the only answer is that God's time 
for taking active control of the affairs of the world, subduing 
evil and advancing righteousness, had not yet come. 
The entire Law dispensation, from Moses to Christ, was 
introduced during a period when nothing else could have 
been brought in. The Gospel could not have been proclaimed 
at that time because the foundation for it had not 
yet been laid— the foundation being the redemption accomplished 
by the death of Christ. Nor could the death 
of Christ have been properly accomplished sooner, or the 
Gospel age and its work been begun sooner, because in the 
divine plan and foreknowledge that great event was arranged 
to take place just long enough in advance of the 
Millennial Kingdom to permit of the gathering out the 
Church of the First-born, the Bride class, Christ's joint-heirs 
in the Kingdom. 

For these reasons God introduced the Law dispensation, 
as the Apostle declares,— "The Law was added because 
of transgressions, until the promised seed should 
come." The Law Covenant made with Israel served two 
particular objects: (1) In its laws and Atonement Day 
sacrifices, typical jubilees, etc., it foreshadowed or typified 
glorious and great things to be fulfilled during this 
Gospel age, some of them during the Millennial age. 
(2) It served to show the constantly downward tendency 
of sin, and how impossible it would be for the world to lift 
itself out of present degradation and sin and weakness even 
if God should release the whole world from original sin 

R3447 : page 316 

and the original death penalty. Moreover, we are 
to remember that although Israel and Judah exhibited 
great weakness along the lines of idolatry, nevertheless 



they were by no means as corrupt in these respects as 
were the nations round and about them— the remainder of 
the world. Whatever peculiarity there was consisted in 
the fact that they still maintained some reverence for the 
invisible Jehovah, some semblance of worship for him 
whom other nations regarded not at all. 

The whole history of Judah and Israel shows us that, 
notwithstanding the trend of the majority towards sin and 
idolatry, there were still amongst them Israelites indeed 
whose hearts were sincere towards God. We have examples 
of this in Elijah and Elisha, the sons of the prophets, 
the Shunamite, and others. Nevertheless, in thinking of 
all these we are to remember that they were still in the 
dark as respects the divine plan. No revelation of God's 
great salvation had yet been made: only a dim light of 
a hope of the resurrection of the dead and everlasting life 
for those obedient to God had reached even the wisest and 
best of them. In harmony with this is the statement of 
the Apostle, "The Law came by Moses, but grace and 
truth by Jesus Christ," and again his declaration that 
"Christ brought light and immortality to light through the 
Gospel," and again the statement that this "salvation [in 
which we now rejoice] began to be spoken by the Lord." 
-John 1:17; 2 Tim. 1:10; Heb. 2:3. 

We are not, therefore, to compare present-day conditions 
amongst those who profess to be spiritual Israelites, 
with the old-time conditions referred to in this lesson, 
because in the meantime the true Light, the Lord 
Jesus, has come into the world; and although the world 
as a whole has not recognized him, the Israelites indeed 
have had the eyes of their understanding opened, so that 
they are blessed and benefited by this true Light, which 
in God's due time shall lighten every man that cometh 
into the world— when the Millennial day shall dawn and 
the Sun of righteousness arise with healing in his beams. 
Then, in the fullest sense of the word, the righteous shall 
be in authority— Christ, the great King, and the Church, 
his Bride and joint-heir in the Kingdom— and then the 
people will rejoice. They will rejoice in a manner not 
possible at present, for now, as the Apostle declares, even 
under the best of rulers, while Satan is at the helm, "The 
whole creation groaneth and travaileth in pain together." 
—Romans 8:22. 



R3447 : page 316 

REPAIRING THE TEMPLE. 

-2 KINGS 12:4-15. -NOVEMBER 13.- 

Golden Text:— "We will not forsake 
the house of our God."— Neh. 10:39. 

THE DEATH of Athaliah, the usurping queen, quickly 



following the anointing and proclaiming of her 
grandson, Joash, as the proper heir to the throne 
of Judah, was noticed in our last lesson. Joash, the new 
king, being but eight years of age at this time, was properly 
under the care of his uncle-in-law, the high priest, who had 
secreted and protected him from infancy. The choosing 
of this particular time for bringing forward King Joash 
was no doubt influenced by the affairs of the neighboring 
ten-tribe kingdom of Israel. In the latter, by the Lord's 
direction, Jehu had been anointed as the king to supplant 
the weak and wicked Ahab and to punish the wicked and 
idolatrous Jezebel, his queen— thus to rid the ten-tribe 
kingdom of iniquitous rulers, whose influence seems to have 
been evil continually to the extent of their opportunities. 
No doubt the success of Jehu encouraged the high priest, 
Jehoiada, to overthrow the usurped dynasty of Jezebel's 
daughter and to re-establish the line of David upon the 
throne. More than this, we may properly assume that as 
the Lord directed in the anointing of Jehu to succeed 
Ahab, so he directed in the anointing of Joash to succeed 
Athaliah, and that the priest was guided by the Lord in 
the matter, though perhaps unconsciously. 

The high priest Jehoiada, as sponsor, made the coronation 
the occasion for a general revival of interest in true 
religion and for the reviving of corresponding opposition 
to the idolatrous worship of Baal, which the pseudo queen 
had introduced. Inspired by the counsel of the priest, 
inspired also by the circumstances surrounding the coronation 
in the Temple court with its reminder of Jehovah, 
the true God, of their past history as a nation under his 
care, the assembled people reached such a fervor of excitement 
for the Lord and against idolatry that they surged 
forth, and as a mob tore down the adjacent temple of Baal, 
slaying its chief officiating priest, breaking its statuary, etc. 

Mobs are rarely if ever to be encouraged, but in the 
present case we are to remember that, under special divine 
arrangement, just such a course of opposition to idolatry 
was directly commanded, and that, besides this, the people 
were keeping under and obeying the direction of the 
lawfully constituted government of the Lord, in the hands 
of his representatives, the king and the priest, which government 
had been illegally suppressed for a long time, and 
was now merely assuming its proper position and overthrowing 
its illegal opponent. 

The new government, seizing upon the newly awakened 
religious fervor of the people, proposed the immediate 
repair of the Temple and the re-instituting of its 
service by the true priests of God, who during the period 
of Baal worship had been unable to give their time and 
attention to the religious services of the Temple and to 
the instruction of the people in the matters of the Law. 
Because, being opposed by the usurping government, and 
the revenues of the people being directed to the support 

R3447 : page 317 



of Baal worship, the true priests of God and the services 
of the Temple had been neglected and practically out of 
commission. 

All this was now to be changed, and the government 
gave commands for the raising of the money necessary. 
(1) There would be the tax which the Law of Moses enjoined, 
a poll tax, a half shekel. (Exod. 30:13.) (2) "The 
money every man is set at," possibly the tithes— one tenth 
of all the profits of the year. (3) "Money that cometh 
into every man's heart to bring"— voluntary donations 
above those required under the Law. The priests were to 
collect this money, each in the neighborhood and from 
the persons with whom he was acquainted. 

The good intentions of the king and the high priest 
failed, for fifteen years after this, when the king was 
twenty-three years of age, the Temple had not yet been repaired, 
as our lesson shows. The reasons we are left to 
surmise, but the inference seems to be either that the 
people did not trust the priests with the money, fearing 
that they would use it upon themselves and not upon the 
Temple, or that the moneys paid and donated were largely 

R3448 : page 317 

consumed, and perhaps not improperly, in the maintenance 
of the priests, their families, etc. At all events, at 
the time mentioned, the king called for the high priest 
and the under priests to make report why the commission 
given to them fifteen years before had not been 
accomplished. 

The result of the conference was that the priests in 
general agreed that the repairing matter should be taken 
out of their hands and left wholly under the care of Jehoiada, 
the high priest. The latter arranged a method by 
which the people of Israel might know that the money 
contributed by them for Temple repairing would not be 
diverted to other uses: he prepared a chest securely 
locked, with a slot in the top, into which donations for 
Temple repairs could be put. This plan worked successfully 
and the repair of the Temple proceeded in the hands 
of competent workmen and faithful overseers. The repairs 
and their cost must have been considerable, for the 
Temple was now more than one hundred and fifty years 
old and had long been in disuse, and it is presumed that 
many of the stones from it had been taken and used in 
the construction of the Temple of Baal near by. Verse 13 
merely signifies that none of the money was used for furnishments 
of the Temple until the Temple itself had been 
thoroughly repaired, because 2 Chronicles 24:14 shows 
that ultimately a sufficiency of money was donated to furnish 
the Temple utensils. 

CONSIDERED AS A PARABLE. 

The foregoing is all interesting to us as an item of history 
and as an illustration of the sameness of human nature 



in all periods amongst all peoples. But now let us 

see what lessons we can draw from these experiences of 

natural Israel, beneficial to us as spiritual Israelites. 

One lesson is that while the High Priest, our Lord 
Jesus, can be thoroughly trusted in connection with the 
entire work, nevertheless some of the under priests have 
less of the self-sacrificing spirit and are more or less inclined 
to use upon themselves for their own comfort and 
pleasure means which otherwise might have been better 
used in the repairing of the house of God— the true Temple, 
the true Church. 

The spiritual Temple and its doctrines, hopes, practices, 
etc., have become seriously deranged during the 
long period of the triumph of sin, the "mystery of iniquity," 
the "mother of harlots," during the dark ages. 
The Reformation movement of the sixteenth century was 
bold and courageous, and promised great things in the 
way of repairs needed in the spiritual Temple. But, alas, 
the Protestant clergy have used the means and opportunities 
connected with this reformation for their own personal 
advantage. Considerable has indeed been done, considerable 
stir has been made amongst the people, considerable 
money has been raised, and yet withal comparatively little 
has been done in repairing the faith and hope and love of 
the Church, the true Temple— comparatively few of the 
gross errors have been eradicated. 

But here, as in the lesson, the Temple shall be repaired 
—the High Priest has taken full charge of the matter. 
The people of God, when they once see the need of 
repairs and the safety of the channel, will be encouraged 
to do everything necessary on their part for the accomplishment 
of the work, and in this work the clergy of 
nominal Christendom, who should have been active in the 
service, are being ignored— our great High Priest can do 
his work without them. 

Another lesson we may learn is the association between 
faithfulness to the Lord and the service of the Lord. 
As soon as the people of Israel had consecrated themselves 
to the Lord, and in proportion as they did so, their every 
source of income would gladly cooperate in the building 
up of the interests of the Lord's cause. And just so with 
spiritual Israelites: in proportion as we realize in our 
hearts a fulness of consecration to the Lord, in the same 
proportion everything that we possess is subject to corresponding 
responsibility. There are the proper taxes or 
demands upon our time, talents, influence and means for 
the service of the Lord, and then each may give additionally, 
over and above this responsibility, a free-will offering 
to the Lord, according to the abundance of his love, according 
to the zeal of his heart. And this love, this zeal, 
and the self-sacrifice to which it leads, measures our devotion 
to the Lord. Thus the Lord is gauging all who have 
named his name and professed a full consecration to him 
—he is gauging their love not merely by the dollars and 
cents contributed to his service, but also by the time, influence, 
etc., which they possess and their willingness in the 



use of these in his service and in the opposition to Satan, 
and to all the errors of which he is the father and author. 

Another harmony in this illustration is that the work 
mentioned in our lesson was done for and upon the Temple; 

R3447 : page 318 

and so any work we may now do as spiritual Israelites, 
and any sacrifices which we may now make, are to 
and for the Church, which is the Temple of God. The 
work of the present age is the preparation of this Temple; 
the work of the next age will be the blessing of all the 
families of the earth through it and its then glorified Royal 
Priesthood. It is in harmony with this thought under a 
different figure that the Lord declares, "His wife hath 
made herself ready." Her chief energy or self-sacrifices 
are to be on behalf of the Church— as the Apostle declares, 
we may "do good to all men as we have opportunity, but 
especially to the household of faith." 

It will be noticed that we are not using this lesson as 
an occasion for the solicitation of money. But while we 
never solicit, we do realize that there is a special blessing 
of the Lord upon the voluntary giver, as the original signifies, 
"The Lord loveth a hilarious [merry] giver." He 
appreciates, he loves to see in us such an interest in him 
and his cause that everything else in comparison seems 
worthless, that our best talents and powers of every kind 
we will delight to use, not grudgingly but heartily, joyfully, 
in association with himself and under his guidance 
and direction, according to our best understanding of his 
will, in the service of his Truth and his brethren. 



R3448 : page 318 
ENCOURAGING WORDS FROM FAITHFUL WORKERS. 

page 318 

GENTLEMEN:- 

I am in possession of a copy of the first volume 
of the Millennial Series entitled, "The Divine Plan of 
the Ages," and I believe you will be pleased to know 
that I am delighted with the work. I never have seen 
anything before that has shed so much light on the 
meaning of the Bible as it does. I have been a close 
Bible student all my life since a boy, but I have been 
wandering in the dark most of the time until now. 
The scales have fallen from my eyes at last, thank 
God, before it was too late. I was born of Christian 
parents who belonged to the Presbyterian Church, was 
baptized in that faith, and lived all my life in the belief 
of the doctrines connected therewith. But of late 
years I have had some misgivings in my mind. I 
never could see how to reconcile some of the teachings 



of the church with some passages of Scripture. But 
I rejoice to say that is all made clear now. I cannot 
think of anything that expresses my true sentiments 
so well as four lines of poetry that I committed to 
memory more than fifty years ago but never saw their 
beauty till now. Here they are:— 

"When all thy mercies, O my God, 

My rising soul surveys, 
Transported with the view I'm lost 

In wonder, love and praise." 

Now, having received so much good myself, it is 
natural that I should like others to be partakers also; 
and I would like to make some arrangement if 
I could see my way clearly to engage in some way to 
help spread the Truth so that others might receive 
some benefit. 

Yours respectfully, JAMES KING,-Mass. 



R3448 : page 318 

DEAR BROTHER AND HONORED SERVANT OF GOD: 

It is with gratitude that I acknowledge the blessing 
the Lord has seen fit to bestow upon me through 
your last labor of love, DAWN VI. I wish to thank 
you as the instrument used of Him and pray you may 
have the grace sufficient to keep you faithful even 
unto death. 

With so many chapters of good things, it would 
be difficult to say which is best; but I believe, to 
me, the chapter on Judgment has been as helpful as 
any, giving me a keener sense of the repulsiveness of 
the evils of the tongue, and I hope I may learn to be 
dumb until I can use my tongue only to sound His 
praises and honor His name. 

The beautiful clearness with which you have 
shown us the type of man and woman has also helped 
me much. It was a new thought to me that approbativeness 
was more peculiar to women, and I trust I 
may set a double picket on that line, so that I may 
use it without abusing it. I also hope hereafter, when 
privileged to sit in a congregation of saints, to do so 
with more reverence. I thank you also for mentioning 
the covering of the head. 

It has been my privilege to be with the Los Angeles 
Church for two years, and I wish to tell you 
something of the showers of blessing that have come 
to me through them. Their fervent love and unceasing 
efforts on my behalf have helped to teach me the 
way of God both by precept and example. 

I have learned something of the narrowness of 
"this way," and I would ask an interest in your 
prayers that I may more fully appreciate the privilege 



of walking therein. 

With Christian love from one who hopes ever to 
be able to subscribe herself. 

Your Sister in Christ, 

HATTIE L. WOODWARD,-Cal. 



FRIENDS:- 

I received the tracts you sent me. Thanks be to 
the Lord and you for all they have revealed to me. 
Let me tell you how it all came about: I picked up a 
tract on the stairs one day when I came home from 
work, called "The Hope of Immortality." I never 
knew who put it there, but I know it was the Lord 
who sent it. I read it and it showed me very clearly 
my need of a Savior, and through it I have given my 
heart to the Lord Jesus and am now trusting in his 
finished work. 

At the bottom of the tract it said that if the 
reader was interested he could by making application 
have "What is the Soul?" which you sent me, and a 
few more with it which looked as though they were 
especially for me. I took great pleasure in reading 

R3448 : page 319 

them, for I do hunger and thirst after righteousness. 
Yours in Christ, C. WATT,-R.I. 



DEAR FRIENDS :- 

I enclose a copy of a letter I addressed to about 
sixty ministers of St. Louis. As yet I have received 
no returns, as they are so wrapped up in World's 
Fair entertainments and civic reforms that they have 
no time to spare to point the inquirer the way to life: 



R3449 : page 319 

DEAR SIR:- 

Some time since I mailed to your address a copy 
of the Pittsburg Gazette, special edition, containing reports 
of the Eaton Russell debates. I have also come 
into possession of some pamphlets bearing on these 
subjects, printed at Allegheny, Pa., one of which I 
am mailing to you. 

I am an ardent student of the Scriptures, and am 
associated with a small number of others who, like 
myself, love the Lord and seek always to increase our 
knowledge of his Word and revealed wisdom, to the 
end that we may become more able to do that which 
is pleasing to him. We are not connected with any 



particular denomination, but we realize that many 

earnest and well-informed disciples of Jesus are members 

of each, whose intellectual capacity is far greater 

than our own, hence this request, which I feel you 

will not consider presumptuous,— that, if agreeable and 

convenient to you, I may be privileged to have an expression 

of your views on the questions involved in 

these debates, either briefly or at length, as pleases 

you, and your opinion as to what methods would be 

best to pursue in order that a Truth-hungry child of 

God may reach a proper conclusion on these and other 

doctrines which seem to clash, and, while each claims 

a Biblical basis of proof, run counter to each other. 

I can assure you that, knowing you to be a leader 
of thought among professing Christians, any assistance 
to further light on God's revealed Word will be 
greatly appreciated and your words will receive respectful 
consideration, should you deign to reply. 

Awaiting your convenience, I am, in Christian 
hope and love, 

Sincerely yours, J. LOCKWOOD,-Mo. 



page 319 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

Each Pilgrim brother sent to us seems more capable 
of presenting the Truth and more humble and 
loving than the one preceding. Are they improving 
in ability to proclaim the glad news of salvation, and 
our call to glory, as likewise in spirituality and meekness, 
or are we developing Christian love and character 
so that daily we are enlarging our capacity for 
appreciation of the old, old story, which each time 
repeated becomes, as we sometimes sing, "more wonderfully 
sweet," or are both they and we making 
progress in the heavenly way, so that everything said 
and done touches the chords of harmony within and 
thus thrills our hearts with ever-increasing delight? 
On each visit of a Pilgrim we find ourselves congratulating 
each other and declaring "he is the best of 
them all," not merely as one capable of presenting 
the Truth— a forceful speaker— but one whose character 
conforms more closely to our ideal of a perfect 
life. 

These Pilgrim brethren are truly in a great work, 
a work that affords splendid opportunity for ennobling 
those they visit. They have great responsibility, 
which perhaps they do not fully realize as yet. They 
doubtless also have many temptations to pride and 
self-esteem and must constantly be on their guard 
against self-exaltation. Not only in the words they 
utter but in their actions they minister to us either 
favorably or unfavorably. A Pilgrim returning a second 
time impresses us with his experiences and we 



can see where he has gained in spiritual things since 
his previous visit. I am glad so many are now in this 
good work. We of the Washington congregation may 
not so much need the frequent Pilgrim visits, but we 
want all we can get and as many as can be sent, 
though not more than our rightful share. Our heavenly 
Father has through your instrumentality been 
very gracious to us, and especially in the immediate 
past. There is much we have for praise, and thanks 
to you in serving us so well. The Lord bless you 
richly for your works and earnest effort for all his 
people. 
Your brother in Christ, J. A. BOHNET.--D.C. 



R3449 : page 319 

DEAR BRETHREN:- 

Enclosed please find report. I must tell you that 
we have encouraging experiences by the way, with an 
occasional rebuff. In an out-of-the way place I saw 
two men by the roadside. As I introduced the work, 
one man broke in with the remark, "Did you ever 
read that great debate by that man Russell and Dr. 
Eaton? He is a smart man but he could not stand 
before Mr. Russell." He spoke in a very enthusiastic 
way. When informed that the book I sold was by 
Bro. Russell, he took it, and I trust it will become a 
great blessing to him. 

In showing the Plan of the Ages to the M.E. 

minister at G he remarked, "I have that book. 

I did not read it much, as I did not find it as definite 
as I expected." I began to read page 224 in explanation 
of the Chart, "The Path of Glory." I had not 
read far when he said, "We have found out that is 
not so; Adam was never perfect." We then brought 
the ransom to his attention, and having acknowledged 
that Jesus was perfect as a man, he could not 
well resist the force of this grand Bible truth. He 
said he was glad to have met me, would read the book, 
and asked could I speak for him some time I was that 
way. He seemed very sincere and desirous of the 
Truth, and now that he has it I trust it will be received 
into a good and honest heart. 

We hope to add to the great blessing received at 
the Convention at Boston and be more successful in 
the harvest work. 

In the Lord's name and with Christian love, 
A. N. MARCHANT,-Colp. 



page 321 

SEMI-MONTHLY 
VOL. XXV. NOVEMBER 1, 1904. No. 21. 



CONTENTS 

Views from the Watch Tower 323 

Signs of Degeneration 323 

The Prayer-Meeting Test 323 

The Panic of 1913 324 

Japan and Christianity 325 

Watch Tower Special Bibles 325 

Great Pyramid Measurements 326 

A Search for Atoning Blood 326 

Cease to Do Evil, Learn to Do Well 327 

Spiritual and Animal Intoxication 331 

Interesting Questions Answered 334 

Publishing Bro. Russell's Sermons 322 

page 322 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-24 EVERSHOLT ST., LONDON, N.W. 
GERMAN BRANCH-MIRKER STR., 45, ELBERFELD. 
AUSTRALIAN BRANCH-32 JOHNSTON ST., FITZROY, MELBOURNE. 

PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE, 5c (2-l/2d.) A COPY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity 
or adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER, will be supplied FREE, if 
they send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting 
the paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our 
list continually. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE 



THIS JOURNAL IS PUBLISHED IN THE 

FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, DANISH AND ITALIAN LANGUAGES. 

SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



R3450 : page 322 

PUBLISHING BROTHER RUSSELL'S SERMONS. 



Word has come from many brethren and sisters of their 
efforts to secure the publication of Brother Russell's Sunday 
discourses in papers published nearer to them than the 
Pittsburgh Gazette. Many have sent postal cards to their 
favorite local papers, saying that they would gladly subscribe 
for a year if assured that these sermons would appear 
regularly and in full. 

Our advice on the subject might not in every instance 
be the best: you know some of the conditions better than 
we do. For instance, the friends near St. Louis may think 
better of the Republic than of the Democrat; and The Kansas 
City Star, a weekly; near Chicago the Inter-Ocean 
may be preferred to the American, etc. Canadian friends 
assure us that the Toronto Mail and Empire or the Montreal 
Family Herald would be more likely to publish them than 
others there. Our general advice is that papers of large circulation 
and good character be preferred in every case. If 
you have written a postal card to one paper and it has not responded, 
it could do no hurt to write similarly to another, 
—to whichever you prefer. Where papers are obtainable 
regularly at a news-stand it is not necessary to promise a 
year's subscription: it would be enough to say that you 
would get the papers of your newsdealer and extra copies 
of those issues containing these discourses. 

From time to time we will mention the papers proposing 
the publication of the sermons regularly. Friends in 
the neighborhood of each journal will, we are sure, be glad 
in some measure to show their appreciation by patronizing 
such journals and using among their friends extra copies of 
the issues containing the sermons. In cases where the papers 
can be purchased of the newsman a card of appreciation 

R3451 : page 322 

might be sent to the editor: in cases where subscriptions 
are sent in for a journal it would be well to say that 
the sermons are one of the attractive features, or that it is 
sent on the understanding that the sermons will appear 
regularly. So far the following journals have intimated 
that they will probably publish these sermons regularly:— 
The Commercial Appeal, - Memphis, Tenn. 

The Oregonian, Portland, Ore. 

The State, Columbia, S.C. 

The Sunday World, New York City. 

page 322 

"SCRIPTURE STUDIES, SERIES I." FOR GIFTS. 



This is another title for Vol. I. DAWN, preferred by 
some, though we prefer the old title, which will continue. 
We have these in special leather binding with gold edges, 
intended for holiday tokens. At cost to TOWER subscribers, 
viz., 60c, including postage to any address. 



R3451 : page 322 

POLISH TRACTS can now be supplied to all who have 
special opportunities for using them. They are published 
by our Society, although our name and address does not 
appear on them, because of prejudice of Catholics against 
everything like Bible Societies. 



R3449 : page 323 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 
SIGNS OF DEGENERATION. 



"LOVERS OF PLEASURE MORE THAN LOVERS 
OF GOD. "--2 TIM. 3:4. 

DR. HALL, President of Union Theological Seminary, 
New York, declared recently:— 

"We all rejoice in the remarkable growth and 
the excellent features of American civilization, and 
we are pleased at the relatively good state of the commonalty 
of the people, but a deeper examination of 
the social side of our American life reveals a situation 
that causes anything but satisfaction. 

"It is a matter of consternation and deep concern 
to us that the moral standard of American life is 
deteriorating. In the hustle and bustle of every-day 
activity we have astonished the world, but morally we 
are rapidly going astern— so rapidly that one is dumfounded 
at the contrast of a visit to some of the countries 
of the Old World. 

"I am an optimist through and through, but I 
am not a stoneblind optimist. I feel and I know from 
observation that religion has little, if any, part in our 
American civilization today. This is a lamentable 
state of affairs, and it behooves each and all of us to 
do all we can to help stem this tide of indifference. 
Our home life is not what it should be, and it is not 
to be wondered at when we realize the general apathy 
of the people as regards their spiritual welfare." 



Doctor Hall should have expected just such results 
from the teaching of Evolution and Higher Criticism 
in "Union" and other Theological Seminaries. 
And it is only beginning, too. For twenty years the 
Doctor and his coadjutors have been sowing the seed 
of unbelief: now they are surprised at the first samples 
of the crop. They have failed to gauge up the 
ordinary layman as more honest than their clerical 
brethren: when they lose faith in the Bible and supernatural 
religion they will soon drop the forms and 
ceremonies associated therewith. Some clerical higher 
critics and agnostics would do the same were they 
not looking for honor and "gain every one from his 
own quarter," or denomination.— Isa. 56:11. 

THE PRAYER-MEETING TEST. 



"It is a common thing in village and rural districts 
to find churches where the prayer meeting has 
not even a name to live. It is just as common to find 
in towns and cities among the larger churches where 
the membership goes up into the hundreds to find, 
comparatively speaking, a handful of people, mostly 
women, gathered in the weekly prayer-meeting, when 
scores if not hundreds might reasonably be expected 
to be present. The situation is one of concern, if not 
of alarm, and unless a remedy is soon found, that 
meeting of the Church which above all others is vital to 
its life and work will have gone out of existence. We 
do not believe that either the necessity for the prayer 
meeting or its genuine usefulness has gone, but we 
are persuaded that many of our people need to be reconverted 
regarding its responsibility and value to 
themselves and the community in which they live."— 
Canadian Baptist. 



Yes, the prayer-meeting test is a good one. Wherever 
true Christians find it possible to meet for mid-week 
communion with the Lord and with each other, 
they will surely have pleasure in so doing. The Spirit 
of the Lord will constrain them and his Word will encourage 
them,— "Where two or three of you are met 
in my name, there am I in the midst." 

We are glad to say that the Allegheny congregation 
has this evidence of spiritual life. Six meetings 
of this nature are held every Wednesday evening in 
the various districts contiguous to Allegheny. The 
attendance ranges from seven to thirty, and those most 
regular in attendance are usually the most earnest and 
most spiritually alive. Our hope is that this love of 
prayer and praise and communion with each other on 



R3449 : page 324 

spiritual themes and experiences of the week may be 
more and more a characteristic of all of "this way"— 
of all WATCH TOWER readers. 

CONGREGATIONALISTS ALARMED. 



"Congregational leaders, especially those in the 
West, are alarmed over the showing just reported 
made by their body in the states of Illinois, Iowa and 
Michigan. In all three states Congregationalism lost 
in membership last year, and in two of them in Sunday-school 
attendance. The leaders referred to are 
pointing out to their brethren that in these states conditions 
are best fitted of all states, New England not 
excepted, for Puritan growth. Yet there has been 
less. The membership in all states is 120,000 in round 
figures, or a little more than one-sixth of the entire 
Congregational membership, and almost exactly the 
membership of the same body in Massachusetts. 
These leaders are asking the cause and the remedy. 
The former they give as too much higher criticism and 
too little real religion. They point out that these 
states are filled with educational institutions."— Secular 
Press. 



The thing which seems to strike the alarm bell 
in religious clerical circles is any sign of falling off in 
numbers. That is a sore spot. It means fewer 
preachers or less salaries, and naturally awakens alarm. 
The numbers and wealth are too great now. If the 
"wheat" could only get together and study God's 
Word and learn something of the lengths and breadths 
and heights and depths of the great divine plan of the 
ages and the love which it exemplifies, they would be 
blest richly, and the great bulk of well-meaning but 
unconsecrated and unbelieving tares could better be 
dispensed with. "Fear not, little flock." "Not many 
great or wise or noble hath God chosen"— to be heirs 
of the Kingdom which shortly now will be set up in 
power and great glory to bless the "tares" and "all 
the families of the earth." 

THE PANIC OF 1913. 



"There is something almost uncanny in the 
thought that panics in the financial and commercial 
world have a habit of recurring at such regular intervals 



that, if not prevented, we, here in the United 

States, are doomed to suffer another cataclysm in the 

business world in 1913. It would seem that, given 

R3450 : page 324 

nine years' warning, we ought to be able to forestall 

such a catastrophe. Yet we are stared in the face by 

the fact that during the last one hundred years the 

United States has been visited by periodical convulsions 

of the kind described, at intervals of almost exactly 

twenty years, with premonitory symptoms of 

derangement at or about midway intervals. The first 

real panic in the domestic commercial world in the 

nineteenth century was in 1814— the outcome of the 

war of 1812, the exclusion laws and the embargo; 

the next was in 1837-39, following the United States 

Bank convulsion, wild-cat banking and speculation in 

land, with 33,000 resultant failures, more than three 

times the average annual total today; after that came 

the big reversal of 1857, consequent on over-expanded 

banking credits and tariff legislation; and next, the 

disturbance of 1873, caused by over-speculation following 

the civil war; and finally, the most serious 

panic in our history, in 1893, due to over-extended 

credits in commercial and other lines. Punctuating 

these five plunges into the region of unreasoning 

fright there were minor panics: those of 1818, 1826 

and of 1829, due to tariff legislation upsetting business; 

that of 1848, which was a reflection of the disturbed 

conditions in Europe; one in 1864, which was 

lost sight of by the turmoil incident to the closing 

year of the War of the Rebellion; the Eastern commercial 

and banking credit derangement in 1884, the 

echo of the Barings' failure in 1890, and last, but not 

least, among these disturbances of a so-called minor 

class, the wrenching liquidation or deferred panic of 

1903. This brief review makes it plain that some 

not well-understood psychological or sociological law 

has, for a century past, exercised an unerring influence 

to produce the cycles of prosperity, panic and 

liquidation which have scared the domestic business 

world. It likewise emphasizes, in a way that should 

come home to every banker and business man, that in 

1913 it is certain that the twenty-year variety or major 

panic will be due. There was not much in the Mississippi 

or South Sea Bubble enterprises which was 

not duplicated in kind at least in that which underlay 

the violent liquidation in prices of securities that so 

marred the fortunes of millions in the year just 

elapsed. The theory has grown apace, in view of the 

liquidation without panic in 1903, that with stronger 

and bigger banks, chains of banking houses, clearing 

houses, combinations of industries and mercantile enterprises, 

panics may be prevented, just as civilization 

has found panaceas for various ills to which the flesh 



is heir. But fright, which is the basis of panic, is 

like a thief in the night. It may seldom be foreseen. 

No solvent bank or merchant could meet all its or his 

obligations if asked for peremptorily, at the instant. 

The undue expansion of credits, by either, in proportion 

to reserves, in an emergency, is always likely to 

precipitate a crisis, after which the house of cards 

falls. The dangers of company promotion, over-capitalization, 

undue expansion of credits have been and 

still are too often overlooked. Nine years is a long 

while in which to prepare to avoid a given contingency. 

It also furnishes time in which to grow prosperous 

and careless, and in which to forget." 



The above clipping, we believe, is from The Saturday 
Evening Post. We print it not for its own sake 
as an item merely, but also because it so closely coincides 
with our expectations, based on the divine Word 
—regarding the ending of "Gentile Times" in October, 
1914, when will follow the "time of trouble such as 
was not since there was a nation;"— the anarchous 
period which will in divine providence be followed by 
the Kingdom rule of everlasting righteousness. 

Our readers will recall that for the past two years 
we have expressed the opinion that there would not 

R3450 : page 325 

be time for a general panic and its following years of 
depression and then another gradual rise and another 
panic before 1914, and that we therefore looked for 
only a temporary lull of the world's prosperity now 
(such as is now being experienced) followed by a 
period of reasonable prosperity of growing proportions 
lasting for some years. We advise the consecrated, 
however, to take heed not to be overcharged by 
cares of this life and the pursuit of riches. Seek first 
the Kingdom. So long as we can realize ourselves 
heirs of it we can feel "rich toward God." "All 
things are yours, for ye are Christ's and Christ is 
God's." 

THE TREASURES OF ETHIOPIA. 



It has long been known that King Menelek of 
Abyssinia, Africa, claims to be a lineal descendant of 
Solomon through the Ethiopian Queen of Sheba; but 
the evidences of this have only recently been discovered 
by H. LeRoux, a French scientist. LeRoux obtained 
permission to visit the islands of the Sacred 
Lake, where he discovered, in a semi-ruined monastery, 
documents written on ancient paper parchments 



(papyri) dating back to the time of the visit of the 
Queen of Sheba to King Solomon and ascribing to him 
the paternity of the first King Menelek. 

Our informant declares that LeRoux is in great 
favor with the king, or negus, Menelek, and has been 
granted permission to negotiate the construction of a 
railroad into Abyssinia and to make further explorations 
on the islands of that sacred lake, Zonai. These 
islands, which, until the day when visited by LeRoux, 
had never been seen save in the distance by any white 
man, are dotted with ancient monasteries, most of 
them in ruin, and only a few of them inhabited by 
ignorant monks, who have no knowledge or power to 
comprehend the importance of the treasures that are 
contained within the walls of their abode. For it is 
known that at the time of the great Mohammedan 
invasion about 400 years ago, all the sacred relics and 
the treasures of the nation, all the historical records 
and, in fact, everything of value, was bundled off to 
the monasteries on the island of Zonai and concealed 
therein order to protect them from being carried off 
and destroyed by the Moslems. 

It is a matter of tradition in Abyssinia and of 
belief in the scientific world of Europe that the original 
Jewish Ark of the Covenant, containing the Mosaical 
stone of Tables of Law and all the other treasures 
of the Temple of Solomon, which disappeared 
from Jerusalem at the time of the so-called Jewish captivity, 
were despatched by the Jewish high priests for 
safety to Abyssinia. It is generally believed that the 
Ark of the Covenant, along with all the other relics 
contained in the holy of holies of the Temple of Solomon, 
will be found in some of these monastery islands 
of Lake Zonai. 

JAPAN AND CHRISTIANITY. 



That the Japanese are not becoming Christianized 
but merely civilized, note the views of a Japanese 
university professor, quoted in the Booklovers' Magazine 
as follows:— 

"Our empire has salted all the seas that have flowed 
into it. The West cannot hope to Christianize Japan 
when our ambition is to Japanize Christianity, and to carry 
the new doctrines, the gospel of rational ethics, to the 
millions of Asia, and, in time, to all the world. We shall 
go to China— in fact, we are already there— with a harmonious 
blending of the best precepts in Buddhism, Confucianism, 
Bushido, Brahmanism, Herbert Spencer, Christianity 
and other systems of thought, and we shall, I 
think, have little trouble in awakening the naturally 
agnostic mind of the Chinese to the enlightenment of 
modern free thought. What the Far East needs is a religion 
as modern as machinery. We have had more gods 



than were good for us. We believe that a cosmopolitan 
gospel, tolerating the existence but minimizing the potency 
of prayers, offerings, shrines, temples, churches, litanies 
and gods, and dwelling more on the time that now is and 
the relation of man to man, will create a wonderful reformation 
in Asia. We confidently believe that it has been 
assigned to Japan to lead the world in this new intellectual 
era in the progress of mankind." 



R3451 : page 325 

WATCH TOWER SPECIAL BIBLES, 

WITH WIDE MARGINS, CONTAINING DAWN AND TOWER REFERENCES. 

ONE brother, noting our recent call for these 
Bibles, writes us that if we will issue a new 
edition he would gladly purchase eight copies. 
We note the fact, and if 3,000 more were thus wanted 
we would lose no time in arranging for them. We 
fear that many have only partially learned the value 
of the special features of this remarkable work. 

For the benefit of new readers we explain that 
the Bible is printed from the regular Linear Bible 
plates, showing Common and Revised Versions at 
once. It has wide margins, in which, aside from 
the usual references, are special ones which direct to 
the volume and page of TOWER or DAWNS treating 
the passage. 

Notwithstanding the advance in the cost of paper 
and leather, we believe that we could duplicate 
the special prices, too. They were: 
French Seal, divinity circuit, gold edges, $2.00. 
Genuine Morocco, " " 3.00. 

The matter is with you. We will undertake 
the labor, etc., if a sufficient number desire the Bibles 
to make the new edition practicable. 



R3451 : page 326 

THE GREAT PYRAMID MEASUREMENTS. 

ARE we quite sure of the accuracy of the measurements 

of the Great Pyramid's passages as 

given in MILLENNIAL DAWN, Vol. III.? I 

have seen another measurement of the downward 

passage (3465 inches instead of 3416 inches), said to 

be from Prof. Piazzi Smyth's writings, says a reader. 



We have no reason to question the accuracy of 



the figures given in DAWN III. They were all secured 
from Prof. Piazzi Smyth's work entitled, Our Inheritance 
in the Great Pyramid. Moreover the manuscript 
of that chapter was submitted to Prof. Smyth by a 
friend before it was published and no flaw in its figures 
was noted. The illustrations are of Prof. Smyth's 
preparation, too. 

We remark, however, that Prof. Smyth's interest 
centered in the upper chambers of the Pyramid, and the 
passages leading upward to these. Much less care and 
precision are manifested in his dealings with all other 
parts of the Pyramid than with this. As an evidence of 
this note the difference in the two drawings in VOL. III. 
which show this downward passage and the "pit" at its 
terminus. In the frontispiece the lower or level portion 
of the downward passage is shown as running to 
the axis line of the Pyramid, nearly one-half the 
length of the "pit." The illustration showing "The 
Passage System" of the Pyramid (MILLENNIAL DAWN, 
Vol. III., page 333) shows this totally different— it 
shows the depressed and broken floor commencing 
before the vertical axis is reached. Examine the illustrations 
carefully and note what we refer to. 

The cut of page 333 is to a scale, and, being prepared 
by the one Astronomer Royal of Scotland, it 
should be accurate, yet the figures we have given 
(3416 inches) reach (into the "pit" of this diagram, 
—to the "pit" in the frontispiece) to the vertical 
axis of the Pyramid. We cannot therefore see how 
any longer measure for the passage could be possible. 
Measure for yourself, using the scale given on the 
diagram, page 333. If you have not the proper calipers 
use a piece of stiff paper as your measuring line 
and then apply it to the scale. 

At the time of the Editor's visit to the Pyramid 
in 1892 the downward passage was filled full of debris 
and evidently had been long in that condition, as only 
one Arab was found who had any knowledge of it. 
He was quite an old man who many years before had 
assisted Prof. Smyth. The Editor, therefore, like 
other measurers of recent years, could ascertain nothing 
new respecting the "downward passage." 



R3454 : page 326 

A SEARCH FOR ATONING BLOOD. 

THE following will prove interesting reading to 
many of our subscribers. It is a report of remarks 
made by an old Hebrew at a "mission" 
meeting. We note that God has so overturned 
natural Israel that even if they had possession of the 
holy places where sacrifices were appointed to be 
offered, they have no priest qualified to make the 



offerings. No Jew living in the world today could 
prove his right to the priest's office by showing his 
pedigree back to Aaron. Jews named Levy and Cohen 
are supposed to be of the Levitical tribe, but could 
not prove it so as to qualify for the office according 
to their Law. With the true Priest and the offering 
of the "better sacrifices," the types were obliterated 
most effectually by the Lord. By and by fleshly Israel 
will realize the truth— they will "look upon him 
whom they pierced"— they will recognize him as the 
great Priest who "offered up himself." Thank God 
for the assurances of his Word on this subject in 
Rom. 11:25-33. 

The testimony follows:— 

"This is Passover week among you, my Jewish 
brethren, and as I sat here I was thinking how you 
will be observing it. You will have put away all 
leaven from your houses; you will eat the motsah— 
unleavened wafers— and the roasted lamb. You will 
attend the synagogue services and carry out the ritual 
and directions of the Talmud; but you forget, my 
brethren, that you have everything but that which 
Jehovah required first of all. He did not say, 'When 
I see you eat the motsah or the lamb, or go to the synagogue; 
but his word was, 'When I see the blood 
I will pass over you.' Ah, my brethren, you cannot 
substitute anything for this. You must have blood, 
BLOOD, BLOOD!" 

As he reiterated this word with ever increasing 
emphasis, his black eyes flashed warningly, and his 
Jewish hearers quailed before him. "Blood!" It is 
an awful word, that, for one who reveres the ancient 
oracles and yet has no sacrifice. Turn where he will 
in the Book, the blood meets him, but let him seek 
as he may, he cannot find it in the Judaism of the 
present. After a few minutes' pause the patriarchal 
old man went on somewhat as follows: 

"I was born in Palestine nearly seventy years 
ago. As a child I was taught to read the Law, the 
Psalms, and the Prophets. I early attended the synagogue 
and learned Hebrew from the rabbis. At first 
I believed what I was told, that ours was the true and 
only religion, but as I grew older and studied the Law 
more intently I was struck with the place the blood 
had in all the ceremonies outlined there, and equally 
struck by its utter absence in the ritual to which I was 
brought up. Again and again I read Exodus 12 and 
Leviticus 16 and 17, and the latter chapters especially 
made me tremble, as I thought of the great Day of 
Atonement and the place the blood had there. Day 
and night one verse would ring in my ears, 'It is the 

R3454 : page 327 

blood that maketh an atonement for the soul.' I knew 
I had broken the Law. I needed atonement. Year 



after year, on that day, I beat my breast as I confessed 
my need of it; but it was to be made by blood, 
and there was no blood! 

"In my distress I at last opened my heart to a 
learned and venerable rabbi. He told me that God 
was angry with his people. Jerusalem was in the 
hands of the Gentiles, the temple was destroyed, and 
a Mohammedan mosque was reared up in its place. 
The only spot on earth where we dare shed the blood 
of sacrifice, in accordance with Deuteronomy 1 2 and 
Leviticus 17, was desecrated and our nation scattered. 
That was why there was no blood. God had himself 
closed the way to carry out the solemn service of the 
great Day of Atonement. Now we must turn to the 
Talmud, and rest on its instructions, and trust in the 
mercy of God and the merits of the fathers. 

"I tried to be satisfied, but could not. Something 
seemed to say that the Law was unaltered, even 
though our temple was destroyed. Nothing else but 
blood could atone for the soul. We dared not shed 
blood for atonement elsewhere than in the place the 
Lord had chosen. Then we were left without atonement 
at all. This thought filled me with horror. In 
my distress I consulted many other rabbis. I had but 
one great question— Where can I find the blood of 
atonement?' 

"I was over thirty years of age when I left Palestine 
and came to Constantinople, with my still unanswered 
question ever before my mind, and my soul 
exceedingly troubled about my sins. One night I 
was walking down one of the narrow streets of that 
city, when I saw a sign telling of a meeting for Jews. 
Curiosity led me to open the door and go in. Just as 
I took a seat I heard a man say: 'The blood of Jesus 
Christ, his Son, cleanseth us from all sin.' It was 
my first introduction to Christianity, but I listened 
breathlessly as the speaker told how God had declared 
that, 'Without shedding of blood is no remission,' 
but that he had given his only begotten Son, 
the Lamb of God, to die, and all who trusted in his 
blood were forgiven all their iniquities. This was the 
Messiah of the fifty-third of Isaiah; this was the suffering 
of Psalm 22. Ah, my brethren, I had found 
the blood of atonement at last! I trusted it, and now 
I love to read the New Testament and see how all the 
shadows of the Law are fulfilled in Jesus. His blood has 
been shed for sinners. It has satisfied Justice, and is 
the only means of salvation for either Jew or Gentile." 



R3451 : page 327 

CEASE TO DO EVIL, LEARN TO DO WELL. 
-ISA. 1:1-9,16-20.-NOVEMBER 20.- 



ISAIAH was one of the grandest of the Lord's prophets. 
Not only is his message couched in kindly, 
sympathetic terms, but it is most comprehensive, 
including, with the rebukes and exhortations appropriate 
to his own day and nation, sublime glimpses of the glorious 
future which the Lord in his own due time will bring 
to pass for the blessing not only of Israel, but of all the 
families of the earth. This variation in the style of the 
prophets teaches us that although all the holy prophets 
spoke and wrote as they were moved by the holy Spirit, 
nevertheless the Lord was pleased to permit his messengers 
to throw into their words a certain amount of their own 
personality. We may assume, too, that the Lord in choosing 
his messengers had in view their personal characteristics 
as well as their willingness to be used as his mouthpieces. 
While, therefore, we appreciate all the prophets 
and all their messages as being from the Lord, we may 
properly enough discriminate amongst them, loving most 
those who most abundantly manifested the Spirit of the 
Lord. So today, while loving all the Lord's people and 
appreciating all whom he uses as servants of the Truth for 
its public and private ministry, we are bound to appreciate 
most those who with greatest constancy and fullest 
measure illustrate the teachings of the divine Word— who 
manifest most the Spirit of the Lord and the wisdom which 
cometh from above, which is "first pure, then peaceable, 
easy of entreatment, full of mercy and good fruits." 

The first verse of our lesson simply informs us that the 
book of Isaiah, the prophecy of Isaiah and what he saw 
and foresaw, was prepared during the times of certain 
kings— altogether a period of about forty years. 

His prophecy opens with a stirring appeal, "Hear, 
O heavens, and give ear, O earth: for the Lord hath spoken." 
The message was not to be considered as the wisdom 
or exhortation of Isaiah, but as the Lord's message 
through the Prophet. It is the Lord who declares, "I 
have nourished and brought up children and they have rebelled 
against me." The original signifies, "I have 
caused children to grow up and have lifted them high in 
greatness and they have rebelled." All familiar with the 
history of natural Israel can appreciate the truth of this 
statement. From the little obscure beginning the Lord 
brought that people forward to the most prominent place 
in the world's history and gave them much advantage every 
way, chiefly in that he communicated to them his will 
through Moses and the prophets, promising them additional 
greatness in the future. Notwithstanding all these 
favors of God they were a rebellious people, as both the 
Old and New Testaments agree. In saying this we do 
not wish it to be understood that the Israelites were worse 
than the other nations, to whom God extended no such 
favors and privileges: we have no reason for so thinking. 
Quite probably the other nations under the same circumstances 
would have followed a similar course; but it was a 
wrong course, an ungrateful course, a sinful course, 



nevertheless. 

A FORM OF GODLINESS WITHOUT ITS POWER. 

In Israel was illustrated the natural tendency of humanity 
towards sin— the downward tendency resulting 
from the fall. In that nation was illustrated the fact that 
if God had not imposed the death penalty and separation 

R3452 : page 328 

from his favor, the result anyway would have been downward, 
and more seriously so because of the continuance of 
life and the increasing opportunities for delving into sin. 
In other words, we can readily see that had God not interposed 
with the death sentence, the condition of the 
world would today probably have been much more 
terrible than it now is. Even with the brevity of life 
staring the world in the face, and disease blighting every 
pleasure and comfort, and fear clouding every hope, the 
tendency is to forget God and to go every one after his 
own schemes and selfish plans: how terrible would have 
been the condition without this constraining influence, 
with perfection of health, with the fruits of the garden and 
perpetual life. As it is we see that even the part of the 
penalty which refers to sorrows and labor with sweating 
of face, incidental to present "cursed" conditions, is a 
great blessing, a great restraint to the downward tendency 
of sin. Those who must labor here and have much of 
tribulation are thereby led to look away from present conditions 
to the Lord and to the relief which he offers. 

God proposed to adopt the children of Abraham according 
to the flesh for his children, and the nation of 
Israel was hoping to attain this glorious station, "Unto 
which promise our twelve tribes, instantly serving God day 
and night, hope to come." Since they were "cast off" 
when they rejected Messiah, this same hope has still been 
before all of their nation who believe in Jesus and the gracious 
things of the Kingdom which he has promised to all 
called and found faithful to him. (Acts 26:6,7.) We are 
to distinguish between the few and the many. There was 
a remnant in natural Israel who did not rebel against the 
Lord, but who, like the prophet Isaiah, sought to walk in 
his ways. And so likewise in nominal spiritual Israel, 
there are two classes in both cases. The masses, however, 
now as then, are in an attitude of rebellion against the 
Lord. Not that they rebel openly, but while outwardly 
affecting obedience and reverence, in their hearts they are 
far from the Lord and his requirements. 

"The ox knoweth his owner, and the ass his master's 
crib: but Israel doth not know, my people do not consider." 
The brute recognizes an obligation to the one who 
cares for him, while often those gifted with bright intellects, 
as, for instance, the masses of Christendom today 
—like the masses of the Jews in Isaiah's day— seem not to 
realize their responsibility to the Lord, their dependence 



upon him and their proper obligations to him. A "remnant," 

a handful as it were, appreciate the situation. 

The Apostle Paul refers to this class saying, "Ye are not 

your own, ye are bought with a price," "even the precious 

blood of Christ"— therefore glorify God in your bodies 

and spirits which are his. The masses do not consider, 

they have no time to consider; they are too busy with 

their own plans and schemes— honest and dishonest; selfishness 

and pride have full control of them. 

The Prophet addresses Israel as sin-laden and corrupt 
through having forsaken the Lord. He tells them that 
their course implies that they have despised the Lord— his 
promises of blessing to the obedient and his threats of retribution 
to evil doers; then he inquires what would be 
the use of any more stripes or chastisements, what hope 
would there be of effecting a reformation?— "Ye will revolt 
more and more: the whole head is sick and the whole 
heart is faint. From the sole of the foot even unto the 
head there is no soundness in it; but wounds and bruises 
and putrefying sores." This picture probably referred to 
the people as a whole and to their land, which had been 
desolated by their enemies from the north and from the 
south. These chastisements had not wrought reformation, 
and apparently the only thing to do with the nation was 
to wipe it out, and this the Lord did about a century later, 
permitting their enemies to lay waste and make utterly 
desolate the land, without inhabitants for seventy years. 
The Prophet Isaiah was probably looking down into the 
future rather than describing events of his own day when 
he said, "Your country is desolate, your cities are burned 
with fire: your land, strangers devour it.. .and the 
daughter of Zion is left as a booth in the vineyard, as a 
lodge in the garden." The booth and lodge were very 
unsafe, unsatisfactory, temporary shelters, a dwelling whose 
occupant was continually on the alert against depredators, 
spoilers. Thus the Prophet pictures the condition of the 
Jewish nation— thus he shows to what their course would 
lead unless they turned from it. 

NOMINAL SPIRITUAL ISRAEL ASTRAY. 

We may draw a lesson applicable to Christendom, the 
civilized world, and see that so far as spirituality is concerned 
Christendom is in a deplorable condition. The 
enemies of the Truth, boastful higher critics and powerful 
evolutionists, have invaded all the territory of faith and 
hope and are laying waste the heritage of the Lord's people, 
and the majority are going into captivity to these 
enemies. Those who remain loyal to the Lord are in 
straits, and, like those who dwell in the booths and lodges 
watching against depredators, merely on the defensive, 
and that in unfavorable quarters in many respects. 

As for the Lord's dealing with Christendom as a 
whole, it would be useless to prosecute the matter, as the 
increased knowledge and opportunities and blessings are 
seen to bring more of worldliness, selfishness and corruption: 



Why should they be stricken any more? Why 
should they be dealt with a view to correction? As 
a matter of fact we know that Christendom will not be 
much longer dealt with under present conditions: already 
we are in the time of the fall of Babylon, already the message 
is being proclaimed in every quarter of the spiritual 
heavens that the harvest of the age is come, that great 
Babylon is no longer to be esteemed God's representative 
in the earth, and that his people should all come out of 
her. (Rev. 18:3.) The light of Present Truth showing 
us the errors of Babylon is the divine voice to all who are 
of the Truth, to all who love the Truth. Such will hear and 
will obey. 

R3452 : page 329 

In verse 9 the Prophet declares that, except for the 
small remnant left to the Lord, the nation and its hopes 
would have been like Sodom and Gomorrah— would have 
been utterly destroyed. Because of this faithful remnant in 
natural Israel to whom God's promises and favors belonged, 
he specially cared for that nation even after he permitted 
the full overthrow and desolation of their land to come 
upon them. His providences were with them still even 
in their captivity in Babylon, and he brought them back 
again, in due time, to their own land and perpetuated in 
that remnant the promises of which the nation as a whole 
had proven themselves unworthy. So it was again with 
natural Israel in the end of their age when Messiah appeared. 
He found only a remnant worthy of the Kingdom, 
and the great mass were cast off and the time of trouble 
destroyed them nationally. The faithful remnant, 
however, were accepted of the Lord to be the nucleus of 
the house of spiritual Israel, and to this number he has 
since been adding out of every nation, kindred and 
tongue. 

Similarly also in the end of this Gospel age, at the 
second advent of Christ. The Scriptures assure us that 
only a remnant will be found Israelites indeed, while the 
majority, the great mass of Christendom, will be rejected. 
To these remnants the oppositions of their evil surroundings 
serve as polishing instruments to prove them, to test 
them, to prepare them for future services and honors. 
Otherwise, had there been no faithful ones found, all 
hopes of Kingdom privileges and blessings, so far as the 
people are concerned, would have failed, and Messiah 
alone, without his Church, would have been the King of 
the Millennial age. Had God not foreseen these remnants, 
Israel and Christendom would have received no more consideration 
than did the other nations of the earth. 

To be as Sodom and Gomorrah, therefore, does not 
signify to be in an utterly hopeless condition as respects 
the future, though it would have implied hopelessness as 
respected the Kingdom opportunities of the Jewish and 
Gospel ages; because even to the Sodomites a blessing 
shall yet come through the glorified Christ Jesus, the 



Head, and the remnant Church, the little flock, his body. 
Our Lord mentioned this future hope of the Sodomites in 
one of his discourses, and the Prophet Ezekiel has stated 
it further in considerable detail, showing that as natural 
Israel will be reclaimed in due time from her cast-off condition 
and be dealt with by the great Messiah during the 
Millennial age, so also will the Sodomites come back to 
their "former estate," and if obedient they as well as others 
may yet return to all that was lost in Adam and redeemed, 
bought back, by the precious blood of Christ.— 
Ezek. 16:48-63; Matt. 10:15. 

"WASH YOU, MAKE YOU CLEAN." 

The latter part of our lesson was addressed primarily 
to the well-intentioned Israelite of Isaiah's time. As an 
exhortation it reminds us of the words of John the Baptist 
and his disciples and of Jesus and his disciples when appearing 
to the Jewish nation in the harvest time of their 
age. It is a plea for reform to a people already justified, 
consecrated. We are to remember that the whole nation 
of Israel was baptized into Moses in the sea and in the 
cloud, and that, as the mediator, Moses, by divine arrangement 
instituted a covenant between God and Israel by which 
that nation was recognized as under special divine care, 
and by which their sins were typically atoned for every year 
in advance on the Day of Atonement with the blood of 
bulls and goats. These sacrifices, as the Apostle points 
out, could never really cleanse them from sins; they were 
merely temporary coverings of those sins, and typical lessons 
respecting the necessity of blood atonement for the 
sins of the whole world, into which they were precipitated 
by Adam's transgression. It was for the Israelites to learn 
later in God's due time, about the better Mediator than 
Moses, about his better sacrifices for sins, and concerning 
the eternal redemption effected thereby. 

Meantime they were to recognize their responsibility 
for such sins as they could have avoided, and they were to 
cleanse themselves from these and to seek the Lord with 
their whole hearts. The exhortation, therefore, of verse sixteen 
does not mean a washing away of original sin, 
which they could not effect, which was only figuratively 

R3453 : page 329 

done on the Day of Atonement and will only be actually 
accomplished by the Lord Jesus' work. 

Hence this entire exhortation is as appropriate to 
spiritual Israel as it was to natural Israel. As they had 
their typical cleansings in their typical atonement sacrifices, 
we have our real cleansing in the better sacrifice of 
Christ. It is appropriate, however, that we remember 
that if we would be of those who will constitute his elect, if 
we would be of those who would be used of him as kings 
for the blessing of all the families of the earth, we must 
not only be justified from all the evils of the past but we 



must develop character by putting forth effort against evils 

which are natural to us, by overcoming those evils. The 

command is, "Cease to do evil." We can keep this command 

so far as our hearts, our intentions, are concerned. 

To be acceptable to God our wills must be firmly established 

in opposition to sin of every kind, and this will 

mean that to the extent of our ability all our words and 

conduct will be free from evil, free from sin; but since 

our new wills must operate through imperfect bodies, we 

cannot hope to be absolutely free from sin, from blemishes, 

from imperfection. 

Similarly we are to strive continually to "learn to do 
well." Perfection must be our aim, and in our hearts it 
must be continually the criterion. But experience corroborates 
what the Scriptures set forth on the subject, 
namely, that in our imperfect condition and unfavorable 
surroundings we cannot do the things that we would— we 
cannot live fully up to the grand standard which our hearts 
appreciate and desire to meet. This reminds us of our 
Lord's words, "Be ye perfect even as your Father in 

R3453 : page 330 

heaven is perfect." The Lord knew that this would be 
impossible except in our minds, in our hearts, in our intentions; 
we cannot be his and be anything else than 
pure in heart, pure in intention. But he knew that we 
could not under present conditions measure up to the 
heavenly Father's perfection, nor could he set for us a lower 
standard than that. There is only the one standard, and 
we must attain to that as nearly as we can in our conduct 
and approve it fully in our hearts. 

JUSTICE, EQUITY, A CHRISTIAN QUALITY. 

But we should explain what is meant by "doing well." 
We are exhorted to "seek judgment [always be on the side of 
right and justice, desiring to do justice to all with whom 
we have dealings]; relieve the oppressed [be of generous 
spirit, be willing and anxious to lift some of the burdens 
from the groaning creation to the extent of our ability]; 
judge the fatherless [see that the orphans and those not 
properly capable of looking out for their own welfare 
shall suffer no loss at our hands, but on the contrary we 
shall do what we can to secure to them their just and reasonable 
rights]; plead for the widow [feel a sympathy for 
the helpless and plead their cause with others, which 
would imply generosity on our part as well as justice to 
them]." 

It would appear that Christian people spend a good many 
years of their experiences as New Creatures without making 
great progress. One difficulty leading up to this condition 
is a failure to recognize the basic principles underlying the 
divine laws, which apply to us from the moment we are adopted 
into the Lord's family. The first of these basic principles 
is justice. We need to learn more and more clearly what 



are our own rights and the rights of our fellow creatures 
in the Church and out of the Church. We need to learn 
how to measure the affairs of ourselves and of others with 
the plummet of justice, and to realize that we must not under 
any circumstances or conditions infract the rights, 
interests or liberties of others— that to do so would be 
wrong, sinful, contrary to the divine will, and a hindrance 
to our growth in grace. Secondly, we must learn to esteem 
love as next to justice in importance in the divine code. 
By love we mean not amativeness nor soft sentimentality, 
but that principle of kindness, sympathy, consideration 
and benevolence which we see manifested in our heavenly 
Father and in our Lord Jesus. 

In proportion as we grow up in the Lord, strong in 
him, it must be along the lines of these elements of his 
character. More and more we must appreciate and sympathize 
with others in their trials and difficulties and 
afflictions; more and more we must become gentle, patient, 
kind toward all, but especially toward the household 
of faith. All the graces of the Spirit are elements of love. 
God is love, and whoever, therefore, receives of his Spirit 
receives the spirit of love. 

These two basic principles must cover all of our conduct 
in life. Justice tells us that we must cease to do evil 
—that we must not speak a word or do an act that would 
work injustice to another, nor even by look imply such 
injustice; we must be as careful of his or her interests 
and welfare as of our own. Justice must cover all 
of our dealings with others. Love may permit us to 
give them more than justice would require, but justice 
demands that we must never give them less than due, 
no matter if they do not require justice at our hands, 
no matter if they are willing to take less than justice, 
no matter if they would say nothing if we should take advantage 
of them, no matter if they would not appreciate 
our degree of justice— no matter, our course is the same. 
We have received of the Lord's Spirit, and must act from 
this standpoint and not from the standpoint of others who 
have not his Spirit or who are more or less blinded and 
disabled thereby from dealing justly. 

If justice must mark our conduct toward others, so 
love must be used by us in measuring the conduct of others 
toward us. We may not apply to others the strict 
rules of justice which we acknowledge as our responsibility 
to them. Love, generosity, demand that we accept 
from others less than justice, because we realize that they 
are fallen, imperfect, not only in their flesh but also in 
their judgments. Furthermore, we see that the great mass 
of the world has not received the Spirit of the Lord at all, 
and therefore cannot fully appreciate these basic principles 
of justice and love as we appreciate them. We must in 
love look sympathetically upon their condition, as we 
would upon the condition of a sick neighbor or friend, 
parent or child. We must make allowance for their disordered 
condition, and think as charitably as possible of 
their words, conduct, etc. 



LOVE AND JUSTICE BOTH CONTROL. 

This does not mean that we must be blind and oblivious 
to true conditions, and permit ourselves to be deprived 
of all that we possess or earn; but it does mean that 
we should take a kind, sympathetic view of the unrighteousness 
and injustice of those with whom we have dealings 
—that we should remember that they are fallen and 
that they have not received the grace of God as we have 
received it, and that they are not, therefore, to be measured 
by the line of strict justice, but rather that their imperfections 
are to be allowed for reasonably by the elastic 
cord of love. It is our own conduct that we are to measure 
by the rule of justice, the Golden Rule. 

How clearly the Master sets forth these conditions, 
urging upon us the Golden Rule as the measure for our 
conduct toward others, and that in measuring their conduct 
toward us we shall be as generous as we shall wish 
our Lord to be in his judgment of ourselves, in harmony 
with his statement, "With what judgment ye judge, ye 
shall be judged." A right appreciation of these basic 
principles, justice and love, by the Lord's people, and 
worked out in the daily affairs of life, would lift them 
above the world. It would save many an altercation, 

R3453 : page 331 

many a law suit, many a quarrel, and would make of the 
Lord's people shining examples of kindness, generosity, 
love, and at the same time examples of justice, right living, 
sterling honesty, etc. 

Verses 1 8-20 apply specially to natural Israel, though 
we shall see that an application is also possible to spiritual 
Israel. Without telling the Israelites how he would accomplish 
the complete cancellation of their sins in due 
time through the great antitypical sacrifice, the Lord 
merely assures them of the fact that such a result would 
come, and that if they would accept this by faith they 
would see how reasonable were the Lord's requirements in 
every particular. If they would thus seek to walk in the 
Lord's ways they would eat the good of the land, they 
would have blessings upon their herds and flocks and 
crops, for this was the Lord's covenant with that nation; 
while on the contrary it was equally a part of the covenant 
that if they would be disobedient to him they would go 
into captivity, fall by the sword, have famine, pestilences, 
etc.— See our Lord's statement of this matter in 
Leviticus 26:3-33. 

The application to spiritual Israel is that we should 
continually remember that we were bought with a price, 
even the precious blood of Christ, and that his sacrifice 
and not any works that we could do are the basis of our 
acceptance with God— that by his stripes we are healed. 
Another lesson is that no matter how gross or dark our 
condition was before we thus came to the Lord, no matter 



how sinful we had been in ignorance and darkness, the 

merit of the great Atonement Sacrifice covers all these 

blemishes and makes us from the moment it is applied 

absolutely clean, "whiter than snow." We are to remember 

that those sins do not cling to us afterward, that we 

will not be held responsible for them even though some 

weakness of the flesh resulting from sin may be with us 

even until the day of death. The New Creature accepted 

in Christ is counted as being without spot or blemish. 

We are to appreciate this standing granted to us as sons of 

God, and not, like the prodigal, eat the swinish husks nor 

walk carelessly in life, so as to have the robes of our justification 

sullied by contact with the world and the flesh. 

We are, as the Apostle declares, to "keep ourselves unspotted 

from the world." 

R3454 : page 33 1 

Thus appreciating our standing, relationship and favors, 
we are to enter willingly and obediently into all the 
good will of God, seeking to cultivate in ourselves the 
principles of his righteousness— justice and love. The 
assurance is that under these conditions we shall "eat the 
good of the land." To us this would not refer to natural 
good things, but to spiritual good things, for have we not 
exchanged our interest in all earthly things for the heavenly, 
the spiritual? Thus it is fulfilled: the Lord's true followers 
have the best there is so far as heart and mind, peace 
and rest and joy are concerned— the "peace of God which 
passeth all understanding," and a realization that "all 
things are ours, for we are Christ's and Christ is God's." 

If, on the contrary, the spiritual Israelites of today 
refuse to walk in harmony with the Lord's direction and 
rebel against him, they would surely bring upon themselves 
the "destruction," the Second Death which the 
Scriptures indicate as the proper portion of those who, 
after having tasted the good Word of God, the powers of 
the world to come, and have been made partakers of the 
holy Spirit, fall away in unappreciation— unthankfulness. 

We might remark, too, that amongst those who maintain 
their relationship to God as willing and obedient, 
there is a difference: Some are willing and obedient when 
the matter comes to a crisis and they must decide as between 
the Lord and the world, as between the Lord and 
the Adversary. They are loyal to the Lord to the extent 
that they would never oppose him. Such will be overcomers, 
but will constitute the "Great Company" class. 
Others of this class, more zealous, more faithful, more willing 
and more obedient, will be brought off more than 
conquerors and get more than the spiritual new nature. 
Their reward will be the glory, honor and immortality, 
joint-heirship in the Kingdom, as the Bride, the Lamb's 
Wife. 



R3454: page 331 

SPIRITUAL AND ANIMAL INTOXICATION. 

--ISAIAH 28:l-13.-NOVEMBER 27.- 

Golden Text:— "They also have erred through wine, 
and through strong drink are out of the way." 

THIS date has been for years observed throughout 
England as "Temperance Sunday," and the International 
S.S. Lesson Committee of the United 
States has appropriated the date for the conservation of 
temperance interests in the United States also. 

We yield to none in opposition to intoxicating beverages 
and in abhorrence of the terrible results they entail. 
We acknowledge also that the Scriptures everywhere favor 
temperance, and nowhere favor intemperance. We agree 
also that those of humanity who are entrapped by this 
snare are either very weak or very foolish, with the numerous 
evidences all about them showing the bestiality 
which intoxication induces and in general the evils entailed. 
We agree further that no saint should ever be intoxicated, 
and accept the Lord's word that "no drunkard 
shall inherit the Kingdom of God." (I Cor. 6:10.) Nevertheless, 
we find very little in the Scriptures addressed to 
the saints on this subject, and would be surprised if matters 
were otherwise. Why should those who have received 
the spirit of a sound mind, the wisdom that cometh from 
above— why should such require special exhortation not to 
be intoxicated, not to be intemperate? In harmony with 

R3455 : page 332 

our expectation we find the Apostle's exhortation to the 
Church is to be temperate in all things— in eating, in 
drinking, in clothing, in pleasure, in sorrow. "Let your 
moderation be known unto all men," says the Apostle.— 
Phil. 4:5. 

THE DRUNKARDS OF EPHRAIM. 

We are aware that our lesson could be viewed with 
some degree of reason as a temperance lesson— as an exhortation 
against the use of natural intoxicants. We agree 
that the Prophet might possibly have referred to the 
drunkards amongst the people of the ten-tribe kingdom 
known as Ephraim or as Israel, but we do not understand 
that this was the Lord's object in giving the message of 
which our lesson is a part. We believe that he was rather 
giving a lesson to us, his spiritual house of sons of this 
Gospel age. The lesson surely is either a literal statement 
respecting literal intoxication, or a figurative one respecting 
figurative intoxication. If literal, the whole connection 
should bear this out by being similarly literal; if 
figurative, the whole connection should bear it out as 



figurative. 

We cannot think that the drunkards of Ephraim were 
so numerous or so highly esteemed as to be "the crown of 
pride" of that nation, nor that those drunkards lay "at the 
head of every fat valley," nor that the Lord paid so much 
more attention to those drunkards than he does to drunkards 
of our day as that he would make a special demonstration 
against them. On the contrary, we must assume 
that while intemperance may have been one of the faults 
of the people of Israel, pride was another and perhaps a 
greater one. They were intoxicated with pride and self-sufficiency, 
and did not properly appreciate their dependence 
upon the Lord. Hence it was that a few years after 
the date of this prophecy that proud people were carried 
captive by their enemies into Syria. It was the coming 
of this enemy that is figuratively referred to as a tempest 
of hail, a destroying storm, a flood of mighty waters that 
cast down the crown of pride of those people intoxicated 
with self-conceit. 

THE LESSON TO NOMINAL SPIRITUAL ISRAEL. 

In previous studies we noted that, in harmony with 
the Apostle's words, nearly all the Old Testament prophecies 
were written for our admonition upon whom the 
ends of the ages have come, and in many instances those 
who uttered the prophecies and those who heard them 
comprehended them not. (I Pet. 1:12.) The prophecy 
at present under consideration we understand to be of this 
kind— specially applicable to spiritual Israel, though not 
without a meaning to natural Israel at the time of this 
writing. Today we see the Christian world intoxicated, 
bewildered and confused with the wine of false doctrine 
mentioned so explicitly in our Lord's last message to his 
people. There it is clearly set forth that the great mother 
of harlots would make all the nations of Christendom 
drunk with the wine of her fornication. The crown of 
pride and the fat valleys of her possessions are easily seen 
from this standpoint. Churchianity today is intoxicated 
with its material prosperity, its increasing power and dignity 
in the world. It wears a crown of pride and self-sufficiency, 
and in a stupid and maudlin way is blinded to 
its real condition. Thus our Lord pictures nominal Israel 
of the present day as the Laodicean Church, and declares, 
"Thou art wretched, miserable, blind and naked," though 
"thou sayest, I am rich, and increased with goods, and have 
need of nothing." The prosperity of Churchianity is, however, 
like the fading flower— its beauty and fragrance will 
soon pass away; it will soon be swallowed up like a first 
ripe fig. 

But at the same time that the glory passes away from 
the nominal system a proportionately special blessing will 
come to the residue of the Lord's people who are not of 
this class, drunken with the wine of false doctrine, but, as 
the Apostle declares, "Sober, girding up the loins of their 
minds, and pressing along the narrow way for the prize." 



This will mean to this class a spirit of judgment, or what 

the Apostle calls the spirit of a sound mind, enabling them 

to comprehend the divine plan, and enabling them to be 

strong in the defense of the Truth and to "turn the battle 

to the gate;" that is to say, the citadel of Truth will be 

preserved notwithstanding the fall of the masses of Churchianity. 

This is in accord with the prophetic statement, 

"A thousand shall fall at thy side, and ten thousand at thy 

right hand, but it shall not come nigh thee. Only with 

thine eyes shalt thou behold and see the reward of the 

wicked, because thou hast made the Lord, which is my 

refuge, even the Most High, thy habitation."— 

Psalm 91:7-10. 

Where do we find ourselves, dear brethren and sisters, 
as we investigate this picture, so applicable to our day. 
Are we amongst those intoxicated with the spirit of the 
world, the spirit of Babylon, the spirit of Antichrist, the 
spirit of false doctrine, that has "a form of godliness but 
denies its power"? Or are we classed with the Lord and 
more and more being filled with the spirit of a sound 
mind? and are we standing faithful as good soldiers in the 
defense of the Truth and turning the battle at the gateway; 
not suffering that any false doctrine shall intrude 
upon us, but insisting that every doctrine shall be decided 
by the Word of the Lord, and be squared by the Golden 
Rule and by the Scriptural presentations on the subject of 
the Ransom? We trust that the more we examine ourselves 
the more we can assure ourselves that we are with 
the latter class. 

Verse 7 seemingly pictures these drunkards of Ephraim 
as the leaders of the people, their priests and prophets, 
their religious instructors, who have all been misled 
through the strong drink, the false doctrine of the dark 
ages, and who are all erring in vision and stumbling in 
their judgment respecting the Truth, the Divine Plan. 

TABLES FULL OF VOMIT. 

The statement in verse 8 that all their tables are full 
of vomit and filthiness so that there is no place clean could 

R3455 : page 333 

hardly be understood to apply literally to the millions of 
Israelites of Isaiah's day, but it does apply spiritually to the 
millions of nominal Israel of our day. We need scarcely 
say that the table of the Lord's people signifies their spiritual 
supply of food, nourishment; and as we look about 
us we find in Churchianity many such tables, one to each 
denomination— its creed. The creed of each denomination 
represents what it claims God has set before it as the 
truth for its spiritual nourishment and refreshment; and 
for centuries each denomination has been busily inviting 
each other and the world to come to its table. Now, 
however, these tables are measurably deserted. Very few 
want to talk about the doctrine or creed of their sect; they 



generally prefer to ignore creeds. 

Why? Because creeds are nauseating; they are spread 
with doctrines which the preachers and laity have rejected 
—"vomit"; they are full of filthiness; there is no place 
clean, as the Prophet describes. Not a solitary creed in 
Christendom will stand examination in the light of common 
sense; not a preacher in any "orthodox denomination" 
—that is, in any denomination that is recognized by 
the Evangelical Alliance— would be willing to discuss the 
church creed which he accepted and outwardly professes 
and vowed to teach. 

On the contrary, how is it with the remnant mentioned 
in verses 5 and 6? Have they any table? Yes, 
indeed! They have a table spread with divine bounties, 
and it is referred to prophetically in the 23d Psalm, "My 
table thou hast furnished in the presence of mine enemies." 
Having gotten free from the wine of the false doctrine of 
Babylon, these have sought the Truth of the Divine Word 
unadulterated, and have drawn nigh unto the Lord with 
their hearts and not with their lips merely; they have gotten 
mercy and found grace to help in time of great need. 
The Lord has bountifully supplied their wants with truths 
both new and old, and thus he fulfilled the promise he 
made when leaving us, saying to those servants who would 
be ready to hear the knock, indicating his "presence" at 
his second coming, that he would open the door, enter in 
and sup with them. Furthermore, he promised that he 
would gird himself and become our servant, and bring forth 
to his faithful ones things new and old from the larder, 
from the treasure house of truth and grace. We found it 
so! We have a table spread with the most wonderful 
bounties, "riches of grace, mercy and truth." 

Taking up the matter from a little different standpoint, 
verse 9 throws out a suggestive inquiry in full harmony 
with the foregoing,— "Whom shall he teach knowledge? 
and whom shall he make to understand [pure] doctrine?" 
Here is the key for the foregoing. The difficulty with 
Churchianity is a superabundance of mysticism, ignorance 
and superstition and a dearth of knowledge— "My people 
perish for lack of knowledge." The question is asked in 
order to suggest something in connection with the answer, 
as though the question were, Why does not the Lord instruct 
those who are drunken with ignorance and error? 
Why does he not teach them the Truth? 

The answer is that those who will be ready for the 
pure doctrine must first be weaned from the milk and 
drawn from the breasts. So long as the Lord's people are 
babes to the extent that is here indicated, they will be dependent 
upon the systems and sects and false doctrines 
with which the Adversary has so much to do in developing. 
Those who are the Lord's true people in these various 
sects must get strong enough to be weaned from them before 
they can be in the proper attitude of mind to receive 
the Lord's instructions from another quarter. To all who 
are thus weaned from Churchianity the Lord will very graciously 
grant precept upon precept, line upon line, here a 



little, and there a little, that they may grow thereby, that 
they may become strong in the Lord and able to partake 
eventually of the strong meat which he so abundantly supplies 
to those of His table— His Word. 

R3456 : page 333 

WITH STAMMERING LIPS. 

Verse 1 1 tells of the stammering lips with which the 
message is being told, little by little, line upon line. Is 
it not so? Those who are proclaiming Present Truth by 
the printed page and orally are for the most part quite 
unqualified for the work from the standpoint of the world. 
Just as in the Jewish harvest the Lord's people were mostly 
from common people as now— not many great, not many 
wise, not many learned has God chosen, but chiefly the 
poor of this world,— but rich in faith and heirs of the 
Kingdom. 

Through these stammering lips of the Lord's consecrated 
humble ones a proclamation is made throughout 
Christianity, saying, "This is the rest wherewith you may 
rest, and this is the refreshing." There is no doubt at 
all that this brief description of the harvest message is very 
appropriate to the divine plan of the ages. It is indeed 
to those who can receive it a message of rest and refreshment, 
but, as the Prophet pointed out, the majority will 
not hear. Nevertheless, the message of the Lord is to be 
sent forth, line upon line, precept upon precept, tract 
upon tract, here a little and there a little, that every 
true child of God may be reached and be gathered out of 
Babylon. "Come out of her, my people, that ye be not 
partakers of her sins, and receive not of her plagues." 

The Prophet points out that the result will be that 
the nominal system will go and fall backward, and be broken, 
and snared, and taken. We see that this is already 
approaching. Higher Criticism and Evolutionism is undermining 
the faith of the great body of Christendom; 
unbelief is ensnaring them, and their fall backward is near 
at hand. How appropriate it is that those who have the 
privilege of being the Lord's mouth-pieces now shall cry 
aloud, not with the view of awakening or converting, or 
reforming Churchianity as a whole, but to arouse the few 
—all amongst them who are the Lord's true sheep. 

R3456 : page 334 

It will be remembered that the Apostle quoted the 
last verse of our lesson and applied it also in the end of 
the Jewish age— pointing out that because of unbelief the 
nation of Israel stumbled and fell from divine favor. We 
have already seen on previous occasions the parallel between 
the Jewish and Gospel dispensations, and are therefore 
to expect in nominal spiritual Israel something to 
correspond to the stumbling and falling which took place 
in nominal natural Israel in the end of their age. 



Who shall be able to stand? Let us abide under the 
shadow of the Almighty, and stand firmly for the righteousness 
of Christ, the standard that the Lord has set up; 
and let us put on the whole armor of God, and having 
done all, stand. 



R3456 : page 334 

INTERESTING QUESTIONS ANSWERED. 
JUSTIFIED OR CONDEMNED 



Question.— If lasting life is the portion of all when 
awakened, are they justified? If not justified, are 
they still under condemnation? If neither justified 
nor condemned, what is their condition? 

Answer.— The condition of the world on trial during 
the Millennial age will be neither one of justification 
nor of condemnation. The "curse" of the whole 
world under divine condemnation, or sentence to death 
on account of Adam's sin, will cease thoroughly and 
completely with the close of this Gospel age, with the 
close of the antitypical Day of Atonement. But if, 
when awakened, all past sins were fully and freely 
forgiven, and the world were on trial before the bar 
of the Heavenly Father, they would be subject to instant 
condemnation as unworthy, unfit to live, because 
the divine law is that only that which is perfect 
shall live. Hence God has provided the mediatorial 
Kingdom of Christ to deal with the poor world in its 
wretched and undone condition, after the divine sentence 
against mankind has ceased, has been cancelled, 
has been revoked. The revoking of the sentence of 
death effects no restitution— the two things are entirely 
separate and distinct. 

Take an illustration: Suppose a man, justly condemned 
to death for murder, had already served 
twenty years of imprisonment, and in that time he 
had become bald, lost half his teeth and to some extent 
his eyesight. Suppose that in some manner the 
cancellation of the sentence against him was accomplished 
and that he was set free, would the cancellation 
of the balance of the sentence restore to the man 
his teeth or his hair or his eyesight or anything else? 
Surely not. But if a kind friend had in some manner 
effected a settlement of his sentence, we may be sure 
the same friend would be glad upon his release to assist 
him in any manner in his power— to make good 
so far as possible his loss. He could procure for him 
glasses that would aid his sight, false teeth and a wig, 
and that would come as near as the friend could go to 
doing that which the Lord Jesus proposes to do for 



the human family by restitution processes. 

The Millennial Kingdom will have full charge of 
the human family. He who bought the race with his 
own precious blood, he who effected a cancellation of 
the sentence, is to be granted a thousand years to 
effect the restitution of so many of those whom he 
bought as choose to come back into harmony with 
God and his laws. 

We have seen they will not be in a condemned 
condition, because their sins will be forgiven. For 
the same reason they will not be justified by faith, because 
it is better to be forgiven than to be merely 
"covered," or reckoned forgiven. Their condition 
and relationship to Christ under the New Covenant 
provisions of mercy will be all that could be desired for 
them. A little confusion is apt to prevail in our minds 
for a time on this subject of justification. Realizing 
how important is our justification, how indispensable 
to our relationship to the Father and our joint-heirship 
with Christ, we are now inclined to feel that a similar 
justification process would be necessary for the 
world by and by. But not so. If the world were to be 
on judgment before the Father they would need justification, 
that is, a reckoned imputation of righteousness, 
a covering with Christ's merit, etc.; but they are not 
to stand before the judgment seat of the Father until 
the close of the Millennial age. They are to be on 
judgment and trial before Christ, not as sons of Adam, 
under his condemnation, etc., but as individuals, taken 
just for what they are, judged according to their several 
abilities for obedience. At the close of the Millennial 
age, when Christ's Kingdom shall be delivered 
up to God, even the Father (1 Cor. 15:24), these will 
not need justification by faith in order to stand before 
him, because during the Millennial age they will have 
been tried according to their works, and only those 
justified by works will have any standing before the 
Father; and they, being perfect, will need no covering 
for imperfections, but be in just such a condition 
as the Father could approve and declare worthy of 
continued lasting life. 

WHAT IS REPENTANCE? 



Question.— How would you define repentance 
from the Scriptural standpoint? 

Answer.— Webster's definition merely gives the 
views of mankind in general on this subject. We are 

R3456 : page 335 

not to choose which we prefer, but are to choose the 
definition which the Scriptures substantiate; namely 
this, "Godly sorrow worketh repentance." People 



may be sorry, without being repentant, in matters in 
which they have failed where they had wished to succeed. 
This is not a godly sorrow, but merely a sorrow 
of disappointment and regret; just as the thief who 
attempted to steal and was caught was, of course, 
sorry that he was caught. The godly sorrow is that 
which is sorrow for the sin rather than for the penalty, 
and sorrow for the sin produces repentance and 
reformation of character— the only kind recognized in 
the Scriptures. 

Let us not be misunderstood in this matter. Sorrow 
for sin does not necessarily mean a certain amount 
of tears and agony: it does mean a contrition of 
the heart, a regretful heart on account of sin, with 
a full determination to do to the contrary. We mention 
this, because some of our Methodist friends hold 
that unless there be manifestations of agony there has 
been no true repentance. To this we cannot assent. 
The sorrow or regret respecting the past is manifested 
by a radical change of life. 

We are not competent to pass upon the case of 
Cain, to determine whether or not he had a proper 
repentance or merely a fear of punishment. "Judge 
nothing before the time." Cain's own particular sentiments 
would have nothing to do with the fact that 
in a general way he represented the world, with its 
evil spirit, while Abel represented Christ and the 
Church, with the sacrificing spirit. Assuredly, if we 
abhor evil and grieve upon doing that which is wrong, 
and cleave to that which is good, it must be because 
we have learned "the exceeding sinfulness of sin." 
This implies regret for any measure of wilfulness in 
any sins we may have committed. 

In re justification; we believe that quite a good 
many Christians were born in a justified condition, 
and that the sentiments of their hearts always were 
for righteousness, and that therefore they cannot accuse 
themselves of having sinned wilfully, nor feel 
such great contrition as those who have been living 
in sin— in alienation from God. Nor should they. 
They are already the Lord's, and for them to be converted 
(turned round) would mean to turn away from 
the Lord. The Editor is one of this class. 

R3457 : page 335 

SITTING WITH ABRAHAM, ISAAC AND JACOB IN THE 
KINGDOM. 



Question.— Who are meant when it is said, "Many 
shall come from the east and from the west and shall 
sit down with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob in the Kingdom 
of heaven" ?-Matt. 8:11. 

Answer.— As already pointed out in the DAWN 



series, the Gospel Church only will constitute the 

Kingdom in its highest and strictest sense; but Abraham, 

Isaac and Jacob and all the ancient worthies 

will be the chief ministers of that Kingdom in the 

world of mankind, and all mankind will be invited to 

come into harmony with the spiritual Kingdom, that 

God's will may be done in this, as an earthly class, 

as it is done in the heavenly class. In this sense of 

the word, all who shall accept of the terms and conditions 

of the Kingdom will sit down, or be at rest and 

at peace with God, with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob 

and all the faithful of the earthly class. Thus it will 

be seen that the Lord is pointing to a large class of 

the world of mankind who will ultimately become citizens 

of the earthly phase of the Kingdom. This 

same thought is represented in Revelation, where it is 

intimated that all the worthy will enter into the city 

—the Kingdom— while without will be all the unworthy, 

who love and serve sin, subjects of the Second 

Death. 

"CHILDREN OF DISOBEDIENCE" 



Question.— Who are the "children of disobedience" 
ofEph. 2:2? 

Answer.— Since father Adam was created in God's 
likeness, and is designated a son of God, it follows 
that all of his children, had they remained in harmony 
with God, would have been sons of God,— earthly 
sons. But since Adam became disobedient, and all of 
his children shared in his fall, all of the race of Adam 
are children of disobedience, children under punishment, 
under wrath, except those who have "escaped 
the condemnation that is upon the world," by acceptance 
of the divine provision of favor and return to 
harmony with their Creator. Those who return to 
harmony with God through the appointed way become 
children of obedience; those who do not, even 
though they have not yet had the full opportunity 
which God designs they ultimately shall have to discern 
good from evil, and though they may choose the 
good, are, nevertheless, even now denominated "children 
of disobedience" and "children of wrath." 

DEAD TO THE LAW BY THE BODY OF CHRIST 



Question.— In Romans 7:4 we read: "Ye also 
are become dead to the Law by the body of Christ that 
ye should be married to another, even to him who is 
raised from the dead." What body is meant— the 
body of Jesus' flesh or "the Church his body"? 

Answer.— It refers to the flesh of Jesus, whose 



death cancelled all claims of the Law against a believing 
Jew— made free to become united to the risen 
Christ (the Lord of Glory) as new creatures, as his 
Bride. 



page 337 

SEMI-MONTHLY 
VOL. XXV. NOVEMBER 15, 1904. No. 22. 



CONTENTS 

"Baptist" Views Changing 339 

Old and New Views of Sin 339 

The Atonement 340 

Restricted Communion 341 

Further Corroboration of our 

Chronology 342 

"Like Unto the Angels" 344 

Did the Ransom Secure Full 

Resurrection? 345 

Shall We Know Each Other? 346 

"Them That Honor Me I Will 

Honor" 347 

The Captivity of Ephraim 349 

page 338 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-24 EVERSHOLT ST., LONDON, N.W. 
GERMAN BRANCH-MIRKER STR., 45, ELBERFELD. 
AUSTRALIAN BRANCH-32 JOHNSTON ST., FITZROY, MELBOURNE. 

PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE, 5c (2-l/2d.) A COPY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity 
or adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER, will be supplied FREE, if 
they send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting 
the paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our 
list continually. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE 



THIS JOURNAL IS PUBLISHED IN THE 

FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, DANISH AND ITALIAN LANGUAGES. 

SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



HOME EMBELLISHMENTS CHEAP. 

We remind the friends that we have laid in a large stock 
of Scriptural Motto Cards. These are our own importation 
and are supplied at about one-half what they usually 
sell for. Our assortment is very large and if you have already 
had some and wish to have all new patterns, please 
say so. We put them up in $1.00 packages, of which we 
have five different assortments,— only about one of the 
five containing some old patterns— all good. 

For those who cannot afford $1.00 we have put up 50c 
and 25c packages of the smaller and cheaper styles. These 
prices include postage. 

On these Mottoes, as on Bibles and Bible study helps, 
we aim to make no profit— merely to cover cost and 
labor. 



INSTEAD OF FOREIGN TRACTS, hereafter use Foreign 
TOWERS. Orders all the sample copies you can use judiciously, 
FREE. 



R3457 : page 339 

"BAPTIST" VIEWS CHANGING. 

TESTIMONY OF AUGUSTUS H. STRONG, D.D., LL.D. 

DOCTOR STRONG is an authority among Baptists, 

the President of their principal theological 

seminary located at Rochester, N.Y. 

His public discourse, delivered at the "General Denominational 

Meeting" held in Cleveland, Ohio, last May, 

had the approval of that assembly as indicated by its 

"request" that the sermon be printed for general use. 

The changes of doctrinal views to which he calls attention 

may therefore be regarded by the public as 

endorsed by Baptists in general. 

We are by no means opposed to changes of views, 
believing heartily in the old worldly adage, "A wise 
man changes sometimes, but a fool never." We were 
glad when our Presbyterian brethren displaced their 
old creed with a new one, but sorry they prevaricated 
on the subject by telling the world that they still retain 
the old creed— merely made a new statement 



of it. 

Of course we agree with much that Dr. Strong 
has to say. Like other men of talent, he is able to 
state some matters in such terms that even his enemies 
and doctrinal opponents could not wholly dissent, 
and to so gloss other matters with sophistry as 
to mislead the uncritical and confiding of his hearers 
—whether educated or illiterate. We regret to note 
that such tendencies— called "diplomacy" in politics, 
"shrewdness" in business circles, and "falsehood" in 
common parlance— are more and more creeping over 
all prominent theologians. Their excuse, we presume, 
would be "necessity." 

Christendom is admittedly in a time of creedal 
upheaval and transformation, and quiet deception of 
the "old fogies" is considered a virtue, preventing a 
serious commotion. The hope is that the rising generation 
will by these deceptive phrases be kept in line 
until the "old fogies" are all dead, and then it can be 
pointed out that "our denomination changed its views 
slightly in your fathers' days and without their protest, 
and hence with their indorsement," and thus the 
most radical changes would pass unchallenged by the 
masses. 

All this is a great mistake— a seriously wrong 
course, even though pursued with good intentions. It 
amounts to— "Let us do evil that good may follow: 
let us continue to dishonor God and practise double-dealing 
on our too-confiding flocks, that our denominations 
may maintain their standing, numbers and 
influence, and that we may preserve our dignity, honor 
of men and light and remunerative employment." 

But let us examine these Baptist changes and note 
whether or not they mark advances or retrogressions, 
as viewed from the Biblical standpoint. We begin 
with their— 

"OLD AND NEW VIEWS OF SIN." 

"But our fathers did not see, as we do, that man's 
relation to Christ antedated the Fall and constituted 
an underlying and modifying condition of man's life. 
Humanity was naturally in Christ, in whom all things 
were created and in whom they all consist. Even 
man's sin did not prevent Christ from still working 
in him to counteract the evil and to suggest the good. 
There was an internal, as well as an external, preparation 
for man's redemption. In this sense, of a divine 
principle in man striving against the selfish and 
godless will, there was a total redemption, over against 
man's total depravity; and an original grace, that 
was even more powerful than original sin. 

"The great Baptist body has become conscious 
that total depravity alone is not a sufficient or proper 
expression of the truth; and the phrase has been outgrown. 
It has been felt that the old view of sin did 



not take account of the generous and noble aspirations, 
the unselfish efforts, the strivings after God, of 
even unregenerate men. For this reason there has 
been less preaching about sin, and less conviction as 

R3457 : page 340 

to its guilt and condemnation. The good impulses of 

men outside the Christian pale have been often credited 

to human nature, when they should have been 

credited to the indwelling spirit of Christ. I make no 

doubt that one of the radical weaknesses of our denomination 

at this present time is its more superficial 

view of sin." 

Here we find a new error introduced as an antidote 
for an old one. There is not one word in the 
Bible about "total depravity." Baptists, Congregationalists 
and Presbyterians got this phrase and conception 
from Calvin. It is an absurdity on its face. 
The proper, Scriptural thought is this, Man is so depraved 
as to be totally unable to recover himself, so as to 
regain perfection and divine fellowship. This is the 
Scriptural proposition— substantiated by all the New 
Testament writings. 

Why are all the creeds which contain this "total 
depravity" feature gaining in disrepute? Because it 
fixes matters for the heathen and infants— negativing 
the idea that these could pass into heaven acceptable 
to God without faith and regeneration. All along, 
these qualities of faith and regeneration in the parent 
have been counted as sufficing for his children dying 
in infancy; but, with the eternal torment idea still latent, 
modern thinkers with any heart repudiate the 
thought that all but regenerated believers and their 
children, the great mass of humanity, are rushing into 
such an awful eternity at the rate of over 80,000 every 
twenty -four hours. 

But note the new error, that it is worse than the 
former in that it is more subtle,— sophistry less likely 
to be detected by the average mind. Think of it! 
"Humanity was naturally in Christ!" Either the 
learned gentleman is sadly confused on the subject or 
else he is trying his best to confuse others. If the 
gentleman meant to say that divine grace planned a 
universal redemption before the fall occurred and that 
in due time and in some manner all the race will get a 
share of that blessed provision, he would be in full accord 
with us respecting the Scripture teaching. If he 
meant this we assume that he would have said it. 

We deny that "humanity was naturally in Christ." 
When Adam was perfect he needed not to be in Christ, 
for being sinless and in the divine image he had relationship 
with his Creator without a mediator. It was 
sin and its sentence that made necessary a Mediator 
and his work of (1) atonement for our sins, and (2) the 



R3458 : page 340 

deliverance of the willing and obedient from the penalty 
of sin, death. 

Has Dr. Strong forgotten the words of the Apostle, 
pointing to the work of the cross as a previous 
essential to the return of sinners to God? Hearken— 
"When we were enemies we were reconciled to God 
by the death of his Son." (Rom. 5:10.) "The 
friendship of the world is enmity against God." (Jas. 4:4.) 
"The world by wisdom knows not God." (I Cor. 1:21.) 
"Holy Father, the world hath not known 
thee, but I have known thee." (John 17:25.) "The 
whole world lieth in the wicked one." (I John 5:19.) 
"Ye are of your father the devil, for his works ye do." 
(John 8:44.) "Ye are children of wrath even as others." 
(Eph. 2:3.) "Condemnation passed upon all 
because all are sinners." (Rom. 5:12.) Ye were 
"without God and having no hope in the world." 
(Eph. 2:12.) "If any man be in Christ he is a new 
creature; old things are passed away and all things 
are become new." (2 Cor. 5:17.) Does Dr. Strong 
think that all Baptists are so unfamiliar with their 
Bibles that they will fail to remember these and scores 
of other pointed statements to the same effect? Or 
does he think that, remembering these, the Baptist 
people will take his declarations as more inspired than 
those of our Lord and his apostles? We are in doubt 
—which? 

Mark the Apostle's argument respecting Christ's 
relationship to the world and the universe. So far 
from intimating that the world is already in Christ, 
the Apostle declares that, "In the dispensation of the 
fullness of times [the Millennium]" God will "gather 
together in one all things in Christ."— Eph. 1:10. 

Let us next note the new Baptist views on "The 
Atonement." Dr. Strong says:— 

"THE ATONEMENT. 

"We must acknowledge also that our conceptions 
of Christ's atonement have suffered some change. 
Yet that change has been in the nature of a more fundamental 
understanding of the meaning of atonement, 
and its necessity as a law of universal life. To our 
fathers the atonement was a mere historical fact, a 
sacrifice offered in a few brief hours on the cross. It 
was a literal substitution of Christ's suffering for ours, 
the payment of our debt by another, and upon the 
ground of that payment we are permitted to go free. 
Those sufferings were soon over, and the hymn, 
"Love's Redeeming Work is Done," expresses the 
believer's joy in a finished redemption. And all this 
is true. But it is only a part of the truth. 

"The atonement, like every other doctrine of Christianity, 
is a fact of life; and such facts of life cannot be 



crowded into our definitions, because they are greater 
than any definitions we can frame. The atonement 
is a substitution, in that another has done for us what 
we ought to have done but could not do, and has suffered 
for us what we deserved to suffer but could not 
suffer without loss of holiness and happiness forever 
and ever. But Christ's doing and suffering is not that 
of one external and foreign to us. He is bone of our 
bone and flesh of our flesh; the bearer of our humanity; 
yes, the very life of the race. The life that he 
lived in Palestine and the death that he endured on 
Calvary were the revelation of a union with mankind 
which antedated the Fall. Being thus joined to us from 
the beginning, he has suffered in all human sin; in all 
our affliction he has been afflicted; so that the Psalmist 
can say: 'Blessed be God, who daily beareth our 

R3458 : page 341 

burden, even the God of our salvation.' So we add 
to the idea of SUBSTITUTION the idea of SHARING; and 
see in the cross, not so much the atonement itself, as the 
revelation of the atonement. 

"The sufferings of Christ take deeper hold upon 
us when we see in them the expression of the two 
great truths: that holiness must make penalty to follow 
sin; and that love must share that penalty with 
the transgressor." 



We cannot escape the conviction that the author 
of the above words did not want his hearers to understand 
his meaning;— that he desired to repeat the 
words atonement and substitution so as to give the impression 
that he still held the thoughts covered by 
those words, but that he now had more, along the same 
lines. The contrary is, we feel sure, the truth. This 
D.D., like all under the influence of "higher criticism" 
and Evolution theories, has lost faith in the 
Bible narrative of a primary sinless condition in Eden, 
when our first parents were in God's likeness, from 
which they fell into sin and its death penalty, from 
which they were redeemed by the precious blood of 
Christ as man's substitute, effecting an atonement before 
God for original sin. 

The gentleman seems to twist the plain word 
atonement, and as though he would have us understand 
that God and his creatures have always been 
at-one or in harmony, and that man did not know this 
and improperly supposed himself under a "curse" 
and needing a Redeemer. This view seems to be 
that the cross of Christ was not necessary to secure 
divine favor, but was expedient as a showing to man 
that God always had loved him, that God never had 
"cursed" or "sentenced" him and cast him off from 



divine favor. This is the new view common amongst 
clergymen of every school and denomination— the 
no-ransom view, which denies that the Lord bought us. 
-2 Pet. 2:1; I Cor. 7:23. 

The italics of above quotation are ours; note 
them. The arguments are cunningly framed and deceptive. 
The Doctor does not come out courageously 
and say, Our new theories entirely ignore and cast 
aside the doctrine of atonement for sinners by a ransom-substitute, 
and offers you instead the thought 
that our race never was perfect, hence never did fall 
from perfection and divine favor, hence never did sin 
any more than God expected they should, hence needed 
no redemption from sin and no release from a special 
sin-penalty, because there is none; and the story 
of Genesis about a fall and a sentence, and all the reiterations 
of the Lord and the apostles along the same 
lines are mere fudge, as all we learned "higher critics" 
have recently discovered. 

Instead of thus telling the people plainly, the reverse 
policy, as usual, seems to be pursued— the policy 
of confusing the people by complex statements. 
Yet it may be that Doctor Strong is confused and is 
merely doing his best. The following statement from 
his sermon gives us a gleam of hope, though it leaves 
the presentation as a whole the more obscure. He 
says:— 

"The moral influence of the atonement has taken 
deep hold upon our minds, and we are in danger of 
forgetting that it is the holiness of God, and not the 
salvation of men, that primarily requires it. When 
sharing excludes substitution, when reconciliation of 
man to God excludes reconciliation of God to man, 
when the only peace secured is peace in the sinner's 
heart and no thought is given to that peace with God 
which it is the first object of the atonement to secure, 
then our whole evangelical system is weakened, God's 
righteousness is ignored, and man is practically put in 
place of God." 

RESTRICTED COMMUNION OF BAPTISTS 

On this topic Dr. Strong said:— 

"If I am asked whether Baptists still hold to restricted 
communion, I answer that our principle has 
not changed, but that many of us apply the principle 
in a different manner from that of our fathers. We 
believe that baptism logically precedes the Lord's 
Supper, as birth precedes the taking of nourishment, 
and regeneration precedes sanctification. We believe 
that the order of the ordinances is an important point 
of Christian doctrine, and itself teaches Christian doctrine. 
Hence we proclaim it and adhere to it, in our 
preaching and in our practice. But we do not turn 
the Lord's Supper into a judgment-seat, or turn the 
officers of the church into detectives. We teach the 



truth and expect that the truth will win its way. We 
are courteous to all who come among us, and expect 
that they in turn will have the courtesy to respect our 
convictions and to set accordingly. But there is danger 
here that we may break from our moorings and 
drift into indifferentism with regard to the ordinances. 
The recent advocacy of open church membership is 
but the logical consequence of a previous concession 
of open communion. But I am persuaded that this 
new doctrine is confined to a very few among us. 
"There is but one army of the living God, even 
though there are many divisions. We can emphasize 
our unity with other Christian bodies, rather than the 
differences between us. We can regard them as 
churches of the Lord Jesus, even though they are 
irregularly constituted." 



Here we see well-meant confusion. The Baptist 
contention of the past is either right or wrong. Their 
standpoint in years past was the Scriptural one that 
there is but one body of Christ— one Church, of many 
members, in many places. Now Dr. Strong tells of 
"other Christian bodies." Are there other heads to 
those other "bodies"? The Apostle wrote of "one 
body," the Church, and one "head," the Lord. (Rom. 12:5.) 
Have matters changed since that inspired record 
was given us? We think not. Each head and 
each body must claim to be the Christ; but as there 

R3458 : page 341 

is but one, the claims must be false and the claimants 
must be deluding themselves. 

Evidently Baptists are drifting farther and farther 
into sectarianism— and that to their injury, 
though they are disposed to glory in it. The Scriptures 
denounce Papacy as a false "body" under a false 
"head"— as being Antichrist or a counterfeit of the 
true Head and his body, the true Church. Baptists 
once saw this point distinctly. Why can they not see, 
too, that every system or body except one must be 
spurious, must be an imitation of that one? And that 
the head of every such system, whether Pope or Presbytery 
or Conference or Ministerial Union, is a false 

R3459 : page 342 

head over a false or spurious body, and constitutes 
one of the many antichrists or false Christs which our 
Lord's great prophecy predicted for the harvest of this 
Gospel age.-Matt. 24:24. 

The difficulty with our Baptist brethren on this 
subject is their error in confounding water baptism 
with the real baptism, and the Church whose names 



are written on earth with the true Church, "whose 
names are written in heaven"— Heb. 12:23; DAWN 
Vol. VI., chap. 10. 

BAPTISTS AND THE COMING OF CHRIST. 

On this subject Dr. Strong's remarks call for our 
hearty endorsement. He says:— 

"The faith in a second coming of Christ has lost 
its hold upon many Baptists in our day. But it still 
serves to stimulate and admonish the great body, and 
we can never dispense with its solemn and mighty influence. 
Christ comes, it is true, in Pentecostal revivals 
and in destructions of Jerusalem, in Reformation 
movements and in political upheavals. But these 
are only precursors of another and literal and final 
return of Christ, to punish the wicked and complete 
the salvation of his people. That day for which all 
other days are made will be a joyful day for those who 
have fought a good fight and have kept the faith. 
Let us look for and hasten the coming of the day of 
God. The Jacobites of Scotland never ceased their 
labors and sacrifices for their king's return. Their 
passionate devotion to his cause led hundreds of them 
to exile and to death. They never tasted wine without 
pledging their absent prince; they never joined 
in song without renewing their oaths of allegiance. 
In many a prison cell and on many a battle field they 
rang out the strain: 

'"Follow thee, follow thee, wha wadna follow thee? 

Lang hast thou lo'ed and trusted us fairly: 
Chairlie, Chairlie, wha wadna follow thee? 

King o' the Highland hearts, bonnie Prince Chairlie!' 

"So they sang, so they invited him, until at last 
he came. But that longing for the day when Charles 
should come to his own again was faint and weak 
compared with the longing of true Christian hearts 
for the coming of their King. Charles came, only to 
suffer defeat, and to bring shame to his country. But 
Christ will come, to put an end to the world's long 
sorrow, to give triumph to the cause of truth, to bestow 
everlasting reward upon the faithful. 

'"Even so, Lord Jesus, come! 
Hope of all our hopes the sum, 
Take thy waiting people home! 

"Long, so long, the groaning earth, 
Cursed with war and flood and dearth, 
Sighs for its redemption-birth. 

"Therefore come, we daily pray, 
Bring the resurrection-day, 
Wipe creation's curse away!'" 



R3459 : page 342 

FURTHER CONFIRMATION OF OUR CHRONOLOGY. 

WHENEVER any point of Present Truth has 

been attacked the result seems to be to bring 

out its greater strength and beauty. This 

has happened again, in the matter of the recent questioning 

of the correctness of the Chronology presented 

in MILLENNIAL DAWN, Vol. II., referred to in our 

October 1st issue, page 296. 

The diagrams presented herewith and the explanations 
attached are from three different brethren- 
two in Glasgow and one in London. Each has peculiarities 
of its own, yet all show parallels additional to 
those presented in DAWN, Vol. II., and all serve the 
one purpose of confirming the Chronology presented 
in that volume, as the only possible and consistent 
Bible Chronology, on which alone all the various lines 
of prophecy are harmonizable. As stated in DAWN, 
Vol. II., the Bible Chronology presents a sufficiency 
of difficulties to require faith that God meant to give us 
a time measurement. 

The lesson of the accompanying diagrams is that 
no such parallels would be possible were a single one 
of our prominent dates altered. For instance, the two 
years' difference between the end of the 6,000 years, 
1872 A.D. and the beginning of the antitypical Jubilee 
period, 1874 A.D., which in DAWN II. we explained 
as implying that Adam was about two years sinless in 
Eden, these diagrams 
show as necessary to 
fill out the measurements. 
Our date for 
the beginning of A.D., 
and the events connected 
with our Lord's 
birth and death, are 

R3460 : page 343 

confirmed by these parallels, too. These are one 
year and three months different from the Bishop 
Usher dates of our common version Bible, and two 
years and nine months different from the revised 
dates of today's scholarship. This is accomplished by 
the marking of the year A.D. 36 as the end of the "70 
weeks" of Israel's favor and the date when the Gospel 
reached Cornelius. 



DIAGRAM NO. 1 shows that the period from the 



time of the Fall to A.D. 36, 

4162 years, was marked 

exactly at its center by the 

Oath bound Covenant made 

to Abraham, "In thee and 

in thy seed shall all the families 

of the earth be blessed." 

This not only corroborates 

the correctness of 

our placing of the birth of 

our Lord, but also the correctness 

of all the chronology 

leading up to that date: 

for it seems incredible almost 

that such an even division 

could happen by accident. DIAGRAM No. 2 is another 

illustration of the same lesson. See also DAWN, VOL. II. 

MATHEMATICAL DEMONSTRATION. 

(SEE DAWN, VOL. II., PP. 42-54.) 

Creation to the Flood 1656 years 

Patriarchal Age (i.e., Flood to Death of } 427 " 

Jacob) } 232 " 

Jewish Age to End of Favor, A.D. 36 1849 " 

4164 " 
Less "Innocent Years" 2 " 

4162 " 

The middle of the period, viz., one-half 2081 " 

I. PERIOD. 

Creation to the Flood 1656 years 

Flood to Covenant 427 " 

Creation to Covenant 2083 " 

Less years of innocence 2 " 

2081 " 

II. PERIOD. 

From Abraham to the Law 430 years 

Israel in the Wilderness 40 " 

To the division of Canaan 6 " 

Period of the Judges 450 " 

" " Kings 513 " 

" " Desolation 70 " 

" thence to A.D. 1 536 " 

" " " 36 36 " 

2081 " 



DIAGRAM NO. 3.— This diagram presupposes 
that in the divine plan the day of Adam (Gen. 2: 17) 
and the "day of Christ" were 
each one thousand years long: 
as the Apostle declares, "a 
day with the Lord is a thousand 
years." Adam's "fall" 
into death was fully accomplished 
seventy years before 
the end of his "day," and 
presumably Christ will accomplish 
the full lifting up of 
Adam and his race (or all of 

them willing to obey the righteous conditions necessary) 
before the end of the millennial day. 

This diagram views the Millennium as beginning 
with the end of "Gentile Times," October, 1914, and 
shows that the intervening space, 5040 years, is exactly 
twice "seven times;" and more than this, it marks the 
turning point as B.C. 606, as well as the ending point 
A.D. 1914. Does it not appear that the Lord so arranged 
this matter, and that he has now brought it 
to our attention, to be distributed to the household of 
faith for their comfort and encouragement at an opportune 
time? It surely does. It will be observed also 
that all of these calculations include the same two 
years of Edenic purity. The "fall" is kept prominent: 
everything measures from it. Compare DAWN, 
Vol. II., chap. 4. 

DIAGRAM No. 4 in some particulars resembles No. 

R3460 : page 344 

3, yet it is quite different as a whole. It views matters 

from another Scriptural standpoint, taking A.D. 

1 874 for the date of the Millennium, as shown by the 

Jubilee cycles and various 

other prophecies.— See DAWN, 

Vol. II., chap. 6, and Vol. III., 

chap. 5. 

Our readers are already 
familiar with the presentations 
of this from its middle 
at 625 B.C. to the right extremity. 
(DAWN II., p. 185, 
186.) The new features are 
at the left of the center: not new in the sense of 
contradicting or altering anything already seen, but 
new in the sense of bringing to our attention great 
harmonies of the divine plan not before observed, 
and which fully corroborate our previous findings. 

The last line on the figure is interesting, too, 
showing the division of the whole period of 7,000 
years in its center at 625 B.C., the date of the last typical 
jubilee ever observed by Israel— just nineteen 
years before the "seventy years' desolation" of the 



land, since which they have had no opportunity to 
observe the jubilee, even had they desired to do so, 
since their land has always been under the suzerain 
control of alien governments. How grand the thought 
that the Grand Antitypical Cycle did not fail— that 
it counted until its fulfilment in A.D. 1874, and that 
there the real Jubilee of jubilees actually began— that 
the Lord's people are even now blowing the Jubilee 
Trumpets, announcing the "time is at hand" and the 
change of possession is due October, 1914. Do not 
these dove-tailing figures prove (as nearly as faith 
could expect proof) that we are right respecting the 
chronology on which these matters are based— this 
one proving the date 625 B.C., as the previous one, 
No. 3, proved the date 606 B.C.? 

"How firm a foundation, ye saints of the Lord, 
Is laid for your faith in his excellent Word." 

There is nothing forced or fanciful about these 
diagrams, their deductions and conclusions. They 
are almost cold in their matter-of-factness. Yet how 
meaningful and soul-cheering to us who believe and 
appreciate their significance. They come, too, at a 
time when "science, falsely so-called," is making special 
attacks on the chronology of God's Word, and 
making those attacks applicable to the Bible as a 
whole— at a time when thousands at our side are falling 
into skepticism. Let us give reverent thanks to 
the Giver of all good, and more and more sound the 
praises of him who has "called us out of darkness into 
his marvellous light," and more and more appreciate 
and use our privileges as his ambassadors and servants 
in handing forth the "meat in due season" to 
all the members of "the household of faith." 



R3461 : page 344 

"LIKE UNTO THE ANGELS." 

AMONGST the Jews were three particular parties. 

The largest and in every way most 

important of these were known as Pharisees, 

who believed in a future life, to be attained by a resurrection 

at some future time, for which they waited. 

Second to these in importance, yet very much smaller, 

were the Sadducees, who boasted of their intellectual 

acumen, claiming that a man when he died had no 

preeminence above a brute, except in the honors done 

to his corpse— disbelieving in a resurrection or future 

life of any kind, disbelieving also that there are angelic 

beings of a spirit order, holding extremely materialistic 

views, believing nothing that they could not 

appreciate with their natural senses. The third party, 



Essenes, accepted the heathen teachings of Plato, 
disbelieving in a resurrection, and claiming that when 
a man died he was more alive than before. This sect 
or party, although mentioned by Josephus a little 
later than our Lord's time, was so small in the days 
of our Lord and the apostles that they are not so much 
as mentioned once in the New Testament. 

The Pharisees, the numerous party, the orthodox 
at that time, were our Lord's chief opponents in argument 
and otherwise; yet, as the records show, they 
uniformly failed to entrap him, though their ables 
men were put to the fore with this end in view— that 
they might show our Lord's teachings to be illogical 
or unreasonable to some degree, and thus to break his 
influence with the common people; or, failing to do 
this, that they might catch him in his words and have 
opportunity for a charge against him before the Roman 
governor, and thus bring political pressure to 
bear to stop his ministry. It was on such an occasion, 
after the discomfiture of the Pharisees, that the Sadducees 
stepped to the front with a question which 
they had every confidence would confuse our Lord in 
the presence of the people, and not only show his position 
to be illogical, but gain a feather for their own 

R3461 : page 345 

caps as philosophers and teachers superior, not only 
to Jesus, but also to the Pharisees. 

WHOSE WIFE SHALL SHE BE? 

The Jewish Law provided certain inheritances 
for each son, and it was the ambition of each to perpetuate 
his own family. This the Law inculcated, by 
providing that upon the death of any man childless, 
his brother, if he had one, should perpetuate his inheritance 
for him by taking the widow to wife. The 
skilfully arranged question of the Sadducees supposed 
seven brothers, the first one of whom married and 
died childless, the wife being taken by his brother, 
and so likewise until the entire seven had been husbands 
to the one wife. Lastly the wife died. Which 
of these seven could claim the wife in the resurrection? 
The question seemed to show an absurdity in 
the doctrine of a future life, implying that there would 
be such a muddle that all eternity would not straighten 
it out. 

Our Lord's answer was, "Ye do err, not knowing 
the Scriptures, neither the power of God." 
That is to say, the difficulty of the Sadducees arose 
from the fact that they had not understood the 
Scriptures relating to the future life beyond the 
resurrection, neither did they give proper weight 
to the power of God, which is quite able to surmount 
every difficulty that could be imagined. Our Lord 



might have stopped there, giving the not unreasonable 
inference that his hearers lacked the proper 
knowledge of the subject to permit them to clearly 
comprehend anything he might say about it. But 
rather than appear to avoid the question, and, indeed, 
with a view to giving light upon the subject to us who 
would come afterward, our Lord explained the matter, 
saying, "The children [people] of this world [age] 
marry and are given in marriage; but they which 
shall be accounted worthy to obtain that world [age] 
and the resurrection from the dead neither marry nor 
are given in marriage." 

True the glorified Church will not marry, but 
there is no reference here to the Church class, the 
Bride class. The question did not refer to saints, but 
to any ordinary Jews under the Law, to whom the 
illustration might be in any degree applicable. 

Nothing in the illustration implied that either 
the woman or any of her husbands were followers of 
the Lord or in any sense of the word "saints." Our 
Lord's answer should be understood from this standpoint, 
therefore. He did not say, My disciples will 
neither marry nor be given in marriage, nor that those 
who are faithful in following me will have such experiences, 
but he made his answer as broad as the 
Sadducees had made their question: he made the answer 
applicable to all Jews. True, also, the Greek 
article occurs before the word resurrection in the question 
and also in the answer, but this would be no positive 
proof that a special or chief resurrection was 
meant except two resurrections were referred to in 
contrast. Indeed the distinction between the resurrection 
of the Church and that of the world was not 
yet taught by our Lord— was not set forth until after 
Pentecost. Hence the Sadducees could not know to 
refer to it. They did probably know that our Lord 
had awakened some dead ones, as had the prophets of 
old, and so probably referred to the anastasis of the 
future as in contrast and distinction from any temporary 
awakening of the present time. 

DID THE RANSOM SECURE FULL 
RESURRECTION? 

We ask then, what did our Lord mean by limiting 
his answer to "they which shall be accounted 
worthy to obtain that age and the resurrection"? 
Will not the whole world be accounted worthy to obtain 
full resurrection? Did not our Lord's death purchase 
full resurrection for all the race? We answer, 
No. Our Lord's death was the propitiation, the satisfaction, 
whereby the sins of the whole world shall be 
cancelled, and whereby, therefore, the whole world 
may be awakened from the sleep of death and brought 
out of the great prison-house, the tomb. But such 
awakening and coming forth is with a view to their 



enlightenment, that they may all come to the knowledge 

of the Truth to the intent that by such knowledge 

and by obedience to it they might be saved, recovered, 

delivered completely out of all weaknesses 

and imperfections— brought gradually step by step, 

up, up, up, out of sin and death-conditions to full perfection 

and life-conditions; and this condition of absolute 

perfection or life from the dead is resurrection 

"out from among the dead" who will refuse to use 

those opportunities. 

The raising up will proceed during the thousand 
years from the time of the awakening of the individual 
until he shall have attained to the full perfection of 
manhood— all that was lost in Adam. Then he will 
be resurrected— that will constitute his resurrection. 
Thus he will attain unto "that world," that perfect 
dispensation which God has designed shall be the 
ultimate and everlasting condition of all who love and 
obey him. But some will be awakened from the 
tomb who will not be accounted worthy to attain such 
a lifting up to perfection, mental, moral and physical, 
because of their failure to respond to the blessed privileges 
and influences of that time. 

Now, as respects those who, at the close of the Millennial 
age, will have demonstrated their obedience to 
the Lord, and who shall be accounted worthy of that 
perfect state, and to be made perfect themselves, lifted 
clear out of death— such will neither marry nor be given 
in marriage. The Lord does not say what will be the 

R3461 : page 346 

intermediate conditions during the Millennial age, and 
this leaves us to infer that mankind and womankind, being 
awakened from the tomb in precisely the same 
conditions in which they went into it, will possess the 
same sex distinctions as at the present time. What 
will be the regulations of that time we are not told, 
but we have confidence in the Lord that he will be 
abundantly able to direct the course of mankind wisely 
for their benefit, instruction and uplift. 

The end of the uplifting process, the end of the 
Millennial age, will mark a change in the human constitution 
by gradual development, a change so great 
that by that time those who will be ready to pass beyond 
the Millennial age into the everlasting conditions 
will not only be perfect in the sense and degree 
that Adam was perfect before he sinned, but also before 
mother Eve was taken from him and made a separate 
being. That is to say, sex conditions will gradually 
pass away, and be no more in mankind, even as 
it is not found in angels, and as it was not in man before 
the separation into sexes was effected in Eden for 
the purpose of propagating the race and filling the 
earth. 



SEXUAL DISTINCTIONS TEMPORARY. 

It will be remembered that during the first thousand 
years after the fall, not only was life much longer 
than at present, but births were much less frequent 
than now; and so we presume that during the Millennial 
age the propagation of the species will gradually 
diminish until toward its close it will finally stop, 
mankind gradually losing the sex functions. Sex will 
no longer be necessary; for man will no longer be 
alone, as he was at first, to need a companion, for the 
whole earth will then be filled with perfect beings, 
and all the wicked, the incorrigible, will be destroyed. 
It is to this we understand that our Lord referred, 
saying, "Neither can they die any more, for they are 
equal unto the angels, and are the children of God, 
being children of the resurrection." As the angels 
do not die, neither will the perfected human beings 
die. 

Eternal life is the gift of God through Christ for 
all of Adam's race who would receive it upon conditions 
of absolute obedience, and the test which will 
take place in the close of the Millennial age (Rev. 20:7-9) 
will guarantee that none remain to pass beyond 
into the perfect dispensation except those who, like 
the angels, having been tested, will be in no danger 
of falling, and will therefore die no more. Those who 
pass that inspection at the close of the Millennial age 
will be accepted of the Father as his children, and the 
intermediary or mediatorial Kingdom of Christ over 
them will terminate. They will become God's children 
by the resurrection— by the raising up processes 

R3462 : page 346 

of the Millennial age, administered through the glorified 
Christ— the same that elsewhere is called "the 
resurrection by judgments," because the rewards and 
penalties of obedience or disobedience will follow 
promptly, having the effect of constraining to righteousness 
and uplifting from sin-and-death conditions. 

In applying this Scripture thus to the world of 
mankind, and its raising out of death conditions during 
the Millennium and its attainment to life everlasting 
and to the condition where there will be no further 
marrying, we have no desire to imply that there will 
be marrying in the glorified Church. On the contrary 
the Church is married to the Lord. As old creatures 
they are dead; as New Creatures they never will be 
married to any but the Lord; and when in the resurrection 
they come forth to glory, honor and immortality 
it will be to conditions like to their Lord, "far 
above angels, principalities and powers and every 
name that is named." 

WHAT MOSES SHOWED AT THE BUSH. 



Continuing to level his argument against the Sadducees 
—continuing to prove the general resurrection 
of mankind, and not merely the resurrection of the 
Church— our Lord adds, "Now that the dead are [to 
be] raised even Moses showed at the bush, when he 
calleth the Lord the God of Abraham and the God of 
Isaac and the God of Jacob, for he is not a God of the 
dead but of the living; for all live unto him." Had 
there been no provision in God's plan for the raising 
of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, he never would have 
spoken of himself as being their God, but rather 
would have treated them as non existent, having no 
being, no God, and never to have any. Likewise the 
fact that God speaks of the coming blessing through 
Abraham upon all the families of the earth proves 
that from the divine standpoint, although the billions 
of earth are dead, they all live unto God— in his purpose, 
in his plan, in his arrangement, to be accomplished 
and fulfilled through Jesus during the Millennial 
age. 

SHALL WE KNOW EACH OTHER THERE? 

The questions are frequently asked us, What 
knowledge of one another will there be in the next 
life? and Will there be communication between the 
heavenly and the earthly classes? 

We reply that the acquaintance of the present 
time will be prolonged into the next life, and revive 
and increase. As for those who will attain the spirit 
plane of being, viz., the Bride, the overcoming class, 
and "the virgins, her companions, which follow her," 
otherwise in Scripture known as the "great company," 
all being upon the spirit plane will be able to see and 
know each other, because in those respects they will 
be alike, spirit beings. True, the Bride class, with 
her Lord Jesus and the Father, will all be on the divine 
plane, while the Great Company, like the angels, will be 

R3462 : page 347 

on a lower plane of spirit being. But all spirit beings 
may see and know and have intercourse with each other 
—those on the divine plane being superior not only 
in rank and position but also in that they will possess 
inherent life, immortality, while the others will possess 
a life that will be eternal because of its continuous 
supply. 

The world of mankind will know each other as they 
do now— some by previous acquaintance and some by introduction. 
Thus, none of the ancient worthies who 
will be present as perfect men will be known by any 
of the world today, and they would need, therefore, 
some kind of introduction, either by divine miracles 
attesting them and their authority or by some other 



means. It may be easily enough imagined how the 
world will gain introduction one to the other, just as 
such introductions are now accomplished amongst 
men. Similar introductions will doubtless be necessary 
to the glorified saints beyond the vail, since the 
majority of them have never seen the Lord, the Apostles, 
nor each other. 

COMMUNICATIONS BETWEEN SPIRITS AND 
HUMANS. 

Coming now to the last feature, we answer that 
undoubtedly there will be communication between the 
heavenly and the earthly beings, not only throughout 
the Millennial age but subsequently. To our understanding 
the Father and the heavenly angels will 
have nothing to do with mankind during the Millennium, 
until the delivery up of the Kingdom of God's 
dear Son. But there will be communication between 
the Kingdom class, the Church, with Jesus at its 
head, and the world of mankind under their supervision 
and uplifting influences. Looking back into the 
past, we see that God communicated with Abraham, 
and numerous of his natural descendants, through 
spirit beings, who assumed human form for the purpose. 
But we are not to expect such manifestations 
in the future, because we find in the divine arrangement 
a different preparation. 

We find that the ancient worthies as a class have 
been prepared of God in advance to serve this very 
purpose; that they, rewarded with human perfection, 
might serve as the intermediaries between the spirit 
Kingdom and the world of mankind. As it is written, 
"The Law shall go forth from Mount Zion and the 
word of the Lord from Jerusalem." The instruction 
will go from the spiritual Kingdom to the earthly 
princes, its representatives, and be communicated from 
these princes to all the families of the earth, with full 
power and authority in the name of the Kingdom to 
enforce every regulation, to reward the well-doers and 
to punish all who fail of obedience. 

With the end of the Millennial age, wilful evildoers 
having been cut off in the Second Death, the 
world of mankind will be, like the angels, possessed 
of lasting life, and without sex. They will all be perfect 
men, like to and equal to the condition of the 
ancient worthies during the Millennium. When the 
Kingdom of Christ shall be delivered to the Father 
we believe that a similar communication will be established 
between the perfect men and the heavenly 
courts that was in vogue before the first disobedience 
and its penalty came upon men. True, we do not 
know very particularly about the character of the communion 
which prevailed in Edenic times, but it was 
sufficient for every purpose, we may be sure, and such 
will be the communion of the future between the 



perfect God and his earthly image, the perfect man- 
similar communion to that which during the Millennial 
age will take place between the glorified Church 
and its earthly representatives, the ancient worthies. 



R3462 : page 347 

"THEM THAT HONOR ME I WILL HONOR." 

-2 CHRONICLES 29: 18-31. -DECEMBER 4.- 

HEZEKIAH was reckoned in the Lord's sight 

as one of the three most acceptable kings 

who ever sat upon the throne of Judah— 

David and Josiah being the other two. (2 Kings 18:5.) 

His case was the more remarkable in that he was 

the son of King Ahaz, one of the most reprehensible 

kings that ever occupied that throne— one so disesteemed 

that he was not even buried in the sepulchers 

of the kings. King Ahaz had fostered idolatry in its 

worst forms, and under his reign the kingdom had 

sunk to a very low condition every way. At the age 

of twenty-five years Hezekiah, on his father's death, 

had succeeded to the throne, and his entire reign was 

one of reformation and indicated a hearty desire to 

please the Lord. 

The secret of the difference between the father 
and the son is found in the fact that the mother was a 
godly woman, and no doubt this is one particular reason 
why her name, Abijah, is mentioned in the Scriptures. 
The name signifies, "My father is Jehovah," 
and implies that one or both of her parents were reverent 
and God-fearing. How she came to be the wife 
of so ignoble a king we do not surely know, but evidently 
the irreverence and idolatry of her husband 
had no contaminating influence upon her mind. This 
is intimated by the name given to her son Hezekiah, 
which signifies, "Strength of Jehovah." In this we 
have another illustration of the Apostle's words, "For 
the unbelieving husband is sanctified by the wife and 
the unbelieving wife is sanctified by the husband, else 

R3462 : page 348 

were your children unholy." (I Cor. 7:14.) So far 
as parentage is concerned the intimation is that the 
Lord is pleased to recognize the child as the offspring 
of the believing parent, and thus it comes under divine 
providence and care, similar to that of its believing 
parent, up to the age of discretion. 

What a lesson we have here respecting the power 
of a mother for good. True, in this case as a wife 
she did not succeed in influencing her husband to divine 
reverence and righteousness, but she evidently 



did exercise a moulding, controlling influence in the 
formation of her son's character. The influence of 
the wife and mother rightly exercised is very highly 
to be appreciated, but some, failing to properly value 
their privileges and opportunities in the home, have 
launched forth in public efforts to the neglect of home 
duties— a serious mistake. 

CLEANSING THE TEMPLE. 

The lesson recounts the opening of the Temple 
and the cleansing of its various parts, which apparently 
required sixteen days. This probably included 
the restoration of certain brass plates and borders 
which we are informed King Ahaz had removed from 
the altar and tables for use in other places; but sixteen 
days would be none too long for a proper cleansing 
of the building anyway. We recall that history 
says that before the reign of Queen Elizabeth, while 
Great Britain was under the power of Rome, St. 
Paul's Cathedral in London was used as a kind of 
market place, donkeys with burdens passing up and 
down the aisles (previously and subsequently used for 

R3463 : page 348 

worship), huckstering and servant hiring, etc., being 
a part of the regular routine. Evidently it is very 
easy for any people to lose its reverence for God and 
holy things, and such a loss is not only to be deprecated 
in a nation, but particularly in the hearts of individuals, 
for with the loss of reverence goes one of 
the mental qualities most helpful to a moral and religious 
life. 

The restoration of the Temple to the service of 
God was celebrated by King Hezekiah and the rulers 
of the city and the princes of the nation with great 
zeal, for indeed the whole nation seems in some measure 
to have come to a realization of its low condition 
and need of an uplift. Our lesson proceeds to describe 
a special sin offering for the sins of the people. 
The fact that seven bullocks, seven rams, etc., were 
sacrificed instead of one of each would merely mean 
that it was to intensify the matter, seven being a 
symbol of perfection or completeness. 

This was not the regular Atonement Day sacrifice, 
because it was in April instead of in September, 
but we may be sure that no Atonement Day sacrifice 
had been offered in the Temple for many years,— so 
thoroughly had the king and the nation under his 
guidance rejected the Lord and the gracious arrangements 
he had made for their forgiveness and fellowship 
with him. The proper date for sin atonement 
having passed, it was no doubt proper enough that the 
sacrifices should be offered in the middle of the year 
rather than wait for the beginning of the new year; 



but the atonement effected would not be good for 
twelve months, but merely for the remainder of the 
year in which it was offered. The generous spirit 
of Hezekiah is exhibited in his instruction to the 
priest that the same atonement should be effected 
not only for the people of the kingdom of Judah but 
also for those of the ten tribes which had separated 
from them. 

SPIRITUAL TEMPLE CLEANSING. 

Spiritual lessons for the Church may be drawn 
from this narrative. The antitype would not be the 
cleansing and care of church buildings, chapels, 
cathedrals, etc., although it is certainly proper enough 
that any building used for the Lord's worship should 
be respected and kept in decency and in order. The 
antitype of the Jewish Temple is the spiritual Temple 
of which the Apostle speaking says, "Whose Temple 
ye are if so be that the Spirit of God dwelleth in you." 
Applying the lesson in an individual manner it would 
mean that if any of the Lord's people have in any 
measure fallen into worldliness, sin, the worship of 
Mammon— idolatry— the neglect of the worship and 
service of the true God in any measure or degree, 
there should be first of all a cleansing to the best of 
our ability, a reformation, and secondly an appeal to 
God for at-one-ment with him, for forgiveness of 
sins. It is not necessary that we should offer bullocks, 
goats and rams, but it is necessary that in such a reformation, 
such a preparation for divine forgiveness, 
we should come before the Lord in the merit of the 
great sacrifice for sins which he has appointed and 
which already has been made— "once for all." 

Applying the lesson on a larger scale to the 
Church as a whole, we look back in history and see 
the time that the Temple of God was completely given 
over to idolatry, when the "continual sacrifice" was 
set aside, and masses, fresh sacrifices, "abominations" 
in God's sight were substituted, and even the form of 
godliness was almost obsolete and supplanted by heathen 
festivals and carnivals and image worship, wholly 
misunderstanding the divinely arranged faith worship. 
In the Lord's providence a great reformation came in 
the days of Luther, Melancthon and others, and this 
cleansing of the Lord's Temple is still in progress, 
because, alas, all of the debris of Antichrist has not 
yet been removed. 

R3463 : page 349 

A PART IN THE SERVICE FOR EACH. 

Much of superstition, false doctrines and mummery 
still remains. With many the "mass" is still 
reverenced, but, thank God, with the few the precious 



blood shed once for all for the remission of sins has 
come back again into a proper appreciation. Let all 
of the Royal Priesthood, the consecrated followers of 
the great High Priest of our profession, be on the alert 
to do all in their power for the cleansing of the Temple 
of every defilement of error, and let all of the antitypical 
Levites, the household of faith, lend willing 
hands in this same direction, cooperating for the one 
great end which at last will be secured— not by our 
efforts, but by him who declared that his influence 
will be as fuller's soap and as a refiner's fire to purify 
all of the sons of Levi— to purify all of the true believers, 
that ultimately they may be acceptable sharers 
in the heavenly Kingdom and its glorious work of 
uplifting all the people and shedding forth the blessings 
of the great atonement upon all the families of 
the earth. 

The work of reestablishing the true religion recounted 
in our lesson was not to be accomplished in 
a doleful manner, but with joy and rejoicing. The 
priests and Levites proceeded with the various departments 
of the work, and musical instruments and the 
psalms of David expressed the joy of those who rejoiced 
in the new order of things. The king and the 
people bowed before the Lord, giving the worship of 
their hearts to the invisible one instead of to idols and 
the work of their own hands. King Hezekiah, evidently 
addressing the people, said, "Now have ye 
consecrated yourselves unto the Lord: come near and 
bring sacrifices and thank offerings into the house of 
the Lord. And the congregation brought in sacrifices 
and thank offerings, and as many as were of willing 
heart brought burnt offerings." 

Thus it is with the Lord's truly consecrated people 
today. Rejoicing to be free from the errors and 
sins of the past, they rejoice to worship the Lord with 
thank offerings and praise and true worship. Let this 
be more and more the attitude of those who have been 
blessed of the Lord with the opening of the eyes of 
their understanding and a return to his favor. 



R3463 : page 349 

THE CAPTIVITY OF EPHRAIM. 

-2 KINGS 17:6-18.-DECEMBER 11.- 

Golden Text:— "The face of the Lord is 
against them that do evil."— I Pet. 3:12. 

EPHRAIM was the name of the ten-tribe kingdom 

of Israel, as Judah was the name given to 

the two-tribe kingdom of the same people. 

Our lesson recounts how, at the divinely appointed 



time, Ephraim was utterly overwhelmed by the kingdom 

of Assyria. The people, deprived of weapons, 

although otherwise well treated, were deported to the 

lands under Assyrian control, while other peoples conquered 

by the Assyrians were settled in the land of Israel. 

The object of the conqueror evidently was to 

break the national spirit and reduce the various peoples 

conquered to a kind of serfdom, the better to collect 

taxes or revenues for the Assyrian treasury. 

Probably the people were not worse off as respected 

their material welfare, for they were not treated as 

slaves but as emigrants and settlers. 

For many centuries Ephraim, the ten-tribe kingdom, 
especially after Solomon's death, was extremely 
perverse: not more degraded, we may presume, than 
the surrounding nations, but their perversion was 
more wicked, more reprehensible, because of greater 
privileges, blessings, knowledge and opportunities 
which the Lord had granted to them as the posterity 
of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, and the inheritors of 
the great Oath-bound Covenant made to Abraham and 
confirmed to Isaac and Jacob. One is amazed, in reading 
of the Lord's dealings with Ephraim and Judah, 
to note their general tendency toward idolatry, and 
this in spite of the divine chastisements, corrections, 
etc., which evidently influence only the few. 
In thinking of these matters we are to remember that 
the surrounding nations were still more grossly steeped 
in idolatry and its lustful orgies, practised in the 
name of worship. These other nations were not specially 
chastised for idolatry as was Israel, but were 
allowed to practically take the course they chose, as 
the Apostle explains in Rom. 1:28: God gave them 
over to a reprobate mind and to doing those things 
which were not proper because they had not wished 
to retain him in their minds. 

The captivity of Ephraim should be viewed from 
this same standpoint. It was God's abandonment of 
the ten-tribe kingdom, his permission for them to 
have their way, and henceforth be treated of him as 
the heathen— without special chastisement. It was 
in this sense and in this sense only that those tribes 
were "lost." Located in various parts of Assyria 
they gradually assimilated with the population surrounding 
them, and lost identity as Israelites, intermarrying 
with their neighbors. 

It was because of their failure to appreciate him, 
because of hankering after false gods and false worship 
and the more or less mingling of these false worships 
with the true worship, that God withdrew his 

R3463 : page 350 

favor. It is pointed out that God did not cast them 

off without reproving them, chastising them and sending 

them messages by prophets and seers. To the 



seers the Lord gave prophetic visions and messages 
built upon these, and by the prophets he sent them 
instructions and warnings, encouragements and threatenings. 
Elijah and Elisha had been amongst them, 
and later Jonah and Amos and Hosea. Through all 
these the Lord had warned and cautioned. Through 
Hosea the Lord had made especially kind and loving 
appeals to them as a father to children— "How can I 

R3464 : page 350 

give thee up, Ephraim? How shall I make thee as 
Admah?"— a desolate room. Again we read, "Ephraim 
feedeth on the wind"— "I will heal thy backslidings, 
I will love thee freely." These messages had 
indeed some effect upon a few individuals in the nation, 
but did not affect the people as a whole, neither 
did it lead to a reformation. As our lesson declares 
(vs. 14), "They would not hear, but hardened their 
neck like to the neck of their fathers. ..And they rejected 
his statutes and his covenant that he made with 
their fathers, and his testimonies which he testified 
unto them; and they followed vanity," etc. Hardness 
of neck here is a figure of speech doubtless drawn 
from the stiffness of neck of a yoke of unruly bullocks 
—unmanageable, self-willed, resenting every effort to 
turn them in the right way. 

The wrong course of the people is further declared 
in the statement that they not only worshiped false gods 
but made their sons and daughters pass through the fire, 
and used divination and enchantments, and sold themselves 
to do evil in the sight of the Lord. They became 
the slaves of their passions and self-deceptions, 
and were so misled of the evil spirits as to consider this 
burning of their own children as acceptable sacrifices 
to false gods. It was well that all pretensions on 
their part to be people of God should cease; it was 
well that they should be removed to new scenes, 
amongst strangers, where under new conditions their 
minds would be otherwise engaged, even though it 
should be an entire alienation from God. 

VIEWED FROM THE DIVINE STANDPOINT. 

There is but one standpoint from which the history 
of Israel can be properly understood and appreciated: 
namely, Israel's inheritance in the Abrahamic 
Covenant. All of God's dealings with the children 
of Jacob were with a view to a selection of the two 
seeds of Abraham— a natural seed and a spiritual 
one. To this end their national experiences conspired 
—to find in that nation certain noble, loyal, reverential 
souls, such as David, Jonathan, and all the holy 
prophets, and to prepare that people by disciplines, 
prunings, etc., to be the people to whom Messiah 
would first present himself and among whom he would 



find a goodly "remnant" prepared to be his 
followers. 

The separation of the ten tribes from the two 
tribes at the death of Solomon was an important step 
in this selection. The Lord had distinctly stated in 
advance that the Law-giver whom he had promised 
should come out of Judah, and hence any Israelites 
indeed in the ten-tribe kingdom must have looked 
with longing interest toward Judah as the ultimate 
end of their hopes— the Messiah, and the fulfilment 
through him of the Abrahamic Covenant. Throughout 
the varying history of these two kingdoms the 
greater religious faith and zeal was always to be found 
in Judah, and gradually many of the more religious 
in Ephraim removed to Judah and identified themselves 
therewith, because of the greater religious privileges 
and blessings there enjoyed. Thus Judah eventually 
represented the cream of the nation, and the 
records show that not only Hezekiah, the king of Judah, 
was favorably disposed toward his brethren of 
Ephraim and made them welcome to the religious 
assemblies, but that other kings, his predecessors, had 
done similarly. Thus seen the captivity of Ephraim 
was merely the rejection of the skim milk of the nation, 
and as we have already seen was really not at 
all to their injury so far as temporal interests were 
concerned. It was their cutting off from divine favor 
in respect to the Abrahamic Covenant that was specially 
regrettable. 

When a good while afterward the kingdom of Judah 
was overthrown and its people similarly taken 
into captivity and similarly scattered amongst the nations 
composing the Babylonish empire it was merely 
a carrying out of a further development of the divine 
plan. By this last stroke the Lord would put away 
all the more grovelling, sensual and worldly-minded 
of his people. The desolation of the land for seventy 
years permitted all who would to forget the original 
covenant of which they were heirs, permitted them to 
intermarry with the nations around them if they would, 
permitted them to settle and prosper and be content 
in their new homes; and then the Lord in his providence 
opened up a way for all who were not satisfied 
with the good earthly portion they were enjoying to 
return to their own land— a desolated land. 

We can readily see that none of them would come 
back under such conditions except those who had 
strong faith in the Lord and in the original Oath-bound 
Covenant made to Abraham and confirmed to 
Isaac and Jacob and the nation. All without faith 
and all of weak faith, all lacking in zeal, would surely 
find it much to their advantage every way to remain 
where they were. And so we find that only 55,000 

R3464: page 351 



out of all the millions of those two nations cared to 
return to the land of promise— for in the Lord's providence 
the proclamation of King Cyrus permitted all 
Israelites of every tribe to return to their own land. 
The faithful people who did return were the very 
cream of that nation, and their successors, to whom 
our Lord Jesus presented himself as king, represented, 
in many respects, the noblest and best people in 
the world. We should not be misunderstood: while 
the majority of Ephraim and Judah commingled with 
the heathen, others preserved their identity as Israelites 
without returning to Palestine, just as we see the 
Israelites today in every part of the world preserving 
their religious institutions and faith. But then each 
preserved his tribal identity, whereas now all tribal 
lines are lost and obliterated. It is of these that the 
Apostle sometimes spoke as "our twelve tribes scattered 
abroad"— not lost but scattered, as today. The 
only ones lost are those who have become Gentiles, 
by utter disregard of the peculiar characteristics of 
the nation, of which by divine arrangement circumcision 
was one. 

Our lesson viewed from this standpoint is profitable. 
It shows us that God is working out his great 
and wonderful plan. Those favored in that plan are 
not coerced, though graciously dealt with and appealed 
to; neither does their neglect or rejection of divine 
favor estop the development of the divine plan. 

"God moves in a mysterious way 
His wonders to perform." 

ANALOGIES IN SPIRITUAL ISRAEL. 

We may reasonably expect analogies in spiritual 
Israel, and we find them. The first epoch of the 
Church's history in the days of the apostles was quickly 
followed at their death by the great "falling away" 
from the faith and simplicity of the original establishment; 
chastisements followed, persecutions, etc., and 
finally the great majority went into captivity to the 
world— to Babylon. To these the worship of images 
and shrines and pictures and the offering of incense 
and burning of holy candles were associated with a 
great false sacrifice— the "sacrifice of the mass"— the 
"abomination that maketh desolate." 

Gradually the Lord separated from that system 
of confusion and error the few who were spiritual Israelites 
indeed. Protestantism thus gradually grew, 
and in some respects represented more nearly than 
did the Greek and Roman churches the true hopes 
and prospects of the Christian; and yet in Protestantism 
much was found that was reprehensible in God's 
sight, many who had only a form of godliness without 
the power, but some— a proportionately larger 
number than in Papacy— were found at heart loyal to 



the Lord and desirous of knowing his will and plan. 

These dealings with nominal spiritual Israel for 
the past eighteen centuries are gradually separating 
to the Lord an overcoming class and preparing a remnant 
for him in his second presence. The Reformation 
movement gathered out of Papacy the majority 
of the loyal souls indeed at that time: and now in 
the harvest time of this age the ripe wheat is being 
garnered from "all Israel," from Catholicism as well 
as Protestantism, though because of previous siftings, 
etc., much the larger proportion, as might be expected, 
will be gathered from Protestantism— Israelites 
indeed in whom there is no guile. 

"KEEP YOURSELVES FROM IDOLS." 

The Apostle's words, "Keep yourselves from 
idols," are not by any means meaningless to spiritual 
Israel. All around us we see idolatry— not on the 
same low plane practised in olden times, but idolatry 
nevertheless. Some worship the idol of wealth, others 
at the shrine of fame, and in a general sense the 
spirit of worldliness is swallowing up the time and 
talent and influence of the civilized world, which professedly 
claims to be Christendom— Christ's kingdom 
—spiritual Israel. As natural Israel had its groves 
and totem-posts, some plain and some carved, so many 
spiritual Israelites today have for their totem-posts 
the various creeds of the various denominations set up 
in the past. To these the masses bow with reverent 
thoughtlessness, largely neglecting the Almighty 
One and the Word of his testimony, which Word rebukes 
all such misrepresentations of the divine character 
and plan. 

We have not today in nominal Christendom a literal 
Moloch of brass, heated red hot by internal fires, 
with arms open to receive the children to his embrace, 
as ancient Israel had, but we have instead a Moloch 
on a much larger scale— a much worse misrepresentation 
of the only true God, whose character is wisdom, justice, 
love and power. We have today in the minds 
of people, reverenced by many, mental imaginations 
of a god red hot with the flames of hell or purgatory, 
and visions of millions agonizing in his embrace. 
How terrible the thought! How God-dishonoring! 
How manifestly the work of the Adversary and totally 
contrary to the gracious messages which the Lord has 
so repeatedly sent, not only through the prophets of 
old but also through his Son and through the apostles, 
"speaking peace through Jesus Christ," and assuring 
us of his love, as manifested in the great redemptive 

R3465 : page 351 

sacrifice, and of his intention to bless the world 
through the glorified Christ by appointing "times of 



restitution of all things spoken by the mouth of all the 
holy prophets since the world began."— Acts 3:21. 



page 353 

SEMI-MONTHLY 
VOL. XXV. DECEMBER 1, 1904. No. 23. 



CONTENTS 

Christendom's Anxious Situation 355 

Outlook of Congregationalists 356 

Rationalistic Seminaries 356 

New Missionaries Infidels 357 

No "Trumpet" in Christendom 357 

An Illustration in Hypocrisy 358 

A Giant Specter 358 

Price List of Bibles, Helps, Etc 359-362 

"Thou Shalt Worship the Lord thy 

God" 363 

The Prince of Peace 364 

page 354 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-24 EVERSHOLT ST., LONDON, N.W. 
GERMAN BRANCH-MIRKER STR., 45, ELBERFELD. 
AUSTRALIAN BRANCH-32 JOHNSTON ST., FITZROY, MELBOURNE. 

PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE, 5c (2-l/2d.) A COPY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity 
or adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER, will be supplied FREE, if 
they send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting 
the paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our 
list continually. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



THIS JOURNAL IS PUBLISHED IN THE 

FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, DANISH AND ITALIAN LANGUAGES. 

SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



R3465 : page 354 



CLUBBING ARRANGEMENT FOR 1905. 



As usual, all WATCH TOWER subscriptions for the United 
States for 1905 will include subscriptions to the Old Theology 
Quarterly. And this year we have effected a special arrangement 
by which all paid WATCH TOWER subscriptions for 1905 
will include without extra charge, a subscription to the Solon 
Journal (monthly) for four months. It is a secular journal of 
good tone; price with privileges $2 a year. Its claims for 
public recognition we heartily endorse, having profited thereby 
ourselves. Its advantages apply only within the United 
States, hence this offer is thus limited. All U.S. subscribers 
may look for their first number in January. 

BROTHER RUSSELL'S SUNDAY DISCOURSES 



The following journals are now publishing Brother 
Russell's sermons regularly, viz.,— 
The Schenectady Union, - Schenectady, N.Y. 

The State, Columbia, S.C. 

The Pittsburg Gazette, - Pittsburg, Pa. 

The arrangement with the latter was for one year, 
and expires with the present month. Should it not be 
renewed all of its unexpired subscriptions sent to us for it 
will be placed in other journals publishing the discourses. 



R3465 : page 355 

CHRISTENDOM'S ANXIOUS SITUATION. 

BY REV. E. F. BURR, D.D. 

WE SEE, in many pleasant respects, just what 
the Fathers saw. The old Christian flag is 
still waving; the old Christian creeds still 
maintain their places; the old Christian sanctuaries 
are still open every Sabbath; ministers preach and 
pray in them still; there are still prayer meetings, and 
sacraments, and Sunday Schools, and Bible Schools, 
and Salvation Armies, and Northfields, and Bible 
Leagues, and Christian Endeavorers. It is not a surface 
Sahara by any means. 

And yet the condition of things among us is very 
serious— so serious that it would be the height of unwisdom 
to blink it. Beneath the fair crust of Christian 
forms and professions boils and tosses an amazing 
amount of un-Christian and anti-Christian thinking. 
We do not know exactly how much; but that it is 
formidably great we do know. Every now and then 



eruptions occur which startle us as with a blow. Latterly, 
these outbreaks have sometimes come in groups 
and with almost volcanic violence; and the impact 
on us has been as when the smith with both hands 
smites the anvil. We are shocked— shocked at the 
mass of destructive material belched out from most 
unexpected quarters; from pulpits noted for orthodoxy; 
from seminaries supposed to be bound to the 
old Gospel by more than seven green withes, which 
not even a Samson could break; from Associations, 
Presbyteries, Conferences where grey heads listen 
patiently to attacks on the Bible, which a few years 
ago would have raised a storm of astonishment and 
protest. 

Lo, the new departures of a few years ago have 
expanded into the "New Christianity" of the Higher 
Criticism, the destructive criticism of the Bible. Under 
the aegis of the Christian name this unwelcome immigrant 
has come to great estate among us. Its shadow 
covers and chills great denominations, great presses 
and great educational institutions. To multitudes 
the Old Testament is gone and the New Testament is 
either gone or going. Not a few deny or question 
fundamental Christian doctrines— the Messiahship of 
Jesus, his miraculous birth and incarnation, his miracles, 
his atonement, his resurrection and ascension, 
and even his reliability as a religious teacher. Many 
whose standing in the ministry is still unchallenged 
question all these doctrines; and very many more are 
plainly feeling their way to the same depths at various 
stages of descent. These men, even the most 
radical of them, are preaching their views without 
hindrance in our churches and presses. They occupy 
chairs in our colleges and seminaries. The defection 
is so great that no ecclesiastical discipline is attempted. 
Courts, civil and ecclesiastical, have been appealed 
to in vain to prevent the perversion of trust 
funds defended by oaths and creeds as strong as human 
ingenuity could make them. In spite of ironclad 
creeds and quinquennial paths rationalism has 
appropriated many strategic positions in the high 
places of the field. The leading colleges of New England 
invite to their chairs and pulpits the most radical 
Unitarians, Universalists and Rationalists; and, as if 
the home supply was not large enough, are at the 
trouble of importing them. Whole Associations, 
Presbyteries, Conferences are dominated by views of 
the Bible which defy all the Protestant confessions 
and which would, a few years ago, have been met 
by storms of protest and excommunication. 

In view of this general situation the friends of 
the old Bible naturally look with anxious eyes to see 
where stand their Missionary Societies. What do 
they find? I will speak only for Congregationalists. 
Other Protestant denominations must speak for themselves. 



R3465 : page 356 

Just now they may find themselves much better 
off than their neighbors; but they will, at least, 
find that they are being menaced by like conditions. 
We should at least serve as a warning. 

OUTLOOK OF CONGREGATIONALISTS. 

What do Congregationalists find? They find that 
the higher criticism now sits at the council board and 
swarms in the constituency of each of their three missionary 
societies. Whoever sees that much sees reason 
for grave apprehension. All these societies are 
on the brink— liable to be crowded over it at any moment 
by the pressure from behind.... 

Is there not cause for uneasiness? Have not 
evangelical churches reason to fear that as little discrimination 
is made in the laborers sent into the home 
mission fields as exists among the men sending them? 
Is it not certain that men who think that higher critics 
of an extreme type are suitable persons for the championships 
and directorships and presidencies of missionary 
societies will think them suitable for mission 
work in the field? Our misgivings are very great. 
Our fears are stronger in the battle than our hopes. 
We are willing and even anxious to contribute to 
send the old Gospel into all fields, believing it to be 
the power of God unto salvation; but we are not 
willing to do as much for another Gospel. It is forbidden 
us. So we feel obliged to query with our two 
home missionary societies: "What are you doing 
with our contributions? What sort of men are you 
sending into the mission fields in our names? Let us 
know. It looks more and more as if you must be 
sending forth men whom it is against our consciences 
to send and support. Is it so?" 

Again our three missionary societies are so linked 
to a fourth that whatever patronage is given to one is 
measurably given to all. They present themselves 
for patronage in a lump, make a common appeal, 
have a common publication, divide among themselves 
certain common expenses and receipts, and are thinking 
of a common anniversary. We cannot bless one 
without blessing all; cannot help the American Board 
of Commissioners for Foreign Missions without helping 
the Congregational Sunday School and Publishing 
Society. 

And yet this latter society, acting in the name of 
all our churches, and at the expense of all of them, 
is engaged in publishing books and Sunday School 
helps and a weekly newspaper notoriously and 
grossly in the interest of the Higher Criticism— the 
newspaper presumably bought and supported, in 
part at least, by denominational funds and claiming 
denominational authority. Moreover, this 



society has just come into avowed alliance with a 
well known organ of the Higher Criticism; namely, 
"The American Institute of Sacred Literature," for 
the purpose of capturing in its interests our Sunday 
School teachers. 

Such is the society which all our churches are 
now being urged to support liberally— urged by the 
common voice of all our denominational societies, as 
expressed in innumerable circulars, in a plan for having 
a special agency for each society in each church, 
and in the actual appointment of a field secretary to 
give his whole time to the work of swelling the contributions 
of all the churches to all the societies— not 
excepting the most objectionable. Is this tolerable? 
Do not the other missionary societies see that their 
working in harness with such a society, and even 
helping to gild and draw its special chariot, is fitted 
to disturb confidence in themselves? Would not all 
evangelical churches feel wronged at having their contributions 
so used if they were aware of it? 

R3466 : page 356 

But they are not aware. For some reason the 
shepherds have not spoken, or have spoken the wrong 
thing. Even watchmen who have clearly seen the 
enemy entering the gates in force, and have deplored 
the fact, have not seen their way clear to put trumpet 
to their lips. Wonderful silence! And so the 
churches do not know that the Philistines are upon 
them. Are not misgivings (or more) in order under 
such circumstances? Unless something is done, in 
due time our whole city will be taken, our whole 
lump will be leavened with unbelief, at the expense, 
largely, of believers. Are believers ready for this? 

"RATIONALISTIC SEMINARIES." 

Another fact gives us even profounder concern- 
gives vast weight and exasperation to our other sources 
of anxiety. If all our educational institutions were in 
the hands of believing and faithful men, backsliding 
missionary societies would not mean so much. They 
must soon retrace their steps or die. But, as matters 
now stand, they threaten to go from bad to worse by 
endless reinforcement from behind. All the leading 
colleges in the East, and all our technical Congregational 
seminaries both East and West, are in active 
sympathy with the principles and methods of the 
Higher Criticism— as is shown either by the position 
of those who control them, or by publications of their 
professors, or by the reports of their students, or by 
the radical critics invited to their lectureships and 
decorated with their honors. 

This is the condition of things which actually exists 
among Congregationalists, and threatens all our 



Protestant denominations. It is a very serious condition 
—so serious that to realize it almost takes one's 
breath away; only leaving breath enough to exclaim, 
"When the foundations are destroyed what can the 
righteous do!" 

Of course rationalistic seminaries must be expected 
to produce, mostly, rationalists. Here and 

R3456 : page 357 

there, one heavily reinforced by a sound conversion 

and a sound home training, will resist the influences 

of the seminary; but such cases will be few. Practically, 

the entire output of our seminaries at present 

is higher critics. What becomes of them? Somehow 

the Congregational public absorbs them all. Some, 

by grace of easy-going councils, become pastors of 

self-supporting churches. The rest are being sent 

forth by our missionary societies. How can it be 

otherwise? From what other sources than their seminaries 

can these societies draw their recruits? They 

must take higher critics or none. As matters now 

stand they must do it or go out of business. But they 

have not gone out of business. They are still busy 

at sending out appeals and missionaries— sending them 

out at the expense of all the Congregational churches, 

nearly or quite all of whom, in the older States, have 

evangelical creeds and histories. Are we content 

with this? Ought we to be? 

NEW MISSIONARIES INFIDELS. 

Just now, on all the mission fields, are many men 
to whom no exception can be taken— men of an earlier 
and better training. But they are becoming fewer 
every year, and their places are being filled with their 
opposites. If the present condition of our seminaries 
continues, and our missionary societies continue to do 
as they are now doing, and have been doing for some 
time, what but the Higher Criticism, with its eviscerated 
Bible, will occupy the field at home and abroad? 
Can evangelical churches be reasonably asked to assist 
such a result by their contributions? It is asking 
them to commit suicide. 

Are we invited to bear in mind that all the forms 
of Higher Criticism which the seminaries are engaged 
in teaching, and the missionary societies are engaged 
in distributing, are not equally gross? We do bear 
it in mind. We remember that some higher critics 
are standing on the crumbling edge of the precipice; 
that others are clinging to its ragged sides at various 
stages of descent, and that very many are lying on the 
jagged rocks at the bottom, all broken to pieces. No 
—all are not as yet broken to pieces; but all are in 
imminent danger of being so. For, they all decline 
to treat the Old Testament as Christ treated it, and, 



in the treatment of both Testaments, all approve and 
act on those general principles and methods of Biblical 
criticism whose logical and historical terminus is 
a Bible without supernaturalism and without authority. 

"THOROUGH-GOING INFIDELS." 

And, somehow, the most broken of these critics 
manage to do their work under shelter of the old 
creeds, and while wearing the purple robes of Christian 
professors and ministers. We do not see how they 
can put this and that together. To us the man seems 
like a thorough-going infidel. He talks like an infidel 
in private; he writes like an infidel; he is doing the 
work of an infidel; and infidels rejoice over the work 
he is doing and call him Brother. But he denies the 
kinship. He says that he is a Christian and doing 
Christian work. Does he not subscribe to a Christian 
creed, hold a high Christian office, draw a Christian 
salary, sometimes praise the Christian Bible to the 
skies? Though he rejects all the fundamental Christian 
doctrines and tears the Bible to tatters, he says 
to all the azimuths that he is the best of Christians. 
It looks to us extremely like saying that black is 
white; that falsehood is truth, that sin is holiness, 
that infidelity is Christianity. We tremble for the 
dictionary as well as for the Bible. Have words no 
meaning that can be depended on? Are we all at sea 
in the use of the English language? The Son of Man 
was betrayed with a kiss— perhaps our friend, the 
enemy, will take it hard that we remind him of that 
ancient tragedy. In war, the soldier who, being in 
command of a fortress for his king, busies himself in 
making breaches in its walls and hewing down its 
gates in the presence of the enemy is not called a 
loyal subject though he continues to fly the king's 
flag and wear his uniform and eat his bread. 

NO "TRUMPET" IN CHRISTENDOM. 

In view of the foregoing facts, are not the friends 
of the old Bible justified in grave misgivings, even 
anxieties, as to the future of their missions and 
churches? But these anxieties may well be enhanced 
when they consider that the churches in general do 
not as yet fully realize their danger. Individual laymen, 
here and there, have come to know and feel the 
peril; but the churches, as such, are not awake. No 
trumpet has sounded— at least none to which they 
are tuned. They are not given to reading controversial 
theology, bristling with technicals and subtleties 
and dead languages. In a dim sort of way they 
may know that the Bible is under fire; and they experience 
that lowering of spiritual tone and activity 
that naturally comes from living in an atmosphere 
largely charged with impurities of doubt and cavil, 



but they do not realize the extent to which ministers 
and institutions have fallen away from the Fathers 
and the Mayflower. They are still relying on certificates 
of church membership, of seminary training, of 
licensures and examinations and approvals by councils 
and associations, to protect their pupils from fundamental 
errorists. Once these were reliable safeguards. 
They are such no longer. But the laymen are not 
awake to the fact; do not understand that now, at 
least in New England, there is little or nothing to 
hinder errorists of the most radical sort from appearing 
in their pulpits. The doors are wide open— wide 
open. 

R3466 : page 358 

AN ILLUSTRATION IN HYPOCRISY. 

A man enters. Who is he? Possibly, a higher 
critic of the grossest kind. He has no Old Testament 
at all. As to the New Testament, he has little of 
that left— no incarnation; no miracles; no resurrection; 
no ascension; no atonement; no infallible teacher 
—nothing but a poor sort of Buddha loaded down 
with blasphemous pretensions and speaking a bit of 
the Sermon on the Mount. If his parishioners could 
hear him talk in private, or in ministerial circles more 
or less sympathetic, they would be astonished and 
dismayed. They would say, "This man is an infidel 
—as much so as Tom Paine." And they would say the 
truth. An infidel is what he really is. But it is not 
what he appears to his hearers. He appears at first 
to them as a devout Christian. He comes to them in 
the name of Christ and his Christianity. He marches 
under a Christian banner and wears a Christian uniform. 
He wears clerical clothes and manners, stands 
in what has long been an orthodox pulpit, has orthodox 
looks and tones and words in preaching and praying, 
has actually joined their local church with its 
Puritan creed. Must he not be all right? Being victims 
of appearances, his hearers are likely to say Yes; 
are likely to receive the man for what he appears to 
be— a teacher come from God, an angel of light. They 
will have open ears for what the angel will have to say. 

What will he say? The people expect serpents 
to hiss, dogs to bark, lions to roar and infidels to advertise 
themselves with a trumpet. This infidel will 
do nothing of the sort. Nothing startling nor disturbing 
will come from him at first. He has been 
taught better. His teachers have shown him by example, 
if not by precept, a more excellent way. It is 
a prudent way, a cautious way, a way of preparation 
and education by littles and littles. He will introduce 
a new newspaper. He will recommend a new book. 
In due time he will confess that he does not think so 
highly as some do of creeds and dogmas and heresy 



trials. So he proceeds by easy stages from hesitations 
to insinuations, from insinuations to plain doubts, 
from doubts to denials— at last the whole camel follows 
the nose. He has prepared his way just as his 
teachers did theirs. He has walked in velvet slippers 
for a while; for a while has been careful not to tread 
on ancient and rheumatic toes. To the last he continues 
to pose as a true sheep whose fleece is of the 
finest and heaviest; as a warm friend of that Bible 
whose integrity and authority he is engaged in shredding 
away. Is it to be wondered at that he meets 
with a measure of success; perhaps warps over a 
majority of his church into rationalism— all but the 
impossible elect? 

R3467 : page 358 

Behold a church stripped of all safeguards and 
then exposed to the sharp practice of a supposed 
friend! No wonder if it falls an easy prey. Caesar, 
without his shield and cuirass and mail, easily falls 
when friend Brutus strikes. 

The fact is that the misgivings and anxieties 
warranted by the present condition of our colleges 
and seminaries and denominational societies, great 
as these anxieties are, should be much enhanced when 
we consider that our churches generally are not aware 
of the extent of the ministerial apostasy, have lost the 
ancient safeguards against it, and are now being attacked 
from within by enemies who swear by all the 
evangelists that they are best friends. 

"A GIANT SPECTER." 

Such is the state of things in the constituency of 
our Congregational Missionary Societies. It is at least 
a condition that threatens all the Protestant denominations. 
One part of the people have lost all faith in 
the Bible as a supernatural book; and they are largely 
the leaders of the people. Another part is uncertain 
what to believe. And still another part that believe 
as firmly as ever have, at the very least, great misgivings 
as to what their societies are actually doing; 
whether they are not sending forth another gospel, 
and sending it at the expense of the evangelical 
churches. All parts are breathing an unwholesome 
atmosphere, misty with doubts and cavil and venturesome 
speculations. Is not this sufficient cause for 
almost any amount of falling off in missionary contributions 
and ministerial supply? 

And yet the managers of our missionary societies 
ignore the anxious situation altogether. They express 
surprise that their operations are so poorly supported. 
What can be the matter with the churches! Why are 
they giving rills instead of rivers! Not an audible 
word comes from officialdom to show that they understand 



the situation. Neither in their official organs, 
nor in the formal reports and appeals at anniversaries, 
is there anything to show but that they have before 
them the public of fifty years ago. They do not even 
recognize the presence anywhere in their fields of 
such a thing as the Higher Criticism. Is it possible 
that their eyes are holden so that they do not see 
a giant SPECTER stalking through the Protestant 
world and smiting the very foundations of Christian 
Missions? It is not possible. They are aware of "the 
pestilence that walketh in darkness and the destruction 
that wasteth at noon day;" but, for some reason, 
they think it best, on the whole, not to manifest their 
knowledge. They may be right. But if all friends 
of the Bible should do the same— should neglect to 
give the plague its true name, to warn the public 
against it, and to take measures for quarantining and 
suppressing it— common sense would be outraged, the 
Truth and Christ betrayed, and the whole land become 
a charnel house. Which may God and his people 
forbid! 



page 359 
BIBLES, TESTAMENTS, STUDENTS' HELPS, ETC. 
SUPPLIED AT WHOLESALE COST PRICES. 



IN presenting our list of Bibles this year we have dropped 
a number which we have previously carried and have 
selected others which we think more desirable. We give 
below a list which, although not very large, we think will 
cover a range sufficiently large to suit the wants of nearly 
all. However, should any of the friends desire a more 
complete list to select from we shall be pleased to mail 
publishers' catalogues upon postal card application. 



Divinity Circuit Teachers' Bibles. 

No. (Add Postage on these 25c each.) Pub. Our 

8701 Long Primer, French Morocco, div. cir., red Price Price 

under gold, full teachers' helps 8-3/8 x 5-1/2 1.95 1.25 

8709 Same as 8701, leather lined 2.75 1.80 

(Add Postage on these, 20c each.) 
8301 Minion, French Morocco, div. cir., red under 

gold, full teachers' helps, 7-3/4 x 5-3/4 1.45 .95 

04403 Minion, French Seal, div. cir., selected 

helps, 7-1/4 x 5 1.20 .84 

Combination Teachers' Bibles. 



These Bibles show the variations of the Revised Version at the 
foot of each page. Otherwise it is an ordinary "Teachers' Bible," 
with maps, concordance, etc., illustrated. 

(Add Postage on these 25c each.) 
610 Bourgeois, French Seal, div. cir., red under 

gold, 8 x 6 x 1-3/4 5.00 1.25 

612 Same as 610, linen lined 5.50 1.38 

614 Same as 610, leather lined 6.00 1.55 

Linear Teachers' Bibles. 

Hitherto these Bibles have been sold by Subscription Agents only. 
Its special feature, differentiating it from other Teachers' Bibles, is 
that it shows the readings of the Common and Revised Versions side by 
side in the same line. (This is the Bible of which we procured a special 
edition with wide margins and DAWN and TOWER references 
thereon; and of which edition we have no more.) 

(Add Postage on these 25c each.) 
350 Small Pica, French Seal, red under gold, 

full teachers' helps, 8-3/4 x 6 x 1-1/2 6.00 2.10 

355 Small Pica, French Morocco, div. circ. red 
under gold, leather lined, full teachers' 

helps, 8-3/4 x 6 x 1-1/2 8.00 3.15 

360 Small Pica, Levant Morocco, div. circ, red 
under gold, kid lined, full teachers' helps, 
8-3/4 x 6 x 1-1/2 10.00 4.25 

Pocket Bibles. 

(Add Postage on these 15c each.) 
01327 Minion, French Morocco, div. circ, red under 

gold, text and maps, 5-3/4x3-3/4 1.00 .70 

01329 Minion Arabian Morocco, div. circ, leather 

lined to edge, red under gold, text and 

maps, 5-3/4 x 3-3/4 1.45 1.00 

01 150 Ruby, French Morocco, limp, round cor., 

red under gold, text only, 5-5/8x3 -7/8 65 .46 

01153 Same as above, div. circ 75 .53 

194 Minion, French Seal, div. circ, red under 

gold text only, 5-3/4 x 3-5/8 x 1 1.10 .75 

03008 Pearl, French Seal, div. circ, linen lined, 

5-3/4 x 3-3/4, references 1.00 .60 

India Paper Pocket Bibles. 

(Add Postage on these, 8c each.) 
031 14x Ruby, Persian Levant, div. cir., leather lined, 

silk sewed, red under gold, 5-5/8 x 4-3/4, refs 3.25 2.15 

01157x Ruby, French Morocco, div. cir., leather 

lined, 5-5/8 x 3-7/8 x 1/2 2.00 1.35 

01103x Diamond, French Morocco, div. cir., red under 

gold, 4-1/2 x 2-1/2 x 1-1/2 1.40 .98 

(Add Postage on these 4c each.) 
0602x Brilliant, Persian Morocco, limp, round cor., 

red under gold, 3-5/8 x 2 x 5/8 (Vest Pocket 



Bible) 2.25 1.55 

02002x Same as 0602x, div. cir., leather lined, silk 

sewed, references 2.50 1.70 

India Paper Bibles. 

(Add Postage on these 15c each.) 
0865-l/2xLong Primer, Levant, div. cir., calf lined to 

edge, silk sewed, round corners, red under 

gold, full teachers' helps, 7-3/4 x 5-1/4 $8.00 $5.20 

03554x Brevier, Alaska Seal, div. circ, leather lined 

to edge, silk sewed, red under gold edges, 

full teachers' helps, 8-1/8 x 5-1/2 5.50 3.60 

9635x Brevier, French Morocco, div. cir., red under 

gold, 7-1/8 x 5, 1 in. thick, references 2.75 1.93 

9636x Same as 9635, leather lined, references 3.75 2.50 

03265x Minion, Levant Morocco, div. circ, calf 

lined, silk sewed, 6-7/8 x 4-5/8 x 1 1-16, refs 4.50 2.90 

03274x Minion, Alaska Seal, div. cir., leather lined 

to edge, silk sewed, red under gold, with 

maps and concordance, 7-1/4 x 5 4.50 3.00 

8635x Minion, French Morocco, div. cir., red under 

gold, 7 x 4-3/4, only 5/8 in. thick, references 1.75 1.13 

8636x Same as 8635x, leather lined, references 2.70 1.89 

THE FOLLOWING THREE ARE NEW AND SPECIALLY DESIRABLE BECAUSE 
TYPE IS VERY LARGE AND CLEAR FOR SIZE OF BOOK. 

3596xA Bold Face Brevier, Alaska Seal, calf lined to 

edge, etc., (specimen type on next page), 

full teachers' helps, 7-1/4 x 5 4.70 2.50 

2596xB Same type and binding as 3596x, with Maps 

Biblical Gazetteer and Concordance 4.70 2.40 

2596xC Same type and binding as 3596x, with Maps 

and Biblical Gazetteer 4.70 2.30 

Revised Version Bibles. 

(Add Postage, 10c.) 
040 Pearl, Cloth, red edges, 5-1/2x4-1/2 40 .30 

(Add Postage, 20c.) 
060 Minion, Cloth, red edges, 8-1/4x5-1/2 1.00 .75 

Oxford Revised Bibles (Am. Com.) 

(Add Postage on these 25c each.) 
3750 Brevier, Cloth, round cor., red edges, maps, 

8x5-5/8 1.00 .70 

3752 Brevier, French Morocco, div. cir., red under 

gold, 8 x 5-5/8 2.00 1.30 

American Standard Revised Bible. 

(Add Postage on these 20c each.) 

160 Bourgeois, Cloth, References 1.00 .80 

172 Bourgeois, French Seal, References 2.00 1.60 



(Add Postage on these 30c each.) 

260 Long Primer, Cloth, References 1.50 1.15 

272 Long Primer, French Seal, References 3.00 2.25 

Lap Bibles for the Aged— References, Light Weight, 
Large Print. 

(Add Postage on these 25c each.) 

2002 Pica, Cloth, red edges, 9-1/4 x 6-1/2 x 1-1/4 2.00 .90 

2014 Pica, French Seal, limp, size same as 2002 2.75 1.37 

2022 Pica, French Seal, div. cir., size same as 

2002 3.50 1.75 

Children's Illustrated Bibles. 

(Add Postage on these 6c each.) 
252 Minion, French Morocco, limp, red under 

gold, 32 illustrations, 5-3/4 x 3-5/8 1.20 .80 

254 Same as 252, French Morocco, div. cir 1.40 1.40 

Testaments. 

(Add Postage on these 5c each.) 
030 Ruby, French Morocco, limp round corner, 

red under gold, 4 x 2-3/4 25 .18 

033 Same as 030, div. cir 40 .24 

0130 Same as 030, with Psalms 35 .24 

0133 Same as 033, with Psalms 50 .35 

010 Diamond, Venetian Morocco, limp, round 

cor., 3-3/4 x 2-1/4 x 1/4 50 .35 

014 Diamond, Arabian Morocco, div. cir., 
leather lined to edge, red under gold, 

3-3/4 x 2-1/4 x 1/4 1.15 .75 

2142px Nonpareil, French Seal, limp, leather lining, 
round corners, red under gold, Psalms, 

self-pronouncing 1.00 .50 

2142x Same as above, without Psalms 80 .40 

287 Brevier, Roan, gilt edge, Psalms 35 .35 

New Testaments for the Aged. 

(Add Postage on these 10c each.) 

212 Small Pica, Roan, square cor., 5-3/4x8-1/4 35 .35 

283 Same as above, with Psalms, 8-1/4x5-1/2x3/4 55 .55 

Revised Testaments. 

000 Nonpareil, Divinity Circuit, leather lined, red 

under gold, refs., 5-1/4 x 3-7/8 x 1/2 (job lot).... 2.00 .45 
0100 Brevier, Cloth, red edges, 16 mo., including postage, 23c. 

Thumb Index on any Bible, 25c Extra. 



page 360 



CONCORDANCES AND OTHER BIBLE STUDY HELPS. 

First in this list we mention the several volumes of 

MILLENNIAL DAWN SERIES 

—referring inquirers to the second page of each issue of this 

journal for prices, etc. We commend also, as aids, the following 

publications by other presses, which we supply at specially 

low prices because of the assistance they will lend to the study 

of God's Word. We mention these somewhat in the order in 

which they seem to us to be desirable aids,— putting the concordances 

last, though they are not by any means least 

important. 

THE EMPHATIC DIAGLOTT. 

This very valuable work, published under the author's 
copyright by Fowler & Wells Co., New York City, has been 
sold by them at $4 in cloth and $5 in half leather binding. For 
several years a friend, an earnest Bible student, desirous of 
assisting the readers of our Society's publications, has supplied 
them through us at a greatly reduced price; now he has purchased 
the copyright and plates from the Fowler & Wells Co., 
and presented the same to our Society as a gift, under our assurance 
that the gift will be used for the furthering of the 
Truth to the extent of our ability, by such a reduction of 
price as will permit the poor of the Lord's flock to have this 
help in the study of the Word. 

REDUCED PRICES.-These will be sold with ZION'S WATCH 
TOWER only. In cloth binding $1.50 (6s. 3d.)— includes postage 
and one year's subscription, new or renewal, to Z.W.T. 
On thin paper, in full morocco leather, divinity circuit, red 
under gold edges, silk sewed leather lined, $2.50 (10s. 6d.)— 
includes postage and one year's subscription to Z.W.T. 

THE TISCHENDORF NEW TESTAMENT. 

This is the ordinary Common Version in cloth binding. 
As footnotes it gives the reading of the three oldest Greek 
MSS., Sinaiticus, Vaticanus and Alexandrine, wherever these 
differ from the Common Version. This is a very valuable 
little work, published in Europe, which we specially import for 
the benefit of our readers. Price 40c, including postage. 

THE SYRIAC-PESHITO NEW TESTAMENT- 
MURDOCH'S. 

This, too, is a valuable work, and an aid in critical study. 
It is translated from the Syriac instead of from the Greek. It 
is claimed by some that it was the language in which our Lord 
and the apostles spoke and wrote, and that the Greek was 
translated from this. Our price, in half leather binding, postage 
included, $2.00. 



LEESER'S TRANSLATION OF THE OLD TESTAMENT. 

This is the standard translation amongst English reading 
Hebrews, by one of their own rabbis. It is not perfect, but is 
a valuable aid in critical study of the Old Testament. Our 
special price, in leather binding, including postage, is $1.10. 

ANALYTICAL CONCORDANCE TO THE SCRIPTURES. 

In English, Hebrew and Greek, by Prof. Young (Presbyterian). 
A valuable work for all critical students. Price, in 
cloth binding, $5, including postage. We are not permitted 
by the publishers to cut this price; but may and do give postage 
free and give besides a premium of any six volumes of the 
MILLENNIAL DAWN series in cloth binding with each Concordance, 
or six volumes if purchaser pays the expressage. 

THE EXHAUSTIVE CONCORDANCE TO THE 
SCRIPTURES. 

In English, Hebrew and Greek, by Prof. Strong (Methodist). 
This is also an able work and useful in critical study. It 
has some advantages over Young's; after getting used to it we 
prefer it. Price, in cloth binding, $6; half leather, $8; full 
leather, $10. We will pay mail or express charges on these, 
and in addition give as a premium all six volumes of the 
DAWN series in cloth binding, with each Concordance, or nine 
volumes if purchaser pays expressage. 

CRUDEN'S CONCORDANCE TO THE SCRIPTURES. 

A valuable work, but scarcely necessary to those who 
have either one of the above mentioned. English only. Cloth 
binding, $1, postage included. 

SMITH'S BIBLE DICTIONARY. 

This is one of the most desirable editions of Prof. Smith's 
work. It is a large volume of 1020 pages. In cloth binding, 
$1.30, including postage. 

"BIBLE TALKS IN SIMPLE LANGUAGE." 

This is the best book of its kind we have ever seen. It 
presents the Bible stories in simple, but not childish language, 
and seems remarkably free from the bad theology so common 
in this class of books. All Christian parents should have a 
Sunday Bible lesson with their children, and this book furnishes 
interesting topics, to which may be added as much concordant 
"present truth" as the age of the children will justify. 
Parents are responsible for their children's training in theology 
as well as morals. This will assist you in the discharge of this 
duty, and thus be a blessing to yourself as well as to your 
children. 

624 pages, 250 illustrations; cloth sides, leather back and 
corners, gilt edges. A subscription book at $3. Our special 



price 75 cents, plus 25 cents postage. 

HEAVENLY MANNA 
FOR THE HOUSEHOLD OF FArTH 

This is a new publication of our own which we believe will 
be in great demand as soon as known. It is a text-book for 
each day in the year— and good year by year continuously. 
Sister G. W. Seibert has selected the texts, which is assurance 
enough that they are appropriate. 

But this is more than a text-book; it has an appropriate 
comment under each text selected by the same dear Sister 
from the columns of back issues of the WATCH TOWER. You 
will surely agree with us that our dear Sister has exercised excellent 
judgment in making these selections,— and more, that 
she was, in harmony with prayers offered, specially guided of 
the Lord in the selections. 

The pages will be of same width as those of DAWN, but a 
little shorter. The paper, etc., are good and the cloth binding 
is neat and attractive; 190 pages, price 35c postpaid;— to 
WATCH TOWER subscribers at the wholesale rate, 20c each, 
postpaid or in quantities, charges collect, 15c. Free to any 
WATCH TOWER subscriber too poor to pay for it, on request. 
We hope to begin filling orders January 1 . 

We hope that this little book will find a place at every 
breakfast table; and that spiritual refreshment may thus be 
enjoyed with the natural food, stimulating thankfulness to the 
Giver of all Good and thus inducing the peace of God and 
favoring both spiritual and natural health and well-being. 



SPECIMEN LINES OF VARIOUS SIZES OF TYPE REFERRED 
TO ON REVERSE PAGE: 

This line is Brilliant type. This line is Diamond type. 

This line is Pearl type. This line is Ruby type. 

This line is Nonpareil type. This line is Emerald Minion. 

This line is Emerald type. 

This line is Minion type. 

This line is Brevier type. 

This line is Bourgeois type. 

This line is Long Primer type. 

This line is Small Pica type. 



Specimen of Boldface Brevier Edition (No. 3596x). 
Christ purges the temple. ST. JOHN 3. Necessity 



R3470 : page 360 

THE SOLON ASSOCIATION. 

What the WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT 

SOCIETY does for its patrons in the matter of securing 

them wholesale rates on Bibles, etc., the SOLON ASSOCIATION 

does for its members in all lines of goods; 

and on many lines there is a still greater discrepancy between 

the wholesale and the retail prices than on Bibles. 

The managers of the Solon are well-known to us as in 

every way honorable and reliable and we give this announcement 

without solicitation for the benefit of 

WATCH TOWER readers,-that they all (as well as the 

Bible House force) may benefit by the wholesale purchasing 

arrangement, effecting large savings in our purchases 

yearly. See notice on page 2. 



page 361 

YOUR "GOOD HOPES" 1905. 



[The plan here proposed we designate "GOOD HOPES," 
because nothing is actually promised— only your generous 
hopes expressed, based upon your future prospects as they 
now appear to you. The plan proved not only so beneficial 
to the cause of truth, but also so blessed to the hopers, for 
some years past, that we again commend it to all as Scriptural 
and good. Those who desire to make use of this plan 
can fill out both of these memoranda. One should be kept 
for the refreshment of your memory; the other mail to us.] 

To the 
"WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY." 

Dear Friends:— I have read with interest of the openings 
for the Dawn and Tract work in foreign lands and here 
at home. I need not tell you that I am deeply interested 
in the spread of the Glad Tidings of the lengths and 
breadths, the heights and depths of redeeming love expressed 
for us in God's great Plan of the Ages. 

I am anxious to use myself— every power, every talent, 



voice, time, money, influence, all— to give to others this 
knowledge, which has so greatly blessed, cheered and comforted 
my own heart and placed my feet firmly upon the 
Rock of Ages. 

I have been considering carefully, and praying to be instructed, 
how to use my various talents more to my Redeemer's 
glory and for the service of his people— those 
blinded by human tradition who are, nevertheless, hungering 
for "the good Word of God," and those also who are 
naked, not having on the wedding garment of Christ's imputed 
righteousness, the unjustified, who stand at best in 
the filthy rags of their own righteousness. I have decided 
that so far as my "money talent" goes, I will follow the rule 
so clearly laid down for us by the great Apostle Paul (1 Cor. 16:2), 
and will lay aside on the first day of each week, according 
to my thankful appreciation of the Lord's blessings 
during the preceding week. Out of this fund I wish to contribute 
to the several parts of the Lord's work specified on 
the back of this letter. Of course, I cannot in advance 
judge or state particularly what the Lord's bounty may enable 
me to set apart weekly, and hence you will understand 
the sum indicated to be merely my conjecture or hope, based 
upon present prospects. I will endeavor to contribute more 
than I here specify; and should I not succeed in doing as 
well, the Lord will know my heart, and you, also, will know 
of my endeavors. 

My only object in specifying in advance what I hope to 
be able to do in this cause is to enable those in charge of 
the work of publishing and circulating the Tracts, etc., to 
form estimates, lay plans, make contracts, etc., with some 
idea of what I will at least try to do in the exercise of this 
my highly appreciated privilege. 

My present judgment is that during the coming year, by 
self-denial and cross-bearing, I shall be able to lay aside on 
the first day of each week for Home and Foreign Mission 
Work (to assist in circulating Millennial Dawn in foreign 
languages, and in publishing the "Old Theology Tracts" in 
various languages, and in supplying these gratuitously to 
brethren who have the heart and opportunity to circulate 
them widely, and in meeting the expenses of brethren sent 
out as "Pilgrims" to preach the divine plan of salvation, 
and in general to be expended as the officers of the Society 
may deem best), the amount of per week. 

To comply with United States Postal Laws, all or any 
portion of my donation may be applied as subscription price 
for Watch Tower or O.T. Tracts sent to the Lord's poor 
or others, as the Society's officers may deem advisable. 

That the work be not hindered, I will endeavor to send 
you what I shall have laid aside for this cause at the close 
of each quarter. I will secure a Bank Draft, Express Order 
or Postal Money Order as I may find most convenient, and 
will address the letter to 

WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 

"Bible House," Allegheny, Pa. 



(Name) 

(Post Office) (State). 



page 362 

WATCH TOWER SUBSCRIPTIONS 

-ON GOOD HOPES ACCOUNT.- 

The friends who contribute to the "Good Hopes" (described 
on the reverse of this sheet) at times desire to send 
the Watch Tower to friends who are not yet interested 
enough to subscribe for themselves; or to deeply interested 
friends who are too poor to subscribe and backward about 
accepting our Lord's Poor offer. They are invited to give 
us such addresses below— the expense to be deducted from 
their donations. Give full addresses, and write very plainly 
please, mentioning the length of the subscriptions. 



CHRISTIAN HOME EMBELLISHMENTS. 



For several years we have been supplying our readers 
with handsome text and motto cards for the walls of their 
homes. Their influence is excellent; for they continually 
and cheerfully catch the eye and remind the heart of our 
great favors present and to come, based upon the exceeding 
great and precious promises of our Father's Word. We 
commend these as helps in the "narrow way,"— helps in 
character-building . 

We aim to have a good supply of these very choice cards constantly 
on hand, and for particular description of some (not all) 
of the styles would refer you to our illustrated list, which will 
be sent on request. We still recommend the dollar packages 
as the most satisfactory way, all things considered, of acquiring 
these texts. They are sent carriage paid for $1.16, by prepaid 
express whenever feasible. 

OLD THEOLOGY TRACTS. 



These are published quarterly, copies being sent to all subscribers. 
Other copies, for distribution among friends, from 
house to house, for enclosure in letters, and in general for use 
in such ways as seem judicious, are supplied freely, the expense 
entailed by the great demand for them being borne by the 
Tract Fund of voluntary contributions. Write for the tracts as 



you feel able to use them, even if not so well able to contribute 
toward the expense; some who are not able, and do contribute, 
do not have opportunities personally to use all that their 
contributions pay for, so that the matter is equalized, 
and all may have a part in this service of disseminating 
the truth. 

A PRIVILEGE AND A SERVICE. 



We are convinced that the Watch Tower lists do not contain 
the names of one-half of those deeply interested in its teachings. 
The total is small enough surely, and we are not content that 
the name of any should be missing. We believe that all such 
will be stimulated and encouraged on the "narrow way" by 
its semi-monthly appearance on their table, reminding them 
afresh of spiritual matters which the world, the flesh and the 
devil continually tend to crowd out of mind and heart. 

Hitherto we have required that all desiring the Watch Tower 
on credit, or free, as "the Lord's Poor," should make personal 
application; but now we request every subscriber to inquire 
among those whom he knows to be interested in present truth, 
and to obtain the consent of all such to send in their subscriptions 
either on credit or free, as their circumstances may necessitate. 
Any getting it on credit may at any future time request 
that the debt be cancelled, and we will cheerfully comply. We 
desire that as nearly as possible the Watch Tower lists shall 
represent all those deeply interested in its message. 

Our object is not the gain of "filthy lucre," but "the perfecting 
of the saints for the work of ministry"— present and to 
come. (Eph. 4:12.) We offer no premiums, desiring the 
co-operation of such only as appreciate the privilege of being 
co-workers with us in this ministry. Our list is now about 
17,000; but it should be at least 25,000, and we confidently 
expect the above program to bring it to that figure. Let as 
many as appreciate it as a privilege, join at once in this service. 

WATCH TOWER SUBSCRIPTION RENEWALS. 



Most of our subscriptions end with the year, so we take this 
opportunity to remark that we will be glad to hear promptly 
from such as desire the visits of the Watch Tower continued. 
This applies to all who get it on the Lord's Poor list as well 
as to those who pay. When names are dropped and afterward 
renewed it makes us unnecessary trouble. 



R3467 : page 363 

"THOU SHALT WORSHIP THE LORD THY GOD, AND HIM ONLY SHALT 
THOU SERVE." 



--LUKE 4:8.-DECEMBER 18.- 

THIS is the Golden Text of a review lesson intended 
to refresh our minds respecting the Lord's dealings 
with Israel, as portrayed in all the lessons of the 
present quarter. It is placed before the end of the three 
months, that the last Sunday of the period, being Christmas, 
may have a more suitable topic. 

We recommend a general re-examination of the lessons 
of the quarter as a good means of refreshing the mind 
and the heart. Others see in the Lord's special dealings 
with Israel his general supervision of the nations of the 
world and a general responsibility of all peoples, similar 
to that of the Jews; but we see in all these things the very 
reverse lesson, namely, that the children of Jacob, called 
Israel, subsequent to the division into the two kingdoms 
known as Ephraim and Judah, were God's specially covenanted 
people, and were dealt with in a different manner 
from other nations. The Word of the Lord on this subject 
is very explicit. Through the Prophet he declares, 
"You only have I known of all the families of the earth." 
(Amos 3:2) This nation alone had special divine supervision 
of its affairs and the promises and instructions, 
through the Prophets, the Law, etc. The Gentile nations, 
as the Apostle explains, were "strangers, aliens and foreigners 
from the commonwealth of Israel"— "without 
God, having no hope in the world."— Eph. 2:12. 

Very true, the Lord did in a general way exercise 
toward all nations a law of cause and effect which we still 
see in operation in every quarter of the world, and he did 
supervise the affairs of the other nations to the extent of 
not permitting them to interfere with the general outlines 
of his plan and his times and seasons. For instance, we 
see that at the appropriate time for the exodus God specially 
raised up Pharaoh to the throne of Egypt because 
he was a particularly headstrong man, who would resist 
the exodus of that people and thus bring down upon the 
nation the ten plagues which they well deserved and which 
would be typical of certain plagues in the end of this age 
against the antitype of Pharaoh, namely, Satan, who shall 
be ultimately overwhelmed, and all people desiring to be 
God's people shall be delivered from his yoke of bondage. 

Similarly, at the time for the removal of the typical 
diadem from Israel, God's providences favored the exaltation 
of Nebuchadnezzar as a world emperor, the head, the 
first of a series of universal empires whose united reigns he 
foreshowed would constitute the "times of the Gentiles," 
the beginning and ending of which times are clearly marked. 
Evidently divine power had to do with the beginning of 
these times of the Gentiles and will have even more to do 
with their closing, at which time Immanuel shall take the 
reigns of government, the result being the dashing to pieces 
of the nations by the iron rod of his authority.— Rev. 2:27. 

It is interesting to note that although the higher critics 
of today take precisely the same grounds as the open infidels 
of a century ago, so far as an attempt to discredit the Bible 



is concerned, nevertheless they have been obliged to alter 
and amend those arguments to fit the new conditions. 
Modern excavations in Babylon and in Egypt have brought 
to light many interesting matters which all tend to corroborate 
the Scripture records which infidelity of a century 
ago held as unauthentic and totally misleading. But while 
forced to acknowledge that in a general way they corroborate 
the Scriptures, these modern infidels do attempt 
to prove by these old records that the scriptural chronology 
is wholly at fault. They attempt to stretch out history 
so as to prove that some of the records were written 
earlier than the date which the Scriptures assign to Adam. 
Their reasonings are specious, false, but nevertheless they 
are deceptive to some who do not discern that these 
learned gentlemen are striving hard to make these ancient 
records contradict the Scriptures. 

There is a deceptive plausibility in their reasoning, 
too: they attempt to count up the many kings, assigning 
each his period, and the sum of these reigns would indeed 
extend back a long distance; but do we not see that they 
are manifestly and willingly ignorant of the fact that 
probably many of these "kings" were merely under kings 
and princes, just as we have today an illustration in Germany: 
the emperors are one line of monarchs in Germany 
while the kings of the various states of Germany 
have so many other lines of ancestry. To string these all 
together and treat them as one dynasty would mean confusion, 
blindness to the truth; it would imply a quadrupling 
of the length of German history. We may be sure 
that in due time, when all the facts shall be opened up, 
the Bible record will be substantiated, as it has been substantiated 
in every contest in the past. A little history 
of some of the findings referred to may not be amiss here. 
We quote:— 

SUCCESSFUL RESEARCH IN ANCIENT LANDS. 

"Many discoveries in the temples of Egypt and the 
ruins of Assyria, buried for twenty-five hundred years, 
throw great light on the Old Testament Scriptures. There 
has been discovered at Karnak, near Thebes in Egypt, a 
splendid structure erected by the very Shishak, king of Egypt, 
who conquered Rehoboam (I Kings 14:25-28; 2 Chron. 12:1-12), 
for the purpose of commemorating his victories. 
On the walls is sculptured the giant figure of the great 
conqueror, standing erect among the thirty -eight kings and 
rulers he has subdued. Among these captives stands a 
Jewish figure, distinguished by his beard, with a rope 
around his neck to indicate that he has been conquered. 
The Egyptian king is represented as striking down the 
Hebrews with a colossal club. The name of Judah appears 
on the sculptures. 

"The Moabite stone, discovered in 1868, in Dibon, 
east of Jordan, and now in the Louvre, Paris, contains an 
inscription by Mesha, king of Moab, recording events in 
the reigns of Omri and Ahab, and reads almost like a 



chapter of 2 Kings. The black obelisk discovered by Mr. 
Layard in Nineveh, describes the campaigns of Shalmaneser, 
and mentions Jehu and his tribute to Assyria. Royal 
tablets from the stone libraries of Nineveh mention Uzziah, 

R3468 : page 364 

Pekah and Hoshea. On one slab from his palace Sargan 
tells the story of the capture of Samaria. The Taylor 
Cylinder, found in Nineveh in 1830, and now in the British 
Museum, describes Sennacherib's conquest of Judah in 
the time of Hezekiah. The stone records of Assyrian history, 
called the 'Eponym Canon,' discovered in 1862, in 
Nineveh, by Sir Henry Rawlinson, help us to gain a more 
exact knowledge of the dates of this period." 

Our Golden Text, which constitutes the caption of 
this article, contains a valuable thought for any occasion, 
but one especially suited to this review. Looking at the 
history of God's earthly people, Israel after the flesh, we 
can readily see that all of their difficulties and failures to 
attain to the blessings that were before them, were closely 
associated with neglect of the truth set forth in our Golden 
Text. They did not sufficiently sanctify the Lord God 
in their hearts and let him be the only fear and only dread 
—fear to displease him, dread to come under his reproof. 
On the contrary, they were prone to forget the Lord and 
all the blessings and mercies they had received from him 
and the obligations they were under to him. 

They forgot, too, that a part of the Covenant entered 
into between the Lord and them was that if as a people 
they would honor him and serve him he would bless and 
honor them, but if as a people they rejected or neglected 
him, they were to have special disciplines and corrections. 
Their neglect of the Lord, their seeking without the Lord 
to establish themselves and to have the assistance and co-operation, 
and to adopt the manners, customs, etc., of 
foreign nations, all these were a part of their failure to 
properly worship the Lord and serve him alone. How 
great was their mistake! And yet we are to remember 
that a remnant did not make this mistake, though they 
were few. This remnant already received a blessing in 
the present life and are to have a still greater share in the 
favors of God in the coming age. 

Similarly nominal spiritual Israel has neglected the 
counsel of this Golden Text, and, instead of having the 
Lord first, has been disposed to forget the Lord and to 
affiliate with the world, to seek worldly favor and co-operation. 
Fear to displease the world has largely controlled 
Churchianity; desire to have the world's favor and approval 
has apparently been more important before the 
mind of Churchianity than the approval of the Lord and a 
fear of the loss of his favor. 

As a result we see today worldly customs in the professed 
Church of Christ, and note that these worldly customs 
have drawn into the nominal Church, as they were 
intended to do, large numbers of the world, unjustified, 



unsanctified, "tares," and that these now quite overwhelm 

the few who are loyal to the Lord and the spirit of his 

Truth. Nevertheless there is today, and has been all 

throughout the Gospel age, a "little flock," a "remnant," 

which did indeed trust the Lord, and which did 

indeed sanctify the Lord God in their hearts and 

make him alone their fear and him alone their dread 

—fear to displease him, dread to lose the light of his kindness, 

his favor. We trust, dear friends, that the majority 

of those who read these words are of the latter class. If 

so all things are working together for good to such, because 

they love the Lord and have been called according 

to his purpose, and are seeking to make their calling and 

election sure by so running as to obtain the prize. 



R3468 : page 364 

"THE PRINCE OF PEACE." 

-ISAIAH 9:l-7.-DECEMBER 25.- 

Golden Text:— "His name shall be called Wonderful, Counsellor, 
Mighty God, Everlasting Father, Prince of Peace."— R.V. 

EVEN though Christmas day is not the real anniversary 

of our Lord's birth, but more properly the annunciation 

day or the date of his human begetting 

(Luke 1:28), nevertheless, since the celebration of 

our Lord's birth is not a matter of divine appointment or 

injunction, but merely a tribute of respect to him, it is 

not necessary for us to quibble particularly about the date. 

We may as well join with the civilized world in celebrating 

the grand event on the day which the majority celebrate 

—"Christmas day." The lesson for the occasion is 

a most happy choice, fitting well to the series of lessons 

it follows. 

The first verse seems much better translated in the 
Revised Version, thus: "But there will be no gloom in 
her that was in anguish. In former time he brought into 
contempt the land of Zebulun and the land of Naphtali, 
but in the latter time hath he made it glorious, by way of 
the sea, beyond Jordan, Galilee of the nations." The 
Prophet penned these words probably shortly after the 
ten-tribe kingdom known as Ephraim had gone into captivity 
to Assyria. Zebulun and Naphtali were the names 
of the principal districts of Ephraim; and Isaiah, prophetically 
looking from those desolated lands of his time, under 
the guidance of the holy Spirit, points out that in the 
latter time a great blessing is coming to those very lands. 

It was centuries after Isaiah's prophecy that our dear 
Redeemer appeared among men and spent most of his 
time, did most of his mighty works, and performed most 
of his mighty miracles in these lands of Zebulun and 
Naphtali, called Galilee, which in the time of Isaiah had 



been denuded of its Jewish population and had been settled 
by Gentile emigrants, "Galilee of the Gentiles." 
Subsequently these Gentiles gathered more particularly in 
the vicinity of the city of Samaria, and became known as 
Samaritans, and, noting the hopes of the Israelites, were 
inclined to claim a certain share in the blessings belonging 
to the people into whose lands they had been introduced. 
The Jews, however, disowned them as being 
still Gentiles, and would have no dealings with the Samaritans, 
as the Apostle pointed out. 

Our Lord himself instructed the apostles to go not in 
the way of the Gentiles nor into any city of the Samaritans 

R3468 : page 365 

to announce him, declaring that he was not sent to 
any but the lost sheep of the house of Israel. He again 
declared to one of these Samaritans, "Ye worship ye know 
not what: we [the Jews] know what we worship: for salvation 
is of the Jews." (John 4:22.) Outside of the Samaritan 
districts all of Galilee became repopulated with 
Jews, though they represented generally the less noble 
class, so that it was rather as a mark of disrespect that our 
Lord and the apostles were called Galileans, Nazareth of 
Galilee being our Lord's home in his youth— a dis-esteemed 
city, as in the expression, "Can any good thing come out 
of Nazareth?" Our Lord indeed was born in Bethlehem, 
a more honorable city. Under divine providence he was 
taken to Nazareth, to the intent that a certain amount of 
odium might attach to him and to his cause. Thus often 
the Lord permits some unsavory influence to attach to the 
Truth, to the intent that none may receive his message 
except from the love of the Truth— that none should be 
influenced to receive it from any earthly consideration. 

THE LIGHT SHINED IN THE DARK VALLEY. 

The second verse of the lesson fitted well to Galilee: 
"The people that walked in darkness have seen a great 
light." As our Lord declared, "The light shined in 
darkness and the darkness comprehended it not." He was 
the light of the world and was in the world and the world 
knew him not. But there is a higher and deeper and 
broader sense in which these words are to be understood 
—they apply to all peoples who have been favored with 
the opening of the eyes of their understanding during this 
Gospel age. 

The people of Galilee in the day of our Lord's personal 
ministry, and other parts of the earth since with a 
similar humble class of people, have more or less had 
amongst them representatives of the true light, and in 
every case the light has shined in darkness and the darkness 
comprehended it not, as our Lord declared to be the 
case. Only a few appreciate this shining now because, 
as the Apostle declared, "The god of this world hath 
blinded the minds of them that believe not"— the eyes of 



their understanding are so darkened by false doctrines, 
misunderstanding and superstition that they cannot see 
those glorious things which can now be seen only by the 
eye of faith, the eyes of their understanding being opened. 

That the prophecy was not confined to the people of 
Galilee is evident from the last clause of the second verse, 
"They that dwell in the land of the shadow of death, 
upon them hath the light shined." The land of the shadow 
of death is the whole world, for the shadow of death 
has been on the whole world ever since the first transgression 
in Eden, ever since the curse or sentence of death 
was pronounced against our race. As the Prophet David 
describes it, the Lord's true people are blessed even while 
in the present valley and under the shadow of death: he 
says, "Though I walk through the valley of the shadow of 
death, I will fear no evil for thou art with me." It is to 
this class who walk with the Lord, who trust him, that 
the true light now shines— not as the glorious Sun of 
Righteousness, as it will shine by and by when the Millennial 
Kingdom is established, but merely as the little lamp, 
"Thy Word is a lamp to my feet, a lantern to my 
footsteps." 

This lamp shines not for the world but for those who 
are the Lord's special people, to whom the light of his 
revelation, the lamp of enlightenment is granted. All 
these thus walking in this valley, under the guidance and 
care of the great Captain of our Salvation, have indeed seen 
a great light in him, have seen a light which the world 
sees not. But, thank God, the world's time to see the 
great light is shortly coming, drawing nigh. As soon as 
the present work of selecting the Church, the Bride, the 

R3469 : page 365 

body members, is complete, these— changed, glorified— 
shall constitute the great Sun of Righteousness to shine 
forth upon the world, the light of divine Truth, the message 
of divine love and mercy and instruction in righteousness. 
These— Christ the Head and the Church his 
body— shall be the great Teacher of the world, who shall 
instruct all, and shall bring as many as are willing into 
full fellowship and perfection— destroying the unwilling 
and unworthy in the Second Death. 

JACOB'S RESCUE NEAR. 

But evidently the Prophet's vision, while it glanced 
upon the preaching of our Lord and the apostles in Galilee, 
and glanced down through the Gospel age and noted 
how this light glinted here and there as a wonderful 
"lamp," nevertheless rested not until it reached the very 
end of this age. There in prophetic vision Isaiah seems 
to see the end of Jacob's trouble— Israel's deliverance from 
the blindness that has been upon her, her acceptance of 
the Lord as the Messiah at the time mentioned by another 
Prophet, when the Lord would pour upon them the spirit 



of prayer and supplication and they should look upon him 
whom they had pierced and mourn for him— at the time 
mentioned by the Apostle Paul, when the fulness of the 
Gentiles having come in (the full number of the Gentiles 
to complete the elect number of the Church), divine 
mercy shall go forth from the Church to bless the world 
and shall rest first of all upon Israel according to the flesh, 
"They shall obtain mercy through your mercy."— 
Rom. 11:31. 

The third and fourth verses of our lesson, we believe, 
are near fulfilment. In the Revised Version it reads, "Thou 
hast multiplied the nation, thou hast increased her joy: they 
joy before thee according to the joy in harvest, and as men 
rejoice when they divide the spoil. For the yoke of his 
burden and the staff of his shoulder, the rod of his oppressor, 
thou hast broken as in the day of Midian." The nation 
of Israel is much increased today, the estimate at the present 
time being between ten and twelve millions. Their joy 
is not yet accomplished because this great deliverance here 
mentioned has not yet been accomplished. It is to be accomplished 
in the day of trouble, shortly after October, 
1914, we believe. The reference here to their deliverance 
being similar to that in the day of Midian signifies that, as 
in the days of Midian the Lord specially manifested divine 

R3469 : page 366 

power by which Gideon and a handful with him smote an 
immense army and delivered Israel from the oppressor, so 
here in the end of this age the glorified Lord and his glorified 
Church, the little flock, the antitype of Gideon and 
his band, will deliver Israel with a similar mighty manifestation 
of divine power. 

This coming deliverance is mentioned particularly in 
the prophecy of Zechariah, as follows:— "Behold, the 
day of the Lord cometh and thy spoil shall be divided in 
the midst of thee. I will gather all nations against Jerusalem 
to battle; and the city shall be taken, and the 
houses rifled and the women ravished: And half of the 
city shall go forth into captivity, and the residue of the 
people shall not be cut off from the city. Then shall the 
Lord go forth and fight against those nations as when he 
fought in the day of battle [the ancient time when the 
Lord worked miracles for Israel's deliverance as at Midian]. 
And his feet shall stand in that day upon the Mount of 
Olives. "-Zech. 14:1-4. 

The fifth verse seems to be more intelligently rendered 
in the Revised Version thus: "For all the armor of 
the armed man in the tumult, and the garments rolled in 
blood, shall even be for burning, for fuel of fire." The 
thought seems to be that at that time will come the end of 
warfare, as the Scriptures have declared. The time of 
trouble with which the Millennium will be introduced 
will be the means by which the Lord will overthrow all 
the powers of evil, as it is written, "He shall cause wars 
to cease unto the ends of the earth." Under the righteous 



reign which will then follow men will learn war no more, 
but will beat their swords into plowshares and their spears 
into pruning hooks. At the present time the reverse of 
all this is in operation, nor can we hope for a change such 
as the Lord's Word here and elsewhere predicts by any 
other power than that from above. Hence our prayer as 
our Lord instructed and in harmony with our hopes, "Thy 
Kingdom come and thy will be done on earth as it is done 
in heaven." 

THE GOVERNMENT UPON HIS SHOULDERS. 

As the verses three to five indicate the coming joys 
and blessings and cessation of war, verse six points out 
how this would be accomplished. This is shown by its 
introduction with the word "for." This verse is the Golden 
Text of our lesson, its center, its pivot point. It goes 
back of the promised blessings to point out how they will 
be introduced. (1) A child will be born— a Son will be 
given— a gift from God. (2) Passing over his earthly 
ministry and faithfulness, whereby the Lord Jesus was 
tested and proven worthy of the favors here prophetically 
assured him as the overcomer, we have the declaration that 
the government will be upon his shoulders. This is an 
old-style figurative way of declaring that the authority and 
honor will be laid upon the Lord Jesus. The same 
thought is still carried out in the armies of the world, 
whose generals have upon their shoulders epaulets in 
which the dignity of their rank is noted, is indicated. 
So upon our Lord Jesus the heavenly Father has placed 
the dignity and responsibility of being the great King 
who in due time, as the Father's representative, as the 
great glorified Mediator, shall reign for a thousand years 
to restore order in the world, to put down all insubordination, 
to destroy every enemy of righteousness and truth 
and to exalt every one who is the friend of these divine 
principles. 

It is worthy of note that this authority or government 
is conferred upon our Lord before he assumes the various 
offices subsequently made: remarkably few recognize the 
authority of this great Captain of our Salvation whom God 
has set forth. Only comparatively few recognize him 
truly and render him obedience and refuse not him who 
speaketh from heaven. These few have the eyes of their 
understanding opened and see what the others do not see, 
and the ears of their understanding opened that they hear 
and comprehend what others do not comprehend. To 
them the Master is the Father's representative and all in 
all even now— even before the time has come for him to 
take his great power and reign, even before he has established 
truth and righteousness in the world. By the eye 
of faith they see him, recognize him, worship, adore, obey 
and follow him. 

KNOWLEDGE OF HIS GLORY WORLD-WIDE. 



But our lesson implies much more than such an acknowledgment 
of our Lord Jesus by the Church. It implies 
a world-wide knowledge, as it is written, "Unto him 
every knee shall bow, and every tongue confess, to the 
glory of God the Father." The government or authority 
is not laid upon his shoulders in vain, and the fact that he 
has not exercised this authority in now nearly two thousand 
years' triumph and ascension up on high is merely in 
accord with the scriptural declaration that the Father has 
a due time set at which the Son shall take unto himself his 
great power and reign, and in association with himself the 
Church, the little flock, now being gathered out from 
the world during this Gospel age. 

The time when the Lord shall manifest to the world 
his government, his authority, his rule, is represented in 
Daniel 12: 1,2, by the words, "stand up." "At that time 
shall Michael [another name for our glorious Lord] stand 
up, and there shall be a time of trouble such as was not 
since there was a nation; and at that time thy people 
shall be delivered, every one found written in the book." 
Our Lord will not have the authority in vain. When he 
shall have the authority he will use it, and one of the first 
works, we are assured, will be the suppression of evil— not 
only the suppression of Satan, the prince of this world, 
who now worketh in the hearts of the children of disobedience, 
and who, we are assured, will be bound at the beginning 
of that Millennial reign, but additionally all the 
works of the devil, all institutions of evil, moral, social, 
financial, that are now injuring the world of mankind and co-operating 
in effecting the groaning and travailing of the 
whole creation. All these will be suppressed as soon as the 
proper time shall come, and he upon whose shoulders the 
power and authority have been placed shall take unto himself 

R3469 : page 367 

his great power and shall begin his reign. No longer, we 
may be sure, will any evil be licensed; no longer will the 
making of spirituous liquors be permitted, authorized and 
licensed, nor the sale of these nor any other harmful thing 
be allowed to do injury in God's holy Kingdom. ~ 
Isa. 11:9. 

It will be then, at that time, that the whole world 
shall begin to recognize the great King whom God will 
thus set in the throne of the world's dominions to rule it, 
to order it to subdue it, to lift it up out of sin and degradation 
and to bring it into harmony again with God as 
it was before sin entered. 

"COUNSELLOR," MIGHTY ONE, FATHER. 

The great Mediator, the Christ, "Prophet, Priest 
and King," Judge, the Seed of Abraham in whom all the 
families of the earth shall be blessed, shall have various 
names; his character and work shall be recognized from 
various standpoints. He will be the Wonderful in that 



in himself he will manifest more than others the Father's 
character and likeness and nature; he will be Counsellor, 
Teacher, Instructor, Helper, Guide, for the whole world 
of mankind; he will be Mighty God— the one with all 
power and authority to deal with mankind throughout the 
Millennial age. 

There will be no appeal from his righteous laws, regulations 
and decisions because the Father hath committed 
all judgment unto the Son: the whole matter will be left 
in his hands. From another standpoint he will be the 
Everlasting Father; having purchased the life of Adam 
and his race with the sacrifice of his own human life, our 
Lord having been granted a new life in his resurrection, 
will have at his disposal the life which he bought in the 

R3470 : page 367 

sacrificing of his own in such measure as will be sufficient 
to supply every member of Adam's race. Each member 
of our race as he shall respond to the knowledge that shall 
then be filling the whole earth, may receive life more and 
more abundantly from the glorified Christ— everlasting 
life, the life that was lost in Adam's disobedience and that 
was redeemed by Christ's sacrifice of himself. 

The one from whom all life for the world must proceed 
is fitly called the Father of the world, since the word 
father signifies life-giver; and since this Father gives life 
everlasting, it is eminently proper that he should be called 
the Father of everlasting life or the Everlasting Father. 
Prince of Peace is another of his titles, but this one evidently 
will not be appropriate to him until, toward the 
close of the Millennial age, he shall have accomplished 
the putting down of everything obnoxious to divine righteousness, 
the subjugation of all things to himself— until 
he shall have finished the use of the iron rod in smiting 
the nations in dashing them to pieces as a potter's vessel. 
Then it will be seen that the motive beyond all this activity 
against unrighteousness was the bringing in of everlasting 
righteousness, the bringing in of everlasting peace, 
and it will be seen that the title well fits our great King, 
Prince of Peace. 

NO END OF RIGHTEOUS GOVERNMENT. 

The seventh verse of our lesson gives another precious 
assurance, and that is that this Kingdom once being attained 
by our Lord will never be surrendered to another, 
never pass into other hands. Of his government and of 
his peace which he will establish there will be no end. 
Not only Israel, but all mankind have been witnesses that 
the best of kings as well as the worst of kings have at times 
surrendered their dominions, and that the best of kings 
might be followed by the worst. How appropriate then 
the suggestion that when the Kingdom of this great King 
of kings and Lord of lords shall have conquered the world 
and have subdued all things unto him and brought all 



things into harmony with the divine will, it shall never 
again be overturned by evil. 

The expression, "upon the throne of David, and upon 
his kingdom to establish it and to uphold it with judgment 
and righteousness from henceforth even forever; the 
zeal of the Lord shall perform this," signifies that this 
great Kingdom which our Lord Jesus at his second advent 
will establish— his Church as members of his body, members 
of his Kingdom class, his Bride associated with him 
—will be the outcome, the antitype of that which was 
typically presented to Israel in the kingdom, the government 
of David. As previously seen, the name David signifies 
"Beloved," and the David who was the first king on 
Israel's throne, and of whom it was said that he sat upon 
the throne of the Lord, was merely a type, a figure of the 
greater David, the Anointed, the Messiah. Jesus Christ, 
the first Lord of all, and the Church his body associated 
with him, constitute the antitypical David, the antitypical 
Beloved of the Lord, whose kingdom shall be an everlasting 
Kingdom "henceforth even forevermore." 

UNENDING KINGDOM TRANSFERRED. 

The Apostle points out (I Cor. 15:28) that, at the 
close of his thousand-year reign, our Lord (his Church associated 
with him) will abdicate the throne of earth. Having 
accomplished the work which the Father has set apart 
to be accomplished by the Anointed in this Millennial 
reign, at its close the entire authority, with the world in 
complete subjection to the divine law and fully restored 
to the divine likeness and all wilful transgressors cut off, 
will be surrendered to the Father's hands, and in accordance 
with his pre-arrangement will be redelivered to mankind, 
that the perfect human family, in the image and 
likeness of God, may rule the world in harmony with the 
divine regulations. But the government will never cease, 
because the government which Christ establishes is the 
divine government, and having given up this special work, 
the Christ will be even more particularly associated with 
the Father in his throne in the general government of the 
universe; and since the government of earth is merely a 
part of the government of the universe, it will still be in 
that particular sense under the supervision of the glorified 
Christ. 

The zeal of the Lord shall perform this. It will not 
be the arm of man nor the zeal of man, however good 
or well meaning, which could bring to pass such wonderful 
changes as those which the Lord has pointed out. The 
Lord himself will accomplish it; he will put all things 
into subjection to the Son— all things, the Apostle explains, 
except himself, for he is excepted who thus puts all 
things under the Son.— I Cor. 15:27. 

From this standpoint, looking back over the history 
of the world, we get a grand view of the divine power and 
wisdom and justice and love. We see how God has been 
continually overruling in respect to the efforts of man, to 



the intent that ultimately, without interfering with the 
free moral agency of any, every man of the whole race of 
Adam shall be fully and thoroughly tested and proven respecting 
his loyalty to the Lord, and thus respecting his 
worthiness of life eternal. How glorious is the divine 
plan! What wonder is there that with its accomplishment 
every voice in heaven and in earth shall be heard 
expressing praise and thankfulness, glory, honor, dominion 
and might to him that sitteth upon the throne and to 
the Lamb? 



page 369 

SEMI-MONTHLY. 
VOL. XXV. DECEMBER 15, 1904. No. 24. 



CONTENTS 

Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society's 

Annual Report 371 

Brief Reports from Some of the 

Branches 374 

The Life and Light of Men 376 

"He was the True Light" 378 

Jews Not Sons of God 379 

Witnessing for Jesus 380 

John Not the Elijah 381 

Water Baptism vs. Holy Spirit 

Baptism 381 

"This is the Son of God" 382 

page 370 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
--ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-24 EVERSHOLT ST., LONDON, N.W. 
GERMAN BRANCH-MIRKER STR., 45, ELBERFELD. 
AUSTRALASIAN BRANCH-32 JOHNSTON ST., FITZROY, MELBOURNE. 

PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE, 5c (2-l/2d.) A COPY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity 
or adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER, will be supplied FREE, if 
they send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting 
the paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our 
list continually. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



THIS JOURNAL IS PUBLISHED IN THE 

FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, DANISH AND ITALIAN LANGUAGES. 

SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



R3474 : page 370 

BROTHER RUSSELL'S DISCOURSES. 



The year's contract with the Gazette having expired the 
Pittsburg Dispatch has taken up the publication of the Discourses 
for an indefinite period with the agreement to refund 
to us pro rata of money paid on subscriptions should 
they be discontinued. 

The Dispatch ranks as Pittsburg's "best" paper and sells 
at 2c per copy or $6.00 per year. We have made a clubbing 
arrangement by which a year's subscription to the 
WATCH TOWER and to Solon Journal and any four volumes 
of DAWN will all be included in the $6.00, which 
price the Dispatch will not permit to be broken. This 
extraordinary combination is made possible only by the 
willingness of the Dispatch to cooperate in the spread of 
our Society's work. 

Where the Dispatch agencies are established the issues 
desired can be readily obtained through them. The Dispatch 
refuses to mail papers to towns where they would interfere 
with agents already located. 

SOLON JOURNAL 



In our last issue we erred in regard to the price of the 
Solon Journal. It is not $2 per year, but $1. Arrangements 
are effected by which all WATCH TOWER subscriptions 
will, on the clubbing plan, include a four months 
subscription to the Solon Journal, or it and the WATCH 
TOWER together will cost you $1.50 for the entire year. 
See our last issue, pages 354 and 360. 



R3470 : page 371 

WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY. 



-ANNUAL REPORT.--DEC. 1, 1903, TO DEC. 1, 1904. 

YEAR by year the Lord's work through our Society 

seems to be increased, and with joy we 

recognize it and tell it to each other. It is so 

great a privilege to be associated with our wonderful 

Redeemer-Lord in the harvesting period of this Gospel 

age. And every now and then we see the Chief 

Reaper's personal care over the work— turning aside 

and making void some of our well intentioned efforts 

to serve him, and guiding and giving success in another 

direction. Such experiences are not disappointments 

in the proper sense of that word— rather they 

are causes for fresh rejoicing, because we desire the 

Lord's will, not our own; and because they give 

fresh evidences that we are not fighting our own battles 

merely but his; and because they give added assurance 

that he will continue to guide us and his 

work to the glorious victory foretold by all the holy 

prophets. 

The year past has not been free from disappointments 
and heart-aches and testings of faith, perseverance 
and patience; but now it is gone and we may 
well rejoice that it finds us a year nearer to the Kingdom 
glories, and by faith we already sing with the 
poet: 

"How light our trials then will seem 
How short our pilgrim way!" 

The reports we are rendering will surprise many 
of you, in that they show but 1,024 increase in the output 
of DAWNS, and that the subscription list of this 
journal, ZION'S WATCH TOWER, instead of increasing 
greatly as we had so confidently expected, has not 
much more than maintained itself at the 20,000 mark 
of last year; and that our expenses have exceeded our 
receipts quite considerably. 

On the other hand, however, you will be surprised 
to note the tremendous circulation of free literature, 
tracts, etc., distributed— so greatly in excess of all our 
past records, and so greatly beyond any other tract 
work ever done by any or all peoples or societies. 
And when you scan the expense columns we are sure 
you will be amazed at the low cost of all this work. 

R3471 : page 371 

The Lord seems to bless the consecrated dollars as of 
old he blessed the loaves and fishes. 

ZION'S WATCH TOWER. 

We are publishing 25,000 copies of our journal 
regularly now, and this leaves about 5,000 copies for 
surplus, samples, etc. This, counting two readers for 



each paper, represents a considerable number, but it 
is not enough— we ought to have double this number. 
Experience teaches us that, in these busy times, those 
who do not receive the TOWER every two weeks to 
stir up their pure minds, are apt to become "overcharged" 
with the cares of this life, and lose their 
interest,— fail to make progress. 

We must look to the dear friends of the Truth, 
everywhere, to effect the increase in the TOWER'S 
circulation, and thus to do something to deepen and 
fix the interest of those they love and desire to see 
well established and well developed spiritually. 

What can and will you do, dear brethren and sisters, 
to push forward this part of the work? This, 
like every other part of the service, is a great privilege 
and will bring to you a great blessing. Inquire 
of the brethren and sisters and friends of the Truth, 
whether or not they are regularly on the TOWER lists. 
Tell them of its worth to you and remind them that 
if too poor to pay they are perfectly welcome to it free. 
We want that the TOWER list shall be nearly as possible 
a list of all "the sanctified in Christ Jesus"— the 
Lord's jewels. This is your part of the work! Do 
it faithfully and let us have a better report next year. 
In sending in new subscribers' names for 1905, number 
them when writing to us— say, This is my first, or 
second or fifth, as the case may be. 

THE COLPORTEUR WORK. 

We have had a great increase in the number of 
Colporteurs during this year. We now have about 
300, but to our surprise the number of DAWNS sent 
out is not much greater than reported last year. Some 
of the new laborers have excellent success, too, and 
all seem very earnest, very loyal to the Lord, to his 
Word and to his brethren whom they seek to serve and 
to deliver from the thraldom of Babylon's errors. Let 
us hope for still greater things in the year before us. 
Some of these dear Colporteurs have merely learned 

R3471 : page 372 

how to do the work recently, and will doubtless have 
greater results to show soon. 

CORRESPONDENCE DEPARTMENT. 

This feature of the work shows a great increase 
over all previous records. We have been cheered and 
comforted many times by your letters telling us of 
your love and zeal and efforts and triumphs and failures, 
etc. And we in turn have endeavored to encourage 
and strengthen you, with, we trust, some 
good results, of which we shall know more fully when 
we reach the Kingdom and have plenty of time to 



talk matters over and recount present blessings and 
crosses. 

During the year we received letters and postal 
cards to the number of 52,065, and sent out 50,254. 
No small labor is represented in these figures, viewed 
from the earthly side; but when compared with our 
debt to the Lord it is nothing— very small interest; 
we can never pay the principal. As we can do nothing 
for the Lord direct we are glad to pay the interest 
to his Brethren in this and other ways. 

THE PILGRIM SERVICE. 

More and more we perceive the Lord's leading in 
connection with this branch of the harvest work. 
The supply of funds more or less regulates its extensiveness, 
and the Lord's program seems to be to have 
the Pilgrims encourage his people without taking from 
each little gathering the responsibility of its own affairs. 
In other words, it preserves the order of meetings 
usual in the primitive Church, as described in 
I Corinthians, twelfth chapter, and does not foster 
the idea of regular preaching and paid ministry common 
today. The little companies, thrown upon their 
own resources, are getting more and more free from the 
entanglements of Babylon, which exercise one man on 
every occasion and force all others to idleness as 
listeners. 

The "Berean Bible Studies," outlined on the 
third and fourth pages of the WATCH TOWER BIBLES, 
bring all to the point of careful thought on the subjects 
discussed, and all who do think on the divine 
plan grow stronger and stronger in the Faith. The 
Lord's plans are always the best, and blessed are those 
who most carefully follow them. If WATCH TOWER 
readers were numerous enough to form large congregations 
and then were to adopt Babylonian methods 
it would mean great spiritual loss. Each should to 
the extent of his ability take some part in some of 
the meetings of "the household of faith." 

The Pilgrim visits are far better, therefore, than if 
protracted stays were made. They can assist and 
encourage without relieving the friends from personal 
responsibilities which are properly theirs and to their 
advantage. Excellent reports have come in respecting 
this branch of the service. We will continue it and 
add to it as divine Providence seems to direct and 
make possible. 

Our records show that twenty-seven brethren 
took part in the Pilgrim service during the year. This 
record includes Brother C. T. Russell's travels, etc. 
Over 140,000 miles were covered, sixteen hundred and 
ninety-five public services and twenty-six hundred 
and twenty-three parlor meetings were held. 

We consider this an excellent showing of a great 
work which the Lord is directing. As the friends 



generally know, these ministries are wholly free— not 
one penny of collections having been solicited. The 
Lord supplies the workers and the means for the 
work. We have only the one general fund— the Tract 
Fund— supplied by voluntary contributions and used 
for the various departments and services according to 
our judgment of their needs and usefulness, as the 
Lord gives us wisdom. 

The total cost of this service was $6,837.86. 
The "miracle" of so great service for so proportionately 
small a sum is partly explained by the fact that 
some of these "Pilgrims" not only served without 
compensation, but actually paid their own traveling 
expenses— donating the same to the Tract Fund. 
None of them receive more than their "expenses"— 
this in a very few cases including small allowances for 
dependent families. But all other things being equal 
we give a preference to the "free"— the unmarried. 

THE WORK ABROAD. 

This is our Foreign Missions account. The labor 
for the Truth amongst benighted Christian brethren 
in Europe and Australia and Jamaica is certainly 
a better work than any we could have done among 
the heathen; and surely the results, though not great, 
are superior to any we could have hoped for amongst 
the degraded of heathendom. As in the beginning of 
the Gospel age the apostles went to the Jews and 
most intelligent and most religiously inclined with 
the message of divine mercy, so the same course should 
still be pursued. 

We have put forth a great effort in foreign fields 
during the past year, and have spent $16,354.00 in 
connection with it, we hope and trust under divine 
guidance and approval. What the fruitage or harvest 
will be the Lord alone knows. We trust that to you 
and the dear colaboring friends abroad, and to us, the 
Lord may ultimately say in connection with this and 
our other services, 'Well done, good and faithful servants, 
enter ye into the joys of your Lord. Ye have 
been faithful over a few dollars and talents; I will 
make you rulers over larger opportunities in my Kingdom. 
About one-third of the above sum is represented 
in DAWNS still on hand at the foreign branch 
depots. 

The largest expenditure was made in Germany, 
amongst whose people over a million tracts and sample 
German TOWERS have been circulated free. No 
great results should be looked for immediately; but 
we are getting into touch with some of the Truth-hungry 
who "have an ear to hear." 

In the French and Italian languages, too, many 
thousands of tract-papers were circulated free, besides 
work being done by Colporteurs. Some fruit is showing; 
yet faith in the Lord is constantly necessary or 



we should be discouraged. Our confidence is that 
"The Lord knoweth them that are his;" and that he 
desires us thus to sound the great trumpet of Jubilee 
from one end to the other of the nominal "heavens." 
-Matt. 24:31. 

The Swedish and Danish friends have joined also 
in the free circulation of the Truth through the use 
of sample copies of the Danish and Swedish TOWERS. 
Some excellent heads of "wheat" are ripening there. 

The British Branch received from us tracts to the 
value of $2,739.82, and did a splendid Volunteering 
work. This branch is growing and bids fair ere long 

R3471 : page 372 

to be self-sustaining. The Lord has many true children 
there and we are gradually finding them through 
the various channels in active use;— colporteuring 
DAWNS, tracts, preaching and TOWERS. 

The Australian branch is our latest foreign work 
on a considerable scale. In money and printed matter 
it received during the past year $3,453.75 out of 
the total mentioned above. We trust that it will soon 
get so under way as to be nearly self-sustaining. Several 
of our American Colporteurs (among the best) 
have gone to Australia at their own expense,— to endeavor 
to give the work there a good start. 

Jamaica was the center of a good work during the 
past year. The interested are nearly all blacks, and 
Brother Browne (colored) has apparently been doing 
excellent service there; not so much in awakening 
new interest as in crystalizing and rightly directing 
and deepening that already started. 

R3472 : page 373 

SUMMARY OF YEAR'S OUTPUT. 

Total number of DAWNS sold at cost, 21 1,985 

These were of various languages and volumes 
and all in cloth binding. DAWN I. in 
magazine form is included in statement of 
TOWERS. 

Booklets sold at cost, 68,438 

Copies of English WATCH TOWER sent out free, 293,542 

Tracts of various kinds sent out, 4,589,300 

These tracts and TOWERS represent in tract 
pages, the usual form for stating such 
matters, 129,588,258 

These figures are really astounding, far beyond 
any tract distribution ever before accomplished. May 
the Lord's blessing go with these messages of his love 
and mercy to their readers, and abide also upon all of 
you, dear readers, who joined in their circulation, 
either by distribution or by financial assistance in 



their preparation. 

The dear friends in every quarter entered into the 
"Volunteer work" with great zeal during the past 
year, and experienced divine blessings accordingly, 
we believe. As examples of the four Churches most 
actively engaged we note the following: 

Boston Church had 84 workers engaged and 
served Boston and 28 adjacent towns with tracts. 
Total tracts, 84,431. 

Washington Church had 46 workers and served 
33 towns adjacent. Total tracts, 64,876. 

Chicago Church did much more Volunteer work 
than ever before, distributing 73,000; but we have no 
report as to the number of laborers who engaged. All, 
we are sure, received rich blessings. 

Allegheny Church made a wonderful record this 
year— over 304,960. These, however, were not all 
distributed in the usual manner: a thorough distribution 
in this and adjacent cities used about 100,000 and 
the remainder were sent out by mail, some sending in 
the addressed wrappers and some wrapping them. 
About fifty participated and much pleasure and profit 
resulted. 

So far as heard from there is a fervent zeal to begin 
afresh next spring, as soon as new Volunteer 
matter is ready. 

NEWSPAPER GOSPELLING. 

Many will read a Gospel message from a newspaper 
who would not so readily hearken to the message 
from other quarters. Some of these are "disgusted" 
Christians, confused by the jargon of Babylon. Some 
are worldlings, whose parents were Christians, and 
who have never seen anything attractive in the so-called 
Gospel they have heard preached. During the 
past year the Lord has opened a door to many of these 
through the publication in the secular press of 
"Brother Russell's" discourses. Millions of sermons 
have thus been scattered far and near; and some at 
least have done good. If the Lord wills we shall be 
glad to see this "door" keep open, or even open still 
wider. The dear friends in various quarters were 
prompt to encourage the journals which thus published 
the "meat in due season," by purchasing extra 
copies and circulating them amongst their 
acquaintance. 

THE FINANCIAL OUTLAY. 

Naturally the outlay for so great a work has been 
considerable; and it will be seen that we have miscalculated 
to some extent and spent more than we received. 
Some who sent us "Good Hopes" for the 
year have written us of their inability to do as they 
desired. We of course reminded them that their 



"Good Hopes" were merely suggestions of what they 
hoped and would have liked to do; but that God accepted 
the good intentions and so do we: and that 
they must not grieve as if this meant the breaking of 
a pledge, for it was nothing of the kind. This has 
occurred before, but never for so large an amount. 
We must guard our expenditures during the coming 
year, for our Lord's commands prohibit our going into 
debt, except, as in the present instance, temporarily. 

Receipts. 

Surplus on hand, Dec. 1, 1903, $ 1,094.11 

Receipts from "Good Hopes" 26,159.89 

" Tract Fund from other sources, 12,345.93 



Total $39,599.93 

Expenditures. 

For "Pilgrim" expenses, $ 6,837.86 

" Publishing matter circulated free— tracts, 

etc 25,908.04 

" Foreign Missions account, on which there 

may be some later returns, 13,614.18 



Total, $46,360.08 

Deficit,— receipts less than expenditures, $ 6,760.15 



Praising God for his mercies, we have started on 
our new fiscal year with good courage and a realization 
that never before have we had so many evidences 
that the crisis of Babylon is approaching— that the 
division between "wheat" and "tares" was never 
more marked, and that very soon the harvest work 
will witness a great impetus from the repellant force 
of "higher criticism" or scholastic infidelity. The 
fields are white for harvest and laborers shall receive 
abundant wages, not only in the life to come but also 
in the joys of the Lord in the present time. Be of 
good courage, dear brethren— our Lord's reign will 
soon be due, and if faithful we shall share his glory, 
honor and immortality. 

R3472 : page 374 

BRIEF REPORTS FROM SOME OF THE BRANCHES. 



BRITISH BRANCH REPORT. 

Sale of Cloth and Leather DAWNS, 23,640 



" Paper DAWNS, 1,364 

" TOWER DAWNS, 3,844 

28,848 

Sale of Booklets, 4,213 

Tracts circulated free,— pages, 24,169,200 

Letters and cards received, 4,282 

" sent out, 5,256 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL,- 

It is again my privilege to send you a report of the 
work of the British Branch so far as the circulation of the 
various publications and the receipts and expenditures of 
the Tract Fund are concerned. 

We are pleased in being able to say that the work 
of the past year has been one of continued progress. 
The circulation of the DAWNS has increased quite 
considerably. We report increase of 4,000. Last year 
the increase was 3,000, the year previous 2,000; so that 
not only is increase going on, it is growing proportionately. 
Besides these sales we have sent out about 5,000 of 
the special DAWNS in TOWER form. Then the booklets 
are increased in numbers, though at a rather slower rate. 
Most of this work was the result of the labors of the Colporteurs, 
and we thank the Lord for their zeal in the harvest 
field. This service has hitherto been confined to a few 
zealous ones who have held on to the privilege of serving 
the Lord and his people, but during this year some others 
commenced the work, to their own joy and to that of those 
to whom they have been privileged to minister. However, 
from one cause or another, the total number of active 
workers has not been greatly increased. Some of these 
who have been in the work for a time are now resting; we 
hope to see them back soon. There is still a large portion 
of this country untouched with the harvest message, and 
the inquiries which come in tell us that there are yet 
many waiting for the Truth. We continue to pray that 
"the Lord of the harvest will send more laborers into his 
vineyard." 

The Volunteer work has gone on well, though the 
number of tracts delivered this year is less than last. However, 
as the tracts are double the size, there has been much 
more reading matter distributed, as well as much more 
weight. The tracts are bringing in evidences of the distribution. 
The TOWER list continues to grow, as you will 
have noticed: however, it does not grow as fast as your 
very liberal terms would lead us to expect; the friends do 
not appear to appreciate fully the offers which have been 
made— free to the Lord's poor. 

The receipts of the Tract Fund are less this year, by 
a considerable item; but as last year's were made large by 
two special donations and as there is this year an increase 
of the average, there is even in this a cause of satisfaction. 

You will be glad to know that Wales is now getting 
its share of the harvest blessing: several colporteurs have 
been working in South Wales, and they find the books 



sell there readily. In Ireland, too, the Truth spreads: the 
dear brethren in Dublin continue to scatter the message 
of love, with much joy to themselves. Scotland still 
keeps in the vanguard, though most of its towns are now 
well colporteured. Since writing my last report we have 
lost the fellowship of some dear brethren, gone to be with 
the Lord; but the knowledge that they are with him 
helps to enforce the fact that the time for the establishment 
of the Kingdom draws very near. We pray that we 
may be faithful to the end, that we also may hear him 
say, "Well done." 

I am sure the British friends would think this report 
incomplete if I did not make mention of their love to 
you, and of their desire that you may find it convenient 
to come to this country again very soon, and the sooner 
the better; and so, dear brother, please take this from 
them and from me, and do your best to come. 

About seven years ago there were only about three or 
four regular meetings held in this country— now there are 
over forty in England, Scotland and Ireland. 

I trust that the record of the work accomplished, and 
the signs that much is waiting to be done, will prove the 
needful stimulus to us all to "do" with our might what 

R3473 : page 374 

our hands find to do. 

Praying the Lord's blessing upon all his people, including 
you, and all the colaborers, I am, dear brother, 

Yours affectionately, in him, J. HEMERY. 

GERMAN BRANCH REPORT. 

Sale of DAWNS cloth bound, 3,479 

" " in TOWER form, 5,600 

" Booklets, 3,471 

Tracts and TOWERS distributed free, stated in tract 

pages, and not included in general report, 34,344,000 

Letters and cards received, 1,355 

" sent out 2,025 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

I have the pleasure of handing you herewith a report 
of the work here during the year past. It has seemed a 
short but eventful year, and we are grateful to the Lord 
for all his sustaining grace. We feel that without him we 
could have done nothing— nothing that would have been 
worth mentioning. As it is, though well aware of weakness 
and inabilities, we may mention with pleasure evidences 
of some fruit of labors. We feel confident that 
the Society's sacrifices on behalf of the household of faith 
of the German tongue are not in vain, neither will the 
witness to the German nation be without avail. Evidences 
have reached us within the last two weeks showing that 
weapons prepared against the Truth are rapidly increasing. 
At least a dozen different papers have issued articles against 



the DAWNS and TOWERS: some repeatedly. The latest 
step is taken by the national church authorities in publishing 
leaflets of a warning, and causing them to be scattered 
abroad. Of course, these "weapons" of misrepresentation, 
etc., will not prosper against the Truth and the 
"very elect," but they are prejudicing a great many so 
that they will not prove "our gospel" (the old gospel)— 
whether the things said about it are true or false. But we 
are not dismayed, "whether they hear or whether they 
forbear," the witness being given as the Lord directed, 
"in every city," "in all nations." 

However, encouraging features of the work are not 
wanting. The German TOWER is now being sent to from 
five to six hundred regular subscribers in Europe, many 
of whom are quite zealous in spreading the good news, 
though most of them are poor and cannot, as they would 
like to do, support the work financially. But these 
"brethren" are learning to appreciate more and more the 
fact that the Lord, the Head of the one body, is fulfilling 
his good pleasure toward them through some of the 
"stronger members" of the same "body." They think 
with gratitude of those "brethren" whom the Lord has 
made "rich" in faith and love and "good works,"— good 
works in the laying down of their lives and giving of their 
substance to "do good, specially to the household of 
faith." But these younger members in the knowledge of 

R3473 : page 375 

Present Truth need also your prayers— yea, we feel that 
your prayers are with us. 

In several places Bible Study meetings are now regularly 
held where the number of those deeply interested in 
the DAWNS is gradually increasing. I might mention fifty 
to sixty in Barmen and Elberfeld, thirty to forty in Konigsberg 
thirty to forty in Wermelskirchen, twenty to twenty-five 
in Weidenau, etc. Having very few Colporteurs and 
Volunteers to start with, the progress made with the spread 
of the good message was naturally slow. But within the 
last three weeks, since we have been sending the Volunteer 
TOWERS to newspaper lists, the inquiries for further reading 
are coming in quite encouragingly. I doubt not that, 
the Lord willing, another year of faithful effort to gather 
the elect will be well rewarded with "gathering fruit 
unto eternal life." 

Germany is well supplied with false teachers of great 
influence and popularity, who are "shaking" the powers of 
ecclesiastical "heavens" of all denominations. This fact 
seems to make it timely indeed that the Lord should send 
his message to bear up the "feet" members who are in 
danger of falling into doubt, infidelity or other snare of 
the devil. We know of some who have already been so 
helped. Are these not also our "brethren," for whom we 
should lay down our lives? 

Our assurance is in the Word of the Lord: "Your 
labor is not in vain in the Lord." 



With much love, your brother, O. A. KOETITZ. 

AUSTRALASIAN BRANCH REPORT. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

I have the honor to hand you herewith the report of 
the Tract Fund receipts and expenditures for the Australasian 
Branch of the WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY 
for the period beginning Feb. 10, 1904 (when our 
first consignment of DAWNS, etc., arrived) and ending 
Oct. 31, 1904, being eight and one-half months. 

Expenditures. L. S. D. 

Freight and postage 77 15 6 

Pilgrim work 19 16 11 

Rent, gas and other expense, 42 11 3 



Total 140 3 8 

Receipts from Australasia 19 6 11 



Deficit, supplied by the Home Office 120 16 9 

Report of Literature Circulated. 

Copies of DAWN and TOWER DAWN 3,132 

" Booklets 1,004 



Total 4,136 



Tracts sent free 214,150 

These represent tract pages 5,108,800 



Letters and cards received 1,135 

" sent 2,300 



Total 3,435 

The work of harvest, as we have the privilege of 
being associated with it in Australasia, though not large, 
has shown considerable to encourage. For example, the 
TOWER list in this state of Victoria has increased eighteen-fold 
during the period covered by our report, and we have 
reason to believe that most of these are intelligently and 
deeply interested, some of the names representing more 
than one interested person. Fresh interest is continually 
coming to light, not only here but in all parts of the 
commonwealth and New Zealand. 

Hundreds of TOWER-DAWNS are being read from 
North Queensland to Southern Tasmania, and from the 
west coast of Australia to the east coast of New Zealand, 
with highly gratifying results in respect of interest taken 
and activity developed by those who have read. The influence 
of these TOWER-DAWNS will be making itself felt 
for some time to come. 

Another encouragement has been afforded by a brother 



resident in this state. He donated L.10 to the Tract 
Fund, requesting that it be used to pay postage on packets 
of tracts to be sent to addresses in Victoria. For this 
sum we can post 4,800 packets; part of them have been 
sent. 

The Spirit is moving on the face of the waters, and 
there may be accessions to the Colporteur ranks from our 
Australasian brethren and sisters, besides the courageous 
souls coming from America. 

In response to invitations, I made a Pilgrim tour of 
about 4,500 miles. The brethren in South Australia and 
Western Australia made us heartily welcome. Interesting 
meetings were held almost every evening, with double 
duty on Sundays, and we were cordially invited to come 
again, which we hope we may do in the course of the 
next twelvemonth. 

The volunteer work is going on in the largest cities 
of this part of the world, also in some of the smaller 
towns. And there has been a considerable demand for 
other tracts, all of which is indicated in the report of literature 
distributed. If these were to be charged against the 
Tract Fund of the Australian Branch, as might appropriately 
be done, our deficit would be much larger than it is. 

In Melbourne some hundreds of DAWNS and a good 
many thousands of tracts have been put into circulation. 
These are having an effect, as is to be expected. Some few 
souls are being drawn to the Truth; they hear the Lord's 
voice and recognize it, as the sheep do that of their 
Shepherd. Public warnings have been given against the 
DAWN literature. The Universalists decry it, because they 
consider it too narrow; others object that it is too broad. 
What are we to do? "I am in the place where I am demanded 
of conscience to speak the Truth, and therefore 
the Truth I speak, impugn it whoso list." Oh, may our 
"speech be with grace, seasoned with salt;" may we be 
able clearly and meekly to give a reason for the hope that 
is in us; may we be workmen that need not to be ashamed, 
"rightly dividing the Word of Truth!" 

An incident which occurred not long ago will interest 
you. Of itself, it was a small matter; yet it illustrates 
perfectly the spirit which now possesses some who professedly 
serve the Lord. A minister came to secure Vol. I 
and booklet about hell for a friend. He himself had been 
reading it and agreed with much of the teaching. To the 
writer he said, "Doesn't the author err in associating the 
eternal torment doctrine so closely with the ministers? 
Very few believe it now." Said I, "Mr. Russell is aware 
that very many ministers disbelieve that doctrine and 
avoid teaching it; the point is that under those circumstances 
they allow their congregations to believe it without 

R3474 : page 375 

trying to teach them otherwise." Said he, "Perhaps 

it is as well that the people believe it." I was so astonished 

at hearing such a sentiment actually expressed in living 



words that it took me some moments to recover. Then I 
said, "That won't do; if the doctrine be true, it should 
be preached by all means; if it be false, it is too awful a 
misrepresentation of God to allow the people to remain 
under." He came down, so to speak, and saying, by way 
of excuse, "Perhaps the ministers wish to be sure of their 
ground," he departed. Is it surprising, in view of such 
things as this, that the Lord has spewed out the Laodicean 

R3474 : page 376 

(present) state of the nominal church, and that he has deprived 
them of the honor of declaring his Truth as it becomes 
due? 

Public meetings are now being held regularly in Melbourne 
in the interest of the Truth. Excellent attention 
has been given to the opening series of Chart Talks, and 
we believe genuine interest is being aroused, notwithstanding 
the opposition. 

Discouragements there have been, both locally and in 
connection with the work at large; but they are behind, 
and we need not trouble you with details. Let us class 
them with the "light afflictions." The Lord has been 
very good to us and we are thankful for his great mercies. 
Our thanks are due our Australasian friends who have put 
their shoulders to the wheel. A continued interest in 
your prayers, and those of the saints generally, is earnestly 
solicited. 

Your servant in Him, E. C. HENNINGES. 

Special reports from Danish Swedish, French and 
Italian depots not received in time for this report. 



R3474 : page 376 

THE LIFE AND LIGHT OF MEN. 

--JOHN 1:1- 18. -JANUARY 1.- 

"In him was life; and that life 
was the light of men."— Verse 4. 

OUR lesson is an epitomized statement of the 

entire plan of God in most comprehensive 

form, reaching from long before the creation 

of the earth down into the future to the grand consummation 

of the divine plan at the close of the Millennial 

age. The subject is wide enough, deep enough, 

high enough to furnish food for thought for a score 

of lessons. In considering it as a whole, therefore, 

we can touch only briefly on its various points at this 

time. 

"In the beginning": These same words introduce 
us to the Bible as the record of the world's creation 
in the book of Genesis, but here the reference is 



to a beginning long before the creation of this earth. 

At the beginning mentioned in Genesis, Job tells us 

that the morning stars sang together and all the sons 

of God shouted for joy. There were then at that 

time angelic beings, sons of God, previously in existence, 

who rejoiced at this further manifestation of divine 

power in the creation of this world. There must 

have been a beginning, so far as they were concerned, 

long before. It is to this original beginning that our 

text refers, a beginning before the angels were created. 

To what beginning, then, could it refer— a beginning 

of what? We answer that it was not the beginning 

of the divine being, for respecting the heavenly 

Father, Jehovah, the Almighty, we have the 

distinct statement that from everlasting to everlasting 

he is God— he had no beginning. Hence the beginning 

mentioned in our text refers neither to man, nor 

to angels, nor to the Father: it does refer to the "beginning 

of the creation of God" (Rev. 3:14), a name 

or title given to the only begotten of the Father, who 

subsequently became our Redeemer and Lord, Jesus. 

With this thought in mind all is clear: the Apostle's 

explanation has settled the matter. 

This original or beginning or first creation of 
God in our text is called the Word of God— the Logos. 
History tells us that in olden times it was customary 
to regard the person of the king as too sacred to be 
seen by the common people except on special occasions, 
and that when certain great laws or edicts were 
to be announced it was customary for the king to be 
screened by a lattice from the gaze of the multitude 
assembled, while before the lattice stood a person who 
enjoyed the king's favor and confidence and who became 
his representative and was called the king's 
word, because he spoke in a loud, audible tone the commands 
and directions of the king, who communicated 
with him in a low voice from beyond the lattice work. 
This illustration gives us a clue to the use of the Word 
as one of the titles of the only begotten Son of God. 
It suggests to us what the Scriptures variously declare, 
namely— that all of the Father's dealings with all 
others of his creatures are done indirectly through the 
Son, his mouthpiece, his Word, his representative. 

A GOD, WITH THE GOD. 

In the beginning the Word was alone with the 
Father, the Apostle declares. But the whole matter 
is still more clearly seen when we take the literal 
reading of the Greek, because in it the Greek article 
appears before the word rendered God, which would 
make the translation into English properly read, "And 
the Word was with the God." Here we see most 
clearly and beautifully the close relationship existing 
in the very remote past between the heavenly Father 
and the heavenly Son, between the Almighty God 



and his only begotten Son, in whom centered all the 
divine purposes and through whom he was pleased to 
manifest every feature of the divine power and glory. 

The next statement, "And the Word was God," 
is not to be understood as contradicting the statements 
previously and elsewhere made, but the distinction 
is considerably lost in the translation. We explain, 
therefore, that here the Greek article does not 
appear before the word translated God, and hence the 
thought in the statement is a God, as in contrast 
with the previous statement, the God. Thus understood 
the passage would properly read, "The Word 
was with the God and the Word was a God." Ah, 
now we have it clearly! The word god signifies 
mighty one, and in the Scriptures is used not only respecting 
the Father but also respecting the Son, also 
in reference to the angels, and in one instance when 
referring to men, influential men— the seventy elders 
of Israel whom Moses appointed or designated elohim, 
that is gods, mighty ones. The thought in our text, 
then, is that the Word of God, the Only Begotten of 
the Father, the beginning of the creation of God, was 
created on a nobler and higher plane of being, endued 
with grand qualities, so that he was in very fact a 
god— not the Father, not the God, not Jehovah, but 
"The Son of the Highest." The Apostle Paul clearly 
sets forth this matter, saying, "To us [Christians] 
there is one God the Father, and one Lord Jesus 
Christ." -I Cor. 8:6. 

The second verse reiterates and thus emphasizes 
the statement that the Word, which was a God, was 
in the beginning (before the creation of others) 
with the God. If anyone were in danger of misunderstanding 
the statement of the first verse that the 

R3475 : page 377 

Word was a God, if in any danger of thinking of this 
as signifying that the Word was the God, the second 
verse would correct the error by showing that the 
Word as a God was with the God, and that therefore 
they were two and not one in person. 

The third verse is a grand, comprehensive statement, 
which gives us a glimpse of the great honor 
and dignity of the Son of God, "the Only Begotten" 
of the Father, the "beginning of the creation of God." 
"All things were made by him," by the Word- 
angels, worlds, mankind— all things: "Without him 
was not one thing made that was made." How 
grandly, how gloriously, the dignity and honor 
and position of our great Lord looms up before 
us as we think of how highly the Father honored 
him, even before he came into the world, even before 
he manifested his obedience to the Father's will even 
unto death. 



"HE IS EXCEPTED WHICH DID PUT ALL THINGS 
UNDER HIM." 

-2 COR. 15:27; EPH. 4:5,6.- 

We are not from this statement to get the inference 
that the Son was superior to the Father, that 
the Father had created nothing previously because of 
lack of ability to create, but that the Father was 
pleased thus to recognize, honor and use this particular 
channel in his great work. The Apostle sets the 
whole matter straight, saying, "To us there is one 
God of whom are all things, and one Lord Jesus 
Christ by whom are all things." This explains the 
matter. The power all resided in the Father— everything 
is of him, from him, through the Son, by the 
Son as his honored instrument and representative, 
"that all men may honor the Son even as they honor 
the Father also." (John 5:23.) It will be noticed 
from this last quotation as well as in all the other 
statements here examined that there is no suggestion 
whatever that the Father is the Son and that the Son 
is his own Father, but quite to the contrary— that 
there are two persons, both Gods, both Creators, but 
the one the superior, the other his honored representative 
in glory and in power. 

Verse four transports our thought from the glorious 
Only Begotten, the Word of Jehovah, creating 
angels, worlds and man, to his work as man's Redeemer 
—present among men. Elsewhere we get the particulars 
of how he who was rich became poor for our 
sakes; how the Only Begotten, the Word, left the 
glory of the Father to carry out the Father's great 
and wonderful and loving plan of salvation toward 
man. Briefly the Apostle assures us that when Jesus 
was amongst men "in him was life." There is a 
great force and meaning in this expression when we 
understand it. When our Lord was amongst men he 
was the only man who had life in him. Father Adam 
once had life, but he lost it through disobedience in 
Eden, and instead the curse, the sentence of death, 
rested upon him and was inherited by all of his children, 
so that not a man in all the world of Adam's 
race had life— except this Son of man of whom John 
was writing. Of all others the Apostle Paul wrote, 
"By one man's disobedience sin entered into the 
world, and death as a result of sin; and thus death 
passed upon all men, for all are sinners." (Rom. 5:12.) 
Our Lord's words respecting those about him 
were, "Let the dead bury their dead." True, not 
all were dead in the sense of having lost every spark 
of life, but all were more than nine-tenths dead and 
the other tenth fast ebbing away. But in him, in 
this Only Begotten of the Father when amongst men, 
there was life, absolute life, perfect life, because his 
life had not come from Adam through an earthly 



father but was directly transferred from his prehuman 
state or condition to the womb of Mary. Thus born 
he was indeed partaker of a human organization but 
without any impairment of his life rights; hence, as 
the Scriptures declare, he was holy, harmless, separate 
from sinners— separate and distinct from all the race 
of Adam, peculiarly different because of his different 
begetting. 

"AND THE LIFE WAS THE LIGHT OF MEN." 

Needless to say light is here used in a figurative 
sense: it signifies hope, intelligence, instruction. 
Our Lord's life as the "man Christ Jesus," his holiness 
of heart, his full obedience to the Father's will, 
his loyalty to every principle of righteousness, his 
manifestation of divine character, no less than the 
words of instruction that he spoke as never man 
spake— all these attest that indeed he was a great light 
amongst men— a light which ever since has been shining, 
not only through his recorded discourses and instructions 
but also through the lives of his disciples, 
and that in proportion as they were and are truly his. 

"And the light shined in darkness; and the 
darkness appreciated it not." How true! not only 
of the Jews of his own day, but how true still in respect 
to the world in general. How few grasp, comprehend, 
appreciate the light of divine truth and 
grace which shone out through the words and deeds 
of the man Christ Jesus. True, we are informed that 
about four hundred million, nearly one-fourth of the 
world's population, are named by his name— Christians, 
—yet how impossible it would be to close our 
eyes to the great fact that the vast majority of these 
are in nearly as great darkness as the remaining three-fourths 
of the world's population, the heathen. Into 
how few hearts and minds has this true light shined! 
The Apostle's explanation is the only one that covers 
the case. He declares, "The god of this world hath 
blinded the minds of them that believe not, lest the 
glorious light of the goodness of God shining in the 
face of Jesus Christ our Lord should shine into their 
hearts."— 2 Cor. 4:6. 

How sad! Three-fourths of the world in total 
darkness, while nearly all of those who say, We see, 
are "blind also"! (John 9:40.) If by the grace of 
God our eyes have been opened to some degree to appreciate 
this great light, let us not be highminded but 
fear lest the light should pass from us, lest we should 
ever get into darkness again, lest pride of heart or the 
cares of this world or the deceitfulness of riches, or 
any other thing should again blind us to the goodness 
and grace of God in Christ. Even Christians, the 
Apostle intimates, see only in part, but may see increasingly 
in proportion as they come into line and 
accord with the divine plan respecting them. Let us 



keep in memory how he wrote respecting some true 
followers of the Lord in his day, saying, "I cease not 
to give thanks for you, making mention of you in my 
prayers; that the God of our Lord Jesus Christ, the 
Father of glory, may give unto you the spirit of wisdom 

R3475 : page 378 

and of revelation in the knowledge of him: the 
eyes of your understanding being enlightened; that 
ye may know what is the hope of his calling, and 
what the riches of the glory of his inheritance in the 
saints."— Eph. 1:16-18. 

In verses six to eight the Apostle begins to particularize 
respecting the Lord's earthly ministry, and 
shows us that John the Baptist was divinely commissioned 
to bear testimony and witness to the Lord, to 
this great Light, the object being the giving of a 
ground for faith in Jesus as the Light, the life of the 
world. John was not the Light, but merely the messenger 
of it, one to point out the true Light. And we 
remember, indeed, that John was particular not to 
take any honor in respect to these matters to himself, 
but declared plainly that his mission was to introduce 
the Messiah; and as soon as he received from the 
Father the witness that Jesus was indeed the expected 
one he made haste to proclaim the Lord, declaring himself 
unworthy to even be his servant to unfasten his 
shoes. So faithful was John's testimony that many 
of his own disciples at once forsook him and became 
followers of Jesus, as the record shows. 

"HE WAS THE TRUE LIGHT." 

As he was the Father's Word or Messenger he 
was also the Father's Light, whose mission it was to 
reveal, to make known, the Father's love, that thereby 
those who had eyes to see might be attracted, 
drawn, blessed. Alas, how many were blind! Eyes 
had they but they saw not, and understanding had 
they and appreciated not. Those who did see, who 
did appreciate, what a blessing they received!— not 
only those who saw the Lord personally but those who 
have since seen his glory, his light, through the words 
of his faithful messengers under the guidance of his 
holy Spirit. "Blessed are your eyes for they see and 
your ears for they hear." What a blessed thought 
lies half hidden in the Apostle's words— in the declaration 
that this true Light shall enlighten every man 
born into the world! What a ray of hope this lights 
up in the sympathetic and Christian heart! All who 
have the Spirit of God, who so loved the world as to 
give his only begotten Son to be its Redeemer, are 
sure to be sympathetic with the world in its lost and 
blinded condition. To such this promise is a reassurance 
of all the glorious privileges and messages sent 



by the Lord through the prophets telling of the age of 

glory, when the Messiah shall be the Sun of Righteousness 

to scatter the darkness and miasm of sin and 

death and to bring in everlasting righteousness and 

life to the world— to whomsoever will accept the 

same. 

Nothing is plainer than that our dear Redeemer 
has not yet enlightened those born into the flesh four 
thousand years before he was made flesh and died for 
our redemption. It is equally clear that not more 
than one in ten of those born into the world during 
the past two thousand years since he redeemed us 
have ever heard of that great transaction or had the 
opportunity of thus being enlightened and blessed. 
This, then, is the glad message, the good tidings of 
great joy which shall yet be unto all people— our dear 
Redeemer is not only the Redeemer of the Church and 
the light of the Church, but the Redeemer of the 
world, the light of the world, that shall ultimately enlighten 
every man born into the world, every son and 
daughter of Adam. In this connection we are reminded 
of the words of the Apostle to Timothy, "There is 
one God, and one Mediator between God and man, the 
man Christ Jesus, who gave himself a ransom for all 
—to be testified in due time."— I Tim. 2:5,6. 

"TO BE TESTIFIED IN DUE TIME." 

Ah, yes! there is a due time for every feature of 
the divine plan, and not until all of these various features 
have been developed will its glory and beauty 
fully appear. For two thousand years the world was 

R3476 : page 378 

left practically without hope of any kind; during the 

next two thousand years Abraham and his seed alone 

of all the families of the earth enjoyed divine favor 

and a partial knowledge of the glorious plan of salvation 

which would be outworked by Messiah, who according 

to the flesh would be of the seed of Abraham; 

during the last two thousand years the knowledge of 

Messiah has been largely hidden from the Jews and 

from the majority of other nations, but has gone nevertheless 

hither and thither, selecting a peculiar people, 

a Royal Priesthood, a holy nation— spiritual Israel. 

Each of these features has its due time: in due time 

God revealed the outlines of his plan to Abraham; in 

due time Christ died for the ungodly; in due time his 

second coming will usher in his Kingdom and with it 

the blessing of all the families of the earth, when the 

true Light shall lighten every man. 

"He was in the world, the world was made by 
him and the world knew him not. He came unto his 
own [nation] and his own [people] received him not." 
Thus briefly the rejection of Christ by the blind world 



and blinded Israel is recorded. But this blindness, 
which God foreknew and had left provision for in his 
plan, did not hinder our dear Redeemer from accomplishing 
the gracious purposes intended. He came 
not to reign, not to be ministered unto, but to serve 
Israel and the world as their Redeemer— to purchase 
them with his own blood, and to draw them out from 
under the condemnation that rested upon all because 
of disobedience to the divine law. Grandly he finished 
the work that was given him to do. 

But not all rejected him: a small remnant as compared 
with the whole nation believed on him, trusted 
him and obeyed him, and were blessed by him in a 
special manner. These were the apostles, and other 
faithful brethren to the number of about five hundred. 
(I Cor. 15:6.) To these by divine arrangement a 
special favor or blessing was extended— the privilege 
of passing from the house of servants to the house of 
sons. Moses was the head of the house of servants- 
natural Israel; Christ is the Head of the house of 
sons— spiritual Israel. This the Apostle points out, 
saying, "Moses, verily, was faithful as a servant over 
all his house; but Christ as a son over his own house; 
whose house are we if we hold fast the confidence of 
our rejoicing firm unto the end."— Heb. 3:5,6. 

JEWS NOT SONS OF GOD. 

The Jews never claimed to be sons of God, neither 
are they referred to in the Scriptures as such. No 
greater dignity than that of being servants of the 
Most High God could possibly have been dreamed of 
up to the time when our Lord himself announced the 
privilege of adoption to the new nature. In evidence 
of this we remember that the Jews sought to stone 
our Lord simply because he claimed to be a son of God. 

R3476 : page 379 

(John 5:17,18.) The place and time of adoption for 

these believers was in the upper room at Pentecost, 

when the spirit of adoption was granted unto them— 

the holy Spirit, the anointing: and similarly the 

spirit of adoption is granted to all the followers of the 

Lord during all the centuries since, although not accompanied 

by the same miracles and manifestations 

granted and necessary in the beginning. It is this 

begetting of the spirit to a newness of life on the 

spiritual plane to which the Apostle refers, saying, 

"Which were begotten not of blood, nor of the will 

of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God. " 

The word born, as used both in the Common and Revised 

Versions, is erroneous and misleading; begotten 

is the proper translation of genao in this case. We 

note also that Westcott bears out this thought, saying, 

"Literally begotten, as in I John 2:29; 3:9." 



The Apostle is very particular to show that this 
begetting to the new nature is as necessary to the new 
creation as begettal of the flesh is necessary to human 
generation. Furthermore, he hedges the subject all 
around to prove that the begetting power is not of 
heredity, not of blood, not of the will of the flesh directly 
or indirectly, not of the will of man in any 
sense of the word: God alone does this begetting, 
God alone accepts to membership in this new creation, 
God alone imparts the seal of his adoption; and hence 
those so begotten, when born in the resurrection, will 
be in the highest sense of the word children of the 
Highest, "heirs of God, joint heirs with Jesus Christ 
our Lord." 

Coming back to our original topic to view our 
Lord's advent amongst men from the standpoint of 
the faithful disciple, he says, "The Word was made 
flesh and dwelt among us, and we beheld his glory, 
the glory as of the only begotten of the Father, full 
of grace and truth." Note first the statement that 
he was made flesh, a totally different thought from 
that expressed in some of the creeds when they speak 
of the Lord as "incarnate." To be incarnate would signify 
to get into flesh as though the flesh were merely 
a covering or garment. This is not the statement nor 
the significance of the Scriptural testimony, which is 
very explicit, "made flesh." The Revised Version, 
following the original still more exactly if possible, 
gives it, "The Word became flesh." This is in accord 
also with the statement of Romans 1 :3, that our Lord 
was made "of the seed of David according to the flesh;" 
and again, the statement of Galatians 4:4, that "God 
sent forth his Son made by a woman." 

WE BEHELD HIS DIGNITY. 

The apostles and all believers who had intercourse 
with our Lord in the days of his flesh experienced, 
"beheld, his glory." They beheld the grandeur, the 
nobility, the perfection of the "man Christ Jesus"— a 
perfection and glory seen in no other because all others 
were sinners, while he by virtue of special birth 
was holy, harmless, separate from sinners. The Word 
glory here represents the same thought as in Psalms 8:5, 
where, speaking of Adam and his perfection and 
God likeness as the perfect man in the image of God, 
it is declared that God "crowned him with glory and 
honor." Similarly our Lord Jesus was crowned with 
glory and honor of human perfection in the days of 
his flesh, and his disciples beheld this dignity of human 
perfection, which marked him as separate and 
distinct from all others; and they recognized it as 
differentiating him from the world of sinners, marking 
him as the only begotten of the Father, full of 
grace and truth— abounding in every proper and desirable 
quality and characteristic. 



Another thought is somewhat covered by our 
translation in the word dwelt. In the Greek this signifies 
tabernacled or tented, as if it read, "The Word 
was made flesh and tabernacled amongst us." A tabernacle 
was intended to be a temporary residence or 
dwelling, and thus the Scriptures point out that our 
Lord took the human nature, "was made flesh," not 
that he might forever be a fleshly being, a human being, 
but merely temporarily. Other Scriptures fully 
corroborate this thought, and it seems strange indeed 
that Christian people should have so generally received 
the erroneous thought that our Lord is now a human 
being, a flesh-and-blood being in heaven. Quite to the 
contrary— flesh and blood cannot inherit the Kingdom 
of heaven. Our Lord was changed in his resurrection 
and is now, as the Apostle declares, "a quickening 
Spirit," and again "Now the Lord is that Spirit." 
Again he declares that all of the Lord's people who 
shall be joint-heirs with him in his Kingdom must be 
"changed," because "flesh and blood cannot inherit 
the Kingdom." 

It would be too bad indeed to think that our Lord 
had made the great stoop from heavenly conditions 
to earthly conditions, laying aside the glory which he 
had with the Father before the world was, being made 
flesh and suffering on our behalf, and that then, after 
thus being obedient to the Father and serving us so 
graciously, he should be obliged to remain forever 
upon the lower fleshly plane of being. It would indeed 
be a distressing thought. But not only do the 
Scriptures cited above prove the contrary of this, but 
in harmony with the statement of the text we are considering, 
namely, that he merely tabernacled with us 
for a little while, the Apostle distinctly explains the 
object of our Lord's coming into the world and shows 
that it was all accomplished at his death: he says he 
was made flesh that he by the grace of God should 
taste death for every man. (Heb. 2:9.) That was 
the object, the only object, the only necessity for our 
Lord's becoming a man, and when he had finished 
that work which the Father gave him to do he was 
glorified, and, as we are distinctly told, he was highly 
exalted and given a name above every name— "far 
above principalities and powers and every name that 
is named." Phil. 2:9; Eph. 1:21. 

The Apostle John proceeds to show that John the 
Baptist fully proclaimed the Lord as the Messiah, and 
doubtless he notes this fact because many of the Jews 
evidently had great confidence in John the Baptist 
though rejecting Jesus. The Apostle proceeds to say 
that the fulness of Christ, the grace and merit which 
were in him, have been conferred upon all of his followers, 
his true disciples, "grace for grace," or, more 
literally, favor upon favor. This last expression 
seems to be a statement of what all the Lord's people 
recognize in their own experiences, namely— that the 



blessing coming to them first in their relationship to 

the Lord is by no means all of his favor; that they 

may grow in grace, grow in knowledge, grow in the 

fruits of the Spirit, and possess favor upon favor additionally, 

R3477 : page 379 

continuously to the end of the course; and 
then— in the resurrection morning— that which is perfect 
shall come as the climax of God's favor, and we 
shall be like our Redeemer and see him as he is and 
share his glory. 

Proceeding, the Apostle contrasts Moses, the 
typical mediator, the head of the typical house of Israel, 
with Christ, his antitype, the Head of Spiritual 
Israel. The Law Covenant communicated and mediated 
by Moses was a great blessing to that nation in 
many respects; but the grace and truth, God's favor 
and the knowledge of his wonderful plan, came not 
through Moses but came through Christ, and not to 
the followers of Moses but to the followers of Christ. 

Our lesson concludes by pointing out that our 
Lord Jesus was the only begotten Son of his Father's 
bosom, and that his mission in the world was to declare 
the Father, to make him known, to reveal the 
Father first to the Church, and ultimately, in due 
time, to the world. The Father, standing as the embodiment 
of perfection and righteousness, could not 
properly and justly recognize sin and sinners, for they 
are wholly contrary to the best interests of the universe 
and contrary to the divine purposes: they can 
not be recognized by God. Hence, if he would exercise 
mercy it must be through another— a mediator. 
His love and mercy, therefore, are revealed to us in 
Christ, and are none the less his because exercised 
toward us in this circuitous manner, and with the 
reservation that no man cometh unto the Father but 
by him, and that there is no other name given under 
heaven and amongst men whereby we must be saved. 
Thus the entire work of the Son in man's redemption, 
in the instruction of his followers, and ultimately in 
the judgment and blessing of all the families of the 
earth— all of these will be but the revelation of the 
Father, the showing of his real character both for 
love and justice, wisdom and power. 



R3477 : page 380 

WITNESSING FOR JESUS. 

-JOHN l:18-34.-JANUARY 8.- 

Golden Text:— "Behold the Lamb of God, 
which taketh away the sin of the world." 



JOHN THE BAPTIST had the great honor and 

distinction of being the first of God's witnesses 

amongst men respecting God's only begotten 

Son. John was a grand character, from whatever 

standpoint we view him, and all of the Lord's people 

now seeking to witness faithfully may draw some valuable 

lessons from his course, in addition to which we 

shall show that he was a type of all the faithful witnesses 

of the Lord throughout this Gospel age. He 

was not an example to us in respect to his manner of 

speech or dress or general methods; nevertheless his 

peculiarities in these respects especially adapted him 

to the witnessing which the Lord designed him to do. 

Living in a time of increase of wealth and luxury, 

John was all the more attractive as the prophet of the 

Lord by reason of his peculiar disregard of the conventionalities 

of the time, and the evidences these 

gave of his complete separation from the world, his 

complete devotion to his special ministry. The people 

of Israel, as our Lord pointed out, carefully cherished 

the memories of their great prophets and garnished 

their sepulchers, although they were not sufficiently 

careful to heed their teachings. Amongst the ancient 

prophets Elijah was one of the most revered, and the 

fact that John the Baptist simulated him in his apparel 

and general demeanor and forceful teaching 

attracted the people much more than otherwise would 

have been the case. 

Little is told us respecting John except that he 
was a cousin of Jesus and six months older, beginning 
his ministry at thirty years of age. Therefore he had 
been teaching and baptizing just six months before 
the Lord came to him for baptism. His ministry continued 
for a year after Jesus' baptism; then he was shut 
up in prison for about a year before he was beheaded. 
Our lesson opens with a reference to John's witnessing 
—calling upon the people to repent because God's 
Kingdom was about ready to be established, urging 
them that they would not be fit for a share in it unless 
their hearts were fully turned to the Lord and away 
from sin. 

Other Scriptures show us that for some time the 
nation of Israel had been looking for Messiah and that 
false Messiahs had arisen from time to time, and one 
record is that "all men were in expectation of him." 
Under these circumstances it is not surprising that the 
Jews urged the leaders of their nation, priests and Levites, 
to go to John and interview him and advise 
them respecting his message. Our lesson recounts 
the visit and the testimony John gave. Apparently 
it was the expectation of the questioners that John 
would claim to be the Messiah himself, and it was 
probably with surprise that they learned from his own 
lips that he made no such boast— "he confessed and 
denied not." Their next question was, "Art thou 



Elias?" (the Greek form of the word Elijah), and 
he replied, "I am not." Remembering the prophecy 
of Deuteronomy, "A prophet shall the Lord raise up 
unto you like unto me [Moses]," they next inquired 
whether or not John were that prophet, and he answered, 
No. 

Surprised they then asked, "Who art thou, then? 
We must make some report respecting you." Humbly 
and faithfully John declared that he was merely a 
nameless voice calling attention to the great Messiah, 
heralding his coming: he was like a voice in the wilderness 
declaring that a way must be prepared for the 
coming of the Kingdom, for which Israel had been 
hoping and longing and praying for centuries. 

JOHN NOT THE ELIJAH. 

It will be noticed that John distinctly declared 
that he was not the Elijah, and some have felt perplexed 
over the matter because our Lord, on referring 
to John and in answer to the query of the disciples 
about Malachi's testimony that Elijah must first come, 
declared of John, "This is the Elijah if ye will receive 
it." The explanation already given we repeat: As 
Jesus in the flesh was the forerunner of the Messiah 
in glory and power, who will take his great power and 
reign in the opening of the Millennial age, and as the 
Apostle shows the Christ will be of many members, 
Jesus the Head and the Church his body, in the Kingdom 
glory, so, similarly, John the Baptist was a forerunner 

R3477 : page 381 

to a greater one than himself, a more important 
witness composed of many members, witnessing 
over a period of nearly nineteen centuries, preparing 
the way for Messiah's Kingdom and announcing it. 
John in the flesh introduced Jesus in the flesh; but 
the greater than John, the Elijah of many members, 
will introduce the greater, the glorious Christ of 
many members. 

The real Elijah, who for nineteen centuries has 
been fulfilling the predictions of Malachi, the prophet, 
has been composed of the many faithful witnesses for 
Christ throughout this Gospel age. Jesus himself in 
the flesh was the first of those who witnessed a good 
confession before Pilate and before the Jewish nation; 
the apostles witnessed similarly, and all down through 
the Gospel age the Lord's people in the flesh have 
witnessed— have witnessed against sin and in favor of 
righteousness, have witnessed the necessity for turning 
from sin to righteousness in order to be prepared 
for a share in the Kingdom, have witnessed that the 
Kingdom of the Lord is to be established in the hands 
of the glorified, and that it will bring in everlasting 
righteousness and fulfil the Lord's prayer, "Thy 



Kingdom come, thy will be done on earth as it is done 
in heaven." 

Hence we see that the words of Jesus and the 
words of John the Baptist are in full accord; John 
was not the Elijah mentioned by the Prophet, and yet 
he did a work of Elijah to those amongst the Jews who 
received his message. As it is the work of the greater 
Elijah to draw attention to the great Christ and the 
great work to be accomplished by him, so it was the 
mission of John in the Jewish nation to call attention 
to Jesus in the flesh, and in this sense of the word he 
was the Elijah to those who received it because to 
them he did the work of Elijah. From this standpoint 
we see a grand antitypical Elijah, the Church 
in the flesh, doing a great work of witnessing throughout 
this Gospel age, and preparing for the establishment 
of the Kingdom in the end of the age; and we 
see the great work of Messiah, Head and body, Bridegroom 
and Bride, which will immediately follow this 
testimony. 

The Prophet Malachi declared that one of two 
things would follow the work of the true Elijah, 
either it would turn the hearts of the fathers to the 
children and of the children to the fathers— that is, 
bring into full accord and loving harmony the people 
—or else it would result in the bringing of a great 
curse upon the people and great tribulation. The 
world must be made ready for Messiah's Kingdom 
either by repentance and true conversion to the Lord 
or by judgments of the Lord. Malachi does not state 
which way the results will be accomplished, but other 
Scriptures clearly indicate that the work of the antitypical 
Elijah would not succeed, would not convert 
the world, and that as a result the establishment of 
Messiah's Kingdom would come in connection with a 
time of trouble such as was not since there was a nation 
—the curse mentioned by Malachi, the great 
tribulation mentioned by our Lord. 

From this standpoint, recognizing John the Baptist 
as a part of the typical Elijah and the Church in 
the flesh as the antitypical, we must draw lessons of 
humility as well as of zeal and faithfulness from John's 
course: not only did he make the preaching of the Gospel 
the chief object of life, to the extent of carelessness 
respecting all interests of this life, but additionally he 
boasted nothing of himself. His main mission in life 
was to prepare the people for the Messiah and to point 
them to him; and our success as members of the antitypical 
Elijah will be in proportion as self is ignored 
and Christ is made the theme of our discourses, the 
center of our teachings. 

R3478 : page 381 

"WHY BAPTIZEST THOU, THEN?" 



It is the worldly idea and the nominal Church 
idea that all associated with religious teaching should 
make some great boast or claim respecting themselves 
—that they are wonderful prophets, or reverend, or 
doctors of divinity, or something else above the ordinary: 
no wonder then that the Priests and Levites, 
accustomed to this sort of thing, were surprised to 
find John making no such boasts and basing his 
preaching upon no such claims. They inquired what 
right, then, he had to be baptizing at all, if he were 
merely a servant, not a lord over God's heritage. 
The same thought prevails today; and unless some 
boastful title or position or authority is claimed, 
the right to preach, the right to witness for the 
Lord in public, is called in question by many. Let 
us who have followed carefully the scriptural proprieties 
in such matters boast nothing, but rather as John 
and, later, Jesus did, let our boasts be that we are 
merely servants, not lords; merely witnesses, not 
great or honorable or reverend, not priests. By and 
by, when the Master's views of matters shall be expressed, 
he will show that those who sought to exalt 
themselves failed of his approval, while those who 
humbled themselves, seeking only the privilege of service, 
have his approval. Directing their minds away 
from himself to Jesus, John declared, "There standeth 
one in your midst whom you do not recognize: 
him I declare, him I introduce as so great, so honorable, 
that I am not worthy even to be his servant, to 
loose the strings of his shoes." Similarly humble 
feelings should pervade the hearts and testimonies of 
all who are true members of the an ti typical Elijah, 
witnessing to the Lord of glory, who is about to establish 
his Kingdom. Alas, that self love and self-pride 
should at times hinder the testimony. Alas, 
that some seem to draw attention to themselves rather 
than to the King. Let us, dear brethren and sisters, 
in proportion as we have opportunity for witnessing, 
be careful, be faithful. Our faithfulness in witnessing 
to the Lord shall be the test of our worthiness to 
be members of his glorified Body. 

WATER BAPTISM VS. HOLY SPIRIT BAPTISM. 

In bearing witness John called attention to the 
fact that what he did in the way of water baptism was 
insignificant, unimportant in comparison to the work 
of Messiah and his baptism of the holy Spirit. Jesus 
baptized none with the holy Spirit during his ministry. 
The baptism taking place at Pentecost, after he 
had died for our sins and ascended up on high, had 
appropriated a portion of the merit of his sacrifice to 
the credit of believers— then the latter received the 
baptism of the holy Spirit. There is a similarity between 
the work of John and that of the Church in the 
flesh in respect to this feature also. We can witness 



to the Lord and perform the symbol of baptism into 

R3478 : page 382 

his death, but further than this we cannot go. Our 

glorified Head must give the great blessing by bringing 

the consecrated under the blessing and favor of the holy 

Spirit; and later on, when all the present witnessing 

has been finished and when the Atonement Day sacrificing 

shall all have been accomplished, the glorified 

Christ shall pour out his Spirit upon all flesh, as during 

this Gospel age he pours it out upon his special 

servants and handmaidens. 

"BEHOLD THE LAMB OF GOD!" 

This was the first formal proclamation of Jesus 
by John to his disciples and to the public. It occurred 
at least forty-two days after our Lord's baptism, for 
immediately following that he was forty days in the 
wilderness being tested. After the wilderness temptation, 
probably very soon, he returned to John's company 
at Jordan. Shortly after this proclamation by 
John, our Lord departed from his vicinity, so that a 
simultaneous work by John and by Jesus was for a 
time in progress in different localities, for we read 
that Jesus and his disciples baptized more than did 
John and his disciples— though Jesus himself baptized 
not. 

Our Lord was variously represented in the sacrifices 
of the Jews at their festivals: for instance he was 
typified by the peaceful lamb at their spring festival, 
and he was the antitype of the bullock of their Atonement 
Day sacrifices. It was with full propriety, 
therefore, that John announced Jesus as the "Lamb of 
God"— meek, gentle, patient, unassuming, the passover 
sacrifice for Israel and for the whole world. In 
the ears of the unregenerate such a title as lamb 
would not sound very dignified: amongst the coats of 
arms of chivalry, wolves' heads, bullocks' heads, 
lions' heads, serpents' heads, etc., are freely used to 
represent the strength and the prowess of the families, 
but where will we find anyone taking a lamb as a 
symbol of dignity? To the Lord's consecrated people, 
however, the lamblike quality of our dear Redeemer 
and his patient and willing sacrifice on our 
behalf are beautifully represented in this symbol of a 
lamb— the Lamb of God, God's Lamb, provided by 
him as the sacrifice for our sins, as the price of our 
redemption from the curse or sentence of death. This 
must be our witness, too, "Behold the Lamb of God." 
The world must be pointed to the great sacrifice for 
sins, and not to Christ as the great Teacher. After 
they have received him as the Lamb, acknowledging 
their sins and need of his precious blood, then they 
will be ready to hear his words, to be taught of him; 



but no instruction can be rightly received until first 
our Lord is accepted as the Lamb of God which taketh 
away the sin of the world. 

It is worthy of note that although our Lord's sacrifice 
had begun at this time, John did not say the 
Lamb of God which took away the sin of the world. 
The entire sacrifice of Christ was necessary as the offset 
price to justice for the sin of Adam and his race. 
That price must be laid down before any of the sins 
of the world could be cancelled. And we remember, 
too, that it was necessary that our Lord should be 
raised from the dead and should ascend up on high, 
there to appear in the presence of God on our behalf. 
After his resurrection as the great High Priest he 
appropriated of the merit of his sacrifice "on our behalf," 
but not yet on behalf of the world. Only believers 
are included in the appropriation of the precious 
blood already made. 

Our Lord is the Lamb of God which taketh away 
the sin of the world and not merely the sin of the 
Church, but his work is not yet finished. It begins 
with the appropriation which clears believers; it will 
reach its full accomplishment after the glorification 
of the Church, when the sins of the whole world will 
be cancelled. The merit or value of the entire transaction 
was in the sacrifice of our dear Redeemer, but 
in the divine plan the arrangement was made as it is, 
so that we who are now justified in advance of the 
world might have fellowship with our Lord and share 
in his sufferings, share in his sacrifice and share also 
in his glory by and by, and in the dispensing of the 
blessings incidental to the taking away of the sins of 
the world. None should overlook the fact that it is 
the divine intention not to stop in taking away the 
sins of the Church and the household of faith, typified 
by the Priests and Levites, but that ultimately 
our Lord's sacrifice shall be appropriated to bringing 
blessings unto all the families of the earth. 

"THIS IS THE SON OF GOD." 

Proceeding, John explained that Jesus was the 
one to whom he had previously referred in his preaching 
—the one who would come later and take the more 
honorable place because of his being so much the 
greater. John's statement that he knew him not 
should not be understood to signify that he did not 
know that Jesus was his own cousin nor that he was 
unacquainted with him previously, but that he knew 
him not as the Messiah previously. John then explains 
that when he was himself commissioned to 
preach and to baptize the Lord informed him that he 
would see a better witness to the Son of God, the 
Messiah, and that he would know him by a certain 
sign by seeing the holy Spirit descend upon him like 
a dove, remaining upon him. John says that he did 



see this sign in Jesus' case just following his baptism, 
and that he was, therefore, fully qualified to give this 
witness that he was the Son of God. 

So it must be with us, dear fellow-witnesses: We 
must see for ourselves that Jesus is the Son of God, 
the Lamb of God which taketh away the sin of the 
world, before we can be God's witnesses respecting him. 
Alas, that it must be said that many of those who today 
in prominent pulpits are claiming to be God's 
witnesses are thoroughly unqualified to give the witness, 
since, according to their own confession, they 
know not Jesus as the Lamb of God which taketh 
away the sin of the world. The higher criticism and 
evolution doctrines have so undermined the faith of 
the majority of those who claim to be ministers and 
ambassadors and witnesses for God and for Christ 
that they cannot give the forceful witness such as 
alone will carry weight on this subject. We who have 
seen, we who have tasted, we who have to some extent 
appreciated the merit that is in the Lamb of God, 
may well rejoice in our privilege of being his witnesses; 
and it is to these faithful witnesses in the 
flesh, begotten of the holy Spirit, that the blessed 
privilege shall shortly be granted of being sharers 
with the Lord in his Kingdom and glory and work. 



