Overcoming Tragedy in Jehovah’s Strength
BY AWAKE! CORRESPONDENT IN SPAIN
IN February of this year, many from the Bailén Congregation of Jehovah’s Witnesses in Spain enjoyed a beautiful day together in the nearby Sierra Nevada Mountains. But just three miles [5 km] from home, an oncoming car crossed into the lane in which their bus was traveling, causing a head-on collision. There was an explosion, and the bus was engulfed in flames. Some passengers were able to get out in time, but many in the back of the bus were overcome by the smoke and died.
In all, 26 Witnesses lost their lives, including four full-time ministers and several children—nearly a quarter of the Bailén Congregation. The king of Spain, Juan Carlos, echoed the sentiments of most Spaniards when he wrote in his telegram to the mayor of Bailén: “Greatly shocked by the tragic accident. Be assured of our sincere condolences. Please transmit to the families of the victims our deepest sympathies and support during these painful moments.”
A question on the minds of some of the thousands who attended the funeral service was, Why do such tragedies happen? Clearly, accidents caused by “time and unforeseen occurrence” can affect Jehovah’s people the same as everyone else. (Ecclesiastes 9:11, 12) Nevertheless, Jehovah does promise that shortly such tragedies will be done away with.—Revelation 21:4, 5.
Many members of the branch family of Jehovah’s Witnesses in Spain and thousands of Witnesses from other parts of the country traveled to Bailén to give the local brothers comfort and support. The people of Bailén, along with the local and regional authorities, also shared the grief of the Witness families. Many observers were impressed by the fortitude of the bereaved Witnesses.
“I’ve known the Witnesses for many years,” commented Antonio Gómez, the mayor of Bailén, “and although personally I am an agnostic, I admire your faith. When the accident happened, I thought right away that your religious and human cohesion would enable you to overcome the tragedy better than other groups. I’ve seen how the whole town has given its support to the grieving families. Perhaps before, people had misconceptions about what you stand for, but I am pleased to say that these have disappeared. You have an inner strength that is hard for someone who is not a Witness to understand.”
José Borrell, the minister of public works who attended the funeral as the representative of the Spanish government, confessed: “What can you say to those who have practically lost all their family in one blow? Nothing that they themselves cannot find in their faith. . . . You have a wonderful faith.”
“Keep Comforting One Another”
What did they “find in their faith”? Above all, they found comfort from Jehovah, “the God of all comfort, who comforts us in all our tribulation.” (2 Corinthians 1:3, 4) Despite their grief, they found the strength to comfort one another, taking to heart Paul’s words to the Thessalonians: “Keep comforting one another and building one another up.”—1 Thessalonians 5:11.
It was a moving experience to see Christian brothers and sisters, some of whom had lost as many as eight relatives, making visits to other bereaving members of the congregation. “When we saw each other, we wept. But through the tears we reminded ourselves of the resurrection hope, and we felt comforted,” explained Francisco Saez, the presiding overseer, who himself lost his only two children.
“We have not neglected our preaching activity, and we have made a special point of visiting relatives of the deceased who are not Witnesses, using the brochure When Someone You Love Dies.” Francisco continued: “Personally, I wanted to preach, for I knew that by preaching to others I would feel better. And sure enough, although I went out weeping, I returned home comforted.”
The people of Bailén responded very favorably to this witnessing work. A week after the accident, Encarna, who was grieving the loss of two daughters and four grandchildren, visited a lady with whom she had recently started a Bible study. Encarna had been giving Scriptural comfort to this woman, whose husband had died four months previously. “Now we have to comfort each other,” she said, as they continued their consideration of the brochure When Someone You Love Dies.
Support from the worldwide brotherhood was also immediately forthcoming. “The whole congregation feels so encouraged by the thousands of letters and telegrams we have received,” explained Francisco Capilla, the congregation secretary. “The post office has to send a van directly to our house every day to deliver them all. We are very grateful for the brothers’ loving concern.”
Hope Out Of Tragedy
Can anything good come out of such a tragedy? “The heart of the wise ones is in the house of mourning,” wrote ancient King Solomon. (Ecclesiastes 7:4) In line with this principle, the tragedy in Bailén has made some people think more seriously about their relationship with God. Faustino, an unbelieving husband who lost two of his six children in the accident, told his wife Dolores: “I have some good news to tell you. I am going to start studying the Bible, since I want to see my children in the new world.”
Although our brothers and sisters in Bailén will not quickly overcome their grief, they are comforting others and are being comforted. Jehovah is strengthening them with his spirit and with the support of many loving brothers and sisters. Our prayers continue to go up to our heavenly Father in their behalf.
[Pictures on page 26]
Four of those who perished

