Why Should It Be That Way?
WHY is injustice so widespread? Two scriptures in the Bible help answer that question for us. The first is in Jeremiah chapter 10, verse 23, and here is what it says:
“To earthling man his way does not belong. It does not belong to man who is walking even to direct his step.”
This indicates that man is just not equipped to govern himself. Why? First, because he is inherently sinful. God himself said: “The inclination of the heart of man is bad from his youth up.” (Genesis 8:21) Thus it is that man’s laws and customs perpetuate all kinds of inequality. For instance, many prefer to poison themselves with cigarettes or build space-age weapons of mass destruction rather than give clean, fresh water or adequate nourishment to those in need.
Man also lacks sufficient wisdom. Thus, as in Roy’s case, laws designed to be just can lead to grave injustices. Even though many individuals and organizations work hard to bring justice in health, food distribution and economic conditions, they are unable to do it. In many cases, they just do not know how.
The truth is, man was not designed to “direct,” or govern, himself with total autonomy, or independence. He was designed to be governed by a higher power, by God. And since, historically, most men have rejected rule by God, another powerful spirit force has stepped in to influence them. This spirit is referred to in the second scripture that helps to explain the prevalence of injustice today. It says:
“The whole world is lying in the power of the wicked one.”
These are the words of the apostle John. (1 John 5:19) Who is “the wicked one”? Why, Satan the Devil, who is also called “the god of this system of things.” (2 Corinthians 4:4) Satan and his demons are far more powerful than we are. They have little interest in seeing justice prevail. In fact, as long as injustice exists, people are distracted from seeking God, and some even blame him for the injustice. Hence, injustice serves Satan’s purposes well.
The Bible tells us: “Jehovah is a lover of justice, and he will not leave his loyal ones.” (Psalm 37:28) Why, then, has he allowed man to rule himself and come under the influence of Satan, and thus suffer so much injustice and other evil? The next article will discuss this.

