Divine Monarchy Is Coming!
HISTORIANS tell us that monarchy has been going out of style for centuries. Most countries today are ruled by representatives of the people, at least in theory. Even where monarchs still exist, such as in Great Britain, they have little real power.
Why, then, would God purpose to govern the entire earth through a monarchy? Doesn’t he realize that such an idea is unfashionable in these republican times? Yes, but Jehovah God does not care about what is fashionable among men. He is going to give the earth the type of rulership it needs, regardless of what people think they want.
God does not purpose to conduct a worldwide referendum to see if people will accept his kingdom, his monarchy. Instead, here is how the Bible describes the establishment of that kingdom. The setting is a dream that an ancient monarch had regarding the future of world government, represented by a huge statue of gold, silver, copper, iron and clay.
As ancient King Nebuchadnezzar regarded that composite image, “a stone was cut out not by hands, and it struck the image on its feet of iron and of molded clay and crushed them. At that time the iron, the molded clay, the copper, the silver and the gold were, all together, crushed and became like the chaff from the summer threshing floor, and the wind carried them away so that no trace at all was found of them. And as for the stone that struck the image, it became a large mountain and filled the whole earth.”​—Daniel 2:34, 35.
The symbolic meaning is clear. World governments are in for destruction! But at whose hands? Who is responsible for the great stone that destroys the statue? What is the large mountain that fills the whole earth after the world’s governments are destroyed?
We do not have to guess, because the Bible explains the king’s prophetic dream, saying: “And in the days of those kings the God of heaven will set up a kingdom that will never be brought to ruin. And the kingdom itself will not be passed on to any other people. It will crush and put an end to all these kingdoms, and it itself will stand to times indefinite; forasmuch as you beheld that out of the mountain a stone was cut not by hands, and that it crushed the iron, the copper, the molded clay, the silver and the gold. The grand God himself has made known to the king what is to occur after this. And the dream is reliable, and the interpretation of it is trustworthy.”​—Daniel 2:44, 45.
No human is going to put God’s kingdom into power! It will be set up by divine irresistible force, destroying whatever world governments exist at the time it comes to dominate the whole earth, like a large mountain. Since God’s Word assures us that the vision is reliable, there is no reason to doubt that God will do just what he said. There is no excuse for religious organizations failing to alert people to this important fact. They do this by teaching people that God’s kingdom is just an abstraction or a state of mind!
The question is not whether God intends to set up a worldwide kingdom, but when will he do so. From their study of the Bible, Jehovah’s Witnesses are convinced that the time is very near. Why?
Here are two good reasons—
First, the same prophetic book of Daniel containing this vision also contains chronological prophecies clearly pointing at our century. For example, Daniel chapter 4 contains a prophecy in which God’s kingdom is pictured, not as a stone or a mountain, but as a tree. Jehovah’s Witnesses have proved in detail that the “seven times” that were to pass until the fulfillment of that prophecy lead directly to this twentieth century.a (Daniel 4:25) There can be no question concerning the chronological accuracy of Daniel’s visions. One of those visions correctly predicted the time the Messiah was to arrive. (Daniel 9:24-27) No wonder Jesus Christ referred his followers to the book of Daniel when discussing future events!​—Matthew 24:15.
A second reason is found in the words of Jesus Christ himself. If you read Matthew chapter 24, Luke chapter 21, or Mark chapter 13 you will find his discussion of the world conditions that would mark the time of his return as King of God’s kingdom. No discerning reader can fail to be impressed by the similarity between the wars, famines, earthquakes and lawlessness foretold by Jesus and the wars, famines, earthquakes and lawlessness daily reported in the news.
So Bible chronology and Bible prophecy combine to prove that all of us, including Prince Charles, are living among people of the generation that will see God’s kingdom begin to rule this earth, sweeping away the present squabbling monarchies and republics of men like so much chaff from a threshing floor. When that day arrives, are you going to be ready?
Your relationship with God and his Son, the righteous ruler Christ Jesus, is not something you should take for granted. It will determine what happens to you when Jehovah’s worldwide monarchy is established. You can either be crushed as a resister of God’s kingdom or look forward to a delightful life in God’s “mountain” as it transforms the earth into the paradise it always should have been. The choice is yours.
How can you make such a choice? The Christian witnesses of Jehovah will be glad to help you to obtain the Bible information on which to make the right decision. Why not talk to them? You can live in happiness under the only perfect monarchy this world will ever know.
[Footnotes]
See Aid to Bible Understanding, article “Appointed Times of the Nations,” pages 94-96. (Published by the Watchtower Bible and Tract Society of New York.)
[Diagram/​Picture on page 10]
(For fully formatted text, see publication)
GOD’S KINGDOM
Babylonia
Medo-Persia
Greece
Rome
Britain & America
Radical Popular Movements

