From Our Readers
Motorcycles
I wish to compliment you on the article “Motorcyclists​—Knights or Blights of the Road?” I think this is one of the best articles on the use of motorcycles that I have seen in the past few years. It shows the more productive side of the use of motorcycles instead of the usual downgrading of the cycles and riders. It is nice to see that there are people who look on the motorcycle as a means of economical transportation and recreation.
M. H., Yamaha dealer, Illinois
There is no doubt in my mind that motorcycles are in fact a very economical means of transportation and are very practical in many parts of the world. Our family is gathering funds together to help one of our missionaries in Kenya to purchase one to facilitate getting around in this assignment. However, in the United States there are factors that should be given consideration. Not that the machine is bad in itself, but the image portrayed by the majority of riders is bad. Aside from this, there is the safety factor. My insurance company will not insure a motorcycle unless one already has several cars on a policy and then only as a special risk add-on. This is because motorcycles are more dangerous than enclosed vehicles. The mortality rate is many times higher than that for ordinary cars or trucks. Whether for sport or for transportation the motorcycle is dangerous.
N. R., Maryland
Please tell your readers and the writer of this article that motorcycles are not a safe method of transport for the riders. Insurance companies in North America know that they are so dangerous that many will not insure them. Liability rates are low because a motorcycle does very little damage to someone else. But collision rates are high because of the numerous accidents. Uninsured motorists rates are two and a half times higher and medical payments insurance is nonexistent. The way that rates are set should tell you that motorcycles are dangerous to the rider. The motorcycle does have its advantages like everything else; but safety is not one of them for the rider.
G. B., insurance agent, Ohio
Your article had some good points in it, urging operators of these machines to be alert, careful and considerate of other drivers. However, the writer did not mention at all how dangerous it can be these days just to ride on a motorcycle. When a motorcycle is involved in an accident there is almost always serious injury or death to the person or persons riding the motorcycle. There is simply no protection.
F. G., Texas
Our article did not intend to encourage motorcycle riding nor to glorify it as a sport, but, rather, to show that it has a proper place as a means of transportation and to encourage those using it to be careful and considerate of others. We agree that it is a high-risk vehicle whether used as transportation or for recreation.​—ED.

