Build On Interest by Making Effective Return Visits
1 Every well-​prepared talk includes an interest-​arousing introduction, an informative body, and a motivating conclusion. The introduction captures the attention of the audience, but without the body and the conclusion, the talk would be incomplete. The same principle applies to our ministry. It is a fine thing to arouse the interest of the householder on the initial call, but we must keep building on that initial interest by making effective return visits.
2 Why does God permit suffering? What a thought-​provoking question that is! Do you not agree that this subject is on the minds of many people today? That is why, in the article above, it was suggested that you raise this question at the end of the initial call with a view to answering it when you make the return visit.
3 You might say this:
▪ “Hello. The last time we spoke, the subject of God’s permission of suffering came up, and I promised to return with some information for you. Many people feel that if God truly cares about us, he would put an end to suffering. Perhaps you have felt the same way. [Allow householder to answer.] The Bible assures us that God really does care. [Read 1 John 4:8.] God has good reasons for having allowed suffering to continue until now. One of those reasons is explained at 2 Peter 3:9. [Read.] Other reasons are outlined in this brochure.” Then turn to pages 12-14 of the brochure Does God Really Care About Us? and discuss a point of interest.
4 Some householders may be interested in a more thorough explanation, and several return visits may be necessary before they are completely satisfied with the answer. A number of the Society’s 192-​page bound books that will be featured during January include a chapter that can be used as a basis for further discussion of the subject.
5 As you bring the discussion to a close, raise another question and tell the householder you will be happy to share some interesting information with him when you return. Many people would like to know what happens to a person at death. Why not arrange to discuss that topic at a convenient time?
6 It will be helpful for you to keep three basic principles in mind. Be flexible. The householder may not be used to setting aside a specific time for Bible discussion. Be brief. Do not stay too long or cover too many points at first. In most cases, there will be a more favorable response to your visits if you cover just a few points in a short time. Be warm and friendly. Show the householder that you are personally interested in him as an individual.
7 Our immediate goal is to engage the householder in a Scriptural conversation. Then we want to start a productive home Bible study in a suitable publication, such as the Live Forever book. That joy may be yours if you patiently build on the initial interest by making effective return visits.

