Preach God’s Way to Peace and Security
1 Men have made many proposals for peace and security, but none of these fulfill the real needs of people worldwide. Although religious, racial, and national hatreds, combined with political ambition and greed, appear to be major roadblocks to a secure and peaceful world, true Christians know that the real obstacles are Satan the Devil and man’s refusal to submit to Jehovah God.​—Ps. 127:1; Jer. 8:9; 1 John 5:19.
2 During January, we will endeavor to help our neighbors to see that God’s way to peace and security is the only way and that Jehovah has the ultimate solution to all of mankind’s problems.
3 Use New Tracts: We can share this upbuilding message by using the new tracts that were introduced at our “Light Bearers” District Convention. A simple demonstration showed how to use Tract No. 19, Will This World Survive?, to start a conversation and lead into a Bible study. The striking fulfillment of Jesus’ prophecy about the end of this world should arrest the attention of many.
4 Millions of people today are depressed, and they long for a time of healing and of true peace, security, and tranquillity. Comfort for the Depressed (Tract No. 20) may be a real source of encouragement to many.
5 Tract No. 21, Enjoy Family Life, provides practical counsel on what can be done to improve family life even now while awaiting a wonderful future in God’s new world.
6 Tract No. 22 gives a straightforward answer to the question Who Really Rules the World? It explains why humans have used the most heinous methods to torture and slaughter one another despite the desire of most people for a peaceful and secure life. There are wicked spirit forces in heavenly places, and Satan’s most clever deception has been to induce many to believe that he and his demons do not really exist.
7 Start Bible Studies: A Bible study may be started with a tract, a brochure, a magazine, or a book. If you learn that a householder already has one of our publications, tactfully offer to demonstrate how it can be used in a Bible study. The new tracts and the new brochure Does God Really Care About Us? are excellent tools to use in determining the extent of the householder’s interest and in starting Bible studies. Additionally, any books published by the Society in 1983 or before may be featured in the field service when people show real interest in the truth. If your congregation has Family Life, “Kingdom Come,” Truth, or Youth books in stock, plan to make good use of them in the ministry.
8 Genuine security can come only from the Creator, Jehovah God. We want to help as many as possible to open their hearts and minds to the truth of God’s Word and embrace the hope it holds out to us. May we make good use of the teaching aids we have to preach God’s way to peace and security.​—Isa. 2:3, 4.

