Service Meetings for January
Week Starting January 4
Song 23
10 min: Local announcements and appropriate Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry.
25 min: “1993 ‘Divine Teaching’ District Convention of Jehovah’s Witnesses.” Question-​and-​answer consideration of insert by secretary. First, read December 15, 1992, convention assignment letter. After considering paragraph 3 of article, read opening and closing paragraphs of Recommended Lodging Locations list from convention. Read paragraphs 4-6 and 12-14 of insert. Emphasize need for all to select accommodations from Recommended Lodging Locations list even if attending a convention outside the assigned area, as noted in paragraph 12. Stress the Bible principles of honesty, obedience, loving concern for others, and so forth, from the article even if it appears that no one will be using motel rooms. Commend those cooperating with the Society’s rooming arrangement. Congregations that have deaf ones in attendance should highlight paragraph 15 for them.
10 min: Local needs, or talk entitled “Maintain a Proper View of Entertainment,” based on November 8, 1992, Awake!, pages 3-10.
Song 139 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting January 11
Song 162
10 min: Local announcements. Outline any special arrangements for field service on January 18.
20 min: “Preach God’s Way to Peace and Security.” Question-​and-​answer coverage of article. Encourage publishers to use tracts in field service. After discussing paragraph 3, have well-​prepared publisher demonstrate how a Bible study might be started either on initial call or on return visit, using the tract Will This World Survive? Publisher: “Good morning. We are talking to people today about the quality of life. Are you satisfied with what you observe taking place in the lives of people today?” Householder: “Not really.” Publisher: “Do you think the situation will improve?” Householder: “I don’t know.” Publisher offers tract and says: “Some think that what is happening is in fulfillment of Bible prophecy and that the world’s end is near. What do you think?” Householder: “I don’t know. I guess it is possible.” Publisher then refers to tract and explains that the end of the world does not mean the end of literal heavens and earth. Publisher arranges for another visit to consider Bible evidence that end of present system is near.
15 min: Avoiding Blood Transfusion Problems​—Time to Renew Our Advance Medical Directive. Elder handling this part has new cards distributed to baptized publishers and carefully considers October 15, 1991, letter, which explains the use of these cards. In preparation, thoroughly review the Society’s letter of January 1, 1990. Those who sign as witnesses should actually see cardholder sign the document. Encourage all to complete new cards before leaving Kingdom Hall. Baptized publishers should never leave home without their Advance Medical Directive/​Release card. Unbaptized minor children with a Witness parent should always carry an Identity Card. A recent check at one congregation meeting showed that 1 out of every 5 publishers did not have his card with him, and no children had their Identity Cards. In conclusion, read and apply Proverbs 22:3.
Song 151 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting January 18
Song 130
10 min: Local announcements and Theocratic News. Read accounts report and Society acknowledgments of donations. Commend congregation for loyal financial support of local congregation as well as Society’s worldwide work.
20 min: “Wisely Using Vital Tools.” After brief introduction by chairman, there will be two demonstrations based on material outlined in paragraphs 2 to 5. At the conclusion of the first demonstration, householder accepts two magazines, asks what they cost, and makes a donation to the worldwide work. Publisher promises to return to answer the question, Why does God permit suffering? At the conclusion of the second demonstration, a home Bible study is started with an appropriate tract. Encourage all to engage householders in a Scriptural discussion when working in field service this weekend.
15 min: Why Christians Abstain From Blood. Talk by elder based on definition and first three subheadings under “Blood” in Reasoning book, pages 70-2.
Song 177 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting January 25
Song 128
10 min: Local announcements. Discuss main points from article “A Fine Privilege of Service.” As time permits, interview publisher who has an established magazine route. How did he get it started? How has it helped him cultivate interest or clearly discern extent of interest on part of householder?
15 min: “Can You Serve Jehovah as a Pioneer?” Discussion with audience. Interview a young person who is a regular pioneer or a publisher who pioneered as a young person. Highlight how parents and others can encourage youths to reach their goal of pioneering. Appeal warmly to all to consider seriously their possibilities of engaging in full-​time service. Plan now to auxiliary pioneer in April.
20 min: “Build On Interest by Making Effective Return Visits.” Brief talk followed by demonstration of conversation outlined in paragraph 3. As time permits, certain key elements of the presentation, such as the introduction or the transition to the scripture text, may be repeated.
Song 160 and concluding prayer.

