Wisely Using Vital Tools
1 As you witness from door to door, your goal should be to engage each householder in a constructive, Scriptural conversation by using the Bible and other vital tools. (Compare 2 Corinthians 6:1; 2 Timothy 2:15.) What are people in your territory concerned about these days? Are they worried about the economic situation and the decline in the quality of family life? A few introductory remarks on either of these topics may lead to a fine Bible discussion.
2 You could say:
▪ “In these challenging times, many people are finding it hard to make ends meet. Do you think human governments will solve our financial problems in a way that will be fair to everyone? [Listen to reply.] I personally found this thought to be most encouraging . . . ”
3 Then you could read Psalm 72:12-14 and round out the conversation by selecting an additional text from those found on pages 154-5 of the Reasoning book. Or after reading one scripture, you could refer to a paragraph in the tract Life in a Peaceful New World. Many publishers​—including young ones—​are successfully starting Bible studies in one of the tracts by reading a paragraph and then asking the householder for his opinion on what was read.
4 In some communities you may prefer to use this approach:
▪ “Many people would like to see a return to traditional family values. Do you think it is up to each individual to determine what those values should be, or should there be one standard for everyone? [Allow response.] Many agree that if the Bible’s wise advice were followed, there would be a marked improvement in the quality of family life.”
5 At this point you may either introduce and discuss the apostle’s statement at Colossians 3:12-14 or endeavor to start a home Bible study on the initial call by using points under the subheading “Which Way to Success?” in the tract Enjoy Family Life.
6 If the householder manifests interest, show him the value of one of the Society’s 192-​page bound books you are featuring during the month. If you are not sure of the extent of his interest, make wise use of other vital tools by sharing an appropriate point in a tract, a magazine, or a brochure.
7 If you are able to start a study on the first call, make definite arrangements to continue the discussion at a later date. You might lay the groundwork for your next visit by telling the householder that when you return you would like to share the answer to the commonly asked question: “Why does God permit suffering?” The article below will suggest how the subject may be developed on the return visit.

