Announcements
REMAIN AWAKE TO YOUR KINGDOM MINISTRY
The ministry in connection with the kingdom of God is most worthy of watchful attention. It is something to which we are awake and want to remain awake. We must be aware of the danger of becoming dull and drowsy, sluggish and sleepy, drugged by worldly propaganda and human philosophy appealing to love of self. Our love for God must keep us alert and ever watchful so we stay awake, standing firm in the faith, and have a full share in the happy work of proclaiming the good news of God’s kingdom. (1 Cor. 16:13, 14) During October Jehovah’s witnesses will stay awake to their Kingdom ministry privileges by going from house to house offering a year’s subscription for Awake! magazine on a $1 contribution. Three revealing Bible study booklets will be given free to each new subscriber. If you would like to have a share in Kingdom ministry, contact a nearby Kingdom Hall of Jehovah’s witnesses.
CONVENTION RELEASES
During the Divine Will International Assembly of Jehovah’s Witnesses just past ninety-one new publications were released. Most of them were in languages other than English. Four outstanding English releases were two Bibles and two bound books. Readers of The Watchtower will certainly want to have them. The first to be released was a pocket-size edition of the American Standard Version of the Bible. Its price is $1.50. The second was Volume IV of the New World Translation of the Hebrew Scriptures. This most recent Bible translation contains the books of Isaiah, Jeremiah and Lamentations. It may be had for $1. The third, and perhaps the most surprising release, was the book From Paradise Lost to Paradise Regained. Not only is its size different, but it is filled with large illustrations, and it is written in a manner that even poorly educated people can understand. You can obtain it for 75 cents. The fourth book is “Your Will Be Done on Earth”. This 384-page book is devoted to a detailed explanation of much of the Bible book of Daniel. A contribution of 50 cents will bring it to you.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES FOR THE WEEKS
October 12: Keep Your Eyes on the Prize. Page 560.
October 19: Running the Race Without Stumbling. Page 567.

