Indian Searches for Jehovah’s Witnesses
THE Indian population make up the majority of Bolivia’s inhabitants. They live mainly in the mountains and the vast altiplano, the 13,000-foot-high plateau stretching from the north to the south of Bolivia, located between two mighty mountain ranges, the eastern and western cordilleras or ranges of the Andes.
Although they are great sticklers for their traditions, especially as to religion, some of them have come out of the old-world system of things showing a keen desire to know Jehovah and his promised new world of righteousness. For an example: At the Cochabamba missionary residence when the doorbell was answered by one of the missionaries there, she was surprised to see an Indian standing there with the book “Let God Be True” in his hand. He greeted her in Spanish, saying, “Hello, my sister.”
About six months before, a friend had given him a Bible, which he began to read. Through his own study of the Bible he became convinced that Jehovah is the only true God. This truth he tried to teach those of his local Evangelist church, but without success. They insisted that Jesus was the only God. After this, he decided to come to the city to find the organization that worshiped Jehovah. He walked up one street and down the other until he found a building marked Kingdom Hall of Jehovah’s Witnesses. It was here that he obtained the book he was carrying. Soon thereafter he joined Jehovah’s witnesses in the house-to-house ministry and attended their meetings.
Being able to speak the Quechua Indian dialect, he allowed himself to be used by Jehovah in a marvelous way. He could reach these people, whereas we, not understanding the language, could not. After having talked at a door he was asked by the missionary to translate what he had said. So he repeated to her in Spanish: “Humanity is in a sad and pitiful state today. However, Jehovah has a wonderful organization for them, if they would only realize it. They enjoy the beauty of a flower for a short time, but Jehovah’s organization can be compared to a beautiful eternal flower and they can enjoy the fruits of it forever.”
It is said that Quechua is a very expressive language. And it is even more so when used to praise Jehovah.

