Is Catholic Action Christian?
THROUGHOUT many nations of the earth the Roman Catholic clergy endeavor to leave the impression that they are good fellows, tolerant of other people’s ideas and religions. Especially is this true in the United States. But this apparent sanctimoniousness of theirs has been proved time and again to be nothing more than a subterfuge, because in lands where Roman Catholics are in the majority the clergy show no tolerance for other religions. They are openly and at times violently opposed. It is only in lands where Roman Catholics are in the minority that this sheeplike cloak of tolerance is put on.
For an example of Roman Catholic opposition to peaceable religious assembly we go to Sucre, Bolivia. There Jehovah’s witnesses were preparing to hold a three-day meeting. While they were looking for a suitable place to meet, one hall owner told them that the Catholic clergy had warned and instructed all Catholic hall owners not to rent their halls to Jehovah’s witnesses. In addition, the Catholics had a handbill printed, which was entitled “We Do Not Want Them.” This, of course, meant that not only Jehovah’s witnesses were not wanted but all Protestants as well. The priests went so far as to instruct school children and students not to let any of Jehovah’s witnesses into their homes and to get rid of them as quickly as possible and then for them to go into a room and pray.
A meeting hall was leased in the Hotel Sucre directly across from a church. As soon as the priests found out that the hall had been arranged for they visited the owner and tried to get him to break his contract. The owner, however, refused to be intimidated. Next a gang of boys from the Sacred Heart School surrounded the hotel where the meeting was held and began throwing stones. They became very noisy and loud and tried to invade the premises. But the police arrived on time to scatter them. These Sacred Heart rowdies tore down the sign advertising the main public talk.
The assembly began and the sessions were held despite Catholic interference. The last day of the assembly proved to be exciting, because on this day a number of Jesuit priests came down to demonstrate their displeasure. They shoved their way into the assembly room, but before entering they were told: “We want order in there if you go in.” Mean while, across the street, high on the church a powerful loud-speaker of the Catholic radio station was blasting out—calling on all Catholics to come and defend the church and the virgin against these Protestants, heretics, etc. Since the hall was deep in the interior of the hotel, the loud-speaker noise did not disturb the assembly.
All went well until a priest arose toward the end of the public lecture and clamored to be heard. He was promptly told that his question would be recognized after the lecture was over. It was obvious that the clergy were not interested in any answers. They were there to break up the peaceable assembly. More police were summoned to the scene. The prefect or the chief of police himself came over. When he saw the Catholic mob milling around outside threateningly and heard the loudspeaker blasting away, he called a priest over and began to reprimand him for such shameful, unchristian conduct. He then ordered the priest and his group to leave. Those priests inside the assembly hall were asked to leave the premises and to take their gang with them. Police officers showed disgust over the unbecoming way these religious leaders conducted themselves. One officer stated that the citizens of Sucre do not approve of what they had seen.
For that matter, neither does God nor any Christian peace-loving person. But the good and the bad are distinguished by their fruits.—Matt. 7:15-20.
For such men are false apostles, deceitful workers, transforming themselves into apostles of Christ. And no wonder, for Satan himself keeps transforming himself into an angel of light. It is therefore nothing great if his ministers also keep transforming themselves into ministers of righteousness. But their end shall be according to their works.—2 Cor. 11:13-15.

