Question Box
▪ How should the opening song of the Theocratic Ministry School, the Service Meeting, the Public Meeting, and the Watchtower Study be introduced, and by whom?
Opening song selections for each week of the Theocratic Ministry School are listed in the Theocratic Ministry School Schedule that constitutes the October Our Kingdom Ministry insert. Opening and closing songs for each week’s Service Meeting are indicated on page 2 of Our Kingdom Ministry. Likewise, song numbers for the weekly Watchtower Study are found on page 2 of each issue of The Watchtower. The songs assigned are considered part of the unified whole of the meeting and should thus be introduced by the brother conducting the meeting rather than by the chairman of the preceding meeting.
For example, the Theocratic Ministry School overseer will welcome the audience, introduce the opening song, conduct the school, and then invite the first speaker of the Service Meeting to the platform. The brother with the Service Meeting part is the one who should call for the song that opens the Service Meeting.
In like manner, the Public Meeting will be called to order by a chairman. He will warmly welcome all in attendance and invite them to join in singing the opening song selected by the speaker. The chairman (or perhaps another qualified brother assigned in advance) will open the meeting with prayer. He will introduce the speaker and state the subject of his discourse. After the talk the chairman, while not summarizing what the speaker just said, will make a brief expression of appreciation for the instruction. He will announce the title of the public talk for the following week, and then he will invite all in attendance to remain for the Watchtower Study. There is no need for the chairman to ask if the audience would like to send love and greetings to a visiting speaker’s congregation. Next, the chairman will invite the Watchtower Study conductor to the platform.
The Watchtower Study conductor will introduce the first song to be used in conjunction with the study. He will conduct the study in harmony with published instructions and then announce the concluding song. The Watchtower Study conductor will usually call on the brother who gave the public talk to offer the closing prayer.
Observing these general guidelines will help to ensure that our congregation meetings are conducted in a unified manner.

