Service Meeting Schedule
Week Starting May 14
Song 205
10 min: Local announcements. Using the suggestions on page 4 or other presentations appropriate for your territory, demonstrate how to offer the May 15 Watchtower and the May Awake!
20 min: Supporting Kingdom Activity Locally and Worldwide. Talk and audience discussion based on Organized to Do Jehovah’s Will, chapter 12.
15 min: “He Is Giving to the Tired One Power.”a As time permits, invite audience to comment on the cited scriptures.
Song 1 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting May 21
Song 41
10 min: Local announcements. Review Question Box.
15 min: You Can Learn Another Language! Talk based on the Awake! of March 2007, pages 10-12. Highlight the value of learning another language for the purpose of furthering the good news.
20 min: “Do You Champion God’s Word?”b Include comments on the boxes on pages 143-4 of the Ministry School book.
Song 202 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting May 28
Song 46
10 min: Local announcements. Read accounts report and donation acknowledgments. Remind publishers to turn in field service reports for May. Using the suggestions on page 4 or other presentations appropriate for your territory, demonstrate how to offer the June 1 Watchtower and the June Awake!
20 min: Feature Either the Creator or the Family Happiness Book in June. Point out some of the timely features of the books, and demonstrate how to offer each book, using presentations that would be effective in the local territory. As time permits, invite the audience to comment on the good results obtained from using these publications with acquaintances or family members.
15 min: Field Experiences. Relate experiences enjoyed by auxiliary pioneers and other publishers who worked hard to increase their field activity during March, April, and May. Also relate experiences of those who followed up on magazine placements with the goal of starting a Bible study. One or two outstanding experiences may be reenacted.
Song 21 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting June 4
Song 99
10 min: Local announcements. Selected Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry.
15 min: Local needs.
20 min: “Teach Your Children to Praise Jehovah.”c When discussing paragraph 4, include comments on the July 2005 Our Kingdom Ministry, page 3.
Song 169 and concluding prayer.
[Footnotes]
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.

