Teach Your Children to Praise Jehovah
 1. Can young children praise Jehovah?
1 Psalm 148:12, 13 encourages boys and girls to “praise the name of Jehovah.” The Scriptures contain numerous examples of young children who did so. For example, “Samuel was ministering before Jehovah, as a boy.” (1 Sam. 2:18) It was “a little girl” who told Naaman’s wife that Jehovah’s prophet in Israel could cure Naaman of his leprosy. (2 Ki. 5:1-3) When Jesus entered into the temple and performed powerful works, “boys” were the ones who cried out: “Save, we pray, the Son of David!” (Matt. 21:15) How can parents teach their children to praise Jehovah?
 2. Why is it important for parents to set a good example for their children?
2 Example: Before inculcating the truth in their children’s hearts, Israelite fathers were instructed first to love Jehovah and have his commands on their own hearts. (Deut. 6:5-9) If you speak positively about the ministry and make it a part of your weekly schedule, your children will be inclined to view the ministry as important and satisfying.
 3. How was one sister benefited by her parents’ example?
3 One sister fondly recalls: “When I was growing up, our family routine included sharing in the field ministry every weekend. I could see that my parents really enjoyed preaching. We grew up viewing the ministry as something pleasurable.” This sister became an unbaptized publisher at the age of seven and is in her 33rd year of full-time service.
 4. What does it mean to train children progressively?
4 Progressive Training: Involve your children as you share in the ministry. Perhaps they can ring the doorbell, hand the householder a tract, or read a scripture. This will add to their enjoyment and help them to gain confidence in their ability to share the Kingdom message. As they grow older, their participation in the ministry should increase. Therefore, help them to be progressive and to give thought to spiritual goals.
 5. What is needed for a child to qualify as an unbaptized publisher?
5 Speak to the elders as soon as you feel that your children are qualified to become unbaptized publishers and when they express a desire to become such. Becoming a publisher will impress upon them their personal responsibility to praise Jehovah. Keep in mind that a child does not need to know as much as baptized adults before he can qualify. Does your child understand basic Bible teachings? Does he adhere to the Bible’s moral standards? Does he desire to share in the ministry and to be identified as one of Jehovah’s Witnesses? If so, the elders may then determine that he is qualified as an unbaptized publisher.​—See Organized to Do Jehovah’s Will, pp. 79-82.
 6. Why is it worthwhile for parents to train their children?
6 Teaching children to praise Jehovah from their heart requires work. However, few things cause greater joy for parents than seeing their children make spiritual progress. More important, Jehovah is pleased when children tell about his wonderful works.

