“He Is Giving to the Tired One Power”
1 All of us get tired from time to time. It may result not only from work or other physical activity but also from the challenges we face in these “critical times hard to deal with.” (2 Tim. 3:1) As servants of Jehovah, how do we acquire the spiritual strength needed to keep from slowing down in our ministry? We do this by relying upon the one who is “vigorous in power,” Jehovah. (Isa. 40:26) He is aware of our needs and has a genuine interest in helping us.​—1 Pet. 5:7.
2 Jehovah’s Provisions: Jehovah strengthens us by means of his holy spirit, the same irresistible force that he used to create the universe. God’s spirit helps us to “regain power” if we become weary. (Isa. 40:31) Ask yourself, ‘When was the last time I specifically prayed for holy spirit to strengthen me to meet my Christian obligations?’​—Luke 11:11-13.
3 By daily reading and meditating on God’s inspired Word and being nourished spiritually by a regular study of our Christian publications, we will be like a vibrant “tree planted by streams of water, that gives its own fruit in its season and the foliage of which does not wither.”​—Ps. 1:2, 3.
4 Jehovah also uses fellow believers, who can be “a strengthening aid” to us. (Col. 4:10, 11) They strengthen us at congregation meetings by their upbuilding conversation, comments, and talks. (Acts 15:32) Christian elders, especially, provide spiritual help and refreshing encouragement.​—Isa. 32:1, 2.
5 The Ministry: If you feel yourself becoming weary, do not stop preaching! Unlike many other activities, regular participation in the ministry actually refreshes us. (Matt. 11:28-30) Sharing the good news helps us to focus on God’s Kingdom and to keep eternity and its blessed prospects in view.
6 There is much to do before this wicked system is destroyed. We have every reason to remain steadfast in our service, “dependent on the strength that God supplies.” (1 Pet. 4:11) With Jehovah’s help we will finish our work, for “he is giving to the tired one power.”​—Isa. 40:29.

