From Our Readers
Morse Code Near Death?  The item “Morse Code Near Death at 150 Years,” which appeared in “Watching the World,” could give a wrong impression. (August 8, 1997) Morse code is still used in radio navigation beacons for aircraft and in short wave radio transmissions.
H. K., Netherlands
Thank you for pointing this out. As our reader correctly observes, the “death” of Morse code that we reported on referred specifically to maritime operations.—ED.
Tuberculosis  I appreciated the series “Tuberculosis—The Return of a Killer.” (December 22, 1997) I caught TB in 1988 and recovered. You are right to point out that patients must take their medication “with unerring regularity.”
Y. L., France
My mother-in-law, who is not religiously inclined, saw the article on my table and read it. She asked if she could take it home. I was able to place two other issues of Awake! with her. Thank you for all the hard work you do to produce each magazine.
L. N., United States
I contracted TB 11 years ago. The information presented was very accurate. At times, reading it was like reliving my own experience. I thank Jehovah for the gift of life and the regular counsel we receive in Awake! to safeguard our health.
G. B., Italy
I contracted this disease and was under medication for six months. Your article helped me to learn more about this killer disease. More important, it has helped build my faith that the Kingdom of God will bring a global solution to this problem.
P. P., Indonesia
Life Story  The article “The Customer Is Always Right” touched my heart deeply. (December 22, 1997) Wei Tung Chin had six children; so did I. Tears flowed from my eyes as she told her story. I know she is proud of her children and their families. Four of my own children have not as yet accepted Christianity as their way of life. Perhaps one day I may experience her kind of joy.
E. H., United States
I always find the life stories in Awake! to be so encouraging. The story of Wei Tung Chin touched me deeply. How happy we can be that such valuable individuals are a part of the people that Jehovah is gathering.
I. T., Germany
Wrong Label!  I want to thank you for the interesting article “The Beauty of Alpine National Parks.” (November 22, 1997) Since I love mountains and photography, I have had the pleasure of seeing and photographing all the animals described in this article. I believe, however, that there is an error in the photo caption at the top of page 15. I think that the animals shown are, not chamois, but female ibex.
M. D. M., Italy
We’d like to thank our reader for catching this error.—ED.
Moscow  Thanks for the article “Moscow—Its 850th Anniversary.” (December 22, 1997) Russian hospitality and friendliness are overwhelming. I got to experience this myself in 1989, when 3,000 Russians came for a Christian convention in Poland. The last page of that issue, showing a Russian sister preaching in the Russian countryside, was also moving. May Jehovah see to it that many more Russian-speaking people become his worshipers!
I. L., Germany

