Listening With Your Eyes
WHAT is a key to success for effective communication with a Deaf person? Clear and appropriate eye contact. It is a must when Deaf people are speaking. In fact, if two people are conversing in signed language, it is considered rude for one of them to look away and break eye contact. And how do you get a Deaf person’s attention? Rather than use the person’s name, it is more appropriate to tap that one gently on the shoulder or arm, wave in his or her peripheral vision or, if distant, motion to another to get the person’s attention. Depending on the situation, you could tap on the floor or flick the lights on and off. These and other appropriate attention-getting methods complement the experience of Deaf people and are a part of Deaf culture.
The Uniting Bond of Language
When encountering a Deaf person, some have mistakenly concluded that lip-reading is a simple task. Many Deaf people, however, find it a very limiting means of communication. Of course, there are exceptions, as some individuals are very adept at speech-reading, but in general it would be a kindness not to assume that one can easily read your lips. Perhaps using an interpreter or writing on paper what you want to say would allow for a degree of meaningful communication to take place.
However, if you regularly encounter Deaf individuals, would it not be considerate to learn some signed language? What a wonderful bond this would engender, especially among those who share the same faith! It is similar to learning the basics of the other language in a bilingual culture. Jehovah’s Witnesses have long been interested in making information about Jehovah God accessible to all. When we realize that Deaf people cannot learn to have normal hearing, how much better it is if we adapt to them by using signed language!—1 Corinthians 9:20-22.
Antonino states that when he began attending Christian meetings in Italy, initially “there was not a real and active exchange of encouragement in conversations with the brothers who could hear. Because we could not understand each other, I felt very left out.” Many congregation members responded by learning Italian Sign Language (LIS). Interested Deaf ones started studying the Bible, and meetings were conducted in LIS. Antonino was encouraged and now desires “to talk to all of my Deaf friends about our meetings and the warm love that exists among Jehovah’s people.”
Around the world Jehovah’s Witnesses are forming sign-language congregations, where Deaf people are able to enjoy warm and loving fellowship with one another. In Spain, sign-language groups for the Deaf have existed for over 20 years. In the United States, there are presently 19 active congregations for the Deaf and 47 smaller groups.
Deaf people are able to serve as full-time ministers (pioneers), ministerial servants, and elders as well as to give talks at conventions, teach Pioneer Service Schools, and take the lead in a variety of ways. In this environment there are no limitations, only opportunities to praise Jehovah with one’s abilities.
Our inherent need for companionship and communication is expressed through the many cultures and languages around the world. Instead of seeing Deaf people as lacking or deficient, how much better it is when we see the achievements, abilities, and attributes that make all of us human! By our respect for others and our willingness to adapt, we all contribute to a diversified but unified human family.
[Picture on page 24]
When conversing in signed language, maintain eye contact
[Picture on page 24]
Deaf people joyfully serve as full-time ministers
[Picture on page 25]
Signing Kingdom songs in Spain
[Picture on page 25]
Delivering a convention discourse in Korean Sign Language
[Picture on page 25]
Bible-based publications presented in sign language on video

