Announcements
● Literature offer for February: Any 192-page book published prior to 1980 that the congregation has in stock. If the congregation has no stock of such books, the book “Let Your Kingdom Come” should be used. The “Kingdom Come” book may be requested from Brooklyn. March: Revelation Climax book. April and May: Watchtower subscription.
● The secretary and service overseer should review the activity of all regular pioneers. If any are having difficulty meeting the requirement of hours, elders should arrange for assistance to be given. For suggestions, review Society’s letters (S-201) of October 1, 1989, and October 1, 1990. Also, see paragraphs 12-20 of the August 1986 Our Kingdom Ministry insert.
● Regarding pioneer service, the following reminders are given:
○ An announcement should be made to the congregation when a regular pioneer discontinues his pioneer service. The brief announcement may simply state: “This is to inform the congregation that [name] is no longer serving as a regular pioneer.”
○ The yearly hour requirement for regular pioneers is still 1,000 hours.
○ A full year must have passed following a judicial reproof or reinstatement before one can be considered for auxiliary or regular pioneer service.​—See Our Kingdom Ministry insert, August 1986, paragraphs 21 and 23.
● On April 27 the Brooklyn Bethel Home and factory as well as Watchtower Farms buildings will be closed for spring cleaning, so there will be no arrangements for tours or for congregations to pick up literature on that day.
● The Memorial celebration will be held Saturday, March 30, 1991. Although the talk may start earlier, please remember that the passing of the Memorial bread and wine should not begin until after sundown. Check with local sources to determine when sundown occurs in your area. No meetings other than for field service are to be conducted on that date. Congregations having a regularly scheduled meeting on Saturday should arrange for that meeting to be held on another day if possible. There will be no change in Sunday meeting schedules.
● Those publishers who wish to auxiliary pioneer in March and April should make their plans now and turn in their application early. This will help the elders to make necessary field service arrangements and have sufficient literature on hand.
● U.S. Selective Service regulations require that all men register at the post office when reaching 18 years of age. All of those required to do so should take care of the matter promptly, viewing it as a Christian’s obligation to the superior authorities. Elders will want to have this in mind and give appropriate reminders to young brothers nearing the age of 18. Questions as to the young Christian’s responsibilities in this regard may be answered by the elders.
● New Publications Available:
Insight on the Scriptures, Volume 1 (Aará-Escrita)​—Portuguese
Mankind’s Search for God​—Danish, Finnish, Norwegian, Swedish
My Book of Bible Stories​—Armenian
Organized to Accomplish Our Ministry​—Russian
Questions Young People Ask​—Answers That Work—​Hungarian
Survival Into a New Earth​—Tamil
The Bible​—God’s Word or Man’s?​—Arabic, Hungarian, Indonesian
True Peace and Security​—How Can You Find It?​—Turkish
United in Worship of the Only True God​—Greenlandic
You Can Live Forever in Paradise on Earth (Large size)​—Romanian, Tamil
You Can Live Forever in Paradise on Earth (Small size)​—Hungarian
Enjoy Life on Earth Forever!​—Kachin
How Can Blood Save Your Life?​—Croatian, Czech, Danish, Finnish, Hungarian, Indonesian, Norwegian, Polish, Serbian, Ukrainian
Jehovah’s Witnesses in the Twentieth Century​—Indonesian
Jehovah’s Witnesses​—Unitedly Doing God’s Will Worldwide—​Estonian, Ukrainian
“Look! I Am Making All Things New”​—Lushai, Malayalam, Marathi, Serbian, Tahitian
Should You Believe in the Trinity?​—Czech, Malayalam, Slovak, Telugu
Tract No. 13​—Laotian, Russian
Tract No. 14​—Laotian, Russian
Tract No. 15​—Russian
Tract No. 16​—Russian
● The 1991 Calendar of Jehovah’s Witnesses and Examining the Scriptures Daily​—1991 are now available in Romanian.
● The Society has produced a new 32-page brochure in English for the special purpose of helping people of Hindu background understand the truth. The title is Our Problems​—Who Will Help Us Solve Them? Congregations that have English-speaking persons of Hindu background in their territory may wish to request a SMALL supply of this brochure. As it becomes available in other languages, an announcement will be made.

