Boldly Extend the Invitation to “Come!”
1 Fast-moving events worldwide identify these times as “the last days.” (2 Tim. 3:1-5) The rise in crime, economic instability, and life-threatening diseases have added their pressure. But happily, in the face of such woes, people are being extended an invitation that could affect them everlastingly. The spirit and the bride continue to say: “Come!” And now “a great crowd” have joined them in extending an open invitation to people everywhere to come and take life’s water free.​—Rev. 7:9; 22:17.
2 Today, those thirsting for righteousness are responding to this invitation in great numbers. Last year millions attended the district conventions held worldwide, and almost ten million were present at the Memorial. Millions of others are showing appreciation for Jehovah’s provision by listening to the Kingdom message. How important, then, that we use our time wisely in extending this invitation publicly and from house to house!​—Acts 5:42; Eph. 5:15, 16.
BOLDLY PARTICIPATE
3 The early Christians were persecuted because of their zealous preaching. (Acts 16:19-21; 17:2-8) However, they did not let up in their bold efforts to announce the good news. We likewise must be bold and determined in our efforts to get the good news preached.
4 Even in countries where the work is under ban, the brothers are sharing wholeheartedly in the preaching work despite severe persecution, including the possible loss of jobs, homes, and even their freedom. Their fine example serves to encourage us to continue inviting others to “Come!”​—2 Thess. 3:9.
5 For more than 35 years after learning the truth, one sister maintained the heart desire to pioneer. Her personal circumstances changed when she was 70 years old, and she became a regular pioneer. Although few people at that age would undertake a new career, she did so. Having enjoyed the full-time ministry now for a number of years, she says, “It gets better every day.” She has brought spiritual refreshment to others because of fearlessly accepting Jehovah’s invitation to reach out and share more fully in Kingdom service.
6 As in the first century, people today are responding to this invitation, transforming their thinking, making over their minds, and giving up God-dishonoring practices. They become part of a dedicated international brotherhood of Witnesses and join with the spirit and the bride in saying “Come!” to yet other honesthearted people.
7 The vast increase in the Kingdom work and the expansion of branch offices in various lands give evidence of Jehovah’s blessing. But time is running out for this old system. Now is the opportune time to demonstrate boldness and zeal in extending the invitation to “Come!” so that others may respond quickly and act upon what is heard.​—Acts 20:26, 27; Rom. 12:11.

