Fulfilling Our Kingdom Ministry as Jehovah’s Witnesses
1 As Jehovah’s Witnesses we have the greatest privilege on earth. We represent Jehovah in a universal court case that puts on trial all of those worshiped as gods. (Isa. 41:1, 23; 43:12) To help us make a worthy defense of our hope, Jehovah has provided a well-stocked library of publications. (1 Pet. 3:15) The Watch Tower Publications Index is an important key to finding the information we need. Familiarity with some of its principal features will help us become more skilled in its use.
2 All of us should be well acquainted with the main heading “Jehovah.” Under that heading in the 1986-1989 Index, can you find references explaining Jehovah’s temporary permission of what is bad? Also, you will find the centered heading “Name” in both the 1930-1985 Index and the current Index. References to everything published about the name Jehovah are collected here.
3 Another heading of major importance is “Jehovah’s Witnesses.” It brings together references about Jehovah’s Witnesses as an organization. Do you know what our official view is on advanced education, autopsies, killing in self-defense, or public welfare assistance? You will find references for such questions under the subheading “attitude toward—.” Further along are listed modern histories of Jehovah’s Witnesses in various countries, and an extensive list of comments about Jehovah’s Witnesses is found under the centered heading “Statements by Others.”
4 Information on how Jehovah’s people in modern times have fulfilled their Kingdom ministry can be traced using several principal headings. Under the heading “Dates,” there is a centered heading “Clarification of Beliefs.” References for major clarifications of our understanding on doctrines, prophecy, and prophetic types are listed in order by year. “Dates of Prophetic Significance” follows almost immediately. These are years when prophecies or prophetic types were fulfilled or began to be fulfilled.
5 Life stories of faithful servants of Jehovah are a source of encouragement and instruction for us. They can help us lay a solid foundation for the future in our children and our Bible students. You will find these life stories listed by personal name and article title under “Life Stories of Jehovah’s Witnesses.”
6 Unique to Jehovah’s people is the Scriptural teaching of two destinies for those approved by Jehovah​—a heavenly one and an earthly one. The principal heading under which we find references about those who have received “the heavenly calling” is “Congregation of God.” (Heb. 3:1; Acts 20:28; 1 Tim. 3:15) Other headings are “Remnant” and “144,000.” Two headings, “Great Crowd” and “Other Sheep,” are the primary ones pointing to information dealing with those whose hope is everlasting life on earth.​—Rev. 7:9; John 10:16.
7 Whether we are young or old, the privilege of being one of Jehovah’s Witnesses involves every aspect of life. Future articles in Our Kingdom Ministry will show how the Index can help us in our ministry, in the congregation, within the family, and in the field.

