Meetings to Help Us Make Disciples
WEEK STARTING FEBRUARY 4
Song 92
10 min: Local announcements and selected Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry. As time permits, suggest ways to present current magazines in local territory. Encourage participation in field service this weekend.
15 min: “Boldly Extend the Invitation to ‘Come!’” Question-and-answer discussion and demonstrations. Cover material in Our Kingdom Ministry article, highlighting application of yeartext, Revelation 22:17. Present two brief demonstrations to suggest ways of making current literature offer in local territory.
10 min: “Praising Jehovah in Song.” Encouraging talk based on article. Use songs on this evening’s program to illustrate points made in article.
10 min: Local needs or talk based on “Why Pursue Righteousness?” in The Watchtower, October 15, 1990, pages 26-9.
Song 20 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING FEBRUARY 11
Song 193
10 min: Local announcements. Accounts report. Include expressions of appreciation for congregation’s generosity in caring for local needs, and convey to the brothers the Society’s acknowledgments of contributions that have been sent in.
20 min: “Presenting the Good News​—By Street Witnessing.” Questions and answers. Intersperse two or three brief demonstrations to illustrate points that publishers will be able to use in street witnessing this week.
15 min: Make Plans for Auxiliary Pioneering During Memorial Season. Encouraging talk with helpful information for those who would like to auxiliary pioneer in either March or April or during both months. Refer to the item under Announcements regarding auxiliary pioneering. Explain what arrangements the congregation and individual publishers can make in order to encourage and help those who will be pioneering during the Memorial season. Have auxiliary pioneer application forms ready for those who may request them following the meeting. Mention can be made that there will be five full weekends in March and that special efforts will be made to invite people to the Memorial celebration on March 30 and to the special public talk scheduled for April 7.
Song 130 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING FEBRUARY 18
Song 71
10 min: Local announcements. Question Box. Point out need for all publishers to know the correct name of their congregation as well as the names of some, if not all, of the elders. Encourage full participation in field service this weekend, perhaps offering suggestions for appropriate talking points in the current magazines.
15 min: “Fulfilling Our Kingdom Ministry as Jehovah’s Witnesses.” Brother who is a qualified teacher discusses the information presented and demonstrates use of features mentioned for improving our ministry.
20 min: Share in a Global Joy by Saying “Come!” Talk, interview(s), and experience(s) based on feature articles in The Watchtower, January 1, 1991. Enthusiastic and encouraging presentation of information from The Watchtower along with expressions and experiences from zealous local publishers, reflecting such joy.
Song 211 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING FEBRUARY 25
Song 148
10 min: Local announcements and Theocratic News. Suggest and demonstrate appropriate magazine presentations. Encourage participation in field service this weekend.
15 min: “How Jehovah Prospers His Work.” Talk based on article in The Watchtower of December 1, 1990, pages 22-5.
20 min: Prepare for Service in March. During March we will be offering the book Revelation​—Its Grand Climax At Hand! Fine suggestions for introducing and offering this publication were given in the February 1989 issue of Our Kingdom Ministry. Discuss some of these suggestions that may prove to be helpful to the publishers this weekend. Demonstrate presentation of book with explanation of how worldwide Bible educational work is supported by voluntary donations.
Song 63 and concluding prayer.

