Study Questions for the Brochure How Can Blood Save Your Life?
At places in these studies, reference is made to the appendix, pages 27-31. Comments on the indicated paragraphs may be included in the study, the appendix paragraphs being read as time permits.
FIRST WEEK
Page 2
1-4. Why is it timely to consider how blood can save lives? (See page 27, paragraphs 1-3.)
Page 3
1, 2. Why is it natural to view life as being linked to blood, and how is God involved in this matter?
3, 4. Why should we be interested in what God has to say about blood?
5. For what reason should we give attention to Genesis 9:3-6, and what is the significance of that passage?
6. The Israelites were under what obligations with respect to blood?
Page 4
1, 2. How did God’s laws benefit ancient Israel, but what was the main reason why Israel avoided blood?
3. How was the law on blood to be regarded in an emergency?
Page 5
1, 2. Concerning the law on blood, what example did Jesus set?
3, 4. (a) What did an apostolic council determine about Christians and blood? (b) How do we know whether abstaining from blood was merely a temporary decree?
5. According to Jesus’ apostles, how important was the avoiding of blood?
6, 7. What additional evidence shows that the decree about blood was a permanent requirement?
Page 6
1, 2. How was blood used medicinally in pre-Christian times?
3. How did early Christians respond to the use of blood, even medicinally, in Roman times?
4-6. (a) How did the use of blood transfusions begin? (b) In view of God’s law, why would transfusing blood into the veins be wrong?
7. Why do Jehovah’s Witnesses refuse blood transfusions? (See page 27, paragraphs 4-6, and page 28, paragraph 1.)
Page 7
1. Though the primary reason that Christians avoid transfusions is religious, why should we examine medical aspects of blood therapy?
SECOND WEEK
Page 7
2, 3. Blood transfusion holds what place in modern medicine?
4, 5. Why is it reasonable to consider whether transfusions are risky?
Page 8
1. We wisely ask what concerning blood transfusions?
2, 3. Why are blood-typing and cross matching critical but not necessarily sufficient?
4, 5. How could a blood transfusion cause immunologic problems?
6, 7. What harm may blood transfusions do after cancer surgery?
Page 9
1. What is the significance of the evidence regarding blood transfusion and cancer surgery?
2, 3. Transfusions may do what other immunologic harm?
4, 5. Why do people need to know of the danger of contracting disease from transfusions?
Page 10 (Box)
1, 2. How serious is the risk of transfusion-borne hepatitis?
3. At one point, why did it seem that the risk of contracting hepatitis from blood was being overcome?
4, 5. What developments proved that the danger of contracting hepatitis from blood was still not to be ignored?
6-8. Why is concern over hepatitis not a thing of the past?
Page 11
1. What might illustrate that the disease risks of blood are not about to disappear?
2-4. How can blood expose someone to diseases that are not common in his area? (See also box, page 11.)
5-7. How has the AIDS pandemic shown that new, fatal diseases may be linked to blood?
Page 12
1, 2. Why does the use of tests to detect antibodies to the AIDS virus still not guarantee that blood is risk free?
3-5. Why is the threat of the AIDS virus not the end of the matter?
6, 7. What valid concerns do experts have about blood-borne viruses?
THIRD WEEK
Page 13
1, 2. Who wants quality medical care, and what does this include?
3-5. How could you illustrate that there are alternatives to blood transfusions?
6-8. When has blood often been transfused, but why was this practice not well-founded?
Page 14
1. What indicates that below-normal hemoglobin levels can be accommodated?
2, 3. In the case of rapid blood loss, what is needed, and how can the problem be treated?
4. Why are nonblood volume replacement fluids effective?
5. How can physicians help a patient to cope with a loss of red cells?
Page 15
1. What can be done to speed up red-cell production?
2-4. During surgery, how can blood loss be minimized?
Page 16
1-3. What evidence shows that major surgery without transfusions is possible?
4-6. What broad range of surgery is possible without using blood? (See page 28, paragraphs 2-4.)
Page 17
1. What good results have been obtained in heart surgery where blood was not administered?
2-4. How do Witness patients themselves contribute to the excellent outcome often experienced in nonblood surgery?
FOURTH WEEK
Page 17
5, 6. What is risk/​benefit analysis, and how is it employed?
Page 19
1, 2. What role does the patient play in risk/​benefit analysis?
3-5. Why is blood therapy appropriately included in weighing risks and benefits? (See page 31, paragraphs 1, 2.)
6. What legal principle bears on your right to choose medical therapies? (See page 30, paragraphs 1-8.)
Page 18 (Box)
1-4. What do patients who are Witnesses do to relieve legal concerns on the part of medical personnel? (See page 28, paragraph 5.)
5-7. In view of what Witnesses will do to quiet legal concerns, why is it reasonable for doctors and hospitals to cooperate?
Page 20
1-3. How have some medical personnel responded to the stand that Witnesses take?
4, 5. How is it that the courts have become involved in some cases of patients who are Witnesses?
Page 21
1, 2. Why is resorting to the courts not the best way to handle cases involving Witnesses and blood?
3, 4. For what reasons is it inappropriate to turn to the courts even when the patient is a child?
5, 6. What parental right comes into play in selecting treatment for children? (See page 28, paragraph 6, and page 29, paragraph 1.)
Page 22
1-4. What are some legal indications that parents should be free to make medical decisions for their children?
5. Why should Witness parents and medical personnel work together?
FIFTH WEEK
Page 22
6, 7. What key facts should you have in mind about blood and a Witness’ request for nonblood medical management?
Page 23
1-3. Even if some die refusing blood, what must we not ignore? (See page 29, paragraphs 2-5, and page 31, paragraphs 3-5.)
4, 5. What is a realistic view concerning death and blood?
Page 24
1, 2. What can help us to appreciate how blood is truly lifesaving?
3, 4. In pre-Christian times, what was God’s view of blood, and why?
Page 25
1. How was blood involved on Atonement Day, and why should we care?
2, 3. There is what link between Atonement Day and Jesus’ role?
4. (a) What is the key reason why Christians abstain from blood? (b) Why should we not stress too much the risks of blood transfusions?
5, 6. (a) How is blood linked to our standing with God? (b) What teaching must we understand as central to our view on blood?
7. Why can we say that the Witnesses’ position on blood shows respect for life?
Page 26
1, 2. How is blood involved in our everlasting future?

