Fiji Islanders Put on New Personality
CHRISTIANS are commanded to clothe themselves “with the new personality which through accurate knowledge” of God’s Word “is being renewed according to the image of the one who created it,” Jehovah God. (Col. 3:10) That some in the Fiji Islands are heeding this admonition of the apostle Paul can be seen from the following report recently received from there:
A Witness missionary was going from house to house in a certain town in the Fiji Islands when he came across one of the leading businessmen of the town. Upon hearing that the missionary was one of Jehovah’s witnesses the businessman invited him in and told him that the Witnesses were always welcome at his home. When asked why, the man stated the following: ‘For years the village was plagued by a group of hooligans who caused the businessmen much trouble and loss of property. Then about a year ago Jehovah’s witnesses came to town. Before long certain of the leading ones of this band of hooligans became Witnesses and are now peaceable and respectable citizens. The entire situation has seen a great improvement within the past year because of this.’
Among these hooligans who became Witnesses was a certain Isoa. Friends of a murdered man had persuaded him to perjure himself in order to procure the conviction of a certain man that was supposed to have committed the murder, but for which there was no evidence. To accommodate these friends of the murdered man he twice swore in court that he had seen the suspect with the murdered man. The trial dragged on for months, and in the meantime Isoa became one of Jehovah’s witnesses.
Now Isoa was greatly concerned about what he should do, as he did not want to have the bloodguilt of this suspect resting upon him. He consulted with the local congregation overseer and the congregation committee, who gave him good counsel. So Isoa wrote a letter to the magistrate telling that in the religion in which he had been reared he had not been properly instructed and so saw nothing wrong in accommodating his friends by perjuring himself. But now he had become one of Jehovah’s witnesses and he saw that it was very wrong and he was therefore confessing to having perjured himself and was retracting his oath. As a result the accused man was set free. Needless to say, this caused quite a sensation in the court.
It also caused the police to be angry with Isoa, as by means of his perjury they had apparently solved the crime. So now they brought him to court to try him on the charge of perjury. Fortunately, at the time a visiting European magistrate was on the bench, and upon hearing all the facts, he dismissed the case against Isoa as having no merit whatsoever. As a result, the name of Jehovah’s witnesses is being held in high esteem.

