Questions From Readers
● The Watchtower, October 1, 1960, stated that the Christian congregation, when it began at Pentecost, “had six of the eight Jewish believers who were used to write the remaining twenty-seven books of the Holy Bible.” One of those not present, of course, was the apostle Paul. Who was the other one?—M. W., Indonesia.
From Acts 1:13, 14, it is apparent that the Christian Greek Scripture writers and apostles Matthew, John and Peter were present because it names all the faithful apostles. And since Jesus’ brothers, or half brothers, were also said to have been there, included also are James and Jude. There is twofold reason for believing that Mark was an early believer: First it appears that he was the young man, scantily clothed, who fled on the night of Jesus’ betrayal, because Mark is the only one who mentions this incident, and had it been another than he, he doubtless would have named him. Secondly, the home of his mother was used as a place of worship by the early congregation, which would seem to indicate that both she and her son Mark had become Jesus’ followers before his death.—Mark 14:51, 52; Acts 12:12.
This, then, would leave only Luke, aside from Paul. That he most likely was not present at Pentecost is clear from the introduction of his Gospel, for he speaks of “those who from the beginning became eyewitnesses and attendants of the message [and who] delivered these to us,” thus showing that he was not an eyewitness. Additionally, the earliest reference to Luke, but only by means of the personal pronoun “we,” is after the conversion of Saul, who later became the apostle Paul.—Luke 1:2; Acts 16:10.
● In instituting the memorial of his death and the covenant for the Kingdom with his followers, did Jesus partake of the bread and wine?—F. S., United States.
Regarding these emblems Jesus said: “Take, eat. This means my body.” “Drink out of it, all of you.” It therefore does not seem reasonable to conclude that Jesus would partake of the bread, which was representative of his own fleshly body, nor of the wine which represented his own blood. So while there is not a scripture that gives us definite information, it is reasonable and logical to draw this conclusion.—Matt. 26:26, 27.
● Are sisters required to wear a head covering when giving the third and fourth student talks in the theocratic ministry school?—D. H., United States.
No, it is not necessary for sisters to wear a head covering when giving these talks. They are not teaching dedicated males but only giving demonstrations of their own teaching ability for the purpose of being counseled. Since this is the purpose of their giving these talks and since the school is under male supervision, sisters are not required to wear a head covering. For similar reasons they would not be required to wear a head covering when taking part in service meeting demonstrations.

