From Our Readers
Double Life  I want to thank you for the article “Young People Ask . . . A Double Life​—Who Has to Know?” (January 8, 1994) When I was 16 years old, I started drinking, smoking, and dating behind my parents’ backs. These articles really helped me to see that nothing is hidden from the watchful eyes of God.
T. T., Fiji
Money Chase  I just read the series “The Money Chase​—Where Will it End?” (March 22, 1994) The articles gave the subject excellent coverage. I did not know that such bad conditions still existed for migrant workers and their families. My heart goes out to them.
G. M., United States
The way you described the bad working conditions and low wages is accurate. It is a sad commentary on how some view these workers​—not as human beings with feelings like ours. Yes, “man has dominated man to his injury”!​—Ecclesiastes 8:9.
K. V., United States
Breast Cancer  In your series “Breast Cancer​—Every Woman’s Fear” (April 8, 1994), you made no mention of studies that indicate breast-​feeding may lessen the chance of breast cancer.
B. J. M., Germany
We regret this omission. However, the point was made in the article “The Case for Mother’s Milk,” which appeared in our September 22, 1993, issue.​—ED.
I spent some time with a Christian sister who had her breast removed. She was 62 years old and very depressed. I remember being at a loss for words of support. Thanks to the comments you quoted in the articles, I can now give her support that counts.
D. H., United States
About two years ago, I was operated on for breast cancer. To find information on the subject, I bought a medical encyclopedia, but I did not find much. Your article, though, answered my questions. It truly comforted me.
M. G., Italy
Nine years ago my mother died from breast cancer. At the time I was only nine years old, and I never understood what she went through. It was hard not to cry as I read those articles and thought of her. I shall never be able to thank you enough for the insight you have given me into the last few years of her life.
K. F., United States
AIDS Victims  I read your article “Helping Those With AIDS.” (March 22, 1994) I am HIV positive and found the article very hard to swallow. My family cried because of the hurt and the feelings of rejection.
B. J., United States
Our hearts certainly go out to all such afflicted ones in our midst. Our article endeavored to balance their needs with the concerns of the majority. Since God’s Law to Israel took strong measures to protect the health of the nation as a whole, we felt it appropriate to recommend reasonable health precautions. (Compare Leviticus 13:21, 33.) We acknowledged that “one need not be unduly fearful of being around people with AIDS.” Even so, many continue to be fearful in spite of the assurances of doctors. We therefore encouraged AIDS sufferers to respect the feelings of others who might be uncomfortable with displays of physical affection. What noninfected ones choose to do in this regard is their personal decision. In any event, all Christians should have a heartfelt desire to show kindness and compassion to sufferers.​—ED.
I am very encouraged that such a compassionate and well-​written article has been provided. I especially appreciated the suggestions that while we should take “universal precautions,” we should show compassion and provide sympathetic help.
M. H., United States

