VOL. XXIX. AUGUST 15 No. 16 
A.D. 1908-A.M. 6036 



CONTENTS 

Our Western Convention Tour 243 

General Convention, Aug. 29-Sept. 7 244 

The Changed Heaven and Earth 246 

A Friend in Need a Friend Indeed 246 

The Basis of Loving Friendship 247 

How Love May be Developed 247 

"Do Good to Them That Hate You" 249 

"Deliver Thee Out of All Tribulation" 250 

No Murderer in the Kingdom 251 

Some Who Have Vowed are Blest 252 

page 242 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-24 EVERSHOLT ST., LONDON, N.W. 
GERMAN BRANCH-MIRKER STR., 45, ELBERFELD. 
AUSTRALASIAN BRANCH-EQUITABLE BLDG., COLLINS ST., MELBOURNE 

PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 

TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR AS FOLLOWS:- 

All Bible Students who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity or 
adversity, are unable to pay for this Journal, will be supplied FREE if 
they send a Postal Card each MAY stating their case and requesting its 
continuance. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on 
our list continually and in touch with the Studies, etc. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



THIS JOURNAL IS PUBLISHED IN THE 



FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, DANISH AND ITALIAN LANGUAGES. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



DATES OF BEREAN LESSONS 



The Berean Lessons of our last issue, August 1st, by 
error were dated August instead of September. Please correct 
with pencil. 

"MARKED" NEW TESTAMENTS 



We still have some of the "Marked" New Testaments 
(passages relating to ransom and salvation marked); in cloth 
binding, 15c each, including postage. 

NEW WATCH TOWER BIBLES 



Our new edition will be ready about Oct. 1, but in our 
next issue we hope to be able to give a full description of the 
various styles and bindings and prices, so that you may be 
able to order in advance. Do not send money until you have 
full particulars. 

ANSWERS TO YOUR LETTERS 



Brother Russell would gladly answer every letter received, 
but with so large a mail this is impossible. Please accept 
the TOWERS and DAWNS as answers, with occasionally a 
post card or letter if some queries of your letters make this 
necessary. He is glad to have your letters, to know of the 
joy you have in taking and keeping the Vow, and that it 
assists you to "A closer walk with God." 



R4220 : page 243 

OUR WESTERN CONVENTION TOUR 

SUNDAY, July 5th, was Pittsburg's Convention day. 
The morning session was devoted to the exposition 
of the doctrine of Baptism. The afternoon service 
for the public was held in Alvin Theatre. There were 
about 1,000 present, of whom about one-half were strangers. 
Close attention was given to our topic, "Where are the 
Dead?" The evening service at Bible House Chapel was 



a Question Meeting, after which we took train on our western 
journey— accompanied to the depot by about a dozen of the 
friends. 

We stopped over with the Indianapolis friends and had 
a delightful meeting with about fifty-five of them from 8 to 
10 a.m. We remarked the love for the Truth which would 
bring together nearly the entire class on a Monday morning. 
They came not from curiosity— to see the speaker— for they 
had seen and heard him many times. They came not "to 
hear some new thing," for they are already well acquainted 
with the Divine Plan of the Ages, and knew that only "the 
old, old story" would be presented. Evidently the attraction 
was in the rehearsing of the old message of "love divine, all 
love excelling." 

Little Rock, Arkansas, was reached early on Tuesday, 
July 7. A little group awaited our arrival at the depot and 
greeted us most heartily. From 10.30 to 12 we talked to 
about sixty on the precious things of the divine plan— especially 
exhorting the interested. The afternoon session was 
for the public and was well attended for a week-day afternoon. 
About 200 to 250 very intelligent people listened 
with manifest interest for nearly two hours. We met with 
some of the dear friends in a social way until train time, a 
considerable number accompanying us to the depot. 

Houston, Tex., was reached on Wednesday at 5 p.m. 
All the sessions were held in the Public Park Theatre— two 
of them for the interested and two for the public. The attendance 
at the former was about 100 and at the latter between 
500 and 600. The interest was good. 

San Antonio, Texas, was reached next morning. An 
enthusiastic group met us at the depot and after refreshments 
we addressed quite a good congregation for an hour 
and a half, the essence of our theme being "Love the principal 
thing," and therefore the final test of saintly character. 
An afternoon meeting with the elders of the congregation 
took two hours and then we addressed the friends for an 
hour on the delusions coming on the world which, "if it 
were possible, would deceive the very Elect." 

The evening meeting for the public was in the Opera 
House, and surely brought the Truth to a large and very 
intelligent audience. We have excellent hopes for the results, 
but they of course are wholly in the Lord's hands. It 
is ours to do our best to present the Truth, but not ours to 
give the hearing ear. 

Dallas, Texas, was reached in season for a Saturday 
morning discourse to the interested. The session had already 
started with a Testimony Meeting and a delegation awaited 
our train and escorted us to the Maccabees' Temple. On 
our arrival the congregation of nearly 300 arose and joined 
in singing, "Blest be the tie that binds our hearts in Christian 
love." 

The afternoon session was addressed by Pilgrim Hoskins 
with excellent acceptance, and the evening meeting was 
held on Brother Rust's lawn in the suburbs. About 200 attended. 
The first hour was occupied by six speakers for 
ten minutes each and then we spoke for about an hour and 



a quarter on "the evil day" and its peculiar testings and 
needs for grace from on high. 

Pilgrim Parker addressed the Convention at its Sunday 
morning session and quite evidently pleased and edified 
those who heard. 

The afternoon session was specially for the public, 
the topic being, "Where are the Dead?" The audience was 
estimated at 700 and excellent attention was given. Our 
Sunday evening discourse to the interested has already been 
published and has reached many of you through the Dispatch, 
Enquirer and other journals. 

The Monday morning session of the Convention opened 
with a discourse on Baptism, by Brother Coward, and was 
followed by an immersion service. The afternoon session 
concluded the Convention, and consisted of brief addresses 
by a number of brethren, covering various phases of Love. 
We can give no particulars of Monday's sessions because we 
left at six a.m. for our next appointment. 

Oklahoma City, Okla., was reached about five p.m., 
Monday, July 13th. Our reception began at once as we 
alighted from the train; about 106 greeting us with hearty 
hand-shakes. It was our first visit to the friends of these 
parts, and we met the majority for the first time and received 
a hearty welcome. 

The evening service was for the public— "To Hell and 
Back," etc. About 500 heard for the first time and very attentively. 
The friends believe that a favorable impression 

R4221 : page 244 

was made for the truth. The meeting on the 14th was at 
Brother Young's home. About 125 were present and we had 
a very enjoyable time for three hours. A portion of the time 
was devoted to answering questions and the remainder to the 
discussion of Baptism. In the afternoon eleven were immersed 
in the White Temple Baptist Church, while others who would 
have been glad to do so, were prevented by our lack of 
time, but will be immersed later on the occasion of a Pilgrim's 
visit to their home towns. About 20 of the friends accompanied 
us on the north-bound train, getting off at various 
stations within 60 miles. But some of the dear friends drove 
as much as 65 miles. 

Topeka, Kansas, our next stop, was reached early, but 
two dear brethren met us, arising about three o'clock to do 
so. The morning session was a Rally and Testimony Meeting, 
in which we participated, appropriating the larger share 
of the time. The afternoon discourse for the interested was 
along the lines of Preparation for the Kingdom. The evening 
topic was for the public at The Auditorium. We had an 
excellent hearing and we trust for fruit to our labors ere long. 
About 80 visitors were present, some coming over 100 miles. 
The attendance at the public service was estimated at 550. 

St. Joseph, Mo., was reached the next day in season for 
a Morning Rally in the Y.M.C.A. Chapel. We heard some 
warm, loving testimonies to the power of the truth and the 
joys of living in full consecration to the Lord. Then we spoke 



for one hour on Baptism and its symbol, following which 
about 13 were baptized in water, confessing their death with 
Christ and their hope to live with him through the power of 
the First Resurrection. 

The afternoon subject in the same chapel to the interested 
set forth some of the evidences that we are in that 
"evil day," and pointed out some of the safeguards which the 
Lord has been providing during this "harvest" time, and the 
necessity for our appropriating these before the "overflowing 
scourge shall come" (Isa. 28:18), and before "the enemy 
shall come in like a flood."— Isa. 59:18-20. 

The public session was in the evening at the Opera 
House. It had evidently been well advertised, for we had a 
splendid audience, estimated at 1 100, which gave close attention. 
Brother Senor (at whose home we were entertained 
most hospitably) and several others accompanied us the following 
morning to our next appointment. 

Kansas City friends met us at the depot, and soon a 
Testimony Rally was in progress at the Music Academy 
engaged for the entire day. We had an excellent season of 
refreshing with the local Church and friends from surrounding 
parts— hearing their testimonies to God's grace and giving 
them ours. The afternoon service was for the interested and 
the evening session for the public. We believe that some 
good was accomplished and a blessing carried away by all 
the truth-hungry. 

Joplin, Mo., was our next stop and a very enjoyable one 
it was. All meetings were held in the fine new Opera House. 
The morning Testimony Rally was followed by a discourse 
for the interested, and the afternoon session was for the public, 
while before and after each session we greeted the friends. 
Some had come long distances to the meeting, and not by 
word only but by the earnestness of their hand-clasps and the 
moisture of their eyes did they tell us of their love, and of the 
blessings the Lord had graciously poured upon them through 
the channel of Present Truth. We were informed that seven 
"Reverends" were present at the public service, which was 
well attended for a very hot week-day afternoon. 

A goodly crowd assembled at the railway station to say 
a final good-bye and two accompanied us to St. Louis. As 
our train pulled out the throng was singing— Praise to him by 
whose kind favor heavenly truth has reached our ears. 

St. Louis was duly reached next morning (Sunday, July 
19). The Colporteurs had claimed the privilege of being 
the Reception Committee to meet our train, and there they 
were for nearly three hours because of a misunderstanding 
as to which train to meet. We had a most cordial reception 
also at the general meeting for the interested, which we 
addressed for nearly two hours. 

The public service was held in The Odean, from 2:20 to 
4:40. About 1100 were in attendance notwithstanding the 
oppressive heat. We had a joyful time telling the good tidings 
to so many whose interest was manifest by their close 
attention. A brother owning an automobile took us quickly 
to the five p.m. train. We reached home next morning— 
the entire circuit having been covered in one night more than 



two weeks. 



R4221 : page 244 

GENERAL CONVENTION AUGUST 29 TO SEPTEMBER 7, 1908 

ON PUT-IN-BAY ISLAND, LAKE ERIE, AND ABOUT 
THIRTY MILES FROM TOLEDO, TEN MILES FROM 
SANDUSKY, SIXTY MILES FROM CLEVELAND, 
FIFTY MILES FROM DETROIT 

WHAT we anticipate as the most blessed convention 
our Society has ever held has been provided for 
as above. We have arranged for the exclusive use 
of Hotel Victory, which is located about two miles from the 
steamboat landing and reached by an electric car line. The 
seclusion from the world and its affairs will, we trust, be 
conducive to our highest spiritual profit, and the nine days 
will give opportunity for reasonable rest and refreshment of 
body as well as of mind. Jesus said to his disciples, Let us 
turn aside and rest for a season, and we may do well to follow 
their example. 

The hotel grounds are spacious and beautifully kept 
and the house itself is an exceptional one. Besides large 
parlors and dining rooms it has more than 675 large, airy 
bed rooms. Experience shows that to enjoy spiritual refreshment 
we need to be physically comfortable and this comfort 
the Lord seems to have arranged for us on this occasion. 

The hotel management agrees to provide a very large 
tent, with a capacity of three or four thousand, and chairs 
on the hotel grounds. There is also on the premises a large 
swimming pool, where baptism may be symbolized. One of 
the main features of the Convention, we expect, will be the 
personal fellowship which the friends will surely enjoy. 

THE EXPENSE MODERATE 

Hotel Victory prices generally range from four to five 
dollars per day, but by our special contract with the management, 
and on an assurance that our people, although not 
wealthy, are genteel and refined, and that probably not a 
single cigar-stump or tobacco-quid will be dropped, our rates 
will be as follows: Six persons in a room, 50 cents per day 
each; two persons in a room, 75 cents per day each; one 
person in a room, $1.50. 

Meals will be provided on the hotel plan at 40 cents 
each, and on the home plan, a general table and general 
dishes, at 25 cents each. Besides, there will be a lunch-counter, 
at which sandwiches, cakes, pies, milk, coffee and 
tea may be had at five cents for each item. Thus it will be 
possible to regulate one's eating according to his appetite 
and pocket-book. We advise, however, that no one calculate 
on less than $1.25 per day. 



R4221 : page 245 

RAILROAD EXCURSIONS 

Friends from the west and south of Toledo will surely 
do best if they purchase "G.A.R. Encampment tickets" to 
Toledo and return. The Western Railroad Association has 
already "agreed to a rate of one and one-half cents per mile 
from all Missouri River points," and the Southern Association, 
we learn, "will give a one-cent rate." Probably by Convention 
time the Central Railroad Association will make some extra 
concession also. Such information, however, must be obtained 
from your Railway Ticket Agent. As for other points 
east of Toledo and in Canada each must determine for himself 
what will be the most economical arrangement. The 
Canadian friends should inquire for Excursion Tickets to 
the WATCH TOWER SOCIETY'S CONVENTION on the Certificate 
Plan— either to Detroit or Buffalo. Buy boat tickets separately. 
Be sure to get your Certificate. New York and New 
England friends may find this ticket cheaper than the G.A.R. 
rate and should inquire. 

BOAT EXCURSION RATES 

We have a boat rate from Toledo to Put-in-Bay and 
return for 50 cents. The Cleveland boat rate is $1.00; the 
Detroit boat charges the same for round-trip. The Buffalo 
rate to Put-in-Bay for the round-trip will be only $3.50. Ask 
for boat excursion tickets to the WATCH TOWER SOCIETY'S CONVENTION 
at Put-in-Bay. 

The Buffalo boat leaves at night, and Put-in-Bay is 
reached about noon of next day. The Cleveland boat leaves 
in the morning at 8:15 and reaches the Bay at noon. The 
Toledo boat leaves in the morning at 8:15, reaching the Bay 
at noon. But as Toledo will be crowded, and as most of the 
friends will embark there, we have chartered a night boat 
to leave at ten p.m. on Friday and Saturday nights, 
August 28 and 29, at same rate; 50 cents for the round-trip. 

APPLY FOR ACCOMMODATIONS SOON 

The hotel will be able to accommodate 2500 people; it 
is quite possible that the attendance may exceed that number, 
and provision has been made for some to be lodged in 
cottages not far distant from the hotel. However, those who 
desire rooms to themselves, or where six of one sex prefer to 
be in a room together, it would be safe to make application 
in advance. Address Hotel Victory, Put-in-Bay, Ohio. 

EXCURSION PARTIES 

Although each individual can buy his ticket as cheaply 
as others, some may desire to go in company with others for 
the sake of the fellowship. Thus a considerable number 
will be going from Pittsburgh via Cleveland, rate $7 for the 
round-trip, or 70 cents less where ten or more ride on a "party 



R4222 : page 245 

ticket." Leave via P.R.R. Friday, Aug. 28, midnight. Sleeper 
$1.50 extra. If going, advise at once "Convention Dept." 
Similar companies will be starting from Cincinnati, St. 
Louis, Chicago, Detroit, Cleveland, Buffalo, New York, Washington 
and Boston. Those who desire to join any of these 
companies we shall be pleased to supply with proper 
directions, which should reach you at least a week in advance 
of the Convention date. The Chicago friends advise that 
they will have a special train via the WABASH RAILROAD on 
August 28th. Any desirous of joining them may address Dr. 
L. W. Jones, 2024 Washington Boulevard, Chicago. 

PREREQUISITE TO A BLESSING 

Let us not forget, dear friends, that no matter how 
beautiful the surroundings and favored are the conditions 
and fellowship, our share in the blessing will be proportionate 
to our readiness of heart to receive it! Let each one 
purposing to attend prepare his heart in advance for a blessing; 
the words of the Apostle constitute one of the best prescriptions 
we know of for such preparation; he says, "Let us 
put away all filthiness of the flesh and of the spirit, perfecting 
holiness in the fear of the Lord." (2 Cor. 7:1.) With 
prayer and supplication let our request for the divine blessing 
be presented at the throne of grace, that the Lord may 
open to us the windows of heaven and pour out such a 
blessing as we shall not be able to contain— such a blessing 
as will overflow from those who attend the Convention to 
the other dear ones at home not thus privileged. 

The condition upon which the Lord promises this out-pouring 
of his blessing is that we bring our tithes into the 
storehouse; that we pay our vows unto the Lord; that we 
seek to appreciate and live up to our consecration, and to 
develop in harmony therewith more and more of the spirit of 
our Master— the spirit of Love. Come desirous of an opportunity 
for comforting and strengthening and refreshing others 
as well as with the desire to be comforted yourself. Thus 
drawing nigh to the Lord according to his arrangements we 
shall be sure to have his smile and his blessing. 

We were obliged to abandon the project of coming to 
Pittsburgh for the closing Sunday of the Convention, for two 
reasons: (1) The expense would be considerable. (2) The 
fatigue incident to such a program would be too great for 
the majority. Discerning this we considered whether it might 
be the Lord's will to have the entire Convention at Pittsburg, 
and we allowed the matter to be decided by our ability or 
inability to secure a suitable Convention Hall upon satisfactory 
terms. The result was our decision in favor of the quiet 
and restful season at Put-in-Bay for this year. Possibly the 
way may be open for a Pittsburgh Convention some time 
again, but we concede that Convention facilities here are not 
very favorable at present. 

Brother Russell expects to be at the Put-in-Bay Convention 



during its first Sunday, August 30, and during some 

of the week-days following, returning to Pittsburgh for Sunday, 

September 6th. 

COLPORTEURS AT THE CONVENTION 

Just in time, we trust, we have heard from the dear 
friend of the truth who last year assisted to the Convention 
the Colporteurs needing help. He writes:— 

"I dearly love the noble band of Colporteurs although 
not privileged to be one of them. Their heroism in leaving 
home and earthly comforts to preach the 'glad tidings' and 
to assist the Lord's poor, blinded sheep out of Babylon, 
specially appeals to me. I can well realize what a treat to 
such are the Conventions— what an uplift! I wanted to do 
this year as I did last year to assist some of them, but I learn 
that their number has increased, besides the year being less 
prosperous proportionately more may request the aid. What 
shall I do with no more money at my disposal? 

"I think of only one way of discriminating, and so 
(without any reflection on those who have not taken it), I 
decide to favor those who have taken "the Vow" published 
in the June 15 TOWER, which I also have taken and which I 
heartily commend to all in all of its provisions. 

"My offer then is this: I will pay through your Colporteur 
Department ONE-HALF OF THE MINIMUM EXPENSES of any 
Regular Colporteur on your list who has made reports or 
ordered books during June and July and whose financial condition 
makes necessary this aid, in order to his or her attendance 
at the General Convention at Put-in-Bay. Please publish 
the offer in the WATCH TOWER, but withhold my name." 

These funds will be disbursed at the Convention. Buy 
excursion tickets. The hotel expenses will amount generally 
to as much or more than the ticket; if not, write to the Colporteur 
Department at once. 



R4222 : page 246 

THE CHANGED HEAVEN AND EARTH 

"Thou, Lord, in the beginning hast laid the foundation of 

the earth, and the heavens are the works of thine hands: 

They shall perish; but thou remainest; and they shall 

all wax old as doth a garment; and as a vesture 

shalt thou fold them up, and they shall 

be changed; but thou art the same, 

and thy years shall not fail."— Heb. 1:10-12. 

THESE words are a quotation by the Apostle from 

Psalm 102:25,26. They are used to attest the 

fact that God had foreordained that our Lord 

Jesus should be very great— should be superior to all 

change. We quite agree with the Apostle's argument 

in our text and its context. However, a question arises 



in the minds of some as to how this declaration agrees 
with some Scriptural statements to the effect that the 
earth abideth forever, etc. 

We have already shown in DAWN-STUDIES, Vol. I, 
and elsewhere, that the words "heaven" and "earth" 
are used in a figurative and symbolical sense in the 
Scriptures, as well as literally. We have shown that as 
symbols they represent the present order of things, 
which is to pass away and give place to a new order 
of things. We have shown that this is the sense of the 
Apostle Peter's argument when he speaks of the world 
that now is and the present heavens and earth, which 
are to pass away with a great noise (2 Pet. 3:10), and to 
be supplanted by the new heavens and new earth. As 
already shown, we understand that our physical earth 
has been the basis for "the world that was," "the 
present evil world," and "the world to come," and 
that the word "world," even in this instance, signifies 
the order of things that was, the order of things 
that is, and the order of things to come. The figure is 
carried out in detail by speaking of it as a heaven and 
earth, because the word "earth" is used to represent 
the earthly systems, social and political, while the word 
"heaven" is used to represent the higher, the ecclesiastical, 
the spiritual things connected therewith. Thus, 
the heaven and earth which were before the flood perished, 
disappeared; not the literal heaven nor the literal 
earth, but the symbolical or figurative. That social 
order, or earth, that prevailed before the flood passed 
away, and at the same time there passed also the spiritual 
or superior rule of the angels which was connected 
with that epoch which preceded the flood. After the 
flood, a new order of things was instituted; society was 
reorganized under new conditions, but on the same 
physical earth, and a new spiritual government or rule 
or order obtained also. It is this symbolic heaven 
and earth that was organized after the flood which is to 
pass away with a great noise at the second coming of 
our Lord— not the physical earth nor the physical 
heaven. Similarly we understand the Apostle, "We 
look for a new heaven and a new earth," to refer not to 
some other planet, but to this same one, and to imply 
a new social order of things and a new ecclesiastical 
order or rule. 

In view of these things, we feel justified in interpreting 
the words of our text in harmony with the other 
Scriptures referring to the changes of dispensation 
which are foretold to be coming to the world. 

Hence, while agreeing with the Apostle's argument 
that our Lord Jesus was the Father's active agent in 
the creation of the physical earth and physical heaven, 
we understand the real thought to be that with him 
there will be no change, but with his creation, there 
will be change— not as respects the matter and form of 
the earth, but in respect to its highest interest, its 
social and religious order. To elaborate the statement 



further: The order which our Lord originally established 

in the world was right and proper— the Divine 

order. As for the earth, Adam was its king, created in 

the image and likeness of his Creator and given dominion 

over the beast of the field, the fowl of the heaven 

and the fish of the sea. As for the spiritual heavens, 

they recognized the supremacy of the Almighty and 

that his will must be law to mankind. This beautiful 

arrangement originally established by our Lord was 

changed twice by sin, until today we have what is 

known as "This Present Evil World," in which neither 

the heavens nor the earthly ideals, regulations and arrangements, 

are in harmony with the original, but on 

the contrary, are quite unfit and ready for dissolution. 

They are about to be folded up and to be changed. 

They need a change, not because of any imperfection in 

the original arrangement, but because it was departed 

from through sin, disobedience and the penalty death. 

The new heaven and earth which the Lord will establish 

by his Millennial Kingdom reign will be the original 

R4223 : page 246 

restored. The law of love will then prevail amongst 
perfect men, and a direct responsibility will be realized 
to God, the giver of every good and perfect gift, and to 
the Lord Jesus, who not only was the Father's prime 
minister and agent in creation, but who during the next 
age will be the Father's prime minister and agent in 
bringing all things back to their primeval condition 
with added splendors. 



R4223 : page 246 

A FRIEND IN NEED A FRIEND INDEED 

-I SAMUEL 20:3 0-42. -AUGUST 23.- 

Golden Text:— "A friend loveth at all times, 
and a brother is born for adversity." 

HISTORY does not record a more touching story of love 
than that which existed between Jonathan and 
David. Both were noble characters, capable of loving 
deeply, intensely, although in many respects they were men 
of entirely different stamp. David was the more versatile, 
His is the broadest character on record; says Charles Reade:— 

"In holy writ Moses, Elijah and Paul; in profane history 
Solon, Alexander, Caesar, Charlemagne, Napoleon and others 
excelled David in one quality or another. But David presents 
a greater number of distinct and striking features than 
any one of those great men; and that is why I style him the 
widest character on record— a shepherd, a soldier, a courtier, 
a famous friend, a fugitive, a captor, a marauder, a general, 



a king, a statesman, an exile, a priest, a prophet, a saint, a 
criminal, a penitent, and nothing by halves. His character 
was a harp of many strings." 

Jonathan, the son of King Saul and heir apparent to 
the throne of Israel, had also noble qualities. He was a 
faithful son, who alone could comfort his father in his times 
of disappointment. He showed himself an able warrior and 
displayed great faith in God; and his religious nature was 
apparently as fully developed as was that of David. Evidently 
these elements of honesty and devotion and reverence for 
God which these two men perceived in each other, constituted 

R4223 : page 247 

the basis of the great friendship which so spontaneously 
knit their hearts together in a wonderful bond of friendship 
—love. Indeed, according to the entire account, Jonathan 
would seem to have been the larger of these two great 
souls and his love the greater. From this standpoint alone, 
since love is the principal thing in the world, Jonathan may 
be considered to be one of the grandest characters in the 
world; for he loved much and against his own interests. 

DEEP FRIENDSHIP FOR HIS RIVAL 

At times friendships spring up based upon mutual admiration, 
and often with a measure of selfishness in cooperation. 
But in the instance under consideration selfishness 
would have operated against the friendship; it is, therefore, 
a sample of disinterested love. Every success and honor 
that came to David raised him as a popular idol to the place 
which Jonathan to a considerable extent had held. Every advancement 
of David meant the preparation of the people to 
receive him instead of Jonathan as Saul's successor. The 
king saw this, so did Jonathan; but they were reversely 
affected by it. The king was made jealous, angry; Jonathan, 
reversely, loved his rival, and that from the time of their 
first meeting, on which occasion he gave to David his armor 
and court robes. (1 Sam. 18:4.) We read, "The soul of 
Jonathan was knit unto the soul of David"; their natures 
interwove, intermixed— a beautiful description of the purest 
and truest of love. Alexander White says: 

"Had I read, 'Jonathan loved David as his own soul,' 
for once only I should have passed it by as hyperbole,... 
but as I read again the rest of the story, I found myself saying 
to the sacred writer, 'Lo, in all this speakest thou plainly, 
and speakest no hyperbole.'" 

THE BASIS OF LOVING FRIENDSHIP 

Friendship love is not a miracle, but results from certain 
combinations. The one we love need not of necessity be just 
like ourselves, but rather would appeal to us more as a 
counterpart possessing qualities which we admire, but 
do not so strongly possess. Darkness, however, never 
loved the light; the light never loves darkness. Hence for 



friendship-love on a noble plane both friends must have 
high ideals, noble aspirations, even though they may have 
these in different measure. Each should see in the other 
something to esteem and to look up to; although in the case 
of the Almighty this cannot be true; his love for us must be 
chiefly along the lines of sympathy for us and appreciation 
of our endeavors to attain to his character standards. We 
may be sure, too, that in Jonathan's case reverence for the 
Lord had much to do with estopping any feeling of rivalry 
and with encouraging his admiration for his rival. Who will 
not admit that such an appreciation of the divine will and 
providences would be a help to all friendship, a hindrance 
to all spirit of rivalry and in general a most valuable uplift 
in every Christian character? How much it means to us in 
the way of contentment to know that our heavenly Father is 
at the helm as respects all the affairs of his people! How 
much rest it permits in our own hearts! How much meekness, 
gentleness, kindness and love it prompts toward others, 
both to realize that they as well as ourselves are subjects of 
divine care, and to have a heart so fully submitted to the 
Lord as to desire that his will shall be done irrespective of 
our own temporal interests or those of others. 

Undoubtedly this was the good basis of Jonathan's love; 
and undoubtedly it is the fruitful soil out of which all proper 
love amongst the Lord's people will be developed. We must 
love the Lord with all our heart, mind, soul and strength before 
we shall be prepared to love our neighbor as ourselves, 
and to wish for him the same riches of grace that we desire 
for ourselves under the Lord's providences. Still more is it 
necessary to have this supreme love for God before we could 
in any measure approximate the degree of love which the 
Lord set before his followers as a new commandment, saying, 
"A new commandment I give unto you, that ye love one 
another as I have loved you." Jonathan's love approximated 
this Christian love, this self-sacrificing love which so loved 
his neighbor as to delight to see that neighbor have the 
Lord's blessing upon him, even while this meant his own loss 
of honor, prestige and kingly power. Oh, that such love as 
this might more and more prevail in the hearts of the New 
Creation! It is to such that the Apostle says, "Let the 
brother of high degree rejoice in that he is abased, and the 
brother of low degree rejoice in that he is exalted"— under 
the Lord's providences. 

A DAVID AND JONATHAN BOND 

It is not necessary for us to form a society for the propagation 
of the Jonathan and David bond of love amongst us 
as the Lord's people. We have this organization which inculcates 
a love that is even greater. The head, the chief, 
the center of this organization is our Lord Jesus Christ, who 
not only exhorted us to the highest conceptions and practices 
of love, but exemplified this in himself when he laid down 
his life, not only for his friends, but also for his enemies. 
"Greater love hath no man than this." This greatest of all 
lovers, our Lord Jesus Christ, has organized an association of 



lovers, and has made membership therein dependent upon 
the willingness of his followers to take up the cross and follow 
him, to lay down their lives for the brethren. 

Only those who have made such a consecration of faithfulness 
to the Captain, faithfulness to the spirit of love, faithfulness 
to one another as members of the Body of the 
Anointed— only these are admitted to membership in this exclusive 
society, "The Church of the Living God, whose names 
are written in heaven." And more than this, the founder of 
our society has told us that he is the Vine and we are the 
branches; and that every branch in him that beareth not 
this fruit of love will be taken away, cut off from the Vine, 
disassociated from membership in this blessed Church. He 
assures us further, that our faithfulness to our covenant with 
this true Vine will bring upon us purgings, prunings from the 
great Husbandman, that he may develop in us more and more 
the fruits of the Spirit, the fruit of the Vine— meekness, gentleness, 
brotherly kindness, love; that these graces may be in 
us and abound; that thereby the Father may be glorified 
and blessed, and that we may be made ready, "meet for the 
inheritance of the saints in light." 

So then we see that we need no special organization, 
but are already members of such a company, if so be that we 
are disciples of Christ and united to him as members of the 
New Creation. 

HOW LOVE MAY BE DEVELOPED 

David, the younger man of the two, as we have seen, 
possessed by nature a deep, generous character, capable of 
intense love, but apparently time was required for its development. 
And as we perceive Jonathan's love for him, the 
brighter and more intense at first, we find that David's love 
was drawn forth, that he loved in return, just as God's love 

R4224 : page 248 

was first toward us and subsequently our love drew out toward 
him increasingly. Our lesson tells us how Jonathan 
endeavored to preserve peace between the king and David, 
but finding his father intent upon killing his friend, he took 
occasion to forewarn David that he must flee, as matters had 
come to that pass where his life would be unsafe anywhere 
near the king. This warning was given by a previous arrangement 
in a field at a distance from the palace. David 
was hidden behind a great rock. As an excuse, Jonathan 
went forth to practice archery, with a lad accompanying him 
to bring back the arrows. His real mission, however, was to 
advise David whether or not he must flee that vicinity. His 
words to the lad, "Make speed, haste, stay not," while appropriate 
to the arrows, were really intended for David, that he 
might know the urgency of the situation. Then, sending the 
boy with the weapons to the palace, Jonathan concluded that 
he must risk a few moments with his friend. By this time 
David was realizing the depth of Jonathan's love, which had 
been proved in so many ways and now finally in his willingness 



to protect David's life, when it would have been to his 
own interest to permit his father to wreak vengeance upon 
David. Such a love is rarely known, except amongst the 
saints; and alas, we fear not too much experienced even 
amongst these. When, however, we do find a friend who 
sticketh closer than a brother, we properly appreciate him 
all the more because of the rarity of his kind. 

At this meeting David bowed himself three times to the 
earth, an eastern custom expressive of humility and appreciation. 
The friends kissed each other and wept one with 
another, David ultimately appearing to be the more heartbroken 
of the two. Although confident in the Lord, he was 
leaving his home to be an outcast— an outlaw. He not only 
was losing the companionship of his dear friend Jonathan, 
but he would be considered by many of the people of his 
own nation as a traitor, because of the king's opposition and 
the necessity it would put upon him for becoming a kind of 
brigand. Then it was that Jonathan said to him, "Go in 
peace; forasmuch as we have sworn both of us in the name 
of the Lord, saying, The Lord shall be between thee and me 
and between thy seed and my seed forever." They parted, 
according to the record, and never met again except once, a 
year or two later, when David was pursued by Saul. Then 
Jonathan went again to his friend to comfort him and 
"strengthened his hand in God."— 1 Sam. 23:16. 

A glimpse of David's estimation of Jonathan and his 
love is given in what is termed "The Song of the Bow," 
David's touching lament at the death of his friend Jonathan. 
He exclaims, "I am distressed for thee, my brother Jonathan. 
Very pleasant hast thou been unto me; thy love to me was 
wonderful, passing the love of women." (2 Sam. 1:26.) But 
we, dear friends, know of a still more wonderful love than 
this, of which we sometimes sing, 
"Love of Jesus, all divine, 
Fill this longing heart of mine." 

Love begets love; and so the Scriptures tell us that it 
was not that we first loved God, but that he first loved us 
and manifested his love for us in the gift of his Son. So it 
was the love of Jesus that attracted us and drew forth our 
love in response. And day by day, as we come to appreciate 
more and more the heights and depths and lengths and 
breadths of the love of God and of Christ, which passes all 
human understanding, the more our love toward them will 
increase and abound. And as it increases we ourselves become 
more Godlike and correspondingly also from us proceeds 
a love for others who love us not; and our love for 
them will excite the love of some in return, and lead them to 
a greater appreciation of this principle which stands in opposition 
to the spirit of the world, the love of the world, the 
selfishness of the world. Let us then seek to cultivate this 
godlike quality. Let us notice not only that the Scriptures 
declare love to be the principal thing in the world, but that it is 
the very essence of the divine character, the very essence of 
the divine law which is fulfilled in this one word, Love. Let 
us remember then that in the exercise of this quality we are 
preparing ourselves for the glorious possibilities to which we 



have been invited, and which by our Lord's grace we are 
seeking to obtain by making our calling and election sure. 

In the Scriptures sharp contrasts are drawn; and while 
this love of Jonathan, and the love of the Father and of the 
Son are set forth as worthy of emulation, another kind of 
character is also pictured, as when our Lord is represented 
in the Psalms as saying respecting Judas, "Yea, mine own 
familiar friend, in whom I trusted, which did eat of my bread, 
hath lifted up his heel against me." (Psa. 41:9.) Let us 
see to it that this spirit of love, our spirit of friendship, proceeds, 
from the fountain of love itself; for God is love. Let 
us also have in mind the Apostle's declaration that there are 
only two great sources: a sweet fountain cannot send forth 
bitter waters, nor a bitter fountain send forth sweet waters. 
(James 3:11.) Let us, therefore, settle it in our hearts that 
any spirit of treachery toward a friend, toward a brother, is 
not in any sense of the word connected with the spirit of 
love, but in opposition to it. Let us remember that a sweet 
fountain, a pure fountain, a love-fountain, cannot send forth 
bitter waters of hate, of malice, of envy, of strife. We must 
recognize such a stream of evil as coming from a different 
quarter, a different fountain, from the enemy of God and 
man. These qualities are therefore set forth in the Scriptures 
as works of the flesh and of the devil. Let us remember, 
too, that a radical change from an attitude of love and friendship 
to an attitude of bitterness and enmity is not an instantaneous 
but a gradual work. In the case of Judas we 
see a gradual deflection, which at first merely murmured 
because others had honors bestowed from the Lord; yet that 
spirit of murmuring increased, until within a week it took 
delight in betraying the Friend of all friends, who was even 
then laying down life on his behalf. Let us remember that 
by nature we have seeds of evil, of selfishness, received from 
the Adversary through heredity, through the fall; and that 
we need continually to be on guard to uproot all such roots 
of evil, and need continually to be cultivating the tender 
plant of love, that its fragrance may fill our entire lives and 
prepare us for association with him who is love and with him 
who is the friend above all others. 

OUR GOLDEN TEXT 

Well has the wise man said that a friend loveth at all 
times. He who merely loves at a time when he thinks it 
will be to his own advantage to love knows not love. He 
who loves, and is a brother in prosperity merely, and whose 
love and friendship wither under the heat of persecution and 
adversity, has never known love in its true sense, but merely 
a certain brand of selfishness— the love of the world. 

As God commended his love toward us and showed us 
that not through selfishness, but generosity, at a great cost 

R4224 : page 249 

to himself, he provided us release from our prison, and gave 
us privileges of sonship, so true love will be willing to sacrifice. 



Let us judge then of our love for others, for the Lord, 
for the brethren, for our families, for our neighbors, for our 
enemies even, by our willingness to sacrifice in their interest 
and for their highest welfare. If we find ourselves sacrificing 
nothing in the interest of the Lord's cause, let us not 
delude ourselves by saying that we love the Lord. If we 
find ourselves unwilling to endure, to sacrifice in the interests 
of the brethren and others dear to us, let us not mistake the 
matter and call it love. If we find ourselves unwilling to do 
kindness even to our enemies when they are in need, let us 
make no mistake; for the Lord hath declared that a course of 
goodness and mercy and self-denial is the only index of a loving 
heart. If once we can see that such a love of heart is 
essential to a place in the Kingdom it will make us doubly 
earnest in the attainment of such a character. If still farther 
than this, we see that none will ever gain eternal life in this 
age or that which is to come, except as he or she shall possess 
a heart of love, it will help to awaken us to realize that love 
indeed is the principal thing, the most important thing to be 
attained and cultivated by ourselves, yea, by all. 

Note Canon Farrar's earnest words: "My brethren, the 
love that sees goodness and beauty in all human nature, 
helps to make goodness and to make beauty in human nature. 
To those who love, even a common person is a human soul, 
who walks in the transfiguring glory of their affection. You 
think a person dull. Why? That is because you are dull. 
An angel has been with you and you have known it not; and 
I imagine that to a spirit full of malice and self-conceit an 
angel would be very dull. Each human soul is like a cavern 
full of gems. The casual observer glances into it through 
some cranny, and all looks dark, sullen and forgotten. But 
let light enter into it; lift a torch up to the walls; let God's 
sunlight fall into it and flood its open recesses; and lo, it 
will flash with crystals and with amethysts, and each separate 
crystal will quiver under the touch of brightness with a 
transporting discovery of its own nature. If souls do not 
shine before you it is because you are bringing them no light 
to make them shine. Throw away your miserable, smouldering, 
fuming torch of conceit and hatred; lift up to them the 
light of love, and lo ! they will arise and shine; yea, flame 
and burn with an undreamt glory." 

"Was it friend or foe who spread these lies? 
Nay, who but infants question in such wise? 
'Twas one of my most intimate enemies." 



R4225 : page 249 

"DO GOOD TO THEM THAT HATE YOU" 

-I SAMUEL 26:17-25.-AUGUST 30.- 

Golden Text:— "Love your enemies; do 
good to them that hate you."— Luke 6:27. 



FOR seven years David was forced to be an exile from his 
home and nominally to fill the role of an outlaw. 
King Saul, troubled with evil spirits, was at times 
practically insane, and no doubt pursued David from place 
to place during those seven years as a relaxation, as some 
men take pleasure in hunting wild game. It is in this light 
that David himself in the Psalm presents the matter of his 
escape. A large band of discontented people gathered to 
David as their leader, mostly victims of Saul's persecution. 
These numbered 400 at least (1 Sam. 22:2) and later on 600. 
(1 Sam. 25:13,27.) David's own parents and brothers were 
amongst those persecuted, probably on David's account; also 
the prophet Gad, and the high-priest Abiathar, a son of the 
high-priest Abimelech (1 Sam. 22:22,23), also his nephew 
Abishai, subsequently a great general. (1 Sam. 26:6.) It 
is also noted that in the company were eleven mighty men 
of valor of the tribe of Gad (1 Chron. 12:8-14), and twenty-three 
Benjamite warriors who could shoot their arrows with 
both hands equally well.— 1 Chron. 12:1-7. 

Professor Wright suggests that under the circumstances 
then prevailing, to be an outlaw was creditable. He says: 
"To be an outlaw at such a time was not to be on the side 
of disorder; it was the beginning of a justifiable revolution. 
The dissatisfied men who gathered around David in the cave 
of Adullam were the true patriots of the time. ...This is 
evident from his message to Nabal, in which he claims that 
he had performed all the duties of a government in protecting 
Nabal from the incursions of the bordering tribes; so that 
the tribute he asked was not more than just taxation of established 
authority." 

There are many caves in that limestone region. The 
one credited as the Cave of Adullam has several apartments 
and space for a small army; it is located not far from the 
place where David encountered Goliath. Associated with 
its name are three items of considerable interest. One of 
these, told in 1 Chronicles 11:15-19, gives us a little picture 
of the fidelity of David's followers and of David's own unselfishness, 
which lay no doubt at the foundation of the love 
which his followers bore him. It was at a time when the 
Philistines were making an invasion and when David and his 
followers could not be on Saul's side, yet would not be 
against him. The Philistine camp lay between the cave and 
the spring of fine water at Bethlehem, David's home town. 
Thirsty, David had remarked longingly on the fineness of the 
Bethlehem spring. With devotion to their leader three of 
David's chief men ventured through the lines of the Philistine 
camp and brought him some of the coveted water. 
On receiving it David's heart was full of gratitude to God 
for such appreciation and love from his followers; yet considering 
the price it had cost them and the dangers they had 
risked, he felt himself unworthy, and tendered the water as 
a thank-offering to the Lord and as an expression to his followers 
of his highest appreciation of their kindness. Of this 
the poet says,— 

"And all the host looked and wondered, and those noble three, 



The mightiest of the thirty, felt their souls 
Knit closer to King David and to God." 
The second item of interest referred to was the taking 
of David's aged parents from Adullam on a long journey 
over the rocky hills and around the furthest end of the Dead 
Sea and up the mountains of Moab to a place of safety with 
the king of Moab. --1 Sam. 22:3,4. 

The third item of interest referred to was the sparing 
of the life of King Saul at this cave.— 1 Sam. 24. 

DAVID TESTED-SAUL SPARED 

The lesson of today concerns the second sparing of 
Saul's life by David. The King had come out against David 

R4225 : page 250 

and his band with a large army corps. After the manner of 

that day the camp had been set with the king's tent in the 

center, as indicated by the king's spear standing at his doorway. 

Possibly, however, at that time no tents were used in 

that country, where there would be no danger of rain and 

where it is customary for travelers even to wrap themselves 

in their outer garments and lie down to sleep at any convenient 

place. David with his scouts was familiar with the 

entire country and everything that happened; and one of the 

chiefs of his band suggested to him a daring plot for the 

overthrow of the enemy, for the rescue of the country from 

the rule of a partially demented sovereign, and for the rectification 

of his own wrongs and those of the company of faithful 

men with him. The proposer of the plan, provided David's 

consent could be obtained, was to steal into King Saul's 

camp while his soldiers were sleeping after the fatigue 

of the journey, and kill King Saul in his tent, and thus end 

all their difficulties which centered in him. The plan was 

one that would be considered proper by nine hundred and 

ninety-nine out of a thousand soldiers, yet it did not appeal 

to David. 

Taking the proper view of the situation David considered 
King Saul the divine appointee for the place and position he 
occupied although the anointing oil had come upon himself as 
Saul's successor. He properly reasoned that when the Lord's 
due time should come for his accession to the throne, the Lord 
could and would bring it about in his own way; and that it 
would be sin on his part to connive at the king's death on 
any ground. Not only would he not kill Saul, but he would 
not sanction another's doing it, not even by a half-hearted 
protest. On the contrary he would act as Saul's protector, 
so that the author of the bold scheme might have no opportunity 
for its execution. David went with him to carry out 
a different project; namely to bring away from the camp 
something that would prove to the king that he had been 
entirely within David's power, and that at heart David had 
no desire for Saul's injury, but the contrary. 

In execution of this plan David accompanied Abishai 
quietly, speedily, into Saul's camp. First they took Saul's 



spear from before his tent; then entering the tent they found 
near the king's couch a cruse or bottle of drinking water, 
which they took. The two then went to a hillside opposite 
Saul's camp and shouted to awaken the soldiers and Saul. 
David upbraided Saul's captain-general for his carelessness 
in not properly protecting the king, telling how he had invaded 
the camp and had taken the king's spear and drinking 
pitcher, not, however, revealing his identity. Soon the 
entire camp was awake, and it was the king himself who 
recognized David's voice and also the facts related— that his 
spear and cruse were gone. These David offered to return 
through a messenger, explaining that he had taken them 
merely to prove that he had no ill will to the king, no wish 
to do him injury. David did not attribute Saul's enmity to 
his own evil passions and selfishness, but very politely suggested 
that if it were of the Lord it might well cease with an 
offering to the Lord; but if the king were following the counsel 
of men these must be wicked men, for the effect of their 
counsel was to alienate a fellow-Israelite not only from his 
home and land, but also from his God and his religion, by driving 
him from amongst his people to the heathen. He assured 
the king that if his blood must be shed he preferred that his 
death should be in the land of Israel, and that this alone 
was his reason for not leaving his native land. But he suggested 
that for the king to be pursuing him as an enemy and 
thinking of himself and his associates as foes to the empire, 
was as ridiculous as to think of a hunting expedition against 
a partridge as being war. 

King Saul was honest enough to admit that he was in 
the wrong, and said, "I have sinned. Return, my son, David; 
for I will no more do thee harm because my life was precious 
in thine eyes this day. Behold, I have played the fool and 
have erred exceedingly." 

"DELIVER ME OUT OF ALL TRIBULATION" 

David's reply to the king is very noteworthy, and shows 
us that the center of the man's character and the guidance 
of his conduct was his reverence for the Lord, his faith. He 
said, "The Lord shall render to every man [according to] 
his righteousness and his faithfulness.... It was the Lord 
that delivered thee into mine hand today and I did not put 
forth mine hand against the Lord's anointed. And behold, 
as thy life was precious today in mine eyes, so let my life be 
precious in the eyes of the Lord and let him deliver me out 
of all tribulation." (Vs. 23,24.) How wonderful this expression! 
In it there is no appeal to Saul for mercy, no expression 
of dependence upon him, but an appeal to the Lord, 
an expression of absolute confidence in the willingness and 
ability of the Lord to deliver him. Moreover, David seems 
to have learned a lesson which many dear Christian people 
have not learned, even though possessed of education and 
advantages in the school of Christ which David never enjoyed. 
David's course and language show that he understood that 
portion of the Lord's prayer which says, "Forgive us our 
trespasses as we forgive those who trespass against us"— 



have mercy upon us as we have mercy upon others. This is 
the essence of David's statement, As I have shown mercy to 
you, King Saul, so may the Lord show mercy to me. 
"Then Saul said to David, Blessed be thou, my son 
David. Thou shalt both do great things and shalt surely 
prevail. So David went on his way and Saul returned to 
his place." But although invited to return, David realized 
that the word and the heart of Saul were unreliable. It is 
a lesson that we all need to note, that a wicked heart is an 
unreliable thing, though for the moment it may seem contrite, 
gentle and loving. This would not mean that we never 
again could have confidence in any one who had done evil 
to us or injury, or had done us harm; but it does mean that 
while not rendering evil for evil, bitterness for bitterness, 
malice for malice, slander for slander, we should nevertheless 

R4226 : page 250 

use wisdom and not entrust ourselves too fully to the 
power of such until we should receive not merely reassuring 
words but practical evidence of a change of heart; that the 
leaven of malice had been purged out. 

OTHER LESSONS FOR THE NEW CREATION 

David won a great victory over Goliath; but this lesson 
records a still greater victory over himself. As a natural 
man, not begotten again of the holy Spirit, he certainly exhibited 
wonderful self-control. We cannot say that it was 
his love for Saul that spared the king's life; rather it was 
his love for the Lord, his respect for divine authority. We 
can see that unless his devotion to the Lord had been very 
strong indeed the temptation would have swept him before it. 
To the average man eight reasons would appeal for a contrary 
course for killing his enemy. (1) It was legitimate 
warfare, as between the king and his army and David and 

R4226 : page 25 1 

his handful. In any army today such a surprise would be 
considered entirely justifiable. (2) His own self-preservation 
seemed to demand the king's death; and such preservation 
is recognized generally by the world as the first law of 
nature. (3) His desire to escape from his wandering life 
and to live quietly and peaceably as one of God's chosen 
nation, appealed strongly for action. (4) The fact of his 
anointing to be king and Saul's successor, and the prospect 
of soon coming to the throne would be a powerful reason with 
many. (5) Revenge for the things he had suffered from 
Saul would no doubt suggest itself. (6) His patriotism— his 
love for his country and his nation, and his appreciation of 
the fact that Saul was rapidly becoming unfit to be king— was 
another reason for Saul's death. (7) An opportunity for 
accomplishing the deed thus coming to his hand might have 
been construed as of divine providence; and a wicked heart 
and guilty conscience would have so decided. (8) The interests 



of all of his followers, amongst them those who had 
risked their lives for his comfort and defence, demanded that 
the king should be slain; and furthermore doubtless many of 
them would be unable to comprehend David's motives in sparing 
the king's life. To such his course would appear foolish 
almost to madness in letting escape such an opportunity. 
Thus he might alienate from himself his associates in 
tribulation. 

Surely a weaker man, or a man with less reverence for 
the Lord and less faith in him, would have yielded under 
the pressure of such inducements. The fact that David did 
not yield testifies loudly as respects his character, his 
principles. 

How is it with us who have had advanced lessons in 
the school of Christ, and who have the advantage of being 
begotten of the holy Spirit, and ability therefore to comprehend 
the deeper things as respects the divine character and 
will? Would we have been similarly faithful and generous? 
But surely the Lord would expect still more of us than of 
David; surely, therefore, we should expect much more of ourselves, 
who are of the "house of sons" and have much advantage 
every way over the "house of servants." Has not 
our Redeemer, our Master, our Teacher, instructed us and 
given us a new commandment saying, "A new commandment 
I give unto you, that ye love one another as I have loved 
you"? Again in the words of our Golden Text we are instructed, 
"Love your enemies, do good to them that hate you." 
How are we exhibiting our appreciation of the lessons, of the 
instructions we have received? How do we daily put in 
practice this law of love for God— for his instructions, for the 
brethren, for our enemies? 

NO MURDERER IN THE KINGDOM 

It may be said that no such test as David had could 
come to us today as Christians; but that if it did, surely no 
Christian, no saint, would be a murderer. We reply that it 
must not be forgotten that we under the new dispensation 
are under the same law, but with a higher definition or explanation; 
as for instance the Master's words, when he said, 
"He that looketh upon a woman to desire her hath committed 
adultery already in his heart;" and again, "He that is 
angry with his brother without a cause is in danger of 
the judgment." "He that hateth his brother is a murderer." 
(Matt. 5:22,28; 1 John 3:15.) Taking this higher definition 
of the divine law and its operation in our minds, 
we can readily see that opportunities may offer to every one 
of us very similar to this which came to David, opportunities 
to render evil for evil, railing for railing; opportunities 
to assassinate our neighbor, our brother— to kill his influence, 
his reputation, etc. 

How are we meeting these tests? Are we gaining victories 
over self, as did David, or are we being overcome by the 
wicked one? If the latter course is ours, we are thus proving 
ourselves not members of the David or Beloved class, 
but establishing a relationship with the Adversary as being 



to some extent partakers of his spirit, his disposition, and 
manifesting this to some extent in wrong doing, murdering our 
brother. Our Lord indeed seems to imply that in the end of 
this age there will be special trials coming upon his people 
along these lines. He declares that brother shall deliver up 
brother to death, and parents shall deliver up children; and 
that his faithful ones under such conditions may become 
hated of all men. To what extent are we conniving with 
or cooperating with the enemy in such matters? To what 
extent are we like David of old, so reverent toward the Lord 
that we dare not touch, harm one of the members of the 
anointed, nor even an enemy who seeks our life, who does 
us injury and who says all manner of evil against us falsely, 
as Saul did against David? 

A certain part of the temptation which comes to the 
Lord's people is well illustrated in this testing of David; viz., 
the opportunity to favor another's doing an evil work which 
we ourselves would not wish to do. How easy it would have 
been for David to say to Abishai, Proceed to do according to 
your judgment, I will hold aloof; but will say to you privately 
that I believe you will be doing a noble work for our nation; 
and it will even be to the king's interest, because he is an 
enemy even to himself and might the better die. Let us note 
how different a course David pursued; and let us judge 
that any other course would have been displeasing to the 
heavenly Father and would have meant David's failure in 
the test. 

Similarly with us. Not only are we ourselves not to do 
unrighteousness, not to speak evil, not to think evil, not 
to do evil toward friend or foe; but we are to be so 
heartily in sympathy with this procedure that if another proposes 
to do an evil in our interest, we would be so in sympathy 
with the divine will and the law of brotherly love that 
we would oppose the act with all our energy. 

During those seven years of trial David was being disciplined 
for the kingship. It was a school of adversity, of 
persecution and testing, in which he learned valuable lessons. 
Many of his most interesting psalms are credited to this epoch; 
as for instance, the thirty-fourth and fifty-seventh. Similarly 
the Lord's anointed of this Gospel Church are now in the 
wilderness of discipline pursued by our opponents; and with 
us this is the time to learn valuable lessons preparatory to 
occupying our kingly position; and this is the time in which 
our hearts may be drawn out toward the Lord in praise, and 
thanksgiving, in homage, as was David's. The difference in 
every respect is in our favor. His were typical and earthly 
things, ours are the antitypical, the heavenly things, the realities 
of priceless worth. What manner of persons ought we to 
be! How thoroughly we should learn these lessons! How 
great is the prize, the Kingdom we hope to attain! "If we 
know these things, happy are we if we do them."— John 13:17. 



R4226 : page 252 



SOME WHO HAVE VOWED ARE BLEST 

MANY letters are coming to us announcing that 

the number who have taken the Vow mentioned 

in a recent issue, June 15, is increasing. 

We are glad of this and believe that a blessing surely 

follows with it. Indeed, quite a number of letters are 

coming in telling us of the deepening of spiritual refreshment 

and blessing as a result of the Vow, a drawing 

nearer than ever to the Lord— an assistance in the 

narrow way. Some of these letters are of a private, 

confidential character and not suitable for publication, 

but in general they indicate a deep and spreading work 

of grace, which causes us to rejoice and to believe that 

this matter of the Vow is a part of the Lord's providence 

in connection with this harvest work, by which he would 

safeguard his people in respect to the various trials of 

this "evil day" just before us. Here is an illustration 

of how the matter has already worked advantageously: 

A Sister informs us that, caught in a shower, she 
heard the singing of a hymn and entered what appeared 
to be a place of worship. The speaker was a man of 
ability, a spirit medium, who was giving descriptions 
and demonstrations to those present. The Sister rejoiced 
in her heart that by the Lord's grace her eyes of 
understanding had been opened so that she was not deceived 
as were those about her, who thought they were 
having communication with their deceased loved ones. 
She was wishing that she had the power to make some 
of the deluded ones know that their communications 
came from the demons, the fallen angels, and not from 
the dead. While her mind was thus ruminating happily, 
the Adversary was preparing a snare for her. The 

R4227 : page 252 

minister looked straight down to her and, stopping in 

his discourse, walked to her in the rear of the room 

looking upon her intently, probably with a view to hypnotizing 

her. As he came quite close, the sister withdrew 

her gaze from his face and turned her heart to the 

Lord in prayer for protection. The medium stopped 

beside her and asked if he might shake hands with her. 

Remembering our advice, and in harmony with the Vow 

she has taken, to have nothing whatever to do with 

Spiritism or Occultism, she answered, "Excuse me, 

please, I think it is unnecessary." The man stopped 

for a moment, and, frustrated, returned to the platform. 

The Sister perceives that if it had not been for the 
warnings received through the Spiritism pamphlet (recently 
reiterated in connection with the Vow suggestions) 
she might have consorted to the extent of the simple 
act of shaking hands with the medium and might have 
come under a hypnotic influence by that indiscretion. 
She rightly perceives also that had she met the man under 
other circumstances where she would not have known 



him as a medium, the taking of his hand might have 
been an act of innocence, in which the Lord would have 
protected her from harm; but that giving her hand 
knowingly to a medium would have been placing herself 
to that extent knowingly under his influence, and 
the responsibility would have been with her for not 
having obeyed the divine command that we should have 
nothing whatever to do with the evil spirits or their 
"mediums." Indeed, we believe that the Sister, when 
she found herself in such a meeting, should have gone 
out at once and that, staying at all in such company, 
she was under responsibility. She at once took the 
Vow, realizing that even from thinking along its lines 
she had already received a blessing and a deliverance 
and that the lesson to her was a still greater care such 
as the Vow implied. 

A Colporteur brother writes us that shortly after 
taking the Vow, while canvassing a lady in her doorway, 
she asked him into the room and as soon as he entered 
she fell into a trance. Her lips spoke, but in a different 
tone of voice, and the evil spirits, speaking through 
her, used the plural form "we" and spoke of the woman 
in the third person, saying, "We brought her here," etc. 
They evidently desired to get the Colporteur into some 
dispute with them or to arouse his curiosity so that he 
would question them. But remembering his Vow he 
said not a word in reply. Presently the woman came 
out of the trance; it was for this he had waited, that 
he might explain to her that she was under the 
influence of the fallen angels, demons, and warn 
her to prayer and effort that she might be delivered 
from their power. While he was still talking to her 
she again went into a trance and the spirits, speaking 
through her, told him that he was entirely mistaken, 
that they were not evil spirits, that they were the spirits 
of dead humans and that he was the one who was deceived, 
etc. Again he answered not a word, but waited 
until the woman came out of her trance, then finished 
his conversation with her, interesting her in reading 
the Spiritism pamphlet and subsequently the DAWNS. 
How he might have been ensnared had it not been for 
the Lord's providence, not only in bringing to him a 
knowledge of the truth but also in bringing him to the 
point of making a vow that he would have nothing 
whatever to do with Spiritism, demonism. 

Others write that they have received great benefit 
from the Vow along the line of their greater reserve in 
respect to the opposite sex, and that they feel that the 
Lord has specially used the Vow for their assistance 
along the line of a general weakness in the human 
family, and that their greater isolation from the opposite 
sex has resulted in their closer fellowship with the 
Lord. Others write us respecting the feature of the 
Vow which refers to the keeping of the thoughts: that 
the Vow has helped them and is helping them "to bring 
every thought into captivity to the will of God in Christ." 



-2 Cor. 10:5. 

Let the good work go on, dear brothers and sisters. 
The Vow, if you please, is the fastening on of the armor 
which the Lord has been providing for us and which we 
have been fitting to ourselves for some time. We might 
perhaps consider it a girdle by which, as the Apostle 
says, we should "gird up the loins of our minds," 
strengthening our wills in respect to all the various 
features of our covenant with the Lord, and bringing 
our bodies under subjection. As the Apostle again says, 
"I keep my body under and bring it into subjection: 
lest by any means after I have preached to others I myself 
may become a castaway."— I Cor. 9:27. 

Are some inclined to be afraid of bondage? Let us 
remind all such that the bondage of Sin is the one to 
which we are in greatest danger and that the Vow has 
proven to many an assistance in getting free from much 
of the bondage of Sin into the liberty of Christ, the 
liberty of righteousness. As for our relationship to 
Christ let us remember, as the Apostle expresses it, 
that we are his bondservants, literally bondslaves. The 
Apostle gloried in the fact that he bore about in his 
body the marks of the Lord Jesus, marks of his slavery, 
of his full consecration, of his having no liberty to do 
anything except what would be the Lord's will. The 
Vow may in some respects mark us amongst the Lord's 
people, as taking less liberty than others along certain 
lines, but if it is a mark of our more complete submission 
to the Lord's will, then indeed we may glory in it. 

R4227 : page 253 

We believe that the number of those seeing the 
wisdom and expediency of the Vow and the blessings 
which it will bring will greatly increase. Let all remember 
that the Vow is not to us but to the Lord, but 
that we will be pleased to know of such as take the Vow 
that their names may be an encouragement to others 
and also a protection to themselves. If those who 
have taken the Vow and have informed us, do not see 
their names in the lists or if the names appear misspelled 
or with wrong initials, will kindly advise us 
that correction may be made, we will appreciate it very 
much. 

An article in our issue of October 1, 1907, presents 
reasons for concluding that the fallen angels will have 
special powers for materializing during the next few 
years. We learned only recently of their greater activities 
in this direction and that for fifteen months past 
spirit mediums have claimed that by the fall of 1908 the 
spirits will have full power of materialization in daylight 
and go about the streets as human beings. 
Whether or not they will attempt to palm themselves off 
as resurrected humans we know not, though we have 
learned of one such case. It is our duty to put all 
of the household of faith within reach of our influence 



on their guard against these wiles of the Adversary. 

We have reasons for concluding that with the power to 

materialize regained by the demons the effect will be 

much as it was before they were restrained, as recorded 

in Genesis 6:1-5, and that a spirit of licentiousness 

amongst humanity may correspondingly be expected. 

Our Lord's statement that in this harvest time it would 

be "as in the days of Noah," and "as it was in the days 

of Lot," should not be forgotten. Both of the times referred 

to were times of great licentiousness. It is true 

that we have claimed and still claim that the likeness 

of those days to these which our Lord emphasizes is 

laid upon the words, "and knew not;" but why may 

not both thoughts be true? We incline to so expect. 

It is written, "He shall give his messengers charge 
concerning thee, and in their hands they shall bear thee 
up, lest thou dash thy foot against a stone." We have 
seen that this Scripture applies to the feet members of 
the Body of Christ now living in the end of this age. 
We have seen how the Lord has provided helping hands 
for warning and guarding the Feet members for their 
protection in this "evil day." We believe that the Lord's 
providence in connection with this Vow matter is part 
and parcel of his general provision for the bearing up 
of the "feet" at this time. If such conditions prevail, 
as we anticipate, those taking the Vow will certainly be 
forearmed and protected in great measure thereby. 

It is not our thought to awaken needless alarm, but 
rather to call attention to the safeguarding and protecting 
arrangements which the Lord has provided, in the 
use of which the Lord's consecrated ones may be kept 
in perfect peace. Our thought is that in some manner 
there is a protecting influence surrounding human beings 
which safeguards them from the Adversary and 
his assistants except so far as they shall give a measure 
of their will or consent. This safeguarding influence, 
we believe, is manifold in the case of the consecrated. 
"The angel of the Lord encampeth round about them that 
fear him, and delivereth them." This view is supported 
by the statement of Satan respecting Job— "Hast thou 
not made an hedge about him?" (Job 1:10.) Our thought 
is that as the Lord gave the Adversary permission 
against Job, so Satan will gain liberty in the impending 
hour of temptation which shall come upon all the world 
to try them that dwell upon the earth. (Rev. 3:10.) In 
that contest the only ones safe from all harm will be those 
who have made the Lord, even the Most High, their 
refuge and habitation; because no harm can come nigh 
that dwelling place. 

How important, then, that all the Lord's people 
forewarned by him should draw near to the Lord himself! 
The prophet represents the matter under the 
figure of a mother hen, which in the time of danger 
clucks for her chicks. They run to her and are safe 
while they look out from under her feathers at the 
dangers from which they had escaped. 



This is the Lord's picture in respect to the faithful 
ones, "Surely he will deliver thee from the snare of the 
fowler, and from the noisome pestilence. He shall 

R4228 : page 253 

cover thee with his feathers and under his wings shalt 
thou trust. His truth shall be thy shield and buckler." 
-Psa. 91. 

Someone writes fearful that the Vow would prove 
an embargo on marriage by hindering courtship. We 
reply, that if this be true amongst the Lord's people it 
would doubtless prove a blessing, in full accord with 
the Apostle's exhortation in I Cor. 7:7,8,25-35. However, 
we see nothing in the Vow to hinder a proper 
courtship and marriage. Assuredly there would be 
fewer unhappy marriages under the operation of the 
Vow. Those younger brethren and sisters who desire 
unhappy marriages, who desire marriages which could 
be led up to only under the exhilaration of animal passion, 
which beclouds their judgment and stifles the 
spirit of a sound mind— these should not take the Vow. 
But let us warn these that such an attitude of heart is 
apt to keep them out of the Kingdom. 

A doctor and also a nurse express fear that the Vow 
would conflict with their professional duties. We fail 
to see how! One doctor advises us that he finds the 
Vow a great blessing. Surely it is safe to have a third 
party present when treating one of the opposite sex 
"when reasonably possible." And that is exactly what 
the Vow expresses. What is "reasonably possible" is for 
each to decide for himself. A doctor or a nurse should 
do nothing to a patient that he or she would consider 
wrong or immodest, so that if necessity compelled the 
services might be rendered in the presence of a congregation 
of the Lord's people. 

LIFTING UP A STANDARD 

Some fear that we are lifting up too high a standard 
which will deter some from accepting other truths now 
due. But we ask, can we have too high a Scriptural 
standard in view of the strenuous times the Scriptures 
forewarn us to expect? May we not unconsciously have 
lifted up the very standard foretold by the prophet 
Isaiah (59:19,20), "When the enemy shall come in like 
a flood the spirit of the Lord shall raise up a standard 
against him, and the Redeemer shall come to Zion." 

We admit that too high a standard could be lifted 
up, an unscriptural one: For instance, "forbidding to 
marry" or demanding celibacy or requiring fasts or 
feasts or holy-days, or stipulating clothing or diet. On 
the contrary, the Vow we suggest merely emphasizes 
our Covenant of Consecration by specializing some of 
its features appropriately to "that evil day." 

However, let not us who have taken the Vow assume 



any "holier-than-thou" attitude toward those who have 
not taken it, nor in any manner make the Vow a test of 
fellowship. To the Master each is responsible, and 
each should exercise his own conscience in this and in 
every matter. While we believe that the spirit of the 

R4228 : page 254 

Lord has raised up this standard for the aid and protection 
of his people in this evil day, we cannot demonstrate 
the fact, and all of the members of the Body may 
not be able to "see eye to eye" on the subject. Love is 
the supreme and final test, we may be sure. 



A RE-STATEMENT OF THE "VOW" 

WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY. 

Dear Brethren:— We, the undersigned, 17 of the 
members of the Class of St. Joseph, have taken the following 
"Vow" before the Lord:— 

"Our Father which art in heaven, hallowed be thy name. 
May thy rule come into my heart more and more, and thy will 
be done in my mortal body. Relying on the assistance of thy 
promised grace to help in every time of need, through Jesus 
Christ our Lord, I register this Vow. Daily will I remember 
at the throne of heavenly grace the general interests of the 
harvest work, and particularly the share which I myself am 
privileged to enjoy in that work, and the dear co-laborers at 
the Bible House, Allegheny. I vow to still more carefully, 
if possible, scrutinize my thoughts and words and doings, to 
the intent that I may be the better enabled to serve Thee 
and thy dear flock. I vow to thee that I will be on the alert 
to resist everything akin to Spiritism and Occultism, and that 
remembering that there are but the two masters I shall resist 
these snares in all reasonable ways, as being of the Adversary. 
I further vow that, with the exceptions below, I will at all 
times and at all places, conduct myself toward those of the 
opposite sex in private exactly as I would do with them in 
public— in the presence of a congregation of the Lord's 
people, and so far as reasonably possible, I will avoid being 
in the same room with any of the opposite sex alone, unless 
the door to the room stand wide open— in the case of brethren, 
wife, children, mother and sisters excepted, and in the case 
of sisters, husband, children, father and brother excepted." 

Yours in the service of the Master, Dr. S. D. Senor 
and wife, F. R. Gossin and wife, M. E. Reimer and 
wife, C. W. Orton, Sister L. Freydig, Hugo H. Reimer, 
Wm. Wild, Nettie M. Wild, John Freydig, Mrs. H. K. 
Reimer, Dora A. Reimer, Emily V. Reimer, Alice E. 
Stone, Clara L. Buehler. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 



I have been so situated ever since the publication 
of "the Vow," suggested in June 15th TOWER, that I 
could not give the prayerful attention to its consideration, 
which the sacredness and importance of this matter 
demanded, but I made the time today, and therefore 
write to announce the registering of my vow at 1.00 P.M., 
August 1st, 1908. I give the date thus explicitly, 
as it may assist in keeping it more clearly before my 
mind. I will also keep a copy of the Vow in the MANNA, 
and DAILY refresh my mind when I read the text and 
comment for each day. Pray for me! 

Several objections had been suggested to my mind 
by others, as well as by my own inner consciousness: 

1st. I felt that my consecration had included all these 
things, as I held very clear convictions, from the first, 
of the necessity for what you refer to as "antitypical 
fasting," explained in ZION'S WATCH TOWER, 1899, page 
140. But I reasoned that the taking of "the Vow" 
would mean only a more explicit statement in detail of 
what I had formerly striven to practice, therefore it 
could do no harm, even though it might not serve to add 
anything. First objection overruled. 

2d. It had been suggested that "the publication of 
names in TOWER implied an acknowledgment of past indiscretions, 
of present weaknesses and of future fears." 
But I replied to this, what right has any "member of 
the Body" to judge another in this manner? I said to 
myself, "What is that to thee? follow thou me." I would 
not wish anyone to judge me thus, so I would not thus 
judge another— "to his own master he standeth or 
falleth." Second objection overruled. 

3d. The Vow appeared to me something like the temperance 
pledge. I had never been a drunkard, never feared 
that I should become one, but for the sake of some 
other poor, weak, fallen wreck of humanity, who perhaps 
had inherited a weakness in this direction, 25 
years ago I signed this pledge in the hope that my example 
might serve to strengthen him in his efforts to 
take a stand against intemperance. I realize the power 
of numbers and example, and therefore, if my example 
might be used of the dear Master to encourage even the 
least of his brethren, I am glad to take this stand, "with 
meekness and fear," not knowing how weak my own 
flesh might become under temptations which others find 
hard to withstand. Third and last objection overruled. 

Pray for me, dear brother, as I do for you and all 
the dear Israel of God everywhere, that we may daily 
grow stronger and stronger in him and in the power of 
his might, that our faith may increase more and more, 
that we may all be made perfect in Love, "more than 
conquerors through him who loved us and died for us," 
our blessed Lord and Saviour, Jesus Christ, whose 
we are and whom we serve, in whose likeness we hope 
to awake after the storms and trials of life are over and 
we have resisted even unto blood! 

With much Christian love to yourself and all the 



other dear friends at the Bible House, I am, 
Yours in his precious service, G. W. SEIBERT. 



MY BELOVED UNCLE:- 

Just a line to express to you my gratitude for the 
assistance which you have vouchsafed us in pointing 
us to an additional means for the strengthening of the 
cords of love which bind the sacrifice to the horns of 
the altar— viz., "the Vow" mentioned in June 15 TOWER. 
I feel that there is a blessing in thus definitely stating 
my heart's desires and intentions in these matters; for 
although realizing that the Lord knows this has been 
my heart's attitude since my consecration seven years 
ago, yet I think this particular statement of the same 
will be very beneficial; not only keeping more definitely 
before my mind my privileges and obligations, but also 
enabling me to better witness for the Lord and for his 
glorious cause. Praise the Lord for this additional 
assistance by the way! 

May the rich favor of the Lord continue with you, 
and may he continue to direct you in your earnest 
efforts to do and to assist others to do his blessed will. 

With much love, and hoping to see you soon, I am 
as ever, 

Your affectionate niece, 

ALICE LAND WILLIAMSON. 



R4229 : page 254 

OUR DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

We wish to make mention to you of the means of 
grace and strength (spiritually) the recent Olean Convention 
was to us. Concerning "the Vow": On returning 
home, my dear husband and I reread the 
article in full, in the June 15th TOWER, and reconsidered 
it. We feared we had not given it due consideration 
before. 

We have also reread the October 1st, 1907, TOWER, 
on "The Judgment of the Great Day." We are so thankful 
to our heavenly Father for this meat in due season, 
which it truly is. 

Since entering the school of Christ we have tried 
daily to follow in the footsteps of the Master, striving 
toward the mark of perfect love— the love that thinketh 
no evil.— I Cor. 13. 

We have perfect trust that our heavenly Father will 
help us to carry out this Vow. Whatever our Father 
wants us to do that is what we truly wish to do. His 
will is our delight, and we gladly and prayerfully take 
this Vow. 

We do thank the heavenly Father that he has put 
his children on their guard. We also thank him for the 



channel he is using to dispense this meat in due season. 
May his richest blessings be yours. How we will praise 

R4229 : page 255 

him when this night-time of sin and weeping is over! 
Yours in Christian love and fellowship, 

RAY VAN HYNING AND WIFE. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

Referring to your suggestion in ZION'S WATCH 
TOWER of June 15th, in regard to the proposed "Vow," 
we beg to state that we have taken it. It expresses 
to our understanding our definite and determined relation 
to the harvest work and its servants; great self-inspection 
in regard to present strong delusions which 
would "deceive if it were possible the very elect;" and 
finally a very guarded relationship to those of the opposite 
sex, in which we are to avoid, if possible, the very 
appearance of evil. 

Therefore, dear pastor, unitedly we thank you for 
calling our attention to this as well as to many other 
matters of importance. 

Yours in fellowship and service, 

L. JOSEPH LARSEN AND WIFE. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

We, the undersigned of the Avalon Class who until 
now had not taken "the Vow" mentioned in the TOWER 
of June 15th, desire to register our names as having 
done so. Frank C. Roller, Patience M. McCauley, Mrs. 
M. L. Herr, Mrs. Margaret Wilson, Mrs. Laura B. Gasquoine, 
Geo. M. Wilson, W. D. Boder, Mrs. Mary A. 
Boder, Mrs. Margaret J. Boyd, Martha E. Dunbar, Mrs. 
Lillie A. Moore, Mrs. E. C. Whitehouse, Geo. A. Wilson, 
Mrs. G. A. Wilson, Mr. and Mrs. Sam'l McComb. 



MANY MORE ADVISE THAT THEY HAVE TAKEN THE VOW 

F. W. Williamson and wife, Clara Tomlins, Alfred 
W. C. Kuehn, Mrs. G. W. Seibert, L. C. Work and wife, 
Mrs. Lydia Messner, H. Hoskins, Jr., and wife, Emma 
Blumer, Katherine A. Baeuerlein, Mrs. Alex. Ogston, 
Bessie Ford, J. B. Alford, E. A. Saddler, Martha Wilson, 
Gerald Barry, F. P. Moulton, John Segergren, Bro. 
and Sr. J. A. Lehman, Bro. and Sr. Tallman, Henry 
Gindroz, H. C. Peck and wife, Mrs. H. Graham, Mrs. H. 
T. Whiteworth, Mrs. C. J. Williams, Miss Annie Williams, 
Mrs. Cornelia Winton, Maggie Millar, Alex. Laidlaw, 
Mrs. J. D. Wright, Miss. M. Persons, Mrs. J. H. 



Gourley, Aug. Lundborg, Mr. and Mrs. C. A. Russell, 
E. Detwiler, J. D'Cecca, R. G. Russell, T. W. Hill and 
wife, Francis Hill, J. Walter Davis, John Stephens, 
Katharine Ashby, Mabel Jette, E. S. Weekly, Emory 
Williams, Nellie Severance, L. J. Kihlken, G. A. Phillip, 
Warren C. Hickman, Walter Taylor, C. H. Booz, Joseph 
Levens, Mrs. Joseph Levens, John W. Jackson, Helen 
L. Jewell, John E. Hardie, Mrs. C. R. Zeh, Mrs. D. Antisdel, 
Mrs. W. Hewish, C. E. Phillips, A. W. Leflar, K. M. 
Welty, Sidney Morton, O. D. Deifer, Mr. and Mrs. H. C. 
Minkler, G. J. Redford, Virginia Noble, L. F. Zink, J. 
R. Brode, L. G. Clymer, E. L. Dockey, J. F. Shehorn, 
Gracie Doughty, Saml. and Mary Hammond, Cora 
Carmicheal, Geo. B. McCord, Joseph V. Waters, Mr. 
and Mrs. Chas. A. Ward, Mrs. Jane M. McCormick, 
Erma E. Mason, Mrs. Emma P. Mason, C. W. Mason, 
Mamie Mundy, M. L. Mcllvaine, E. P. Taliaferro, 
Thayle Gardner, Dr. W. W. Murray, E. L. Fletcher, Reginald 
Ward, Elizabeth Hoskins, Ellen Hoskins, Elizabeth 
Gillett, T. F. Williams, Mrs. D. H. Rodgers, G. 
Bolton, Sadie C. Redford, T. E. Banks and wife, J. R. 
Hill, Hans Finjord, Alex. Evans and wife, Mrs. Annie 
Hammond, Mrs. Minnie Ensley, James Marshall, Ethelinda 
Hendrickson, A. N. Pierson, Bro. and Sr. Gus. 
Smith, Isaac P. Noll, Edith S. Hanson, C. C. Waddle, 
Mr. and Mrs. G. W. Chamberlain, Thos. P. Yates, K. 
Yeo, C. A. Hewes and wife, C. W. Vord, Mrs. E. O. De 
Haven, Mrs. Geo. M. Hunt, Mrs. B. M. Stephenson, 
Mrs. C. P. Powley, Mrs. C. L. Knowles, Carmel Knowles, 
John H. Cart, Alice Nelson, F. E. Riley, H. Scott, 
Mrs. J. W. Burrows, Bro. and Sr. Aker, J. A. Hudspeth, 
Mr. and Mrs. O. R. Wilkins, Mrs. Nora B. Glass, C. L. 
and A. F. Crockett, Mrs. S. Stokes, Mabel E. Hewes, 
James S. Samuda, Wm. A. Baker, G. B. Raymond and 
wife, Anna H. Brooks, Willetta K. Bolger, Mr. and Mrs. 
C. S. Brooks, Belle Goodwin, J. W. Morris and wife, 
Beda Rahm, W. P. Hall, Mrs. L. F. Achor, Mrs. Catharine 
Rouch, K. W. Jackson, Leota C. Hall, Ruth Gregg, 
Mrs. G. P. Bronaugh, E. W. Reinbolt, E. W. Weld, 
Augusta E. French, Elmer G. Berry, Edward Worcester, 
Mrs. Catharine Roach, G. C. Elton, Mrs. G. C. Elton, 
W. A. Davis and wife, Frank French, Frank Gwillim, 
H. A. Remick, J. M. Campbell, J. H. Martin, Mrs. V. 
Banning, Nellie Bush, Herbert C. Robb, Willard Wells 
and wife, Mabel Wells, Carrie A. Dorst, Ellen J. Barnet, 
Dora Bailey, Margaret Hall, Mrs. Richard Schulze, 
J. W. Broom, J. F. Davault and wife, Emma C. Gill, 
R. J. Kilpatrick, F. W. Pattison, W. L. Dimock, Mrs. 
M. M. Harvey, Maggie Adams, W. M. Higbee, Erven 
Schlatter, F. Samuel Ganoung and wife, Wm. E. Walton, 
Evan T. Jones, Mattie Herbruck, Calvin Dodge 
and wife, Eva L. Adams, N. A. Linderberg and wife, 
W. B. Johnson, T. J. Beatty and wife, Mary A. Eldred, 
E. Gerber, Mrs. M. Hufford, F. G. Hammes, Clara 
Phillips, G. H. Wright, Mrs. E. Grimes, Mrs. H. C. Bell, 
John J. Stacey, Sue Bivens, Frank A. Shook, Mrs. Flora 



D. Bradley, G. F. Dillenbeck, Lucy J. Fleming, Edith 
S. Hansen, Lucinda Willey, Louise Fletcher, Carrie 
Beaty, Jr., Bee Beaty, Frank W. Wall, Josie House, 
Nannie M. Foster, Corintha K. Pendleton, Olive Pendleton, 
Ellen Pendleton, Clara Jackley, Adah Schath, 
Alice Ferguson, Geo. Moffatt, Cordia B. Rhodes, Ella 
J. Brown, Roxy Tyler, Agnes Wall, S. M. York, Miss 
Belle Hancher, Helen M. Hancher, Ruberta G. Brunig, 
Hattie Anna Miller, Horace C. Galloway, Mrs. A. Monro, 
Emma Bates, Sister Baltzell, H. W. Strasser, Emma 
Bowman, Mrs. A. Thomas, Lemuel R. Browne, Mrs. 
Ianthe D. Thurston, Howard B. Hale, Mrs. M. M. Harvey, 

B. S. Grubb, W. S. Dimock, Dr. John L. Wooding, 
Inez M. Merritt, H. T. Hixon, Miss Pearl Gilmore, Dr. 
Lora K. Barnes, Bro. and Sr. J. C. Garrison, Walter 
McLendon, Alfred Smith, Frank Vogler, Luther Fail 
and wife, Mrs. O. Margeson, Clarence B. Snow, Nora 
Peterson, Mrs. A. W. Peterson, F. A. Barnett, Joseph 
Isaac, S. H. Huston, Mary A. West, Edith E. Mason, 
W. Homer Lee, wife and son, F. B. Hindman and wife, 
George M. Haucher, Bro. and Sr. Boyeson, Harry 
Ehlers, Byrd McDonaugh, Mrs. Grace Marshall, 
Mary Stapleton, Susan Graham, Mrs. A. E. Morse, F. 
L. Spencer and wife, Mrs. C. M. Chase, Mrs. Harriett 
Broughton, Henry McClellan, Ruby L. Hotchkiss, Mrs. 

D. M. MacKay, Mrs. C. Johnson, I. I. Margeson and 
wife, Ida M. Finney, Henry H. Brown, Margaret R. 
Brown, Mrs. Ella F. Wilson, C. P. Bridges, A. Shipman, 
Sadie E. Davidson, Mercy Davidson, James A. Davidson, 
Arthur Hawley, Mary Orton, Wm. B. Wright, J. 

H. Wills, Mae Gage, Wm. Evans and wife, A. Hope 
Tate, Rilla Strawn, H. Manning, Phoebe Myers, Gertrude 
Swinney, Bettie Reynolds, Harry G. Davis, Joseph 
Cooch, T. H. Perkins, Ida M. Stewart, Ross W. 
Bailey, Mrs. Anna Fisk, W. E. Housman, Rudolf Selin, 
Lottie Bishop, Mrs. W. S. Lane, Mary Octavia Noe, 
Anna L. Bell, James Steele, Geo. A. Bail, A. C. Morgan, 
Helen M. Lemon, Nettie Thompson, E. C. Smith and 
wife, John Johnson and wife, Thomas Johnson and 
wife, Wm. Barth, A. Olson, Sietse Koopman, De Verne 

E. Corbin, M. W. Earl and wife, Sarah E. Rogers, W. 
H. Clark, L. F. Lartigue, J. F. Harding, G. S. ODowd, 
Mrs. J. E. Culver, R. Robt. Hollister, Wm. J. Hollister, 

C. E. Schiller, Ralph Snyder, A. J. Chidester, C. F. 
Bullard, Lillian A. Clingman, O. E. Staples and wife, 
Emma Beaner, Will J. Madole, Geo. D. Laing, Abner 
Duffield, E. B. Stinson, H. F. Jordan, H. C. Beebe, 
Clark L. Sharper, Mrs. Jennie M. Barber, Archie H. 
Frier, Mrs. H. T. Chase, Mrs. Una Snow, Hugh A. 
Piatt, Adolphine Lass, Mrs. W. A. Baade, Mrs. V. A. 
Fuller, Mrs. Margaret Foster, A. F. Binkley and wife, 

F. H. Taylor, Fred and Emmy Guard, August and 
Amelia Krueger, Ira K. Wilson, Benj. F. and Horace E. 
Hollister, Elders and Deacons of Bay City Class, Mich. 



page 257 

SEMI-MONTHLY 