Announcements
FIELD MINISTRY
Zeal for a cause is contagious. Those who possess such zeal stimulate others to action. The apostle Paul was such a zealous one that when he spoke or wrote, others were stirred up to preach more actively the good news of the Kingdom. (1 Cor. 11:1) Moved by the words of Paul to imitate him even as he imitated the Lord Jesus Christ, Jehovah’s witnesses zealously preach the Kingdom good news from house to house. As they do this during the month of August, they will be presenting the fine Bible-study aid The Truth That Leads to Eternal Life, for just 25c.
EVOLUTION: FACT OR FICTION?
Do you think this magazine you are holding is the product of pure chance? that the paper and the words printed on it came about unassisted, a development of their own necessity? Is it any more reasonable, then, to believe that you are the result of a series of evolutionary changes, a progression upward “by means of a series of biological changes taking place over millions of years”? The origin of man by the process of evolution is regarded by many as established fact. But is it? Has there been so much evidence for evolution that the Bible teaching of a direct creation is obsolete? Which holds the key to the future of mankind—evolution or the Bible? You owe it to yourself to find out. Your life depends on it. Read Did Man Get Here by Evolution or by Creation? Send only 25c.
ANNUAL MEETING OCTOBER FIRST
October 1, 1969, this year falls on Wednesday, on which day at 10 o’clock in the forenoon the annual meeting of the members of Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society of Pennsylvania will be held at the Society’s office located at 4100 Bigelow Boulevard, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. All members of the corporation should be certain that the Secretary’s office has their present addresses so that the letters of notice will reach them shortly after September 1.
Proxies will be sent to the members along with the notice of the annual meeting. The proxies are to be returned so as to reach the office of the Secretary of the Society not later than September 15. Each member should complete and return his proxy promptly whether he is going to be at the meeting personally or not.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES FOR THE WEEKS
August 31: God Rewards the Earnest Seekers. Page 488. Songs to Be Used: 117, 35.
September 7: Jehovah God, the Hearer of Prayer. Page 495. Songs to Be Used: 42, 87.

