How to Bring Alcohol Problems Under Control
ALCOHOL abuse is a problem that can deeply affect the life of the entire family. So it is beneficial to discuss the subject as a family, to help all within the household to understand it, and to cooperate in avoiding situations that may tend to make one of its members try to drown his problems in drink.
Don’t wait until alcoholism has already marred your family life before you do something about it. Take preventive measures.
In many households, unfortunately, the problem has already developed. What can they do?
When the Problem Already Exists
First of all, there is a need to face up to the fact that there is an alcohol problem. The alcoholic may not believe that he has such a problem. Other members of his family, as well as friends outside the home, may feel that he does. Why? They can’t see whether there is damage being done to his internal organs. But they can see deterioration in behavior.
A person who is becoming dependent on alcohol tends to reach for the bottle when lonely or depressed. He may be embarrassed by his drinking or angered by the criticism of other people, so he tries to conceal the amount he consumes. When he wants a drink, he may be somewhat irritable until he gets it. As a result of his drinking habits, he may become impulsive, less reasonable and may even resort to physical violence against his marriage mate. Even though he does not drink every day, once he begins he has too much. In time, there may be alcoholic blackouts, or perhaps withdrawal fits when he fails to get a drink.
The one who is having trouble with alcohol may know that his family life is deteriorating. He may realize that he is having trouble at work. But if someone suggests that an important reason for this is that he has become overly dependent on alcohol, it is not unusual for such a person to become defensive. If a doctor were to tell him that he was allergic to a certain food and that his health would improve if he would eliminate it from his diet, he would probably do so. Is alcohol somehow different? Yes, it can act like a mood-altering drug, and a person can become dependent on it, both psychologically and physically.
If he is willing to face up to the fact that he has a weakness in regard to alcohol and that it can ruin his life, but that it is possible to get the mastery over it and that it is worth trying to do so, there is hope for recovery. It will require firm determination and a definite program to be followed.
Breaking the Hold of Alcohol Dependence
The problem is not solved by drinking only on weekends. Nor does one eliminate his dependence on alcohol by shifting from hard liquor to wine or beer. A considerable proportion of those who are alcoholics drink beer almost exclusively.
There is a need to clean out the system and allow the cells to restore themselves to the extent that it is possible. Total abstinence is required. Some doctors say that you need to allow at least four days for the body to eliminate completely your last alcoholic drink. However, the restoration of cells that have been damaged as a result of unwise drinking habits may require six months or more, during which special attention is given to good nutrition.
Withdrawal symptoms do not always occur, but they are common in habitual heavy drinkers and alcoholics. As the blood-alcohol level goes down and the nervous system adjusts to the change, a person may experience restlessness, irritability, depression, sleeplessness, confusion, palpitations, sweating, the shakes and nausea. These symptoms usually begin eight to 24 hours after cessation of drinking. If the alcoholic condition has been prolonged or the physical condition is very poor, there may be further severe reactions requiring medical attention.
The extent to which the body will be able to restore damaged organs will depend on the amount of “functional reserve” that was wiped out, the length of time that the condition existed, and the care that is given with a view to rebuilding the body. For those truly addicted to alcohol; in most cases it is unlikely that they will ever be able to return to a normal use of alcoholic beverages. No matter how long it has been, one drink may be too many. It is as if a volcano within is waiting to erupt. In such a case, the only way that one can continue to lead a normal life is to abstain totally.
The Family Can Help
Cooperation of the family is important in breaking the hold of alcohol dependence, and, in most instances, the family is very willing to help. To minimize temptation, it would be wise to remove all alcoholic beverages from the house. And it will make it easier for the one having the weakness if other family members refrain from drinking in his presence.
Of course, there will be times when the person is visiting in the home of someone else. Either because of their not knowing of his condition or out of thoughtlessness, they may offer him an alcoholic drink. What will he do? That is something that he ought to think out ahead of time. He doesn’t need to go into a long explanation, but his refusal should be firm. “No thanks. But I would enjoy a glass of soda [or of water].”
What the Bible says is very encouraging for one who wants to free himself from alcohol abuse. It tells of persons who succeeded in getting the mastery over it (1 Cor. 6:9-11), and of those who for personal reasons abstained altogether. (Num. 6:2, 3) It also recounts events involving entire families that abstained, out of obedience to the family head, to preserve the dignity of the family name. The Rechabite families are given special mention in this regard. They abstained for successive generations, although they lived in the vicinity of other families that regularly used wine. God did not ask those Rechabites to abstain from wine, and neither does his Word require total abstinence today, but he looked favorably on what they did in obedience to their family head.​—Jer. 35:5, 6, 8, 18, 19.
Gaining Spiritual Strength
Accurate knowledge of God’s Word will do much to give one the spiritual strength needed to overcome weaknesses. The Bible will show you how to be successful in coping with problems instead of trying to blot out reality by heavy drinking.
Take, for example, one young man in Australia who had a serious alcohol problem. Oftentimes, in order to get home from the pub, he would put his car in first gear, hold the door open and hang his head out to watch for the white line, taking up to two hours to travel the seven miles (11 km) home. He would spend up to $40 on grog in one weekend. He even experienced hallucinations, so he made a vow to stop drinking. But he didn’t succeed.
About this time he started studying the Bible with the help of Jehovah’s Witnesses. He brought up the subject of alcohol and was shown that God does not approve of drunkards, but that everlasting life in a restored earthly paradise is possible for those who live by Bible standards.​—Gal. 5:21; John 17:3.
It was not easy for him to change, as he was the live wire of his parties. When he started to quiet down, his drinking friends thought that he had a girl friend but that soon her influence would weaken and he would be back to the parties. But the power of God’s promises had a greater hold on him than his friends realized, and he never did go back to their drunken parties. He says: “Now, 10 years have passed since I was able to get the upper hand on my drinking problem. I am a much happier and healthier person, thanks to Jehovah’s kindness.”
This change did not come overnight. It was a gradual one, as his knowledge increased and his understanding grew. What he formerly had not been able to accomplish alone he succeeded in doing with the help of God’s spirit.​—1 Cor. 6:11.
Knowledge of the Bible makes for happier marriages, happier families. It helps to reduce problems by aiding a person to make wiser decisions in life. It helps one to absorb shocks and to understand why evil conditions exist and calamities occur. It describes a new system in store for those who love life and who do God’s will, and it helps a person to develop the motivation needed to change his life pattern so as to be acceptable to God.​—Rom. 12:1, 2; 2 Pet. 3:13.
Alcoholic beverages can bring enjoyment if used in the right way. But if you have an alcohol problem, do not let it ruin your life. Come to grips with it. Do it now.

