The Growing Problem of Alcohol Abuse
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES can add to a person’s enjoyment of a meal, causing the heart to feel good. However, the abuse of alcohol is having a drastically different effect on a growing number of persons world wide. It is making them addicts. How extensive is the problem?
The Health Department of Italy reports that the alcoholic trend there is “uncontrollable.” A published report states that in France, between 11 p.m. and 6 a.m., at least every 10th car on the road is being driven by someone who is intoxicated! And nearly one half of all hospital beds in France are occupied by alcoholics. It is called France’s “national illness.”
In the Soviet Union, alcoholism is reported to be responsible for 90 percent of all minor offenses and 60 percent of all murders.
In the United States, the number of alcoholics is said to be upward of 10,000,000. A considerable number of these are war veterans.
In many countries, alcohol abuse is responsible for approximately 20 percent of the cases of child beating, 75 percent of all violent crimes, 20 percent of drownings, 50 percent of industrial accidents, 30 percent of suicides, 40 percent of separation or divorce cases, and 20 percent of psychiatric admissions. Obviously, millions of persons are endangered by alcoholism​—not only the alcoholics, but also those who live around them.
Increased Consumption
Alcohol consumption per person is increasing at an alarming rate. The World Health Organization reports that in many lands the number of persons experiencing direct adverse effects from alcohol outnumber those affected by all the dependence-producing drugs put together.
The average Italian is drinking twice as much per day now as he did 20 years ago, and the Australian consumes 277 percent more than he did some 30 years ago. Commenting on the problems that alcoholism has caused in industry, the president of the Australian Trades Unions observed that the great Australian thirst is fast becoming the all-Australian nightmare.
In some areas the increase is especially drastic among women. In Western Germany, for example, whereas the ratio of female alcoholics to male alcoholics 10 years ago was approximately 1 to 10, today it is 1 to 3, the same as in Britain. And while the French woman is still considered to be basically a water drinker, her average alcohol intake has now reached 19 percent of her daily fluid consumption.
To what extent are youths involved? Of some 1,400 underage youths interviewed in one Western country, 19 percent bought drinks personally from licensed premises. Of another group of 2,741 adolescents from 30 different schools, it was discovered that 9 percent of all 12- to 17-year-olds claim to get “very drunk” more than once a month and a further 2 percent “pass out” regularly from the effects of alcohol.
How the Problem Develops
Initially, a person may experience that, as the Bible says, wine can make the heart joyful. (Ps. 104:15) Then, as the years pass and as the body’s tolerance for alcohol appears to increase, he may find himself drinking larger quantities and stronger drinks. Generally, he appears to be able to “hold his liquor” satisfactorily. His apparent tolerance for alcohol may even add to his confidence.
Later, he finds himself relying on it more and more. He counts on it for “good times.” It becomes an escape from boredom, and it comes in handy in drowning sorrows. Or, a person may just gradually increase his dosage to get the desired euphoric or anesthetic effects.
Some authorities say that such a person has now reached the stage of psychological dependence. He may be a bit defensive about his position when alcoholism is discussed, but, in most cases, he is not ready to acknowledge that he is becoming an alcoholic. He may never actually get drunk. Nevertheless, an alcohol problem may exist.
If he faces up to his situation at this early stage, recovery is more easily achieved. But if not, he will usually advance to what some call physical dependence, a compulsion to drink regularly to avoid withdrawal symptoms.
Plainly stated, when there is an excessive satisfying of the desire to drink and/​or a continuing dependence upon it, a person has an alcohol problem.
Of course, not everyone who drinks is an alcoholic. But it is a good thing to know what happens in the body of a person who does indulge in alcoholic beverages to excess. This is discussed in the following article. Such knowledge can be a protection to you. And if you are one who is having a problem with drink, it may help you to understand the situation more clearly and what can be done about it.
[Box/​Picture on page 6]
WHAT IS YOUR ANSWER?
If offered a choice between an alcoholic drink and a nonalcoholic one, is your selection easy to predict?
Do you drink alcoholic beverages as a means to change how you feel?
When you drink, do you often have several before you stop?
Have you learned to “hold your liquor” so that you no longer feel its effects as soon as others may?
YOUR ANSWERS MAY REVEAL MORE THAN YOU REALIZE

