Announcements
CONVENTION INFORMATION
The “Fruitage of the Spirit” Assembly of Jehovah’s Witnesses scheduled for Anchorage, Alaska, July 30–August 2, will be held at the Wendler Junior High, Lake Otis Road at Northern Lights, instead of at the Sydney Laurence Auditorium. An assembly will also be held August 27-30 at Humber Gardens in Corner Brook, Newfoundland; and rooming accommodations will be handled at the Kingdom Hall, Wellington Street, Corner Brook. The rooming address for the assembly in Southport, Lancashire, England, is now available; it is 83 Hart Street, Southport. For the assembly at Prince George, B.C., Canada, August 13-16, the rooming address has been changed to 663 Douglas St., Prince George, B.C. The French assembly at Granby, Quebec, Canada, July 23-26, will be at the Municipal Stadium, St. Marc St.; rooming: Tinning Corners, R.R. 1, Granby, Quebec.
For complete information concerning assembly dates and locations for the United States, Canada and the British Isles, see the May 1 issue of The Watchtower.
RENEW YOUR CONFIDENCE IN THE BIBLE
Many leading clergymen today deny that the Bible is a book of historical facts. They hold that such accounts as the creation of man are myths and fables. As a result, the confidence of those who know little about the Bible is shaken. Do not fall into this snare. Read the Bible yourself. Send for the New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures and read it daily. This modern-language version of the complete Bible in English is only $1. Also available, a gold-edged deluxe edition for $2.50. The New World Translation is also available for the Christian Greek Scriptures in Dutch, German, Italian, French, Spanish and Portuguese for only 50 cents a copy. Send now and receive free the booklet When God Is King over All the Earth.
FIELD MINISTRY
During June Jehovah’s witnesses will continue to share unitedly in the ministry, so cooperating together to maintain their spiritual maturity. As they do so they will be aiding others to acquire the Scriptural knowledge they need in order to serve God. This they will do by offering the modern-English New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures, with a free Bible-study booklet, on a contribution of $1. To those who read Dutch, French, German, Italian, Portuguese or Spanish, they will offer the New World Translation of the Christian Greek Scriptures for just 50c.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES FOR THE WEEKS
July 5: Using Life to Serve Jehovah. Page 328.
July 12: Right Motive in Serving God. Page 334.

