Announcements
MAINTAINING SANCTITY FOR THEOCRATIC WARFARE—Deut. 23:14, NW.
The sacredness of the Christians’ spiritual warfare demands that each one who engages in it be clean and free from taint. Such personal sanctity will keep the servant of God from bringing reproach upon His name and cause. During the month of September Jehovah’s witnesses will busy themselves in carrying on the right contest of the faith by presenting to the people Bible study aids in the form of a bound book and a booklet on a contribution of 50c.
NEW WORLD TRANSLATION OF THE HEBREW SCRIPTURES, VOLUME II
The New World Translation of the Hebrew Scriptures, Volume II, sets forth in the clear living language of today the historical and prophetical account found in the inspired canonical books of First Samuel to Esther. It is new! Just published on June 22, 1955. You will want a copy. This is a volume for the keen student of the Scriptures as well as for those who read the Bible for comfort and spiritual uplift. Its copious chain and cross references, helpful maps and illustrations all combine to make this an outstanding edition, a necessary addition to your library. A copy will be sent to you on the contribution of $1.50.
NOTICE OF ANNUAL MEETING WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY
The Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society will hold its annual meeting of members on Saturday, October 1, 1955, at ten o’clock in the forenoon at the registered office of the Society, which is located at 4100 Bigelow Boulevard, corner of Parkman Avenue, in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.
The members of the corporation will receive the usual letter of notice advising them of the meeting and sending them proxy forms. We should like to have all the proxies returned to the office of the secretary of the Society not later than the 15th of September. Each member should complete and return his proxy promptly whether he is going to be at the meeting personally or not. Members of the corporation should be certain that the secretary’s office has the proper addresses to which to mail the notices of the annual meeting.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES FOR THE WEEKS
October 2: What Do the Scriptures Say About “Survival After Death”? ¶1-21. Page 524.
October 9: What Do the Scriptures Say About “Survival After Death”? ¶22-40. Page 530.
October 16: What Do the Scriptures Say About “Survival After Death”? ¶41-58. Page 536.

